THE SUM OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION, DELIVERED BY ZACHARIAS URSINUS,

First, by way of CATECHISM, and then afterward more enlarged by a sound and
judicious EXPOSITION, and APPLICATION of the same.

Wherein also are debated and resolved the Questions of whatsoever points of
moment have been, or are controversed in DIVINITY.

First Englished by D. HENRY PARRY, and now again conferred with the best and
last Latin Edition of D. DAVID PAREUS, sometimes Professor of Divinity in
Heidelberge.

Whereunto is added a large and full Alphabeticall TABLE of such matters as are
therein contained: Together with all the Scriptures that are occasionally
handled, by way either of Controversy, Exposition, or Reconciliation; neither
of which was done before, but now is performed for the Readers delight and
benefit.

To this WORK of URSINUS are now at last annexed the THEOLOGICAL MISCELLANIES
Of D. DAVID PAREUS: In which the orthodoxall Tenets are briefly and solidly
confirmed, and the contrary Errors of the Papists, Ubiquitaries,
Antitrinitaries, Eutychians, Socinians, and Arminians fully refuted;

And now translated into English out of the original Latin Copy: By A. R.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, and are to be sold by Steven Bowtell, at the
sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READERS, HENRY PARRY wishes grace and peace through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
WHereas but a small and short remnant of days is alloted unto every of us, to
try the hazard and adventure of this world in Christ's holy merchandise (yet
forty years, and the youngest may, the oldest must depart) I being subject to
this common case and most certain uncertainty of our life, neither knowing, if
perhaps at this present my staff stands next the door; have bin, and am
desirous and earnest in this behalf, so to bestow all my possible endeavors
in this my Lord and Masters traffic, as that I may not return unto him with a
talent in a Napkin, and withal may leave behind me some poor token and
testimony of my love and duty toward him and his blessed Spouse, with future
posterity. Which my desire and earnest deliberation, struggling and striving so
long within me, until it had gotten the conquest of such shamefast and
fearful motions, wherewith men are well acquainted, who are at all acquainted
with their own infirmities: I was thereby at length drawn to this bold and
hardy resolution, as to commit something to the press, and so to the eyes of
them, whose great and sharp censures I have ever with trembling thought of
heretofore, and even now would fly them with all willingness.

Wherefore also in respect hereof, and of the greenness of my age, so has the
flame and heat of my desire been slacked and cooled with the water as it were
of fear, wherewith I shake in mine own conceit; as I have not presumed to
draw any shaft out of mine own quiver, or to present the world with an untimely
fruit of so young a tree: but rather have made choice of a shaft out of the
Lords Armory, framed by the hand and skill of the Lords workman, fit to make
the man blessed who has his quiver full of them.

If yet in this I have been presumptuous, if bold, if undiscreet, if foolish;
my Brethren, for your sakes have I been so, for your sakes have I been
presumptuous, bold, undiscreet, and foolish, even for you and for your
children. The greater is my hope and trust, that these, whatsoever my pains
and labors, shall find favor and grace in your sights, and receive good
entertainment at your hands; because for you they have been undertaken, and the
gains and commodities that shall arise thereof (if by the blessed will of God
any shall arise) shall redound unto you and yours for ever.

It is a case lamentable, deserving the bowels of all Christian pity and
compassion, and able to cause the tears of sorrow to gush out and stream down
the face of a man, who is not frozen too hard in security, and in uncharitable
carelessness, when he shall but lift up his eyes, and see the waste and
desolation of so many distressed souls, who in so many places of this our land
and country have been, and are daily either pined away and consumed to the bone
for lack of Gods sustenance, the Bread of life, the Word of God, the only
preservative of the soul: or, through the deceitful poison of that old
Sorceresse and Witches children, infected and baned unrecoverably. Alas! poor
souls, feign would they have somewhat to keep life within them: and therefore,
as famished and starved creatures, which have been for a space pounded up and
pin folded in a ground of barrenness, debarred of all succor and relief,
whenever they may light of any thing that may go down the throat, be it as
bitter as gall, and as deadly as poison, they swallow bitterness as Sugar, and
lick up death as sweet honey: And yet (I rue to speak it) such is the hard
heartedness and brutish unnaturalness of many merciless men, if yet men, who
have so flinted their foreheads, seared and sealed up their minds and
consciences in all impiety, as that they have entered as it were into a league
and bond with themselves to forget Christ, never to know the man more, never to
speak in the name of Jesus, never to feed the flock of Jesus, whose souls are
even as great and dear to him, as the price they cost him: For, had not these
men sworn, like Of Valentinus the Cardinals religion, who (graceless man) ab
jured his Ecclesiastical vocation, to be lifted up to a temporal Dukedom.
Sab. Enncad. 10. lib. 9.
sons of the earth, to possess the earth for ever, and to leave heaven, and
the heirs of heaven, even the chosen of God, to God himself to look to: it
were uncredible, nay, unpossible were it, that after so many threats and
warnings from heaven, from earth, from God, from men, from their foes abroad,
and their friends at home, they should not yet once, not once descend into a
dutiful consideration of this their heavy trespass, and so with a speedy
industry and assiduity re-enter and recover those their forsaken Charges, which
a long while have languished, and worn away for want of pasture, and lie now
(the dear Lambs of Christ Jesus) stretching on the ground for faintness,
fetching their groans deep, and their pants thick, as ready to give over, and
to yield up the ghost: O Lord, Jerem. 5.3.
are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken these men, but they have
not sorrowed: thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction: they have made their faces harder than a stone, and have refused to
return. Not the losses and unsupportable calamities of Christ's people, not the
miserable Apostasy and grievous falling away (woe to us therefore) of
multitudes of the ignorant and unlettered men from the Apostolic Faith, and
the Church of Christ, not the certain dangers and hazzards of their own
persons, Wives, Children and Kins-folks (with all which rods of his fatherly
chastisement God has lately, in his justice, tempered with surpassing mercy,
visited them) can awake or rouse them out of that dead and deadly slumber,
whereby they have, as much as in them lies, betrayed to the powers and forces
of Satan Gods sacred inheritance, and laid open the precious flock of Christ
to the mouths and teeth of Wolves.

But would God the burden of this sin rested only on the necks of these
wretchlesse persons, whose extreme barbarity yet in letting, through their
profane absence, their harmless sheep to drop away by famine of the Word, has
raised a louder cry and clamor against them in the ears of God, than any we
are able to make by our most just complaint in the ears of men. Another swarm
of Caterpillars there are, the very trash and rif-raffe of our Nation: who
deeming it a more easy life to say Service in the Church, than do service in
the house, and to stand at the Altar of God, than to follow the plough of their
Master, have, like men of idle and dissolute quality, only moved thereto in a
lazy speculation, laid their wicked and sacrilegious hands on the Lord's Ark,
unreverently entered with shoes and all into his Temple, taken his undefiled
testimonies in their defiled mouths, disgraced, defaced, and defamed the glory
and majesty of Divine rites and mysteries, through their beggarly entering into,
and base demeaning themselves in so high an office. Gape not these men, trow
you, for new miracles to rain out of heaven? as if Christ must needs for their
sakes lay the foundation of his Church again, and call again from the Net,
and the receipt of Custom, and other Trades of this world, such as he would
despatch abroad for his holy Message, that so these Artisans might be invested
with Apostle-ships, Doctor-ships, and the rooms of Prophets, as ready men
after a nights sleep, or an hours transe, to turn the Book of God, and
manage the Keys of heaven. But, my friend, be not deceived; awake out of
sleep, and dream no more: Thou art no Prophet; Zach. 13 5.
thou art an husbandman, and taught to be an heard-man from thy youth up. Get
away therefore with speed from the Lords house: if thou be a cleaver, to thy
wedge and axe; if an hind, to thy Masters plough; but meddle not with Gods
affairs, lest he break out upon thee, and destroy thee.

But in vain spend I words to brass and iron, who, though the Lord have held
in his hand for a long time the vial of his wrath, and is now weary with
holding it any longer, and about to power it out upon them for this their
horrible transgression, yet stagger they not a whit at it, but run out, like
hungry companions, with an eye only to the fleshpots, and so sell both
themselves and their people for a morsel of Bread, and a mess of pottage, to
the Devil. Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord? Or shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jerem 9.9.
Yes doubtless: He who is able to muster the clouds and winds, and to fight
with heavenly powers against us, shall and will, if we leave not off to make
havocke of his children, be avenged on us: he shall raise up the standard, and
make the trumpet blow, neither shall suffer the sight of the one to pass our
eyes, nor the sound of the other to forsake our ears, until destruction come
upon destruction, death upon death, plague upon famine, and sword upon both, to
the utter overthrow both of our selves and country perpetually. Nay rather, O
God, if there be any place for mercy (and why should we doubt of mercy with
thee the God of mercy?) looked not upon this dross and filth, wherewith thine
holy house has been polluted, but sweep them out: but look, O Lord, with thy
tender eyes of compassion upon thy silly people (for what have they done?) and
stir them up daily, for Pastors and Prophets, wise and skillful men, whose lips
may keep knowledge, and whose hands may break unto them the bread of life.

Now, that this may have a more mature and happy success, I am humbly to
beseech and solicit (if so this my simple work come unto their hands) the
reverend Fathers of this Land, to whom I acknowledge all duty and submission in
the Lord, and whom with all reverence I solicit in this the Lords cause, that,
if their authority be not able to stretch so far as to the throwing out of
these dumb, deaf, and blind watchmen, out of Gods Tabernacle, into which they
have shuffled (against many of their Honors wills) by those accursed
Simoniacall Patrons, who have sodered and simoned the walls of their houses,
with the very blood of souls: yet it may please their wisdoms to constrain
and compel these, wheresoever they shall find them in any of their Diocesses,
to the reading and diligent studying of those Books, which their own
Countrymen, moved with more pity toward them and their flocks, have
painfully delivered unto them in a tongue familiar and common to them all.

And if it shall seem so good and expedient to their Honors, to adjoyne these
my labors unto the pains and travels of many the servants of God, who have
with great praise endeavored in the like matter, on the like respects
heretofore; I make no doubt, but that out of this short, yet full Sum of
Christian Religion, God adding his blessing thereunto, they may in short time
receive such furniture and instruction, as they shall save both themseves and
others, who both else are in case to perish everlastingly. But if their feet
will walk on in the way of blindness, and themselves refuse to come out of the
darkness of ignorance, into the bright light of Gods knowledge: yet will I not
faint in hope for Israel, but will yet look when once again God himself shall
smite on rocks, and water shall flow out of them, that his people in this time
of drought may drink.

Even so, O God, for thy promise sake, and for thy troth of old plighted in thy
beloved Son unto thy Chosen, open the rock of stone again, let again the
waters, the living waters of thy Word flow out, and let the saving rivers of
thy Gospel run, and stop not, through all dry places of our Land, that men and
Angels may see the felicity of thy Chosen, and rejoice in the gladness of thy
people, and give thanks, and praise, and glory, and honor, with thine
inheritance, unto thy blessed Name for ever.

URSINE'S HORTATORY ORATION TO THE STUDY of Divinity, together with the
manifold use of Catechism.
WHereas, by the advice of them that have the charge of your studies, I was
appointed to publish an abridgment of those heads of Christian religion, as
were of you to be learned: I seriously acknowledge and confess such a
business was required of me, as to which nothing can be less answerable than
are my defects: For, this is a doctrine which (I say) not only is still
unknown to the wiseest, and most sharp-witted of men, Angels in part ignorant
of the Gospel, till they were informed by the word of Christ.
unless they be taught by the voice of the Church, and efficacy of the Spirit;
but also in a great part was unknown to the Angels themselves before it was
disclosed by the Son, from the secret bosom of his eternal Father. Which to
unfold and praise, if men and Angels should bend all the strength of wit and
eloquence, 1 Pet 1.12.
yet were they never able to speak of it, according to the due compass and
worth of the thing. Whiles therefore I think with my self how much I might
sink under this charge, I had rather it were committed to another, who, at
least, might somewhat better, and more successively undergo the same: But when
I well weigh the nature of mine office, I perceive I ought with all
cheerfulness both to help forward your salvation, and obey God that calls me
to so honorable an employment; especially he promising me assistance, with
which whosoever are assisted, may despair in nothing: for God will be
effectual by weak and abject means; according to that of the Psalmist, Out of
the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength. Psalm. 8.2.
The word there used, signifies a child which begins to understand and
speak. There are that are commonly called children, not only in regard of age,
but also in regard of ability of understanding, Two sorts of children.
or performance of any action. Infants, though such in age, are sufficient
witnesses of the divine goodness and providence, being clear evidences of
Gods presence, in the wonderful propagation, conservation and education of
humane offspring, Humane offspring an argument a against Atheists denying God.
abundantly confuting Devils, and all Atheists that deny either God to be God,
or to be such a God as he has said himself (...) Our Savior interprets
that saying of the Psalmist, of confession. Acts 17.27, 28, 29. Mat. 21.16.
In which kind it agrees unto us all who do meditate or speak any thing
concerning God. For we are all infants in understanding and utterance, In some
kind we are all infants.
touching all matters divine. In this life we attain but some small beginnings
of those things, as the Emperor Gratian, in his confession to Ambrose, piously
and truly writes: We speak (says he) of God, not what we ought, but what we
are able; yea, the Prophets and the Apostles themselves confess the same
thing: 1 Cor. 13.9. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part; but when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.
And in v. 12. Now we see through a glass darkely, but then face to face.

But, notwithstanding the beginnings we learn are small, and also the voice
of the ministry be proportioned to our capacity, therein God himself speaking
with us, as with babes, and permits us, like babes to speak to him; yet so
would the Lord have the doctrine touching himself to be known, No hope of life
to come, but by knowing the things revealed concerning God.
as that he gives us no hope of another life, by any other means. Yea, those
beginnings, whatsoever they are, do with so great a distance surpass all
humane wisdom, that there is no comparison between it and them; for these
rudimennts, which to reason are hidden wisdom, are both necessary and
sufficient to everlasting salvation. Let us therefore, not only acknowledge
our infancy, but desire also to be of the number of sucking babes. For as the
babe grows not to ripeness of manhood, unless he be fed with the mothers
milk, or convenient food: so we likewise, that we may not fail of our hoped
perfection, 1 Pet. 1.1, 2.
ought not to refuse the milk of the Word, whereby we are nourished and suckled
to eternal life. This is that spiritual infancy well pleasing to the Lord, as
Christ witnesses, rebuking the Pharisees disdain of the childrens cry in the
Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David. These are those infants, in whose voice
the Lord will be effectual: By whose mouths (as the Psalmist adds) he
perfecteth strength; Psalm. 8.2. Mollerus upon the 8. Psalm. v. 2. A description
of the kingdom of Christ.
or (as they translate who weigh the original) foundeth a kingdom. He
speaks of the strength or kingdom, which is seen in this life, called the
kingdom of Christ: which is, the Son of God instituting and preserving of a
ministry, thereby gathering a Church, quickening believers by the sound of the
Gospel, and sanctifying them by the holy Spirit to eternal life, defending the
Church in this life against the kingdom of the Devil, and after this life
raising them up holy to eternal life; that in them may reign the Godhead
evidently, and not covertly by the ministry.

The foundation of Christ's kingdom is Christ, and how many ways.
That which is the foundation of this kingdom, St. Paul declares, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Christ is the foundation, first in his proper person: Because all the members
of his kingdom, namely the Saints, being conjoined and inserted into him, does
he carry about him, keeping and holding them together, as the foundation does
the other parts of the building, as the vine does its branches. Then again by
his doctrine: For, as good laws are the sinews of a politicall-kingdom: so this
kingdom is gathered, kept, and governed, by the doctrine concerning Christ. And
as without a foundation the building cannot consist: Phil. 3.8.
so unless we hold to Christ, and what he is, and what he has done for us,
whatsoever else may seem to be piety or comfort, it is fading, it is (...)
nothing.

This foundation is laid in the mouths of infants, when they, believing this
same doctrine upon their hearing of it, do by the incitement of the holy Spirit
learn and embrace the same, and thereby are ingraffed and grow into one with
Christ.

In this business of maine importance, God uses our infancy to illustrate his
glory; The greatness of the work, Why God uses weak means for the conversion
of them.
and weakness of the instrument plainly proving, that so great a matter is not
effected or dependent by and on our, but Gods effectual power. Also to the end
it might blunt the insolency of his adversaries, when as their lofty power is
subdued under our weakness, and our seeming folly evinceth, that nothing is more
foolish than their wisdom: As it is said, In silence and hope shall be your
strength: For the Son of God destroys the works of the Devil, snatching from
him them that believe, remitting their sin, and taking it away, and beginning
in them eternal life, defending the Church, accusing and laying open the
malice of the enemies, repressing and punishing them both in this present life,
and at the full deliverance of the Church from all evils. And these (though
hell repines) does he work and witness, by the miserable cries of men: As it is
said 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of the strong holds, casting down imaginations,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. And having in
a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

As therefore the baseness of the vessel detracts nothing from the worth of the
wares it contains; so our mean and infant expression of the doctrine, may
not so far be slighted, as than it should derogate one whit from the weight of
those motives which invite you to an ardent study of Divinity. But whiles I
meditate with my self, that I am to take a view of some of those motives in
this rehearfall Preface, I am sensibly so overwhelmed with an infinite mass of
matter of main importance, that scarcely can I resolve whence to make an
entrance. But seeing that some of them must come into consideration, The
necessity of Catechismal instruction, is pressed from these motives, 1. Gods
command.
we will put that foremost which ought to rule all our actions and endeavors;
namely, the serious will of God, expressed in apparent commands. For now, we
which are citizens of the Church have conference together, and know for
certain, that the books of the Prophets and Apostles are most infallible
declarations of the mind and will of God. And in them, here and there, are
certain precepts delivered and rehearsed, which enjoin men a diligent search
and knowledge of the doctrine contained in those books. Such is the precept of
the Decalogue touching the Sabbath. Such is that speech of our Savior, Luke
10.41. One thing is necessary. The knowledge of this wisdom (says he) is
eternal life. This David commends, as frequently in other places, so in the
first Psalm (which he writes as an Epitomie of it) for that it is a companion
of true blessedness. But these have not satisfied our man-loving heavenly
Father, that is solicitous of our salvation. He adds further peculiar
precepts touching that sum of doctrine that is to be published to all,
especially the youth; namely, the doctrine of Catechismall instruction. Deuteronomy.
4.9. Teach them thy sons. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words shall be in thine heart.
Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, etc. And thou shall bind
them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine
eyes. Here do we hear Parents, and those to whom the charge of Parents is
committed, commanded that they care to teach, or see taught the youth; the
youth commanded that they learn: and both are commanded that they daily
inculcate, rehearse, and meditate on this doctrine. This doctrine would the
Lord have both to be delivered unto children, and also to be in our view
continually. And its apparent, that brevity and plainnes are required; which
what else they, but a Catechism or sum of doctrine, neither prolixe, nor
obscure. So Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which
thou have heard of me, in faith, and love which is in Christ Jesus. In this
precept of using and holding his Catechism, we hear the definition of ours.

The form of sound words, of C^^echism^l instruct^o^, described: 1 More
largely.
The Apostle meaning a draught or plat-forme of sound positions, concerning each
point of doctrine, methodically and briefly comprised, as if it were painted
before the eye; together with a kind and manner of teaching and expression, as
is both proper, plain, and agreeable with the style of the Prophets and
Apostles. Therefore does he name sound words delivered by him, concerning faith
and love in Christ: (i.e.) in the knowledge of Christ; as in sundry places he
reduces all piety to faith and love. A Catechism then, is a sum of
doctrine, delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, concerning faith and love in
Christ. 2 More briefly, two ways.
Or, is a sum of doctrine of Christianity, briefly, methodically, and plainly
couched together. For it is not for us to invent opinions: but of necessity we
must refer our selves, as it is, Esaias 8.20. to the Law and the Testimony. And
there must be added an exposition, which may be both a manifestation of the
parts and method, and an interpretation of words and phrases.

This reason, if there were no more, is of efficacy to them that are not of
profane minds, to excite them to the study of this sacred doctrine. For to
such the command of God is a cause of all causes, though nothing more be added.
But when as God is so indulgent to our weakness, as to declare unto us the
causes of this command, needs must we weigh them wtih reverence. Now God
avoucheth, that therefore must we learn this doctrine, because by the knowledge
thereof, 2. Motive, our salvation.
and not any other way, will he convert and save all that by age are of
understanding, and are to be made heirs of eternal life. Marvelous
confidently is that spoken of Saint Paul, Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power of
God to salvation, etc. And, 1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching of the Cross, is to
them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved, it is the power of
God. And Ver. 21. It pleased God, by the fool shnesse of preaching, to save
them that believe.

But this opinion, howsoever it be delivered, and confirmed by diverse and
weighty testimonies of the holy Spirit, is oppugned by the utmost endeavors of
Satan. Against the Zwenckf^^dians, touching the point of the ^fficacy of the
Spirit, by the ministiy of the word. (...)
For the Father of lies, seeing how the Paradox of the foolishness of
preaching the Cross of Christ, does not a little pierce the minds of men,
snatcheth an occasion of suborning fanaticall minded men, who cry out, that the
work of the ministry is nothing less than the means of converting men; but
that God communicates himself to us immediately; and that we Ministers make
our voice an Idol. They babble forth many wonderful words, carrying with them
indeed a show of special illumination: but hear and consider, I pray, upon
what foundation they rely, and how they oppose their wisdom to the divine.
The omnipotent God, say they, does not at all need that voice, ministry,
reading, meditation, to convert men: Therefore he uses not this instrument,
neither is a necessity of labor in learning it to be imposed upon those that
are to be saved. Now, say I, to you young men; Is there any one among you so
weak and childish in judgment, that does not perceive such a one to be hissed
at, that would so argue? God can by his omnipotency easily bring to pass, that
one without books, teachers, study, should become skillful in all learning and
doctrine: as the Apostles, and others of the Primitive Church, spoke with
tongues which they never learned. He can make the earth fruitful, and bring
forth fruit without the help of husbandmen. He can sustain the nature of man
without food: as Moses and Christ forty days: Therefore its not a necessary
labor that is undertaken, or any cause of the thing we hope and expect, whiles
Scholars ply their books and studies, Teachers go to their schools,
Husbandmen to their ploughes, entering their shares, harrowes, and engines into
the ground, and each man spends his life time to maintain life. You see upon
what rocks of blind madness the Devil does split unhappy men; which, having
neither learned the grounds of Piety, or the more excellent Arts, nor list to
take the pains of learning them, are forward notwithstanding to seem what
they least of all be; and dare exalt themselves against the knowledge of God,
and bring the eternal wisdom under their censure. And they have as little wit
as modesty, when as, for their opinion, they allege the example of them that
were converted by miracle; as Paul: or those endued with extraordinary gifts;
as the Apostles at the Pentecost: or the multitude of them that heard the
Gospel, and did not believe; or the Scriptures, which speak of the office of
the holy Ghost. We know and acknowledge, that, by the blessing of God, God can,
without the labor of teaching or learning, convert those that he will: And
this to be the end of miracles, The end of miracles.
that it may appear, that the order, whereby God is effectual in nature, is
made and freely preserved by him. We so certainly know, that conversion is the
gift of God alone, as that by how much it is a greater and more wonderful
work, to restore lost man to salvation, than to make him not having any being;
by so much the more were it impudency and madness, Conversion greater than
Creation.
to attribute this conversion, more than that creation, to the efficacy of man's
voice. But withal, we know this too for a certain, that it pleases God, by
the foolishnes of preaching, to save them that believe. Why it pleases God so
to do, there is no necessity he should give us an account; yet he lets us
understand some reasons of that his counsel: but he propounds not the same
reasons to the godly and godless. To the godless he gives this reason Reasons
why God converts by man's ministry: 1. In regard of godless. 2. In regard of
godly.

Because by this means he would before the whole Church, and their
consciences also being witness, more manifest his justice in condemning the
malice of those that oppugn the word revealed. But other kind of reasons take
place in our consideration; namely, such as make for our instruction and
consolation: viz. God, who shall be all in all. 1. Cor. 3.6.
Paul planteth, Apollo waters; but God gives the increase. To the same
effect also Paul calls the Gospel by him preached, the power of God to
salvation. Rom 1.16.
Ephesians. 4.11. the Apostle says, He has given some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and the edification of the body of
Christ. Can a more glorious speech be uttered touching the office of teaching?
Let us not therefore take upon us to be wiser than God, neither let us so much
regard the pride, contumacy, and mischief of those that contemn the voice of
the Gospel, as thereby the less to love and respect the fruit and efficacy of
the divine ordination in the means of mercy. Nor let the sluggishnesse and
obstinacy of some Schoolmen prove impediments of all good proceedings and
goodness, who persuade others that instruction, study, and doctrines, to get or
increase virtue, are unnecessary things: but rather with obedient and thankful
minds let us enjoy that sweetest consolation, whereby we are assured, that
neither our endeavors are unpleasing to God, nor undertaken in vain;
according to that, Eccles. 11.1. Cast. thy bread upon the waters: for after
many days thou shall find it. And, 1 Cor. 15.58. Your labor is not in vain
in the Lord. Matthew 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my
Name, I am in the midst of them. Unless these promises were known to be
certain, amidst so great outrages of Satan, (...)
and miseries of mankind (of which its too truly spoken: The most are naught)
the best teacher, or the greatest lover of the common good, should be in the
unhappiest condition, hardly sitting fast in his own place. For mine own part,
I feel my self to be so affected, that (me thinks) my sorrow permits me not
to stand in this Pulpit, but shuts up my speech within my bowels and jaws; but
that I know for certain, that in this our assembly there are, whose hearts
entertain the the and saving doctrine, and are inflamed with the holy Spirit,
in a due manner knowing, and calling upon God, being lively temples of him, and
shall hereafter praise him in the celestial Quire. We speak not this to that
end, as if we did expect equal knowledge and understanding, or the same gifts
of the holy Spirit in all men: For the Apostle commands us, Romans 12.3. To think
soberly of our selves, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith. But all them that will be saved, must of necessity hold the same
foundation, that is, that they know and believe what a one Christ is, and what
he has done for each of them: as it is said, John 17.3. This is life eternal,
that they know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
And, John 3.36. He that believes in the Son, has eternal life. By these and
the like sayings we perceive that to be a truth, which Dionysius (which is
falsely named the Areopagite, but is thought rather to be a Corinthian) ascribes
to Bartholomew the Apostle: That the Gospel is brief and large. The Gospel it a
brief largeness. Brief.
Its brevity is apparently more curt than the Law of Moses, and ought to be,
and is, fixed in the minds and hearts of men; and therefore is the sum of the
Gospel so often delivered, and repeated in the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, and comprised in the Creed. But much less can ever the wisdom of
the Gospel be exhausted, than that of the Law. But forasmuch as its certain,
Large.
that in this mortal life, that which is eternal is but begun; 2 Cor. 5 2, 3,
4.
For we shall be clothed upon with that, if so be we are not found naked: This
is the nature of true conversion, A true godly man grows in godliness.
that it suffers not those that are converted unto God to stay in their race,
but kindles in them a perpetual study and desire of further profiting:
Therefore is it commanded, 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. it is said, Yo are
no more strangers and forrainers, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God; And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, In whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. And,
Mark 9.24. The man prayed, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief. And, Luke
17.5. The Disciples cried, Lord increase our faith. Saints then are commanded,
and commended, and are petitioners to be such as go forward: Therefore they
are not of the number of them that have no mind of proceeding onward. Comforts
and promises for a tender heart and wounded conscience.
Yet let none be out of heart, because they, finding in themselves less life
and vigor, and acknowledging their weakness and corruptions, do with a true
sorrow of mind bewail the same. For thus says the everlasting Father
concerning his Son, Esaias 42.3. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the
smoking flax shall he not quench. Again, the Son says of the Father, Mat.
18.14. It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these
little ones should perish. And the Son says of himself, John 6.37. All that
the Father gives me, shall come unto me: And him that comes unto me, I will
in no wise cast out: Wheresoever piety is not dissembled, it is, and is
cherished of God; and, together with it, Beneficia. (...)
all the everlasting and unchangeable benefits of the Gospel are tied with the
indissoluble bond of divine truth: For, unless the certainty of our faith and
salvation did depend upon the alone free mercy of God (whereby he receives all
that believe) and not upon the degrees of our renovation, there would be no
stability at all in our comfort. Hence therefore may be drawn three things,
which may be as grounds to judge of a Christian: 1. The laying hold of the
foundation. (...), i.e. the critical marks to discern a true godly man.
2. An earnest endeavor of increasing (which two include each godly man within
the general promise of eternal salvation:) and, 3. Acomfort that,
notwithstanding our inequality of gifts and degrees to some others, we shall
not perish: which consolation is to be opposed against the cogitation of our
own unworthiness. These three, as inseparables, has Saint Paul comprised in
those words, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ: Now, if any one build upon this foundation, gold,
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stuble, every ones work shall be made
manifest; for the day shall declare, etc. but he himself shall be saved, so
as by fire. By that therefore which hitherto has been said, it is apparent,
that both the Lords injunction and our own salvation do exhort and bind all
men, and among these the youth, being, to wit, a great part, and also the
Nursery of the Church, to learn, as soon as by age they are capable, the
grounds of Christian Religion: Therefore does this most earnestly and seriously
admonish them, to whom the charge of nurturing the younger in years does
belong, to be careful of this their duty.

3. Motive, the preservation and propagation of the Gospel.
For, we that are teachers and learners ought to have a diligent and earnest
care of godliness, not only for our own sakes, but for their sakes also that are
ours, and our succeeding posterity: For we find, by experience, how easily in
process of time an oblivion, and manifold depravation of that doctrine creeps
in, the sum whereof is not concisely and perspicuously couched together and
known, repeated, inculcated, and divulged abroad. Besides we know, Horat. Quo
semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa di^. --
that of what liquor a new vessel is first seasoned with, be it good or bad,
it longest savours. There is none in his right mind but will confess, seeing
the evil that we learn does so constantly stick by us, that when the youth is
not instructed in, and inured to religion, it does threaten the leaving to the
ensuing times an age of monsters, contemning God and all religion: and that,
being we are hardly by the greatest endeavors and longest care made pliable to
that which is good, the groundwork of the most difficult business should be
laid in the first age.

4. Motive, the weak capacity of youth, and the more ignorant.
Catecheticall instruction therefore is necessary, not only for the preservation
of the purity and soundness of religion, to us and our posterity, but also for
the capacities of younger age, to whom we have showed this doctrine must be
taught: For, if it be said of the teaching youth the other arts, Quicquid
praecipies, esto brevis, ut cito dicta
Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles:
Short precepts shall thou give, which being briefly told,
Apt wits may soon conceive, and faithful long may hold:
how much more in this heavenly wisdom, which is a stranger to humane wit,
should we seek out for, and apply our selves to breifness and plainness,
especially seeing divine testimony approves our experience in this? as Heb.
5.13. Every one that uses milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness,
for he is a babe: but strong meat is of those that are of full age. And
therefore when Saint Paul speaks of his manner of teaching, 1 Cor. 3.2. thus
he says, I have fed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, nor yet now are ye able: 5. Motive, that always in the
Church, there has bin such a sum of doctrine.
for ye are yet carnal. From the first beginning of the Church, there has bin
extant in it some such ground of doctrine, well known publicly, and, for it is
briefnesse and plainness, easy to be understood, reserved for posterity. As,
together with the increase of mankind, God himself proceeded on with his own
mouth to deliver more summary doctrines, either of the law, as he began, in
these words; If thou do well, Genesis 4.7.
shall thou not be accepted? Or of the Gospel, as at first, in these words; The
seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15.
Likewise after both the promise and the Decalogue was repeated to Abraham. At
last the Creeds, and such summary doctrines as were dispersed here and there in
the writings of the Apostles, were fitted into a meet form of Confession, to be
divine informations for all degrees of age. And indeed, this our accustomed
manner of instructing, which we call Catechism, has bin anciently used both
in the Jewish, and in the Apostolical Church, as does appear by the Apostle
Paul, Romans 2.18. where he calls the Jews those that from their tender years
had bin instructed or catechized out of the law. (...), etc.
And Gal. 6.6 Let him that is taught in the word, or catechized in the word,
communicate to him that instructs or catechiseth in all good things. So Luke
1.4. That thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have
bin instructed or c^^^^hised. Because these testimonies are to be preferred
before all other, I d^ed^u recite the example of the Church that was in the
ensuing times next after the Apostles, being a thing publikly known by
histories. I rather add this, (...).
That, if the now present Church surviving has till now kept this form of
instruction, brought into the world, with so long continuance, 6. Motive, the
dangers and heresies of the last times.
not by man's device, but by the divine providence; then, in this doting old age
of the world, wherein the Church does daily more and more languish, and thicker
darkness day by day over-cloudeth it, we had need for to sharpen all our
diligence, of preserving and propagating this doctrine, rather than any whit to
grow remiss: For this is the age of which our Savior speaks, Mat. 24.23.
Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there; believe it
not: for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders; insomuch, as if it were possible, they shall deceive
the very Elect. And largely does Saint Paul speak of this matter, 1 Timothy 4. and
2 Timothy 3. These predictions of the calamities of these last times were written,
not only for our consolation and confirmation, but also for exhortation, of us
to arm our selves to watch against and prevent errors: for so our Savior
begins that his prophecy: Take heed that no man deceive you. We think it
necessary therefore, that not only they that come into the place of teaching,
Mat. 24.3.
but also all that love their own salvation, should have fixed in their hearts
the sound positions concerning every part of christian religion: and on the
other side, to. the utmost that every man is able to be well fenced against the
contrary errors: and that all they to whom the office of instructing and
governing is committed, should with great care teach or cause to be taught,
those that are committed to their charge, unless they, as curats negligent and
unfaithful in their duty, had rather answer for their perdition. And indeed,
the desire of your parents, in this respect, is to be commended; that they will
have the sum of godliness to be propounded to, and inculcated into you, not
only at home, and in the Church, but also in the schools; For they well
perceived what great ignorance ensued, and how great an hint and opportunity
was given to the Devil, of detaining men in that ignorance, when once the
primitive custom of the Church, of hearing and teaching the Catechists, was
lost, and in the room thereof succeeded that silly and foolish dumb show of
Popish confirmation. And they now see that the same things, or worse than
these, are now to be feared, unless God out of his singular mercy look upon
us: than the which danger, as scarce any thing can bring greater heavines to
all godly persons; so contrariwise, it is not easy to find out any thing that
may be more desirable and pleasant unto all pious Parents, than if they can
certainly promise themselves that their children and nephews shall a while
live after them in the same light of divine truth, which now is lighted up
amongst us. Wherefore if we are not without natural affection, (...) Romans 1.31.
and cruel against those which love us more than themselves, let us endeavor
to our power, that by our negligence we do not destroy their hope, nor cross
their prayers: But that, together with them, we may show our selves thankful
unto God, who, collecting to himself a perpetual Church out of the dregs of
this world, has, by the bringing back again of the sun of heavenly
doctrine, so dispelled the dirs, ass of the kingdom of Antichrist, that any man
that will not wilfully in ^his eyes and ears, and oppose the known truth, may
behold and diserne them stripped naked of those divel-deceits, which were those
fair outsides of which they vauntingly bragged. 7 Motive, the benefit if we
do, the punishment if we do not study this doctrine.
If we do these things the Son of God will conserve and augment those gifts
that he has bestowed upon us according to his promise. To him that has, (i.)
to him that desires to go on forward, shall be given. If we do contrariwise,
then will follow upon us that which is threatened in the contrary sentence
following, from him that has not shall be taken that which he has. Mat. 25.29.
And indeed, how the Lord will not endure the contempt of the Gospel revealed,
both the divine word of God, and the continual history of the world does
proclaim. Isa. 5.24. Because they have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts,
and despised the word of the holy One of Israel, therefore is the anger of the
Lord kindled against his people, and he has stretched forth his hand against
them, and has smitten them. And Amos 5.11. He threatens; Behold the days come
says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the Land; not a famine of
bread, not a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of God. And they shall
wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the East; they shall run
to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. We now see the
nation of the Jews, which the Lord honored with so many excellent titles and
privileges, with so great success and miracles, and exalted it far above all
other mortal men, now to be more abject than the meanest of all men, and so
grossly and strangely grown blind amidst the noone-day-light of the Prophets
preaching, that the example thereof duly considereed may (not to say, move
laughter or anger) strike a terror into us. The cause of this so great an
evil we hear the words of the Prophets, and of Christ himself to aver, to
have bin their contempt and neglect of the sound doctrine concerning God and
our salvation. Joh. 5.43. I come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not. If
another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. I forbear the
recital of other examples, only one will I touch, which is of the kingdom of
England, which a little before was most flourishing and happy, Englands Manian
persecution.
and that not only because it is a very sad example, but also because there is
not one in this our assembly that is such a youth, but that it fell out in his
days. For, in this our age, the knowledge of the divine truth was given to
England, and in the reign of Edward the sixth the Church and Schools were
excellently constituted in a flourishing estate. And when the King was
seventeen year old, he was beautified with piety, virtue, and learning far
above the model of that age; so that nothing in the most glorious kingdom was
more glorious than the King; so that this kingdom came behind no part of the
whole world in happiness. But on a sudden, this Edward, a Prince of great hope,
being taken out of this life, the Papal tyranny soon again surprised his
kingdom, the most glorious Churches were cruelly wasted with imprisonments,
banishments, fire, sword; and men of eminent learning and holiness, without any
respect of age, sex or dignity, some of them haled to the fire, and other most
cruel punishments, and others cast out into all corners of the world. It was
now onward in the fifth year, whiles these calamities continued there. But I
rather acknowledge and bewail our own sins, than take upon me the judging of
others. The cries of the English banished, which I heard with these ears, are
not out of my hearing, wherewith they complained of the unthankfulness,
security, and surfeit of the Gospel, that had seized upon their Nation. But do
we look to it better to manage our condition? would God we did. When Pilate
mingled the blood of the Galileans with their sacrifices, says Christ, Luke
13.3. Unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. The tumults and ruins
of Empires, by which the Church is shaken, are before our eyes threatening us:
the theevish Turks gape after us, endeavoring with might and main to take
Christ from us, and to obtrude upon us their Mahomet; and we hear that daily
they prey upon our near blood, drawing away Christian youths to their filthy
and blasphemous society, and to make a breach in upon us. The abomination of
the kingdom of Antichrist curses us, and cries out, that we are to be
destroyed. And there are more heresies and depravations of the truth hatched
and increased within and without the Church (like Hydraes heads) than can be
numbered. Isay 1.2. Romans 9.10.
And now verily is that fulfilled, that unless the Lord preserve unto us a
seed, we shall be like to Sodom and Gommorrah, nothing of us remaining. Let us
not be now so stupid, or such haters of our selves, as not to be moved with
these things. Let us seek the Lord whiles he may be found. Isay 55.6.
Let every one enter into a serious consideration of his own salvation, and to
hold fast in our hearts those things which we collect, and are fitted
pertinently unto the same, that if the world broken to pieces should fail, yet
the ruins thereof should not affright us.

These things we have spoken of do concern al men, but chiefly our order of
Scholars. For, all that ever instructed or governed schools, or have bin
employed in those things, or would have others to be employed, have agreeed
upon this; That they that are brought up in the schools should be not only more
learned, but also more godly. Which being so, let men acknowledge, that a
school is a company according to Gods ordinance, Scholars should have learned
godliness, or godly learning.
teaching and learning the doctrine necessary for mankind, concerning God and
other good things; that the knowledge of God among men may not be extinguished,
but the Church may be preserved, 8. Motive, that doctrine (...) be the ma^k of
the Church, and chiefly of the Schools.
many may be made heirs of eternal life, discipline may be upheld, and men may
have other honest benefits by the arts.

Therefore we swerve far from, too far from our scope or mark, unless we be
settled in this purpose, that we ought to be busily employed in these Ant-hils
and Bee-hives of Christ, not only to be more skilled in learning, but also more
adorned with a good and holy conversation, that we may be more acceptable to
God and men. And it is apparent in the Church, that all instruction, without
the doctrine of godliness, is nothing else but an erring, and a withdrawing from
God, from true good, true righteousness, true salvation. For whatsoever we do
not to the glory of God, whatsoever we do not in the name of Christ Jesus,
whatsoever we do not of faith, the holy spirit pronounces as sinful, vile,
and condemned of God. When therefore this doctrine is put out of the Schools
of the Church, then not only nothing can be taught concerning true perfect
virtue, such as God requires; but also those other few and obscure doctrines
left behind of bad, would make us far worse: not by reason of their being
amongst us; but the want of those things, without which nothing is holy and
sound. And although the consent of all men of sound judgment should satisfy
us in this matter; yet the divine Commandment, John 5.35. 2 Timothy 2.15. (...).
commanding us to search the Scriptures, to attend to reading, and rightly to
divide the Word of God, should be of more weight unto us. And because none can
orderly and plainly distinguish, and lay open the speeches of the Prophets and
Apostles, and the parts of Religion, without the instructions and exercises of
the Schools; who does not see, with how near a tie the study of godliness is
knit unto the Schools? That therefore which is the chief work amongst men,
and cannot be performed of us without the help of the Schools, we judge to be
chief in the Schools: namely, the understanding and interpretation of the
Prophets and Apostles. And seeing there is afforded unto us Scholars more
ability, and opportunity of more exact knowledge of Religion, than to other
men; if indeed we neglect it, we both make our Religion to be suspected, and
shall undergo greater punishment for our negligence and ignorance. Neither
would the Lord have the care and keeping of the doctrine of Religion committed
to us Scholars chiefly, only for our own cause, but others. For the Learned
themselves, understanding the terms and method of the doctrine of Religion, it
is expected they should instruct, and interpret unto others.

Seeing therefore Religion is to be taught in the Schools, as unto children;
to the end, that it may be rightly taught, Catechism is necessary. Neither
indeed can this age learn, unless brevity be used. Nor can the parts of a
discipline be dexterously, and with due proportion of agreement between them be
handled, either by teachers or learners, unless they first conceive in their
minds some short sum of the same. For both these respects is it, (...).
that we read such often repetitions in the holy Scriptures of brief sums of
things: As, Repent, and believe the Gospel. He that shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved. War you a good warfare, keeping faith and a good
conscience. And seeing that it is said, Colos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom; Explications must be added aggreeable
to the speeches of the Prophets and the Apostles. Neither is a Catechism any
thing else, but a brief explication of such speeches. But because the little
book, called Melanchthons Examen, is of that nature, which I propound to you;
and the Author has comprised, with great fidelity and dexterity, the heads of
Christian Religion, under an apt and perspicuous style of words: as also it is
of no small consequence, that a like form of Catechism should be extant in
sundry Churches; stir up your selves to learn, and conceive, that these
wretched papers of ours are swadling-bands, wherein Christ will be found
swadled up. You see many are the things which do commend these Swathels unto
you, and seriously exhort you to the embracing of them; by which, I humbly
beseech you, to delight in them, as the commandment of God, your own
salvation, the duty we owe to posterity, the example of the more reformed
Church, your condition of life, your present age, your desires and hope,
imminent dangers, and the rewards and punishments to be expected from God. But
however our admonitions may be necessary, yet of none effect, we well know,
without the suggestions of the holy Spirit. Therefore turning our selves unto
God, let us give thanks to him, that his will was we should be born in this
light of the Gospel, and pray that we may be taught and governed of him.

CERTAIN PREAMBLES on that Catechism of Christian Religion, which is delivered
and taught in the Churches and Schools throughout the Dominions of the County
Palatine.
THe Preambles or preparatory Prefaces to this Catechism are partly General,
concerning the whole Doctrine of the Church; and partly Special, concerning
Catechism alone.

The General Prefaces touching the Doctrine of the Church are seven.
1 What, and what manner of doctrine, the doctrine of the Church is. 2 What are
the parts thereof, and what the differences of each part. 3 Wherein it
differs from the doctrine of other Sects, and from Philosophy also, and why
these differences are to be retained. 4 Whence it may appear that it alone
came from God. 5 By what testimonies the certainty thereof is confirmed. 6 For
what cause no other doctrine besides is to be received in the Church. 7 How
manifold is the course of teaching and learning this doctrine.
1 What, and what manner of doctrine, the doctrine of the Church is.
THE doctrine of the Church, is the entire and incorrupt doctrine of the Law
and Gospel, touching the true God, The definition of the doctrine of the Church.
and his will, works, and worship; which doctrine is revealed by God himself,
comprised in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and confirmed by sundry
miracles, and divine testimonies, by which the Holy Ghost works powerfully in
the hearts of Gods chosen, and collecteth unto himself out of mankind an
everlasting Church, in which he may be glorified both in this life, and in the
life to come.

This doctrine is the chief and special note of the true Church, which God
will have eminent in the world, and severed from the rest of mankind,
according unto these sayings of Scripture; Fly Idols. Come out from amongst
them, and separate your selves. If there come any unto you, and bring not THIS
DOCTRINE, 1 John 5.21. 2 Cor. 6.17. 2 John 10. Esaias 52.11. Rev. 18.4.
bid him not God speed. Be ye holy, touch no unclean thing ye that bear the
vessels of the Lord. Go out of her my people, that ye receive not of her
plagues. Now God will have this separation made, 1. His glory.
For his own glory. For as he will not have himself coupled with Idols and
Devils: So he will have his truth severed from falsehood and lies, 2. Reasons
why God will have his Church distinguished from other Sects.
and his household separated from the enemies of the Church, that is, from the
children of Satan. It were contumelious so to think of God, as that he will
have such children as persecute him. 2 Cor 6.15.
It were blasphemy to make God the author of impious doctrine, and patron of
the blasphemous: For, What concord has Christ with Belial? 2. The salvation of
his Elect.
The consolation and salvation of his Elect. For it is necessary that the
Church be visibly beheld in this world, that the Elect dispersed throughout all
mankind may know to what society they are to join themselves, and, being
gathered unto the Church, may lay hold on this sound comfort, That they are of
that company which is acceptable and pleasing unto God, and has the promises
of everlasting life. For, God will that all which are to be saved, be gathered
unto the Church in this life, because, without the Church there is no salvation.

3. Notes whereby the Church is distinguished from other Sects.
How the Church is known, and what are her badges and marks whereby she is
distinguished from other Sects, is at large discoursed of in the tract of the
Church. The notes are three: Purity of doctrine. The right use of the
Sacraments. Obedience toward God in every point of doctrine, whether of faith
or of manners. Object. Yea but oftentimes great vices abound in the Church
also. Answ. I confess indeed many times great vices over-grow the whole body
of the Church, but they are not patronised or maintained, as falls out in
other Sects: nay, the true Church is the first her self that reprehendeth and
condemns them before any other. In the Church faults are committed, but with
present reproof, and speedy reformation. As long as this remains, so long
remains the Church.

2 What are the parts of the doctrine of the Church, and what the differences
of each part
That the Law and Gospel are the two only parts of Christian doctrine, proved
by 4. reasons.
THE parts of the doctrine of the Church are two; the Law, and the Gospel: in
both which the sum of the whole Scriptures is contained. The Law is termed
the Decalogue, and the Gospel is the doctrine touching Christ our Mediator,
and the free remission of sins through faith. This division of Church
doctrine is clearly demonstrated to be sufficient, by these evident arguments:
1. All doctrine comprised in sacred writ, concerns either the nature of God,
or his will, or his works, or sin, which is the proper work of men and
devils: But of all these we are taught either in the Law, or in the Gospel, or
in both: Wherefore the Law and the Gospel are the chief general heads which
comprehend all the doctrine of the Scripture. 2. Christ himself makes this
division of that doctrine which he commands to be preached in his name,
saying; So it is written, and so it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead the third day, and that in his name should be preached repentance and
remission of sins. Now the whole sum of all this is delivered in the Law and
the Gospel. 3. The writings of the Prophets and Apostles do contain in them
the old and new Testament, or covenants between God and man: Therefore it must
needs be that in them is declared what God promises, and what he does unto
us; to wit, his favor, remission of sins, his holy Spirit, righteousness,
and life everlasting: as also what he requires of us; that is to say, Faith
and Obedience. And these are the things which are taught in the Law and Gospel.
4. Christ is the foundation and ground of the whole Scripture; and the doctrine
of the Law and Gospel is necessary to conduct us to the knowledge of Christ and
of his benefits. For, the Law is our Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3.24.
constraining us to flee unto him, and showing us what that justice is which
Christ has recovered, and restored unto us. The Gospel of purpose amply
treats of the person of Christ, his office and benefits: Therefore, all
Scripture and heavenly doctrine is comprehended in the Law and the Gospel.

3. Differences of the Law and Gospel
The maine differences of these two parts of Christian doctrine consist in three
things: In the matter it self.
In the subject or matter and kind of doctrine which they diliver, because the
Law is a doctrine prescribing unto men what is to be done, and prohibiting
whatsoever ought to be left undone; whereas the Gospel is a preaching of free
remission of sins by and through Christ. In the manner of revealing.
In the manner of their revealing; because the Law is known by nature, the
Gospel is revealed from above. In their promises.
In their promises; because the Law promises life with condition of perfect
obedience, the Gospel promises the same life on condition of our steadfast
faith in Christ, and the inchoation or beginning of new obedience unto God. But
hereof more shall be spoken hereafter in his due place.

3 Wherein the doctrine of the Church differs from the doctrine of other
Sects, and from Philosophy also, and why these differences are to be retained.
THE differences between the doctrine of Gods Church, and other Religions, 4
Differences between Church-doctrine and other Religions*
are four. In their Authors.
GOD is the author of the doctrine of the Church, from whom it was delivered by
the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles: other Sects are sprung from men, and
have been invented by men through the suggestion of Satan. In their
testimonies of confirmation.
The doctrine of the Church alone has divine testimonies, firm and
infallible, such as quiet consciences, and convince all other Sects of error.
In teaching and not teaching aright the whole Law.
In the Church the entire and incorrupt Law of GOD is perfectly retained and
kept: as for other Sects and Religions, they maime and corrupt the Law of GOD.
For they utterly reject the doctrine of the first Table concerning the true
knowledge and worship of GOD, either framing unto themselves another God
besides that GOD who by his word and works has revealed himself unto his
Church; or seeking to know God, but not by and in his Son; or worshipping GOD
otherwise than he has commanded in his word. They are also altogether
ignorant of the inward and spiritual obedience of the second Table. That
little good and truth which they have, is a part of the commandments of the
second Table concerning external discipline, and civil duties toward men. In
preaching and not preaching aright the whole Gospel.
The Gospel of Christ is wholly taught and rightly understood in the Church
only; other Sects are either clean ignorant of it, and despise it; as the
Ethnickes, Philosophers, Jews, and Turks: or they do patch some little part
of it out of the doctrine of the Apostles unto their own errors, of which
part yet they neither know not perceive the use; as the Arrians, Papists,
Anabaptists, and all other Heretics; of whom some maintain errors
concerning the person, others concerning the office of our Mediator. These
maine discords do prove that the doctrine of the Church alone is zealously to
be followed and kept, and the Religion and doctrine of other Sects repugnant to
the truth, warily to be prevented and avoided; according as it is said in
Scripture, BEWARE of false Prophets: and, FLY Idols.

The case holds not alike in Philosophy: For true Philosophy, howsoever it
vary much from the doctrine of the Church, yet it impugneth it not; it is no
lie, as are the false doctrines of other Sects, but it is absolute truth, and
as it were a certain bright-shining ray of Gods divine wisdom, fixed in man's
understanding at the creation: For, it is a doctrine treating of God and his
creatures, The nature of Philosophy, with the lawful and fruitful use thereof.
and other things good and profitable unto mankind, compiled by wise and grave
men through the light of Nature, and grounded on principles in their own nature
plain and evident. Whence it follows, that it is a thing not only lawful,
but profitable also for Christans to employ their labor and travel in the
studies of Philosophy; whereas contrariwise we may not busy our wits in the
doctrine of other Sects, but detest them all as untruths and lies coined by the
Devil. Notwithstanding, between Philosophy and the doctrine of the Church there
is great difference, especially consisting in these points: 3 Differences
between Philosophy and Church-doctrine:
In their grinciples.
They disagree in their principles: For Philosophy in her principles, is merely
natural, founded and built on things naturally known unto every man: but the
doctrine of the Church, although it contain many things depending on nature;
yet the chiefest part thereof, I mean the Gospel, so far surpasses the reach
and capacity of nature, that had not the Son of God revealed it unto us out
of his Fathers bosom, no wit of men or Angels could have attained unto it. In
their subjects
They vary in their subjects, and matter which they handle: For the doctrine of
the Church comprehends the full, perfect, and entire sense both of the Law
and Gospel; but Philosophy is quite ignorant of the Gospel, and omitteth the
principal parts of the Law, and rawly and obscurely propounds that small
portion it retains concerning discipline, and external duties, drawn but out
of some few precepts of the Decalogue. It teacherh us also other arts and
sciences meet and serviceable for man's life; as Logic, Physic, and the
Mathematickes* all which are not delivered in Church doctrine, but have their
proper necessary use in handling and learning the same. In their effects.
They concur not in their several effects: For the doctrine of the Church
alone shows us the original of all evils, and man's misery; to wit, the fall
disobedience, or sin of our first parents. Moreover it ministers true and
lively comfort unto our consciences, pointing out the means by which we may
wade out of the danger of sin and death, and assuring us of life eternal
through Christ. As for Philosophy, it knows not the cause of our evils,
neither yields it us any sound comfort or consolation. Philosophy has
certain comforts common unto her with Divinity; Comforts common both to
Philosophy and Divinity.
such are 1. The providence of God. 2. The necessity of obeying of God. 3. A
good conscience. 4. The worthiness of virtue. 5. The final causes or the ends
which virtue proposes. 6. The examples of others. 7. Hope of reward. 8. A
comparing of events, because a less evil compared unto a greater carries a
show and shadow of good: but true comforts against sin and death are proper
to the Church; Comforts proper to Gods Church.
such as are 1. Free remission of sins by and for Christ. 2. The grace and
presence of God in our very miseries. 3. Our final delivery, and life
everlasting. Wherefore Philosophy, though in respect of Divinity it be
unperfect, and fail in these premises; yet it never impugneth Divinity.
Whatsoever erroneous opinions, contrary to the true doctrine of the Church,
occur in the writings of Philosophers, or are cited out of Philosophy to
overthrow Scripture; all these are either no way Philosophical, but the vain
sleights of man's wit, and very biles and sores of true Philosophy; such as was
the opinion of Aristotle concerning the eternity of the world, and of Epicurus
touching the mortality of the soul, and such like: or else they are indeed
Philosophical opinions, but unfitly applied to Divinity.

The use of these differences in doctrine.
These maine differences between Christian doctrine and other Religions, and
Philosophy also, are very worthy observation, for these ends: That Gods glory
be no way impaired of us, but reserved wholly unto himself; which cannot be,
unless we acknowledge and confess in the face and eye of the world,
whatsoever he has precisely commanded us to believe, either concerning
himself, or his will; and that we add nothing of our own brain unto that
which he has revealed. For God cannot be mingled with Idols, nor his truth
confounded with Satan's forgeries without high dishonor to his name. That we
hazard not, nor endanger our salvation, which might happen, if erroneously we
should embrace for true Religion any Schismatic doctrine, or heathenish
Philosophy. That our faith and comfort in Christ Jesus might be strengthened
and confirmed, which falls out, when we discern the perfection of the
doctrine of the Church before all other Religions: how many important and
weighty matters are found in our Religion, which are wanting in others: What
are the causes why they alone are saved who profess this doctrine, and other
Religions with their Sectaries and adherents are damned, and of God rejected:
Finally, that we separate our selves from Epicures and Academicks, who either
make a mockery of piety and godliness, or so rack Religion, that they think
every man in every Religion shall be saved; wresting in this sense that saying
of the Apostle, The just man shall live by HIS faith. Now these Epicures are
not worthy the answering: Romans 1.17. Hab. 2.4.
as for those Academicks, they manifestly falsify the sentence and meaning of
the Apostle, and are easily refuted. For, the pronoune HIS in no sort
signifies whatsoever faith every man frames unto himself, but the true
Catholic faith, particularly appropriated unto every man; and this word HIS
stands in opposition against any other man's faith, though it be a true and
good faith; and thwarteth and crosses also the opinion of Justification by
works. So that the natural sense of that Text is, The just man is justified,
not by the works of the Law, but by faith alone in Christ, and that by his own
private faith, not by the faith of another man.

4 Whence it may appear that the doctrine of the Church alone was delivered of
God.
5 By what testimonies the certainty of Christian Religion, or Church-doctrine
is confirmed.
GOD in the very creation of the world put this bridle in the mouth of all
reasonable creatures, that no man, without extreme and manifest impudeney,
such as was the Devil in Paradise, durst say, that any thing, if it were once
apparently known to have been spoken, or commanded by God, might be called into
question, or that any man might refuse to obey it. Here-hence are those things
so often inculcated in the Prophets. Hearken, O heavens, and hearken, O earth,
for the Lord has spoken. Thus says the Lord. The word of the Lord came to
Esaias, Jeremias, etc. Since therefore it appears, that the books of the Old
and New Testament are the words of God, there is no place left of doubting,
whether that be the true Religion and Doctrine which is contained in them: but
whether these books were written by divine instinct, and by what proofs and
testimonies we are certain of so great a matter, this is a question not to be
let pass of us. Wherefore this question is necessary.
For except this above all other things remain steadfast and immovable, that
whatsoever we read in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, does as truly
declare the will of God unto us, as if we did hear God openly speaking tous
from heaven; it cannot choose, but that the very foundation and whole certainty
of Christian Religion must be weakened. Wherefore, it is a consideration worthy
those who are desirous of the glory of God, and do seek for sure comfort, to
enquire whence it may appear unto us, The first part. The authority of the
Scripture does depend on the Church.
that the holy Scripture is the Word of God. To this question now long since
answer has been made by the Papists, that forsooth it is not otherwise
certain, then because the Church does confirm it by her testimony. But we, as
we neither reject nor contemn the testimony of the true Church; so we doubt
not, but their opinion is pestilent and detestable, who do often say, that the
holy Scriptures have not their authority elsewhere, then from the word of the
Church.

1 Reason. The reproach of God.
For first, wicked is it and blasphemous to say, that the authority of Gods Word
depends of the testimony of man. And if it be so, that the chiefest cause why
we believe that the Scriptures were delivered from heaven be the witness of
the Church, who sees not, that hereby the authority of a man's voice is made
greater then the voice of God? For he that yields his testimony unto another,
so that he is the only, or the chief cause why credence is given unto the
other, out of all doubt, greater credit is given unto him, then unto the other
who receives his testimony. Wherefore it is a speech most unworthy the majesty
of God, that the voice of God speaking in his holy Book is not acknowledged,
except it be confirmed by the witness of men.

2 Reason. Our comfort. Faith is grounded on approved witness, therefore not
on man's.
Secondarily, whereas the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles does preach of
so great matters, as the certain knowledge whereof is so greatly desired of
all, who are well disposed, and the conflicts of doubtfulnesse in all men's
minds are so great; what full assurance of our faith can there be, what sure
consolation against assaults or temptations, if that that voice, on which our
confidence relieth, be no otherwise known unto us to be indeed the voice of
God, but because men say so, in whom we see so much ignorance, error, and
vanity to be, that no man scarcely, especially in matters of some weight, does
attribute much unto their word, except other reason concur with it?

3 Reason. The confutation of our enemies.
Thirdly, the truth of God and Christian Religion is plainly exposed unto the
mocks and scoffs of the wicked, if we, going about to stop their mouths, do
therefore only desire that we should be credited, that our Religion is from
God, because our selves say so. For if they be by no other confutation
repressed, they will with no less show of truth deny it, then we affirm it.

4 Reason. Witnesses.
Last of all, the Scripture it self in many places is against this opinion, and
does challenge a far higher authority unto it self, then which hangs upon
men's words. For so says Christ himself, I receive not the record of man:
signifying thereby, John 5.
that his doctrine stood not, no not on John Baptists testimony, although yet
he did allege it, but as of less account; that he might omit nothing, by
which men might be moved to believe. Therefore he adds, But I say these
things that you may believe. I have a greater witness then the witness of
John. And if Christ now, being humbled, said these things of himself, then
surely shall they be no less true of him being in glory, and sitting in his
Throne. Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.
My word and my preaching stood not in entising speech of man's wisdom, but in
plain evidence of spirit, and of power, that your faith should not be in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God. If so be then our faith must not rest,
no not upon reasons wisely framed by men, much less shall it depend on the
bare word of men. Ephesians. 2.
The Church her self is said to be built upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles: If then the confidence and confession of the Church stays on
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as on the foundation; the certainty
of Scripture cannot hang on the Churches witness: for so should not the Church
be upheld by the testimony of the Prophets and Apostles, but by her own. And
it is said, 1 John 5.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: If it be
greater, then the authority of it hangs not on the record of man; but we are
to give more credence unto God, witnessing the Prophets and Apostles writings
to be indeed his voice, then unto the Church affirming the same.

1 Object. That they are true, the Church alone does witness. Ans. The Minor
is false.
Now that it is said of the contrary, That by the Churches record alone, it does
appear unto us, that the sacred books which we have, were written by the
Prophets and Apostles, whose names they bear in their forehead, and that even
unto us they are come incorrupt: this we grant not, For God far more certainly
testifies both in Scripture, and in the hearts of his Saints, that no feigned
or forged thing is in these books, then it can be by the Church, and all the
creatures of the world, confirmed. They therefore who stand upon the Churches
testimony alone in this point, show that themselves have not as yet felt or
understood the chiefest testimony.

2 Object. The discerning of books. Ans The Minor is false. 1 The working of
the holy Ghost.
Furthermore they say, That the books authenticke, or, as they term them,
Canonical, of both Testaments, are discerned from the Apocryphal by the
Churches judgment: and therefore that the authority of holy Canon does depend
on the Churches wisdom. But that this difference of the books is not
determined by the Churches judgment, but being imprinted into the books
themselves by the Spirit of God, is only acknowledged and approved by the
Church; this is easily to be understood, if the causes of this difference be
considered. For either in these which are called Apocryphal, the force and
majesty of the heavenly Spirit does less evidently appear in the weight and
vehemence of word and matter, then in others; of which it is clear, that they
are the heavenly Oracles, 2 The certainty of Authors.
set down in writing by the divine instinct, that they might be the rule of our
faith: or it cannot be determined, neither out of these books themselves, nor
out of others which are Canonical, that they were written either by the
Prophets or Apostles: because either they were not opened by those, whom God by
certain testimonies has warranted unto us to be endued with a Prophetical
spirit; or themselves do not show any certain Authors of them; or by their
form of speech, or other reasons it may be gathered, that they were not left of
them whose names they bear. Now as touching either this evidence of spirit, or
certainty of the authors, we build not our judgment on the testimony of the
Church, but of the books themselves. And therefore not for the Churches
judgment only do we judge some books to be Canonical, and the foundation and
rule of our faith, and do therefore accept of the doctrine of other some,
because they agree with the Canonical; but rather for the very cause of this
difference which we find in the books themselves.

3 Object. The Church is more ancient then the Scripture. 1 Ans. The Minor is
false.
As for that which some men say, that the Church is ancienter then the
Scriptures, and therefore of greater authority, it is too trifling. For the
Word of God is the everlasting wisdom in God himself. Neither was the
knowledge of it then first manifested unto the Church, when it was committed to
writing, but the manifesting of it began together with the creation of mankind,
and the first beginnings of the Church in Paradise: yea, the Word is that
immortal seed, of which the Church was borne.

The Church therefore could not be, except the word were first delivered. Now
when we name the holy Scripture, The Scripture is first in nature as the cause.
we mean not so much the characters of the letters, and the volumes; but rather
the sentences which are contained in them, which they shall never be able to
prove to be of less antiquity then the Church. For albeit they were repeated
and declared often after the beginning of the gathering of the Church: 2 Ans.
The Minor is false.
yet the sum of the Law and Gospel was the same for ever.

To conclude, neither is that which they assume always true, That the
authority of the ancienter witness is greater then of the younger: A younger
workman may be more skillful then an elder.
for such may be the condition and quality of the younger witness, that he may
deserve greater credit then the ancienter. Christ, being man, bare witness of
himself: Moses also and the Prophets had long time before borne witness of
him; yet neither his, nor all other witnesses authority is therefore greater
then Christ's alone. In like sort the Church witnesses, that the holy Scripture
which we have, is the Word of God. The Scripture it self also does witness
of it self the same, but with that kind of witness that is more certain and
sure then all the others of Angels and men.

There is alleged also to this purpose a place, 4 Object. The pillar of truth.
1 Timothy 3.
where the Church is called the pillar and ground of the truth. But since the
Scripture does teach other-where, and that not once, that the foundation of the
Church is Christ and his word; it is manifest enough that the Church is the
pillar of the truth: not a fundamental, or upholding pillar, but a
ministerial, that is, a keeper and spreader of it abroad, and as it were a
mansion place, or sure seat, which might carry the truth left with her, and
committed unto her, in the open face of all mankind: Acts 9. Galat. 2. 1 These.
2. 2 These. 1. Titus 1. Galat. 2.
even as the holy Apostle Paul was called an elect vessel, to bear the Name
of God before the Gentiles and Kings: neither yet did Paul get credit unto the
Gospel, but the Gospel unto Paul. So likewise are the Apostles termed pillars,
not that the Church rested on their persons, but that they were the chief
teachers of the Gospel, and as it were the Chieftaines and Masters of doctrine:
for a man is not bound to believe those that teach, on their bare word, but for
the proofs which they bring of their doctrine.

Furthermore, they allege a sentence of Austine out of his book entitled, 5
Object. Chap. 5. A place of Augustine. 1 Ans. An Example makes no rule.
Against the Epistle of the foundation, I (says Austine) would not believe the
Gospel, except the authority of the Catholic Church did move me thereunto.
But first, if it were true, that either Austine, or some others did give
credence unto the Gospel only for the Churches authority, yet might there not
be fashioned a rule hence of that which all men either did, or ought to do.
But that this is not the meaning of Austine, which these men would have, they
do easily perceive, who weigh both the whole course of this place, and the
phrase of speech which is usual unto Austine. For Austine going about to show
that the Manichees were destitute of all proof of their doctrine, first he
opposes one, who as yet believes not the Gospel, 2 Ans. He speaks of
himself, as yet not converted, or not sufficiently confirmed.
and denies that such a one is able any way to be convicted by the Manicheans;
for he were to be convicted either by arguments drawn out of the doctrine it
self, of which themselves were departed: for example sake he proposes
himself, who should not have believed the Gospel, except the authority of the
Catholic Church had moved him thereunto. Austine therefore speaks this not
of himself, as he was then when he writ these things against the Manicheans;
but of himself, before he was yet converted, or not sufficiently confirmed.
And that he speaks not of the present, but of the time past, the words that
follow do manifestly declare: Whom then I believed, when they said, Believe
the Gospel: why should I not believe them, when they say, Believe not a
Manichean? For hence it appears, that when he says, he was moved especially
by the authority of the Church, he means it of that time, at which he obeyed
the Churches voice, that is, departed from the Manicheans unto the true Church.
But after that once he was converted, and had perceived the truth of doctrine;
that his faith was not now any more builded on the authority of the Church, but
on a far other foundation, himself is a most sufficient witness for us,
whereas in the self same book, he says on this wise: Chap. 14. Therefore he
did believe the Church especially, before he was able to perceive it.
Thou have proposed nothing else, but to commend that thy self beleevest, and
to laugh at that which I believe. And when as I of the other side shall commend
that which my self believe, and laugh at that which thou beleevest; what do
thou think we must determine, or do, but even to shake hands with them, who
bid us to know certain things, afterward will us to believe things that are
uncertain? and, Let us follow them, who bid us first to believe that, which as
yet we are not able to perceive, that being more enabled by faith it self, we
may discern to understand that which we believe; not men now, but God
himself, inwardly strengthening and enlightening our mind. Wherefore they do
manifest injury unto Austine, who draw that which himself confesses of
himself, when he was not yet converted, or was but weak, unto that time, when
he affirms far otherwise, both of himself, and all the godly. For so
reverent a regard ought we to have of the word of God, The application of the
answer.
and such also is the force and efficacy of the holy Spirit in confirming the
hearts of believers, that we believe God, yea without any creatures testimony,
even as Elias forsook not God, no not when he thought, 1 Kings 19. That
follows not which they would: 1 Because there is more in the consequent, than
in the antecedent. 2 Because there is a fallacy of the Accident.
A declaration of the like example.
that himself was only left alive of the true worshippers of God. If
therefore either Austine, or whosoever else being not as yet converted unto
Religion, not as yet having experience of the certainty of it in his heart, was
moved rather by humane than divine testimonies to embrace it: it cannot thereof
be gathered that the certainty of the holy Scripture depends on no other
testimonies, or that by no other we are assured of it: because that some are
moved especially by humane voices to reverence it, comes not thereof to pass,
for that the Scripture is not maintained by any other authority; but it
chances through the fault and weakness of them, who sticking upon humane
records, do not feel as yet, or understand divine. An Image and example of
these degrees of faith, is the story of the Samaritane woman. For many of the
Samaritans are said to have believed in Christ, 1 The Samaritans.
because of the speech of the woman, who testified, that he had told her
whatsoever she had done. But after that they had Christ with them for two
days, many more believed because of his own speech; and they said unto the
woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. All
men come not by the same occasions, nor have not the same beginnings unto
faith. 2 The Emulation of the Jews. Romans 11.
Paul says, that salvation was come unto the Gentiles, and that he did
magnify his ministry, that the Jews might be provoked to follow the Gentiles.
In the first of Peter, 3 The honesty of wives. Chap. 3.
wives are willed to be subject unto their husbands, that even they which obey
not the word, may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives,
while they behold their pure conversation which is with fear. Even then as the
Samritans were moved, first by the speech of the woman, to believe in Christ,
but after they had seen Christ, and heard him, they were so confirmed, that
they said they would now believe though the woman held her peace: so also may
it be, that they which are not as yet converted, or but weaklings, may be moved
especially by the Churches testimony, (as which runs more into their eyes)
to give credence unto the Scripture; who yet nevertheless, after they are once
illuminated with a more plentiful light of faith, do find by experience, that
they are confirmed by a far superior and more certain testimony, that the
Scripture is the word of God, and do know by the force and evidence of it, that
they must keep their faith, were all the Angels and men perswaders to the
contrary: as it is said by the Apostle: Though we, or an Angel from heaven,
preach unto you otherwise then that which we have preached unto you, (...)
let him be accursed. By these things therefore it may be understood, that the
voice and consent of the catholic Church may and ought, The conclusion of the
first part.
amongst other testimonies, to serve for our confirmation; and yet the
authority of the holy Scripture not to hang upon it: but that out of the
Scripture it self rather we must learn by what arguments we may be brought
to know that it was delivered from God; because that God himself does witness
it: and also such is the force and quality of that heavenly doctrine, that
although all men should gainsay it, yet it should not be any otherwise more
manifestly and certainly known to be the voice of God, than by it self.

But left any man may think, that by any arguments, which even reason by a
natural light judges to be sound, The second part. Arguments showing the
certainty of the Scripture.
without the singular grace of the spirit, this may be wrought in the minds of
the wicked, as either to obey the truth, or to leave off to reproach it: first,
he must remember that the arguments or testimonies are of two sorts, which
show the certainty of Christian Religion, and maintain the authority of the
Scripture. For there is but one only testimony, which is appropriated unto
them alone who are regenerated by the spirit of Christ, and unto them alone is
it known: the force of which testimony is so great, that it does not only
abundantly testify and seal in our minds the truth of the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, but it also inclines and moves our hearts to the
embracing and following of it. Other testimonies, whatsoever may be brought,
they are understood indeed both of the godly and the wicked, and do compel
their consciences to confess, that this Religion rather then others is
pleasing unto God, and that it came from him: but unless that one other come
also, which is known of the godly alone, these testimonies will never bring to
pass, that men shall embrace the truth, although it be known unto them. The
arguments therefore which show the truth and certainty of the Scripture, or
Church-doctrine, are these:

The purity of doctrine.
The purity and perfectness of the Law therein contained: For impossible it
is, that that Religion should be true, and derived from God, which makes
Idols, or approves open outrages, flat against the express Law of God, and
sound judgment of reason. Now all religions (that only excepted which is
delivered in Scripture, and received of the Church) are manifestly convicted of
this crime: For (as before has been sufficiently declared) they either
abrogate and cancel the first Table of Gods Law touching the true God, and his
worship, or they shamefully defile and disgrace it with their feigned untruths;
and of the second Table they reserve only a part, touching outward decent
demeanor, and civil duties. Only the Church, according to the prescript of
Scripture, retains both Tables of the Law whole and sound. Wherefore the
doctrine of the Church alone is true and divine.

The Gospel, showing our deliverance.
The gospel, which shows us the only way to escape, and find deliverance
from out the power of sin and death: For questionless that doctrine and
religion is true and divine, which directs us unto the means of avoiding sin
and death, without violating Gods justice, and which yields effectual and
lively consolation to men's consciences concerning life everlasting. But it is
the doctrine of the Church alone set down in the Gospel, which opens and
proclaims unto us this freedom from misery, and seals unto men's
consciences these solid comforts: Therefore that doctrine alone is true and
divine.

Antiquity.
The antiquity of this doctrine, which is found to be most ancient: For the
doctrine of the Church alone delivered in Scripture, deriveth her original
from God, and is able to prove her continual descent from the beginning of the
world. The conference of the histories of the whole world with divine history
shows, that all other religions rose long time after it, and are Novices in
respect thereof. Whereas then undoubtedly the ancientest Religion is most true
(for men received the first Religion that ever was, immediately from God) it
follows, that the doctrine of the Church alone is true and divine.

Miracles.
The miracles, whereby God from the beginning of the world confirmed the truth
of this doctrine, such as the Devil is not able to imitate in deed, nay not to
resemble in show; I mean, The raising of the dead the standing still or going
back of the Sun, Luke 7. Josh. 10.13. 2 Kin. 20. Exodus 14. 2 Kin. 2. Genesis 18.
the dividing of the sea and rivers, the making of the barren fruitful, and
such like; which miracles, whereas they are the works of God alone, wrought
for the confirmation of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles (and God
cannot give testimony unto a lie) do powerfully evince, that this doctrine is
most true, and proceeds from God.

For albeit mention is made also of some miracles of the Heathen, 1 Object.
Others also have miracles. Ans. It is not true
and it is said of Antichrist and false prophets, that they shall work signs
and great wonders, so that the very elect themselves, if it were possible,
should be seduced: yet these neither in number, not in greatness are equal
unto the miracles of the Church; and by the end, for which they are done, it
may easily be discerned, that they are not wrought by any divine power.
Wherefore there is a double difference, especially by which true miracles are
severed from false: For first, Those miracles which are vaunted of by the
enemies of the Church, are such as without changing course and order of nature,
They differ. 1 In the substance.
may be done by the sleights and jugglings of men or Devils: and seem therefore
to others to be miracles, because they perceive not the causes of them, and the
means whereby they are wrought. Furthermore, they have this as their chief end,
that they confirm Idols, superstitions, 2 In the ends.
manifest errors and mischiefs. But the miracles with which God has set
forth his Church, are works either besides, or contrary unto the course of
nature and second causes: and therefore not wrought but by the power of God.
The which that it might be the more manifest, God has wrought many miracles
for the confirming of his truth, whose very show the devil is never able to
imitate or resemble: as the aforesaid miracles; raising of the dead, to stay or
call back the course of the Sun, to make fruitless and barren women fruit
full. But specially, the miracles of God are distinguished by their ends from
the divellish and feigned. For, they confirm nothing, but that which is
agreeing with those things which aforetime were revealed by God, and that in
respect of the glory of the true God, of godliness, and holiness, and the
salvation of men. And therefore it is said of the miracles of Antichrist, 2
Thes^^.
That his coming shall be by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders, and in all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, among them
that perish, etc. Now, 2 Object. They are doubtful.
if any be so bold as to call in question, whether or no the miracles which are
reported in the Scriptures, were done so indeed, he is out of all question of
very great impudency. Ans. The Antecedent is false.
For he may after the same manner give the lie to all both sacred and profane
histories. But let us first understand, that as other parts of the holy story,
so especially the miracles are recited, as things not wrought in a corner, but
done in the public face of the Church and mankind. In vain should the
Prophets and Apostles have endeavored to get credit unto their doctrine by
miracles, which men had never seen. Furthermore, the doctrine which they
brought was strange unto the judgment of reason, and contrary to the
affections of men: and therefore their miracles, except they had been most
manifest, would never have found credit. Also it clearly appears, both in the
miracles themselves, and in the doctrine which is confirmed by them, that they
who writ them, sought not their own glory, or other commodities of this life,
but only the glory of God and men's salvation. To these arguments agrees not
only the testimony of the Church, but the confession also of the very enemies
of Christ, who surely, if by any means they could, would have denied and
suppressed even those things that were true and known; much less would they
have confirmed by their testimony ought that had been forged, or obscure.

Oracles.
The Oracles and Prophecies of things to come verified by their events, of
which sort many are found in the books of either Testament, whose heavenly
fountain and head-spring is evidently demonstrated, in that it is the property
of God alone to utter true Oracles.

Consent in the parts of doctrine.
The consent of each part of the doctrine of the Church: For that doctrine
which is contrary unto it self, is neither true, nor of God, since that truth
consorteth with truth, and God contradicts not himself. But the doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles alone except, all other Religions manifoldly jarre,
discord, and mutinize within themselves, even in their very foundation, and
chief points. Wherefore the doctrine of the Church alone is true and divine.

Enemies confession. Luke 4.41.
The confession of very enemies: Because the Devil himself is enforced to cry
out, Thou art the Christ the Son of God: and other enemies are constrained to
confess, that this our doctrine is true; for whatsoever goodness and truth
they have in their Religions, the selfsame has our Religion, and that more
clearly and soundly disciphered; and they may easily be convicted to have
stolen it from our Religion, and intermingled it with their own forgeries, as
indeed it is the custom of the Devil, through Apish imitation of God, to
mingle some truth with his manifold falsehoods, that thereby he may the more
cunningly and easily deceive men. Whence it arises, that these things, which
other Sects have agreeable with our doctrine, cannot therefore be refelled,
because they have borrowed them of us; but those things which are contrary to
our doctrine are at the first on set overthrown, because they are the
inventions of men.

Satan and wicked men's hatred thereof.
The hatred of Satan and his instruments exercised against this doctrine: For
certainly that doctrine is true and divine, which all the wicked, yea and Satan
himself with joint conspiracy despite, and endeavor to abolish: For, Truth
hatcheth hatred; and, John 8.44.
The Devil is a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. But Satan
and the world oppugn not, nor hate more eagerly any doctrine then the doctrine
of the Church, because (forsooth) it accuses them more sharply, and handles
them more rigorously; it oftener calls their cavils into trial, sifreth and
discovers their fallacies, and condemns their Idols, and other vices, then
any other Sect, which rather either tolerate and wink at, or patronize and
defend them. The world hates me, because I testify of it, that the works
thereof are evil. John 5.17. John 15.19.
If ye were of the world, the world would love her own.

Gods mavelous preservation thereof.
The mavelous protection, and wonderful preservation of this doctrine
against the furies of Satan, and other enemies of the Church. For whereas no
Religion is more dangerously at all times without intermission assailed by
Tyrants and Heretics, then this of the Church, and God notwithstanding has
hitherto wonderfully protected it against the cankred rancour and malice of
enemies, and the very gates of Hell (insomuch as it alone has persisted
invincible; whereas other Religions, either not at all, or slenderly assailed,
have speedily perished, and suddenly fallen to the ground) hence we conclude,
that the doctrine of the Church is approved of God, cared for, and secured by
him.

Punishments of the enemies of it.
The punishments of the enemies. For without doubt, that Religion is allowed
and advanced by God, whose adversaries God punishes for oppugning and
withstanding it. But histories both old and new have registered and recorded the
dreadful and heavy punishments inflicted by God on them who resisted the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: Therefore God countenanceth and
authoriseth that doctrine. Now, although the wicked sometimes flourish in this
world, and the Church lies trodden under foot, yet the end and event
testifies, yea and Scripture teaches, that this is a work of Gods
providence, and no casualty or accident, neither is God therefore more pleased
with them, or displeased with his Church. For the Church is always preserved
even amidst her persecutions, and is at length delivered; whereas the short
felicity of Tyrants and wicked Imps has a most doleful and eternal
destruction following it. Neither is thereby the force of this proof weakened,
because that all the persecutors of the Church are not in tragical manner
punished in this life, as were Antiochus, Herod, and the rest. For, whiles God
does take vengeance on most of them in this life, he does sufficiently show
what he would have to be thought of the rest of their accomplices; verily, that
they are his enemies, whom, without they repent, he will plunge into eternal
plagues, the beginning and feeling of the which is desperation, in which all
the enemies of Christian Re^igion end their days, 2 Object. Not for this cause.
yea they who are not oppressed with any other calamities of this life. To
conclude, that it may be manifest, that they are not only for other
transgressions punished of God, God does so often denounce in his word, that
such shall be the ends of his enemies, Ans. Yea, for this cause.
and that for this very cause, because they go about to extinguish the people,
and true worship of God. Yea, furthermore they are not a few, from whom, while
they lie in torments, their conscience wresteth out this confession, that they
have drawn these miseries upon themselves, by persecuting the godly: as from
Antiochus Epiphanes, and Julian the Apostata. And since that all the
adversaries of the Church in their calamities and death are destitute of
comfort, it is manifest, that they suffer as the enemies of God; and therefore
are far from true Religion. Now that which the wicked alone do, there is no
doubt but that is in the number of their sins, for which they suffer
punishment. Wherefore the overthrowes of the enemies of the Church are no
obscure testimony of the wrath of God against them, even as God himself says
of Pharaoh, To the same purpose have I stirred thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, Exodus 9. Romans 9.
and that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth.

Confession and constancy of Martyrs.
The testimony and constancy of Martyrs, who sealing this doctrine with their
blood do show in the very midst of most exquisite torments, that they do so
think indeed, as they taught, and are firmly persuaded in their hearts of the
truth of that doctrine which they have professed; and that they draw that
comfort out of it which they did preach unto others: to wit, that for Christ's
sake they are truly the sons of God, and that God cares for them in the hour
and point of death. God therefore sustaining them by this lively comfort,
thereby witnesses, that he affects the doctrine of the Church, for which
they suffer.

The piety of the writers and professors thereof.
The true pretty and holiness of those who wrote the holy Scriptures, and made
open profession of the doctrine comprised therein. For that Religion is most
sacred and divine, which makes men holy and acceptable unto God. But the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and others, who heretofore have, and now do
earnestly embrace this doctrine, far exceed men of other Religions in true
virtue and integrity, as by the conference and comparison will appear.
Wherefore it accords with reason, that the doctrine of the Church, rather
then of any other Religion whatsoever, is true and divine.

Their plain dealing in detecting vices.
Their ingenuity and plain dealing in opening faults committed either by them
or theirs, whom the holy Ghost has used in committing this doctrine to
writing.

The testimony of the hol^ Ghost.
The testimony of the holy Ghost, by whose in spiration the Scriptures were
written; the testimony, I say, of the holy Ghost in the hearts of them which
believe, that is to say, a full faith and firm persuasion that the holy
Scripture is the word of God; that God, according unto the tenor of this
Scripture, will be merciful and good unto us; which faith there follows
joyfulnesse, resting on God, and calling on his name with assured hope of
obtaining both other good things, which according to the prescript of this word
we beg of him, and even eternal life it self. For this assent and assurance,
this lively consolation of the godly, testeth neither on the testimony of man,
nor any other creature, but it is the proper effect of the holy Ghost; which
effect how it is enflamed and strengthened by the same spirit, through the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles read, heard, and meditated, all the godly
in a lively and certain feeling of their hearts have experience. By this
testimony of the holy Ghost, all that are converted unto Christ, have the
certainty of heavenly doctrine mainly confirmed, and surely sealed up in their
hearts. And this argument, as it is proper unto the regenerate, so it forces
their hearts alone, not only to credit the truth and authority of the holy
Scripture, but also persuades them to give an absolute assent thereunto, and
rest settled thereon. All the other testimonies before alleged, are common to
those that are not converted unto Christ, whom they also convict, and stop the
mouths of them that contradict this doctrine. But of themselves, they neither
persuade not move the mind to assent, without the inward testimony of the holy
Ghost. But the Spirit of God, when he once breeds this most assured
persuasion in our minds, that the doctrine which is contained in the holy
Bible, is of a truth the will of God, and works that comfort and change of
our minds and hearts, which is promised and taught in this book; by our
experience and feeling it is so confirmed, that while this remains within us,
though all Angels and men should say contrary, yet we would believe this to be
the voice of God: but if that remain not, or be not in us, though all should
say it, yet we would not believe it. Neither does not the Spirit therefore
establish the authority of the Scripture, Object. The Scripture bears
witness of the Spirit; therefore the Spirit not of it. Answer.
because we are to examine what the Spirit speaks within us by the rule of
the Scripture: for, before that this is done of us, the Spirit himself
declares unto us, that the Scripture is the word of God, and inspired by him;
and that he will teach us nothing in our hearts, which is not agreeable unto
that testimony before set down of him in the Scripture. And if this be not
first most certainly persuaded us of the Spirit himself, we will never re-call
our opinions of God and his worship to the Scripture, as the only rule to try
them by. Now then after it is declared unto us by divine inspiration, that the
Scripture is a sufficient witness of that divine revelation in our hearts,
then at length do we find our selves to be confirmed, by the mutual testimony
of the same Spirit, in the Scripture and in our hearts, and we believe the
Scripture affirming of it self, 2 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 1.
That it was delivered by divine inspiration to the holy men of God.

6 For what cause no doctrine besides the holy Scripture is to be received in
the Church.
The Scripture is of God: therefore the rule of faith.
Whereas it appears unto us, that it is the word of God, which the Prophets
and Apostles have left in writing: there is no man which does not see, that the
Scripture must be the rule and square, by which all things, which are taught
and done in the Church, must be tried. Now all things, of which there uses to
rise questions in the Christian Church, do appertain either unto doctrine, or
unto discipline and ceremonies. That the word of God ought to be the rule unto
both sorts, it is out of doubt. But in this place we speak of the doctrine of
the Church, which consists in the sentences and decrees, which we are bound
by the commandment of god to believe or obey; and therefore they cannot be
changed by the authority of any creature; and they are become obnoxious unto
the wrath of God, whosoever submit not themselves in faith and obedience unto
them. To these decrees and precepts the Papists add many sentences, which not
only are no where delivered in Scripture, but are repugnant unto it; and they
contend, That the Church or the Bishops have authority of decreeing, yea,
contrary and besides the Scripture, what the Church must believe or do: and
that men's consciences are bound by those decrees, no less then by the words of
the holy Scripture, to believe or obey. Contrariwise, we believe and confess,
That no doctrine is to be proposed unto the Church, not only if it be repugnant
unto the holy Scripture, but if it be not contained in it. And whatsoever
either is not by the express testimony of the holy Scripture delivered, or
does not consequently follow out of the words of the Scripture rightly
understood that we hold, may be without hurt of conscience believed or not
believed changed, abrogated, and omitted. The difference of the Scripture and
of other men's opinions.
For, we must ever hold a necessary difference between the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the writings and doctrine of others in the Church.
The Scripture only is of it self to be believed, and the rule of faith.
That the Scripture only neither has, nor can have any error in any matter;
other teachers both may err, and oftentimes also do err, when they depart
from the written word of God. Again, that the Scriptures are believed on their
own word, because we know that God speaks with us in them; others have
credit, not because themselves say so, but because the Scripture witnesses so,
neither a whit more then they can prove by the Scripture. Wherefore we do not
reject others doctrine and labors in the Church; but only setting them in
their own place, we submit them unto the rule of Gods word. This doctrine
first is delivered of God himself, and that not in one place only of the
Scripture: as, You shall not add unto the word which I spoke unto you, neither
shall you take away from it. And, I protest unto every man that hears the
words of the prophecy of this book, Dent. 4. Revel. 22.
if any man shall add unto th^se things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the words,
etc. Neither only by these words is forbidden, that no false things, and openly
repugnant to the written word, be added to the doctrine of the Church, but also
that no uncertain things, or things not appertaining unto it, be mingled
therewith. For, it is not in the power of any creature to pronounce what we are
to think of God and his will: but this is only to be learned out of that
which is disclosed in his word. And therefore the men of Beraea are commended,
Who searched the Scriptures daily, Acts 17.
whether these things were so.

2 Faith is grounded only on the Word.
Secondly faith, which is spoken of in the Church, is a part of divine worship;
that is, the sure assent by which we embrace every word of God delivered unto
us, because it is impossible for us to be deceived by it, if we understand it
aright. Further also, that it may breed in us a true worshipping of God, and
comfort of our souls, it must stand sure and immovable against temptations:
But there is no certain doctrine concerning God and Religion, besides that
which is known to be revealed in his word. We may not therefore give the
honor which is due unto God, unto men; neither may we go from certain things
to uncertain, but cleave only to the word of God in the doctrine concerning
Religion: and therefore humane decrees must not be accounted amongst those
which we are to embrace by faith: Faith comes by hearing, hearing by the word
of God, etc.

3 Things necessary to be believed or done, are part of divine worship. But
things not prescribed, are no part of divine worship: Therefore they are not
necessary.
Thirdly, for so much as the worship of God is a work commanded of God,
performed by faith, to this end principally, that God may be honored; it is
manifest, that to believe and do those things which cannot be denied or
omitted without offending of God, is the worship of God: and contrariwise, that
God cannot be worshipped, but by the prescript of his will, both the
consciences of all men, and God himself in his holy word does testify: as, In
vain do they worship me, who teach the doctrines and commandments of men. It
is as wicked therefore to number those things which are not expressed in the
word of God, Isa. 29. Matthew. 15.
amongst those which are necessary to be believed and done in matters of
Religion; as it is unlawful for any creature to thrust upon God that worship
which himself never required.

4. The Scripture is sufficient.
Fourthly, there cannot be any thing added of men unto this doctrine without
great injury and contumely done unto the holy Scripture. For if other things,
besides these that are written, are necessary to the perfection of true
Religion; then does not the Scripture show the perfect manner of worshipping
God, and of attaining to salvation; which fights with the plain words of
Scripture, which affirm, that God has opened unto us in his Word as much as
he would have us know in this life concerning his will toward us: John 15.
as Christ says, All things which I have heard of my Father, I have made
known unto you. And Paul, I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all
the counsel of God. Acts 20.
And, Knowing that thou have known the holy Scriptures from a child, 2 Timothy 3.
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus. For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness.

5. Other Doctors may err, the Prophets and Apostles cannot; therefore they
are tied to these.
Fifthly, we are to consider the degrees of them who teach in the Church: For
therefore is the authority of the Prophets and Apostles far higher then of
other Ministers of the Church, because God called them immediately to declare
his will unto other men, and adorned them with testimonies of miracles, and
other things, by which he witnessed, that he did so lighten and guide their
minds with his Spirit, that he suffered them to err in no one point of
doctrine: our Ministers are called by men, and may err, and do err, when
they depart from the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore the
Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 1 Cor. 3.
That the Church is builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.
And, That he had laid the foundation, and other then that could no man lay:
others build upon it gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble. Now it
is manifest that they who may err, ought to be tied unto their doctrine who
are warranted by the testimonies of God that they cannot err. Wherefore all
other teachers in the Church must not bring any new point of doctrine, but
only propound and expound those things unto the Church, which are delivered by
the Prophets and Apostles. The consent of Fathers in this point.
For these causes therefore does the whole ancient Church with great consent
submit it self unto the rule of the sacred Scriptures, whose authority yet
ought of right to be greater then these men's, who both in words and deeds fight
against this opinion. Basil. sermon. de confess. fidei.
Basil says, That it is a falling from the faith, and a fault of pride, either
not to admit those things which are written in the holy Scriptures, or to add
any thing unto them. Agust. Epist. 3.
And Augustine, For neither ought we to account of every ones discourses
(though they be catholic and worthy men) as of the Canonical Scriptures, that
it may not be lawful for us, without impairing the reverence, which we owe to
those men, to dislike and refuse any thing in their writings, if peradventure
we shall find that they have thought otherwise then the Scripture has, as it
is by Gods assistance understood either of others, Epist. 112.
or of our selves. And, If ought be confirmed by the plain authority of the
divine Scriptures, of those which are called in the Church Canonical, we must
without any doubting believe it: as for other testimonies, by which any thing
is moved to be believed, thou may choose whether thou will believe them or no.

But against these testimonies of the Scriptures and the ancient Church, the
adversaries of the truth contend, that besides the doctrine which is comprised
in the holy Bible, other decrees also, made by the authority of the Church, are
no less unchangeable, and necessary to salvation, then the Oracles
Prophetical and Apostolic. And, that they may not without some show and
pretense take upon them this authority of decreeing what they list, Objections
of the Papists. 1 Object. The Scripture does not remain perfect. Numb. 21.
Joshua 10. 1 Kin. 14.19. Jude 9. and 14. 1 Cor. 5. Ephesians. 3. John 21.25.
besides and contrary unto the Scripture; they allege places of Scripture, in
which some writings of the Prophets and Apostles are mentioned, which are not
come to our hands: as, The book of the wars of the Lord, The book of the just,
The book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, The prophecy of Enoch, and
the story of the body of Moses. And lastly, the Apostle Paul makes mention of
his Epistles, which now the Church has not. Hence therefore these men will
conclude, That the doctrine of the sacred Scripture is maimed, and that
therefore the defect hereof must be supplied by the Church. But first of all,
concerning the holy Scripture we are to know, that so much thereof has been
preserved of God for us, as was necessary and profitable for the doctrine and
consolation of the Church. Furthermore, concerning points of Religion, though
some holy books are wanting; as those Epistles of Paul, yet it is manifest,
that all necessary doctrine is contained in those which are extant.

They allege, That many things were delivered by word of mouth, 2 Object. Some
things delivered by word of mouth. Answer.
both before there were any Scriptures and afterward also by Christ and the
Apostles, as John 16.12. 1 Corinthians. 11.34. 2 Thessal. 2.15. and elsewhere. But
those things which they delivered by word of mouth, are the self same which
they put in writing, except some matters of ceremonies, as Act. 15.20. 1 Cor.
11.34. which makes not for the adversaries, whose traditions most of them
repugne the Scriptures.

They allege farther the practice and examples of the Apostles, 3 Object. That
the Apostles have decreed against and besides the Scripture. Titus 1. 1
Timothy. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 6. Answer.
as if they did make any ordinances or laws either besides, or against the
Scripture: as when Paul ordains many things of choosing Bishops and Deacons,
of widows, of women to be covered, and to contain themselves in silence, of
not divorcing the husband, if he be an Infidel, of controversies between
Christians. But these men remember not, that their authority is not equal unto
the Apostles authority: neither consider they, that there is nothing in all
these things appointed of Paul, which is not agreeable to the rest of the Word
of God contained in writing, and that many of those things which they allege,
are comprehended in the commandments of the Decalogue. More trifling is it,
that they say the form of Baptism appointed by Christ was changed by the
Apostles, because it is read Acts 28.19. that they baptized in the Name of
Jesus Christ. For in those places not the form of Baptism, but the use is
declared, that is, that men were baptized for to testify that they did belong
to Christ. Neither yet by the example of the Apostles, who interdicted the
Churches things offered to Idols, blood, and that which was strangled, is it
lawful for Councels and Bishops to make decrees and laws to tie men's
consciences. For, first, here again there must needs be retained a difference
between the Apostles, by whom God opened his will unto men (whereupon they also
say, It seems good to the holy Ghost and to us) and other Ministers of the
Church, who are tied unto the Apostles doctrine. Further, as concerning this
decree of the Apostles, they decreed nothing else then what the rule of charity
commands, which at all times would have, that in things indifferent, men
should deal without offense. Now if they urge, that these ordinances are
called necessary; yet it does not thereupon follow, that the traditions of
Bishops are necessary, especially such as are the Bishops of Rome. Then, that
necessity, whereof the Apostles spoke, was neither to last continually, neither
did it bind consciences for fear of the wrath of God, if these things were not
observed: but it dured but for a time, for their infirmity, who were converted
from Judaisme to Christ, or were to be converted, 1 Cor. 10.
as Paul does at large teach.

To these they add the examples of the Church, 4 Object. Present examples.
whom they say even from the Apostles to these very times to have believed and
observed some things, But it has been already said, that that constitution was
made, not that it should last for ever, but for a time, for a certain cause,
even for the infirmity of the Church, which was gathered from among the Jews:
and after that cause ceased, that ordinance takes place no longer. Neither yet
did it at that time fetter men's consciences, as if the worshipping or offending
of God did lie in it: wherefore the abrogating of it is not contrary, but does
very well agree with it. To these also they reckon the observing of the Lords
day. an Apostolic tradition, and perceive it to be profitable, and a far
other manner of one then for the most part they are which they would feign
thrust upon us under the Apostles name; so we do not put any worship of God to
consist in this thing, but know it to be left arbitrary unto the Church. Even
as it is said, Let no man condemn you in respect of a holy day. some things
not written are believed, which yet to call to question, we our selves
confess to be unlawful: as, That Infants are to be baptized, That Christ
descended into Hell, Coloss. ^.
That the Son of God is consubstantiall unto the eternal Father. But they
are too impudent, if they take unto themselves a license of hatching new
opinions, because the Church for to expound the meaning of the Scripture, uses
somewhere words which are not extant in the Scripture. But impious are they and
blasphemous, if they say the doctrine it self which the Church professes in
these words, is not extant in the Scripture.

5 Object. The holy Ghost to teach the Church, therefore not the Scripture.
They say also, that the holy Ghost is promised the Church, that it may teach
those things which are not delivered in the Scriptures: as, But the Comforter,
which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father shall send in my name, he shall teach
you all things. And, When the Spirit of truth shall come, he shall lead you
into all truth. But here they maliciously omit that which is added; And shall
bring all things to your remembrance, which I have told you. John 14.26. and
16.13.
Again, He shall bear witness of me. Again, He will reprove the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Again, He shall glorify me, For
out of these it is manifest, I will put my law in their inward parts, Jerem.
31. 2 Cor. 3.3.
and in their hearts I will write it: And, Ye are the Epistle of Christ,
written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of
stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart; they do not mark that the Spirit
cannot speak in men's hearts contrary unto these things which be revealed in the
Scripture: neither would God write any other law in men's hearts, but that which
is already revealed and written; and that therefore the Apostle Paul opposes
not the matter written, but the manner of writing in tables and hearts one
against another; because that the same was written in both: but there with ink,
and here with the spirit of God. It has less color, which they go about to
build out of that place; If you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the
same unto you. Phil. 3.15.
If therefore, say they, the Church think any thing different from the written
word, that proceeds from the holy Ghost. For the Apostle comfort and
confirms the godly, that albeit they did not understand somewhat of that
which there he had written, or were of any other judgment in it: yet that
hereafter they should be taught it of God, and should know those things to be
true which he had written. When as therefore it is denied that the holy Ghost
reveals any thing diverse from that which is written, the rule and mastership
of the Spirit in the Church is not taken away, but the same Spirit is matched
with himself, that is, with the rule of the Scripture, lest those things
should be thrust upon us under his name, which are not his.

Further, 6 The Church does not err. Matthew 18.19.
they make their boast that the Church cannot err: and that therefore the
decrees of the Church are of equal authority with the holy Scripture, because
the Church is ruled by the same spirit, by which the Scripture is inspired;
even as it is promised, If two of you shall agree in earth upon any thing,
whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them of my Father which is in
heaven. For where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst
of them. And, I am with you always unto the end of the world. Matthew 28.20. 1
John 2.20, 27.
So, Ye have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye know all things:
Likewise, The anointing which ye received of him, dwells in you, and ye
need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and it is true, and is not lying, and as it taught you, ye shall abide
in him. But first of all we know, 1 Answer. The true Church. Matthew. 13. Mark
4. Luke 8.
that it is the true Church only which erreth not, and is ruled by the holy
Spirit, which is gathered in the name of Christ, that is, which hears and
follows the voice of the Son of God. And therefore these things do nothing
appertain to a wicked multitude, which openly maintains doctrine contrary to
the Gospel, though it never so much vaunt of the Churches name, yea and bears
sway and rule in the Church, according to that which is said; To him that has
shall be given: but from him that has not, even that which he seems to have
shall be taken away. So did the Pharisees and Sadducees among the Israelites
err, not knowing the Scriptures; neither were they the true Church, though
they seized upon the name and place of it. 2. The true Church indeed erreth not
universally: For always the light of the truth, 2 Answer. Universally.
especially concerning the foundation of doctrine, is preserved in some men's
minds: whereupon the Church is called the pillar and ground of truth. But yet
nevertheless, some of the godly oftentimes fall into errors through ignorance
and infirmity: yet so, that they hold the foundation, neither do they defend
their erroneous opinions contrary to their conscience, and at length they
forsake them, even as it is said, 1 Corinthians. 3.
If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, etc. And, If ye be
otherwise minded, Ephesians. 4.
God shall reveal even the same unto you. Last of all, There is given unto every
man grace, 1 Corinthians. 12.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. And, The Spirit distributeth
to every man severally as he will. Philip. 3.15.
The Apostles before they had received the holy Ghost at Whitsontide, were the
lively members of the Church; yet erred they concerning the kingdom and office
of the Messiah. There were of the Chiliasts opinion, great men in the Church as
Papyas, Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian, Victorinus, Lactantius, Methodius,
Martyr: And therefore, although the Church err not universally, yet oftentimes
some of her members err, when as they swerve from the word: which God
suffers not seldom to happen unto them, for to keep us, being warned of our
weakness and blindness, in modesty, and his true fear, and in daily
invocating of him; and withal, to teach us, that the truth of doctrine is not
to be measured by the title of the Church, but by the word delivered of him by
the hands of the Prophets and Apostles: as it is said, Thy word, O Lord, Psamle
129.
is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Likewise, 1 Timothy 6.20.
Keep that which is committed unto thee, and avoid profane and vain babblings.

This ground being once laid, that, so far forth the Church erreth not, 7
Object. The Church ought to obey Bishops by the commandment of God. Acts
20.28. Marthew 18.7. Luke 10.16. Heb. 13.17.
as it does not swerve from the written word of God, it is easy to answer to
that which they make show of to the contrary, That the Church is ruled by
Bishops, and therefore must obey them; as it is said, Take heed unto all the
flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to govern the Church
of God. And, If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen man, and a Publican. He that hears you hears me: and he that
despises you despises me. And, Obey those who bear rule over you: For both
they must rule, and the Church must obey them, according unto the prescript of
Gods word, as it is said, If any man preach any other doctrine, let him be
accursed. Galatians 1.9. Answer. Necessarily in those things which belong to
the Ministry: freely in traditions. Mat. 23.2.
Whatsoever therefore the Ministers propound of the word of God unto the
Church, we must of necessity obey it; that which the Lord teaches when he
says, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair: All therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do: For they sit in Moses chair, who
teach Moses doctrine in the Church. If also they ordain any things
indifferent, and of a middle sort, which are profitable, these also are
observed for maintaining of order and avoiding of offense. But if they require
us to believe or observe things repugnant to the word of God, or things that
are in their own nature indifferent, with putting an opinion of necessity in
them, and of worshipping of God, they sit no longer in Moses chair, but in the
chair of scorners, and of them it is said, John 10.^. 1 Timothy 4.1.
The sheep heard them not. Likewise, In the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, and shall give heed unto the spirits of error. And that the
decrees of the Bishops also are not to be received among the precepts and
decrees of the Church, is confirmed by the example of the civil Magistrate,
whose just and good laws bind the consciences of the subjects. For the
dissimilitude of the examples consists in that, 1 Instance. The Magistrate
does bind the conscience, therefore Bishops.
that God himself by express word has decreed a necessity of obedience to
the Laws and Commandments of the civil Magistrate, which are not repugnant
unto his Law: but has given a liberty of conscience in traditions of the
Church: so that he pronounces himself to be angry with him, who obeys not
civil Magistrates, as long as they command nothing repugnant to his Laws: but
not with them, which without offense do contrary to the constitutions of
Bishops. For of the Magistrate is is said, Romans 13.5.
We must obey him for conscience sake. But of things indifferent in the
Church; Col. 2.26.
Let no man condemn you in me at or drink, or in respect of a holy day.
Likewise, Galat. 5.^.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

Now, if again they reply, that the office of Bishops is above the civil
power, 2 Instance. The higher power does more bind. 1 Answer.
and therefore has greater force than that, to bind men to obey: first, we
grant, that more obedience is due unto the superior power then to the
inferior, as long as it commands nothing contrary to Gods word. As long
therefore as the Ministers propound the word of God unto the Church, and for
avoiding of offense command such things to be observed, as appertain to decency
and order, they do not now offend against them, but against God, whosoever obey
them not. But if they require their laws concerning things different to be
observed, with putting an opinion of necessity in them, and of the worship of
God, and do make them necessary, when there is no danger of offense to ensue;
because this charge is contrary to the word of God, no obedience is due unto
it. Further, we confess that greater obedience is due unto the superior power
in those things, in which it is superior, that is, in which God would have
other powers to obey it: But the Ministerial power is superior unto the
Civil in those things, in which it is superior; that is, which are of God
delivered, commanded, and committed unto the Ministers, that by them they may
be declared unto the Church. But, In matters indifferent, concerning which
nothing is either commanded or forbidden of God, the civil power is superior,
by reason of the authority, which God in these matters has given unto the
civil Magistrate, and not to the Ministers of the Church.

8 Object. Fathers and Councels are cited.
But against this they return again, That we also do allege the testimonies
of Councels and Fathers in confirming the doctrine of the Church: which were
but in vain for us to do, if their sentences had not the force and authority
of Ecclesiastical doctrine. But we never bring nor receive the testimonies of
the ancient Church with that mind, Answer.
as if, without the authority of the holy Scripture, they were sufficient for
confirmation of any points of doctrine. Neither yet is there regard had of them
in vain. 2. Uses of the testimonies of Fathers in points of doctrine.
For, 1. They which are rightly minded, after they are instructed by the voice
of the Scriptures concerning the truth, are yet more confirmed by the Church as
by a testimony of lower degree. 2. They which attribute more authority unto
them then they should* or abuse their sayings against the truth, are very well
refuted by the testimony of them, whom they have made their Judges.

Also they say, 9 Object. Traditions are order. 1 Cor. 14.
That order and decency in the Church is necessary by the commandment of God,
according as it is said, Let all things be done comely, and in order: For God
is not the author of confusion. Now the order and discipline of the Church
does a great part consist in traditions Ecclesiastical: wherefore they
conclude, that by the violating of these, men's consciences are wounded, Answ.
Of mere particulars there is no concluding. A double liberty of the Church in
matters of order.
and God offended. But as God commands some order to be appointed and kept in
the Church, so has he given a double liberty in it unto his Church: To appoint
it.
That it be arbitrary for the Church to appoint, as may be most commodious for
it, what order shall be in every place, and at every time observed: To keep or
not to keep it, being appointed, so it be without offense.
That also after any thing is certainly ordained, it may be kept, or not kept,
without hurt of conscience, both of the whole Church, and of every one of the
godly, if there be no danger of offense. For it is necessary, that ever a
difference be put betwixt the commandments of God (by the observing whereof
God is worshipped, and offended by the breaking of them) and those things which
God has left to men to appoint, neither is worshipped or offended, as himself
pronounces, either by the altering, or omitting of them, so long as there is
no cause, or danger of offense. 1 Cor. 14.40. Galat. 5.1. Col. 2.16.
And the same Apostle, who commands all things to be done comely and in
order, wills us to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and that we should be condemned of no man in meat or drink, or in
respect of a holyday. Wherefore, not they, who without contempt of divine
things, or wantonness, or danger of offense, do something otherwise in these
things then is appointed; but they rather offend against the commandment of
God, concerning keeping order, who either would have no order in the Church, or
trouble that which is well appointed.

These men find fault also with the obscurity of the holy Scripture, 10 Object.
Obscure things do not suffice without interpretation. 1 Pet. 3.16.
which they prove both by examples of hard places of Scripture, and also out of
Peter, where it is said, That there are some things hard to be understood in
the Epistles of Paul. And therefore, since that things darkly spoken, without
they be expounded, cannot suffice to perfect and wholesome doctrine, they urge,
that the interpretation of the Church also is necessary to be received with the
Scripture. But here above all things, they injure the holy Ghost, ascribing
darkness and obscurity unto him, Answer. The Minor is false, if they respect
the ground.
who of purpose endeavored to apply himself in simplicity of speech to the
capacity of the common people, and the rudest. For those things which
appertain to the ground of doctrine, which is necessary to be known of all, as
are the articles of our Belief, and the ten Commandments; they are so plainly
recited, so often repeated, so plentifully expounded in the Scriptures, that
they are open and easy to any, but to him who will not learn: even as the
119. Psalm teaches, where the word of the Lord is called a lantern to our
feet, and a light to our paths. Again, the entrance into thy word shows
light, and gives understanding to the simple. The word of the Prophet is
called a light shining in a dark place. To which ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and
the day star arise in your heart. 2 Pet. 1.19.
And Solomon affirms, that he writes to give the simple sharpness of wit;
and to the child, Prove. 1.4, 20.
knowledge and discretion. Again, that wisdom cries without, and utters
her voice in the streets. Paul also says, that Christ sent him to preach the
Gospel, 1 Corinthians. 1.17. 1 Instance. The ground of doctrine is unknown to
many. Answ. Yea to the reprobate. 2 Cor. 4.3. Isa. 65.2. Romans 10.21. Psalm.
36.3. Mat. 11.25.
not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none
effect. The ground therefore and sum of doctrine is not obscure, except it be
unto the reprobates, who contemn the truth, or stubbornly reject it: as the
Apostle says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that a^e lost: in whom
the god of this world has blinded their minds, that is, of the Infidels, that
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them. All the
day long have I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying
people. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to
understand and to do good. I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise men, and men of
understanding, and have opened them unto babes. Now if they reply again, 2
Instance. Divine matters are obscure unto all men. 1 Cor. 2.14. Answ. Not of
themselves, but through our natural blindness, which in the regenerate is
cleared by Gods spirit. Luke 8.10. 2 Cor. 3.15.
that divine matters are hard and obscure to all men, as it is said, The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, they should have called to mind, 1. That this ignorance and
hardness rises not of the obscurity of the Scripture, but of the blindness
of man's mind. 2. That the obscurity (since in very deed it is not in the
Scripture, but seems to be the fault of our nature) does not always remain
in those, who are regenerate, but is removed from them by the illumination of
the holy Spirit, according to those sayings; It is given unto you to know the
secrets of the kingdom of God, but to others in parables, that when they see,
they should not see: and when they hear, they should not understand. Until
this day, when Moses is read, the veil is laid over their hearts:
Nevertheless when their hearts shall be turned unto the Lord, the veil shall
be taken away. From this very place may we easily refute that which they
object: That we our selves, 3 Instance. The Scripture a long time not known.
Answer.
in that we say the Scripture has not been understood for these many ages in
the Popish Church, do confess the obscurity of it. For the ignorance which
has bin from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the end in the
adversaries of the truth, is not to be imputed to the obscurity of the
Scriptures, but their own perverseness, who have not a desire to know and
embrace the truth: as Paul says, Because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved, 2 These. 2.10, 11.
therefore God shall send them strong delusions that they shall believe lies.

Whereas therefore it appears, that the ground and sum of doctrine is not
obscure; 4 Instance. Many places obscure. Answer.
yet we confess that some places of Scripture are more dark and difficult
than others: But, 5 Instance.
because of the dullness and slownesse of man's mind in learning divine
matters, Of the necessity of interpretation Acts 8.13.
neither those things which are most clear, are understood of the people, as
the Eunuch of Queen Candaces does complain: and that the Ministry it self was
therefore ordained of God in the Church, for that it seemed good unto the holy
Ghost to add for our instruction an exposition of the Scripture: which is done
by the voice of the Church. To be short, because our selves in writing and
teaching do expound the Scripture, and do exhort all men to the reading and
hearing the exposition thereof: out of these they conclude, that besides the
reading of the Scripture, the interpretation of the Church is necessary: and
that therefore what the Church does pronounce of the meaning of the Scripture,
that is without controversy to be received. Answ. 1. It is necessary as a
help and instrument, not as if it were impossible to know the truth without it.
But we confess, 1. That the interpretation of Scripture is necessary in the
Church; not for that, without this, to come to the knowledge of heavenly
doctrine is simply impossible (whereas both God is able, when it pleases him,
to instruct his, even without the Scripture it self, much more then without the
exposition of his Ministers: and the godly learn many things out of Scripture
without interpreters: and of the contrary side, except the eyes of our minds be
opened by the grace of his holy Spirit, heavenly doctrine seems always alike
obscure unto us, whether it be expounded by the word of the Scripture, or of
the Church) but for that it pleased God to appoint this ordinary way of
instructing us, and himself has commanded the maintenance and use of his
Ministry in the Church, that it should be an instrument, which the holy Ghost
might most freely use for our salvation. 2. Although interpretation of
Scripture be necessary, Answ. 2. Though interpreting be necessary, yet so that
it must not be a depraving of Scripture.
yet this is so far from granting any license to the Ministers to bring new
ordinances into the Church, that nothing does more tie them to this doctrine
alone, comprehended in the Scripture, then this very function of expounding the
Scripture. For to interpret another man's words, is not to faigne at our
pleasure a meaning, either diverse from them, or repugnant unto them: but to
render the same meaning and sentence, either in more words, or in more plain
words, or, at least in such as may be more fit for their capacity, whom we
teach; and withal, when there is need, to show, that this is the mind of the
author, which we affirm to be. Now such an interpretation of Scripture is made
by this means: 3 Points to be observed in interpreting Scripture.
1. That the phrase be considered, and the proper sense of the words found out.
2. That the order and coherence of the parts of the doctrine contained in the
text of the Scripture be declared. 3. That the doctrine be applied to the use
of the Church, which it has in confirming true opinions, or refuting errors,
in knowing of God and our selves, in exhorting, in comforting, and in directing
of our life: 2 Timothy 2.15. Titus 1.9.
as Paul commands, Study to divide the word of truth aright. And, A Bishop
must hold fast the faithful word according to doctrine, that he also may be
able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improve them that say against it.
And wisely did Epiphanius advise, Lib. 2. cont. haeres.
Not all words of Scripture have need to be allegorized, or construed according
to a strange sense, but they must be understood as they are: and further, they
require meditation and sense for the understanding of the drift and purpose of
every argument. That is, All places of Scripture are not to be transformed into
allegories: but we must seek out the proper sense of the words, by meditation
and sense; that is, using the rules of Art, and having a regard of the
propriety of tongues, and our own experience, by which we know the nature of
those things, which are signified by words commonly used in the Church.

6 Instance. Concerning the deciding of a controversy about the text and
meaning thereof.
But here is cast in another difficulty, for that in controversies concerning
the text, and the meaning thereof, such a Judge is required, whose authority
and testimony may suffice for determining the meaning of the text. For when
both parties, say they, who strive about the meaning, pleads each of them
that his interpretation is true; except judgment be given of such a Judge,
from whom it may not be lawful to make any appeal, the contention will never
be decided, and we shall still remain doubtful of the sense of the
Scripture, Furthermore, this judgment must needs belong to the Church: for in
the Church alone we are to seek for an examining and determining of
controversies concerning Religion. What the Church therefore does pronounce in
these matters, we must of necessity rest upon that, as the assured meaning of
the Scripture. And hereof they say it is manifest, that the decrees of the
Church are of no less authority then the express sentence of Scripture. But
we, as we willingly grant, that the eontroversies of the Church must be at
length determined, Answ. Not the Church, but holy Ghost, is Judge of the Word.
and that according to the sentence of that Judge of whom we may be certainly
assured, that we cannot be deceived: so we acknowledge this Judge to be not
the Church, but the holy Ghost himself, speaking unto us in the Scripture, and
declaring his own words. For he is the supreme Judge, whose judgment the
Church only demands, declares, and signifies: he cannot be deceived,
whereas all men are subject to the danger of error: in a word, he being the
author of the Scripture, is the best and surest interpreter of his own words.
And therefore the Scripture it self in all doubts recalleth us, and binds us
unto it self: 2 Pet. 1.19. John 5.39. Isa. 8.20.
We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to which ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place: Search the Scriptures: To
the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them: The Church does not always speak the words
of the holy Ghost.
For although the holy Ghost speaks also by the Church, yet because she does
not always speak the words of the holy Ghost, she cannot be the supreme and
chief Judge of controversies in Religion: For this Judge must be such a one,
whose sentence may by no means be called in question. But we have none such
besides the word of God registered in the Scriptures. Neither do we at all take
away the deciding of controversies, Deciding of controversies is not taken away.
when we make Scripture Judge of meaning of the Scripture. For although
contentious persons always seek sophismes, by which they may delude and shift
off the testimonies of Scripture; yet do they this against their conscience:
and the lovers of the truth require no other interpreter of the Scripture, but
the Scripture; and do acknowledge and confess themselves to be plentifully
satisfied by it.

6 Ways how to decide doubtful places.
For whereas unto men also it is granted, to be themselves the best interpreters
of their own words: how much more ought this honor to be yielded unto the
holy Scripture? wherefore, if controversies be moved concerning the meaning of
some place in the Scripture, we ought much more to do that here, which we would
do in other writings. The analogy of faith.
To consider and respect the analogy of faith, that is, to receive no
exposition which is against the ground of doctrine, that is, against any
article of Faith, or commandment of the Decalogue, or against any plain
testimony of Scripture: Even as Paul admonishes, forbidding to build wood,
hay, 1 Cor. 3.12.
stubble, upon the foundation. Examining of Antecedents and Consequents.
To weigh the things that go before, and follow after that place which is in
question, that so not only nothing contrary to these may be feigned on it, but
also that they may be set for the meaning of it, which these require: For,
these either not being observed, or being dissembled, the meaning of the
Scripture is not seldom depraved. So those words of the Psalm, Psalm. 91.11.
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, that they shall bear thee in
their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone: the Devil, tempting
Christ, interprets them, as if they served to maintain over-rash and curious
attempts; when yet that which is added (In all thy ways) does show, that they
are to be understood of men doing those things that are proper unto their
calling. Resorting to places which teach the same more clearly.
To search every where in the Scripture, whether there be extant any place,
where it stands for confessed, or is manifest, or may be showed, that the same
doctrine in other words is delivered touching the same matter, which is
contained in that place which is in controversy: For if the meaning of the
clearer and undoubted place be manifested unto us, we shall also be assured of
the place which is doubted of, because in both places the same is taught: As
when it is said, Romans 3.28.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law:
that in this place, to be justified by faith, is not to please God for the
worthiness of faith, but for the merit of Christ apprehended by faith, and
that the works of the Law signify not the ceremonies only, but the whole
obedience of the Law, chiefly the moral; other places do teach us, which in
more and clearer words delivered the same doctrine concerning the justification
of man before God: as in the same chapter, By the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified in his sight: Verse. 20, 21, 22, 23.
for by the law comes the knowledge of sin: But now is the righteousness of
God made manifest without the law, having witness of the law and of the
Prophets; The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all and
upon all that believe; for there is no difference: For all have sinned and are
deprived of the glory of God: and are justified freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Conferring like places together.
To confer places of Scripture, where though the same words be not spoken of
the same thing, yet the words and forms of speaking are used of the like
things: For, if the interpretation of the like place be certain, and there be
the same causes for the like interpretation to be given in the place in
controversy, which are in the other, then of the like places we must give one
and the same judgment. Mat. 5.29, 30.
The Lord wills to put out our eye, to cut off our hand, if they be a cause
of offense unto us: Now whereas the Law forbids us to maime our body, Thou
shall not kill; that therefore by this figure of speech the Lord would have us
that we should rather forsake things most dear unto us, than by the rust and
motion of them, we should suffer our selves to be withdrawn from God, the
like form of speech other-where used, Jeremy 22.24. Deuteronomy. 32.10.
to signify things most dear and precious, does show, as, If Jechoniah were
the signet of my right hand yet would I pluck thee thence: and, He kept him
as the apple of his eye. Consent of the catholic Church, with 3 rules of
direction therein. John 8.37.
When once according to that rule, the controversies concerning the text and
meaning thereof are judged, we may lawfully also descend to the consent of the
Church, yet putting great space betwixt, and not without great advisement. For,
lest by the name of the Church we be beguiled, 1. No sentence or meaning is to
be received which these rules of examining and judging, which have been now
declared, do not suffer: 2. We must consider what times, and what writings are
purest: what points of doctrine have been, and in what ages, either rightly
expounded, or depraved with errors: 3. Whose interpretation either is of the
author, or may be of (...) confirmed by the testimonies of the Scripture. And
to this deciding of all controversies about the meaning of the Scripture,
drawn out of the Scripture it self, do all the godly and lovers of truth
agree; even as it is said, He that is of God, hears the words of God. Now
the testimony of the ancient and catholic Church, so far as they see it to
accord with the Scripture, they do with glad and thankful minds embrace, and
are so much more assured of the known truth. But if any quarrelling men do
not yield unto the testimonies of the Scriptures, we must not seek, because of
them, a Judge higher then the word of God, but must leave them unto the
judgment of God, as the Apostle counsels us, Reject him that is an
heretic after once or twice admonition, Titus 3.20.
knowing that he that is such, is perverted, and sins, being damned of his
own self. 1 Cor. 14.38. Rev. 22.11.
And, If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. He that is filthy, let him
be more filthy. Neither verily does he, whom the word of God does not satisfy,
rest on the authority of men, as the truth it self does show; but as these
things are sufficient to shut the mouths of them who gainesay the truth, or at
leastwise to manifest their impudency: so is there further required for the
fencing of the consciences of all the godly in debate of Religion, besides a
care of learning the doctrine of the word of God, Prayers.
An ardent and daily invocating of God, by which we may desire, that we may
be taught and guided by his holy Spirit. This if we shall do, he will not
suffer us to make stay in error, which may pull us from him: but will open
unto us the true and certain meaning of his word concerning all things
necessary to our salvation, that our faith may depend not on humane but divine
authority, even as it is promised, Mat. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. Luke 11.13. James 1.5.
For whosoever asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. How much more shall your heavenly Father
give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? If any of you do lack wisdom,
let him ask it of God, which gives to all men liberally, and reproacheth no
man, and it shall be given him; but let him ask in faith, and waver not.

Object. 11. It is unmeet that the holy Ghost should be subject unto another.
Answ. We make him not subject to any other, but compare him with himself.
To their former arguments our adversaries add, That it is a shame that the
holy Ghost speaking in the Church, should be subject to the examination and
judgment of another: and therefore we must not examine him by the rule of the
Scripture. But seeing that the same Spirit speaks in the Church, and in the
Scripture; when we do examine the voice of the Church by Scripture, we do not
subject the holy Ghost to another, but we compare him with himself. And by this
means, 1. We give unto him the praise of truth and constancy, while we do
acknowledge and restifie, that he is always like himself, and does never
square from himself: 2. We confess that the supreme authority of pronouncing
the will of God belongs unto him, while we do not seek whether those things
be true and certain which he has spoken, but whether those be his words which
men ascribe unto him: and this do we, even after the self same manner which
he has prescribed us; and after we find out by the rule of the written word,
that any thing has proceeded from him to that, without making any
controversy, we submit our minds and wills. Contrariwise, it is easy to see, 2
Contumelies against the holy Ghost, issuing out of the Papists opinion of the
Judge of the Scripture.
that our adversaries themselves are guilty of that contumely against the holy
Ghost, of which they accuse us: For while they will have the authority of
giving judgment, concerning the meaning of the Scripture, and deciding of
controversies, not to belong unto the Scripture, but unto themselves; by this
very thing, 1. They imagine that the holy Ghost may dissent from himself; 2.
They make themselves Judges higher then the holy Ghost, and Word of God.

Lastly, whereas Paul says, That he is the Minister of the New Testament,
Object. 12. The Letter kills, the Spirit quickneth. 2 Cor. 3.6.
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter does kill, the Spirit
does quicken; some men do thence gather, That we are to hear, not what the
written word of God sounds, but what the Spirit speaks by the Church in our
hearts. Yea, there has grown an opinion heretofore, That the Grammatical and
Literal meaning of the Scripture is pernicious, except all be transformed into
allegories. But a manifold Paralogisme in this argument does easily appear,
Two significations of the word Letter.
if it be considered what the Letter and the Spirit signifies in Paul; for
that all the doctrine and knowledge touching God, as also the outward
observation of the Law in those that are not regenerate, is called the Letter
by the Apostle: and the Spirit signifies, 1. The holy Ghost himself: Three
significations of the word Spirit.
2. The true doctrine concerning God, when the holy Ghost is of force and
efficacy by it: 3. Faith and conversion, and motions pleasing God, being
kindled of the holy Ghost through the Word; as it appears by the words going
before: For, for that which here he says, The proofs of both significations.
Verse. 2, 3.
That he was made of God a Minister, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; he
said before, That the Epistle of Christ was ministered by him, and written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, in tables of the heart, that
is, that his preaching was not in vain, but of force and efficacy in the
hearts of men, the holy Ghost working by it. And in like manner he calls the
ceremony without conversion, Circumcision in the Letter: Romans 2.27, 29.
but conversion it self, Circumcision of the heart in the Spirit: Walk in
newness of Spirit, Romans 7.9.
and not in the oldnesse of the Letter; that is, in true holiness: such as is
begun by the Spirit in the regenerate; not in the sin and hypocrisy of them,
who know verily the will of God, and make practice also of outward discipline
and behavior, but remain without faith and conversion.

Wherefore first, as the doctrine by the fault of men, and not of it self, 1
Answ. The Letter kills not of it self, but by an accident.
remains only the Letter; so also not of it own nature, but because of the
corruption of men, it kills, that is, it terrifieth men's minds with the
judgment of God, and does stir up a murmuring and hatred against God, as we
are plainly taught by the Apostle, Romans 7.12, 13, 14.
The Law is holy, and the Commandment is holy, and just, and good. Was that
then which is good, made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might
appear sin, wrought death in me by that which is good, that sin might be out
of measure sinful by the commandment: For we know that the Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal, sold under sin. But the proper effect of the Scripture is to
quicken men, that is, to lighten them with the true knowledge of God, and to
move them to the love of God. 2 Cor. 2.15.
As it is said We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are
saved, and in them which perish, etc. Answ. It kills, as it is without the
Spirit.
Albeit the Letter, that is, the doctrine without that spiritual motion,
kills: yet the operation of the holy Ghost accompanying it, when now it is
not the Letter, but the Spirit and power of God to salvation unto every one
that believes, it does not kill, but quicken: as it is said, Thy word
quickneth me. Wherefore, Psalm. 119.
that the Letter kill us not, we must not cast away the Scripture, but the
stubbornness of our hearts; and desire of God that he would let his doctrine
be in us and others, not the Letter, but the Spirit: that is, that he would
forcibly move our hearts by it, and turn them to him. Answ. The Spirit
quickneth, agreeing with the Word.
That it is added, that the Spirit quickneth; that calls us not away from the
Scripture to other opinions or revelations: For that Spirit quickneth, which
dissenteth not from the Scripture, but teaches and minds the same which he
has uttered in the Scripture: But that Spirit which leads men away from the
Scripture, it quickneth not, but may be said much more truly to kill, then the
Letter, that is, not by an accident or external cause, but of it own nature:
For the spirit of Antichrist is a liar, and a murderer; and therefore be it
accursed unto us. Answ. The Apostles mis-construed by them.
They who by the Letter understand either the characters of letters, or the
proper and literal sense, whether it be of the whole Scripture, or of those
speeches which are allegorically and figuratively spoken; and by the Spirit,
the interpretation of these speeches: it is manifest, that they swerve far from
the mind of Paul, both by those things which have been spoken concerning the
meaning of Paul, and also because not only every sentence of Scripture, whether
it be proper of figurative; but also every interpretation of it is and
remains the killing Letter, except the quickening force of the holy Ghost come
unto it.

Wherefore, since that neither for interpretation, nor revelation, nor
authority, nor any other pretense, it is lawful, leaving the Scripture of the
Prophets and Apostles, to depart to whatsoever decrees of Religion, which are
not confirmed by the testimony of the Scripture, let us hear it as an Oracle
sounding from heaven; bringing to the reading thereof not minds fore-stalled,
neither with opinions, conceived either of our own brains, or elsewhere;
neither with affections, neither with prejudices: but the love of God, and a
desire of knowing the truth. So shall it come to pass, that both we shall
know the true meaning of the Scripture, and by it godliness, and sure and
sound comfort shall be kindled in us, and great increase.

7. How manifold the course is of teaching and learning the doctrine of the
Church.
THere is a threefold order, or there are three parts of the study of Divinity:
The first is a Catecheticall institution, 1 Catechizing.
or a summary and brief explication of Christian doctrine, and the chief
general points thereof, which is called Catechism. This part is necessary for
all men, because both the learned and unlearned ought to know the foundation of
Religion. 2 Handling of Common places.
The second is an handling of Common places; or Common places, which contain a
larger explication of every point, and of hard questions, together with their
definitions, divisions, reasons, and arguments.

Pour especial uses of School Divinity.
This part properly appertains unto the Schools of Divinity, and is
necessary: The understanding of principal points of divinity.
That they who are trained up in Schools, and may one day be called to teach
in the Church, may more easily and fully understand the whole body of Divinity:
For, as in other Arts and Sciences, so in the study of Divinity, we hardly and
slowly conceive the grounds thereof; nay, all our knowledge is confuse and
imperfect, unless every part of the whole doctrine be delivered by the
Professors and Readers, and conceived by the Auditors and Hearers in some
method and order. Orderly delivery thereof in public.
That the Students of Divinity may hereafter plainly and orderly deliver unto
their auditory a brief sum of this whole doctrine, necessary it is, that
they themselves first carry in their understanding a complete frame as it were
and perfect body thereof. Invention and judgment of the interpretation of
Scripture.
It is farther necessary to the finding out and judging of the true and
natural interpretation of Scripture: which, whereas it ought to square with
faith, that is to say, to impeach no point of this heavenly doctrine; of
necessity the Interpreter must have an absolute knowledge of the main grounds
and foundation thereof. Examination of controversies in the Church.
It is needful for the increase of judgment in Ecclesiastical controversies,
which are diverse, difficult, and dangerous; lest perhaps otherwise we be
carried headlong from truth into error.

3 Reading and meditation.
The third course of the study of Divinity, is the reading and diligent
meditation of the Scripture, or holy Writ. And this is the highest degree of
the study of Divinity, for which Catechism and Common places are learned; to
wit, that we may come furnished to the reading, understanding, and propounding
of the holy Scripture. For Catechism and Common places, as they are taken out
of the Scripture, and are directed by the Scripture as by their rule; so again
they conduct and lead us as it were by the hand unto the Scripture. Catechism
pertains unto the first part of the study of Divinity, whereof it follows
that we presently discourse.

The Special Preambles touching CATECHISM.
THE Special Prefaces touching CATECHISM, are these five which follow: 1 What
Catechizing, or Catechism is. 2 Whether it has bin always practiced, and of
the original thereof in the Church. 3 What are the chief points thereof. 4
The reasons why it is necessary. 5 What is the scope and end thereof.


1 What Catechism is.
THE Greek word, (...) comes from (...), as also (...) is derived from (...):
The significations of the word Catechism.
both these words signify in their common and largest sense, to resound, to
instruct by word of mouth, and to rehearse another man's sayings: But properly,
to teach the rudiments and elements of any doctrine whatsoever: and more
properly in Church phrase, to deliver the first principles of Christian
Religion; in which sense we read it used, Luke 1.4. Acts 18.25. Gal. 6.6. etc.
So then this word Catechism signifies in a general and common sense, the
first brief, and A B C Lecture in whatsoever doctrine delivered by word of
mouth. But as the Church uses it, it signifies an institution of the ruder
sort in the elements of Christian doctrine. Wherefore Catechism is a brief
and plain exposition, and a rehearsal of Christian doctrine, The definition
of Catechism.
framed for the capacity of the ruder sort, select and gathered out of the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and drawn into certain questions and
answers. Or, Catechism is a brief sum of the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, delivered by mouth unto the simple and ignorant, and exacted or
required again at their hands.

What the Catechumeni in the Primitive Church were, and how many sorts of them.
1 Ancient Converts.
Catechumeni in the Primitive Church were those who learned the Catechism,
that is to say, such as were now of the Church, and were instructed in the
principles and beginnings of Christian Religion. Of the Catechumeni there were
two sorts: Some of good years and ripe age, who of Jews and Gentiles became
Christians, but were not yet baptized. These were first instructed in the
Catechism, and afterward baptized and admitted to the Lords supper. Such a
Catechumene was Augustine, when of a Manichee he became a Christian; Austen.
and he, whiles he was yet but a Catechumene, wrote many books before he
was baptized of Ambrose. Ambrose.
Such a Catechumene was Ambrose when he was chosen Bishop of Millaine, the
urgent necessity of the state of that Church so requiring, for suppressing the
pestilent heresy wherewith the Arrians had infected it. Otherwise Paul
forbids a Novice or Catechumene to be chosen Bishop: For the Neophiti or
Novices were those Catechumeni, who as yet were not, (...). 1 Timothy 3.6.
or very lately were baptized, so called from the words (...) and (...), in
Enlish New-plants, that is to say, New-beginners and Punies of the Church.
Other Catechumeni there were little impes borne in the Church, 2 Young children
of Christian parents.
the children of Christians. These eft soones after their birth, as being
members of the Church were baptized, and after they were grown a little elder,
they were instructed in the Catechism, which when they had learned, they were
confirmed by laying on of hands, and so dismissed out of the company of the
Catechumeni, so that it was lawful for them thence forward to draw near with
the elder sort unto the Lords Supper. Of the Catechumeni you may see more in
Eusebius tenth book of Ecclesiastical history, Eusebius. hist. Ecclesiast. lib.
10. cap. 4. Catechists.
and fourth chapter, not far from the end. They also were called Catechists,
who taught the Catechism, and were the instructers of the Catechumeni.

2. Of the Original of Catechism, and of the perpetual use thereof in the
Church.
AS of the whole ministry of the mysteries of Christianity, so must we
conceive of the original of Catechism, The practice of catechizing exereised
in the time of both the Old and New Testament. Genesis 17.7.
that it was ordained of God; and has been of perpetual continuance in the
Church: For whereas God since the beginning has been the God not only of the
aged, but of younglings also, according to the form of his Covenant made with
Abraham; I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: he has instituted and
appointed that both of them, after the exten^ and reach of their capacity, be
severally instructed in the doctrine of salvation: First the elder, by the
public voice of the Ministry; then the younger, by catechizing at home and in
schools. Concerning the instruction of the elder sort, the case is clear, and
out of doubt. Touching the catechizing of children in the Jewish Church, In the
time of the Old Testament.
there are express commands every where extant in holy Scripture. In the 12.
and 13. of Exodus God commands, that children, and the whole family should be
taught the original and use of the Passover. In the fourth of Deuteronomie God
charge Parents, that they rehearse unto their little children the whole
history of the Law then published. And again in the sixth he wills, that the
doctrine touching one God, and the perfect love of God, be often inculcated in
the ears of children. And farther, in the eleventh he bids, that the whole
Law and Decalogue should be expounded unto them. Wherefore in the Old Testament
children were taught the chief points of the doctrine of the Prophets; whethe^
touching God, or the Law, or the promise of the Gospel, or the use of the
Sacraments and Sacrifices of those times, which were types of the Messiah to
come, and of his benefits: these, and whatsoever other points of doctrine
children were taught either at home by their Parents, or in public schools
and congregations by the Prophets: 2 Kin. 4.38. and 6.1.
For I doubt not, but that to this use the houses of the Prophets, of Eliseus,
and others were erected. To this purpose God himself in brief delivered the
whole doctrine of the Law, thus: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, etc. and thy neighbor as thy self. To this purpose likewise
delivered God summarily the whole doctrine of the Gospel, thus: The seed of the
woman shall break the head of the Serpent. And, In thy seed shall all the
nations be blessed. They had also Sacrifices, Prayers, and other things, which
God would that Abraham and his posterity should teach their children, and their
whole family: and therefore this doctrine was framed fit for the capacity of
children, and the ruder sort.

In the New Testament we read how Christ commanded little children to be
brought unto him, In the time of the New Testament. Mat. 10.14.
on whom he laid his hands, and blessed them: Suffer the little children to
come unto me, says Christ, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom
of God. And that catechizing of children was in use in the Apostles time,
witness the example of Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.15.
of whom Paul writes, that he had learned the Scriptures of a child. A
farther and more direct proof hereof we have in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 6.1, 2.
which Epistle lays down certain heads of the Apostles Catechism, of
repentance from dead works, of faith toward God, of the doctrine of Baptism,
and of Sacraments, and the laying on of hands, of the resurrection from the
dead, and of eternal judgment; all which he entituleth, Milk for children.
These and such like grounds of doctrine were required at the hands of the
Catechumeni at the time of Baptism, and of little children at the time of
Confirmation by laying on of hands: Therefore the Apostle terms them, The
doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of hands. Semblably the Fathers also wrote
brief sums of doctrine, certain remnants of which we see as yet in Popery.
E^seb. hist. Eccles. ^ib. 6. cap. 3.
Eusebius writes of Origin, that he restored in Alexandria the custom of
catechizing, which in time of persecution was decayed. Socrates also reports
of catechizing thus: Our form of catechizing. says he, is after the manner we
received of the Bishops our predecessors going before us, according as we were
taught when we laid the foundation of faith, and were baptized, according as we
have learned out of the Scripture. Pope Gregory's Catechism.
Pope Gregory erected and set up Idols and Images in Churches, that they might
be the books of Laymen and children. After these times the doctrine of the
Church, through the negligence of other Bishops, and subtlety of the Bishop of
Rome, was by little and little corrupted, catechizing decayed, and at length
was transformed into that ridiculous ceremony, which at this day is by them
called Confirmation. Thus far of the original and perpetual practice of
catechizing in the Church.

3. What are the parts and chief points of Catechism.
THe especial parts of the rudiments of Christian Doctrine (as it is said in
the place aforementioned unto the Hebrews) were Repentance, and Faith in Christ,
that is to say, The Law and the Gospel. Catechism therefore may primarily, and
in the largest sense it bears, be divided (as the whole doctrine of the
Church is) into the Law and the Gospel: For, Catechism differs not from the
doctrine of the Church in subject and substance of the matter it handles, but
in the form and manner of handling it: as, solid strong meat prepared for men
of years (which represents the doctrine of the Church) and milk, and weak
meats chewed for children (which shadow and resemble Catechism) vary not in
the subject, I mean, the essence, and nature of meat; but in these qualities
of being strong, and weak meats. These two parts the vulgar and common sort
call by the name of the Decalogue, or the Apostles Creed: because the Decalogue
comprehends the sum of the Law; the Creed in brief the substance of the
Gospel. They term it also the doctrine of faith and works, Or, the doctrine of
things to be believed and done.

Some of the learned divide it into the doctrine concerning God, his will, and
his works. Again, they distinguish Gods works into works of Creation,
Preservation, and Redemption. But these three members of this division are all
handled either in the Law, or the Gospel, or in both; and therefore this
division is easily reduced to the former.

Others make five parts: The Decalogue, The Apostles Creed, Baptism, the
Supper of the Lord, and Prayer: of which parts some were immediately delivered
by God himself; as, The Decalogue: Others mediately, and that either by his
Son manifested in the flesh; as, The Lords Prayer, Baptism, and the Supper
of the Lord: or by the Ministry of the Apostles; as, The Apostles Creed. But
these parts are also couched within the two before rehearsed: For, The
Decalogue is the sum of the Law; The Creed the brief of the Gospel, The
Sacraments are as appurtenances of the Gospel, and therefore have reference
unto the Gospel, as far forth as they are the Seals of grace promised in the
Gospel; but, as they are testimonies of our obedience toward God, so they
carry the nature of Sacrifices, and appertain to the Law. Prayer is a part of
the worship of God, and therefore referred to the Law.

The parts of this Catechism.
This Catechism consists of three parts: which are, 1. Man's misery. 2. Man's
delivery from this misery. 3. Man's thankfulness for this delivery. Which
division in effect swerveth not from the rest, because the other parts are
coupled in these. The Decalogue pertains to the first part, inasmuch as it is
the glass wherein we view, and have sight of our sin and misery: and to the
third part, inasmuch as it is the exact rule of true thankfulness to God, and
of Christian conversation. The Creed, because it describes the manner of our
delivery, is contained under the second part. Thither also belong the
Sacraments, which are as the appurtenances and seals of the doctrine of faith.
Lastly, Prayer, as the principal part of our spiritual worshipping of God,
and thankfulness toward him, is placed under the third part,

4. The reasons why Catechizing is necessary in the Church.
THe diligent exercise of Catechizing is necessary in the Church, Deuteronomy. 4.9.
and 11.19.
Because of the commandment of God; Ye shall teach them your children. Because
of the glory of God, which requires, that God be not only known aright, and
magnified by those of riper years, but of children also. For our own comfort
and salvation: for without the true knowledge of God, and his Son Christ Jesus,
that is to say, without Faith and Repentance, no man of sufficient years, and
able to receive instruction, can be saved, or have any stable or sure
confidence that he pleases God: John 17.3. Heb. 11.6.
For, This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God. And,
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Now, no man believes on him whom
he knows not, or of whom he never heard; How shall they believe on him of
whom they never heard? Romans 10.17.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. As many then as will be
saved, must needs hold the foundation, which is the doctrine touching Christ.
Wherefore all must be instructed, and such a sum of doctrine must be
delivered in the Church, of which the ruder and younger sort also may be
capable. Fourthly, For the maintaining of a Church and Common weal in this
life: For to the establishing of Church and Commonweal there is need of
Religion, and the worship of God, Christian discipline, studies, and exercises
of godliness, honesty, justice, and truth amongst men. All which in vain we
seek for amidst the barbarous Nations, where there is no practice of piety, or
virtue at all. Now therefore it behooves, that we be instructed herein from our
childhood, because the heart of man is evil and perverse from his youth: Genesis
1.21.
Nay, such is the corruption of nature, that unless there be sudden redress,
we then too late take physic, when our evil and grief, through long delay,
has gathered strength, and is become past cure. Wherefore, except we be
instructed aright in the will of God out of his Word in our childhood, and
exercised unto godliness; hardly, or never do we suffer our selves to be
withdrawn from those errors which are inbred in us, and which we drunk in
like water in our childhood; scarcely can we endure to be revoked and weaned
from those vices, in which we have been trained up. Wherefore we must betimes
meet with, and bridle man's depraved nature, lest Church and Commonweal go to
wrack. Because the rule of examining opinions, and discussing the truth of
them, must be generally known unto all, lest they err, and be seduced;
according to the commandment, Beware of false prophets: Prove all things: Try
the spirits, whether they be of God. Now the rule of this trial is no other,
then those chief grounds of Catechism, The Decalogue, and the Apostles Creed.
Because they who have thoroughly learned Catechism, better understand Sermons,
in that they are able easily to reduce whatsoever they hear out of Gods Word,
to their several heads of Catechism which they have learned: whereas
otherwise, Sermons for the most part are heard with little fruit and benefit.
Because Catechism best fitteth the unskilful and weak judgment of learners.
For a copious and vagrant form of instruction is hard for youth and beginners,
and very unprofitable: therefore the doctrine delivered unto them must be
brief, and plain packstaffe, such as is Catechism. Because it is necessary,
that the rude and younger sort be severed from Schismatickes, and from the
profane Heathen; which distinction is no way made but by the knowledge of
Catechism. Catechism doctrine is most needful for Scholars, because they
ought to be more expert in Christian doctrine then others, both in regard of
their calling, that one day they may instruct others; as also in respect of
their many occasions which daily occur of learning this doctrine; which,
after the example of Timothy, they may not neglect.

To these may be added many impulsive causes, especially with the people to win
them drawn either from the end of our Creation, or from the cause of Gods
prolonging and preserving our lives until the time of youth, etc. Also from
the dignity andexcellency of the object of Catechism doctrine, which is the
highest and perfectest good even God himself; and from the effect of
Catechism, which is the knowledge of this great good, and a community
therewith; a thing more precious then all the treasures of the world. This is
that costly Jewel dug and hidden in the field of the Church, Mat. 13.44.
whereof Christ speaks: and for whose sake in ancient times Christians, with
their little children, suffered martyrdom with cheerfulness. Let us view with
our eyes the example of Origin in Eusebius his sixth book of Ecclesiastical
History, Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 3. Theod. hist. lib. 4. cap. 16.
and third chapter. Let us read to this purpose Theodoret his fourth book of
History, and sixteenth chapter. But contrariwise, what is it that we will
gladly suffer for Christ's glory, if we be ignorant of this doctrine? and how
shall we not be ignorant, if we learn it not in our childhood? Wherefore the
ignorance of Catechism is not the last and least cause why many now-adaies are
carried hither and thither with every wind of doctrine, and why many fall from
Christ unto Antichrist.

5 What is the end of Catechism and Christian doctrine.
THE scope of Catechisme-doctrine is, our comfort, and salvation. Salvation
consists in the fruition and participation of the highest Good. The comfort
thereof is, a certain hope and expectation of this Good in the life to come,
together with a fruition, in part begun in this life. The chiefest Good is
that, which if we have, we are blessed; if we want, we become most unhappy and
miserable. Further, what, and what manner this only comfort is, it is resolved
in the first question of this Catechism; whereunto, these Prefaces now ended,
we will proceed.

A CATECHISM OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
On the first Sabbath.
Quest. 1. What is thy only comfort in life and death?
Answ. That both in soul and body, whether I live or dye, Romans 14.8.
I am not mine own, 1 Cor. 6.19.
but belong wholly unto my most faithful Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
3.23. Tit. 2.14.
who by his precious blood, most fully satisfying for all my sins, 1 Pet. 1.18.
1 John 1.7. and 2.2.
has delivered me from all the power of the Devil, Heb. 2.14. 1 John 3.8.
and to preserve me, John 6.39. John 10.28. 2 These. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.5.
that without the will of my heavenly Father not so much as an hair may fall
from my head: Mat. 10.30. Luke 21.18.
yea, all things must serve for my safety. Romans 8.28.
Wherefore by his Spirit also he assures me of everlasting life, 2 Corin.
1.22. 2 Cor. 5.5. Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 8.16.
and makes me ready and prepared, that henceforth I may live to him. Romans
8.14. 1 John 3.3.


The Explication.
THE question concerning Comfort is therefore handled in the first place,
because it contains the maine scope and drift of Catechism; whose end is to
work in us sure comfort both in our life, and at our death: For to this
purpose is all celestial and heavenly doctrine revealed by God, and is
principally to be learned of us. The sum of this comfort is, That we are
engraffed into Christ by faith, beloved of him, and reconciled unto God, that
by him we might be cared for, and saved for ever. Touching this comfort we are
to learn, 1 What it is. 2 Of how many parts it consists. 3 Why this comfort
alone is sound and good. 4 Why it is necessary. 5 How many things are necessary
for the attaining thereto.


1 What comfort is.
COmfort is a certain argumentation or reasoning, What comfort is.
wherein we oppose some good thing against some present evil, and by the due
consideration and meditation thereof, do mitigate and assuage our grief
conceived, and suffer a while the evil with patience. Where, look how much
more grievous the evil is, so much must the good which is desired, exceed the
said evil in greatness and certainty. So that whereas consolation against sin
and everlasting death (two the greatest evils that possibly can befall to
mankind) is here sought for; it is not any common good, but the principal and
sovereign good that can be a sufficient salve and remedy thereof. Touching
which principal good, Diverse opinions of man's chiefest good.
without the Scripture and Word of God, so many men, so many opinions are
broached. The Epicures seat and place this supreme good in sensuality and
pleasure. The Stoics in a decent moderation and bridling of the affections,
Or, in the habit of virtue. The Platonicks in their Idea's. The Peripateticks
in the action and exercise of virtue. The vulgar sort in honors, riches, power
and sway amongst men. But all these are flitting transitory toys, either lost
in the time of life, or left behind us at the term of death. Now, that
principal good we hunt after is such as fades not, nor vanishes, no not in
death. I grant the honor of virtue is immortal, and virtue it self (as the
Poet has) surviveth after men's funerals: But where lives it? verily with
others, not within our selves. And well said one, that virtues could not justly
be reputed men's principal bliss and felicity, whereas we have them witnesses
of our distress and misery. Hypocrites both within and without the Church, as
Jews, Pharisees, and Mahumetists (Papists also do the like) seek a remedy of
death in external rites and beggarly ceremonies; but all in vain: For these
external rites do not purge nor cleanse the conscience, and God will not be
mocked with petty satisfactions. Howsoever therefore Philosophy, and all other
sects enquire after, and promise such a good as may yield us sound consolation
and contemplation both in life and death, yet they neither find, nor perform
any, but such as consciences stagger at, and very sense disclaimeth: True
comforts proper to the Church.
only the doctrine of the Church presents unto us such a good, effectual,
and lively comfort, as wherewith our consciences rest satisfied. For this alone
detecteth the fountain of all miseries, whereunto mankind is captivated and
enthralled: What is the only comfort of the Church.
this alone directs us unto the means of delivery through Christ. This
therefore is the only Christian comfort of principal consequence both in life
and death; A confidence of free remission of sins, and reconciliation with
God through Christ, and a certain expectation of eternal life, imprinted in
our hearts by his holy Spirit, through the ministry of the Gospel, so that we
doubt not but that we belong unto Christ, and are beloved of God, and saved for
ever for his sake: according to that of S. Paul, Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? Romans 8.35.
shall tribulation? or anguish? etc.

2 Of how many parts this comfort consists.
SIx parts there are of this comfort: Our reconcilement to God by Christ, so
that we are no longer enemies, 1 Cor. 3.25.
but sons of God; neither are we in our own power, but properly belong unto
Christ. The manner of our reconcilement, even by the blood of Christ: 1 Pet.
1.18. 1 John 1.7.
that is to say, by his passion, death, and satisfaction for our sins. Our
delivery from the misery of sin and death: For Christ does not only reconcile
us unto God, but also does exempt and free us out of the power of the Devil,
so that sin, death, Heb. 2.14. 1 John 3.8.
and Satan have no power over us. The perpetual preservation and maintenance
of our reconcilement, freedom, and whatsoever other blessings Christ has once
purchased for us. His we are by right: therefore he keeps us as his own
interest, that not so much as an hair may fall from our head without the will
of our heavenly Father. Neither lies our salvation in our hands or power; for
if it were so, we should lose it a thousand times every moment. The turning of
all our evils into good. Romans 8.28.
The godly indeed are afflicted in this life, nay, they are massacred, they are
as sheep appointed to the slaughter: but these things do not hurt or hinder at
all, but further and help forward our salvation; because God gives a good
issue, and turns all to the best. Romans 8.28.
All things work together for the best unto them that love God. Our full
persuasion and assurance of all these good gifts and graces, and of life
eternal. Two parts of Christian security.
This security consists, 1 The testimony of the holy Ghost.
1. Of the testimony of the holy Ghost, working in us true faith and unfeigned
conversion, witnessing unto our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and that
these blessings do truly appertain unto us, because he is the pledge of our
inheritance: Effects of true faith.
2. Of the effects of true faith, which we perceive to be in us: such as are
true repentance, and a constant purpose of believing and obeying God according
to all his precepts: For out of the earnest desire of performing obedience unto
God, arises our assurance of our true faith; and by faith we are certainly
persuaded of the favor and love of God, and of everlasting salvation. This is
the ground of all the other five parts before, specified, without which there
is no comfort in temptations. Briefly therefore the sum of our comfort is
this, That we are Christ's, reconciled by him unto the Father, of whom we are
beloved, and shall be saved through the gift of the holy Ghost and life
everlasting.

3 Why this comfort alone is sound and good.
THat this comfort alone is sound and true, it is apparent: 1. Because it alone
fails us not, no not in death: For, whether we live or dye, we are the Lords.
And, Romans 14.8. Romans 8.35.
who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Neither death nor life, etc. 2.
Because it alone stands impregnable and invincible, it alone sustaineth, and
assoileth us against all the assaults and attempts of Satan. For Satan thus
gives the onset:

Thou art a sinner: Comfort makes answer; But Christ has satisfied for my sin,
and has redeemed me by his precious blood, that now I am no longer mine own,
The temptation^ of Satan, with their remedies, out of this only consolation.
but belong unto him.

Thou art a child of wrath, and an enemy of God. Ans. I am so by nature, and
before reconcilement; but I am reconciled by God through Christ, and received
into grace and favor with him.

But thou must dye the death. Answ. Christ has delivered me from the power of
death; and I know, that by Christ I shall escape out of the hands of death into
life eternal.

But in the mean time many miseries happen unto the godly. Answ. Our Lord and
Master guardeth and defends us in them, and effects that they work for our
good.

But how if thou lose the grace of Christ? For thou may fall and perish,
because it is a long steep way to heaven. Answ. Christ has not only merited
his benefits for me, but also bestows them, and perpetually preserves them
in me, and gives me perseverance, that I faint not, and fall from grace.

What if grace pertain not unto thee, and thou be not of the number of them
who are the Lords? Answ. I know that grace pertains unto me, and that I am
truly Christ's: 1. Because the holy Spirit testifies unto my spirit, that I am
the child of God. 2. Because I have true faith, and the promise is general,
pertaining to all that believe.

What if thou have not a true faith? Ans. I know that I have a true faith by
the effects thereof; because I have a conscience steadfastly relying on God, and
an earnest will and fervent desire to believe and obey God.

Thy faith is weak, and thy conversation or repentance imperfect. Answ. True:
But yet it is entire and unfeigned. And I know, Luke 19.26. Mar. 9.24.
that to him which has shall be given. Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.

In this great and dangerous conflict, whereof all the children of God have
experience, Christian consolation stands fixed and immovable, and at length
concludes; Therefore Christ with all his benefits appertains unto me.

4 Why this comfort is necessary.
BY that which has been spoken it appears, that this comfort is very
necessary for us: For our salvation, that we faint not, nor despair in
temptation, and wrestling of conscience. For the worshipping of God. For, that
we may worship God in this life, and in the life to come (to which end we were
created) we must come out of sin and death; not rush into desperation, but be
sustained with sure comfort unto the end.

5 How many things are required for the attaining unto this comfort?
THis is resolved in the Catechism question here immediately following.

Quest. 2. How many things are necessary for thee to know, that thou, enjoying
this comfort, may live and dye happily?
Answ. Three: Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. Ephesians. 5.8, 9.
The first, what is the greatness of my sin and misery. John 9.41. Mat.
9.12. Romans 3.11. 1 John 1.9, 10.
The second, how I am delivered from all sin and misery. John 17.3. Acts
4.12. etc. 10.43.
The third, what thanks I owe unto God for this delivery. Ephesians. 5.10. Psalm.
50.14. Matthew. 5.16. 1 Pet, 1.12. Romans 6.13. 2 Timothy 2.15.


The Explication.
THese three are the whole matter, and several parts of this Catechism, which
jump in with that division of Scripture into the Law and the Gospel, and are
suitable with the differences of those parts, as before has been delivered.

The knowledge of our misery is necessary for our comfort, not that of it self
it ministers any comfort, or is it self any part thereof; Why the knowledge of
our misery is necessary.
for of it self, and in it own nature it terrifieth, rather then comfort us.
But it is necessary for our comfort: To stir up in us a desire of delivery
thence.
1. Because it stirs up in us a desire of delivery, as the knowledge of his
disease kindles a desire of remedy in the sick man: whereas on the other side,
if we have no knowledge of our misery, we affect not our delivery; as the sick
man when he has no sense nor feeling of his disease, consulteth not the
Physician. Now, if we desire not delivery, we do not seek it; if we seek it
not, we obtain it not, because God gives delivery only to those that seek it;
it is opened only to him that knocks: as it is said in Scripture, Mat. 5.6.
and 7.9. Mat. 11.28. I^a. 37.15.
To him that knocks, it shall be opened. Ask, and it shall be given you.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Come unto me all
ye which labor. I dwell in a contrite spirit. So then, That which is necessary
to stir up in us a desire of deliverance, that is also necessary for our
comfort. But the knowledge of our misery is necessary for the desire of
salvation or deliverance: Therefore the knowledge of our misery is necessary
for the obtaining of our comfort; necessary, I say, not as a cause working and
effecting comfort, but as a motive inducing us to pursue after it: for of it
self it breeds terror, but this terror is good for us when faith
accompanies it. 2. That thereby we may be the more thankful for our
delivery: To work in us thankfulness for our delivery.
For we should wax ungrateful, if we understood not out of how great miseries
we were delivered, because we should never judge aright of the greatness of
the benefit, and so should not attain unto our delivery, whereas that is
performed only to the thankful. 3. Because we can be no fit hearers of the
Gospel, To prepare and make us fit hearers of the Gospel.
without the knowledge of our sin and wretchedness. For, unless by the
preaching of the Law, concerning sin, and the wrath of God, there be a
preparation made to the preaching of grace, there follows carnal security,
and our comfort is made unstable; because sound retired comfort, and carnal
security cannot stand together. Hereof it appears, that we are to begin from
the preaching of the Law, after the example of the Prophets and Apostles, that
thereby men may be cast down from presumption of their own justice, and may be
prepared to the knowledge of themselves, and true repentance. Except this be
done, through the preaching of grace, men will become more careless and
stubborn, and Pearls shall be thrown to Swine to be trampled under feet.

The knowledge of our delivery is necessary for our comfort: 1. That we fall
not into desperation: Why the knowledge of our delivery is necessary.
For as soon as we have a knowledge of our sin, we should be swallowed up of
despair, were it not that the means of our delivery presented themselves
ready at hand with us to succor us. 1 To keep us from despair.
2. That we may thereby be touched with a desire thereof. For a good thing not
known is not desired: according to that, 2 To kindle in us a desire of it.
There is no coveting after an unknown thing. If then we know not the benefit
of our delivery, we shall not long after it, and by consequent we shall not
obtain it: nay, when we either happen to find it, or have it offered unto us,
we shall not acknowledge it. 3. That it may comfort us: 3 To comfort us.
For a good thing not known does not comfort. 4. Lest through the ignorance
thereof, we our selves should imagine, 4 To prevent all erroneous conceits
therein.
or receive imagined by others any manner of delivery, to the reproach of Gods
Name, and hazard of our own salvation. 5. That we might be made partakers
thereof through faith: For, 5 To gain possession of it by faith.
faith is not without knowledge, and our delivery is apprehended only by faith.
6 To work thankfulness in us toward God for it.
6. That we may be thankful to God for it. For, as we desire not an unknown
good; so neither do we greatly esteem or account of it, neither do we think
of rendering condign thanks for it. Now the benefit of delivery is not
bestowed on the unthankful; but God imparteth it unto them, in whom it has
that end, whereunto it was ordained, that is, Thankfulness. For these causes,
to our sound and true comfort, the knowledge of our delivery is requisite and
necessary, both what it is, in what manner, and by whom it was performed. Now
this knowledge of our delivery is drawn out of the Gospel, heard, read, and
apprehended by faith; because faith alone promises freedom to them that
believe in Christ.

The knowledge of our thankfulness is necessary for our comfort: 1. Because
God exhibiteth this delivery only to the thankful. 1 Why the knowledge of our
thankfulness is necessary.
For in these alone God reapeth the end of his benefits; which is his worship,
and their gratefulness toward him: For thankfulness is the chief end and
scope of our delivery. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil. 1 Because God performs it to the thankful
alone. 1 John 3.8.
He has adopted us to the praise of the glory of his grace. 2. That we may
offer such thanksgiving as is acceptable unto God: For God will have us no
otherwise grateful unto him, then he has prescribed in his Word. True
thankfulness therefore is to be learned out of Gods Word, 2 To teach us what
thankfulness we are to render unto God.
not fashioned after our own imagination. 3. That we may know, that those
duties, which we perform to God and our neighbor, are no merits, but only a
public declaring of our thankfulness. And what thou give thanks for, 3 To
exclude all show of merit.
that thou know thou have not deserved. 4. That by our thankfulness our
faith and comfort may be confirmed, 4 For confirmation of faith in us.
or that by this thankfulness we may be ascertained of this delivery, as we
are sure of the causes of things, when we see their effects: for the thankful
do acknowledge and profess an assurance of the good they have received. Now
thankfulness it self we know in general out of the Gospel, Thankfulness in
general known out of the Gospel: in special out of the Law.
because the Gospel requires faith and repentance of them that will be saved:
We know it in special out of the Law, because the Law in special does
distinctly declare and determine what works, and what kind of obedience is
pleasing unto God. Wherefore necessarily we are to treat of thankfulness in
the Catechism. Object. That which of it self follows, is not necessary to
be taught. But thankfulness must needs follow of it self, after the
acknowledgement of our misery and delivery: Therefore it is not necessary to be
taught.

Answ. The fallacy of this argument is called in Schools, A supposall of that
to be generally true, which is true but in part. For, thankfulness follows
delivery, but not the manner of thankfulness likewise: that is, as soon as
we know our deliverance from misery, we presently conceive, that it is a point
of our duty to be thankful for so great a benefit; but what true and
acceptable thankfulness to God is, we know not, except we be taught: Therefore
of the manner of thankfulness we are to be instructed out of the Word of God.
Furthermore, the Major proposition is not universally true: for a thing, which
of it self does follow, may be taught for greater and fuller knowledge and
confirmation. And God by this means, that is to say, by his Word delivered and
known, will kindle, increase, and strengthen thankfulness in us.

The first general Part of Catechism, touching the Misery of Man.
On the second Sabbath.
Quest. 3. Whence know thou thy misery?
Answ. Out of the Law of God. Romans 3.10.


The Explication.
IN this first part concerning the Misery of man, principally is handled the
common place of sin, and of the effects and punishments of sin. To this are
annexed other subordinate places, and in this tract less principal then the
forenamed, as, the Common places of the creation of man, of the image of God
in man, of original sin, of freewill, and of afflictions. Touching our Misery,
we are to know in general, What it is, Whence it is known, and the means how.

1 What is meant by the name of misery.
The name of Misery stretches farther then the name of Sin. By the name of
Misery we understand, as well the evil of trespass or offense, as the evil
of punishment. The evil of trespass is, all sin: The evil of punishment is,
all calamity, torment, and destruction of our reasonable nature. To be short,
the evil of punishment comprehends all miseries and sins that follow after,
wherewith sins that go before are punished. So the numbering of the people
committed by David, is both a sin, and a punishment of sin which went before,
to wit, of the adultery and murder committed by David; that is to say, What the
nature of misery is.
it was an evil both of offense, and of punishment: Therefore Man's misery is
his wretched estate since the fall, consisting of two great evils; 1. That man's
nature through sin is corrupted and averted from God. 2. That for this
corruption it is guilty of an eternal malediction, and rejected of God.

2 Whence our misery is known. Romans 3.20. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
We have a knowledge of this misery out of the Law of God. By the Law comes the
knowledge of sin, says Saint Paul. And it is the voice of the Law; Cursed is
he that fulfilleth not all the words of this Law. Now by what means the Law
yields us the knowledge of our misery, the two next Questions which follow in
order shall declare.

Quest. 4. What does the Law of God require of us?
Answ. That does Christ summarily teach us, Matthew. 23. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all
thy strength. This is the first and the great Commandment: and the second is
like unto this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hangs the whole Law, and the Prophets. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Levit. 19.18.
Mar. 12.30. Luke 10.27.


The Explication.
THis sum of the Law Christ rehearses, Mat. 22.37. and Luke 10. out of Deuteronomy.
6.5. Levit. 19.18. And he expresses what is meant by that, Cursed is he that
fulfilleth not the whole Law: that is to say, who loves not God with all his
heart, with all his soul, with all his mind, and with all his strength; and his
neighbor as himself. The which several clauses are particularly to be
unfolded more at large.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God. To love God with all the heart, etc. is, on
due acknowledgement of his infinite goodness, reverently to regard him, and to
account him our principal and chiefest bliss, and for this cause to love him
above all things, to rejoice in him, to rely on him, to prefer his glory
before all things, that there be not found in us not so much as the least
thought, inclination, or appetite of any thing that may displease him; and
rather to part from that which is dearest unto us, and partake of any grievous
calamity whatsoever, then suffer our selves to be separated from communion with
him, or any way offend him: Lastly, to direct all our actions to this end, that
he alone may be glorified by us.

The Lord thy God. As if he should say: Thou shall love that God who is the
Lord, and thy God; who is revealed unto thee, who conferreth his manifold
benefits upon thee, and whom thou art bound to serve. It is therefore an
Antithesis, or opposition of the true God against false gods.

With all thy heart. By the Heart in this place is understood all the
affections, inclinations, and appetites or desires. Whereas then God requires
our whole heart, his meaning is, that he will have himself alone to be
acknowledged, and reckoned our sovereign and supreme God, and to be loved above
all things: that our whole heart rest on him, and not part thereof to be
yielded unto him, and part unto another. Nay, his will is, that we match and
compare nothing with him, much less prefer, and admit to share or partake
one jot in his love. This the Scripture calls, to walk before God with a
perfect heart: whose contrary is, Not to walk before God with a perfect heart,
to wit, to halt, and yield himself by halfes unto God. Object. God alone is to
be loved: therefore we ought not to love our neighbors, parents, and
kinsfolks. Answ. It is a Sophisme, which Logicians call a fallacy of accident,
when we argue from the denial of the manner of any thing, to the simple and
absolute denial of the thing it self: As in this present example, God is
chiefly to be loved, and above all things; that is, in such manner, that there
be nothing at all which we either prefer or equal with him, and which for his
sake we are not ready presently to forgo. We ought to love our neighbor, our
parents, and other things also; but not chiefly, not above God, not so that we
rather choose to offend God then our parents; but after God, and for God.

With all thy soul. By the Soul he comprehends that part which is willing
to any thing, or the motions of the will: therefore he means, with thy whole
will and purpose.

With all thy cogitations. By the Cogitations he understands the mind and
understanding: as if he should say, So much as thou know of God, so much
also shall thou love him: But thou shall bend all thy cogitations and thoughts
to know God perfectly and aright, and so shall thou love him. For, so much as
we know of God, so much also do we love him. Now we love him imperfectly, 1
Cor. 13.10.
because we know him but in part: in the life to come we shall know him
perfectly; therefore we shall love him perfectly, and that which is in part
shall be abolished.

With all thy strength. He means all actions both inward and outward, that
they be agreeable to the Law of God.

Why the love of God is called the first Commandment.
This is the first and greatest Commandment. The love of God is called the
first Commandment, because it is the spring and fountain of all the rest,
that is, the impulsive, efficient, and final cause of obedience in all the
rest: For, we therefore love our neighbor because we love God, and that we may
declare in the love of our neighbor that we love God. In like manner it is
called the greatest Commandment: Because the object, which it immediately
respects and considers, is the greatest object, Why it is called the
greatest Commandment.
even God himself. Because it is the end whereunto all the other Commandments
are directed. For our whole obedience has this only end, that we show our
love toward God, and honor his name. Because that is the principal worship
of God whereunto the ceremonial worship was to yield and give place. For the
Pharisees extolled the Ceremonial law above the Moral. Contrariwise, Christ
calls love the greatest Commandment, and prefers the Moral law before
the Ceremonial, because Ceremonies were appointed for love, and are to veil
and submit themselves unto it. Object. Love is the greatest Commandment:
therefore love is greater then faith: therefore love justifies rather then
faith. Answ. Love is here taken in general for our whole obedience which we
owe unto God, A distinction of love and faith.
under which Faith is comprehended: which faith justifies, not of it self, as
it is a virtue in man, but with relation and reference to her object, I mean,
the merit of Christ, as it appears, and applies to it self that merit. But
that love which in special is properly called love, is not the same with
faith, neither justifies it; because Christ's justice is applied unto us, nor
by love, but by faith alone.

The second is like unto this: Thou shall love thy neighbor. To love thy
neighbor as thy self, is, for the love thou owe unto God, that is, because
thou love God, to do well unto thy neighbor according to the commandments
of God: or to wish, and do all things unto him, which thou would in equity,
and according to the law to be done unto thee. Our neighbor is every man. Why
the love of our neighbor is called the second Commandment.
Now every man is our neighbor.

The second. It is called the second commandment: 1. Because it contains the
sum of the second Table, or the duties which are immediately performed unto
our neighbor. For, if thou love thy neighbor as thy self, thou will not
murder him, thou will not hurt him, etc. 2. Because the love of our neighbor
must rise out of the first Table, even from the love of God: therefore it is in
nature inferior to the love of God.

Why it is said to be like unto the first.
Is like unto this. It is called like unto the first in three respects: In
respect of the kind of worship, which is moral, or spiritual, and principal;
because it is there in the second Table no less commanded then in the first,
and is opposed unto the Ceremonies: In respect of the punishment, which is
eternal, because God does inflict this punishment for the breach of either
Table. In respect of the coherence, because neither can be observed without the
other. Wherein it is unlike.
It is also unlike to the first: In respect of the immediate object, which in
the first Table is God; in the second, our neighbor: In respect of their
process and order; the one being a cause, the other an effect of that cause:
For the love of our neighbor arises from the love of God, but it falls not
so out on the contrary. In respect of the degrees of love: For we must love God
above all things: We must love our neighbor, not above all things, nor above
God, but as our selves.

Hence rises an answer unto that objection, Object.
The second commandment is like unto the first: Therefore the first is not the
greatest. Or, therefore our neighbor must be set equal with God, Answ.
and equally worshipped. For, it is indeed like to the first, not simply and in
every point, but in some few; and unlike unto the first in some other points,
as before has been showed.

On these two Commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets: that is,
all the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets is reduced unto these two heads:
and all the legal obedience, which is contained in Moses and the Prophets,
does spring from the love of God, and our neighbor. Object. Yea, but the
promises and doctrine of the Gospel are found also in the Prophets: Therefore
it seems that the doctrine of the Prophets is unfitly restricted and limited
within these two Commandments. Answ. Christ speaks of the doctrine of the
Law, not of the promises of the Gospel, which appears by the question of the
Pharisee, demanding, which was the chief Commandment, not, which was the
chief promise in the Law.

Quest. 5. Art thou able to keep all these things perfectly?
Answ. No truly: Romans 3.10, 20, 23. 1 John 1.8, 10.
For by nature I am prone to the hatred of God, and of my neighbor. Romans 8.7.
Ephesians. 2.5. Titus 3.3. Genes. 6.5. Genes. 8.21. Jer. 17.9. Romans 7.2.


The Explication.
THis question, together with the two former, Man's misery known two ways.
teaches that our misery (as there are two parts thereof before specified; so
it) is known out of the Law two ways: By a comparing of our selves to the Law:
By an applying of the curse of the Law unto our selves. The examining of our
selves after the Law, What it is to examine our selves by the Law. Romans 8.7.
Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.31.
and comparing the Law with our selves, is a consideration of that purity and
uprightness which the Law requires, whether it be in us, or no. The
comparison shows, that we are not such as the Law requires: for the Law
requires a perfect love of God; in us there is a hatred and backsliding from
God. The Law requires a perfect love of our neighbor; in us there is a hate
of our neighbor. So then out of the Law is known the former part of our
misery, I mean, our corruption, whereof the Scripture elsewhere convicteth us.
How we do apply the curse of the Law to our selves.
The application of the curse of the Law unto our selves is made by the framing
of a Syllogism practical, that is, assuming and inferring our action; whose
Major, or former proposition is the voice of the Law, thus; Cursed is he who
continues not in all which is written in the book of the Law, to do them.
Conscience prompteth and tells us the Minor or latter proposition, thus; I
have not continued, etc. The conclusion or shutting up of all is, the allowing
and approving of the sentence of the Law, thus: Therefore I am accursed.

Every man's conscience frames such a Syllogism: nay, every man's conscience is
nothing else but such a practical Syllogism, Conscience a practical
Syllogism.
formed in his mind and understanding, whose Major is the Law of God, the Minor
is the pondering and weighing of our fact, which is contrary to the Law. The
Conclusion is the approving of the sentence of the Law condemning us for our
sin; which approbation grief and despair follow at the heels, unless the
comfort of the Gospel interpose it self, and we perceive the remission of our
sins purchased by the Son of God our Mediator. In this sort the guilt of
eternal malediction, which is the second part of our misery, is disclosed unto
us by the Law. For, we are all convicted by this reason and argument: The Law
binds all men to obedience, or, if they perform it not, to everlasting
punishment and malediction. But no man performs this obedience: Therefore the
Law binds all men to eternal malediction.

On the third Sabbath.
Quest. 6. Did God then make man so wicked and perverse?
Answ. Not so. But rather he made him good, Genesis 1.31.
and to his own Image Genesis 6.26, 27. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
, that is, endued with true righteousness and holiness, that he might rightly
know God his Creator, and heartily love him, and live with him blessed for
ever, and that to laud and magnify him. 2 Cor. 3.18.


The Explication.
HAving hitherto laid down and proved this Proposition, Man's nature is subject
unto sin: the next question to be discussed is Whether it were so created by
God; And if not so, What manner of nature was created in man by God; And,
Whence sin entered and set foot in man. Wherefore the Common place of the
Creation of man, and of the Image of God in man, is hitherto duly referred.
Here also we are to make an Antithesis, or comparison of man's original
excellency before his fall, and his original misery since the same, for these
causes: That the cause and fountain of our misery being discovered, it might
not be imputed unto God: That the greatness of our misery might the more
appear. For look how much more open and eminent our original excellency is
unto us, so much more obvious and evident is our misery; as also the benefit of
our delivery is so much the more precious and honorable in our eyes, by how
much the greatness of the evils, whence we are freed, is more apparent.

OF THE CREATION OF MAN.
The special points touching man's Creation are,
1 What manner of creature man was made by GOD. 2 To what end man was made by
GOD.


1 What manner of creature man was made by God.
THis question is proposed even for the same causes for which the whole place
it self is; namely, That it may appear how man was created by God without sin,
and that therefore God is not the author of our sin, corruption, and misery.
That we may perceive from what a height of dignity and honor, into how deep a
gulf of wretchedness and misery we are plunged through sin, and thence may
acknowledge the tender mercy and compassion of God, who vouchsafes to hale and
pull us out of the same. That we further acknowledge our thankfulness for
benefits heretofore received, and our unworthiness of receiving any
heretofore. That we may the more earnestly thirst after the recovery of the
dignity and happiness we have lost, and seek it in Christ. That we may be
thankful unto God for the restoring of it. Now what manner of creature man
was fashioned by God in the beginning, is showed in the Answer of this sixth
Question, where it is said, He made him good, and to his own Image, etc. Which
words require a more ample declaration. Man therefore was created by God on the
sixth day of the Creation of the world, consisting of body and soul. His body
was fashioned of a mass or lump of earth: immortal, if he stood still in
righteousness; mortal, if he fell: for mortality ensued on sin as a
punishment thereof. His soul was made of nothing, but immediately inspired by
God into his body, and was an incorporeall substance, understanding, and
imortall. God breathed in his face breath of life, Genesis 2.7.
and man was made a living soul. This was by God infused and united to an
isntrumental body, to inform or quicken it; and together with it to make one
person or Subsistent, namely man, to work certain motions and actions proper
unto man, both external, and internal; in the body, and without the body; by
the ministry of the body, and without the ministry of the body; just, holy, and
pleasing unto God. After the Image of God: that is, perfectly good, wise, just,
holy, blessed, and sole sovereign of the creatures. Of this Image of God in
man more shall hereafter be spoken.

2 To what end man was created.
THE Catechism makes answer, That he might rightly know God his Creator, and
heartily love him, and live with him blessed for ever, and that to laud and
magnify his name. Wherefore, the last and principal end of man's creation is,
The glory and praise of God.
The glory and praise of God. For God therefore created reasonable creatures,
Angels and men, that, being known of them, he might be magnified for ever. Man
therefore was principally created to the knowledge and worship of God; that is,
to the profession and invocation of his Name, to praise and thankesgiving, to
love and obedience, which consists in the performance of those duties, which
concern God and man. For the worship of God comprehends in it all these. Obj.
Heaven, earth, and other creatures void of reason, Psalm. 19. and 146.
are said to worship and magnify God: therefore the worship and praise of God
is not the proper end why man was created. Ans. This reason has a fallacy of
equivocation or ambiguity. Creatures void of reason are said to worship and
praise God, not that they understand ought of God, or know and worship him; but
because they bearing certain prints and stamps of Divinity in them, are the
matter of Gods praise and worship, which is properly performed by reasonable
creatures. For Angels and men, by the beholding and contemplation of these Gods
works, disery in them the infinite goodness, wisdom, power, justice, bounty
and majesty of God, Romans 1. 20.
and are raised and stirred up to magnify God by these his creatures. And if
God had not formed creatures of reason and understanding, who might behold,
consider, and with thankful mind acknowledge his works, and the order and
disposing of things in whole nature: other things which are void of reason,
might no more be said to praise and worship God, that is, to be the matter and
occasion of praising him, then if they never had bin at all. Therefore that
which David says, is spoken by the figure Prosopoeia, or counterfeiting of
some other person under that which is presented; as, Praise the Lord ye
heavens, sea, and earth, etc. That is, let Angels and men at the sight and view
of these Gods creatures take occasion of lauding and magnifying his Name. Many
other ends are subordinated to this principal end. For unto Gods worship is
substituted, The knowledge of God.
The true knowledge of him: For God, not being known, cannot be worshipped. And
it is the proper work of man, wherein eternal life consists, to know and
worship God aright. This is everlasting life, that they may know thee alone to
be the true God. John 17.3.
To the knowledge of God is subordinate, or next in order, Man's felicity.
The felicity and blessedness of man, which is the fruition and everlasting
participation of God, and heavently blessings. For out of these appears the
goodness, mercy, and power of God. Obj. The felicity and blessedness of man,
his knowledge and worship of God, are qualities and properties in which, or
with which man was created; that is, they are a part of the Image of God, and
the form or proper nature of man. Therefore they belong unto the first
Question; which was, What man was created, and not to this, Of the end of man's
creation. Answ. They are a part of man's form and nature, and they are man's end
in a diverse respect, in which there is no contrariety. For God made man such a
creature, as being blessed and happy, should know and worship him aright: and
again, he made him to this end, that thenceforth for ever he might be
acknowledged and magnified by him, and might continually communicate himself
with all his graces and blessings unto him. Wherefore man was created happy,
holy, and religious, and ^^us was his form, which he received in the Creation,
and moreover he was so created, that he should so continue for ever; and this
was his end. Therefore both these are fitly spoken, to wit, that man both is
created holy, happy, and religious, and is created to be holy, happy, and
religious. The former of these is referred to the question What, in respect of
the beginning: the latter to the question For what, in respect of continuance
and perseverance. So righteousness and true holiness, whereas they are the
form and very being of a new man, are termed his end. Neither is it absurd
that the same things should in diverse respects be called the final cause, and
the formal. For that which is the form in respect of the creature, may be
termed the end, Ephesians. 4.24.
in respect of the intent and purpose of the Creator. The manifestation of Gods
mercy and justice.
The manifestation of God, or the declaration of Gods mercy in his chosen to
everlasting life, and of his justice and wrath against sin to be punished in
the reprobate. This fourth is subordinated to the knowledge of God, and man's
felicity. For that thou may know God, and he communicate himself unto thee,
it is needful also that he make himself manifest unto thee. The preservation
of the society of men. Psalm. 22.23.
The preservation of society in mankind, which end is subordinated to the
manifestation of God: For except there were men, God should not have whom to
manifest himself unto. I will declare thy name unto my brethren. The community
of civil duties amongst men.
The communion of mutual intercourse of duties and courtesies amongst men,
serving for the preservation of humane society. For that the society and
conversing of men together may be maintained, there must needs be peace, and
mutual duties interchangeably passing between them. The first creation of man
is diligently to be compared with the misery ^f mankind; as also the end for
which we were created, with the aberration and ^^verving from the end: that so
by this means also we may know the greatness of our misery. For how much
the greater we see the good was, which we have lost; so much the greater we
know the evils to be, into which we are fallen.

OF THE IMAGE OF GOD IN MAN.
The chief Questions hereof are,
1 What is the Image of God in man. 2 How far forth it is lost, and how far
it remains. 3 How it is repaired in man.


1 What the Image of God in man is.
What the Image of God is.
THE Image of God in man, is a virtue knowing aright the nature, will, and
works of God; and a will freely obeying God; and a correspondence of all the
inclinations, desires, and actions, with the will of God; and, in a word, a
spiritual and unchangeable purity of the soul, and the whole man; perfect
blessedness, and joy resting in God; and the dignity of man, and majesty,
whereby he excels and rules other creatures: 5 Parts of the Image of God in
man.
Wherefore the whole Image of God in man comprehends, The soul it self,
together with the faculties thereof, endued with reason and will. All our
natural notions and knowledge of God, his will, and his works; that is to say,
perfect wisdom in the soul. All just and holy actions, inclinations, and
motions of the will,I mean, perfect righteousness and holiness in our heart
and will, and all our external actions. Felicity, blessedness, and glory
linked with perfect joy in God, and abundance of all good things, free from all
misery and corruption. Rule and dominion of man over the creatures; as fishes,
fowls, and other living creatures. In all these things this reasonable
creature in some sort resembles his Creator, as the Image expresses in some
sort the Arch-type or principal pattern; yet can he by no means be equalled
unto his Creator: for in God all things are immense and without measure, Ephesians
4.24.
and even his essence infinite. The Apostle Paul puts Righteousness and
Holiness as the chief parts of this Image; yet does he not exclude, but
presuppose wisdom and knowledge: for no man can worship God unknown. But
neither does Paul exclude perfect blessedness and glory; for this, according
to the order of Gods justice, is necessarily coupled with perfect holiness or
conformity with God. For, where true righteousness and holiness is, there is
the absence of all evils, whether of crime or offense.

Righteousness and holiness in this text of the Apostle may either be taken
for the same thing; or so distinguished, that Righteousness may be meant of the
actions both inward and outward, as they have a conformity and congruity of the
will and heart with the mind judging aright, and with the Law of God; and
Holiness may be understood of the qualities themselves. Perfect wisdom and
righteousness is in God alone, Man was perfect but in a certain degree and
measure: not infinitely as God is.
and is not found in any creature; and the wisdom of all creatures, even of
the Angels themselves, both may, and does increase: how then was the Image of
God perfect wisdom and righteousness in man? An. By perfect wisdom here is
meant not such a kind of wisdom as is ignorant of nothing, but which has as
absolute perfection, as is incident unto the nature of a creature; as great a
portion as the rich Creator has measured and sundred out unto his creature,
sufficient to indue it with happiness and felicity: as the wisdom of the
Angels and their blessedness is perfect, because it is such as God has
ordained, and yet unto it somewhat daily may be added; otherwise it were
infinite. So was man perfectly just, because he was conformable to God in all
things which God required of him; not that he was of equal perfectness, or
had justice inherent in him in that degree of perfection which God had, but
because he wanted nothing of the full measure of such perfection as God created
in him, and would should be in him, and which might suffice a created nature to
the attaining of blessedness. There is therefore an ambiguity in the word
perfection; and in this sense here expressed, man is said in Scripture to be
the image of God, 1 Cor. 15.47.
or to be made after the image of God. The first man was of the earth, earthly;
the second man, the Lord from heaven. As the earthly was, such are they that
are earthly: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And
as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of the
heavenly. Ans. The Apostle does not here take away the image of the heavenly
man from Adam, when he as yet stood; but compares his nature and estate as
well before, as after his fall, with that heavenly glory, unto which we are
restored by Christ; that is, not only the nature of man corrupted through sin
by death, but the degree of the image of God in man's nature before the fall,
and before glorification, with that which follows in glorification.

Christ called the image of God in two respects.
Christ is called the image of God in a far different and diverse manner: 1. In
respect of his divine nature; whereby he is the image of his eternal Father,
coeternall, consubstantiall, and coequall with his Father in Essence,
essential properties, and works; and is that person by which the Father does
mediately reveal himself in creating and preserving all things, but chiefly
in saving the Elect. And he is indeed called the image not of himself, or of
the holy Ghost, but of his Father, because he was from all eternity born, not
of himself, or of the holy Ghost, but of the Father. Of his humane nature.
In respect of his humane nature, whereby he is the image of God, created
indeed, yet by many degrees, and in number of gifts, John 14.9.
as in wisdom, righteousness, power, glory, far exceeding all Angels and men
and after a particular manner resembling his Father in doctrine, virtues, and
actions; according as himself says, Philip, he that has seen me has seen my
Father. Angels and men the image of God. Genesis 1.26. Not in essence, but in
qualities.
But Angels and men are termed the image of God, as well in respect of the Son
and the holy Ghost, as of the Father, whereas it is said, Let us make man in
our image, according to our likeness: and that not for the likeness or
equality of essence, but for the agreeing of some properties; not in degree or
essence but in kind and imitation. For there is something created by God in
Angels and men, proportionable to the counterfeit and pattern of the divine
essence.

Adam the image of God, not according to his body, but according to his soul.
They who, as in time past the Anthropomorphitae, will have the image of God to
be the form of man's body, say, that whole Adam was made to the image of God;
and therefore according to his body also. But they perceive not the usual
manner of speaking of a person composed of diverse natures, which is called, The
communicating of properties, when that is communicated to the whole person in
the concrete, which is only proper to one of the natures; as in the same
place, The faithful not in all things like unto the divinity in which they are
like Christ: because Christ himself in his body was not like unto God, but
unto man.
Adam was made a living soul. Now as the Scripture mentions the nature of the
soul, so also does it mention such an image of God as agrees not unto the
body. Again, they object, Christ is the image of God, But the faithful bear
in their body the image of Christ: therefore the body also is the image of
Christ. There are four terms in this Syllogism: because Christ is not in his
body, but in his divinity, the image of his Father: and in soul, or in the
gifts or properties thereof, and actions, he is the image of the whole divinity
or Godhead. Wherefore the image of God in the faithful is not the same which
the image of God is in Christ: neither are they in all things like unto the
Godhead* in which they are like Christ; because there is somewhat in Christ
besides his divinity, and the image of the divinity which is in the soul; that
is, his body, which has an affinity not with the divine nature, but with the
nature of our bodies. Again, they say, the frame of man's body is made with
admirable skill and cunning: therefore there shines in it, and is beheld as in
an image, the wisdom of the Creator. But it follows not hereof that the body
is the image of God: for so should all things be made to the image of God,
seeing that in all Gods works, his power, wisdom, and goodness does appear,
which yet the Scripture does not permit: which sets out only the reasonable
creatures with this title and commendation, and places the image of God in
those things which belong not to the body, but to the soul.

How man is said of S. Paul to be the image of God, and not the woman.
Here also question is made concerning the place of the Apostle, Man is the
image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of man: where Paul seems
to attribute the image of God only to man, and to take it away from the woman.
But the Apostle means, that man only is the image of God, not in respect of
his nature, 1 Cor. 1.11.
being partaker of divine wisdom, righteousness, and joy; neither in respect
of his dominion over other creatures (for these are common to man and woman)
but in respect of civil, domestical, and ecclesiastical order, in which he
will have the public government and administration to belong unto the man, not
to the woman.

2 How far forth the Image of God was lost, and how far it remains.
SUch then was the image of God, after which God in the beginning created man,
and which man before his fall had apparent stamped in him. But man after his
fall, by means of sin, lost this glorious image of God, and was transformed
into the deformed and ugly shape of the Devil. The remnants of Gods image in
man after the fall.
Some remnants and sparks of Gods image continued re^iant in man after his
fall, and yet remain also, even in the unregenerate: The incorporeall substance
of the reasonable and immortal soul, together with the powers thereof; and
amongst these the liberty of his will, so that whatsoever man will, he wills
it freely. Many notions in the understanding; of God, of nature, of the
difference of things seemly and unseemly; which notions are the principles of
Arts and Sciences. Some prints and steps of moral virtues, and some petty
abilities concerning outward discipline, and behavior. The fruition of many
temporal good things. A kind of dominion over the creature: For this is not
wholly lost, but many are subject to man's government, and man is able to rule
many, and to use them. These remnants, I say, of the image of God in man,
howsoever they also through sin are mainly defaced, and manifoldly impaired,
yet in some sort they are reserved and preserved in nature, The ends for which
God preserves these remnants in us.
and that to these ends: 1. That they might be a testimony of the bounty of God
toward us, yea though we were unworthy of it. 2. That God might use them to
the restoring of his image in us. 3. That he might leave the Reprobate without
excuse.

Howbeit, the good and graces which we have lost of this image of God, are
far more in number, and of greater worth and moment: As, The true, perfect,
and saving knowledge of God, and his will. The integrity and perfection of the
knowledge of Gods works, What is lost of the image of God in us.
and a bright shining light, or a dexterity in the understanding, or discerning
truth; in place whereof succeeds, ignorance, blindness, and darkness.
Righteousness and conformity to the Law of God in all our inclinations, in
whose room is invested a horrible disorder and corruption of the inclinations
and motions of our heart and will, Whole and perfect dominion over the
creatures: For those beasts which feared man before, now assault him, they lie
in wait for him, and violence him. The fields bring forth thorns and
thistles. The right and interest of using those creatures, which God granted to
his children, not to his enemies. The felicity and happiness both of this
life, and of the life to come; in place whereof is come death both temporal
and eternal, with all sorts of calamities. Object. The Heathen excelled in
many virtues, and achieved great works: therefore it seems the image of God
was not lost in them. Two causes why the virtues of Ethnicks please not God.
Answ. The noble virtues and famous exploits of Heathen men pertain indeed to
the relics and remainder of Gods image in man: but so far are they from
being that true and perfect image of God, that they rather are mere maskes and
shows of outward behavior and discipline, 1 They proceed not from a true
knowledge of God.
without any obedience of the heart toward God, whom they know not, and f^ie
from: therefore these works are not pleasing unto God, 2 They have not Gods
glory proposed for their end.
whereas they neither proceed from the true knowledge of God, neither are
wrought to that end, that all the glory may redound unto God.

3 How the image of God is restored in us.
The repairing of the image of God in us, is the work of all three persons.
THE repairing of the image of God in man is wrought by God alone, who gave it
unto man: for in whose power it is to give life, in his also it is to restore
it being lost. The manner of restoring it is this: 1. God the Father restores
it by his Son, because he has made him unto us, wisdom, justification,
sanctification, and redemption. 2. The Son by the holy Ghost immediately
regenerating us; 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 3.18. Romans 1.16.
We are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord. 3. The holy Ghost restores it by the Word and use of the Sacraments:
The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation. Now this renewing is so wrought
by God, as that in this life it is only begun in the chosen, and in them
confirmed and augmented unto the end of their life, as concerning the soul;
but as concerning the whole man, at the resurrection of the body. Wherefore it
is to be observed, who is the author, and what the order and manner of this
repairing.

Quest. 7. Whence then arises this wickedness of man's nature?
Answ. From the fall and disobedience of our first Parents, Adam and Eve.
Genes. 3. the whole chapter throughout. Romans 5.12, 18, 19.
Hence is our nature so corrupt, that we are all conceived and borne in sin.
Psalm 51.5. Genesis 5.3. Wisdom 12.10.


The Explication.
HEre we are first to meditate on the fall and first sin of man; whence the
corruption of man's nature had his beginning. Secondly, on sin in general, and
especially on Original sin.

Of the fall and first sin of man.
Concerning the fall and first sin we are to consider and know, 1 What and
what manner of sin it was. 2 What are the causes thereof. 3 What are the
effects. 4 Why God permitted it.


1 What and what manner of sin that first sin of Adam and Eve was.
THE fall or first sin of man was the disobedience of our first parents, Adam
and Eve in paradise; or, the eating of the apple and fruit forbidden by God.
Genesis 2.16, 17.
Thou shall eat freely of every tree of the garden; but of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou
shall eat thereof, thou shall die the death. This commandment of God, man
through the persuasion of the Devil trangressed, and hence is our corruption
and misery derived. Is then the plucking of an apple so heinous a crime? Yea
verily, a grievous offense; The manifoldness of the first sin:
because in it many horrible sins are fast linked together: In pride against
God.
Pride against God, ambition, and an admiration of himself: for man, not
content with that state wherein God had placed him, desired to be equal with
God. This God does charge him with, when he says; Genesis 3.22.
Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: In incredulity.
Incredulity and unbelief, and contempt of Gods justice and mercy: for he
tempted God, and charged him with a lie: For God had said, Thou shall die the
death: The Devil denied it, saying, Ye shall not die: Genesis 2.17.
and farther, the Devil accused God of envy, saying; But God knows that when
ye shall eat thereof, Genesis 3.4, 5.
your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil.
Here Adam gave credence to the Devil, and did eat of the forbidden fruit;
neither did he believe that God would therefore inflict that punishment on him
which he had threatened. Now not to believe God, and of the contrary to believe
the Devil, is to account God for no God; nay, to seat and install the Devil in
the place of God. This sin was heavy and horrible above measure. In
stubbornness and disobedience.
Stubbornness and disobedience toward God; because against the express
commandment of God he did eat of the apple. In unthankfulness.
Unthankfulness for benefits received at his creation; as, for these, that he
was created to the Image of God, and to eternal life: for which he rendered
this thanks, that he rather hearkened and inclined to the Devil then God. In
unnaturalness^.
Unnaturalness and neglect of love toward his posterity: because (miserable
and wretched man!) he thought not with himself, that as he had received those
good things for himself and his posterity, so he should by sinning against God
make loss of them both from himself and them. In Apostasy.
Apostasy or manifest defection from God to the Devil, whom he believed and
obeyed rather then God, whom he set up in the place of God, withdrawing and
sundring himself from God. He did not ask of God those good things which he
was to receive; but rejecting the wisdom and direction of God, by the advice
of the Devil, will aspire to be equal with God. Wherefore the fall of man was
no light and simple, or single fault; but was a manifold and terrible sin,
for which God justly rejected man with all his posterity. Hence we easily
answer that objection: Object. No just Judge inflicteth a great punishment for
a small offense; God is a just Judge: Thorefore he should not have punished
the eating of an Apple so grievously. Answ. The eating of the Apple was no
small sin, but manifold and outrageous; in which was conceived Pride,
Unthankfulness, Apostasy, etc. as has been already proved: Therefore God
justly inflicted a great punishment on mankind for the same. Repli. Yet at the
least he should have spared man's posterity, because himself has said; Ezekiel.
18.20.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father. Answ. True, if so the
son be not partaker of his fathers wickedness: But here all are partakers of
Adams iniquity.

2. What were the causes of the first sin.
The causes of sin are the Devils instigation, and man's will freely yielding
unto it.
THe first sin of man sprang not from God, but from the instigation of the
Devil, and from the free will of man: For the Devil provoked man to fall away
from God; and man, yielding to the enticing allurements of the Devil, freely
revolted from God, and wilfully forsook him. Now, although God left man
destitute in his temptation, yet he is not the cause of his fall, or sin, or
destruction of man: For in that dereliction or forsaking of man, God neither
intended, nor effected any of these; but he proved and tried man, to show how
impotent and unable the creature is to do, or retain ought that is good, God
not preserving and directing him by his Spirit: and together with his trial of
man, he in his just judgment suffered the sin of man to concur, but he
was no cause or efficient of it. Fleshly wisdom thus reasons against this
doctrine: Object. Whosoever with-draweth grace in the time of temptation,
without which the fall cannot be avoided, he is the cause of the fall; but God
withheld from man his grace in the time of temptation, without which he could
not but fall: Therefore God was the cause of the fall. Answ. The Major is true
only of him, who withholds grace, when he is obliged and bound not to
withold it: and him, who with-draweth it from such a one as desires it; not
from such a one as wilfully rejects it: and of him, who of despite and
malice with-draweth it. But it is not true of him, who is neither bound to
preserve and maintain the grace which he sometime gave; and who withholds
it not from such a one as desires to have it continued; but from him, who is
willing he should so do, and voluntarily refuses it: and, who denies it not
therefore, because he envieth the offenders righteousness and life eternal,
or is delighted with the sin; but only to this purpose, to try him to whom
he has imparted grace: For he who forsakes any man on this manner, is not
the cause of sin, howsoever in him, who is thus forsaken, sin necessarily
follows this dereliction and withdrawing of grace. Now God in the temptation
of man withheld his grace from him not after the former, but the latter manner
here expressed: Wherefore God is not the cause of man's sin and destruction
for withdrawing, but man for wilful rejecting of grace. Repl. Whosoever will
that such a one be tempted, whom he certainly knows that he will fall, if he
be tempted; he wills his sin which falls: but God would that man should
be tempted of the Devil, whom he certainly knew that he would fall; for
otherwise, and against the will of God. man could not have been tempted:
Therefore God is the cause of man's fall. Answ. This Major is denied as false,
if it be simply and precisely taken: For, he is not the cause of sin, who will
that he who is apt to fall, be tempted only for cause of trial, and to make
manifest the creatures infirmity. Now God in this sense, and with this intent
suffered man to be tempted, that is, to be proved. But the Devil tempting man,
to the end that he might sin, and be separate and distracted from God; and
man willingly obeying the Tempter against the commandment of God, they both
are the true causes of sin. But of the causes of sin more shall be spoken
hereafter.

3 What the effects of the first sin are.
THE effects of man's first sin are: Guilt of death.
Guiltiness of death, and a privation and destruction of Gods Image in our
first Parents. Original sin.
Original sin in us their posterity, that is to say, the guilt of eternal
death, and the corruption and averseness of our whole nature from God. Actual
sin.
All actual sins which are sprung of original: for that which is the cause
of the cause, is also the cause of the effect: But the first sin in man is
the cause of his original sin, and this of his actual sin. Punishments
inflicted for sin.
All the evils of punishment which are inflicted for sins. Therefore the
first sin of man is the cause of all other his sins and punishments. Now
whether it stand with Gods justice to punish the posterity for the sin of the
parents, it shall hereafter in the common place of Original sin be fully
resolved.

4 Why God permitted the first sin of man.
GOD could have kept man from falling if he would, The causes of Gods
permission of the first sin:
but he permitted him to fall, that is, he gave him not the grace of
resistance against the temptation of the Devil; and that for two causes: To
show man's weakness and infirmity.
That it might stand for an example of the weakness and infirmity of the
creature, were it not supported, and preserved in original righteousness by
the Creator. To show his mercy, justice, and power.
That by this occasion God might show his goodness, mercy, and grace, in
saving the Elect by Christ: and that he might show his justice and power in
punishing the wicked and reprobate for their sins; according to these sayings
of Scripture: God has shut up all in unbelief, Romans 11.32. Romans 9.22, 23.
that he might have mercy on all, and every mouth might be stopped. And, God,
to show his wrath, and make his power known, suffered with long patience the
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction; and that he might declare the riches
of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

This doctrine concerning the Creation and fall of man is necessary for the
Church, for many causes and uses which it has. The necessity and use of this
doctrine of man's creation.
lest God be imagined the author or cause of sin: that all things were
created for the use of man, and that the dominion over the creatures lost in
Adam, is restored unto us in Christ; we must magnify the bountifulness of God
toward us: we must ask all things of him, as being our Creator and sovereign
Lord, who has the right and power of giving all good things, to whom, and how
far he will himself; and use those things which are granted to our use with a
good conscience, and to the glory of God, who gave them. wrath, to show the
justice and severity of God against sin, let us be thankful to God, since of
his mere and infinite goodness he would have us to be vessels of mercy, to
declare through all eternity the riches of his glory.

OF SIN IN GENERAL.
The special questions of sin in general are these: 1 Whether sin be, or
whence it appears to be in the world, and in us. 2 What sin is. 3 How many
kinds of sins there are. 4 Whence sin is, and what be the causes thereof. 5 What
be the effects of sin.


1 Whether sin be in us.
THat sin is not only in the world, but in us also, we are diverse ways
convinced: We know that sin is in us,
By Gods own testimony. Genesis 6.5. and 18.21. Jer. 17.9. Romans 1.21. and 3.10.
and 7.18. Psalm. 14. and 53. Isa. 59.
By Gods divine testimony, which pronounces us all guilty of sin; and we are
to give credence unto Gods assertion, since he is the searcher of hearts, and
truest eyewitness of our actions: By Gods Law. Romans 3.20. and 4.15. and 5.20.
and 7.7
By the Law of God sin is fully known, as before in the third and fifth
Questions of the Catechism has been at large declared, according to those
texts of Scripture, By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. The Law causes
wrath; for where no Law is, there is no transgression. The Law entered
thereupon, that the offense should abound: I knew not sin, but by the Law. By
conscience and the law of nature. Romans 1.19. and 1.14
By conscience, which convinces us of sin: for God, besides the written Law,
reserved unto us certain general notions and principles of the law of Nature
imprinted in our understanding, sufficient to accuse and condemn us. Forasmuch
as that which may be known of God is manifest in them. The Gentiles do by
nature the things contained in the Law, and show the effect of the Law written
in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts
accusing one another, or excusing. 4. The punishment and death, whereunto all
men are subject and enthralled. Nay, our Churchyards, places of burial, and
of execution are as so many Sermons of sin; because God, being just, inflicteth
not punishment on any but for sin, Romans 5.12. Romans 6.23. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
as says the Scripture: Death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have
sinned. Again, The wages of sin is death. Also, Cursed is every one that
confirms not all the words of this law to do them.

The use of this question is, The use of the doctrine of sin is,
1 To work in us Humility and Repentance.
That we may thence exercise our selves continually in humiliation and
repentance: 2 To withstand Anabaptists.
That we detest and withstand the outrages of Anabaptists and Libertines, who
deny that there is any sin in them; contrary to the express word of God. If we
say we have no sin we deceive our selves; and contrary to all experience: For
they both commit many things which God in his law pronounces to be sins, 1
John 1.8.
howsoever themselves falsely and blasphemously term them the motions of the
holy Spirit; and live also in misery, no less subject to death and diseases
then other men: which truly, were they no sinners, were flat against that
precise rule, Where there is no sin, there is no death.

But it is demanded, Object.
whether we have not a knowledge of our sin by the Gospel also: For, The
Gospel charging us to seek for righteousness, not in our selves, but without
our selves, even in Christ, pronounces us sinners. Therefore by the Gospel
also we have knowledge of our sin, and not by the law alone. Answ. The
Gospel pronounces us sinners, but not in special as does the Law; How the
knowledge of sin comes by the Gospel.
neither does it purposely teach what, or how manifold sin is, what sin
deserves, etc. which is the property of the Law: but it executes this
function only in general, and less principally, and presupposing the whole
doctrine and duty of the Law; as inferior Sciences, which are in order
directly one under another, borrow some principles and chief grounds from the
Sciences next above them: For after that the Law has arraigned and convicted
us of sin, and proved that we are sinners; the Gospel immediately takes this
principle, and concludes, that whereas we are sinners in our selves, we must
seek for righteousness without our selves in Christ, that we may be saved.
So then by these five means we may find that sin is in us: Sin is known
five ways.
1. By Gods own assertion: 2. By Gods law principally, and in special: 3. By
the Gospel less principally, and in general: 4. By the touch and sense of
conscience: 5. By the punishments which God, being just, inflicteth not but for
sin.

2 What sin is.
SIn is a transgression of the law, or, whatsoever is repugnant to the law,
that is a defect, 1 John 3.4.
or an inclination, or action repugnant to the law of God, offending God, and
making the creature that sins guilty of the everlasting wrath of God, except
remission be granted for the Son of God our Mediator. The general nature of
sin is a defect* The Logicians call it Genus, which is the more common nature
of a thing, or the matter of it.
or an inclination, or action: but to speak properly, a defect is this general
nature; and inclination. or actions, are rather the matter of sin. The
difference and formal essence of sin, is a repugnancie with the law; which
John calls a transgression of the law. The property, which necessarily
cleaves fast unto it, is the guilt of the creature offending: that is to say,
a binding of the offender to temporal and eternal punishments, which is done
according to the order of Gods justice. And this is that which they commonly
say, that there is a double formality, or twofold nature of sin; A twofold
nature of sin: 1 Repugnancie with the law. 2 Guilt.

repugnancy with the law, and guilt: or, that there are two respects, of which
the former is a comparison or a dissimilitude with the law; the other, an
ordaining unto punishment. An accidental condition of sin is expressed in
these words, Except remission be granted, etc. because it arises not out of
the nature of sin, but it is by occasion and accident, in respect of sin,
that they who believe in Christ are not punished with everlasting death;
because (forsooth) sin through Christ is not imputed unto them, but remitted
by grace. Now these are called defects: In the understanding, ignorance and
doubtfulnesse of God and his will: In the heart, a privation or want of the
love of God and our neighbor, of joy in God, and of an earnest desire and
endeavor to obey God according to all his commandments; and an omitting of
inward and outward actions, which are commanded by the law of God. What corrupt
inclinations are.
Corrupt inclinations are said to be stubbornness of the heart and will
against the law of God, or against the judgment of the mind as touching
honest and dishonest actions: or a pronenesse and willingness of nature to do
those things which God forbids, which evil they call Concupiscence.

That these defects and corrupt inclinations are sins, and condemned by God, is
proved, Three proofs that corrupt inclinations are sins.
Gods Law.
Out of the Law of God, which expressly condemns these defects and
inclinations, when it says, Cursed is every one that confirms not all the
words of the Law to do them: and, Thou shall not covet: which Law also
requires in men the contrary graces and faculties, I mean, a perfect knowledge
and love of God and our neighbor. Deuteronomy. 6.5. John 17.3. Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, etc. This is life
eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, etc. Thou shall have no
other gods before me. Testimony of Scripture. Genesis 8.21. Jer. 17.9. Romans 7 7.
John 3.5. 1 Cor. 2.14. and 15.50. Romans 1.21. and 8.6.
By many testimonies of Scripture condemning these evils for sins; The frame
or imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. The heart is
deceitful and wicked above all things. I had not known lust (that is to say,
to be sin) unless the Law had said, Thou shall not lust. Death of Infants.
By the punishments and death of Infants, who although they do neither good
nor evil, and offend not after the similitude of Adams transgression; yet they
have sin in them, for which death reigns over them. And this sin is the
blindness and frowardness of our nature toward God, of which we have
hitherto spoken. 1. Object. That which is not voluntary, neither can be
avoided, is not sin, neither deserves punishment: Defects and inclinations
cannot be avoided by us: Therefore they are no sin. Answ. The Major holds
true in a Civil Court, but not in the judgment of God, before whom,
whatsoever is repugnant unto his Law (whether it be in our power to avoid it,
or no) is sin, and deserves punishment. For Scripture teaches both that the
wisdom of the flesh cannot be subject to the Law of God; and that all, who are
not subject to the Law, are subject to the wrath of God. 2. Object. Nature is
good: But our inclinations and desires are natural: Therefore they are good.
Answ. True it is, that Nature is good, if you consider it before the
corruption. Genes. 1.31.
All things were very good which God made. Even now also Nature is good in
respect of the substance, and being of it, and as it was made of God; but not
in respect of the quality of it, and as it is corrupted. 3. Object Punishments
are not sins: But these inclinations and defects are punishments of the first
fall: Therefore they are not sins. Answ. It is true, that punishments are not
sins, if we respect the course of Civil justice; but not so, if we respect
Gods justice. For God oftentimes punishes sins with sins; which the Apostle
especially shows, Romans 1.27. 2 These 2.11. For God has power of depriving his
creatures of his Spirit; which power his creatures have not.

3. How many kinds of sins there are.
There be five principal divisions of sin.
THe first division is this; All sin is either Original or Actual. This
distinction is expressed Romans 5.14. and 7.20. and 9.11.

OF ORIGINAL SIN.
Original sin is the guilt of all mankind, What Original s^n is.
by reason of the fall of our first Parents, and a privation of the knowledge
of God and his will in our mind, and of all inclination to obey God with our
will and heart; and of the contrary, in these there remains a wicked
inclination to those things which God forbids, and backwardness in those
things which he commands, ensuing upon the fall of our first Parents, and
derived from them unto all their posterity, and so corrupting their whole
nature, that all by reason of this corruption are become guilty of the
everlasting anger of God, neither can they do any thing pleasing and
acceptable to God, Romans 5.14. Psalm 51.5. Original sin contains two things.
except remission be granted for the Son of God the Mediator, and a renewing
of their nature by the holy Ghost. Of this sin it is said, Death reigned even
over them also that sinned not after the like manner of the transgression of
Adam. In sin has my mother conceived me. Original sin then contains two
things: Guilt of eternal damnation.
The guilt of eternal damnation for the sin of our first Parents. Corrupt^on
of man's whole nature.
The corruption of man's whole nature after the fall. Of both these Paul says,
By one man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12.
and death by sin; and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have
sinned. The vulgar definition passing under Anselmus his name, contains the
same in effect with this our definition, save that it more obscurely thus
propounds it: Original sin is a want of original righteousness which
should be in us: Anselm's definition of original sin.
For original righteousness was not only a conformity of our nature with the
Law of God, but also it comprehends in it Gods acceptance and approbation of
this righteousness. Now by the fall of man, in stead of conformity, there
succeeded in man's nature deformity and corruption; and guiltiness, in stead of
approbation. Such is that definition also of Hugo Cardinal: Original sin as
that which we draw from our birth, Hugo Cardinal his definition.
through ignorance in our understanding, and concupiscence in our flesh.

The error of the Pelagians and Anabaptists in the doctrine of original sin.
Against this doctrine of Original sin in times past did the Pelagians strive,
as at this day the Anabaptists do, denying that there is any Original sin,
because that neither the posterity are guilty by reason of the first Parents
fall; neither is sin derived into them from their ancestors by propagation, but
every one sins, and becomes faulty by imitation only of the first Parents.
These Pelagians Saint Augustine has confuted in many books.

Others grant, that all became faulty by reason of the fall of our first
Parents; but they deny that such corruption was bred in us, as might deserve
condemnation: for, the defects, as they think, with which we are borne, are no
sin. But against these Sectaries and Schismatics we are to hold these four
Theoremes or Positions: 1. That all mankind is held guilty of Gods everlasting
wrath, Four Theses of the doctrine of original sin. Four proofs showing
that original sin is derived by nature unto posterity.
for the disobedience of our first Parents. 2. That there are in us, besides
this guilt, defects and inclinations repugnant to the Law of God, even from the
hour of our birth. 3. That these defects and inclinations are sins, and
deserve the eternal wrath of God. 4. That these evils are derived not by
imitation, but by the propagation of a corrupt nature from our first Parents
unto all their posterity, except Christ only. The first, second, and third are
sufficiently confirmed in that which has already been spoken.

The fourth is thus proved: Testimony of Scripture. Eph^s. 2.3. Romans 5.18, 19.
Job 14.4. Psalm 51.5. John 3.5.
By testimonies of Scripture; We are by nature the children of wrath, as well
as others. By the offense of one the fault came upon all men to condemnation.
By one man's disobedience many were made sinners. Who can bring a clean thing
out of filthiness? I was borne in wickedness. Except a man be borne of water
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Death of Infants.
Isa. 48.8. Genesis 8.21. De bono mortis, cap. 11.
Infants dye, and are to be baptized; therefore they have sin: But they cannot
as yet sin by imitation. It must needs be then that sin is bred in them. Whence
it is said: I called thee a transgressour from the womb. The heart of man is
evil from his youth. And Ambrose says; Who is just in the sight of God,
whereas an infant of a day old cannot be clear from sin? Every thing which
is borne carries with it the nature of that which bare it, 3 Community or
participation of nature between parents and children.
as touching the substance and accidents proper to that special kind: But we
are all born of corrupt and guilty Parents: We therefore all draw by nature in
our birth their corruption and guilt. From the double grace of Christ's death;
Justification and Regeneration.
By the death of Christ, who is the second Adam, we receive a double grace,
Justification, and Regeneration: therefore it follows, that out of the first
Adam there issued and flowed a double evil, the guilt, I mean, and corruption
of our nature; otherwise we had not stood in need of a double grace and remedy.

The Pelagians objection.
1. Object. If sin be propagated from the Parents unto their posterity, it
passes to the offspring, either by their body, or by their soul. Not by the
body, because that is bestiall, and unreasonable; nor by the soul, because
that is not derived by deduction out of the soul of the Parents, whereas it is
a spiritual substance, which may not be severed into parts; neither is it
created corrupt by God, whereas God is not the author of sin: Wherefore
certainly original sin passes not by nature from the Parents unto the
children. 1. Answ. We deny the Major: because the soul, being created by God
pure and undefiled, may draw naughtiness and corruption from the body, though
it be brutish, into which it is infused. Neither is it absurd to say, that the
evil disposed temperature of the body is an unfit instrument for the good
actions of the soul, and corrupts the soul, not being established in her
righteousness; so that it presently falls from her integrity as soon as it
is infused and united unto the body: 2. Answ. We likewise deny the consequence
and coherence of the Major, because in it there is not made a sufficient
account and reckoning of the parts by which Original sin passes: For it
passes neither by the body, nor by the soul, but by the offense of our
Parents, in regard whereof God, even whilst he creates man's soul, bereaveth
it of Original righteousness, and other such like gifts, which he gave on
that condition to our first Parents, that they should continue, or lose them to
posterity, according as they themselves either kept, or lost them. Neither is
God in so doing either unjust, or the cause of sin: for this privation or want
of righteousness is in respect of God, which inflicteth it for the offense of
our first Parents, no sin, but a most just punishment: although in respect of
the Parents, which draw it unto themselves and their posterity, it be a sin.
Wherefore, if the whole Major be laid down thus, Original sin passes unto
posterity either by the Body, or by the Soul, or by the Sin of Parents, and
merit of this privation of righteousness; If the Major, I say, be thus
proposed, the fault of the Argument is soon espied: for, as Original sin
first sprung in our Parents by their offense; so by the same it is conveyed
unto posterity.

This is not that little chinke of which the Schoolmen so doubtfully dispute,
to wit, of the deduction of our soul from our sinful Parents, and of the
pollution of the soul by means of the body coupled therewith; but this is
that wide gate, by which original sin violently rusheth into our nature, as
Paul witnesses, By one man's disobedience many were made sinners. Repli. 1. The
privation or want of original righteousness is sin: Romans 5.19.
But God inflicteth this punishment of privation, creating our soul in us
bereft of those gifts, which otherwise he would have endowed it withal, if
Adam had not sinned: Therefore herein God is the author of sin. Answ. There
is in the Major a fallacy of Accident. This privation is sin in respect of
Adam and us, since that by his and our fault with might and maine we pull it
unto us, and greedily receive it; for that the creature should be destitute of
righteousness and conformity with God, it is repugnant to the Law, and is
sin: But in respect of God, it is a most just punishment of Adams and our
disobedience, agreeable unto nature and the Law of God. Repli. 2. Yea, but God
ought not to punish Adams offense with such a punishment, whereby he knew the
destruction of all mankind would follow and ensue. Answ. Yea rather let Gods
justice be satisfied, and let the whole world perish and come to naught. It
behoved God, in regard of his exact justice and truth, to take vengeance in
this sort on the pride of man; because the offending and displeasing of the
highest good merited the most extreme punishment, that is, the eternal
destruction of the creature; and God has said, Thou shall die the death. Now
it is of his free mercy that out of this general ruin he saves some, I mean
the Elect through Christ.

Object. 2. The desiring of their proper objects is naturally incident to each
faculty and appetite: Therefore it is no sin. Answ. The ordinate desires of
their objects, which God appointed them, are no sins; but the inordinate, and
such as are against the Law, they are sins: For simply or merely to desire,
is of it self no sin; and the appetite or desire is good, because it is
natural: but to desire contrary to the Law, this is sin.

Object. 3. Original sin is taken away from the Saints of God: Therefore
they cannot derive it unto their posterity. Answ. We answer to this Antecedent,
that original sin is taken away from the Saints of God, as concerning the
guilt of it, which is remitted unto them by Christ: but yet, as concerning the
pure essence thereof, that is, as it is a sin repugnant to the Law, so it
remains in them. For although they be withal regenerated by the holy Ghost,
unto whomsoever their sin is forgiven; yet that renewing is not perfected in
this life. Wherefore the godly also do derive such a corrupt nature to their
posterity as themselves have. Repli. That which the Parents themselves have
not, they cannot derive unto their posterity: But the guilt of Original sin
is taken away from regenerate Parents: Unrighteousness and damnation from our
Parents, but righteousness by the grace of Christ.
Therefore at least the guilt is not derived. Answ. We must distinguish of the
Major. The Parents indeed conveigh not that to their posterity which by nature
they have not. But they are freed from the guilt of sin, not by nature, but
by the grace and benefit of Christ. Wherefore Parents by nature derive unto
their posterity, not righteousness, which is freely imputed; but
unrighteousness and damnation, unto which themselves by nature are subject.
And the cause why they derive their guilt unto them, Why the parents
righteousness is not derived unto their children.
and not their righteousness, is this: Because their posterity are not borne
of them according to grace, but according to nature; neither is grace and
justification tied to carnal propagation, but to the most free election of
God. Examples hereof we have Jacob and Esau, etc.

Austin illustrateth this point by two similitudes: the one is of the grains
of corn, which though they are sown, purged by threshing from their stalk,
chafe, beard, and ear; yet spring again from out of the earth with all
these: and this comes to pass, because the purging is not natural to the
grain, but is the work of man's industry. The other is of a circumcised father,
who though himself have no foreskin; yet he begets a son with a foreskin:
and this comes to pass, because Circumcision was not by nature in the father,
but by the Covenant.

Object. 4. If the root be holy, the branches also are holy: Romans 11.16.
Therefore the children of the Saints are holy, and without original sin.
Answ. Here is committed a fallacy of ambiguity: for holiness in this place
signifies not a freedom from sin, or integrity and uprightness of nature;
but that prerogative and privilege of Abraham's posterity, whereby God, for his
league made with Abraham, had appointed always to convert some of his
posterity, and to endow them with true and inward holiness; and because all
the posterity of Abraham had obtained the right and title of the external
Church.

Object. 5. Your children are holy: Therefore without original sin. 1 Cor.
7.14.
Answ. This is a fallacy drawn from the abuse of a common manner of speech.
They are holy, not that all the children of holy men are regenerate, or have
holiness from carnal propagation: for it is said, When they had neither done
good nor evil, I have loved Jacob, Romans 9.11, 13.
and have hated Esau: but the children of the godly are holy, in respect of the
external fellowship of the Church; that is to say, they are to be counted for
Members or Citizens of the Church, and so also for the chosen and sanctified of
God, except themselves, when they come to age, declare themselves to be others
by their unbelief and impiety.

Object. 6. They are more miserable unto whom the sins of all their ancestors
are derived, then they unto whom have stretched but the sins of some of their
ancestors: But if sin pass from the Parents unto the children, then unto the
latest of their posterity come the sins of all the ancestors; unto the former
only their sins that lived before them: So then the latter are more miserable
then all the rest, which would be absurd, and not agreeable to the justice of
God. Answ. 1. It were not absurd, although God would punish more heavily, and
more forsake the latter of the posterity then the former: For how many more
sins are committed and heaped up by mankind, so much the more vehemently is his
wrath kindled, and the punishment is more aggravated: whereupon are those
sayings; The wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full. Genesis 15.16. Mat.
23.35.
That upon you may come all the righteous blood, etc. Answ. 2. We deny also the
Minor: For although God suffer original sin, that is, the corruption and guilt
of nature to pass unto all posterity; yet, together with this, he of his mere
mercy does set bounds and limits for sin, that the posterity may not always
pay for the actual sins of their ancestors, or imitate them, and that it may
not be of necessity that the children of evil Parents should be evil, or
worse, or more miserable then their Parents.

Object. 7. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father: Ezekiel. 18, 20.
Therefore it is injustice, that Adams posterity should bear the punishment of
the sin of Adam. Ans. True it is, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, or shall not satisfy for his fathers mis-doing, but with this
condition; If himself approve not, or fall not into the same, but disliketh
and avoideth it: But we justly bear the sin of Adam; Four causes for which
Adams posterity abides the punishment of his sin.
1. Because we all approve of the offense, and imitate the same. 2. Because
the fault is so Adams, that it also becomes ours: for we were all in Adam
when he sinned; and therefore, as the Apostle witnesses, We all sinned in
him. 3. Whereas Adams whole nature was guilty, and we, as a part of him,
proceed out of his substance and mass, Rom 5.19.
we cannot but be guilty also our selves. 4. Because Adam received the gifts of
God to be imparted unto us on that condition, if himself did retain them: or
lose them unto us, if himself lost them. Whereas then Adam lost them he lost
them not only in himself, but in all his posterity also.

Object. 8. All sin is committed with the will; but Infants want will:
Therefore they commit no sin. Answ. 1. We grant this argument, if it proceed on
actual sin, not on original, which is the corruption of nature. Ans. 2. We
deny the Minor, because Infants want not the faculty and power of will; and
though in act they will not sin, yet they will it by inclination. Repli. on the
first answer. The corruption and defects of nature rather deserve pardon and
commiseration, then punishment and reprehension, as Aristotle testifies in
these words: (...). Eth. 3. cap. 5.
No man reprehendeth the defects of nature; but original sin is a defect of
nature: Therefore it deserves not punishment. Answ. The Major is current in
such defects of nature as are gotten not by negligence or misdemeanour; as, if
a man become blind, either by nature, or by some disease, or stroke, he is
rather to be pitied for it, then upbraided: But such defects as are procured by
some misdemeanour, (...).
as original sin was; these all men worthily reprove, as Aristotle himself
there adds: But every man checks such a one as becomes blind through
wine-bibbing, or any other mis-behaviour. And thus much touching original
sin.

Of actual sin, and the rest of the distinctions of sin, and of the causes,
and effects of sin.
What actual sin is.
Actual sin is every inward and outward action which was repugnant to the Law
of God, as well in the understanding, will, and heart, as in outward actions:
and the omitting of those things which the Law commands; as to think, to
will, to follow, and to do evil; or not to know, not to will, to fly, to
omit that which is good. Hitherto belongs that division into sins of
commission or fact, and sins of omission.

The second division of sin.
THe second division of sin is thus: Reigning sin.
There is reigning sin, and sin not reigning. Reigning sin is that in which the
sinner makes no resistance by the grace of the holy Spirit, and is therefore
subject to everlasting death, unless he repent, and purchase pardon by the
death of Christ. Or, sin reigning is all sin which is repented of, and which is
not resisted by the grace of the holy Spirit; and for which, not only
according to the order of Gods justice, but also for the thing it self, he is
guilty of eternal punishment who has it. Of this it is said, Romans 6.12. 1
John 3.8.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. Also, He that commits sin, that
is to say, he which of purpose sins, and delights therein, is of the
Devil; where John speaks of Reigning sin. It is called Reigning: 1. Because
we pamper it, and become slaves unto it. Two causes why reigning sin is so
called.
2. Because it has rule over man, and makes him guilty of eternal damnation.

Such are all sins in the unregenerate, and some also in the regenerate; as
errors in the foundation of faith, and slidings and fallings against their
conscience, wherewith a sure confidence of remission of sins, and true and
lively comfort cannot consist, unless they repent: for that they very
regenerate may run head long into reigning sin, the doleful falls of those
most holy men, Aaron and David, do sufficiently declare. Sin not reigning.
Sin not reigning is that which the sinner resists by the grace of the holy
Spirit, and is therefore exempt from eternal death, because he repents, and
obtains remission by Christ. Such kind of sins are all the defects,
inclinations, wicked desires, and many sins of ignorance, omission, and
infirmity, which remain in the faithful, as long as they are in this life;
which notwithstanding they acknowledge, bewail, and hate in themselves, yea
they resist them, and pray daily that they may be forgiven them through Christ
their Mediator, saying, Forgive us our debts: and therefore in these they hold
fast and embrace faith and consolation in their Savior and Redeemer. If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1.8. Romans 7.17. Romans 8.1. Psalm.
19.12.
and there is no truth in us. It is no more I that do it, but the sin that
dwells in me. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
which walk after the Spirit. Who can tell how often he offends? Lord, cleanse
thou me from my secret faults. That vulgar distinction of sin into Mortal
and Venial sin, may be reduced unto this distinction of Reigning, Mortal and
Viniall sin.
and not reigning sin: For although all sin in his proper nature be Mortal,
that is, deserves everlasting death; yet Reigning sin may most fitly so be
called, wherein whosoever persevereth, finally perishes. Now it becomes
Venial, that is to say, it effects not everlasting death, when in the
regenerate resisting it by the grace of Christ it waxes not reigning: not that
of it self it deserves remission, or that it is not worthy of punishment; but
because it is by grace through Christ's satisfaction pardoned unto them that
believe, and is not imputed to them unto condemnation: according as it is said,
Romans 8.^.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, etc. And in this
sense the distinction of Mortal and Venial sin may be retained; but by no
means in that sense in which it is used of the Popes Favorites: as, What the
Papists take Mortal and Venial sin to be.
if that were Mortal sin, which for the grievousnesse thereof deserves
eternal death; that Venial, which for the lightness thereof deserves not
eternal death at Gods hands, but some temporal punishment only. I had
rather, in stead of Mortal and Venial sin, use the names of Reigning and Not
reigning sin: Why the names of Mortal and Venial sin are impertinent, and to
be rejected.
1. Because the names of Mortal and Venial sin are obscure and doubtful: For
all sins are Mortal; and John also calls Mortal sin, or sin to death, the
sin against the holy Ghost. 2. Because the Scripture uses not these terms,
especially the name of Venial sin. 3. Because of the errors of the Papists,
who term Venial sins those which are light, and deserve not eternal pains:
whereas the Scripture says. Cursed is every one that bideth not in all, etc.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. James 2.10. Romans 6.23.
He which fails in one point, is guilty of all. The wages of sin is death.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. In a word, every sin is in
his own nature Mortal, to wit, it deserves everlasting death; but it is made
Venial, that is, it accomplisheth not death eternal in the regenerate, by
grace through Christ.

Object. 1. But the Elect fall not from grace. Answ. Finally they do not: But
they who sin mortally, and do not repent, perish. This falls not to the
Elect, that they should fall finally; but before the end, they fall easily and
often.

Object. 2. The will of God is unchangeable; but he will the salvation of the
Elect: Therefore it is unchangeable. Answ. I grant that it is true, concerning
the purpose and counsel of God, but not concerning our affiance, which we have
of the remission of sins: for our comfort stands not together with errors,
which are contrary to the foundation, and with sin committed against our
consciences. For then are we said to have remission of our sins, when we
apply these benefits to our selves. Now in Christ Jesus ye which once were
far off, are made near by the the blood of Christ. Ephesians. 2.13. Hosea 2.23.
I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people: And they
shall say, Thou art my God.

The Elect may sin against their consciences, yet not to death.
Object. 3. He that is borne of God, sins not: Therefore the regenerate
sin not. Answ. 1. He sins not to death: For the Elect do not wholly
forsake God, albeit they sin against their consciences; but they retain
still some beginning of true godliness, by which, as by sparkles, they are
stirred again to repentance: as David, Peter, and others. 2. He sins not as
he is regenerated: but he sins as long as he abides in this life, sin not
reigning in him, and yet sometimes reigning too, as he is not regenerated by
the Spirit of God, but is as yet carnal: Regeneration but begun in this I^fe.
For regeneration, or the renewing of us to the image of God, is not perfected
in an instant, but is begun only in this life, and in the life to come is at
length finished. For so does John himself pronounce of himself, and all the
Saints in this life: 1 Epist. cap. 1.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. This is therefore the
meaning of John, that the regenerate indeed do sin, but yet not so, that
they make much of their sin, or do so at any time yield and assent to evil
desires, that they cast away all love of godliness, and repent not: For
always in the regenerate there remains some remnant of a regenerate nature,
which causes either a strife against sin, or else true repentance: that is, it
suffers them not to sin to death, or everlasting destruction, or wholly to
forsake God. And this consolation so long they enjoy, as they know themselves
to be regenerated, that is, as they keep faith and a good conscience.

Object. 4. 1 John 3.9. 1 Pet. 1.23.
It is said, His seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is
borne of God. And, being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by
the word of God, who lives and endures for ever. If therefore the seed of
Gods word never dies in them that are borne anew, they ever remain
regenerate, and ever retain grace, neither ever fall into reigning sin. The
regenerate in this life may, and do oftentimes lose the grace of God in part,
but not in whole.
Answ. 1. The regenerate may lose, and do often lose grace and the holy
Spirit, as concerning some gifts, sometimes mo, sometimes fewer; although they
lose it not, if we respect all the gifts: For there abides in them some
beginning or print of true faith and conversion, which although when they yield
to evil inclinations or desires, it is so oppressed and darkened, that it
neither can be known of others, neither confirm them of the grace of God, and
their own salvation for the present; yet it suffers them not wholly to
forsake God and the known truth, and to cast away their purpose of embracing
by faith the merit of the Son of God. Psalm. 51.10, 12.
So David prays, Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right
spirit within me. Again, Restore me to the joy of thy salvation. He had lost
therefore cleanness of heart, rightnesse and newness of spirit, and the joy
of salvation, which he beggeth of God to be restored unto him; and yet did he
not wholly want them: for otherwise he would not have asked, neither would he
have looked for from God this renewing and restoring. 2. The seed of God, that
is, the word of God, working true faith and conversion in the Elect, abides,
and dies not in the regenerate, as concerning their conversion and final
perseverance, how ever they fall often grievously before their end: 1 John 2.19.
If they had been of us, they would have continued with us.

Object. 5. Mat. 7.17. Man in this life is not simply good; and therefore his
works are not always good.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. Answ. It cannot, as it is good:
For, if it be simply good, all the fruit thereof is good; which shall come so
to pass in the life to come: But if it be partly good, and partly evil, such
is the fruit also; which we have trial and experience of in this life.

Heretofore it has been said, All sins mortal in their own nature, but
pardonable by the grace of God. Psalm. 32.5. Pro. 24.16.
That all sins are in their own nature mortal. Against this sentence some
oppose that which is said, I will confess my wickedness unto the Lord, and
thou forgavest the punishment of my sin. And A just man falls seven times,
and rises again. Whence they gather, that there are some sins, the
committers whereof continue still just; and therefore deserve not eternal
death. But they reason amiss from that which befalls to sin, but by an
accident, to that which is by it self in sin: For it is true indeed, that
there are many sins, for which the Saints do not lose holi^^sse and
righteousness, neither become obnoxious to the wrath of God. But this comes
to pass, not by the smalnesse, or nature of the sin, whatsoever it be, but by
the grace of God, who does not impute, neither will punish with eternal death
those sins, which yet in their own nature deserved it. This does the Prophet
most evidently show in the same Psalm, Psalm. 143.2.
when he says, Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives be
justified.

Object. 2. Mat. 5.22.
It is said Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable
of judgment. And whosoever says unto his brother, Racha, shall be worthy to
be punished by the Council. And whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to
be punished with hell fire. Whence they conclude, Seeing Christ himself makes
degrees of punishments and sins, so that of these former, he threatens hell
fire but unto the third only: therefore there are some sins smaller then those
which deserve eternal punishment. But the answer unto this is manifest out of
the words themselves: which is, that Christ does not speak of civil judgments
and punishments, when he mentions Judgment and a Council: For he does not
here speak of the civil order, but disputes against the corruptions of the
Pharisees, concerning the true meaning of Gods Law; and concerning the
judgment of God against both inward and outward sins: For neither can, nor
ought to be punished by the Magistrate with corporal punishment; either such
gestures, as signify some bitterness or contempt; or bad affections, if they
have not accompanying them an endeavor to do any man injury. Now, whereas in
the third place he names hell fire, he does not exempt the other two kinds
of sin from eternal punishments, but signifies that the third shall receive a
sharper punish^^nt at Gods hand then the other.

Object. 3. It is said, Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men,
Mat. 12.31.
but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Hence they will gather, That
some sins are forgiven in this world, some in the world to come, that is, in
Purgatory; and some are never forgiven: of which these be Mortal, but the
others Venial in their own nature. Answ. 1. But, Neither here, neither
elsewhere does Christ teach, that some sins are forgiven in the world to come.
Sins are remitted in this world only.
For that all other sins are forgiven not in the world to come, but in this
world, both Christ signifies in this place, and the Scripture elsewhere
teaches, because it is certain, that sins are not remitted, but only to those
who repent: No sin which may not be remitted, except the sin against the holy
Ghost.
But he denies that the sin against the holy Ghost is remitted, either in
this world, or in the world to come, that he might more significantly express
the denial of pardon to it. 2. Whether they say forgiveness to be in this
world, or in the world to come; yet this stands immovable, that it comes
not of the nature or corruption of the sin, but of free mercy for Christ's sake.
And if every sin be so grievous, that it could not be purged, but by the
blood of the Son of God; then doubtless they do great despite and contumely
unto that blood, who so extenuate any sin, as to deny that it deserves
eternal punishment, unto which the death of the Son of God is equivalent. 3.
Even by their own confession, there are many mortal sins, which
notwithstanding are forgiven in this life. Wherefore, either they must make all
these to be even in their own nature Venial, or they will never prove out of
this place, that the ^^nalnesse of the sin is the cause of forgiveness.

Object. 4. It is said, The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness. Romans 1.17.
And, Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
1 Cor. 6.^.
Out of these and the like places they gather, that seeing they are mortal
sins which shut men out of the Kingdom of God, and all sins do not so:
therefore there are some sins, which in their own nature are not mortal. But
they conclude more then follows by force of reason: For that some sins are
Venial; there is no doubt; All sins shut men out of the Kingdom of God, were
they not remitted by the grace of God. 1 Cor. 3.15.
but that comes by grace remitting those sins, which, without remission, would
shut men doubtless from the Kingdom of God.

Object. 5. It is said, If any man's work burn, he shall lose; but he shall be
safe himself, nevertheless, yet as it were by fire: Therefore say they, some
sins cast men into fire, that is, into some punishment, but not eternal. This
also we grant, not in respect of the nature of sin, but in respect of pardon,
which befalls to those who hold the foundation, which is Christ: For, to
build on the foundation wood and stubble (that is, to patch the Word of God
with unnecessary questions, humane opinions and traditions, which often are
occasions of Schisms in the Church, and often of Idolatry and errors) it is
not so light a sin as they deem it who doit, but deserves eternal
malediction, except remission be made by the Son of God, as it is declared in
the Revelation, Chap. 22.

Object. 6. It is said, A high Priest taken from among men is bound to offer
for sins, Heb 5.1.
as well for his own part, as for the peoples. Ans. This place shows, that
the sins of the Priest are not Venial by themselves, or of their own nature,
but for the sacrifice of Christ, which was signified by the typical
sacrifices: and therefore it quite and clean overthrows the opinion of our
adversaries. For, if all sins even of a righteous Priest are in the sight of
God so great, that they cannot be purged, but by the death of the Son of God;
it necessarily follows, that they of their own nature deserved everlasting
death.

Ob. 7. It is said, When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; Jam. 1.15.
and sin when it is fini^^ed brings forth death. Here, say they, James says,
that there is one sin finished, when as the will upon deliberation consents
to evil lust: another not finished, when a man sins without deliberation)
and to sin finished he ascribes, that it brings forth death. We answer, that
the consequence of this is not o^ force, because that a property which
belongs to diverse kinds, when it is ascribed to one kind, it follows not
thereof, that it is to be removed from the other. Actual sin is an effect of
Original sin, and a cause of death; which though purchased by Original, yet
is aggravated by Actual.
For S. James distinguishes the kinds or degrees of sins, Original and
Actual: and says, that death follows after Actual; not as if death did not
follow after Original, but because that actual is a middle between Original
sin and death, as a cause of this, and an effect of that, and does aggravate
death or punishment, which already was purchased by Original sin. Neither does
he chiefly speak of the degrees of punishments, but of the cause and original
of them to be sought in the corruption of our own nature.

Object. 8. It is said, Jam. 3.2.
In many things we sin all. Hence our adversaries will prove. That the sins of
the just are Venial, because they fall either into few sins, or into no
mortal sins. To this, as also to most of that which has gone before, we
answer, that the sins of the just, who by faith retain or receive
righteousness, are Venial, not of their own nature, but by grace.

Gods justice is not at variance with his mercy, though it judge the least sin
worthy of eternal death.
Object. 9. God is not cruel, but merciful, n^^^her light in his love, but
constant: Wherefore he does not for every light sin judge a man worthy of
eternal punishments. Answ. But they imagine, that the judgment of God
concerning sin is at variance with his mercy: which two are not at variance,
but do very well agree: For God is in such wise merciful, as he is also just.
Now the justice of God requires that he judge all, even the least offense and
contempt of his majesty, worthy of eternal damnation. This judgment against
every sin, the mercy and constancy of Gods love does not take away; but for the
showing and declaring thereof it is sufficient, that he rejoices not at the
destruction of them that perish, and that for testimony thereof, he inviteth
all to repentance, and forgiveth them who repent their sins, which by
themselves were worthy of everlasting death: that is, he punishes them, and
causes satisfaction for them not in the sinners, but in his own Son sent to
take flesh, by punishment answering and satisfying his justice.

Object. 10. It is said, Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. This they interpret after
this sort, That he, who both by sin and teaching does against the Law, is
fallen from the Kingdom of God; and not he, who in teaching subscribeth to the
Law, although sometimes he does a little contrary to that he teaches. But the
opposition or contrariety which Christ adds, But whosoever shall observe and
teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of God, does show,
that Christ in the former part of the speech does understand those who break,
that is, violate the Law which they teach: so that the meaning is, Although one
teach well, and yet violate one of these commandments, which the Pharisees
term the least, that is, of the commandments of the Decalogue; he shall find
these commandments so not to be the least, but the greatest, as himself
thereby shall become the least, that is, in no place in the Kingdom of God.
Albeit it be granted unto them, that in the words of Christ, to teach so, is
the same, that to teach contrary to the Law; yet can it not at all be gathered
thence, that they alone shall be the least in the Kingdom of God, who by
teaching and sinning break the Law, and not they also, who by sinning only, and
not teaching, Christ calls them the least, not as in his own judgment, but
as in the judgment of the Pharisees: and so he imitateth them in thus speaking.
transgress it. The first reason is in the very words of Christ: because he
calls those commandments the least, by a figure of speech called Imitation,
which are the greatest; and the breach whereof, whether it be committed in
deed, or in doctrine, or in both, God judges worthy the shutting out of his
Kingdom, even by our adversaries confession; that is, the whole Decalogue,
which the Pharisees did set behind their traditions. The second reason is in
the words which Christ adds: For I say unto you, Except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. In these words Christ shows, that a far other
righteousness is required by the Law of God, then the Pharisees thought of;
and that those sins also are so great, that they shut men out of the Kingdom
of heaven, which the Pharisees accounted either for light, or no sins: as, to
be angry with thy brother unadvisedly: to say unto him, Racha, or fool: to be
troubled with an evil affection, or desire of revenge; for even these things
also he says are to be avoided, if we will avoid hell fire, and be the
children of our heavenly Father: Therefore he says, Whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, Mat. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. And, Whosoever hates
his brother is a manslayer: and ye know that no manslayer has eternal life
abiding in him. 1 John 3.15.
And therefore not they only which commit the greater sins, but they also who
commit the lesser, cannot escape everlasting death, but by the satisfaction of
Christ imputed to them.

But as our adversaries accuse this sentence of too much rigor, Sin made
venial unto the repentant by grace, for the intercession and satisfaction of
Christ.
That all sins are by themselves of their own nature Mortal, that is,
deserve eternal death; so also the other sentence, That sins are made Venial
to those that repent, which of their own nature are Mortal, they reprehend as
too gentle, and repugnant to Gods justice: because to call that Venial which
is Mortal, is contrary to truth and justice. But the answer is ready, That
God, if we respect the nature of sin, adjudgeth all sin worthy of everlasting
death; and gives pardon to none but of free grace, for the intercession and
satisfaction of his Son our Mediator.

The third division of sin.
THere is sin against the conscience, and sin not against the conscience. Sin
against the conscience.
Sin against the conscience is, when a man, knowing the will of God, of set
purpose does expressly against the same. Or, it is a sin committed of those
who wittingly and willingly sin, as David wittingly committed adultery and
murder, contrary to the Law. Sin not against the conscience.
Sin not against the conscience is that, which we either not willing, or not
witting commit: or, which is indeed acknowledged to be sin, and is lamented
of by the offender, but cannot perfectly be avoided in this life: such as is
Original sin, and many sins of omission, ignorance and infirmity. For we omit
many good things, and commit evil, being suddenly overcome and overtaken by
infirmities: as Peter of infirmity in imminent danger is overcome, and denies
Christ, wittingly indeed, but not willingly: therefore he weepeth bitterly,
and loses not utterly his faith, according to Christ's promise, I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not. It was not reigning sin, Luke 22.32.
much less the sin against the holy Ghost, because he loved Christ no less
when he denied him, then when he bewailed his offense, though that affection
did not at that time for fear of imminent danger show it self. Such sin Paul
acknowledges in himself, and lamenteth it, I do not the good which I would,
but the evil which I would not, Romans 9.1.
that do I, etc. His blasphemy also, and persecution and violence against the
Church was a sin of ignorance: For, I did it ignorantly, says he, therefore
God had mercy on me. 1 Timothy 1.13.
This third division of sin, and the definition of both sins, Christ has
expressly delivered, saying, The servant that knew his Masters will, and
prepared not himself, The proof of this division of sin.
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: but he
that knew it not, and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes. Luke 12.47.


The fourth division of sin.
THere is sin unpardonable: or, a sin against the holy Ghost: or, a sin
unto death. What unpardonable sin, or sin against the holy Ghost is.
There is also sin pardonable: or, not against the holy Ghost: or, not unto
death. This distinction is deduced out of Matthew 12.31. Mark 3.29. 1 John
5.16. Sin unpardonable, or sin against the holy Ghost, and unto death, is a
denial and oppugning of the known truth of God, and his will and works, of
which men's consciences and minds are fully ascertained and convicted by the
testimony of the holy Ghost; not of fear or infirmity, but of set purpose and
hatred of the truth, and of a despitefull malicious stomach conceived against
the same: which sin whosoever commit, they are punished of God with a
perpetual blindness, Perpetual blindness an effect of it. Why it is called
unpardonable.
that they can never return to God by true repentance in this life, and by
consequent can obtain no pardon. It is called unpardonable, not that by the
grievousness thereof it exceeds the worth of Christ's merit; but because he
who offends herein, is punished with sinful blindness* and has not the
gift of repentance: For, because it is a peculiar kind of sin, a peculiar kind
of punishment is also inflicted thereon: namely, final blindness and
impenitencie. And without repentance, Mat. 12.32. Mar. 3.29.
there is no remission: Whosoever shall speak against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. And,
Whosoever blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness,
but is culpable of eternal damnation. Why it is called thy sin against the
holy Ghost.
It is called sin against the holy Ghost, not as if the holy Ghost might be
offended by any man, and not the Father also, and the Son, but by an eminent
significancy of speech, because it is in a special manner committed against
the holy Ghost: that is, against his proper and immediate office or operation,
which is the enlightening of their minds. Why it is called a sin unto death 1
John 5.16.
It is called sin unto death by John, not that this alone is mortal, or
deserves death; but by an emphaticall significancy of speech, because it
especially deserves death, and all they who commit this sin assuredly die
therein, because none of them repents of it: Therefore John will that we pray
not for it; because (forsooth) in vain the remission thereof is craved at Gods
hands. The Scripture elsewhere speaks of this sin, as Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
chapt. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. and Tit. 3.10, 11.

Certain Rules to be observed touching the sin against the holy Ghost.
It is not in every reprobate.
The sin against the holy Ghost is not found in every reprobate person, but in
those only who are lightened by the holy Ghost, and convicted in conscience of
the truth: as Saul, Judas. etc. Object. Every unpardonable sin is a sin against
the holy Ghost, because Christ says, The difference between other sins
pardoned, and this sin against the holy Ghost.
that the sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable; but final perseverance
in whatsoever sin without repentance, is remitted to no man: And therefore it
is a sin against the holy Ghost; and by a consequent, all that perish sin
against the holy Ghost. Answ. The ambiguity of unpardonable sin makes four
terms in this Syllogism: For in the Major it signifies that kind of sin
which is never remitted to any; because whosoever commit it, whether at the
end, or before the end of their life, they persevere in it even to the end
without repentance: But in the Minor it signifies not a certain kind of
sin, but all their sins who repent not; which indeed are not remitted to
them, because they persevere in them to the end without repentance: and they
are unpardonable, not before the end, but in the very end of their life; yet
are they remitted to others who persevere not in them, but repent: For,
perseverance in sin is nothing else then the sins themselves, which are
continued unto the end; and therefore this is the meaning of the Minor: Sins,
in which men persevere without repentance unto the end, are not pardoned them
who persevere in them; but now all men do not persevere in them, as they
persevere in the sin against the holy Ghost, even whosoever once fall into it.
And Christ in this speech shows not, for what sins men are punished with
everlasting death: For it is certain, that it befalls for all sins of
which men repent not; but he shows what sins are such, as whosoever do
commit them, they do never repent. This he affirms of no kind of sin, but
only of blasphemy against the holy Ghost.

It is not every Reigning sin.
Every sin against the holy Ghost is Reigning sin, and sin against conscience;
but not contrariwise every Reigning sin, sin against the holy Ghost: For it may
fall out, that some man either ignorantly, or else wittingly and willingly may
patronize some errors, or make breach of some commandment by reason of
weakness, terror of present torment, or fear of danger; and yet not oppugn
of purpose and malice the truth known unto him, or make an utter Apostasy
from Religion and Piety, and persevere in a sensual senseless contempt, but
retire unto repentance in this life: Wherefore Reigning sin, or the sin against
the holy Ghost differ as a general from a particular; the latter of them
intimating a precedence of the former, but not the former a consequence of the
latter.

It is not incident to the Elect. John 10.28. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 John
5.15. 1 John 2.19.
The sin against the holy Ghost is not incident unto the Elect, and those who
are truly converted; because the Elect can never perish, but are certainly
saved by God: My sheep shall no man pluck out of my hands; with the like
places. They then who thus offend, were never truly converted and chosen: They
went out from us, because they were not of us.

That many of the Reprobate are said to be lightened, and to be made partakers
of the holy Ghost, to have tasted the heavenly gift, the good Word of God, and
of the powers of the world to come, How many of the reprobates are said in
Scripture to be lightened and sanctified. 1 Pet. 2. Heb. 6.7.
and last of all to have been sanctified with the blood of the Testament.
Likewise in Peter, to have escaped from the filthiness of the world: the
Apostles themselves show that this is to be understood of the knowledge of the
truth, and the foregoing and detesiation of errors and vices for a season;
and lastly, of the sufficiency of Christ's merits, even for the wiping away of
their sins also, and the offer thereof made to them by his Word and Sacraments:
which they show, when they interpret that lightning and taste to be the
knowledge of the truth and righteousness, and call them dogs and swine, not
made so again, but returning to their vomit, and wallowing in the mire; and
compare them to the earth, drinking in the rain, but bringing forth, in stead
of good herbs, thorns and briars: For these things agree not to true faith and
conversion.

We are not, lastly, to pronounce any man a sinner against the holy Ghost,
until we see him give up the ghost in apostasy and blasphemy.
We are not rashly to pronounce who they be that sin against the holy Ghost:
and we may not judge of this sin, until the end, that is, until we know
them who once had the truth, and confess themselves to be convicted and
persuaded of it, with hatred thereof to persecute and reproach it, or to end
their life in hatred and despite against it. The reason hereof is manifest,
because we are not the beholders of men's hearts. If it be objected, that there
is a sin unto death, I say not, that thou should pray for it: if he will
not that we shall pray for those who sin to death, it must needs be, that we
may discern them from others. We answer, that John does not universally
forbid that we pray for any so sinning; but at such time, as that is manifest
unto us, either by some divine testimony, or by manifest arguments, and the
sinners own profession. But, before this is certain and manifest unto us, we
ought to desire of God the conversion of all men; and, as much as in us lies,
to endeavor it, as it is said: I exhort, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, 1 Timothy 2.1. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. Mat. 5.44. Act. 7.60.
Our prayer for the adversaries of the truth must be conditional, with
submission to Gods will.
and giving of thanks be made for all men. And, The servant of the Lord must
not strive, but must be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the
evil men patiently, instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded;
proving if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may know the
truth, and that being delivered out of the snare of the Devil, of whom they
are taken, they may come to amendment, and perform his will. And, Pray for
them which hurt you, and persecute you. And, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge. If it be replied, That so it will come to pass that our prayer shall
be contrary to the will of God if not knowing of it, we pray for them who sin
against the holy Ghost: The answer is ready, That prayer is made for them with
a condition, Our prayer for them being but conditional, it argues not, but
that their sin may be notwithstanding unpardonable.
by which we submit our will and desires to the counsel of God, that he will
convert and save the adversaries of the truth, if they may be recovered; but
that he will repress them and punish them, if he have not appointed to
recover them. By the same answer is this argument dissolved, Their sin is not
unpardonable for whom we must pray; but we must pray for all men: Therefore no
man's sin is unpardonable. 1. We deny the Minor: because, if it appears by
any divine testimony, or by manifest arguments and their own profession that
they are cast away, whether they sin against the holy Ghost, or otherwise do
not repent, we must not pray for them. 2. Neither is the Major true: For, if we
know not whether they sin against the holy Ghost, or are rejected of God or no,
we must pray for them, but with that condition, if they may be recovered. Our
of these things also which have been spoken, answer is made to this Object. He
that must fear lest he has any unpardonable sin, The fear of unpardonable
sin belongs to the wicked, not to the faithful.
can never be assured of remission of his sins and life everlasting; but if
there be any sin unpardonable, which is committed before the end of a man's
life, no man can be assured that he has not, or shall not have such sin:
Therefore there is either no such sin, or no man can be assured of the grace of
God, and his own salvation: For the Minor of this reason is false, concerning
those who believe: for they must certainly think, that they neither had, nor
have the sin against the holy Ghost; because there is no condemnation to them
who are in Christ: neither that they shall have this sin, because that no man
can pluck the sheep of Christ out of his hand.

Obj. 1. Adam and Peter obtained remission of sins: Adam and Peter sinned
against the holy Ghost, because they denied the manifest and known truth of
God: Therefore some men sinning against the holy Ghost obtain remission of
sins. Answ. The proof of the Minor is a false definition: For, not every
denial or rejection of the truth is sin against the holy Ghost, but that only
which has accompanying it an inward hatred of the truth, and which of a
purposed intent, and with horrible fury endeavors to oppress it: which
hatred of truth was not in Adam or Peter: Augustine therefore says, Faith
failed not Peter in his heart, when confession failed him in his mouth.

God sparing Cains life, does not thereby show his pardoning of his sin, but a
further revenging of it.
Object. 2. The sin of Cain was not unpardonable, because God would not have
him killed, therefore he pardoned him his sin; but Cains sin was committed
against the holy Ghost: Therefore some sin against the holy Ghost is not
unpardonable. Answ. In the proof of the Major is a fallacy, putting that which
is no cause, as if it were a cause. For the cause why God would not have him
killed, was not, for that he had pardoned Cain his sin, not repenting him of
it; but that the murderer might be the longer tormented with the furies of his
conscience, that in so long time not repenting, he might be made inexcusable:
and further also, that murders might not wax rife among men.

Every sin of the unregenerate unpardonable, because not repented of, which to
others through repentance are pardoned.
Object. 3. They who are altogether ignorant of Christ, sin not against the holy
Ghost; but all that know not Christ have unpardonable sin, because it is
never pardoned them: Therefore some unpardonable sin is not against the holy
Ghost. Answ. We grant the whole reason, if in the Minor and Conclusion thereof
be understood by unpardonable sin, those sins of the unregenerate, which
are not indeed remitted unto them, for that they persist in those sins to the
end without repentance; yet to others they are remitted, who persist not in
them, but repent of them in this life: For not all who commit them, persist in
them. But if that kind of sin be understood, it is never remitted to any man,
because all they who commit it, persist in it to the end of their life without
repentance; then is the Minor false: And so is there no consequence in this
reason.

What pardonable sin is.
Pardonable sin, or sin not against the holy Ghost, is any sin whereof
some repent and obtain pardon.

The fifth division of sin.
THere is some sin which is of it self sin, and some which comes to be
sin by an accident. Sins of themselves, and in their own nature, are all
those things which are forbidden in the Law of God; What is sin of it self.
as are inclinations, motions, and actions disagreeing from the Law of God: yet
they are not sins, as they are motions, nor in respect of God moving all
things: (For motions, as they are mere motions, are good in themselves, and
proceed from God, in whom we live, move, and have our being) but they are sins
in regard of us, as they are committed by us against the Law of God: For in
this sense of themselves, and in their own nature, they are sins. Sins by an
accident are the actions of the unregenerate and hypocrites, which are indeed
prescribed and commanded by God; What is sin by an, accident.
but yet are displeasing unto him, because they are done without Faith and
Repentance. Of this kind are all actions also of indifferency, which are
effected with scandal: Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. To them that are
de^iled and unbeleeving is nothing pure. Romans 14.23. Tit. 1.15. Heb. 11.6. The
virtues of the unregenerate are sins by accident.
Without faith it is impossible to please God: Wherefore all the virtues of the
unregenerate; as the chastity of Scipio, the valor of Julius Caesar, the
fidelity of Regulus, the justice of Aristides, etc. howsoever in themselves
they are good actions, and enjoined by God, yet by occasion and accident they
are sin, and displease God; both because the person, from whom those actions
proceed, pleases not God, neither is reconciled unto God: and also because the
actions themselves are not done after the same manner, neither to the same end
which God would have them to be done; that is, they are not grounded on faith,
nor wrought to the glory of God, which conditions and circumstances are so
necessarily required to a good work, that without them our best actions are
defects and sins: as, it is sin when a wicked man or an hypocrite prays,
gives alms, offers sacrifice, etc. because he does it not of faith, nor
refers it unto Gods glory: Hypocrites give, Mat. 6.2. Isa. 60.3.
etc. He that kills a bullock, etc.

There is then a main difference between the virtues of the regenerate and the
unregenerate: For 1. The good works of the regenerate are wrought, The
differences between the virtues of the regenerate and the unregenerate.
having Faith for their harbenger, and are accepted of God. But it fares not
so with the unregenerate. 2. The regenerate do all things to the glory of God;
the unregenerate and hypocrites to their own praise and glory. 3. The works
of the regenerate are linked with inward obedience, and a true desire of
pleasing God: the unregenerate and hypocrites only perform an outward
discipline and homage, without the inward obedience; therefore their virtues
are mere maskes of hypocrisy, and no true virtues. 4. The imperfection of the
works of the regenerate is covered by the satisfaction and intercession of
Christ; and the spots of sin wherewith they are stained, are not imputed unto
them, neither is it objected unto them that they defile the gifts of God with
their sins: The virtues of the unregenerate being in themselves good,
notwithstanding become and continue sins by accident, and are polluted with
many other sins. 5. The good works of the unregenerate are adorned by God
with temporal rewards only, and that, not as if they pleased God, but that by
this means he might invite both them and others to honesty and outward
discipline of civility, necessary for mankind. But the good works of the godly,
God accepts for Christ's sake, and crowns them with temporal and eternal
rewards; as it is said, 1 Tit. 4.8.
Godliness has the promise of the life present, and that that is to come. 6.
The unregenerate by practicing good works enacted by God, obtain indeed
mitigation of their punishment, lest they should with other wicked Impes suffer
more exquisite tortures in this life: but the good works of the godly serve
not only for this, that they may suffer lighter and easier punishments, but
also that they may be quite freed from all evil. Object. We may not do that
which is sin: The moral actions of the unregenerate are not therefore to be
omitted of us, because in themselves they are sin: but we must avoid the sin,
and perform the action. Why civil discipline is necessary amongst the
unregenerate.
The works of the unregenetate, though civilly good, are sins: therefore we
may not do them. Answ. Here is a fallacy of accident. The Major is true, of
sins which are in themselves sins; The Minor, of sins which are sins by
accident. Now those things which are in themselves sin, ought simply to be
omitted: but those which are sins by accident ought not to be omitted, but to
be reformed, and performed after the manner, and the end which God has
prescribed.

External discipline therefore is necessary even in the unregenerate: 1. In
respect of the commandment of God. 2. For avoiding the grievousnesse of
punishments which ensue upon the breach of discipline. 3. For the preservation
of the peace and society of mankind. 4. For a way and entrance of conversion,
which is stopped by persevering and persisting in manifest offenses.

If instance be given: Hypocrisy is sin of it self, and is to be avoided, as
Mat. 6. it is said, Be not as Hypocrites; but the discipline or outward
behavior of the wicked is hypocrisy: Therefore it is sin of it self, and
they should omit it. We answer to the Major, The good actions of hypocrites are
not to be omitted, but their hypocrisy therein only to be eschewed.
by distinguishing the diversity of Hypocrisy. There is a double Hypocrisy:
one is in works not commanded of God, done for ostentation sake, or to
deceive, as those which Christ mentions, Matthew. 6. to make a Trumpet to be
blown before him when he gives alms, to pray standing in the Synagogues, and
in the corners of the streets, to look sowerly, and disfigure his face in
fasting, and all other superstitious and humane traditions, which appertain
not to the edifying of the Church. That these things are to be omitted and left
undone, there is no doubt: as it is said, In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men. And therefore they are here expressly
condemned and forbidden of Christ. There is another hypocrisy in works
commanded of God, but not done after that manner which God requires. These are
not to be left undone, but to be corrected, and to be done without hypocrisy,
that is, with true faith and godliness: as in the same place Christ teaches
of alms, prayer, fasting, not to be omitted of the godly, but to be otherwise
performed then they were of Hypocrites.

So also is there a great difference between the sins of regenerate men and
unregenerate: for, as it has been heretofore (especially in the second
distinction of sin) said; In all the regenerate there remain as yet many
relics of sin: as, 1. Original sin. 2. Many actual sins, as of ignorance,
omission, and infirmity, which nevertheless they acknowledge and bewail, and
strive and struggle with them; and therefore lose not a good conscience, nor
endanger the remission of their sins. 3. Some also sometimes fall into
errors, which fight with the foundation it self, or into sins against their
conscience, for which they lose a good conscience, and many gifts of the holy
Ghost, and should be condemned, if they persevered in them unto the end; but
they perish not in them, because they repent in this life. In the mean time
there rests a threefold difference, The difference of the sins of the
regenerate and the unregenerate. Romans 7.16. Luke 21.22. 1 John 3.9. 1 Pet.
1.23. Jos. 4.2, 3. Psalm. 37.24.
whereby the regenerate differ in sinning from the wicked: 1. Because the
purpose of God is to keep the Elect for ever. 2. In the regenerate, when they
offend, there is assured and certain repentance in the end. 3. In these, when
they slip, there remains some spark of true faith and repentance, which is
sometimes greater and mightier, and so wrestleth against sin, that they fall
not into Reigning sin, or errors repugnant to the foundation: sometimes less
and weaker, and is for a time overcome of temptation; but yet it prevails so
far, that they who are once truly turned unto God, make not a final Apostasy
from him: as appears in David, Peter, etc. In the unregenerate, when they
sin, none of these is found, but the contrary altogether. By this which has
been spoken it is manifest for what cause this difference of sins, which are
of themselves sins, Two uses of the difference between sins which are of
themselves sins, and those which are made so by an accident.
and by an accident sins, is necessary: 1. Lest that a false persuasion of
their own righteousness or merits should rest in men's minds: 2. Lest with
sins, which are of themselves sins, should be cast away also good things
which come to be sins but by an accident, and so should be increased and heaped
up the sins and punishments of mankind.

4. What are the causes of sin.
GOD is the cause of no sin, as is proved: 1. By testimonies of Scipture, God
saw those things which he had made, Genesis 1.31. Psalm. 5.4.
and they were very good. Thou art the God that have no pleasure in
wickedness, etc. 2. Because God is exactly and perfectly good and holy, so
that no effect of his is evil. 3. Because he forbids all sin in his Law.
4. He punishes all sin most severely, which he could not rightly do, if he
wrought or caused it. 5. He himself destroys not his own Image in man:
therefore he causes not sin, which is the destruction of this Image. The
proper and only efficient cause of sin is the will of Devils and men, The
cause of sin is the will of Devils and men. Wisd. 2.24. John 8.44.
whereby they freely fell from God, and robbed and spoiled themselves of the
Image of God. Through envy of the Devil came death into the world. But death
is the punishment of sin: Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will do: he has been a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a
lie, 1 John 3.8.
then speaks he of his own: for he is a liar, and the father thereof. He
that commits sin, is of the Devil: for the Devil sins from the
beginning. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, Romans 5.12.
that he might loose the work of the Devil. By one man sin entered into the
world.

An order in the causes of sin.
The Devil.
The Devil then was the cause of the first sin, or of the fall of our first
Parents in Paradise, provoking man to sin; Man's will.
and with the Devil man's will freely declining from God, and yielding obedience
to the Devil. The first sin.
That first fall of Adam is the efficient cause of Original sin both in Adam
and in his posterity: By one man's disobedience many were made sinners; and the
precedent and (as it were) preparative cause of all actual sins in posterity,
is original sin. The sin that dwells in me does evil. When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin. The accidentary or casual motives to
sin, are those objects which solicit men to sin: Sin took an occasion
by the commandment, Original sin. Romans 7.17. James 1.5. Romans 7.8.
and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. Actual sins precedent, are the
causes of other actual sins which follow: whereas the Scripture lessoneth us,
that God plagueth and scourges sin with sin, and the sins which follow, are
the punishments of sins which went before. Actual sin.
Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lust, unto uncleanness they
wrought filthiness, and received in themselves such recompense of their error
as was meet: Objects of sin. Romans 24, 27. 2 These. 2.1.
Therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies,
etc. But whereas the wit of man (to such a height of insolency it is grown) is
accustomed to frame the like arguments for the excusing of it self, and
shifting and posting it from it self unto God: we must here enter some large
discourse of the causes of sin, and shake off man's frivolous pretenses in his
own behalf.

Destiny.
Some derive the original cause of sin from the destiny of the Stars, saying:
Four pretended causes of sin.
I have sinned, because I was borne under an unluckie Planet. The Devil.
Others when they sin, and are rebuked for their sin, they make answer, Not
I, but the Devil was in fault that committed this deed. Gods will.
Others, leaving excuses, directly cast the fault upon God, saying: God would
have it so; for if he would not, I should not have sinned. Gods permission.
Others, When God (say they) might have hindered me, and yet did not, himself
is the author of my sin. With these and the like pretenses it is no new thing
for men to sharpen their blasphemous tongues against God: For our first
Parents, when they had sinned, and were accused of their sin by God, they
translate and pass over the fault committed from themselves to others, neither
ingenuously confess the truth. Adam returns the fault not so much upon his
wife, as upon God himself: The woman (says he) which thou gave to be with
me, she gave me of the tree, Gen 3.12, 13.
and I did eat: as if he should say, Except thou had joined her to me, I had
not sinned. The woman simply imputes the fault to the Devil, saying: The
Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. These are the false, impious, and
detestable judgments concerning the original of sin, whereby the majesty,
truth, and justice of God is grievously offended. For the nature of man is not
the cause of sin: for, God created it good and perfect, according as it is
said, And God saw all things which he had made, and lo they were very good. Sin
is an accessory quality which took possession of man after the fall, and no
substantial property; although after the fall it became natural, and is fitly
so termed by Augustine, because now we are all borne in sin, Ephesians. 2.3.
and are by nature the children of wrath as well as others. But this point
would be more amplified and enlarged.

1. They who make Destiny a cloak for sin, define Destiny to be a linked
order through all eternity, and a certain perpetual necessity of intents and
works, according to the counsel of God, or according to the evil Planets.
Now if you ask them, Who made the Planets? God, say they: Therefore these men
lay their evil to Gods charge; but such a destiny did not all the sounder
Philosophers maintain, Destiny is not the cause of sin. Lib. 2. cap. 6.
much less Christians. Saint Augustine against two Epistles of the Pelagians
unto Boniface: They, says he, who hold destiny, maintain that not only
actions and events, but also our wills themselves depend on the position of the
Planets, at the time of every ones conception or nativity, which they call
constellations: But the grace of God surpasses not only all the stars, and
all the heavens, but also the Angels. Let us conclude these things with the
word of the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy, pronouncing to this sense: Jer. 10.2, 3.
Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not afraid for
the signs of heaven, though the Heathen be afraid of such: for the customs
of the people are vain. Wherefore that the Astrologers call the Planet of
Saturn unmercifull, sharp, and cruel; and the Planet of Venus favorable and
gentle, it is the vanity of vanities: for the stars have no force of doing good
or ill; and therefore the fault of sinners ought not to be imputed unto them.

2. That the Devil is not the only author of sin, who when as we commit
sin, The Devil not the only author of sin.
should bear alone the blame of the sin, and our selves be free from fault, it
is most of all declared in this, that he is able to induce and entice a man to
evil, but not to compel him: For God keeps under the Devil by his power,
that he cannot do what he will; but only what, and so much as God permits
him. Nay, he has not so much as power over filthy Swine, much less over the
most noble Souls of men. He has indeed a subtilty and great force in
persuading; but God is stronger, who also never cease himself to put good
motions into man's mind: neither permits he more to Satan, then he makes
profitable for man. Which we may see in that most holy man Job, in the example
of Paul, and in his words: 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be
able: Wherefore they are vain men, who unload the blame of their wickedness on
the Devils shoulders.

3. It remains that we show also, that God is not the author of sin. God is
no cause of sin.
God, say these miscreants, would have it so: for, if he would not, I should
not have sinned. Again, When he might have hindered me, and yet did not,
himself is the author of my sin. These are mere cavils, and foisty Sophismes
of the impious rout. God might by his absolute power hinder evil; but he will
not corrupt his creature man, being just and righteous: Wherefore he deals
with man after the order of man; he proposes laws unto him, he proposes
rewards and punishments, he wills him to embrace good, and fly evil. To the
doing of which thing, neither denies he his grace, without which we can do
nothing; neither refuses he our diligence and labor. Here if a man cease and
give over, the sin and negligence is ascribed to man, not to God, though he
could have hindered it and did not; because he ought not to hinder it, lest he
should trouble his appointed and settled order, and destroy his own work:
Wherefore God is not author of evil or sin.

Now in the process of this our discourse, we will gather in one the
testimonies of Scripture, resolve certain doubts, and discover the very
fountain and original of sin. Many are the testimonies of Scripture which
teach us, that God is not the author of sin; of which it shall suffice to
propose only some few: God made not death, Wisd. 1.13. Ezekiel. 13.11. Psalm. 5.4,
5.
neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living. I desire not the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live: For thou
art not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. The
foolish shall not stand in thy sight. God made man righteous, Eccles. 7.31.
but they have sought many inventions. Our unrighteousness commends the
righteousness of God. Romans 3.5. Romans 5.12. Romans 7.18. Sin arises from man
himself.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. I know that in me
there dwells no good thing. Of this we conclude, that God is not the author
of sin, but that the original of evil springs from man himself, by the
instigation of the Devil; yet so nevertheless, that we say, that the Devil,
being at the first corrupted, did corrupt man; but could have done nothing,
except man of his own accord had consented to evil. The cause of sin is to be
sought in our first father through the Devils instigation: and so by descent to
be found in us.
Here are we to remember again the fall of our father Adam. God made Adam to
his own image and similitude; that is, he made him most good, incorrupt, holy,
righteous, and immortal; he furnished him with most excellent gifts, that
nothing might be wanting unto him to all blessedness in God: Wherefore his
Understanding was wholly divine, his Will most free, and most holy, he had
power of doing good and evil; a law was given him of God, which showed him
what he should do, or what he should not do: For the Lord said, Genesis 2.17.
Thou shall not eat of the tree of knowledge both of good and evil. God simply
required of him Obedience and Faith, and that the whole Adam should depend of
him, and that not constrained by necessity, but should do it freely. Eccles.
15.14, 15.
God made man from the beginning, and left him in in the hand of his counsel,
saying: If thou will, thou shall observe the commandments, and testify thy
good will. Therefore when the Serpent tempted man, and counseled him to taste
of the forbidden tree, man was not ignorant that the counsel of the Serpent
did not agree with the commandment of God: Genesis 2.17.
Ye shall not eat of the tree, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
Wherefore it was in the hand of his counsel to ear, or not to eat: God
declared unto him his will, plainly charging him that he should not eat; and
adding the peril, he did withdraw him from eating, lest perhaps thou die.
Satan also (as neither could he) did not use any force, but did probably move
him unto it, and at length did overcome him: for when the will of the woman
declined to the word of the Devil, her mind departed from the word of God, and
rejecting a good law, she commits an evil work. Afterward she drew on her
husband, willingly following her, to be partaker of her sin. That does the
Scripture inculcate in these words: Genesis 3.6.
So the woman (seeing that the tree was good for meat, and that it was pleasant
to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to get knowledge) took of the fruit
thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat.
Here have you the beginning of evil, the Devil, and that which moved the Will
of man, that is, the false commendation of the Devil; and even as a mere lie,
and the delectable show and sightlinesse of the tree: Wherefore Adam and Eve
do of their own accord that which they do, being led with a hope of more
excellent wisdom, which the Seducer had lyingly promised them.

We conclude therefore, that sin has his beginning not from God, who
forbideth evil, but from the Devil, and the free electron of man, The
beginning of sin from the Devil, and the free election of man corrupted by his
seducement.
which was corrupted by the Devils falsehood: And therefore the Devil, and man's
corrupted will obeying him, are the most true cause of sin. This evil
flows from our first Parents unto all their pos^erity, so that sin has not
else-whence his beginning then from our selves, and our corrupt judgment and
wicked will, and the suggestion of Satan: For an evil root, and that first
corruption, brings forth of it a rotten branch agreeable to the nature
thereof, which Satan now also sets forward, and labors it, as it were
plants, by his guiles and lies: but in vain does he labor, except we yield
our selves to be fashioned and dressed by him. That is called Original sin,
which proceeds from the first Original, that is, was derived from the first
Patents into all by propagation or generation: for this sin we bring with us in
our nature out of our mothers womb into this life; I was borne in iniquity
Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me. And of the Devil Christ speaks
thus: He has been a murderer from the beginning, John 8.44.
and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks
a lie, he speaks of his own: For he is a liar, and the father thereof.

To this may be added this reason, Sin the proper effect of a reasonable
nature, transgressing the Law.
That sin cannot be a proper and natural effect of any cause, but of that
which has power to do against the Law; but this no nature has power to do,
besides the nature of Angels and of men: for God is a Law unto himself, and
cannot do or intend any thing against his Law. And other creatures, whereas
they are not endued with reason, and therefore the Law not made for them, they
cannot commit sin; because, take away the Law, and there is no place left for
sin: Wherefore it necessarily follows, that sin is such an effect, as agrees
to those Angels alone who fell, and to men.

If humane reason do here object, That God is the author and causer of
punishment: God the causer of sins, as they are punishments, but not as they
are sins.
If therefore sins be the punishments of sins, it follows, that God is the
cause of sins. We answer, that there is a fallacy of the accident in the Minor:
For it comes to pass by an accident, that is, by the fault of those who sin,
that when by the just judgment of God, either themselves or others are
punished by evil men, they in the mean season (God permitting, that is, not
showing them that he would have those things to be done by them for to punish
them. which things yet he hates, and which he will punish both in this life
and the life to come) do fulfill their desires, swerving from the Law of God,
and estranging themselves more and more from God by sinning, do purchase more
grievous punishments unto themselves. Or if we will distinguish the Major, it
is in effect the same: For punishments come from God, as author and causer of
them, as they are punishments: but inasmuch as they are sins, so they come, God
neither willing them, nor approving them, nor causing, but only permitting: For
to permit this kind of punishments, which sinners by sinning inflict either
upon themselves or others, is nothing else then not to cause that evil men
should do this, which God would have done for punishment, to the same end, that
they may obey this will of God.

So also we answer to that argument, The privation or want of righteousness
and divine wisdom, God inflicteth as a punishment upon men; but that privation
is sin: Therefore God is the causer of sin: For this privation is not sin, as
by the just judgment of God it is inflicted; but as it is of men themselves,
voluntarily brought upon them by their own misdeeds and demerits, and is
admitted or received into the mind, will, and heart; even as evil actions are
not sins, as they are governed by God, but as they are done by man.

They say further, He that minds the end, minds also the means: God
minds the ends of sin, that is, punishment, Punishment and the Manifestation
of Gods glory and justice are not the ends of sin, because men are not by them
moved to sin. The proper ends of sin.
and the showing of justice and wrath in punishment: Wherefore he minds
sin also, by which those ends are come unto. But the Minor is to be denied,
that Punishment and the Manifestation of the glory of God are the ends of
sin: For the end is that which moves the efficient cause to bring forth an
effect; but Punishment, or the Manifestation of the glory of God, do not move
the sinners to sin: These cannot therefore be said to be the ends of sin. But
those are the proper ends of sin, which the Devils and men respect in
sinning: that is, the destruction of men, the fulfilling of evil desires, the
oppression and reproach of God, and his truth.

God respects those as ends, not of men's sin, but of his permission of their
sin.
If they reply, That men indeed have not those ends, but that God respects
them: For that which God permits, to show his justice by punishing it, the
end which God proposes thereof, is the punishment of the sinners, and his own
glory; but he permits sin to punish it, and to declare himself just by
punishing it: Therefore these are the ends of sin, in respect of the purpose
and intent of God. We deny the Major: for God, suffering sin to be committed,
respects as the end (not of another work, that is, of the sin of Devils or
men; but of his own work, that is, of his permission of sin) the punishment of
sin, and the manifestation of his own justice: For sin is one thing, and the
permission of sin another, Exodus 9.16.
whereof is spoken, For this cause have I appointed thee, to show my power in
thee, Prove. 16.4.
and to declare my name throughout all the world. The Lord has made all things
for his own sake: yea even the wicked man for the day of evil. God, being
willing to show his truth, Romans 9.22.
and to make his power known, has suffered with long patience the vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction: Wherefore punishment is not the end, but the
consequent or proper effect of sin; and an accidentary effect thereof is the
manifestation of the glory of God: Romans 3.7.
as Paul shows, For, if the verity of God has more abounded through my lie
to his glory, etc.

How God is said to will punishment, which is the Consequent of sin, and not
sin it self, which is the Antecedent.
If here again they reply, He that will the Consequent, will also the
Antecedent; but God will these things which are the Consequents of sins, that
is, Punishment and Execution of his justice: Therefore he will also the
Antecedent, that is, Sin it self, without which these should not follow, or be
Consequents. We deny the whole consequence of this reason: For nothing
follows, or can be concluded in reason, when both the former propositions are
mere particular. For the Major of this reason is not universally true, but
only then holds it, when as the Antecedent, together with the Consequent,
agrees with the nature of him which will the Consequent; and not when only the
Consequent agrees, and not the Antecedent: For when it falls thus out, then
is the Consequent by his will, but the Antecedent is not by his will, but only
by permission: For God is said to will those things which he likes, as
agreeing with his nature and rightnesse; but to permit those things which yet
he disliketh, abhors, and condemns, but nevertheless for just causes
hinders them not from being done. And therefore it is said in the Scripture,
that he will, and causes life everlasting, which is the Consequent; and the
conversion of men, which is the Antecedent, and goes before: and that he will
not, but only permits punishment, as it is sin, which follows, and is the
Consequent of sins: as is delivered in holy Scripture.

If again they urge, Romans 9. Ephesians. 1.
He that forbids not sin, when he may forbid it to be committed, in him is
some cause and fault of sin; but God permits it, when he might forbid it:
Therefore there is some cause and fault of sin in him. We deny the Consequent,
because the Major is not universally true: For it is only true of him who does
not perfectly hate sin, The reasons why God not forbidding sin, is yet no
cause of sin.
and therefore forbids it not, when he may; and who is bound to hinder sin,
that it be not committed: But it is not true of God, who with unspeakable anger
accurseth and condemns sin, neither yet hinders is from being committed;
because he is neither bound to do so, neither does he permit it, without most
good and just causes.

God does not evil, when he permits evil. Romans 3.8.
If they object farther, He that does evil that good may come of it, does not
well; God, when he permits evil for good ends, does evil that good may
come of it: Wherefore he does against his justice and law; and by a Consequent
is bound to hinder evil. We deny the Minor: for God, when he permits
evil, does not evil, but good. For the permission of sin is one thing, which
is the good and just work of God; and sin is another thing, which is the evil
and unjust work of the Devil, or man sinning and transgressing the Law.

Lastly, they say, What God permits willingly, that he will to be done; but
he willingly permits sin: wherefore he will sin to be committed, and by a
Consequent is the cause of sin. God permitting sin, does not will sin to be
done.
But the Major is to be denied: God will the permission, that is, the privation
of his spirit and grace: but the sin of his creature, which concurreth with
it, he will not: because he neither minds it, nor approves it. They confirm
their Major by this argument: To permit, is either to Will, or, Not to will:
but it is not, Not to will (for then either that should not be done, which God
is said to permit, or something should be done that God would not: both of
which are absurd.) Wherefore to Permit, is the same that to Will, and by a
Consequent, God when he permits sin, does will sin. We deny the
Consequence, because there is not a sufficient ennumeration of the diversities
of will in the Minor: for God is said to Will, and not to Will a thing after
two ways: Either to will, as when together he both likes and works a thing;
or, as he likes a thing only, (under which also is comprehended his
commanding) but does not work it. And he is said, Not to will any thing,
either, as he both disliketh and hinders a thing; or, as he only disliketh
it, but does not forbid or hinder it. Both which kinds of will are contained
in the Major; but only one of them in the Minor: which is, both to dislike and
hinder a thing from being done. For, it God in that sense would not sin to be
committed, then those absurdities should follow which they speak of. But when
we say that God will not sins, we understand that they do greatly displease
him, and yet that God hinders them not from being committed: which also is
not, to Will, but to Not will sin. For God can will nothing, but that which
is agreeable to his own nature and goodness: neither does the holy Scripture
show any where, that God will those things which are contrary to his nature, in
such sort as they are contrary.

God the cause of man's will, but not of the corruption: or his will is not a
cause of sin, whereof man's will corrupted is a cause.
This is also objected, He that is the cause or the efficient of a Cause, is
also the author of the Effects of that cause, if not the next, yet afar off.
But God is the cause of that Will, which is the cause of sin: therefore is
he the cause of the Effect of the Will, that is, of sin. We answer to the
Major, by distinguishing of the cause. For a cause which is afarr off a cause,
is sometimes by it self, and sometimes only by an accident a cause. That is,
a cause by it self of an effect, which does not only bring forth the next
cause of the effect, but also does move and govern it in bringing forth the
effect which it self intended, or unto which it was appointed; as when God
frames and bends the will of men, which himself made, to good works, or to
such actions as himself will have done; when the Father or Master brings up
his Son or his Scholar to good things, and the learning which he instilleth
into his mind moves him to do well: when the Sun and rain makes the earth
fertile, and the earth brings forth corn. But when the cause which is a
far off a cause either does not move the next cause of the effect, or does
not intend or mind the effect, neither is appointed thereunto, it cannot be
said to be a cause of that effect, but by an accident: as, when of a good
Father, is borne an evil and evil-living Son; or of an evil Father, a good and
wel-living Son: when a godly Magistrate by his commandment ^oveth the will
of a wicked executioner to execute a guilty person, and he, being impelled
either by desire of revenge, or by hatred, or by cruelty, rejoices at his evil
whom he executes, and so commits murder before God: and lastly, when one
makes a sword, and another uses it well, or ill. Now, as aften as the next
cause is either before the bringing forth of the effect depraved, or in the
very bringing of it forth, either by it self, or by an other cause; then
brings it forth a bad effect, which the cause removed, or a far off, that
either brings forth or moves this next cause, neither intends neither, as
by any ordination or appointment unto it, produces. As when the will and hand
of the cleaver purpose to cut a thing, and the iron, being too dull causes
that to break which is taken in hand to be cut: So also God makes and moves
the will; but because the will of men is depraved by the Devil and it self, it
brings forth sin, which God neither when he makes nor when he moves the
will, intends or minds to bring forth. Wherefore it follows not at all,
that God is the cause of those things which are committed by his creatures,
depraved and corrupted of themselves.

Likewise it is objected: Second causes are able to do nothing without the
first cause, which is good: Wherefore neither is sin brought forth, neither
do they deprave themselves, but that also the first cause works it with
them. We answer to the Antecedent, The second causes do nothing without the
first cause, that is, without the first cause preserve and move them to do,
God the first cause does not concur with secu^dary causes to the bringing
forth of sin. Esa. 30.1.
so far forth as it is good which they do: but they do without the first
cause concurring with them to the bringing forth of evil, as it is a fault, or
of sin. Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel,
but not of me: and cover with a covering, but not by my spirit, that they may
lay sin upon sin.

Likewise they object: That which is good, cannot by sinning corrupt it self,
except it be some otherway corrupted: as it is said: A good tree cannot bring
forth evil fruit: The will of the Devil and Adam, before the fall of both,
was good: Therefore it could not corrupt it self by sinning, except it were by
some other means corrupted. We deny the Major. For although the creature be
good, How the good will of man corrupts it self.
yet God not preserving his goodness, that is, moving or willing that his will
should be moved by outward objects, neither in the mean season lightning and
governing the will with the knowledge of his own divine will, it is not only
possible, but it must necessarily follow that he must sin, become an evil tree,
and through his own will and fault avert himself from God, run to worse and
worse, and purchase blindness, the just punishment of sin, both unto him and
his: John 15.5.
as it is said; Without me ye can do nothing.

That is not of God, but of man and the Devil which makes sin.
Again, they object: He that is the cause of those things which make sin, is
the cause of sin. God is the cause of those things which make sin, that is, of
the Action, which is the matter, and of the privation of righteousness in man,
which is the form of sin. Wherefore he is the author of sin. To these the
answer has been made before: For the Minor is to be denied; because the action
and privation of the divine light and direction do make sin as they are
contrary to the law: and they are contrary to the law of God, and make sin as
they are committed by man, and are in him: but as they are guided by God, and
inflicted, they are not sin, but a trial of him that would sin, or a punishment
of him that had sinned. Wherefore that is not of God, but of man and the Devil
which makes sin.

Whether God would the fall of Adam, and how.
Last of all they urge: Seeing that God would the fall of Adam, either as it was
sin, or as a punishment, and could not will it as a punishment, because no sin
had gone before which should be therewith punished; it seems to follow that
God would that work as it was sin. But this consequence also is deceitful,
because there is not a sufficient ennumeration in the Major. For although the
first sin was no punishment, yet God would that action not as a sin, and
contrary to his will and nature; but as in punishing, and receiving again
mankind into favor by his Son, it was a way and occasion of exercising and
manifesting his justice and mercy, and an example of the weakness of al
creatures, yea of the most excellent, if they be not by the singular goodness
of the Creator preserved; as it is declared, God has shut up all in unbeleefe,
that he might have mercy on all. Romans 11.32.
And in the same place it is showed concerning the blindness of the Jews, That
partly this obstinacy was come to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles
were come in: and that the Jews are enemies, of the Gospel for our sakes; and
that we have obtained mercy through their unbeleefe: That is, that God would
this their obstinacy, not as it was a sin of the Jews, neither only as a
punishment of other sins, but also an occasion of translating the Gospel unto
the Gentiles. And it is said that God in the preaching of the Law respects
this, That all the world be culpable before him. Romans 3.19.
Wherefore this also he respected and would in permitting of sin, which if it
had not come between, The Law had not made the world culpable before God.

Object. 1. Satan was made of God: And therefore the malice also of Satan.
Answ. God made indeed all the Angels; God made Satan good, and Satan made
himself evil.
yea those who became Apostates and Devils: but yet he created all the Angels at
the beginning good. But Satan is said not to have stood steadfast in the truth:
Then before his fall he stood in the truth; but after he treacherously fell
from his allegiance, and sinned against God: and therefore the crime of that
evil sticks in that runaway the Devil. For since that time, after he fell,
there is no truth in him, no faith, no integrity, no fear of God, no light, no
goodness. 1 John 3.8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil, etc. for he is the first sinner, and
the fountain of sin.

Object. 2. God made Adam: Therefore he made sin. Answ. Sin is the corruption
of nature created good of God, but not any creature made of God in man. Sin not
made of God, because it is no creature, but the corruption of a creature.
God made man good; who by Satan's persuasion corrupted willingly that
goodness which he received of God, so that now sin is man's, and not a creature
of God created in man. Neither is the nature of man the cause of sin: for God,
who created all things, and the very nature of man, created them all good; Sin
a natural property of man corrupted, but not of man simply as he was first
created.
wherefore the very nature of man also was created good: but sin is an
accidental quality which befell unto man in his fall, and after his fall,
being even from the beginning such as now it is, but no substantial property,
nor of the nature of man. Now indeed whereas we are borne in sin, sin is a
natural property of men, Cont. Manich. c. 9.
according to the judgment of Augustine. But and if we say any man to be
naturally evil, we say so, because of the original of the old sin, in which
all our mortality now is borne.

Object. 3. But the will and power which was in Adam was from God: Therefore
sin also is from God. Ans. God gave not man a will and power to work evil. God
gave not man a will and power to work evil, but to do good.
For he made a Law to forbid evil. Wherefore Adam himself did ill bestow that
will and power which he received of God, in ill using of them. The prodigal
son received money of his father, not that he should lash it out wastfully, but
that he might have so much as sufficed need. Wherefore when himself did ill
bestow his money, and perished; he perished through his own default, and not
by his father, though he received the money of his father. Therefore the fault
is in the abuse. He that gives thee them, leaves the use of them unto thee.
If he be just, he gives them thee for to use, and not to abuse. When thou
abusest them, the fault is laid on thee who abusest them, and not on him who
gave them. So God gave a will and power to Adam to do good, not to work evil.

Object. 4. God made man so as he might fall, It was necessary that man should
have free power either to stand or fall. Romans 9.20. Isa. 45.9.
neither did confirm and establish in him the goodness of his nature.
Wherefore he would have him to fall, or sin. Answ. The Scripture beats back
this forwardness of men wickedly curious. Who art thou which pleadest against
God? Woe be unto him that striveth with his Maker. Except God had made man so
as he might fall, there had been no praise of his work or virtue. And what if
it were necessary that man should be so made as he might fall? For so did the
very nature of God require. God does not grant his glory to any creature. Adam
was a man, no God. And as God is good, so is he also just. He does good unto
men, but he will have them to be obedient and thankful unto him. He bestows
infinite goodness upon man, therefore he should have been thankful, and
obedient, and subject unto him. For he declares by his law what he would, and
what he would not. Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, says he, thou
shall not eat: When thou eatest, thou shall die. As if he should say; Thou
shall regard me, thou shall cleave unto me, obey me, serve me: neither shall
thou elsewhere seek for the rules of good and evil but of me, and so shall
thou show thy self obedient unto me. Repl. God fore-knew the fall of man,
which if he would, he might have hindered: but he did not hinder it: Therefore
God was in the fault that Adam sinned. Ans. Unto this objection answer has
been made before: neither does that necessity follow upon the foreknowledge of
God, that Adam must needs have sinned, because God did foreknow that he would
sin. Some wise father did foreknow by some signs and tokens that his son
should hereafter at some time be slain with a sword. Neither does this his
foreknowledge deceive him: for he was thrust through for fornication. But he
is not therefore thought to be slain, because his father did foreknow that he
should be slain, but because he was a fornicator. Lib. 2. De vo^^^. gent. c. 4.
Lib. 3. d^ libero arbit. cap. 4.
So says Ambrose, speaking of the murder which Cain committed: Verily God did
foreknow to what the fury of him, being in a rage, would come: neither yet was
the attempt of his will forced of necessity to sin, because the knowledge of
God could not be deceived. And Austine: God is a just revenger of those things,
of which yet he is not an evil author. Wherefore, those sins which ensue
and follow, are, in respect of God, considered as most just punishments; which,
as they are punishments, have their being from him as their author and causer:
but as they are sins, in respect of men, they come God neither willing nor
causing them, but permitting only, seeing he does not cause men to do that
which he would have done for a punishment, to this end, as for to obey therein
his will: For, one and the same work is good and holy in respect of God, Two
differences in the working of God and man.
and sin in respect of men, by reason of the diversity both of the efficients,
and of the ends. For, wills and works evil only; but God, because he is
exceeding good, and the very rule of goodness and righteousness, doing in all
things what he will, wills and works always only that which is good.
disagreeing from the Law of God, that is, what they do, they do not to that
end to obey God, but to fulfill their bad and corrupt desires; but God has the
end of all his works agreeing with his Nature and Law, even that he may
declare and execute his justice, goodness, and mercy. By these two things it
comes to pass, that the reasonable creature, working together with God, God
working uprightly and holily, does nevertheless it self work unholily and
corruptly.

5. What are the effects of sin.
NOw that it is defined what sin is, and from whence it came, we are to
consider also, what be the evils which follow sin: For, except this be also
known, we know not yet how great evil there is in sin, and with how great
hatred God pursues it. It has been said before, that evil was of two sorts:
one of crime or offense, which is sin; the other of pain or punishment. The
evil of punishment is the effect of the evil of offense. That this may be the
better understood, we must here again remember, that of punishments, some are
Only punishments, as are the destruction of nature, or torments: others, Both
punishments and sin, as all sins, which have followed since the first fall.

Sins ensuing, effects of sins which go before. Romans 5.19.
The sins which follow are the effects of those which go before. So Original
sin is the effect of the sin or fall of our first Parents: By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners.

Actual sins effects of original. Romans 7.11.
All Actual sins are effects of Original sin. Sin took an occasion by the
commandment, and deceived me.

Increase of sins the effect of actual sins. Romans 1.24. 2 These. 2.11. Mat.
25.29.
The effect of actual sin is the increase of them, that is, greater
guiltiness by reason of the most just judgment of God; because God punishes
sins with sins. Wherefore God also gave them up to their hearts lusts: And
therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies.
From him that has not, shall be taken away also that which he has.

Other men's sins oftentimes effects of actual sin.
The effect of all actual sins are also oftentimes other men's sins, by reason
of scandal or example, whereby some are made worse of others, and are intised
or moved to sin. So the persuasion of the Devil caused man to decline from
God; and now it works in stubborn-minded men. The Devil put it into the
heart of Judas to betray Christ. John 13.27. 1 Cor. 15.33.
Evil speeches corrupt good manners: So evil teachers do withdraw men from
God to errors, idolatry, and other sins. So a use of liberty, out of season,
offends, and draws men to sin.

An evil conscience an effect of sin.
There follows sin, in the immovable and perpetual order of Gods judgment,
an evil conscience, which is the knowledge and dislike which we have in our
mind of our own sin, and the knowledge of the judgment of God against sin, and
that proceeding out of the knowledge of Gods Law, upon which ensues the fear
of the wrath of God and punishment, according to the order of Gods justice, and
a flying and hatred of God who destroys sin; which is the beginning of
despaira^ion and eternal torments, except it be cured by the comfort of the
Gospel. The Gentiles show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, Romans
2.15.
their conscience also bearing witness, Isa. 57.21.
and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing. And, There is no peace
to the wicked.

Temporal and spiritual evils effects of sin.
Temporal and Spiritual evils: as temporal death, and in a word all the
calamities of this life: These evils are only punishments, that is, torments
and dissolution of nature. If any man object, That they also are subject to
temporal death and other calamities, who have all their sins remitted; and
therefore all temporal evils are not the punishments or effects of sin, but
some have other causes. We answer, Temporal evils in the regenerate are
effect, of sin, not as punishments, but as chastisements.
that the consequence holds not from the denial of one particular to the
denial of the general. For albeit the calamities of the regenerate are not
effects of sin as a punishment, which is inflicted on men sinning, that so
the justice of God might be satisfied; yet are they effects of sin, as
chastisements and exercises, whereby sin is repressed, and more and more purged
out, until at length by corporal death the whole be abolished. Now that of
the blind man, Neither this man has sinned, John 9.3.
nor his Parents, Christ means not simply that they had not sinned, or that
their sins were not a cause of this calamity; but that their sins were not the
principal cause why he was borne blind: but that the works of God should be
showed on him, Christ by a miracle opening his eyes.

Eternal death the effect of sin
Eternal death, which is the effect of all sins, as they are sins: For all
sins, of what quality soever they be, are punished either with eternal pain,
as in the Reprobate; or with equivalent pain to eternal, as in the Son of
God. This death does begin in the Reprobate, even in this world, that is,
anxiety, and torment of conscience, which we also should feel except we were
delivered by the grace of God. Now, by the name of eternal death is not
understood the destruction of the soul or body, or the separation of them; but
the abandoning and banishing of the soul and body living from the face of God,
a continual horror, and torment, and a feeling and flying of Gods wrath and
judgment, a horrible murmuring against God, taking vengeance of their sins. If
they object, That the sins of those who believe in Christ, are not punished
with eternal death: We answer, that those were punished in Christ with a
punishment, which both for the grievousnesse of the punishment, and for the
dignity of the person who suffered it, is equivalent to those eternal
punishments, which were to be inflicted upon us for our sins: As it is said,
Isa. 53.6.
He has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Against that which we affirm,
That eternal death is the effect of all sins, yea even of the least, some thus
dispute: Ob. Like is not to be given to things unlike; but sins are not like:
Therefore all ought not to be punished with eternal death. Answ. There is more
in the conclusion of this reason, The regenerate, though they sin, are not
punished with this death, because Christ has suffered an equivalent punishment
for them. Why the during of punishment ought to be alike to all sins, but not
the degree of punishment. Luke 12.47. Mat. 11.24. All sins are not equal.
then was in the premises; for only this follows to be concluded: Therefore
all sins ought not to be punished with like punishment. For all sins, even
the least, deserve eternal punishment; because all sins offend against the
eternal and infinite good. Wherefore, as concerning the durance and lasting of
the punishment, all sins are punished with like punishment; but not as
concerning the degrees of punishment: All sins are punished with eternal
torments, yet so, as not with equal torments. The servant who knows the will
of his Master, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. It shall be
easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for thee.
Greater sins shall be punished with more grievous torments, and lesser sins
with lighter, but both for ever.

Here the Stoics object, That all sins or vices are joined with any one vice;
and therefore all are like and equal: But neither is this consequence of
force, whereas also things unlike and unequal may be joined together; neither
is the Antecedent granted, that seems to be proved by the saying of James, He
that fails in one, Jam. 2.10.
is guilty of all. But James says not, that all sins or vices concur and are
joined with one: but first, that in the breach of one point the whole Law is
violated; as the whole body is said to be hurt, when one part is harmed: Then,
that there concurreth with every sin the fountain or cause of all other sins,
that is, the contempt of God. And this evil being seated in the heart, does
violate the love of God, and so all other parts of our obedience toward God:
For no work, which proceeds not from the perfect love, dread and reverence
of God, can agree with the Law of God, or please God. And yet have we
experience that this hinders not, but that which is infected with one vice,
may be propense and prone to some sins more, and to some less, especially
since vices themselves also are one opposite to another; by the one of which
contraries, and not by both at one time, every man violateth virtue. Neither
are those principles also of the Stoicall Philosophers to be granted: That how
far soever thou go in sinning, after thou have once past the line or middle,
which is virtue, it is not material for the increasing or augmenting the fault
of passing beyond the line: and that all virtues are alike and equal one to
another, so that no man is stronger then a strong man. For, whereas sin is a
swerving from the middle, it is manifest, that how much greater the swerving
is, so much is the sin more grievous. And that virtues are both in the same,
and in diverse men, other-whiles greater, other-whiles lesser, even as much as
the qualities of the body are different in degrees, experience does witness:
Wherefore in the judgment of God also there are degrees put as well of
punishments as of sins.

The use of this doctrine of sin in the Church.
It is requisite that this doctrine be known in the Church:

Quest. 8. Are we so corrupt, that we are not all apt to do well, and are
prone to all vice?
Answ. Indeed we are, Genesis 8.19. and 6.5. Job 14.4. and 15.14, 16, 35. John
3.6. Isa. 53.6.
except we be regenerated by the holy Ghost. John 3.3, 5. 1 Cor. 12.3. 2 Cor.
3.5.


The Explication.
THe Question of Free Will, or of the power of man's will in well-doing, and
performing obedience to God, occurreth next in order after the tract of Man's
Misery: For necessary it is to know, what ability man was of before his fall,
and of what strength after the same, that thence descrying aright the effects
of the first sin, we may be the more pricked forwards and provoked to humility,
and to an earnest desire of Gods divine grace and protection, and finally unto
thankfulness toward him. For this doctrine of Free Will is a view or
contemplation not of men's ability and excellency, but of their weakness and
misery.

OF FREE WILL.
The state of the maine question about Free Will.
THE principal scope and question of this disputation is, Whether as man
averted himself from God; so on the other side he be able by his own
strength to return to God, to receive grace offered by God, and to amend
himself. And further, Whether the Will of man be the first and principal
cause why others are converted, others persist in their sins: and as well of
the converted, as not converted, others are more, others less good or evil;
and in a word, do either good or evil, some after one manner, some after
another. To this question the Pelagians and the like adversaries make answer,
That so much grace is both given of, and left by nature to all men, that they
are able to return unto God, and obey him: neither ought we to seek any
other cause before, or above man's Will, for which others receive or retain,
others refuse or cast away divine succor and aid in avoiding sin, and do
after this or that manner order and institute their counsels and actions.
Contrariwise, we have learned out of the sacred Scriptures, That no work
pleasing to God can be undertaken or performed by any man without regeneration,
and the s^^^all grace of the holy Spirit; neither can more or less good be in
any man's counsels or actions, then God of his free goodness does cause in
them; neither any other way can the will of any creature be inclined, then
whither it shall seem good to the eternal and good counsel of God: and yet
all the actions of the created will, both good and bad, are wrought freely. For
the clearing hereof we are to consider: 1 What the liberty of the will, or
free will is. 2 What difference there is of the free will which is in God, and
that which is in reasonable creatures, Angels and Man. 3 Whether there be any
liberty of man's will. 4 What manner of liberty of will is in man; or how many
are the degrees of free will, according to the four estates of man.


1 What the liberty of will, or free will is.
Liberty from bond, bondage, and misery.
LIberty sometime signifies a relation or respect, to wit, the power or right,
that is, the ordering either of person or thing, made either by ones will, or
by nature, to deal at his own arbitrament or motion, according to honest
laws, or order agreeable to his nature, and to enjoy commodities convenient
for him, without inhibition or impediment, and not to sustain the defects and
burdens or encombrances which are not proper to his nature. This liberty may be
termed a liberty from bond and misery, and it is opposed unto slavery. So God
is most free, because he is bound to no man: So the Romans and the Jews were
free, that is, stood not charged with foreign governments and burdens: So a
City is free from tyranny and servitude after a civil kind of freedom: So
we, being justified by faith, are by Christ freed from the wrath of God, the
curse of the Law, and Moses Ceremonies. But this signification of liberty
appertains not to this present disputation of free will; because it is agreed
upon on all sides, that we all are the servants of God, and are obliged by his
Law, either to obey him, or to suffer punishment. Our Will also wills many
things freely, the liberty or power of performing whereof notwithstanding it
has not.

Liberty from constraint.
Secondly, liberty is opposed unto constraint, and is a quality of the Will, or
a natural power of a reasonable creature, concurring with the Will: that is, a
faculty of choosing or refusing any object or action represented unto it by the
Understanding, by it own proper motion, without any constraint, the nature of
the Will remaining still entire and free to do this or that, or also to
suspend, forbear, and defer any action: as, a man may be willing to walk, or
not to walk. And this is to put any thing in action upon mature deliberation,
which is the proper manner of the working of the Will.

This liberty of Will is in God, Angels, and men; and their free will is called
free Arbitremen. That thing is called free, which is endowed with this faculty
and liberty of willing or nilling: But Abitrement is the Will it self, as far
as it follows or refuses in her choice the judgment of the Understanding;
for it compriseth both faculties of the mind: to wit, both the judgment of the
mind, or understanding of the object, What free will is.
and the Will either receiving or refusing it. Free Arbitrament therefore is a
faculty or power of willing, or nilling, or of choosing, or refusing any object
represented unto it by the Understanding, by proper motion without constraint.
And this faculty or power of the soul is called Arbitrament, Arbitrament.
in respect of the mind, showing unto the Will an object to be chosen or
refused: and it is called free, in respect of the Will following of her own
accord, and without constraint, the judgment of the mind or understanding.
Free.
For that is called free which is voluntary, and which is opposed to that which
is involuntary and constrained; not which is opposed to that which is
necessary: For that which is voluntary may well stand with that which is
necessary, but not with that which is involuntary. As God and the holy Angels
are necessarily good, yet not involuntarily and constrainedly against their
will, but with most free will; because they have the beginning and cause of
their goodness within themselves, I mean, Constrained.
free will. But that is said to be constrained, which has only an external
beginning and cause of motion, and not also an internal, whereby it may move
it self to do on this or that manner. Necessary.
Wherefore, there is such a difference between necessary and constrained, as is
between a general and a special: For, whatsoever is constrained is necessary;
but not contrariwise, whatsoever is necessary is constrained. Whence there
arises a double necessity: A double necessity.
A necessity of Unchangeableness, and a necessity of Constraint. The former
may stand with that which is voluntary: the latter cannot. Contingent.
The like difference is between things contingent and free. For, Whatsoever is
free is contingent; but not contrariwise, all that is contingent is free.

2. What difference there is of the free will which is in God, and that which
is in reasonable creatures, Angels and men.
Two things common to God and creatures in their will.
TWo things there are common to God and reasonable creatures, as touching the
liberty of Will: 1. That God and reasonable creatures do things upon
deliberation and advice; that is, they choose or refuse whatsoever objects, with
an understanding going before the action, and a will accompanying the action of
choosing or refusing. 2. They choose or refuse any thing of their proper and
inward motion without constraint: that is, the Will being fit in it own nature
to will the contrary of that which it wills, or to suspend the action it
intends, of it own accord inclines to the one part, Psalm. 104.24. and
115.3. Genesis 3.6. Isa. 1.19. Mat. 23.37.

Difference of liberty in God and his creatures:
But the differences also of this liberty in God and in the creatures are three:
1. In the Understanding.
In the Understanding; because God understands and knows all things of
himself perfectly and from all eternity, without any ignorance or error of
judgment: but the creatures know neither of themselves, neither all things,
neither the same at all times; but they understand of God his will and works,
so much, and at such time, how much, and when it pleases God to reveal unto
them: And therefore many things they are ignorant of, and err in many. The
testimonies of this difference are: Mat. 24.36. Dan. 2.21. Isa. 40.13. Heb. 4
13.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my
Father only. He gives wisdom unto the wise, and understanding to those that
understand: Who has instructed the Spirit of the Lord? Neither is there any
creature which is not manifest in his sight. John 1.9.
He lightneth every man that comes into the world. In the Will.
In the Will. The will of God is governed by no other, nor depends of any
other cause but of it self. But the wills of Angels and men, are so the causes
of their actions, that nevertheless they are carried by the secret counsel of
God and his providence to the choosing or refusing of any object; and that
either immediately by God, or mediately by instruments, some good, some bad,
which it seems good unto God to use; so that it is impossible for them to do
any thing beside the eternal decree and counsel of God. And therefore the
word (...), (that is, to be absolutely his own, at his own will, and in his
own power,) whereby the Greek Divines express Free Will, agrees more properly
unto God, who perfectly and simply is his own, and at his own will. But of
the creatures more rightly is used (...), (that is, voluntary and free) which
word the Apostle uses to Philemon, Ver. 14. Hebr. 10.26. 1 Pet. 5.2. The
testimonies and arguments of this difference are laid down in the doctrine of
Providence. And, that God indeed is the first cause of his counsels, these and
the like sayings of Scripture do testify: Psalm. 115.3. Dan. 4.32.
He has done what soever he would. Who, according to his will, works in the
army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth. But that the wills and
counsels of the creatures depend on Gods beck and permission, these and the
like speeches do prove: Genesis 24.7. Exodus 3.16. Acts 2.23. and 3.18. and 4.27,
28.
The Lord shall send his Angel before thee, etc. Go and gather the Elders of
Israel together, etc. Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have slain: But God has fulfilled these things.
Herod and Pontius Pilate gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thine
hand, and thy counsel had determined before to be done. I know, Jer. 10.23.
that the way of a man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk, and
to direct his steps. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord: Therefore the
wills of Angels and men, Pro. 21.1.
and all other second causes, as they were created of God their first supreme
and sovereign cause, so are they ruled of him; but the will of God is ruled by
no one of his creatures: because as God has no efficient cause without, and
besides himself, so neither has he any moving or inclining cause; otherwise
he were not God, that is, the supreme and sovereign cause of all his works,
and the creatures should be invested in Gods room. The wills of the creatures
are r^led by God, not enforced.
Moreover God rules and bends the wills of his creatures, and does not draw
or enforce them; that is, by objects represented to the mind he effectually
moves, affects, and allureth the Will to will that which then the mind
judges good, and refuse that which seems evil.

In the will and understanding.
In the Understanding and Will both together: because God, as he unchangeably
knows all things so also he has determined from everlasting, and will
unchangeab^y all things which are done, as they are good; and permits them,
as they are sins. Now, as the creatures notions and judgments of things, so
also their wills are changeable: so that they will that, which before they would
not: and will not that, which before they would. For, seeing that all the
counsels of God are most good, most just and most wise; he never disliketh,
corrects, or changes them, as oftentimes men do, when as they do perceive
themselves to have determined any thing unadvisedly before. Hither appertain
those sayings, God is not as man, Number. 23.19.
that he should lie. I am the Lord and change not. Object. Mal. 3.6. The
unchangeablenesse of Gods purpose takes not away the liberty of his will.
He that cannot change his counsel and purpose, has not free will; but God
cannot change his counsel and purpose. which he has once appointed: Therefore
his will is not free. First, we deny the Major: For not he which does not
change his purpose which he has once appointed, has no liberty of will; but
he which could not purpose any other thing, being let by some external cause:
But the liberty of God consists not in the change of his will or purpose, but
in this, that God will all things (whatsoever he will) altogether with his
will, and of himself, and could have had otherwise decreed, or not decreed all
things, which he decreed from everlasting, of the creation, preservation, and
government of things, according to these sayings: With men this is impossible,
Mat. 19.26. Luke 18.27.
but with God all things are possible. These and the like sayings show, that
God has so appointed from everlasting with himself the creation of things,
and the gathering and saving of his Church, not as if he could not have not
done this, or not have appointed it otherwise; but because so it seemed good to
him: neither must men seek any superior cause then his will, of all his divine
works which he exercises in his creatures; neither is there any other
necessity to be found in them, then which depends of the most free
appointment of God himself. For, as to resolve of such a purpose as is to be
changed; so also to change it either to better or to worse, is rather servitude
or bondage, then freedom and liberty: for it proceeds of ignorance or
impotency. For they change their counsels and purposes, who either err in
taking them, or are not able to perform the counsel which they have taken. But
to resolve of such a purpose, as might alike either have been decreed, or not
decreed; and which after it is decreed, is neither changed, nor to be changed
at any time, this is perfect and divine liberty. Now God, whatsoever he has
decreed, could either not have decreed it at all, or have decreed it otherwise.
And that he changes not that which he has once decreed, the perfectness of
his nature, even his infinite wisdom and goodness is cause thereof. For most
wisely and rightly does he decree all things, and constantly persisteth in
that which is good and right. Wherefore the immutability in God does as well
not diminish his liberty as his immortality, and other things which are proper
unto his divinity. Secondly, if any man urge, That it is a point of liberty,
not only to resolve of any advice what he will, but after he has resolved, to
be able either to follow it, or change it: We understand by those things which
have been already spoken, that this does agree to the creatures, which may err
in their purposes, and therefore stand in need of changes and alterations; but
not to God, who can never err, and therefore requires no change of his
purpose. Lastly, if they reply, That not to be able to alter a purpose once
undertaken, is a defect of ability or power; and therefore against the liberty
of God: We answer, That the Antecedent of this reply is true, if the change of
it be impossible by reason of some impediment, coming from some external
cause, or by reason of defect of nature or ability; but the Antecedent is most
false, if the impossibility of change proceed from a perfection of that nature,
which is not changed, and from a wisdom and rightnesse of that purpose which
is unchangeable, and from a perseverance and constancy of the will in that
which is good and right: after which sort it is apparent to be in God.

Gods directing of our will, takes not away the liberty thereof.
But against that, where it was said, That the wills of all creatures are so
guided by God, that neither they are able to will what he from everlasting has
not decreed, neither not to will what he has decreed for them to will, more
question is used to be made: 1. That which is ruled by the unchangeable will of
God, does not work freely; the will of Angels and men is ruled by the
unchangeable will of God: Therefore either it has no liberty, or the choice
which it makes is not tied to the will of God. Answer we make to the Major by
a distinction: It is not a free agent which is so ruled by God, as it has no
deliberation and election of his own. But that which God so rules, as he
shows the object unto the understanding, and by it effectually moves and
affects the will to choose it; that does notwithstanding freely work, albeit
it be inclined at the beck and will of God, whither he will have it. For to
work freely in the creatures, is not to work without any ones government, but
with deliberation, and with a proper and selfe-motion of the will, although
this motion be else-whence raised and ruled. Wherefore, it is not the
immutability and operation of the divine will and providence, which is against
this liberty, but a privation and constraint of judgment; which is an
impulsion, or a motion proceeding not from an inward cause or faculty, but only
from an outward cause, beside or against the nature of that which is moved.
Now, such an impulsion falls not into the will; but God moves it, leading
and bringing it on as it were by objects, to choose that which he will. For the
faculty or ability and power of the will cannot be brought into act, that is,
to show and express it self without an object; and, Act. 17.28.
We are, live, and move in God: But, to be moved of no other cause but of
himself only, this is exceeding and infinite perfection and liberty, agreeing
to God alone, which the creature cannot desire, much less arrogate and
challenge unto it self, without notorious blasphemy.

Necessity takes not away libetry of will in us. This necessity proceeds
from Gods working in us, which rather preserves this liberty. Absolute
necessity does not take away in God greater liberty: much less can a less
absolute necessity take away a less liberty in us.
Further, it may easily be showed, That the necessity or immutability which
arises not from constraint, but from the nature of the will, or from the
commotion of it, stirred by other causes, to choose or refuse an object thought
of by the mind, does not at all withstand or hinder the liberty of will: 1.
Because this necessity does not take away, but effectuateth and persuades the
judgment of the mind, and free or voluntary assent of the will, inasmuch as
God does cause and work in men both the notions and election of objects. 2.
Because God, albeit he is by nature, that is, by exceeding and absolute
necessity, good, and has begotten his Son, and had his holy Spirit from all
eternity: yet will he not by a constrained, but most free will, be, live, be
blessed, and good, have his Son and holy Spirit, and will all his purposes and
works to be good and just, although it be impossible that he should will any
thing contrary to these which he has already determined. If then this absolute
necessity of willing things in God, does not take away even the greatest
liberty; there is no doubt but that necessity, which is but only conditional,
that is according to the decree and government of God, does not take away that
liberty, which agrees unto the creatures, that is, judgment and election, free
and voluntary. Angels and Saints have greater liberty of will, and yet greater
necessity.
3. The holy Angels and blessed men in the celestial life, even by our
adversaries own confession, are endued with greater liberty of Will, then we
are in this life: But they necessarily will those things only which are right
and just, and hate and abhor al things whatsoever are evil and unjust,
because they are made such of God, and establihed by him, and are so
illuminated and guided by the holy Ghost, that they cannot other wise will or
work: neither by this necessity of Willing those things which are good and
pleasing to God, is the liberty of Will taken away or diminished in them; but
rather is increased, and confirmed, as who with all willingness choose and do
those things only which are just. Fourthly, Many places of Scripture confirm
the necessity of those actions, the liberty of which yet both we and our
adversaries acknowledge.
it is showed by many testimonies of Scripture, that the Wills and voluntary
Actions of good and wicked men, which our adversaries maintain to be and have
been free, and we also, according to the right meaning of this word Liberty,
do willingly confess, are so guided by the secret and unchangeable purpose of
God, that they neither can or could either do, or be otherwise. Wherefore
either so many manifest places of Scripture must be denied, or openly
corrupted: or it must be granted, that one and the same Action of the Will is
free and contingent in respect of the Will, and necessary in respect of Gods
government. Fifthly, it is declared by many places of Scripture, Contingent
effects lose not their contingencie, by reason of any necessity imported by
Gods decree. The same is to be said of the effects of the will, which are in
respect thereof contingent, that is, free, and might as well not be done, as be
done.
that al contingent effects do retain their contingency, which they have from
the nature of their causes, although they be done by the unchangable
determination of the purpose or providence of God: But al voluntary effects or
motions are contingent in respect of the Will, which by nature was alike able to
have done the plain contrary unto them. They therefore retain their
contingency, that is, their liberty (for this is the contingency of the actions
of the Will) although they be so determined of by Gods Will, that there can be no
other. The reason of the Major in this argument is, for that God so moves the
second causes, and by them brings to pass what he will, that in the mean
season by this providence he does not destroy or abolish their nature which he
gave them at their creation, but rather preserves and nourishes it: so that
as concerning their nature, some work contingently, some necessarily, although
in respect of the liberty of Gods purpose, al work contingently, and in respect
of the unchangeablenesse of his decree, all work necessarily, so as they do.
For when God by the rising of the Sun lightneth the world, he makes not the
Sun so, as if being risen it did not necessarily lighten, or were apt by nature
not to lighten: and yet it is in the power of God, either to change the nature
of the Sun, or that remaining as it is, not to lighten the world: as he showed
in Egypt, and at the passion of Christ. In like manner, when the Quails light
at the Tents of the Israelites, and the Ravens carry meat to Elias, and one
sparrow falls on the ground, God does not make the nature of these living
creatures such, as could not be carried elsewhere: and yet that they can have
no other motion then that which they have, by reason of the will of God
interposed and coming between, the Scripture plainly affirms. Whereof it is
manifest, that as in other things, which work contingently, their contingency;
so in the will, the liberty which is given it of God, is not taken away, but
rather preserved by Gods government. Now then, if our adversaries in their
argument understand that Liberty which consists in the deliberation of the
mind and free assent of the will; we do not only grant, but also better
maintain then they the liberty of will in all actions thereof: and so the Major
of their argument shall be false, to wit, that those things which are done by
the unchangeable decree of God, are not done by the free will of men and Angels.
For this liberty the providence of God does so not hinder, but rather establish
and confirm, that without this, that liberty cannot so much as be: for God both
keeps his order which he appointed at the creation by his perpetual efficacy
and operation, and does inspire into al by his virtue true notions and right
election. But if they challenge a liberty unto the creature depending of no
other cause whereby it is guided, we deny their whole argument, as knowing such
a liberty of creatures to stand against the whole Scripture, and that it only
agrees unto God. For him alone do all things serve: In him we live, and move,
and have our being: he gives unto all not only life or power of moving
themselves, but even breathing too, that is, very moving it self.

The will works together with God, and is not mere passive.
Object. 2. If the will when it is converted by God, or turned and inclined to
other objects, cannot withstand, it is even mere passive, and so works not
at all. Answ. This consequence deceives them, because in the Antecedent there
is not a sufficient ennumeration of those actions which the will may have, when
it is moved of God: For it is able not only to withstand God moving it, but
also of it own proper motion to assent and obey him. And when it does this, it
is not idle, neither does it only suffer or is moved, but it self exercises
and moves her own actions; and yet this is to be understood of the actions of
the Will, not of the new qualities or inclinations which it has to obey God.
For these the Will receives not by her own operation, but by the working of
the holy Ghost.

The will of man withstanding the revealed will of God, is yet guided by his
secret will: and therefore resisting does not ^esist.
Object. 3. That which withstandeth the will of God is not guided by it: But the
will of men in many actions withstandeth the will of God: It is not therefore
always guided by the will of God. Answ. The consequence here fails, because
there are four terms. For the Major is true, if both the revealed and the
secret will of God be understood, so that simply and in all respects it be
withstood, and that be done which simply and by no means it would have done:
that which is impossible to come to pass, because of the omnipotency and
liberty of God. But in the Minor, the will of God must be understood, as it is
revealed. For the secret decrees of Gods will and providence are ever ratified,
and are performed in all, even in those who most of all withstand Gods
commandments. Neither yet are there contrary wills in God: for nothing is found
in his secret purposes, which disagreeth with his nature revealed in his word:
and God opens unto us in his law what he approves and likes, and what
agrees with his nature and the order of his mind; but he does not promise or
reveal how much grace he will, or purposes to give to every one to obey his
commandments.

God, though the mover of wicked wills, yet not the mover of the wickedness of
the wills.
Object. 4. If all motions, even of wicked wills, are raised and ruled by the
will of God, and many of these disagree from the law of God, and are sins;
God seems to be made the causer of sins. The answer is, That it is a
Paralogisme of the Accident. For, they disagree from the law, not as they are
ordained by, or proceed from the will of God (for thus far they agree very
well with the justice and law of God) but as they are done by men, or Devils:
and that by reason of this defect; because either they do not know the will of
God when they do it, or are not moved by the sight and knowledge thereof to
do it; that is, they do it not to that end, that they may obey God, who will
so have it. For whatsoever is done to this end, it disagreeeth not from the
law, seeing the law does not, but with this condition, either command or forbid
any thing, if God has not commanded a man to do otherwise. So does the Law of
God forbid to kill any man, except whom God had commanded any to kill.
Whosoever then kills a man, God not commanding it, he out of doubt does sin,
and offends against the Law. Neither does God dissent from himself or his
Law, when he will have some thing done either by his revealed or secret will,
otherwise then according to the general rule prescribed by himself in the
law. For he has such ends and causes of all his purposes, as that they cannot
but most exactly agree with his nature and justice.

Object. 5. Liberty which is guided of another, cannot be an image of that
liberty which depends on no other, which is in God. But the liberty of man's
will is the image of the liberty which is in God: Therefore the liberty of man's
will depends not, or is not guided by the will of God. We deny the Major.
For seeing that every thing which is like, is not the same with that unto which
it is like; to conceive in some sort the liberty of God, it is enough that
reasonable creatures do work upon deliberation and free election of will,
albeit this election in the creatures is both guided by themselves and others;
in God, by no other then by his own divine wisdom. The image of a thing is
not the thing it self: and the inequality of degrees takes not away the
image, as neither the likeness and similitude of some parts takes away the
dissimilitude of others. Wherefore the liberty of reasonable creatures both is
governed of God, and is notwithstanding a certain image of the liberty which is
in God, because it chooses things once known unto it, by her own, and free, or
voluntary motion. For as of other faculties or properties, so also of liberty,
it is impossible that the degrees should be equal in God and his creatures;
whereas all things are infinite in God, and finite in his creatures. Seeing
therefore wisdom, righteousness, and strength in the creatures, is the image
of the unmeasurable wisdom, righteousness, and power which is in God; a
portion also of liberty agreeable and competent for the creatures may be the
image of liberty which is in God.

Object. 6. If the creature cannot but do that which God will have done, and
cannot do what God will not have done; the will has no active force, but is
wholly passive, especially in our conversion, which is the work of God:
Likewise there is no use of laws, doctrine, discipline, exhortation,
threatenings, punishments, examples, promises, and lastly, of our study and
endeavor. We deny the consequence, The will is not idle, or mere passive when
God works by it; no more then the sun, rain, and such like instruments of
Gods operation.
We deny the consequence, because the first or principal cause being put, the
second or isntrumental cause is not thereby taken away: For as God lightneth
the world and does quicken the earth, brings forth corn, nourishes living
creatures, and yet are not the instruments of Gods working idle, as the sun,
the rain, the earth, husbandmen and food: So God converteth men, rules their
purposes, wills and actions, that is, teaches and moves them to approve and
choose what he will, by laws, by magistrates, by doctrines, by rewards, by
punishments, and lastly, by their own will, all which he uses as instruments,
not as if he could not without these enlighten the mind with notions, and
incline the will; but because it so seems good to him to exercise his power
by these. If they reply, that that would necessarily come to pass so which is
done, and even without them, and therefore they are in vain used. We deny the
Antecedent: Albeit God was able to have wrought what he would without the will,
yet because he will work by the will, the working of the will is not in vain.
For although God were able to move men's wills without these, and if he had so
decreed to do, men doubtless should do without these, what now they do being
moved by these: yet whereas God has once so decreed the effects, as he has
also appointed their second isntrumental and impulsive causes; that verily
shall be done which God will have done, but yet not without middle and second
causes, by whose means and working coming between and interposed, God will
bring his purposes and decrees to pass. Luke 11.13.
He will give his holy Spirit to those who ask him. Whom he has predestined,
Rom 8.30.
them has he also called. If they reply again, Although it be granted that
these are not in vain in those in whom God will show his force, and be
effectual by them; yet in others who are not moved by them there is no use of
them: Ans. 1. Although there were no use, yet because that it is not known unto
us whom God will move or not move, we are to labor in teaching and urging
all, and to commit the event and fruit of our labor to God. Preach the word,
be instant in season, etc. 2 Timothy 4.3^. Ezekiel. 3.19.
If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, he shall die in
his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Ans. 2. The consequence
follows not from the denial of one particular, to the denial of the
general, or from an unsufficient ennumeration: For although many obey not
teaching and admonition, neither are moved with rewards and punishments; yet
this use is great, that by this means their naughtiness and stubbornness is
opened, and so the justice of God made more manifest in their punishment. John
15.24.
If I had not done works among them which none other man did, they had not had
sin. Romans 1.19, 20.
God has showed it unto them, to the intent that they might be without excuse.
We are to God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them
who perish. Repl. 2 Cor. 2.15.
External discipline is called the righteousness of the flesh; Therefore it
depends on man's will. The consequence of this reason is to be denied: which
does not hold from the position or putting of the second cause, to the removing
of the first cause. For as it follows not, The Sun causes day, therefore God
does not: so neither does this follow, The unregenerate perform outward
discipline; therefore they do it, God not causing it in them, nor ruling and
directing them.

Object. 8. They allege testimonies also, Which confirm that men do evil or
good with free will: As, The children of Israel offered free gifts unto the
Lord. I have set before thee life and death, Exo. 25.2. and 35.3. Deuteronomy. 30.19.
How the Scriptures admit liberty of will.
good and evil, blessings and cursings: Therefore choose life, that both thou
and thy seed may live. But in these and all the like places, only that liberty
of man's will is affirmed, which has been spoken of before that is, that the
Will obeys or withstandeth the precedent judgment of the understanding, with
free and voluntary motion, without any constraint; but the government of God is
not at all removed from voluntary actions: For it was showed before, that this
liberty of Will does not stand against that necessity, which by the providence
of God does accompany it.

Object. 9. They bring forth testimonies also, in which necessity is removed
and taken away from voluntary actions. Levit. 22.19. Acts 5.4.
Of these ye shall offer willingly. Whiles it remained, appertained it not to
thee? 1 Cor. 7.37.
And after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? He that stands firm
in his heart, that he has no necessity, but has power over his own will,
etc. As every man wishes in his heart, 2 Cor. 9.7. 1 Pet. 5.2. What necessity
the Scripture removes from voluntary actions.
so let him give. Feed the flock of God, caring for it not by constraint, but
willingly. But these sayings speak of obligation or binding, which sometimes is
signified by the name of necessity, as the freeing from any bond by the name of
liberty, as Levit. 22. Act. 5. partly of coaction or constraint, as 2 Cor. 9.
and 1 Pet. 5. or also of need, as 1 Cor. 7. which yet may be referred to
obligation or bond, by which the Parents are bound to have regard of the
infirmity of their children. So also the power of Will in the same place
signifies the right or power of determining any thing, no obligation or bond
hindering it. But the removing of any obligation or coaction does not at all
take away the unchangeablenesse of voluntary actions, which unchangeablenesse
hangs on the decree of God. For as well his will, who is not bound, neither by
any need or want constrained, is guided and moved by the purpose and counsel
of Gods providence; as his, whom either bond or need constrains to resolve of
any purpose. Wherefore the Scripture denies not, that the will is moved and
ruled by God, when it is not driven by bond, or want, or fear, to do any
thing: for there are besides these, many other reasons and causes by which God
can move it, either to will, or not to will.

How in Scripture God is said not to will that which yet he will. Jer. 7.13,
14. Mat. 23.37.
Object. 10. They bring places of Scripture which testify, that men will, or
do somewhat, God bidding and willing otherwise. Because I have called you, and
ye have not answered, I will do unto this house as I have done to Silo.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children, even as the
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? If then they did
that which God would not, their actions did depend only on their own will, and
not of Gods. Answ. It is a fallacy, concluding that which is in some sort so,
to be in all respects and simply so: For God will not the actions of sinners as
they are sins; but he will them as they are punishments of sins, and the
execution of his just judgment. Wherefore this consequence holds not, God
will not the actions of the wicked, as they are sins; Therefore simply he
will not have them to be done, but they depend only on the will of the wicked:
For if God simply would them not, they could by no means be done. And except
there were somewhat in them, which did agree with his justice and nature, he
would not by reason of his goodness, infinite and passing measure, suffer them
to be done. If they reply, That God would things contrary to these which men
do, as it is said, How often would I have gathered thee? and therefore it is
done only by the will of men whatsoever men do: the same answer serves, that
God would the obedience of all his reasonable creatures toward his Law, as
concerning his commanding and approving it: For he requires it of all, and
binds all to it, and approves it in all, as being agreeable to his nature
and purity; but neither will he always it, nor in all, as concerning his
working and grace, whereby they who are directed and guided, do that which God
approves and requires. The Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, Deuteronomy. 29.4.
and ears to hear, unto this day.

2. Whether there be any liberty in us, and what it is.
THat there is liberty of will in men it is proved: 1. Because man was made to
the Image of God; and free will is part of the Image of God. 2. By places of
Scripture: Let us make man in our Image, according to our likeness. Genesis 1.26.
Syrac.
God made man from the beginning, and left man in the hand of his counsel. 3.
By the definition of that liberty, which agrees to man; for man works upon
deliberation, that is, freely, knowing, desiring, and refusing this or that
object. And because the definition agrees unto man, therefore also does the
thing which is defined agree to him.

The doctrine of Original sin not overthrown by that liberty, which we hold
to be in man.
Object. 1. If there be in man liberty of will, the doctrine of Original sin is
overthrown; for these are contrary: Not to be able to obey God, and, To have
liberty of will. Ans. They are not contrary, because we have liberty to will
and do good only in part, to wit, as we are regenerated by the holy Spirit; but
not in whole and full, neither in that degree in which before the fall we had
it, and shall have it in the life to come. Again, although the unregenerate are
only able to will those things which are evil; yet they will them upon
deliberation, without constraint, even by their own proper and inward motion;
and therefore freely.

Ability to choose as well good as bad, is not necessarily joined with free will.
Object. 2. He that has not ability to choose as well good as bad, has not
free will and arbitrament; but man has not ability to choose as well good as
evil: Therefore he has not free will. Ans. The Major consists of a bad
definition of free will: For the liberty of reasonable creatures consists in
the judgment and deliberation of the mind or understanding, and in the free
assent of the Will; not in a power to will as well good as evil, or contrary.
The good Angels, by reason of the wisdom and rightnesse of their judgment,
and of the great and constant propension or readiness of their will to that
which they know to be good and right, cannot will evil and unjust things, but
only things good and honest; and yet notwithstanding they most freely choose and
do those things which are just: Right so, men by reason of their in bred
ignorance, and corrupt judgment of those things which are to be done, and of
the end, as also by reason of the stubbornness and frowardness of their will,
can will only those things which are evil, which also they follow and pursue
with exceeding willingness and pleasure, until they are regenerated by Gods
Spirit. Object. 3. That is free, which is ruled of none other but of it self
only, or which is bound to none; Man's will is not ruled of it self only, but of
another, and is bound to the Law: Therefore it is not free. Answ. The Major is
true, if it be meant of that liberty which is in God; but false, being meant of
man's liberty: For, man to be ruled of none, is not liberty, but a shameful
barbarity, and a wretched slavery. But the true liberty of the creature is to
be subject unto honest and just laws, and to obey them: It is a power of
living as thou will, according unto the Law of God. Object. 4. That which is a
servant, and in bondage, is not free; but our will is a servant, and in
bondage: The will of man is servant to sin, and yet inclines to sin freely.
Therefore our will is not free. Answ. There is an ambiguity in this reason;
for it affirms that to be simply so, which is but in some respect and sort
so: or the conclusion fetches in more then was in the premises. That which is
in bondage, is not free, that is, not in that respect or consideration as it is
in bondage: Our arbitrament or will is in bondage, to wit, under sin: Therefore
it is not free, that is, from sin, which it is not able to shake off by any
force which it self has, except it be freed and delivered by the grace of God.
But thereof it follows not; therefore simply no way it is free. For it is
free, as touching the objects represented unto it by the understanding: because
it chooses or refuses them being once known; or suspendeth and forbeareth her
action by her own and proper motion, without constraint. The sum of all is:
We grant the conclusion, if free be taken for that which has ability to do
those things which are good and pleasing to God: (for so far is it in servitude
under sin, and has power only to sin) but we deny the whole, if free be taken
for voluntary, or deliberative, which chooses the objects represented unto it
by voluntary motion, not constrained or forced thereto by any external agent.

4. What manner of liberty of will is in man, or how many are the degrees of
free will according to the four estates of men.
IT is farther questioned, and it imports much to the knolwedge of our selves
to enquire, What manner of liberty, or to what actions the liberty which was in
man's will before the fall extended it self: and, Whether it were any or none
at all; and if it were any, In what state it remains after the fall: and
Whether it be restored; and, How, and by what means: and, How far forth it is
restored. Whence it is apparent, that the degrees of free will may most fitly
be considered and distinguished according to the four estates of man: namely,
of man not yet fallen into sin, or fallen; or renewed and restored, or
glorified: that is, what manner, and how great the liberty of man's will was
before the fall; what manner of liberty remains after the fall, before
regeneration: of what condition it is in this life after regeneration, and what
it shall be in the life to come after glorification.

The first degree of liberty before the fall.
The first degree of liberty in man not yet fallen, was a mind lightened with
the perfect and certain knowledge of God, and a will by the proper inclination
and free motion thereof yielding perfect obedience unto God; but yet not so
confirmed in this knowledge and inclination, but that it could decline and
defect from that obedience by her own proper and free motion, if hope or show
of any good to come by defecting were offered unto it: that is, the Will of man
was free to good and evil; or freely chose good, but so, that it had an
ability of choosing evil: so that it might persist in good, God preserving it;
and might also fall into evil, God forsaking it. The former is proved from the
perfection of the Image of God in which man was created; the latter is too
evident by the event of the thing it self, and by testimonies of Scripture*
God has made man righteous; Eccles. 7.3. Romans 11.32.
but they have sought many inventions. God has shut up all in unbelief, that
he might have mercy on all. In which words Paul testifies, that God of
especial deep wisdom confirmed not the first man against the fall, nor
allotted him such a portion of grace, that he might not be seduced by the
Devil, and moved to sin; but that he therefore permitted him to be seduced,
and fall into sin and death, that as many as were saved out of the common
ruin, might be saved by his mercy alone: For, if nothing be done without the
everlasting and most good counsel of God, the fall also of our first Parents
may be so much the less exempted from it, by how much the more God had
precisely and exactly determined from everlasting concerning his chief work,
even mankind, what he would have done.

The creature can by no means retain that righteousness and conformity with
God except God, who gave it, keep it; neither can be lose it, if God will have
it kept: James 1.17.
according to these sayings, Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from
above, John 1.4.
and comes down from the Father of lights. In it was life, and the life was
the light of men, which lightneth every man that comes into the world. Take
not away thy holy Spirit from me. Psalm. 51.11. and 104.29. 2 Timothy 2.19.
If thou hide thy face they are troubled. The foundation of God remains sure,
and has this seal: The Lord knows who are his. And of our confirmation and
establishment in the life to come: Mat. 22.30.
In the resurrection they are as the Angels of God in heaven. As then man could
not have fallen except God had withdrawn his hand, and not so forcibly and
effectually affected his will, and ruled it in temptation; so neither could he
persist in integrity, when he was tempted, except God had sustained and
confirmed him, even as he confirmed the blessed Angels, that they should not
defect and fall away together with the other Apostates. Seeing therefore such
was the first man's estate, from which he wittingly and willingly fell; the
crime and fault of sin neither can, nor ought to be laid on God, but on man
only, albeit notwithstanding he fell by the eternal counsel and will of God.

The causes of humane reason refuted, which lay the fault of the first sin on
God.
Humane reason fancying her own wit, deriving the blame of sin from her self,
when she hears these things, is troubled, and keeps a stir, and feigneth
many absurdities to follow, except such a liberty of doing well or evil be
given to man, that his perseverance or falling depend of his own will alone:
First, That God was the cause of that first sin, and by consequent, of all
other sins, as which came all of the first fall. Likewise, That he was the
cause of the sin of the Devil seducing man: especially seeing the first sin
is not to be accounted a punishment, as other sins: for no sin had gone
before, which should be punished with that sin: and therefore, seeing God
would not will that as a punishment, he may seem to have willed it as a sin.
Answ. But although there be nothing to the contrary why sin may not be the
punishment even of it self: whereas in the same action both the creature, How
the first sin might be a punishment unto it self, and to that end permitted of
God.
depriving himself of that conformity which he had with God, might sin, and
God depriving him of that good, which he of his own accord casts away, might
punish, as it is said of covetousness, There is nothing worse then when one
envieth himself: and this is a reward of his wickedness. Yet notwithstanding
there are other ends besides punishment, Syrac. 14.
for which it was convenient for God to will the action both of the Devil and
of man. God would the temptation of man, which was done by the Devil, Other
ends and causes why God would the action, though not the sin, both of Satan
and Adam.
as a trial of man, by which it might be made manifest, whether he would
persevere in true piety toward God: even as God himself did tempt Abraham
immediately, when he commanded him to do that which he yet would not have
done. God would that assent of man, by which he did yield unto the Devil
against the will of God, as a manifestation of the weakness and feebleness of
the creature, which cannot keep the gifts wherewith he was adorned by God,
without Gods special instinct and aid. Likewise, he would have this done as
an occasion or way, to manifest his justice and severity in punishing, and his
mercy in saving sinners: as Exodus 9. Romans 9. Now God, respecting and
willing these things in that persuasion and enticement of Satan, and in man's
assenting and yielding thereunto, did notwithstanding all this while hate the
sin of both; and therefore did not will it, neither cause it, but justly
permitted and suffered it to be done: For first, Whatsoever things God does,
they are always just. 2. He was not bound unto man to preserve and confirm
him in goodness. 3. He would have man to be tempted and to fall, that he might
try man's perseverance in true piety toward God. 4. That he might manifest the
weakness of the creature. 5. That his fall might be an occasion and way to
manifest Gods justice and mercy. These things very well agree with the nature
and law of God. Now that they say, That man did not fall of his own free will,
except he had equal power as well to persist in obedience, as to fall: the
consequence is not of force, because they reason from an ill definition of man's
liberty, which they imagine cannot stand, if it be determined and ruled by God.
But the whole Scripture witnesses, that it suffices for the liberty of the
creature, if the Will be inclinable of it self to the contrary of that which
it chooses, and does of it own accord choose that which the mind either likes,
or disliketh.

And hence also is that dissolved that they say, That man is not justly
punished of God, if he could not avoid his fall: For he that sins willingly,
or does draw on himself the necessity of sinning, is justly punished, his own
conscience accusing him; neither is it unjust that he is forsaken of God, and
deprived of the grace of the holy Ghost, who wittingly and willingly casts it
away, and that he suffer the punishment of this his ingratitude and contempt of
God, although he cannot, God forsaking him, do otherwise: For none is forsaken
of God, except he be willing to be forsaken: As, It must needs be that offenses
shall come, Mat. 18.7.
but woe be unto that man by whom the offense comes.

Gods denial of grace no cruelty, but a way to greater mercy.
At length they say, That God is made cruel, envious, and far from bounty and
mercy, if he did not bestow that grace upon man, without which he knew man
could not stand or consist in temptation; and yet would have him tempted of the
Devil. But these and the like tauntings and reproachings of the works and
judgments of God, out of doubt are joined with great impiety, because they
over-turn the ground and principle, which is the first degree and step to
godliness and reverence toward God, that is, that whatsoever God does, it is
good and just, and not disagreeing from his nature and law, whether the reason
thereof be known unto us, or unknown: Wherefore this answer should suffice,
that it disagreeth not from the mercy and goodness of God, whatsoever he does.
But there is not want also of other answers: As, that denial of grace does not
disagree, but very well agrees with the mercy and bounty of God, when God will
have this to be an occasion of bestowing a greater grace and benefit; as it is
apparent in the fall and restoring of man again, that that is not disagreeing
from mercy, or any other virtue, which does appertain to the manifesting of
the glory of the chief good, which is God: For although it be mercy not to
rejoice in the ruin or destruction of his creature, yet mercy ought not to
fight with justice: now it is just, that more regard should be had of the
chief good, that is, God (both by himself, and by others) then of all
creatures. Wherefore very well do agree together in God, his mercy, which will
not the death of a sinner; and his justice which suffers mankind to fall,
that by his fall the severity and goodness of God may appear.

The second degree of liberty after the fall.
The second degree of free will is in man fallen, borne of corrupt parents, and
as yet not regenerate. In this state the Will verily does work freely, but it
is carried to evil only, and can do naught else but sin. The reason is,
because the privation of the knowledge of God in the understanding ensued on
the fall, and the want of inclination in the heart and will unto obedience; in
whose stead blindness and averseness from God succeeded, which man cannot shake
off, unless he be regenerated by the holy Ghost. Briefly, it is the fitness
and pronenesse in man after his fall, being unregenerate, to choose only evil.
Of this blindness and corruption of man's nature after the fall it is said:
Genes. 6.5. Jer. 13.23. Syrac. 17.14. Mat. 7.18. Ephesians. 2.1, 3. 2 Cor. 3.5.
All the thoughts of man are only evil. Can the Blackmoore change his skin?
etc. Every man from his youth is given to evil, and their stony hearts cannot
become flesh. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. We were dead in our
sins: by nature the sons of wrath. We are not able of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves. With these testimonies concurreth every man's
experience, and the weary sense of conscience, which proclaims, that we have
no liberty and pronenesse of will to do that which is good; but too great
freedom and readiness to practice evil, Jer. 31.18.
unless we be regenerate: as it is said, Convert thou me, and I shall be
converted: Wherefore there is no love of God in us by nature; and therefore we
have by nature no readiness to obey God.

The liberty which is in man now after his fall, and not yet regenerated and
recovered, is the very bondage of sin. Romans 6.16.
This liberty of the unregenerate is the most wretched servitude of sin, and
very death in sins, whereof the Scripture teaches in many places: Whosoever
commits sin is the servant of sin. Know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give
your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether
it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? Promising unto
them liberty, and are themselves servants of corruption. Object. 1. Nothing
more easy, says Erasmus, then to keep a man's hand from stealing. Again,
Socrates, Aristides, and many others have showed and exercised many virtues:
Therefore they had free will to do good before regeneration. Answ. This is an
ill definition of a good work and free will to do good, which is a power of
yielding obedience pleasing to God. 2 Pet. 2.19. Free Will to outward good
actions, without an inward faith and obedience, is not free will to good.
The unregenerate steal within by their lust and desire, though not by outward
fact: that the unregenerate contain their hands, that is, observe outward
discipline, this is also Gods benefit, who by his general providence governs
also the hearts of the wicked, and bridleth their inbred wickedness, that it
break not forth, and affect that which it would. But hereof it follows not,
that it is easy to begin inward obedience, or that to contain their hands
from stealing is simply a good work. Neither are these good works before God,
that is, pleasing unto God, which have not joined with them faith and inward
obedience: But faith and inward obedience could not be in them, because they
were not regenerated. Repl. 1. The works of the Law are good; Heathen men did
the works of the Law: Therefore the works of the Heathen were good: And by
consequence, Heathen men also, or unregenerate, had liberty of doing good. We
answer to the Major by a distinction: The outward actions good in themselves,
are made evil by want of an inward faith.
The works of the Law are good; true, by themselves: but they are made ill by
an accident; and so are the works of the Law made ill by an accident of the
unregenerate: because they are not done by them for that end, and after that
sort which God commanded. Repl. 2. There remain also many true notions in the
minds of the unregenerate concerning God and his will, and the right ordering
of their life: Wherefore the Will working according to these notions, and the
direction of true reason, does not sin, but works well. Ans. 1. Those legal
notions, whether they belong to the first, The remnants of spiritual life in
the unregenerate are not sufficient to make their works good.
or to the second Table of the Decalogue, they are not perfect and sufficient:
And therefore God cannot be rightly worshipped, according to these remains or
relics of spiritual light, except there come thereunto the knowledge of God,
and his divine will out of the Word of God, which is delivered to the Church.
2. Men not brought up in the Church, do patch many false things with these
true imprinted notions of nature, and do heap sins upon errors. 3. Such is the
frowardness of the will and affections, even against the judgment of rightly
informed and ruled reason, that they obey not so much as those natural
notions, much less those which are to be adjoined out of the Word of God.
Wherefore also are those complaints even of the Heathen: I see the better, and
I like them, but I follow the worse: and that accusation of the Apostle, Romans
1.18.
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withold the truth in unrighteousness:
wherefore those notions, without the grace of the holy Ghost, do not engender
true godliness in them.

The praise and commendation which is given of God to our good works, does not
prove, that they proceed from our selves, but rather are his gifts. Romans 9.30.
Object. 2. God commends us for good works: Therefore good works are in our
power and will. Answ. This is a fallacy, concluding of that which is no cause,
as if it were a cause. God commends our good works, not because they are or
can be performed of us, without our renewing by the holy Ghost; but because
they are agreeable unto his Law, and good and pleasing unto him: yea, because
they are his own gifts and effects in us, and we his instruments, unto whom he
communicates himself and his blessings: according as it is said, Whom he
predestined, them also he called. Repl. Who does not in such sort work well,
as that it is in his own power to do either well or ill, he deserves
neither commendation nor reward; but those good things which men do, are not
in their power and arbitrament: Therefore they deserve not either commendation
or rewards for their virtues. Answ. If the question be of desert, we grant the
whole argument: For it is true, that no creature can deserve or merit ought at
Gods hand; neither ought the praise, or commendation, or glory be given to us,
as if the good which we do were of our selves, it being God which works
whatsoever is good in all. But if they say, that neither reward or commendation
is justly given, more is in the conclusion then was in the premises: For God,
to testify that righteousness pleases him, and to show forth more and more
his bounty and goodness, does adorn it with free rewards.

How God is said to wish our conversion and good works, and yet they not
thereby proved to be in our power. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Luke 19.41.
Obj. 3. What God does wish and will to be done of us, that we are able to
perform by our selves; but God does wish and will our conversion, and our good
works: Therefore we are able to perform them by our selves: And so
consequently, we need not the operation and working of the holy Ghost. Answ.
This reason is a fallacy, deceiving by the ambiguity or the word wish: For in
the Major proposition it is taken, as it uses properly to signify: in the
Minor not so. God is said to wish, by a figure of speech called Anthropopathy,
making God to be affected after the order of men: and therefore the kind of
affirmation is diverse in the Major, and in the Minor. But God is said to wish
in two respects: 1. In respect of his commanding and inviting. Two ways God is
said to wish any thing.
2. In respect of his love toward his creatures, and in respect of the torment
of them that perish, but not in respect of the execution of his justice. Repl.
1. He it is that inviteth others, and is delighted with their well-doing: it
follows thereof, that their well-doing is in their own power, and not in
his* who inviteth them; but God is he who inviteth us, and is delighted with
our well-doing: Therefore it is in our selves to do well. Answ. We deny the
Minor, because it is not enough that God inviteth us: but our will also to do
well must be adjoined, which we cannot have but from God only. God therefore
does wish our conversion, and does invite all unto it, that is, he requires
obedience toward his Law of all, he likes it in all, and for the love which
he bears unto his creature, he wishes nothing more then that all perform
it, and all be saved; but yet a will to perform it they only have, whom God
does regenerate by his Spirit: Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your
eyes: Deuteronomy. 29.4.
yet the Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear unto this day.

Object. 4. That which cannot be avoided, is not sin; The unregenerate cannot
avoid sin: Therefore their works are not to be accounted sins. Answ. We deny
the Major: The inevitableness of an ill action does noth take away sinfulness
from it.
For it is enough to make sin, if it be voluntary. And how much the more
necessarily men sin, with so much the greater will they sin. They cannot
therefore pretend necessity to cloak their fault. This does the example of the
Devil prove, who sins so much the more grievously, how much the more
necessarily he sins, wittingly and willingly striving against God, and
contumeliously despiting him. But they do vainly and wickedly cavil, That the
justice of God does not impute those sins to the Devil, which he necessarily
does commit after his corruption. Likewise, That the Devil is now finally and
without hope of pardon cast away of God, but men have power yet in this life
either to persist in sin, or to forsake it; and therefore those actions only of
theirs are sins, in which sin cannot be avoided: For God is wroth with all sins
of men and Devils, and punishes all sins with eternal pains, or with
equivalent punishment unto eternal. Neither does therefore necessary and
inevitable or unavoidable sin cease to be sin, for that there is, or is not
hope of obtaining recovery and pardon: For, whatsoever is committed against the
Law of God, that is sin, whether it can be avoided, or not avoided, whether he
who sins, forsakes his sin, or persisteth in it.

Object. 5. They who cannot but sin, are unjustly punished; but the
unregenerate cannot but sin: They who necessarily sin, are justly punished,
because they do it voluntarily.
Therefore God does unjustly punish them. Answ. They who necessarily sin, are
unjustly punished, except that necessity come voluntarily, and by their own
will. But men have drawn upon them that necessity voluntarily in the first
Parents, and themselves also do willingly sin: Therefore God does justly
punish them.

Object. 6. They who have not equal and like ability to choose good or evil,
must needs be either all good, or all evil, The unregenerate have not like
ability to choose good and evil, but only liberty to choose evil: Therefore
they must needs be all alike evil. Answ. If the argument be understood of
humane nature, as it is without the grace of the holy Spirit, it is wholly to
be granted: for it is certain, that all men before regeneration are alike, and
equally estranged from faith and conversion; yea, neither would they observe
outward discipline and behavior, except God bridled them, that they should not
commit outrage. Genesis 20.6.
I kept thee, that thou should not sin against me. But if they conclude,
that all must needs continue alike evil, when the holy Spirit moves and
inclines their hearts and minds to conversion, there is more in the conclusion
then in the former propositions: For as it is impossible, that they should be
converted whom God moves not; so it is not only possible, but also necessary,
that they whom he vouchsafes the grace of regeneration should be converted:
All that the Father gives me, John 6.37. Hos. 13.9. Isa. 59.2.
shall come unto me. Repl. It is said, Thy destruction comes of thy self,
Israel. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God: Therefore the
cause of this difference, that some are converted, and some not, is in the will
of man, and not in the bestowing or withdrawing of Gods grace: that is, before
the grace of regeneration is bestowed, so are some better then others, as that
they take that grace which others refuse. But Hoseas adds an answer: In me
only is thy help. He shows that our safety does so depend on God, that we
cannot have it without his singular mercy and grace: Wherefore destruction
comes of those that perish, as concerning the merit of punishment; but this
takes not away the superior cause, that is, Gods reprobation: For the last
cause takes not away the first cause. The same is answered to that of Esaiah:
Sins separate the chosen from God for a time, the reprobate for ever; but yet
the divine purpose and counsel of God going before, by which God decreed to
adjoyne those unto him, or to cast them from him, whom it seemed good to him so
to deal with. Romans 9.18.
He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

Object. 7. He that has no liberty to do good, and eschew evil, is in vain
pressed with precepts and doctrine; but the unregenerate have not liberty to
do good works and omit evil: Therefore obedience is in vain commanded them.
Ans. The Major is to be denied; for when God does suffer his will to be
denounced to the wicked, The Word of God not without good cause declared to the
unregenerate.
either he does together lighten them, and move them within by his Spirit to
obey his voice; or pricketh them with the pricks of conscience, either to
observe external order and discipline, or not so much to persecute the known
truth, or he does discover their hypocrisy and madness oppugning it; or he
makes manifest their weakness and ignorance, and at length makes them
inexcusable in this life, and in the last judgment. Repl. 1. Whose conversion
and obedience depends of the grace of God, he has no need of exhortations
and precepts; but in them also who are converted, their conversion depends of
grace: Therefore precepts are vain and needless. We make answer to the Major
by a distinction. If conversion depend of grace, so that the Spirit does not
adjoyne doctrine as an instrument, whereby to teach their minds, and move their
hearts, let this verily be granted: although, as has been before said, there
remain as yet other uses of doctrine. But when it has pleased God by this
instrument both to lighten, and move, or incline men's minds to faith and
obedience, the Major is false: For it is written, Romans 1.16.
The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.
Repl. 2. It is not mercy, but cruelty to propound precepts and doctrine to
those who are denied the grace of obeying, and who are by it more hardened, and
more grievously condemned: God therefore does not this, who is exceeding
merciful. We deny again the Major: 1. Because Gods exceeding mercy does not
take away his justice. 2. Because he so will have them to be made inexcusable
by the preaching of his heavenly doctrine, as that in the mean season he
rejoices not at their destruction and punishment: But for the manifestation of
his justice, (whereof, that greater regard should be had then of all the
creatures, even Gods justice it self requires) he will that which otherwise
he abhors in his mercy and goodness toward all creatures, Ezekiel. 18.32.
I will not the death of him that dies.

Object. 8. He that prepares himself to receive grace, by which he may do
good work^, 4. Readiness of mind to receive g^^c^, is not before conversion,
but after. 1 Samuel 7.3. Act. 10.4.
he now does works pleasing to God; but men prepare themselves to receive
grace: Therefore also before regeneration they do works pleasing to God. We
deny the Major, which yet these places seem to prove: Prepare your heart unto
the Lord. The prayers and alines of Cornelius before he was taught and baptized
of Peter, come up into remembrance before God. But in these and the like
places, to prepare, or to have in readiness, or to confirm the heart, is not
to do works before the conversion, by which God may be invited to bestow the
grace of regeneration upon men; but it signifies, that a ready and firm will
of obeying God, and persevering in true godliness, is showed of those which
are already regenerated and converted: For the people of Israel had repented,
when Samuel said this unto them. For there goes before in the same place, All
the house of Israel lamented and followed the Lord. Act. 10.2.
Likewise Cornelius, before he was taught of Peter, that Jesus was the Messiah,
is said to have been then godly and serving God, and so called and invocated on
him, that his prayers pleased God, and were heard.

Albeit good works are said ^o be ours, ver^^t follows ^ot, that we are ^n
horse of then, but the ins^^uments whereby the author works them.
Object. 9. The works which are not in our power to perform, are not our
works, neither are truly and properly said to be done by us; but good works
are said to be ours, and to be done by us: Therefore it is in our will to d^
them, or not to do them. We d^ny the Major: For they are not therefore said to
be ours, or to be done by us, because they are of our selves; but because God
works them in us, as in the subject, and by us as instruments: and that so,
as our will does them of her own proper motion, although not except it
berenewed, rais^d, and guided by the holy Ghost. For being regenerated and
moved by him, we are not idle, but he works in us, we our selves also work
well, and that freely without constraint: For by regeneration the Will is not
taken away, but corrected, as which before would only that which is evil,
will now that which is good. Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them.

God helps us in working and yet begins our working in us.
Object. 10. He that is helped by another in conversion and in beginning good
works does somewhat of them himself, before he is helped: For he that has
help, begins the action; God helps us: wherefore it is of our selves to
begin good works. The Minor is proved, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief: the
Spirit helps our infirmity. Mar. 9.24. Romans 8.26.
Ans. Nothing can follow in conclusion of mere particular propositions: For
the Major here is not universal, seeing not only he may help who begins a
work, but he also in whom it is begun, and accomplished by another. Now so does
God help us, that himself does first breed and engender in us true knowledge
of him, and an inclination to obey him and the beginnings of good motions, and
does increase also and perfect the same begun by him. But he is therefore said
to help us, because he does so work in us, that we are not idle, but work
while he works: and yet we are able no more to persist, or to bring it to an
end, without him, then to begin it: And therefore we, being inclined, moved,
and governed by him, will also of our selves of our own accord, and are able
to work well, and do work well, that is, because God works good things not
only in us, but also by us, as joynt-workers with him: Phil. 1.6. and 2.13.
He that has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ. It is God who works in you both the will and the deed, even of
his good pleasure. Repl. The beginning, and proceeding, and accomplishment of
conversion is the free work and gift of God: Therefore man's will, when he is
converted, does nothing, but is mere passive. There should be no use also (as
has been said before) of laws, discipline, doctrine, exhortations, and such
like. Answ. We deny the consequence of this reason: because the reason
proceeds from the putting of the first cause, to the removing of the second
or isntrumental cause. Again, it is a mere fallacy, concluding that to be
simply so, which is but in some respect so: For, 1. The Will, as also the whole
man renewed, is both the subject and instrument cooperating and jointly
working of his conversion, No general preventing grace in us, which we have in
our own power to me or refuse; but the special grace of the Spirit only
works in us conversion the want whereof causes our continuance in sin.
that is, is converted of God, and does convert himself: For the action of God
converting and enclining the Will, goes before the assent of the Will, not in
time, but in nature only. 2. The holy Ghost regenerating and converting us,
works in us both new qualities, in receiving whereof we are mere passive,
and work not our selves (for we cannot make to our selves a fleshly heart of a
stony, and God works in us even to will) and also new actions, in working
which we are both passive and active: For we, being regenerated by Gods Spirit,
are not stocks, but joynt-workers with him, because we are made of unwilling
and unfit to do good, willing and fit, and able to do good. 3. The holy Ghost
works this regeneration not without precepts, doctrine and other means, but
by them; because it so pleased him. Wherefore they cannot be neglected without
showing an impious and wicked contempt of God himself. But here especially our
adversaries will reply again, that indeed we cannot be converted to God, except
his grace prevent us, and move us to conversion: but this grace, preventing
those who are to be converted, is so far given to all, as it is in themselves,
or in their own power to use it or refuse it, that is, to be turned from, or
to persist in sin. And then at length, they who have used rightly that first
and universal grace preventing all men, that is, have by their liberty applied
themselves to choose that good, unto the choosing whereof they are solicited, but
yet not effectually moved of God; unto these is given also the subsequent and
joynt-working grace, so that what they could not have performed without this,
this now coming between, they may do, that is, may truly turn unto God, and
persevere. This they prove by sentences of Scripture, which seem to hang the
grace of God upon the condition of man's will: Zach. 1.3. Isa. 1.19. Jer. 7.13.
Turn to me, and I will turn to you. If ye consent, ye shall eat the good
things of the earth. I called you, and ye answered not. But it is certainly
manifest out of the Scripture, that neither any man can be converted, except
the holy Ghost be given him; neither is he given to all men of God, but to
those only, whom he of his free mercy vouchsafes this benefit: so that the
cause is not to be sought in men, but in God alone, why these, rather then
they, believe Gods voice, and are turned unto him; and therefore all truly
might be converted, as concerning the liberty and power of God, and the
changeable nature of man's will: but not, both in respect of the averting of
their nature from God, and of that inbred corruption in all, which may indeed
be taken away by God, but cannot without his working be laid aside or put off
by us; and also in respect of the unchangeable decree of God, whereby God has
determined to leave some in sin and destruction, into which he has permitted
them to fall: and therefore either not to lighten their minds with his
knowledge, or not to renew their hearts and wills with new inclinations or
powers, nor effectually to move them to yield obedience to the known truth.
Neither do the testimonies teach otherwise which the adversaries allege: God
wills us to turn to him, that he may turn to us, that is, may turn away and
mitigate our punishments, and bestow his benefits upon us; not as if our
conversion were in our own power, but because he will effectuate and confirm
these precepts and commandments in the hearts of his chosen. He promises good
things to those who will obey him, not as if it were in our power to will
obedience, but because he will stir up by his promises that will in us. He
charge the stubborn with their wickedness, not as if it were in their own
power to put it off; but because he will, by accusing their wilful
stubbornness, take away all excuse from them when he judges them. Again,
they urge, The will of receiving Gods grace goes not before faith and
conversion, but is part and the beginning thereof. Isa. 55.1.
Although no man can be converted to do well without grace, yet not only the
consequent gifts and benefits of God, but the first grace also of his holy
Spirit, whereby we are converted, all who are willing may have, seeing God
promises that he will give to all that will: As, All ye that thirst, come to
the waters; but all may will: Therefore all may be converted. We deny the
Minor. Repl. The will of receiving goes before the receiving it self:
Therefore they who as yet have not grace, may have will to receive it. We deny
the Antecedent, as concerning the grace of conversion: for no man can desire
this, except he have the beginning of it in him. For, It is God who works in
us both to will, and to do. Phil. 2.13.
Wherefore the will of believing and repenting is the very beginning of faith
and conversion, the which whosoever have true and unfeigned, it is increased
and perfected in them, as it is said, He that has begun this good work in
you, will perform it.

Object. 11. They gather also and collect these sayings, which promise Gods
bounty with a condition of our obedience: As, If thou will enter into life,
Mat. 19.17. Luke 10.21. Gods promises not unprofitable, though made with an
impossible condition to the unregenerate, which yet is made possible to the
regenerate by Christ.
keep the commandments. Likewise, Do this, and thou shall live. Out of these
thus they reason: A promise which has adjoined an impossible condition, is
unprofitable, and mocketh him unto whom it is made; but Gods promises have an
impossible condition: Therefore they are all uncertain, yea never to be
performed and nothing but a mockery. Ans. We deny the Major: For the promise,
even in those who receive it not, has this use, that it may be made manifest,
that God does not rejoice at the destruction of any, and that he is just in
punishing, when as he does so invite them unto him, who through their
ingratitude contemn and refuse Gods promises. 2. We distinguish, that unto them
indeed the promise is unprofitable, to whom the condition adjoined is never
made possible through faith and grace of justification by Christ, and of
regeneration of the holy Ghost; but so it is made possible unto the elect:
Wherefore God deludeth neither, but earnestly declares to both of them what
they ought to be unto whom he gives everlasting life, and how unworthy they
are of Gods benefits; and shall never be partakers of them, unless by the free
mercy of God they be exempted from destruction. Further also he allureth more
and more, and confirms the faithful to yield obedience. Lastly, they cite all
other sayings, which seem to place conversion and good works in the will of
men: I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes. Psalm. 119.
He that is begotten of God keeps himself. 1 John 5.18.
These and the like sayings attribute the work of God unto men: 1. Because they
are not only the object, but the instrument also of Gods working, Two causes
why the works of God are attributed to men.
which the holy Spirit exercises in them. 2. Because they are such an
instrument, which being renewed and moved by the holy Spirit, does also it self
work together, and move it self: For there is not one effect ascribed unto the
holy Ghost, and another to man's will, but the same to both; unto the holy
Ghost, as the principal cause, unto man's will, as a secondary and
isntrumental cause.

The third degree of liberty in man regenerated.
The third degree of liberty belongs to man in this life, as he is
regenerated, but yet not glorified; or in whom regeneration is begun, but not
accomplished or perfected. In this state the Will uses her liberty not only to
work evil, as in the second degree; but partly to do ill, and partly to do
well. And this is to be understood two ways: 1. That some works of the
regenerate are good and pleasing to God, which are done of them according to
Gods commandment; but some evil and displeasing to God, which they do
contrary to the commandment of God: which is manifest by the infinite fallings
of holy men. 2. That even those good works which the converted do in this
life, albeit they please God by reason of Christ's satisfaction imputed unto
them; yet are they not perfectly good, that is, agreeable to Gods Law, but
unperfect, and stained with many sins: and therefore they cannot, if they be
beheld without Christ, stand in judgment, and escape damnation. The cause of
the renewing and beginning of this liberty in man to good, is the Spirit
working by the Will.
The cause for which the Will begins to work well, is this: Because by the
singular grace or benefit of the holy Spirit man's nature is renewed by the Word
of God, there is kindled in the mind a new light and knowledge of God, in the
heart new affections, in the will new inclinations, agreeing with the Law of
God, and the will is forcibly and effectually moved to do, according to these
notions and inclinations, and so it recovereth both the power of willing that
which God approves, and the use of that power, and begins to be conformed
and agreeable to God, and to obey him. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that
thou may love the Lord thy God with all thine heart. Ezekiel. 36.26.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your body* and I will give you an heart
of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes. Act. 16.14.
The Lord opened the heart of Lidia, that she should attend to those things
which were spoken of Paul. 1 Cor. 3.17. Why the Will in the regenerate uses
liberty not only to good, but to evil also.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. The causes for which the
will uses her liberty not only to the choosing of good, but of evil also, are
in number two: 1. For that in this life the renewing of our nature is not
perfect, neither as concerning the knowledge of God, neither as concerning our
inclination to obey God; and therefore in the best men, while they live here,
remain still many and great sins both Original, and others. 2. For that the
regenerate be not always ruled by the holy Spirit, but are sometimes forsaken
of God, either for to try, or to chastise and humble them; but yet are
re-called to repentance, that they perish not. Of the first cause it is said,
Romans 7.18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will
is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good. Mar.
9.24.
I believe, Lord, but help thou my unbelief. Of the second cause it is said,
Psalm. 51.11.
Take not thy holy Spirit from me. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from
thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants
sake. The Lord our God be with us; Isa. 63.17. 1 Kin. 8.57.
that he forsake us not, neither leave us. Therefore the regenerate man in this
life does always go either forward, or backward; neither continues in the
same state.

Hence are deduced these two conclusions: 1. As man corrupted, before he be
regenerated, cannot begin new obedience pleasing and acceptable unto God; so he
that is regenerated in this life, although he begin to obey God, (that is, has
some inclination and purpose to obey God according to all his commandments,
and that unfeigned, though yet weak and struggling with evil inclinations,
affections, and desires; and therefore there shine in his life and manners a
desire of piety toward God and his neighbor) yet can he not yield whole and
perfect obedience to God: because, neither his knowledge, nor his love to God
is so great and so sincere, as the Law of God requires; and therefore is not
such righteousness as may stand before God, according to that saying, Psalm.
143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that
lives be justified. 2. They who are converted, can no farther retain good
inclinations, neither thoughts and affections, and a good purpose to persevere
and go forward therein, then as the holy Spirit works and preserves these
in them: For, if he guide and rule them, they judge and do aright; but if he
forsake them, they are blind, they wander, slip, and fall away: yet so, that
they perish not, but repent and are saved, if so be they were ever truly
converted. 1 Cor. 4.7. Phil. 1.6. and 2.13.
What have thou that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why
rejoycest thou as if thou had not received it? I am persuaded, that he who
has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. It is God that works in you both the will and the deed, John 15.5.
even of his good pleasure. Without me you can do nothing. Who shall also
confirm you to the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Cor. 1.8. and 10.13.
God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be
able, but will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to
bear it. 1 Pet. 1.5.
You are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation.

This doctrine, that the regenerate neither perfectly nor continually can obey
God, and that, Reasons to prove the former doctrine.
as the beginning, so the continuance of our conversion depends of God, is
confirmed, besides these testimonies, by evident reasons: as, Jam. 1.17.
that is, our conformity with God, and perseverance therein.

Ephesians. 2.10.
God from everlasting did decree: We are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them.
Jer. 1.5.
Before I formed thee in the womb I knew thee, and before thou came out of
the womb I sanctified thee. Wherefore they are able to do neither more, nor
less of such works, then God has decreed to work in them by his Spirit.

All these things works even the self same Spirit, distributing to every man
severally as he will. 2 Cor. 12.11. Ephesians 4.7. 2 These. 3.2.
Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. All men have not faith. Now perseverance in true godliness, and a will
and desire to persevere, and the craving of the confirmation, strengthening and
aid of the holy Spirit, are no less the gift of the holy Spirit, then
regeneration it self, and faith, and conversion, as has been showed before.
Wherefore to persevere in faith, and conversion, is no more in our power, then
to believe, and be converted.

John 10.28.
No man shall pluck my sheep out of my hand: Therefore our perseverance is not
in our own power and arbitrament, but in Gods.



But against the former sentence, to wit, that even the best works of the
Saints in this life are not perfectly good; and therefore are not able to stand
in the judgment of God, and to please God, but by the imputation of Christ's
satisfaction, the Papists oppose themselves.

Object. 1. The Works of Christ and the holy Spirit, say they, cannot be
impure, and not please God. The good works of the regenerate, Christ works
in them by his Spirit. Wherefore it is necessary, and must needs be, that they
are pure and perfect, and please God, even as they are considered in
themselves. For God cannot condemn his own works, although he examine them
according to the rigor of his judgment. The good work^ of the regenerate are
not perfect, so long as themselves, who work jointly with the spirit, are not
perfect.
We answer to the Major: The works of God are pure, and worthy no
reprehension, as the works of God, and such as God works; but not as they
are depraved by the creature: neither are they always pure, which are not the
works of God only, but the creatures also: For these, as they are of God, are
void of all fault: but as they are done by the creatures, they are good also,
and without reprehension, if the creature, by which God works them, be
perfectly conformable to the will of God: but impure and unperfect, and
according to the sentence of the Law, subject to damnation, if the creature, by
which God works them, be corrupt and vicious, that is, depraved by the not
knowing of God, and by averting from God.

Object. 2. God cannot condemn the members of his Son. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.
The regenerate are the members of Christ: Therefore, even as they are
considered of themselves, they and their works cannot be condemned in the
judgment of God. Answ. There is more in the conclusion then in the premises.
The imperfections of the regenerate and their works are blotted out, and
pardoned in Christ.
For this only follows, that the Saints cannot be condemned: but this comes
in respect of Christ his satisfaction imputed to them, not in respect of their
own obedience, which pleases God, not because it perfectly agrees with the
Law, but because the defects and faults which cleave unto it, are pardoned
through Christ.

Object. 3. Christ in judgment will render unto every one according to his
works: But the severity of Gods justice does not render good according to
works, which are not perfectly good: Wherefore the works of Saints are so
perfect, as that they cannot be condemned in the judgment of God. We answer
unto the Major: The justice of God does not render good, but according unto
perfect works, if he judge legally, according to the covenant of perfect
obedience toward the law. But he renders good also according to the imperfect
works, How Christ will render unto every one according to his works.
and such as deserve damnation, except the sin that cleaves unto them be
pardoned, when as he judges according to the Gospel, that is, not according to
the covenant of works, or our own obedience, which should satisfy the law,
but according to the covenant of faith, or of the righteousness of Christ
applied unto us by faith; and yet according to works as according to the
tokens or testimonies of faith, from which they proceed, and which they, as
effects thereof, do show to be in men.

Object. 4. The Scripture in many places ascribes perfection of good works to
Saints, even in this life, and says that they are perfect, and did walk with
their whole and perfect heart before God. I have sought thee with my whole
heart. Psalm. 119.10. Psalm 119.2. Genes. 6.9. 2 Chro. 15.17. Matthew. 5.48. In
what sense the Scripture sometimes ascribes perfection of works to the
regenerate in this life.
And in the same Psalm, Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek
him with their whole heart. Noah was a just and upright man in his time. The
heart of Asa was perfect in all his days. Be ye perfect, as your Father in
heaven is perfect. Answ. First, these and the like speeches speak of that
perfection which is not of degrees, but of parts, or of the integrity and
sincerity of the obedience begun in them. Perfection of degrees, or obedience
perfect in degrees, is that which has not only all the parts of obedience, but
that degree also which the law requires in us. Such a perfection have not the
regenerate in this life: They have indeed all the parts of obedience begun in
them, but yet weakly; so that they are here daily more and more perfected, but
attain not to the chief and due degree thereof, until they enjoy the life to
come. The perfection of parts, is the integrity of obedience, or whole
obedience begun according to the whole law; or it is a desire and endeavor to
obey God, and withstand corrupt lusts, according not to some only, but to all
the commandments of his law. The perfection of sincerity, is a desire or study
of obedience and godliness, not feigned, but true and earnest, albeit somewhat
be wanting to the parts, as touching the degree. This perfection, to wit, both
the integrity and sincerity of obedience, is in all the regenerate. For unto
them it is proper to submit themselves to the commandments of God, even to all
without exception, and to begin in this life all the parts of true godliness
or obedience. This is called also the justice of a good conscience, because it
is a necessary effect of faith, and pleases God through Christ. And albeit in
all men, even in the most holy, much hypocrisy remains, as it is said, Romans
3 4.
Every man is a liar: yet there is a great difference between them who are
wholly hypocrites, and please themselves in their hypocrisy, having no
beginning or feeling of true godliness in their hearts; and those, who
acknowledgeing and bewailing the remnants of hypocrisy which are in them, have
withal the beginning of true faith and conversion unto God. Those hypocrites
are condemned of God: these are received into favor, not for this beginning of
obedience in them, but for the perfect obedience of Christ, which is imputed
unto them. And therefore to this declaration or exposition another is also to
be added: That they who are converted, are perfect in the sight of God, not
only in respect of the parts of true godliness which are all begun in them,
but also in respect of the degrees of true and perfect righteousness of Christ
imputed unto them, as it is said: Colos. 2.10. Heb. 10.14. 1 Cor. 2.6. and
14.20. Ephesians. 4.19.
Ye are all complete in him. With one offering has he consecrated for ever
them that are sanctified. But they reply, That the perfection also of degrees
is attributed unto the Saints in the Scripture (...) We speak wisdom among
them that are perfect. Be perfect in understanding. Till we all meet together
in the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, and
unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ. But these places also
do not call them perfect in respect of the law of God, that is, in respect of
the degree of knowledge and obedience which the law requires in us: but in
respect of the weaker, who have less light, and certainty and readiness,
confirmed by use and exercise to obey God, to resist carnal lusts, and to
bear the cross. For so is this perfection expounded, That we be no more
children, Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 5.14. Philip. 3.12.
wandering and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Not as though I had
already attained to it, or were already perfect. They oppose against these
answers a place out of John, 1 John 4.17, 18.
Herein is the love perfect in us, that we should have boldness in the day of
judgment: for as he is, even so are we in this world. There is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear; for fear has painfulnesse: and he
that fears is not perfect in love. But S. John means not that our love
toward God, Our regeneration and newness of life does assure us of
justification, as being an effect thereof. Romans 5.5.
but Gods love toward us is perfect, that is, declared and fully known unto us
by the effects or benefits of God bestowed upon us in Christ: Or, as Saint Paul
speaks, Romans 5. where he says, That the love of God, shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, is the cause, why we do without fear, and with
boldness expect the day of Judgment; and of this mercy and free love of God
toward us, he signifies, that by this token or testimony we are assured,
because in this life we are reformed by the holy Spirit to his Image: For, by
our regeneration we are assured of our justification, not as by the cause of
the effect, but as by the effect of the cause. Now, though regeneration be not
perfect in this life, yet if it be indeed begun, it suffices for the
confirmation and proving of the truth of our faith unto our consciences. And
these very words, which S. John adds, Love casts out fear, show, that love
is not yet perfect in us, because we are not perfectly delivered in this life
from fear of the wrath and judgment of God, and eternal punishment: John
3.21. 1 John 3.23, Psalm. 119.
For these two contrary motions are now together in the godly, even the fear
and love of God in remiss and low degrees, their fear decreasing, and their
love and comfort, or joy in God increasing, until joy get the conquest, and
perfectly cast out all trembling in the life to come, when God shall wipe away
every tear.

These places of Scripture are to be understood of the uprightness of a good
conscience, not of any perfect fulfilling of the Law in the godly.
Object. 5. He that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds might be
made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. If our heart condemn us
not, then have we boldness toward God. I have not declined from thy Law:
Therefore the good works of the regenerate may be alleged, and stand in Gods
judgment as perfectly answerable unto his Law. Answ. These and the like
sayings do not challenge to the godly in this life perfect fulfilling of the
Law; but the uprightness of a good conscience, without which faith cannot
consist or stand: as neither can a good conscience without faith. As it is
said, Fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience. 1 Timothy 1.18, 19.
And, Then being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. For, a good
conscience is a certain knowledge that we have faith, and a purpose to obey
God according to all his commandments, and that we and our obedience, though
maimed and scarce begun, please God; not for that it satisfies his Law, but
because those sins and defects which remain in us, are forgiven us for the
satisfaction of Christ which is imputed unto us: For as new obedience is begun
by faith, so by faith also it pleases God. Wherefore the godly slack not to
bring forth their life into the light, neither shake and shiver they at the
Tribunal of Christ, but comfort themselves with the conscience, or inward
knowledge thereof.

Object. 6. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure: 2 Pet. 1.10.
1 John 3.9.
for if you do these things, ye shall never fall. Whatsoever is borne of God,
sins not. Ans. These sentences in times past the Pelagians also and
Catharists, and now the Anabaptists abuse, to establish perfection of new
obedience in the regenerate: but to fall and to commit or do sin, signifies
in those places of Peter and John to have reigning sin, and to yield unto it,
and persevere in it: and in this sort the regenerate sin not. But that there
remain notwithstanding remnants of sin and defects in them, is expressly
showed: If we say we have no sin, the truth is not in us. 1 John 10.


Mat. 6.22. Luke 11.34. The similitude which is used by Christ, calling the eye
the light of the body, does not enforce the lightsomnesse of the mind.
Object. 7. The light of the body is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be light: hereof they gather, That the minds of the regenerate
are so purged in this life, that the whole heap and multitude of their works is
light and pure, that is, perfectly answerable to the Law. But seeing the speech
of Christ is conditional, it is manifest, that neither the Antecedent nor
Consequent, but only the sequel thereof is affirmed; and that the Antecedent
also being supposed, the Consequent is no otherwise put then the Antecedent:
Wherefore Christ does not affirm by this similitude of the eye guiding the
body, that the minds of men are lightsome, and so all their actions to be well
directed, and without sin; but rather he accuses the frowardness of men, who
go about to oppress and put out even that light which is left them by nature,
Romans 1.18.
and do with hold the truth, as S. Paul speaks, in unrighteousness; and
therefore are wholly, that is, in all their actions, dark, corrupt, and worthy
of damnation. Furthermore, the purity of actions can be but so far supposed, as
the purity and light of men's minds is supposed: For the light of nature being
supposed, actions morally good follow; spiritual light supposed, actions also
spiritually good, or good works follow: imperfect illightning supposed,
imperfect obedience; perfect illightning supposed, perfect obedience also
follows. Seeing then in this life perfect light and knowledge of God and his
will, and as much as the Law of God requires, is not kindled in the
regenerate, but is deferred until the life to come. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
(For we know in part, and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect
is is come, then that which is in part shall be abolished) therefore neither in
other parts perfect conformity with the Law can be in this life: yet
nevertheless, even now concerning imputation of perfect purity, it is true,
that the godly are pure and without sin in the sight of God, when he beholds
them in Christ, which is then, when the light of faith is kindled in their
hearts. So also that is to be taken: Christ gave himself for the Church,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water, through
the word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without
blame: For the Baptism of water, by reason of the word of promise adjoined,
signifies and seals to the faithful a cleansing by the blood of Christ,
which is most perfect, and presents us in this life unblameable before God:
and a cleansing by his Spirit, which is begun in this life, and perfect in the
life to come; and therefore cannot pacify and quiet our conscience.

There are also objections against the second part of the former doctrine,
concerning the third degree of liberty; by which objections they contend, that
it is in the power of the regenerate, either to persevere in righteousness, or
to depart from it. Object. 1. They who have liberty (say they) to choose good,
have liberty to persevere* The regenerate have liberty to choose good. Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: 2 Cor. 3.17.
Therefore they have power to persevere. Answ. If the conclusion of this reason
be rightly meant, the whole reason may be granted, to wit, That the regenerate
have so far forth liberty to persevere, as they are lightened and guided by
the holy Ghost: For the liberty which they have to choose good, depends upon
his working and motion. But if it be meant, that the godly have this liberty
either always, or so, that this perseverance depends of themselves, there
will be more found in the conclusion, then was in the premises: and that for
two causes: 1. Because they have liberty always to persevere, who are never
destitute of the guiding of the holy Spirit: which shall be in the life to
come. 2. Because their liberty also to good, who are never forsaken of the holy
Spirit, yet depends not of themselves, but of God. But here they reply: He
that is not forsaken of the holy Ghost, except himself first with-stand the
motion of the holy Ghost, has always the aid and assistance of the holy
Ghost ready, that he may persist in that good which he purposes; But the
godly are not forsaken of the holy Ghost, unless themselves first with-stand
him: Therefore they have always the assistance of the holy Ghost ready, that
they may persevere. But he who has this, has in his own power to persevere,
or to decline: because the cause is in his own will alone why he does either
obey or resist the Spirit moving him. When we deny the Minor of this reason,
they prove it thus: The justice of God does not inflict punishment, but on
those who sin; but to be forsaken of the holy Ghost, is a punishment of sin and
unthankefulnesse: Therefore no man is forsaken of the holy Ghost, but who has
first deserved that forsaking through his own stubbornness. The answer hereof
is double: The regenerate deserve the departure of Gods Spirit from them
through their manifold sins, which yet the mercy of Christ and his power
preserves in them.
1. The argument may be granted, as concerning the regenerate: For in them, as
long as they are in this life, there is always such remaining of sin, as they
deserve not only temporal, but eternal desertion and forsaking: and
although, because the sin which remains in them, is forgiven them of
Christ, therefore they are freed from everlasting punishment; yet are they not
free from chastisement, so long as the remnants of sin abide in them. There
is therefore in respect of their sins also always most just cause why
sometimes for a season God would bereave them of the grace and guiding of the
Spirit: As it is said, And the wrath of the Lord was again kindled against
Israel, 2 Samuel 24.1.
and he moved David against them in that he said, Go and number Israel and
Judah. 2. We answer to the Minor, Every forsaking, or rather sleeping as it
were of the holy Ghost in the regenerate, is not a punishment, neither done to
that end.
That every forsaking is not a punishment, or done to that end as to punish:
but sometimes also for trial, that is, for to make known and open the
weakness even of the best and holiest, both to themselves and others, that
they may learn, that they cannot for one instant or moment stand against the
tentations and assaults of Satan, if they be not presently sustained and ruled
by the conduct of the holy Spirit; and that so they may be made more watchful,
and more earnest to call hereafter for the assistance of the holy Spirit, and
to beware of relapses and fallings. Lastly, that both in this life, and in the
world to come, they may the better know and set forth their own unworthiness,
and the mercy of God toward them, who has reclaimed and re-called them out of
so many and grievous sins unto himself, and having deserved a thousand times
death and destruction, has not yet suffered them to perish. For these causes
it is said, 2 Cor. 12.
Lest I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of revelations,
there was given unto me a prick in the flesh. And, God has shut up all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. Against this they say, Romans 11.
That God does promise the assistance of his holy Spirit to all that ask it.
But this is general only concerning final perseverance, but not so as
touching continual perseverance: For God promises no where that he will so
guide his Saints by his Spirit in this life, that they shall never fall.

By this which has been said, that objection also vanishes to nothing, when
they say, That the converted, seeing they have in their own power to depart
from that which is right, and to resist, have also perseverance in their own
power: For although he constrains not, or violently draws their wills, but
makes them of rebels and enemies, willingly and of their own accord to become
the Sons of God; and as concerning men's wills in this life, there is nothing
more prone then they to evil: yet as touching the counsel, purpose, and
working of God, evidence of truth constrains even the adversaries themselves
to confess, that it cannot be, but that the will of man must then obey, when
God, according to his everlasting counsels, has decreed forcibly to move and
incline it either to conversion or to perseverance. Neither does this
immutability and efficacy of Gods purpose take away the liberty of will in the
converted, but rather increases and preserves it; and how much the more
effectually God moves it, with so much the greater propension and readiness
it both will and does good, which the example of the blessed Angels confirms.
This is also more frivolous that they say. That the godly are made careless
and slothful, and the desire to persevere is diminished in them, if they hear
that their perseverance depends of the grace of the holy Spirit alone: For we
may very well invert this, and return it upon our adversaries; seeing nothing
does more give an edge unto the Saints, and those who are indeed godly, to a
desire and endeavor to beware of falling, and to a daily and earnest calling
upon God, then if they knew, that they cannot so much as one moment stand
against the tentation of the Devil and their flesh, except by the virtue and
instinct of the holy Spirit they be withdrawn from evil, and be forcibly moved
to good: but contrariwise that opinion, as experience teaches, makes men
careless and less minding to beware of sin, by which men imagine, that it is
in their own power to depart from God, listening a while, and yielding to their
own lusts, and to return again to God, as often as themselves think good so to
do. Now, if so be this sentence concerning true perseverance, depending on the
grace of the holy Spirit, breed in the reprobate and profane men a carelessness
and contempt of God: it is both foolish and injurious to judge of the elect and
godly by their humor, or for their frowardness to hide and smother the truth.

Lastly, against the defects of liberty in the second and third state of degree
of man, they object after this sort: If the whole conversion and perseverance
do so depend on Gods will, and be the work of God in men, that neither they
can have it in whom he does not work it, neither they cannot but have it, in
whom he will work it: then not only the liberty, The working of ^he
isntrumental cause, which is our will, is not taken away, when we put the
working of the principal cause, which is God.
but all the action and operation of the Will is taken away, and there
remains only that it be constrained, and suffer: which is against the
Scripture, experience the inward strife and combat of the godly, and our own
confession. But we answer, that the Will is not therefore taken away, when as it
does not resist the Spirit forcibly moving it: For to assent also and obey is
an action of the Will. But when they reply, That we make that obedience of the
Will in conversion and perseverance wholly the work of God, and so leave
nothing to the Will what to do; they run into another Paralogisme of
consequent, whereas they remove the working of the second or isntrumental
cause, for that the first cause or principal agent is put: For that which is
so wholly the work of God in man, that man is only as the subject in which God
works, in that we grant the Will is only passive, and suffers, and does
work nothing; as imprinting, or working, or maintaining in the Will and heart
new qualities or inclinations: But that which is so the work of God, that the
Will of man is not only the object, but the instrument also of Gods working,
and an agent by it own force given it of God in producing an effect, in that
the Will is not only passive, but both active and passive, forasmuch as it is
to this end moved of the Spirit to work, that it self might do that, which
God will work by it: which also comes to pass in all the good actions of the
Will; even as in ill actions also, when it is incited either by the Devil or
other causes, it self is not in the mean season idle. Wherefore in Ezekiel it
is added, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them.

The fourth degree of liberty is in man perfectly regenerated after his
glorification.
The fourth degree of liberty is in man perfectly regenerated after his
glorification, or after the end and consummation of this present life. In this
liberty the Will shall be only free to choose good and not to choose evil: and
this shall be the perfect liberty of our will, by which we shall not only not
sin, but shall abhor nothing more then sin, and also shall not be able to sin
any more. The reasons thereof are these: Because in the mind shall shine the
perfect knowledge of God, Two reasons of our perfect liberty after
glorificat^on.
and his will; in the will and heart a most perfect and exceeding inclination
to obey God, an exceeding love of God, and a joy resting in God, and an
agreeableness or conformity with God: Wherefore no place shall be for
ignorance, for error, or any doubting of God; yea, or for the least
stubbornness against God. That conformity in the elect, of all their inward
powers and faculties with God, and the effectual guiding of the holy Ghost
shall be continued to all eternity: This last degree or liberty after man's
glorification greater then the first before h^s fall, because th^s excludes
all possibility of falling, the other did not.
For the blessed Saints are never forsaken, but continually ruled by the holy
Ghost in all their actions, in the celestial life. For which cause it cannot
possibly be, that any motions or actions of man there should once swerve from
righteousness. And therefore it is said, They are as the Angels of God in
heaven. Neither by this means is the liberty of will taken away, or
diminished, but is truly confirmed and perfected in the blessed Angels and men:
Forasmuch as both the understanding is free from all error, ignorance, and
doubtfulnesse, and lightened with the perfect knowledge of God: Mat. 22.30.
and the heart and will free from all stubbornness, and without all soliciting
or suggestion to withstand God, is carried with an exceeding love of God, and
an alacrity to obey the known will of God. And hence it appears also how much
more excellent our state shall be, then was Adams before his fall. Adam truly
before his fall was perfectly conformed to God, but he could will both good
and evil; and therefore had some infirmity joined with his excellent gifts
even a power to depart from God, and lose his gifts: that is, he was
changeably good. But we shall not be able but to will good only. And as the
wicked are only carried to evil, because they are wicked; so shall we also
only love and choose good, because we shall be good. It shall be then
impossible for us to will any evil, because we shall be preserved by Gods
grace, in that perfect liberty of will, that is, The use of this doctrine
concerning the diversity of liberty which is in God, and in man, and of the
diverse degrees of man's liberty.
we shall be unchangeably good.

It is necessary that this doctrine, Of the similitude and difference of
free will which is in God, and his creatures, and in diverse states and degrees
of man's nature, delivered hitherto out of the Scripture, should be manifest and
known in the Church for many and weighty causes: creatures are subject to his
government.

On the fourth Sabbath.
Quest. 9. Does not God then injury to man, who, in the Law, requires that of
him, which he is not able to perform?
Answ. No: Ephesians. 4.24.
For God has made man such a one as he might perform it; Genesis 3.13. 1 Timothy
2.13. Wisd. 2.23.
but man, by the impulsion of the Devil, Genesis 3.6. Romans 5.12. Luke 10.30.
and his own stubbornness, bereaved himself, and all his posterity of those
divine graces.

The Explication.
THis question is an objection framed by humane reason against the question
here proposed: For, if man be so corrupt, that he is no way apt to do any thing
well, in vain God seems and unjustly to require at his hands perfect
obedience to the Law. Object. He that requires or commands that which is
impossible, is unjust; God in the Law requires of man that which is
impossible, to wit, perfect obedience, which he is not able to perform:
Therefore God seems to be unjust. Ans. The Major is to be distinguished. He
is unjust that commands things impossible: 1. Except himself first gave an
ability to perform those things which he commanded. 2. Except man, who is
commanded, covet that impotency and unability, and of his own accord has
purchased it unto himself. 3. Except the commandment, which is impossible, be
a spur unto him, who is commanded, of acknowledging and bewailing his
insufficiency. But God by creating man after his Image, gave him possibility,
that is, a power of performing that obedience which in right he requires of
him: Wherefore, if man, by his own fault and folly, lost and cast away this
his good ability, and procured unto himself this unability of obeying God; God
has not therefore lost his right to require due obedience of him. Nay rather,
because we have rejected this good, by transgressing Gods commandment, and
because God threatened punishment to the transgressors, therefore he justly
punishes us. Repl. But not we, but Adam drew on us this sin. Answ. Our first
Parents, being fallen, lost this ability both unto themselves and to their
posterity; like as they received it for themselves and their posterity. If a
Prince give unto a noble man a Lordship, and he traitorously rebel against
him, he loses his Lordship not only from himself, but also from his posterity:
neither does the Prince any injury to his children, if he restore no^ unto
them the Lordship lost by their fathers fault and disobedience; and if he do
restore it, he does it of free grace and mercy. Repl. He that commands things
impossible, God commanding things impossible, does yet command them for good
causes, and to good ends, both in the godly and ungodly. In the godly.
does in vain command them; but God commands things impossible to be
performed by man now after his fall: Therefore in vain he commands them.
Answ. 1. In this reason there is a fallacy from that which is spoken and
verified but in part: as, God does not in vain command, though we perform not
that which he commands; because there are other ends besides of the
commandment, both in the godly and ungodly: For the commandment requires of
the godly, By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 3.20.
In the ungodly.
Again, the ungodly are commanded obedience: Luke 12.47.
That servant that knew his Masters will, and did it not, etc. Ans. 2. We
answer to the Major of this syllogism, thus distinguishing: In vain he
commands, who commands things impossible; if withal he give not the
possibility: But God, commanding the elect the performance of these things,
gives them also power of obeying, beginning it now by the doctrine of the
Gospel* and in the end perfecting it. Augustine, Give, De bona persever. cap.
20.
Lord, what thou command, and command what thou will: and thou shall not in
vain command it. Therefore this impossible exigent is the greatest benefit,
because it is the highway to attain possibility.

Quest. 10. Does God leave this stubbornness and falling away of man
unpunished?
Answ. No: but is angry in most dreadful manner, Genesis 2.27. Romans 5.12.
as well for the sins wherein we are borne, as also for those which our selves
commit; and in most just judgment punishes them with temporal and eternal
punishments Psalm. 20. and 21. and 5.6. Nah. 1.2. Exodus 20.5. and 34.7. Romans
1.18. Ephesians. 5.6.
, as himself pronounces; Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of
this Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 25.26. Gal. 3.10.


The Explication.
IN this question is handled the other part of man's misery, even the evil of
pain and punishment: and it is said, that God does most grievously, most
justly, and most certainly punish sin. Most grievously: that is, with present
and eternal pains for the greatness of sin, because the infinite good is
offended thereby. Most justly; because every, even the least, sin violateth
Gods Law; and therefore by the order of Gods justice meriteth eternal
punishment and abjection. Most certainly; because God is true, and never
changes his sentence denounced in the Law: Cursed is he that continues not
in all, etc. Object. But the wicked flourish here, Galat. 3.10.
and carry many things clear without punishment: Therefore all sins are not
punished. Ans. Yea, but they shall at length be paid home for them; yea, How
the wicked are punished in this life.
and in this life they are punished: 1. In conscience, with whose gnawings the
wicked are tortured. 2. In those good things which they use with greatest
pleasure; and verily so much the more, how much the less they know and
acknowledge themselves to be punished: For it is a most grievous punishment,
not to receive Gods gifts in respect of Gods promise, not to know the right use
of them, neither with his gifts to receive a will and ability also to use them
well: For if these things concur not in the fruition of good things, men's
sins and punishment must needs be the more increased and exasperated; and
thereby, except there come conversion, eternal destruction or death is
certainly purchased. 3. They are afflicted with other punishments also most
grievous oftentimes, yet with more grievous in the life to come, where it shall
be a continual death, not to be dead. Object. 2. God made not evil, and
death: Therefore he will not so grievously punish sin with them. Answ. He made
them not in the beginning; yet when sin was committed, he in his just judgment
inflicted death as a punishment on sinners, according to his commination, Thou
shall die the death. Genesis 2.17. Amos 3.6.
Whence it is also said: Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not
done it? Obj. 3. If God punish sin with present and everlasting punishments, he
punishes the same twice, and is unjust; but he is not unjust, neither
punishes he the same offense twice: Therefore he will not punish sin with
temporal and eternal pains. Ans. The Major is denied: For the punishment
which God inflicteth on the wicked in this life, and in the life to come, is
but one punishment, but has several parts: For present punishments are but
the beginning^ of everlasting; neither are they a distinct or entire punishment
severally, because they are not sufficient to satisfy Gods justice. Object. 4.
If God punish sins with eternal punishments, then either all of us perish, or
Gods justice is not satisfied. Ans. If God should punish our sins in us with
eternal punishments, we should all perish indeed: but he does not punish them
in us with eternal pains, neither yet is his justice impeached or violated,
because he punishes our sins in Christ with a punishment temporal, but yet
equivalent to everlasting. This equability does the Gospel add unto the Law.
Repl. If he punish them in Christ, and be just, he ought no further to punish
them in us: Therefore the godly are unjustly afflicted in this life. Ans. The
afflictions of the godly are not punishments and satisfactions for their
sins, but only fatherly chastisements, and the Cross, whereby they are
brought to humility. Which that it may be the better understood, we are here
necessarily to speak of afflictions or calamities: but first, the next question
is to be expounded.

Quest. 11. Is not God therefore merciful?
Ans. Yea verily he is merciful, Exo. 34.6, 7. and 20.6.
but so, that he is also just. Psalm. 10.7. Exodus 20.5. and 23* 7 and 34.6.
Psalm. 5.56. Nah. 1.2, ^.
Wherefore his justice requires, that the same which is committed against the
divine Majesty of God, should also be recompensed with extreme, that is,
everlasting punishments both of body and soul.

The Explication.
THis question of the Catechism is an objection against that doctrine, That
God punishes all and every sin with everlasting pains; and thus it is framed.
Object. It is the property of him that is exceeding merciful, to remit
somewhat of extreme justice; but God is exceeding merciful: Therefore he will
remit somewhat of extreme justice, and will not punish sin with eternal
pains. Answ. We answer to the Major on this wise: It is the point of him that
is merciful to remit something, but without breach of justice, if he be
exactly just. Now God is so exceeding merciful, that he is also exactly just:
Therefore he will so exercise mercy, that not withstanding he will not impair
his justice. And the justice of God exacteth, that all sins committed against
his sovereign majesty should be punished with most exquisite, that is,
everlasting pains both of body and soul, that there may be some proportion
between the crime and the penalty. Repl. 1. Exceeding strict justice does not
stand with exceeding mercy; in God there is exceeding mercy: Therefore in God
exceeding strict justice stands not with it. Answ. The Major is denied. Repl.
Thus it is proved, Exceeding mercy admits mitigating equity; but strict and
exact justice, such as is in God, admits not this: Ergo, etc. Ans. Yes, the
justice of God admits mitigating equity and favourablenesse, not by
omitting, but by transferring the punishment on some other. Repl. 2. With him
that follows extreme or strict justice, mercy and equity has no place; but
God does strictly execute his Law: Therefore with him mercy has no place. Or
thus, He who remitteth naught of extreme right, he is not merciful, but only
just; but God remitteth naught of his right, because he punishes all sin with
sufficient punishment. Ans. 1. We deny the Minor: For God remitteth a great
deal of his strict right, though he punish sins with eternal pains. For, as
touching the reprobate, he uses much favorable dealing toward them, whiles
he both now deferreth their punishments, and inviteth them by many benefits
unto repentance, and in the eternity it self of their punishment will punish
them more mildly then they deserved. And as touching the elect, he uses much
toleration again toward them, because he gives us his Son, and subjecteth
him unto punishment on our behalf of his mere mercy, obliged and bound thereto
by no right or merit of ours. 2. The Major is denied as false in respect of
him, who for his wisdom knows means of exercising mercy without breach of
his justice: also in respect of him, who whilst he executes his justice, yet
rejoices not in the destruction of man, but had rather he were saved: As, when
a Judge condemns a robber to the wheel, and yet rejoices not in his
punishment; he though he seem to execute the extremity of Law, yet uses
lenity. Much more God mingleth mavelous equity with his justice: For he is
not delighted with the destruction of the ungodly (because he will not the
death of a sinner) and though he punish all sins with everlasting pains,
Ezekiel. 33.11.
yet he also takes pity on us, in deriving the punishment from us, and laying
it on his Son. Repl. 3. The Prophet Jeremy says, Forgive not their iniquity,
neither put out their sin from thy sight: The mercy therefore of God is not
extended to the Reprobate. Answ. 1. It is true, when God denies his mercy unto
them repenting; What mercy God extends to the wicked.
and except he have just cause why he does not save all. But God has most
just cause why he suffers them to perish, even the manifestation of his
justice and power in punishing the wicked. 2. It is to be understood of that
degree of his mercy, which he shows toward his chosen, even of his mercy,
whereby he gives them remission of sins, his holy Spirit, and life
everlasting: but it is not to be granted, concerning that general mercy,
whereby he guides and governs all creatures. Repl. 4. The Lord says in
Isaiah: Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries: Therefore God is delighted
with the destruction of his enemies. Answ. These and the like speeches are
spoken after the order of men, by an Anthropopathy, or humane affection, and by
them is signified, that God will the execution of his justice, but is not
delighted with the death or destruction of men, as being his creatures. Repl.
5. Nay, neither on the penitent does God exercise mercy: For if God punish all
sins with sufficient punishment in Christ, he is not merciful. Answ. I deny
the consequence of this Proposition, because he gave us his Son freely, who
should satisfy for us. This satisfaction did the Gospel add.

OF AFFLICTIONS.
Three principal questions there are touching afflictions.
1. How many kinds of afflictions there be. 2. What be the causes of them. 3.
What comforts are to be opposed against them.
1. How many kinds of afflictions there be.
Two sorts of afflictions. 1. Temporal. 2. Eternal.

SOme afflictions are temporal, and some eternal: Eternal are the torments of
the soul and body, ever to endure, and never to have end; into which all the
Devils are to be thrown, and all wicked men; who are not converted in this
life. They are called in Scripture hellfire, a worm, torment, everlasting
death, because the tortures shall be perpetual, and such as men endure at the
point of death, who by dying daily, can never dye: For this shall be
everlasting death, always to die and never be dead; or a continuance of death
with infinite excess of torments. The testimonies of Scripture which
demonstrate that there are eternal pains, are these: Their worm shall not
die, Isa. 66.24.
and their fire shall not be put out. It is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, Mar. 9.43.
then having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched, where their worm dies not, and the fire never goes out. Mat. 25.41.
Depart into everlasting fire which is prepared for the Devil and his angels.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?
1 Pet. 4.18.
The reason is evident; because for sin committed against the infinite good, an
infinite punishment is justly exacted, whereas by any temporal punishment of a
mere creature, there could not be made sufficient satisfaction unto Gods
infinite and eternal justice. That eternal punishment is both of soul and
body, Christ testifies; Mat. 10.2^.
Fear him who can cast both soul and body into hell fire. The soul is the
cause and fountain of sins. The body, as a thing without reason and brutish,
does execute that which the soul shows and commands: Wherefore both the
author and instrument of sin shall be punished. Object. He that is exceeding
merciful cannot behold the eternal torments of his creatures, much less
inflict them. Gods mercy is great, and far exceeds our sins: Therefore he
cannot behold the eternal torments of his creatures. Answ. We answer to the
Major, that it is true, unless the same also be exceeding just: But God is so
exceeding merciful, that he is also exceeding just; as before has been
declared.

Temporal afflictions belong both to the godly and ungodly.
Temporal afflictions are incident both to the godly, and to the ungodly: as
diseases, poverty, contempt, reproach, oppression, banishment, wars, and other
miseries of this life, and lastly, temporal death it self: These are either
punishments, or the Cross. The punishment is either destruction or torment,
Punishment.
inflicted by order of justice on the person guilty of sin. And this is proper
unto the reprobate, In the wicked they are punishments, in the godly the Cross.
because it is inflicted on them to this end, that Gods justice may be
satisfied: For the Law binds all men either to obedience or to punishment.

Object. But the evils which the wicked suffer in this life, are lighter then
that they should satisfy Gods justice. Answ. They are a part of their
punishment, and a beginning of satisfaction which shall be exacted through all
eternity, Degrees of punishments of the ungodly.
though they be not their whole punishment. Now, as every part of the air is
called air; so every part of punishment is punishment. Howbeit, there are
degrees of punishment. is in this life: For when the conscience of their
mis-deeds does gnaw, vex, and terrify them, then begins their hellish and
infernal worm. in temporal death: For then they begin to feel the wrath of
God, when the soul is separated from the body without all consolation, and is
plunged into the place of torment. at the day of the last judgment, when both
body and soul shall be cast into hell fire, and the everlasting pains of hell
shall fall in troops together on all the wicked.

The Cross is the affliction of the godly, The Cross.
which properly is not a punishment, because it is not inflicted, that thereby
Gods justice should be satisfied for their sins. Now the Cross is of four
sorts, which are all distinguished by their ends: Chastisements.
Chastisements, which God lays on the godly for their sins, but according to
his mercy, as a father gently chastises his son, with much toleration; and
therefore they are not properly punishments, but fatherly corrections, whereby
they are admonished of their uncleanness, their private sins, and peculiar
falls, and stirred to repentance, and brought again into the way; as David was
expelled his Kingdom for his fall: For, even in the Saints, singular and
grievous corrections accompany singular and several sins. But they are not a
recompense for sin, but effects of Gods divine justice* by which God
ascertaineth us and others of his justice, that he verily is angry with sin,
and will punish it not only in this life, but in that other also with death,
unless we make a speedy return unto him. Trials.
Proofs and trials of faith, hope, invocation, fear of God, and patience in
the Saints, that they may go forward in these virtues: and oftentimes that
their infirmity may be laid open to themselves and others. Such was the
affliction of Job. Martyrdom.
Martyrdomes, which are testifications of the Saints concerning their doctrine,
when they confirm and seal with their blood the doctrine which they profess,
that it is true, and that they in the midst of death thence feel and have
experience of the comfort which they did promise in teaching it unto others,
and that there remains another life, and another judgment after this life.
Ransom.
Ransom is the obedience of Christ alone, which is a satisfaction for our
sins, consisting of his whole humiliation, from the very first point of his
conception in the womb, to his last agony on the Cross.

A brief type or table of man's afflictions.
Afflictions are some 1. Temporal in the Wicked: as punishments properly, and
in special so called. Godly: as the Cross; and that is 1. Chastisements. 2.
Trialls. 3. Martyrdom. 4. Ransom.

2. Eternal: as the hellish torments of the damned.

2. What are the causes of affliction.
THe causes of punishment in the wicked are: 1. Sin, the impellent cause;
that sin may be recompensed with punishment. 2. The justice of God, the
principal efficient cause, inflicting punishment for sin. 3. Isntrumental
causes thereof are diverse: Angels and Men, both good and bad, and other
creatures, which are all armed against sin, and fight under Gods Banner.

Eight causes of the afflictions of the godly.
The causes of the Cross of the godly are: The acknowledging and purging out of
sin. 1 Cor. 11.32. Psalm. 119.71.
Sin; but otherwise then in the wicked: For the godly are afflicted for sin,
not to satisfy Gods justice, but that sin may be acknowledged by them, and
purged out from among them by the Cross. They are fatherly chastised for the
acknowledgement of their falls, and these chastisements are unto them Sermons of
repentance: When we are judged, we are chastised of the Lord. It is good for
me, O Lord, that thou have humbled me. But God gives the reins to the wicked,
that they may gallop to destruction; he endoweth them with the commodities of
this life, and suffers them to enjoy a short joy, thereby to show his love
toward them, as being his creatures, and to convince them of unthankfulness,
and to take away all excuse from them. Now contrariwise, by the Cross he
amendeth the godly. The hatred of the Devil and evil men. John 15.10. Ephesians.
16.12. 1 John 3.15.
That we may learn to hate sin, the Devil, and the world; If ye were of the
world the world would love you. We wrestle not against flesh and blood but
against principalities, against powers. Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world. Exercise of godliness.
Our exercise or trial; that we may go forward, and increase in faith, hope,
patience, obedience and prayer; or that we may have occasion of exercising and
trying our selves, and that both unto our selves and others our hope, faith,
and patience may be made known: For it is an easy matter to glory of our faith
in prosperity, but in adversity the glory or grace of virtue is conspicuous and
eminent. He that has not been tempted, what knows he? Experience brings
hope. Syrac. 34.10. Romans 5.4.
Particular defects in the godly.
Particular defects and failings in the Saints; Manasses had his faults,
Josaphat his, and others have other defects; therefore Gods chastisements are
also diverse, wherein he shows, that he is angry also with the sins of the
godly, and will more severely revenge them unless they repent: The servant
which knew his masters will and did it not, Luke 12.47.
shall be beaten with many stripes. Gods glory in their deliverance.
The revealing and setting forth of Gods glory in the deliverance of the Church
and the godly; for God often times brings his into extreme dangers, that
their delivery may be the more glorious; as appears in the slavery of the
Israelites in Egypt, and their captivity in Babylon, etc. that he may, I say,
gloriously deliver them, and show that he has found a way of delivery where no
creature could hope or look for it: The Lord brings down to hell, 1 Samuel 2.6.
and raises up again. A conformity between them and Christ. 2 Timothy 2.12. Romans
8.29. Matthew. 10.24.
The conformity of the members with their head Christ in affliction and glory:
If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Those which he knew
before, he also did predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son. The
servant is not greater then his Lord, neither the disciple above his Master.
Confirmation and testimony of the truth by their martyrdom. Joh. 21.18.
The confirmation and testimony of their doctrine in their martyrdoms; For when
faithful and godly men suffer any evils, and death it self for the confession
and maintenance of their doctrine, they give ample testimony to the world, that
they are so verily persuaded of the truth of this doctrine, that by no means
they can forgo it: and moreover, that this doctrine yields and ministers
true and solid comfort in death it self; and therefore of necessity is the
very truth. Peter is foretold by what death he should glorify God. A
confirmation of the life to come. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
The afflictions of the godly are a confirmation and testimony of the judgment
and life to come: For the justice and truth of God requires, that at length it
go well with the good, and ill with the bad; But this comes not to pass in
this life; Therefore there is remaining yet another life; which is a token of
the righteous judgment of God. Out of these causes we are to answer the
argument which the world uses against the providence of God. Object. The
Church is oppugned throughout the whole world, and trodden under foot of all
men: Therefore it is not the true Church, nor protected by God. Ans. Nay
rather, because it is persecuted by the wicked ones of this world, it is
apparently the true Church: For if it were of the world, the world would love
her own. Joh. 15.19.
But the causes of the afflictions of the Church are manifest and evident, and
the event and end of things shall one day convict the world.

3. Comforts to be opposed against afflictions.
Comforts in affliction.
OF comforts in afflictions, some are proper unto the Church, some are common to
it with Philosophy. Proper are the first, and the two last of those which shall
be recited; the rest are common, and that but in outward show only, and in
name; but not being farther entered into and discoursed of. Remission of sins
and reconciliation unto God.
Remission of sins. This is the ground and foundation of the rest, because
without this the rest minister no comfort unto us whilst we doubt of our
reconcilement to God; for otherwise we always doubt whether the promise of
grace belong unto us: But if this be once surely grounded, the rest are soon
built upon it; for if God be our Father, he will then no way endamage us, but
be our guardian in whatsoever distress: Romans 8.31.
If God be with us, who can be against us? The reason is, because, Take away
the cause, and you take away the effect: take away sin, and the punishment of
sin is also taken away. The necessity of obeying God, and the love which we owe
him.
The will and providence of God; or the necessity of obeying God in prosperity
and adversity, because either of these is according to his will and good
pleasure. The reason of this consequence of obedience is not only because we
are unable to resist God, but especially we must therefore obey him: 1. Because
he is our Father. 2. Because he has so deserved of us, that for his sake we
ought to suffer far greater evils. 3. Because the miseries he sends us are
his fatherly chastisements. This comfort calmeth our storming stomachs, because
it intimates, that it is our Fathers pleasure we should so suffer: Job 13.15.
Job 1 21. Psalm. 39.10.
Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. As it pleased the Lord, so
it is come to pass; blessed be the name of the Lord. I became dumb and opened
not my mouth, for it was thy doing. The Philosophers say, that it is patiently
to be suffered which cannot be altered and avoided. They establish a fatal
necessity, and therefore foolishness it were to kick against the pricks: but
in the heat of calamities they submit not themselves to God, nor acknowledge
his indignation and wrath, nor suffer adversity to that end as thereby to obey
him, but because they cannot shake them off nor wrest themselves out of them at
pleasure. This is a miserable cold comfort. The worthiness of virtue.
The worthiness of virtue; that is, of obedience toward God, which is true
virtue, for which a man is not to cast away his courage in bearing the cross.
Temporal goods are great blessings of God; but far greater benefits are
obedience, faith, hope, etc. Wherefore let us not prefer less things before
greater; neither let us take away the things of greater value to redeem the
loss of things of ^esse worth. Mat. 10.37. and 16.25.
He that hates not his father and mother for my sake is not worthy of me. He
that seeks to save his soul shall lose it. This dignity of virtue do the
Philosophers most of all urge, but coldly, because they are destitute of true
virtues. A good conscience.
A good conscience; which is not really and truly but in the godly, who
perfectly know that God is at peace with them by and through Christ the
Mediator: Now if God be favorable and gracious unto us, we cannot but enjoy
tranquillity and quietness of mind. The Philosophers comfort not theirs on
this manner: for the Philosopher being once afflicted, thinks, Why does not
good fortune follow a good conscience? and therefore he murmureth against God,
and fretteth, as did Cato and others. The final causes or their afflictions. 1
Cor. 2.32, Act. 5.41.
The final causes; which are, 1. Gods glory, which shines in our delivery. 2.
Our salvation; for, We are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. 3. The conversion of others, and the enlarging of the
Church. For this cause the Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy to
suffer rebuke for Christ's name; namely the conversion of others, and
strengthening of many in the faith. The Philosophers say, It is a good end for
which thou suffer, that thou may save thy Country, and attain unto
everlasting renown and glory: But yet in the mean season, wretched man he
thinks, What will these things profit me when my self perish? The comparing
of ends and ^^ents.
The conference and comparing together of events: It is better for a short time
to be chastised of the Lord, then to live in plenty and abundance of all
things, and to be pulled from God, and to run into everlasting perdition. The
Philosophers conferring and comparing evils together, find but little good
arising out of so many evils: but the principal good, for the obtaining
whereof we ought to suffer whatsoever evils, they are wholly ignorant of. The
hope of recompense. Mat. 5 12.
The hope of recompense or reward in this and another life: Your reward is
great in heaven. We know that there remain other blessings for us after this
life, nothing to be compared with the moment any afflictions of this present
world: Even in this life also the god^y receive greater blessings then other
men; for they have God pacified and pleased with them, and other spiritual
gifts. Corporal blessings, though they be small, Mar. 10.^9, 30.
yet are they profitable for their salvation: There is no man that has for
saken house, or etc. but he shall receive an hundred fold now at this present,
and in the world to come eternal life. Psalm. 37.17. Romans 5.3. John 15.20.
Phil. 2.5. 2 Cor. 8.9.
A small thing that the righteous has is better then great riches of the
ungodly. We rejoice in affections, etc. A recompense in small evils does in
some sort comfort the Philosophers, but in great evils not at all: because they
think that they had rather want that recompense then buy it so dear; because it
is but uncertain, small, and transitory. The example of Christ and his Saints,
who have suffered before us.
The example of Christ and his saints: The servant is not greater then his
Master. And God will have us to be made like to the image of his Son. Let us
accompany therefore Christ in ignominy and glory. This the thankfulness which
we owe requires, because Christ died for our salvation. Holy and godly Martyrs
have suffered, and have not perished in afflictions. We are not to challenge
any peculiar estate unto our selves, or better then theirs, since that we are
not better then they, but much worse. They have endured the cross, and have
been preserved by God amidst their afflictions; let us then expect the like
event, because the love of God toward his is immutable, and knows no change.
Matthew. 5.12. 1 Pet. 5.9.
So did they persecute the prophets which have been before you. Resist,
steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in
your brethren which are in the world. The certain presence and assistance of
God.
The presence and assistance of God in afflictions; God is present with us by
his Spirit, strengthening us, and comforting us in our cross, not suffering us
to be tempted above that we are able, but even giving the issue with the
tentation, and always poising in equal balance and proportion the affliction
and our power, that thereby we may be able to endure unto the end. We have the
first fruits of the Spirit. Romans 8.23. Psalm. 91.15. Joh. 14.16, 18, 23. Isa.
49.15.
I am with him in tribulation. He shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever. I and my Father will come unto him, and dwell with
him. I will not leave you comfortless. Can a woman forget her child, and not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Though she should forget, yet will I
not forget thee. The final and full delivery.
The final and full delivery is the period of all the rest. The first is the
ground and principal, but this is the end and consummation: for as of
punishments, so also of delivery, there are three degrees; 1. In this life,
where we have the beginning of eternal life. 2. In our bodily death, when the
soul of poor Lazarus is carried into Abraham's bosom. 3. In the resurrection of
the dead, and their glorification after the resurrection, when we shall be both
in body and soul perfectly blessed: Then shall God wipe away all tears from
their eyes. Wherefore, as the first consolation is the foundation and
beginning; so this last is the finishing and accomplishment of all the rest.

THE SECOND PART. OF MAN'S DELIVERY.
ON THE 5. SABBATH.
Quest. 12. Seeing then by the just judgment of God, we are subject both to
temporal and eternal punishments; is there yet any means or way remaining,
whereby we may be delivered from these punishments, and be reconciled to God?
Ans. God will have his justice satisfied: Genesis 3.37. Exodus 20.5. and 23.7.
Ezekiel. 18.4. Matthew. 5.26. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. Luke 16, 2. Romans 8.3.
wherefore it is necessary, that we satisfy either by our selves, or by
another.

The Explication.
AFter it has been showed in the first Part, that men are become obnoxious
unto everlasting pains and punishments, by reason of obedience not yielded unto
the Law, a question by and by arises, Whether there is, or may be granted any
escape or delivery from these punishments? To this question the Catechism
makes answer, that delivery is granted, so that perfect satisfaction be made
unto the law and justice of God by sufficient punishment paid for the sins
committed: for the law binds either to obedience, or, that being not
performed, to punishment: the performance of both which is perfect
righteousness and justice: and on both follows the approbation and allowing
of him, in whom that righteousness is. Now the means and manner of
satisfaction by punishments are two: One by our selves, which the law teaches,
and the justice of God requires; Legal satisfaction. Galat. 3.10.
Evangelicall satisfaction. Romans 8.3. John 3.16.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc. this is legal.
The other means of satisfying is by another; which the Gospel reveals, and
Gods mercy admits: That that was impossible to the law, God sending his own
Son, etc. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. this
is evangelicall satisfaction. Indeed in the law it is not taught, but it is no
where therein disallowed or excluded, neither is it repugnant to the justice of
God: For so there be satisfaction performed by man through a sufficient
punishment for the disobedience of man, the law rests contented, and the
justice of God permits that the party offendant be absolved, and received
into favor: This is the sum of all. Furthermore, by this question of the
Catechism here propounded, two things are taught concerning man's delivery: 1.
That delivery is possible. 2. By what means it may be achieved. That these may
be more fully understood, we are to consider: 1. What man's delivery is, and in
what things it consists. 2. Whether any such delivery be possible, or might
be wrought after the fall. 3. Whether it be necessary and certain. 4. Whether
we may expect that it be perfect. 5. By what means it may be wrought.


1. What man's delivery is, and wherein it consists.
THis word Delivery is respective: For all delivery and liberty has a respect
of the thing from which it exempteth, and of the thing into which it freeth or
delivers: as, delivery from captivity and bondage, into liberty and freedom,
respects captivity, whence it absolveth; and liberty, whereof it gives us
possession. Now men are by nature the slaves of sin, Satan, and death. We can
therefore no way better conceive and understand what man's delivery is, Heb
2.14. 2 Timothy 2.26.
then by a serious meditation and examination what his misery is. Man's misery
consists, 1. In his loss of righteousness, and his inbred corruption, to
wit, sin. 2. In the punishments of sin. His delivery therefore from this misery
requires, 1. A perfect pardoning and abolishment of sin, with a renewing in us
the righteousness we have lost. 2. An immunity from all penalties and
miseries, which are the wages of sin. As then there are two parts of man's
misery, I mean, Sin and Death: So there are on the other side two parts of his
delivery, to wit, from sin, and from death. His delivery from sin is both a
pardoning of the sin, that it may not for ever be imputed; and an abolishing of
it in us by the renewing of our nature, that it reign not in our mortal body.
His delivery from death is first, a delivery from desperation, or the feeling
of Gods wrath, which being in the wicked here begun, shall continue
everlastingly, and is called everlasting death: and secondly, from all
calamities and miseries of this life; and lastly, from temporal and eternal
death. Hence it appears what, and of what quality man's delivery is; What man's
delivery is.
to wit, A perfect acquitall of man, being fallen, from all the misery of sin
and death, and a full restoring by Christ of righteousness, holiness, life,
and everlasting felicity or perfect blessedness; which in all true believers
is begun here in this life, and shall be perfected in the life to come.

2. Whether any such delivery be possible; that is, might be wrought after the
fall.
THis question is necessary: for if there be no delivery of us out of misery,
in vain make we question of the rest. Again, there is some cause to doubt
thereof, to them especially unto whom the doctrine of the Gospel is unknown.
The delivery therefore of man, Three causes of the possiblenesse of man's
delivery.
being fallen, is possible; and the causes of the possiblenesse thereof are in
God alone, declared in the Scripture, which are these: Gods goodness.
Gods immeasurable goodness and mercy, which would not suffer all mankind to
perish for ever. Gods wisdom.
Gods infinite wisdom, whereby he was able to find out such a way of delivery,
whereby he might show his exceeding mercy toward mankind, and yet no whit
impeach his justice. Gods omnipotency.
Gods omnipotency, whereby as he had power to create man of nothing after his
own image; so he had equal ability to restore him after his fall, and free him
from sin and death. To deny then the possibility of man's delivery, is to spoil
God of infinite wisdom, goodness, and omnipotency; whereas verily in him
there is no defect at al of wise counsel, immeasurable goodness, and infinite
power, as it is said; The Lord brings down to the grave, and raises up. 1.
Sam. 2.6. Psalm. 68.20. Esaias 59.1.
To the Lord God belong the issues of death. The Lords hand is not shortened.

But the question is moved especially concerning us, Whence we know this
delivery to be possible; and, whether man's reason, without the word of God, may
attain unto the knowledge thereof; and, whether Adam after his fall could have
a perfect knowledge and assured hope of the same. Answ. That our delivery was
possible, Humane reason how it might know, or not know ought touching our
deliverie.
is now evident by the event and accomplishment thereof, and we know it by the
Gospel or divine revelation: But humane reason knows no one tittle or jot of
this delivery, or the manner whereby it was effected although probably it may
be conjectured, that in humane reason it was not simply impossible; whereas
there is no likelihood at all, 1. That so glorious and excellent a creature
should be framed to eternal misery: or, 2. That God should authorize such a
law, as could never be fulfilled. Which two arguments of man's brain are in
themselves powerful and invincible: but man's reason, through her corrupt and
weak judgment, gives no credit to so apparent a truth, neither assenteth unto
it, without the promise and grace of the holy Ghost; that is, is not able out
of these two axioms and principles certainly and necessarily to infer, that he
knows and hops for his deliverance out of pain and misery. As then they
who are sequestered from the Church, and are ignorant of the Gospel, can have no
knowledge or hope of delivery: so Adam after his fall, by the mere instinct
and conduct of natural reason, without Gods especial revelation, and peculiar
promise, could not possibly have intelligence or confidence thereof. For, sin
being once committed, nothing could be conversant in his mind and
understanding, nothing obvious to his eyes, but the severe and exact justice of
God, which suffers not sin to escape unpunished, and Gods unchangeable truth,
which had pronounced, Genes. 2.19.
In what day soever thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. Adam well
perceived, that this Gods justice and truth must needs be satisfied with the
perpetual ruin and destruction of the transgressor; and therefore out of this
contemplation and consideration could collect no hold or hope of liberty. He
might indeed probably gather, that a delivery might be compassed, if by any
means this Gods justice and truth might be satisfied; but he could neither
hope for it, nor conceive what manner of delivery it should be, or by whom it
should be performed. Nay, the very Angels themselves could not at any time have
complotted or devised the means whereby this delivery might be wrought, had not
God of his unmeasurable wisdom and goodness invented it himself, and
revealed it unto men by his Gospel. But some man may except and say; If
delivery seemed impossible unto Adam, by reason of Gods justice and truth, then
now also it may seem impossible: (For Gods truth and justice may no more be
impeached now, then heretofore) But a sinners recovery and escaping out of
punishment and misery would impeach the justice and truth of God. Ans. The
escaping of a sinner should impeach the justice and truth of God indeed, if it
happened without sufficient satisfaction mediating for the offense. How Adam
after his fall might not despair of, and how he could not assuredly hope for
delivery, before by special revelation he was assured of the promise.
This resolution unto the objection proposed, if Adam saw, he had good ground
why he should not simply despair of delivery, especially if withal he
considered the nature of God, that is, his unlimited bounty, wisdom, and
power, and if he uprightly weighed the end of man's creation; that it was not
meet that so gracious and good a God, so wise, and so mighty, should make so
excellent a creature as man, to sustain perpetual misery: or, that he should
deliver such a Law to man, as could never perfectly be performed by him: yet on
this could he ground no constant persuasion or immovable hope; because, as
has been said, before the publishing of the Gospel, neither he, nor any
creature was able, or should for ever have been able of himself to perceive,
or so much as imagine unto himself a manner of escaping punishment not
repugnant to the justice of God, except God had declared and revealed the same
by his Son. The sum of all is this: Man being fallen, could hope for no
delivery from sin and death, before the joyful and gladsome promise of the
seed of the woman, which should crush and break in pieces the head of the
Serpent: yet neither ought he hereupon, neither indeed simply could he
despair thereof, as of a thing impossible. For, howsoever he could not
conceive any necessary ground or reason, whereby he might infallibly infer and
conclude his future delivery; neither yet could understand the manner and
means of making satisfaction; nevertheless in consequent it is, that, If no
creature could invent it, then neither could God devise it. It behoved him
therefore to depend and rely on Gods profound wisdom, exceeding goodness,
and mighty power; and not in any case despair hereof, though indeed all things
seemed to solicit and to provoke him to despairation. Notwithstanding, except
the voice of the Gospel had also sounded in his ears, nothing could have
sufficiently comforted and sustained him against the Devils temptations: But
when once the sweet promise sounded in his ears, then he understood the means
of satisfaction by Christ; and then he might not only wax confident of his
delivery, but by virtue thereof resolve all doubts to the contrary, such as are
these here following: Argum^nts against the possibility of man's delivery.
Object. 1. The justice of God suffers not those to escape unpunished: who
deserve eternal damnation. But we have deserved eternal damnation: Therefore
in regard of Gods justice, our delivery is impossible. Ans. Adam saw an answer
to the Major of this Syllogism; namely, That the justice of God absolveth not,
neither dismisseth unpunished those that deserve everlasting damnation, except
there be interposed a full and perfect satisfaction by condign punishment of
the offense. Object 2. When that is not executed which the justice of God
requires, and his truth menaceth, they are both impeached. But if man escape
out of misery, that is not executed which the justice of God requires, and his
truth menaceth, to wit, due punishment, and everlasting death is not inflicted:
Therefore man's escape and wading out of misery cannot be without the impeaching
of both; which impeachment is impossible. Answ. Here again Adam perceived that
the Minor was only true, if no punishment at all were inflicted either on the
sinner himself, or on some other, who offered himself to sustain the penalty
in the sinners place. Now knowing thus much, he had also further learned out of
Gods promise, that in man's behalf, Christ, the seed of the woman, should
break the head of the Serpent. Object. 3. What the unchangeable truth and
justice of God requires, that is necessary and unchangeable. But the
unchangeable justice and truth of God requires the casting away of a sinner
into everlasting pains: Therefore the casting away and perdition of a sinner
is necessary and unchangeable. Ans. He discerned here also what might be
answered to the imperfection of the Major, namely, that that is unchangeable
which the justice of God requires, to wit, simply, and without all condition;
not that which is required with condition, and by way of exchange in this sort,
that either there be a casting away of the sinner into everlasting punishments,
or a satisfaction made by Christ. Object. 4. Whence we have no ability to come
out, all delivery thence is impossible: But to shake off sin and death, and
come out of them we have no ability: Therefore this escape is impossible. Ans.
Here also he descrieth the falsehood of the Major, that the escape is indeed
impossible, unless God know the means, and lay open the way of escapeing out
of these evils, which in it self to humane reason, and to all creatures is
utterly unknown, and impossible to be found out. These and the like darts of
Satan, Adam had learned by the promise of the Gospel to ward and shiver in
pieces. But we at this day far more clearly see and perceive the virtue and
efficacy of these solutions, then heretofore Adam could; whereas we out of the
Gospel, and by the event and accomplishment thereof, and by the sense and
feeling of our private consciences, have an infallible knowledge, that the
delivery of man is possible, and should one day be performed, as Adam saw, but
that it is already finished and achieved by Christ. Man's delivery therefore
now is, and always was possible unto God.

3. Whether delivery be necessary and certain.
ALthough God was not bound at all to deliver man out of his thraldom of
misery, but it remained free unto him to relinquish and leave all men in the
power of death, and save none; (For, Who has given unto him first, Romans 11.35.
and he shall be recompensed?) yet we may well say, that Man's delivery was, and
now is necessary, not by any absolute necessity, but by such as is called
necessity by supposition, that is, with supposall of some special condition it
was always necessary: The necessity of man's delivery not absolute, but
depending on the unchangeable will and decree of God. Exodus 33.11.
Because God has most freely and unchangeably decreed and promised this
delivery published; and impossible it is that he should lie, or be deceived: As
I live, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that the wicked turn from his
way, and live. From the end of the Creation. Ephesians. 1.6. Psalm. 86.46.
Because God in the beginning created man, that he might for ever be magnified
of him: He has made us to the praise of the glory of his grace. And, Have thou
made all men for naught? From the end of sending his Son into the world. John
6.39, 40. Mat. 9.13. Mat. 18.11. Romans 4.25. Gal. 2.21.
Because God did not in vain send his Son into the world, neither did Christ
die to no purpose: I came down from heaven to do his will that sent me. And
this is the Fathers will which sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing. I am come to call sinners to repentance. The Son of man is
come to save that which was lost. He died for our sins, and is risen again for
our justification. If righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died without a
cause. From the stature of God.
Because God more enclineth to the exercising and setting forth of his mercy,
then of his anger. But he shows his anger in punishing the wicked: therefore
much more will he show his mercy in saving the godly.

4. Whether we may expect and hope for perfect delivery.
How our delivery is perfect.
THe delivery and setting of man at liberty is in this life complete and
perfect, but as by a beginning only, and in some measure or degree: in the
next it shall be perfect by a final consummation, and in all competent
degrees. Our delivery is now perfect, but as concerning the parts thereof from
both evils, both of crime and pain; that is, all the parts of obedience are
begun in the redeemed or believer, so that as long as we live here, it is daily
augmented by new accessions and increasing: but then it shall be perfect also
in degrees, when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, the perfect Image of
God renewed in us, and God shall be all in all; that is, shall immediately
bless us with exceeding happiness, so that nothing shall remain in us
repugnant to God, but whatsoever shall be in us, that shall be of God. This is
proved: 1. Because God is not a deliverer in part only, but saves and loves
perfectly those whom he saves. 1 John 17.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: to wit, as touching
both the formal parts thereof, the guilt and the corruption of sin. 2.
Because he will perfectly punish the wicked, that they may exactly satisfy his
justice by their punishments: Therefore will he likewise perfectly deliver the
godly from punishment, because he is more inclined and propense to mercy, then
to anger: For Christ's benefit is not imperfecter, or of less force then the
sin of Adam; which it would be, if he did not perfectly deliver: because we
have all lost all our righteousness, salvation, and blessedness in Adam. We
must therefore expect and look for perfect delivery, but by degrees, as has
been declared: namely, in this life perfect; in the resurrection more perfect;
and in our glorification most perfect.

5. By what means delivery may be wrought.
Two necessary means of our delivery.
THis our delivery may be wrought and accomplished: Satisfaction.
By a full and sufficient satisfaction for our offense committed; that is, by
eternal punishment, or such a temporal punishment, as is correspondent and
equivalent with eternal. Regeneration.
By a purging, and abolishment of sin in us, and a renewing of our nature,
that is, a restoring of the righteousness we have lost, and new fashioning of
the Image of God in us, or a perfect regeneration of our corrupt nature: both
these are necessary for our delivery. 1. Satisfaction is necessary, Why
satisfaction is necessary.
because the mercy of God (as heretofore has been showed) overthrows not his
justice, which must be satisfied; and the Law binds us either to obedience or
punishment. Now by obedience satisfaction cannot be made, because our precedent
obedience is already impaired by the fall, and our obedience (were it any)
which has followed since the fall, cannot satisfy for the former offense,
whereas man is every moment obliged thereunto, as to a present debt. Therefore
obedience being once defective, there remains, according to the commination,
If thou shall eat thereof, thou shall die the death, no other satisfaction,
but by enduring punishment; which punishment being once sufficiently paid, God
is reconciled with the offender, and delivery may follow thereon. 2. The
cleansing from sin, Why regeneration is necessary.
and renewing of our nature is likewise required: For God will on that
condition accept of this satisfaction, and for it pardon our sin, so that we
leave off to offend him hereafter through our sins, and be thankful unto him
for our reconciliation. For to be willing to be received into Gods favor, and
yet not to be willing to cease from sinning, is to mock God. But we cannot
cease from sinning, unless our nature be renewed. Thus then man's delivery is
possible to be effected, to wit, if such a satisfaction be made, whereby
condign punishment and equal to the fault is suffered, and which no
after-slip and offense annihilate or make void.

Quest. 13. Are we able to satisfy by our selves?
Answ. Not a whit. Nay rather we do every day increase our debt? John 9.1. and
15.16. Psalm. 130 3. Mat. 6.12. and 16.26. and 18.25.
.

The Explication.
Since it is out of doubt that the means of our delivery consists in the
satisfaction and cleansing of our sin; it is further demanded, by whom this
satisfaction and cleansing of sin may be performed; whether by us, or by some
other; and if by some other, whether by any mere creature; and if by no mere
creature, by what then, and what kind of Mediator. To the first of these
interrogatories answer is made in this thirteenth Question: to the other two
which follow, in the fourteenth and fifteenth Questions of the Catechism.

Two causes why we can make no satisfaction by obedience.
Satisfaction cannot be performed of us and by us, neither by obedience nor by
punishment. Not by obedience; 1. Because what good soever we do, by virtue of
present bond and obligation we owe it unto God. By it therefore we cannot
satisfy for our former faults. For we can deserve nothing at Gods hands for
the present, much less for time to come: neither can a double merit for the
time both present and to come issue out of one satisfaction. 2. In the
Catechism a more familiar reason is yielded, Because we daily heap up offenses
and debts. For we sin uncessantly, and by sinning heap up and increase our
guilt, and Gods wrath. Now he who goes on still in offending, never appeaseth
the party offended; as the debtor never riddeth himself out of debt, who
without any acquittance of ancient Bills, enters daily new bonds and covenants.
Neither yet can we satisfy by our punishments, We can make no satisfaction by
sufficient punishment.
because our offense being infinite, deserves infinite punishment, that is,
eternal; or if temporal, yet answering in equality to eternal. For all sin is
an offense against the infinite good, and meriteth everlasting damnation, or at
least such a temporal condemnation, as yet is equal to eternal. Eternal
punishment we cannot sustain; because then we should nevet be delivered or
recovered thence. Not by eternal punishment.
We should indeed be always satisfying Gods justice, but it could never be
said that we had satisfied; our satisfaction would never be perfect, we should
never return with conquest of sin and death, but our satisfaction continuing
still unperfect, should be prorogued to all eternity: which satisfaction is
such as is the punishment of the Devils and reprobate men, which never shall
have end. Not by temporal.
Now for a temporal punishment, which should be answerable and equal to
eternal, such as is required to the intent that the satisfaction may prove a
victory over and a quelling and suppressing thereof, there is no creature (as
shortly shall be proved) by reason of manifold imperfection, who can perform
it. Since then we are not able by our selves, if we covet our delivery, we must
needs make satisfaction by another. Hence we easily deduce an answer to this
objection: Ob. We never satisfy the law, neither by obedience, neither yet by
punishment: Therefore this manner of delivery by satisfaction is vain and
imaginary. Answ. It is no way frivolous: because though we be not able to
satisfy by obedience, yet we are by paying the full penalty, not in our own
person, but in the person of Christ, who amply satisfied the law, both by
obedience, and by punishment. Repl. 1. The law requires Our obedience or
punishment, because it is written; He which does these things, shall live by
them. Cursed is he who continues not in all. Answ. Gal. 3.10.
Verily the law requires our obedience, or our punishment, but not
exclusively: to wit, so, that it does not admit it to be performed by another
for us: for it no where excludes or disalloweth another satisfaction on our
behalf, albeit it teach not, or know not the same. But this the Gospel
reveals, and points it out unto us in Christ. Repl. 2. That another should
be punished for offenders, is unjust: Therefore Christ could not undergo our
punishment. Ans. That another should be punished for offenders, is not
disagreeing with Gods justice, if these conditions concur withal: The
conditions to be respected in him who may be punished for another.
1. If he who is punished be innocent. 2. If he be of the same nature with the
offenders. 3. If of his own accord he offer himself to punishment. 4. If of
himself he be able to recover out of punishment. And this is the cause that
men cannot justly punish ones offenses in another, because they cannot bring to
pass, that the party punished should not perish in the punishment. 5. If he
wish and attain unto that end which Christ respected, even the glory of God,
and salvation of men.

Quest. 14. Is there any creature able in heaven or in earth, which is only a
creature, to satisfy for us?
Answ. None: For first, God will not punish that sin in any other creature,
which man had committed Ezekiel. 18.4. Genesis 3.17.
. And further, neither can that which is nothing but a creature, sustain the
wrath of God against sin, and deliver others from it Nah. 1.6. Psalm. 130.3.
.

The Explication.
THe exclusive particle only is added to the question, that the negative
answer may prove true: For it was behoovefull that a creature should satisfy
for the sin of a creature, but not such a one as was merely or only a creature;
because such a one could not satisfy, as hereafter shall appear. Whereas,
when we are to satisfy by another, the question is, No other creature but man
could satisfy for man. Ezekiel. 18.20.
Whether that other by whom we must satisfy may be any creature besides man.
No mere creature could satisfy for man.
And that a mere and bare creature. Both of these is on good reason denied. The
reason of the former is; Because God will not punish that in another creatare
which man has committed: and this he does according to the inviolable order of
his justice. which permits not, that one creature offend, and another bear
the punishment: The soul that sins shall die. This reason demonstrateth,
that no creature but man could satisfy for man: that God could not be
satisfied for the sin of man, no not by the utter and eternal destruction of
heaven and earth, or the Angels themselves, and all creatures else whatsoever.
The reason of the latter is; 1. Because the power and vigor of no creature is
such, that it may sustain a finite and temporal punishment equivalent to
infinite and eternal, due to the infinite crime of man: For sooner should the
creature be wasted and consumed to nothing, then it could satisfy God by this
means: For God is a consuming fire. If thou shall mark what is done amiss,
Deuteronomy. 4.24. Psalm. 130.3. Romans 8.3.
O Lord, who may abide it? Because the law was not able to justify, in as much
as it was weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, etc. This reason proves, that no creature in the whole frame of nature
was able to satisfy God by enduring punishment, that it could it self wade out
of the brunt and peril thereof; which escape is necessary to the
accomplishment of delivery: By reason therefore of the infirmity and weakness
of the creature, there would not be any just proportion between the punishment
and the sin. 2. Because the punishment of a mere creature could not be a price
of sufficient worthiness and value for our redemption. 3. Because a bare
creature could not have purged humane nature from the contagion and corruption
wherewith it was infected, neither yet could effect, that from henceforth we
should sin no more: all which it behooved our Deliverer to perform.

Quest. 15. What manner of Mediator then and Deliverer must we seek for?
Ans. Such a one verily as is very man 1 Cor. 15.21.
, and perfectly just Heb. 7.26. Isa. 7.14. and 9.6 Jer. 23.6. Luke 11.22.
, and yet in power above all creatures; that is, who also is very God.

The Explication.
Since then we our selves are not able to satisfy God, but have need of some
other to become a satisfier and mediator in our behalf; the question is, What
kind of Mediator he ought to be that should make satisfaction in our stead.
For of force and necessity he must be either a creature alone, or God alone, or
both in one. A sole creature he may not be, for the causes before discovered
and expressed. Meerley God could not satisfy for man.
Merely God he could not be, both 1. Because not God, but man sinned: and also
2. Because it behooved the Mediator to suffer and die for the sin of man;
neither of which are incident to the Deity; so that God can neither suffer, nor
die: It remains therefore that we stand in need of such a Mediator as is
both in one, that is to say, which is both God and man. The causes hereof shall
be assigned in the questions immediately following.

ON THE 6. SABBATH.
Quest. 16. Wherefore is it necessary that he be very man, and perfectly just
too?
Ans. Because the justice of God requires, that the same humane nature which
has sinned, do it self likewise make recompense for sin Eze. 18.4, 20. Romans
3.18. 1 Cor. 15.21. He. 2.14, 15, 16.
: but he that is himself a sinner cannot make a recompense for others Heb.
7.26, 27 Psalm. 49.7, 8.1 Pet. 3.18.
.

The Explication.
IT behooved our Mediator to be 1. man, 2. and indeed very man, 3. and that
man also perfectly just.

Our Mediator must be man. Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.21.
He ought to be Man, 1. Because it was man that sinned; therefore man must make
recompense. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death, etc. Since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the
dead. 2. That he might suffer death: for he ought to make satisfaction for us
by dying and shedding his blood; Genesis 2 17. Heb. 9.22.
because it was said, Thou shall die the death. Without shedding of blood is no
remission.

He must be true man.
He ought to be True man; that is, descending and springing of mankind which
had sinned; not created of nothing, or coming from heaven, but every way
subject to all our infirmities, sin only except: The soul which sins shall
die. Ezekiel. 18.20. Genesis 2.17.
And, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death. Wherefore
true man, of the posterity of Adam which transgressed, ought to pay for men
that which was required at their hands. Hitherto tend those sayings; Since by
man came death by man came also the resurrection of the dead. 1 Cor. 15.21. 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 2.16, 17. Col. 2.12.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the Man
Christ Jesus. He took the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it became
him to be made like unto his brethren, etc. Hereof the Apostle also says, that
we are buried with Christ through baptism, in whom we are also raised up
together, etc. And Augustine, in his book of true religion, Aug. lib. de vera
Religione. cip. 53.
says, The same nature was to be taken which was to be delivered. poor, weak,
contemptible: And of Isaiah especially is he described to be such a one. The
seed of the woman should break the head of the serpent. Genesis 2.15. Genesis 22.18.
In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. Whence the Apostle
teaches, that He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of
one; (that is, of the same humane nature) wherefore he is not ashamed to call
them brethren. Now therefore that he might be our brother, it was requisite
that he should be born of Adam: For, Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part with them, etc. Heb. 2.17, 18.
It became him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and a faithful high Priest in things concerning God, that he
might make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he suffered
and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

He must be perfectly just.
It is necessary that he be a man perfectly just; that is, defiled with no spot
of original or actual sin, that he might worthily be our Savior, and his
passion and sacrifice be a ransom not for himself, but for us: for had he
himself been a sinner, he must have satisfied for his own sins. Hence the
Scripture testifies of him; Isa. 53.11. 1 Pet. 2.22. 1 Pet. 3.18.
My righteous servant shall justify many. Who did no sin, neither etc. Christ
has once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God. Yea, if the Mediator himself had been subject to any sin, he should not
have been able to have avoided the wrath of God, much less to have merited for
others freedom from punishment, and the favor of God: neither could his
passion and death, who had not suffered as an innocent, have been the price and
ransom of others sins. Therefore God made him to be sin for us (that is, to be
a sacrifice for sin) which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that were should be made the righteousness of God in him. For such an high
Priest it became us to have, Heb. 7.26, 27.
which is holy harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher
then the heavens; which needs not daily, as those high Priests, to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples. Now four manner of
ways was the man Christ perfectly just, Christ said to be perfectly just four
ways.
or has perfectly fulfilled the law. By his own righteousness; For Christ
alone performed perfect obedience, such as the law requires. By paying
sufficient punishment for our sins. It was necessary that this double
fulfilling of the law should be in Christ: for had not his righteousness been
full and perfect, he could not have satisfied for the offense of others. And
except his suffering of punishment had been sufficient, we by it should never
have been delivered from everlasting punishment. The former of these is called,
The fulfilling of the law by obedience, whereby himself was conformable in all
points to the law: The latter is termed, The fulfilling of the law by
punishment; to wit, which he suffered for us, lest we should remain subject
unto everlasting death. by his Spirit, when as he regenerateth us by the same
Spirit, and by the law traineth us to obedience both outward and inward, which
the law challenges of us, and we begin it in this life, but shall perform it
wholly and fully in the life to come. by teaching it, and purging it from
errors and corruptions, and by restoring the true sense, doctrine and
understanding thereof: as it is said; Matt. 5.17.
I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it. For (as it appears by the
Evangelist Saint Matthew) the Scribes and Pharisees had so corrupted the
spiritual meaning of the law, wholly restraining it to bodily actions, that
Christ was enforced thereby to give the right sense of many places thereof, and
so by the light of the truth to scatter the mist of their corruptions.

Quest. 17. Why must he also be very God?
Answ. That he might by his Godhead Isa. 9. and 63.3.
sustain in his flesh Isa. 53.4, 11.
the burden of Gods wrath Deuteronomy. 4.24. Nahum 1.9. Psalm. 130.3.
, and might recover and restore unto us that righteousness and life which we
lost Isa. 53.5, 10.
.

The Explication.
IT was requisite that our Mediator should be not only man, Our Mediator must
be true God.
and that true and very man, and that man perfectly just; but besides all this,
that he should be God also; and that a true and mighty God, not an imaginary,
and only adorned with excellent gifts above all the angels and saints, as
heretics decipher him. The reasons hereof are these which follow: Because of
the grievousness of the punishment he was to endure.
That by the power of his divinity he might sustain in his flesh the infinite
wrath and indignation of God against sin, and endure such a punishment, as in
durance should indeed be temporal, but infinite in weight, worth, and value.
For certainly he had been brought to nothing by reason of infirmity, whosoever,
being but mere man, had adventured to undertake the huge heap and heavy
burden of Gods indignation. It was therefore behoovefull that our Mediator
should be of infinite strength, and so to be God, who should suffer, without
falling into despair, or being brought unto nothing, Which punishment was of
infinite value.
so unmeasurable punishment. Now it was necessary that the punishment of the
Mediator should be of infinite value, and equivalent to eternal, that there
might be a proportion betwixt the sin and the punishment thereof. For there is
no one sin amongst all the sins committed from the beginning of the world to
the end thereof so little, as that it deserves not everlasting death: they are
all so exceeding evil, that they cannot be expiated and done away by the
endless destruction of any creature. Notwithstanding this punishment ought to
be finite in respect of time; because it behooved our Mediator not to be shut
up in death for ever, but to wrest himself out of the power thereof, to the
intent that he might accomplish the benefit of our redemption; that is to say,
that he might merit perfectly for us our redemption; and now, when it was
perfectly merited, apply it, or bestow it upon us by his forcible working, and
effectually save us. For it became our Mediator to perform both; namely, to
merit first, and then to bestow righteousness, that thence he might prove a
perfect Savior as well in efficacy and fruit, as in merit and desert. These
things could not have been done by a mere man, who, of whatsoever strength he
be, cannot by his own force or power wrestle out of the hands of death.
Wherefore it was requisite, that he which was to save others from death, should
by his power overcome death, and first depell it and shake it off from himself;
which thing he could not accomplish except he were God.

Because of the worth of the ransom he was to pay.
It was needful that the price or ransom which our Mediator paid should be
of infinite value, that it might be a sufficient and full worthy ransom for
the redemption of our souls; that is, that it might be reputed sufficient in
Gods judgment for the purging and putting away of our sins, and for the
repairing of that righteousness and life which we had lost. Therefore it
became the person also that should pay this price to be of infinite
worthiness, to wit, very God. For the worth of this price, for which it is
acceptable unto God, and is of infinite estimate, though it were but temporal,
Which worth consisted 1. In the worthiness of the person paying.
consists in two things: 1. In the worthiness of the person paying it. 2. In
the grievousnesse and extremity of the penalty endured. The worthiness of the
person. Herein appears, that the person which suffered is God, himself the
Creator of all things. For that he should die for the sins of the world is
infinitely more then the death and destruction of all creatures, and is at
higher rate and reckoning then the conformity or correspondence of all the
Angels and holy men with God. Wherefore the Apostles when they speak of Christ's
passion, ever almost make mention of his Godhead: God has purchased the
Church with his blood. Acts 20.28. 1 John 1.7. John 1.26. Genesis 3.15.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world. Yea, God himself in Paradise joyneth
these two; The seed of the woman shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. In the grievousnesse of the punishment. Psalm. 18.4. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Isa.
5.36.
The grievousnesse of the punishment was, that Christ sustained the dreadful
torments of hell, and the heavy wrath of God against the sins of the whole
world: The pains of hell came about me. God is a consuming fi^e. The Lord has
laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Whence it is understood why Christ did so
greatly tremble at death, whereas many Martyrs have without fear or trembling
offered their throats to the persecuters. Ob. The perfect fulfilling of the law
by obedience might have been a satisfaction for our sins: But a mere man, so be
were absolutely just might by his obedience have perfectly fulfilled the law:
Therefore mere man, being perfectly just, might sat is fie for our sins; and by
force of consequent, it was not necessary that our Mediator should be God.
Answ. 1. The Major is false, because, as has before been showed, obedience
being once forsaken and shaken off, Gods justice could not be satisfied for our
offense, but only by sufficient and due punishment, in regard of his
commination once uttered; Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death. Ans. 2. Though
we grant the Minor, that forsooth, a mere man by his obedience might perfectly
fulfill the law; yet this obedience could not have been a price for another
debt, since every man is bound to perform the same. It was required therefore
that our Mediator should pay a sufficient punishment for us, and in regard
hereof, be armed with the power of the Godhead: for the devils themselves are
not able to sustain the weight of Gods wrath against sin* much less should man
be able to do it. Repl. But all the devils and wicked men bear and sustain, and
are constrained to bear and sustain the everlasting wrath of God. Ans. They
indeed bear the immeasurable wrath of God, Wicked men and devils satisfy in
never satisfying.
but so that they never satisfy Gods justice, neither recover out of
punishment; for their punishment is extended to all eternity. But it beseemed
the Mediator so to bear the burden of Gods wrath, that after he had satisfied
for our sins, he might shake off that burden, and take it away both from
himself and from us.

Because of revealing Gods will unto us.
Our Mediator must be God, That he might reveal and make known unto us the
secret will of God concerning the redemption of mankind, whereof except he were
God, he could have no knowledge. For no creature could at any time have
searched out the bottomless depth thereof, and conceived so intricate a
mystery, had not the Son of God displayed, and laid it open unto us. No man
has seen God at any time: John 1.18.
the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him.

Because of giving the Spirit.
Our Mediator must be God, That he may give the holy Ghost, by whom he may
gather in one his Church, be present with it in the world, and bestow on us,
maintain and perfect in us the benefits purchased by his death; remission of
sins, righteousness, new obedience, and life everlasting. For it is not
sufficient for our Mediator to be made a sacrifice for us, to break the bonds
of death, and make intercession with God for us: but it is necessary also that
he promise on our behalf that we shall embrace the decree concerning our
redemption by our Mediator, and cease at length to offend God through our
sins; which is the other part of the Covenant made between God and us, and is
performed by us, that the Covenant may remain firm and ratified: But this, by
reason of our corruption, could be promised of no man in our behalf, except he
have the power also of giving the holy Ghost, by whom he might work in us to
assent, and to be more and more conformed to the image of God. Now to give the
holy Ghost, and by him to regenerate our hearts, and work forcibly in us faith,
conversion, and salvation, belongs to God alone, whose also is the Spirit;
Whom I will send you from the Father. John 15.26.
For only the Lord of nature is able to reform nature.

Jerem. 23.6.
Lastly, it behooved the Messiah to be the Lord our righteousness. Object. The
party offended cannot be Mediator: Christ is the Mediator: Therefore he
cannot be the party offended, that is, God. Ans. The Major proposition is true,
if the party offended be such a one, as in whom there are not more persons: But
a most clear testimony, whereby are taught in few words those three former, to
wit, that the mediator is both true man, Acts 20.28.
and perfectly just, and true God, is extant, when it is said, God has
purchased the Church with his blood: for he is true man, who sheddeth his own
blood: He is perfectly just, who sheddeth it for the redemption of others: He
is true God, to whom both the name and properties of true God are given, which
is, to be a Redeemer both by his merit, and also by his efficacy and power, and
that, of the Church, that is, the elect and chosen.

Quest. 18. And who is that Mediator which is together both very God 1 John
5.20. Romans 9.5. Gal. 4.4. Isa 9.6. Jer. 23.6. Mal. 3.1.
, and a very Luke 1.24. and 2.6, 7. Romans 1.3. and 9.5. Phil. 2.7. Heb. 2.14,
16, 17. and 4.15.
perfectly just man Isa. 53.9, 11. Jer. 23.5. Luke 1.35. Joh. 8.46. Heb. 4.15.
and 7.26. 1 Pet. 1.19. and 2.22. and 3.18.
?
Ans. Even our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 2.5. and 3.16. Ma^th. 1.23. Heb. 2.9.
Luke 2.11.
, who is made to us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption 1 Cor. 1.30.
.

The Explication.
WHat kind of Mediator is necessary for us has already been declared. The
Mediator was to be God; yet not the Father, nor the H. Ghost, but the Son
only. Eight reasons hereof.
Now the question is of the person who is such a Mediator. This Mediator
therefore is Jesus Christ alone, the Son of God manifested in the flesh;
which position is proved by these reasons: true God, as heretofore has been
evidently showed: But God the Father could not be Mediator, because he works
not by himsefe and immediately, but mediatly by the Son and the holy Ghost.
Neither is he the messenger; because he is sent of none, but he sends the
Mediator. Neither yet could God the holy Ghost be Mediator; because he was to
be sent of the Mediator into the hearts of the elect: therefore necessarily
the Son, and he only was to be our Mediator. The Word therefore only, which is
that natural Son of God, is our Mediator, in whom, as in the first begotten
of God, we are adopted to be the sons of God; John S. 36. John 1.12.
as it is said, If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. As
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God. Who has
predestinate to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself: Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
With his grace he has made us accepted in his beloved. the Word, his Fathers
ambassador and delegate, and that person which is sent unto mankind, by whom
the Father opens his will, by whom he works, and gives his holy Spirit, by
whom also is made the second creation; for by the Son we are made new
creatures. Therefore the Scripture joyneth every where the first creation with
the second, John 1.3.2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. Ephesians. 2.10. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.10.
because the second creation was to be made by the same party by whom the first
was wrought: By the Son were made all things. But this was proper to the
Mediator, to be a messenger and truce-man between God and us, and to
regenerate us by his Spirit: Therefore only the Son must be this Mediator.
immediately sends the holy Ghost. The Father also indeed sends the holy
Ghost, but mediately by the Son: the Son immediately from the Father, as
himself testifies; whom I will send unto you from the Father. John 15.26.
God is manifested in the flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ was put to death concerning the flesh, etc. Therefore he only is the
Mediator. John 5.36. John 7.31. John 10.38. Matthew. 11.4, 5.
The works that I do bear witness of me, that the Father sent me. When
Christ comes, will he do more miracles then this man has done? Believe my
works. Go and show John what things ye have heard and seen: the blind receive
sight, etc. There is one Mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ
Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Christ Jesus of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption; that is to say, he is made unto us a teacher of
wisdom, a Justifier, and Sanctifier, and Redeemer, to wit, a Mediator and
Savior in full merit and efficacy: For in this speech of the Apostle the
Abstracts, wisdom, justification, sanctification, and redemption, are put for
the Concretes, a teacher of wisdom, a Justifier, a Sanctifier, a Redeemer. In
this sentence of the Apostle that is worthy observation, whereas he says that
the Mediator was made unto us of God, he means, was appointed and given. The
Mediator was given us by God.
A Mediator should have been given unto us, and proceeded from us: because we
were the offenders: But we were unable to supply any from amongst our selves,
because we were all the sons of wrath: Wherefore it was necessary that a
Mediator should be given us of God. Here we are to note farther, that justice
or righteousness, and sanctity or holiness in us before the fall, were one
and the same thing, to wit, an inherent conformity in us with God and the law;
as at this day in the holy Angels they are one and the same. But now since the
fall, they continue no longer the same in us: For now Christ is our
righteousness, How justification and sanctification, and justice and sanctity
are now since the fall different and diverse in us.
and our justification is the imputation of Christ's righteousness, whereby we
are accounted righteous before God. Holiness also is our inchoative or new
begun conformity with God; and sanctification is the working of a conformity
with God in us, which is here imperfect, and shall be perfected in the life to
come, where holiness and righteousness shall be again one and the same even
in us. Now follows a brief recapitulation of the whole doctrine touching the
Mediator.

OF THE MEDIATOR.
The causes why this doctrine of the Mediator is to be in the Church.
THe doctrine touching the Mediator (whereas it so nearly concerns Gods glory
and our comfort) is to be held and diligently considered for these causes: That
we may acknowledge and magnify the mercy and goodness of God toward us, in
that he has given us his Son to be our Mediator, and to be made a sacrifice
for our sins. That we may know that God is just, and does not of any lenity
pardon sins; but is so grievously offended therewith, that he grants no
pardon to them, except the satisfaction of his Son mediate and come between.
That we enjoying such a Mediator may be assured of eternal life; because
this our Mediator is both willing and able to grant it. Because it is the
foundation and short sum of Christian doctrine. Because of Heretics, who at
all times most grievously oppugn this doctrine, that against them we may be
able to defend it. The doctrine concerning the Mediator seems to belong to
the place of Justification; because there also the office of the Mediator is
declared: But it is one thing to teach, What, and what manner of benefit the
benefit of justification is, and how it is received, which is performed in the
common place touching Justification: another thing to show whose that benefit
is, and by whom it is bestowed, which is proper to this present place here
handled: and these are different and diverse propositions; Justification
belongs to the Mediator, or, is wrought by the Mediator: and, remission of
sins is our justification. In the former proposition Justication is the
subject; that is, it is that whereof another thing is affirmed: in the latter
it is the Attribute or Predicate; that is, justification it self is affirmed of
another thing, even of remission of sins.

The principal Questions touching the Mediator are these:
1. What in general a Mediator is. 2. Whether we need any Mediator with God
for us. 3. What his office is. 4. What manner of one is necessary. 5. Who, or
what person is, or may be our Mediator. 6. Whether there may be more
Mediators.


1 What a Mediator is.
What a mediator (...) in general.
A Mediator in general signifies him who reconcileth two parties at variance,
by interposing himself and mitigating the offense, or appeasing the offended
by entreaty, satisfaction, and caution lest the like offense be again
occasioned and committed. To reconcile has four parts.
For, to reconcile, is, 1
To make intercession for him who offends, unto him who is offended. 2
To make satisfaction for the injury offered. 3
To promise and to bring to pass that the party who has offended offend no
more: For except this be brought to pass and effectuated, the fruit and
commodity of the intercession is lost. 4
To bring them to an atonement and agreement who were before at enmity. If one
of these conditions be wanting, A Mediator in special.
there cannot be any true reconcilement. But in special and as here it is used
and meant of Christ, A Mediator is a person reconciling God who is offended
and angry with sin, and mankind offending and subject to eternal death for
the same; and that by the satisfying of Gods justice by his death, by praying
and entreating for the guilty, and by applying forcibly and effectually his
merit through faith on them that believe, and regenerating them by his holy
Spirit, effecting that they cease from sinning, and lastly, hearing their
groans and petitions when they call on him. Or, A Mediator is a pacifier or
reconciler of God and men, asswaging Gods wrath, and restoring men into Gods
favor by intercession and satisfaction for their sins, and by causing God to
love men, and men to love God, so that hence issues an inviolable peace and
agreement between God and man.

How a middle person and a Mediator differ: and how Christ is the one and the
other.
A middle person and a Mediator are different; because that is the name of the
person, this of the office: both which Christ is between God the Father and us.
He is a middle person, because in him both natures, divine and humane, are
united personally: And a Mediator, because he reconcileth us to God his
Father; albeit in some sort he is also in the same respect the middle person,
in which he is a Mediator, because in him two extremes are joined, God and
man. It is demanded, Whether Adam had need of a Mediator before his fall?
Answer is to be made by distinguishing of the diverse meanings and
significations of a Mediator: If a Mediator be meant to be such a one through
whose mediation, or by whom God does bestow his benefits, and communicate
himself unto us, Adam verily even before his fall had need of a Mediator,
because Christ ever was that person by whom God the Father creates and
quickens all things: John 1.4.
For, In him was life, to wit, all both corporal and spiritual life; and the
life was the light of men. But if the Mediator be understood to be him who
performs both these and all other parts of a Mediators office, Adam did not
stand in need of a Mediator before his fall. We must observe notwithstanding,
that in the Scriptures this phrase is not found, whereby Christ is said to have
been the Mediator also before the fall of man.

2. Whether we need any Mediator with God for us.
No reconcilement without a Mediator.
A Mediator is necessary for us, 1. Because the justice of God admits no
reconcilement without the recovery and new purchase of his grace and favor;
therefore it is very requisite that we have an Advocate: neither yet without
intercession; therefore we have need of an intercessor: neither without
satisfaction; therefore a satisfier is necessary for us: neither without an
applying of these several benefits; (for the benefits must be received)
therefore it became us to have such an applier: Lastly, not without a purging
of sin, and a restoring of Gods image in us, to the end we may cease to offend
him; therefore of force we ought to have such a cleanser of our sinful
corruption, and renewer of a better nature. Now we are not able to perform
this, to wit, to appease God being offended with us, and to make our selves
acceptable unto God: we have need therefore of another Mediator who may
perform this for us. 2. God required a Mediator of the party offending: for
God, as God, would not receive satisfaction of himself, but would, for his
justice sake, that the party offending should perform the same, or else obtain
favor by a Mediator, and should himself present such a one as should be able
to make perfect satisfaction, and also should be most acceptable unto God, lest
he might suffer a repulse; and farther, such a one as might easily by his
favor, whereby he should prevail with God, reconcile us unto him through
satisfying, and making entreaty and intercession for us. Now, we were not able
to bear this person, neither yet to supply any of our race and line sufficient
to sustain the same; because we were all the children of wrath. Therefore we
stood in need of a third Mediator, which third God tendered unto us, even such
a one as was both a man and a man most acceptable to God. 3. They who to
procure their delivery must necessarily satisfy Gods justice, either by
themselves, or by another, and are not able by themselves, have need of a
Mediator: But we, to purchase our freedom, must satisfy Gods justice either
by our selves or by another; and by our selves we are not able: Therefore we
have need of a Mediator. But exception is made against the distinction of the
Major proposition of our reason, in appointing either our selves, or another,
thus: Ob. Where only one means of satisfying is set down, there no other may be
enquired after or proposed: But the law acknowledges and assigns only one
means and way of satisfying, to wit, By our selves: Therefore we must not set
down any other, neither must we say, Either by our selves, or else by another.
Answ. We grant the whole reason, being understood of the law, or according to
the declaration of the law: For in the law one only means of satisfying is
prescribed, and in vain is any other sought after: yet so the law assigns one
means, that it denies not another. For the law verily says, that we must
satisfy by our selves; but it no where says, Only by our selves: The law
requires our selves to satisfy: the Gospel shows, and Gods mercy admits
another to satisfy.
therefore it no where excludes the means of satisfying by another. And albeit
God did not express this other means in the law: yet in his secret counsel
he understood it, and afterward revealed it in the Gospel. Wherefore
certainly the law discloseth no such means, but leaves it to be discovered by
the Gospel. Rep. The doctrine then of the Gospel is disagreeing from the law.
Ans. It is not disagreeing: for what the Gospel propounds, that the law
denies not; because the law no where adds the exclusive particle, namely,
that Only by us satisfaction ought to be made. 4. That a mediator with God is
necessary for us, many other things declare: 1. The tremblings and torments of
conscience in us. 2. The pains of the wicked. 3. The sacrifices ordained by
God, whereby was deciphered Christ's only and perfect sacrifice. 4. The
sacrifices of the heathen, and Papists, whereby they labor to pacify God,
because they perceive that we stand in need of satisfaction before God.

3. What is the office of a Mediator.
What our Mediator does with God.
THe office of a Mediator is to deal with both parties both the offended, and
the offender. So Christ our Mediator treats with either party: With God who
was offended he does these things: less with God. 5. He works this his
covenant and promise on our part in us by giving us his holy Spirit, What our
Mediator does with us.
and life everlasting. With us also, as being the party offending, he does
these things: Philip. 2.13.
except both parties accord. He works in us both to will and to do. merit,
Christ a Mediator both in merit and efficacy.
and efficacy of merit; because he not only meriteth for us by his sacrifice,
but also by virtue of his Spirit does effectually impart unto us his benefits,
righteousness, and life everlasting: witness those sayings; John 10.15, 28.
and 5.20, 26.
I lay down my life for my sheep. I give unto them eternal life. As the Father
has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the Son to have life in
himself. As the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, so the Son
quickens whom he will. Without me ye can do nothing. John 15.5.


The benefits of the Mediator.
Now when question is made of the office of the Mediator, question is made
withal concerning his benefits. For the office enjoined of God unto the
Mediator, is to bestow benefits on his Church; which Paul summarily compriseth
in these four general heads as it were, 1 Cor. 1.30.
when he faith, Ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. He is made
unto us wisdom, 1. Wisdom.
I esteemed not to know any thing amongst you, but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. We preach Christ crucified unto the Jews even a stumbling block, 1
Cor. 2.2. 1. Cor. 1.23, 24.
and unto the Grecians foolishness: But unto them which are called both of
Jews and Grecians, we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Christ the author of our wisdom three ways.
wisdom, that is, the doctrine of our redemption. Christ is called our wisdom,
because he is, 1. The subject, 2. The author, 3. The means of our wisdom. He
is made unto us righteousness, 2. Righteousness.
that is, our justifier: for in him our righteousness is, as in the subject,
and is made ours by his merit, and forcible operation: For, 1. He suffered the
punishment of our sins, which is justice and righteousness, and the merit for
which we are reputed just and righteous. 2. He by his power makes us righteous
in the sight of God, by imputing unto us his righteousness, and by giving us
faith, whereby our selves also receiving it, 3. Sanctification.
may apply it unto us. He is made unto us sanctification, that is, our
sanctifier; because he does regenerate and sanctify us by his holy Spirit. He
is made unto us redemption, 4. Redemption.
that is, our redeemer; because he finally delivers us: for the word
(...)(which we interpret redemption) does not only signify the price, but also
the effect and full complement thereof.

4. What manner of Mediator ours ought to be.
THis question has good and orderly dependence of the former: for whereas it
appears, 1. That we must satisfy. 2. That we must satisfy by another. 3.
That we must satisfy with that satisfaction of our Mediator, which has
already been discoursed of, and described at large. It is well demanded next,
4. What manner of Mediator is required. Our Mediator therefore must be, 1.
Man. 2. True man, deriving his nature of our kind, and retaining it for ever.
3. A man perfectly just. 4. True God. In a word, he must be such a person as
is God and man, having both natures divine and humane, in the unity of his
person, so that he may be truly middle and Mediator between God and men. Now
the demonstrations and proofs concerning the person of the Mediator are drawn
from his office: for, because such is his office, himself also ought to be such
a one. They have been already handled in the Explication of the 15, 16, 17, and
18. Questions of the Catechism, where they may be reviewed.

5. Who is this Mediator God and man.
Three things in the person of the Mediator.
HItherto the Mediator has been described to be the very Son of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ, as has been lively expressed before in the Explication of
the eighteenth Question of this Catechism: the sum is, that the Scripture
ascribes to one Christ, and him only, these three things: The Word was God.
All things were made by it. God purchased the Church with his blood. Who was
John 1.2, 3. Acts 20.28. Romans 1.4. and. 10.11 1 John 5.7.
declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification.
Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed. There are three which bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost; and these three are
one. To these also are to be added those places in which is attributed to
Christ, divine worship, invocation, hearing of our prayers, and works proper to
God alone. In like manner, those which attribute unto Christ the name of
Jehovah. Likewise those, in which those things which are spoken of Jehovah are
applied to Christ. That he is true man: Hitherto belong those places which call
Christ man, and the son of man, the son of David, Jerem. 23.6. Zech. 2.10.
Malac. 3.1. Isa. 9.6. John 12.40. 1 Timothy 2.5. Mat. 9.6. and 16.13. Matthew. 1.1.
Luke 1.42. Romans 1.3. and 9.5. Coloss. 1.22. 1 John. 4.2.
and Abraham, the fruit of Mary's womb. Also when he is said to be made of the
seed of David according to the flesh, to have a body of flesh, to have come in
the flesh: Hitherto belong all those places which attribute unto Christ things
proper unto man; as, to grow, to eat, to drink to be ignorant of some things,
to rest, to be weary, to be circumcised, to be baptized, to lament, rejoice,
etc. That two natures in Christ make one person: Hither are referred the
places, which by the communicating of the properties of each nature, attribute
those things to the person of Christ, which are proper to either his divine or
humane nature: The Word was made flesh. He was made partaker of flesh and
blood. God purchased the Church with his blood. Before Abraham was, I am. John
1.14. Heb. 2.14. Acts 20.28. John 8.25. Matthew. 28.20. Heb. 1.1. 1 John 4.3.
Romans 9.5. 1 Cor. 2.8.
I am with you always, unto the end of the world. He spoke unto us by his Son,
by whom he made the world. Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. Who is God over
all praised for ever. Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory.

6. Whether there may be more Mediators.
There can be but one Mediator, because there is but one natural Son of God.
THere is only one Mediator between God and man: the reason is, because the
Son only is Mediator, and can perform the office of the Mediator. And there
is but one only natural Son of God. Object. The Saints also make intercession
for us; therefore they are Mediators. Answ. There is great difference between
the intercession of Christ, and of the Saints, who live in the world, and pray
for themselves and others, yea, for their persecuters and enemies: for the
Saints depend upon the merit of Christ, Christ on his own merit; and Christ
only offered himself a surety and a satisfier, sanctifying himself for us;
that is, presenting himself in our stead before Gods judgment seat: which thing
can no way be said of the Saints. Object. Where are many means, there is not
one Mediator: But there are many means of our salvation: Therefore there is
not one only Mediator. Ans. The Major proposition we deny: For it is one thing
to be the means, another thing to be the Mediator of our salvation.

Of the COVENANT of God.
IT was said, that the Mediator is a person reconciling parties which are at
variance, to wit, God and men. Now this reconciliation in the Scriptures is
termed, The Covenant and Testament, which is the Correlative, that is, has a
mutual respect to the Mediator: for every Mediator is the Mediator of some
covenant, and a reconciler of parties who are at enmity. Wherefore the doctrine
which treats of the Covenant of God, is linked with the Place concerning the
Mediator. The chief Questions hereof are these: 1. What a Covenant is. 2.
Whether it can be made without a Mediator. 3. Whether there be but one and the
same Covenant, or more. 4. In what the old and new Covenant agree, and in what
they differ.


1. What a Covenant is.
What a Covenant in general is.
A Covenant in general signifies a mutual contract or agreement of two
parties joined in the Covenant, whereby is made a bond or obligation or
certain conditions for the performance of giving or taking something, with
addition of outward signs and tokens, for solemn testimony and confirmation,
that the compact and promise shall be kept inviolable. Hence we easily collect
the definition and nature of Gods Covenant: What Gods Covenant with us is.
For it is A mutual promise and agreement between God and men, whereby God
gives men assurance, that he will be gracious and favorable to them, remit
their sins, bestow new righteousness his holy Spirit, and life eternal for
and by his Son our Mediator: And on the other side, men bind themselves to
faith and repentance; that is to receive this so great a benefit with true
faith, and to yield true obedience unto God. This mutual compact between God
and men is sealed and confirmed by outward badges and tokens, Sacraments the
signs of the Covenant. A Testament.
which we call Sacraments; that is, sacred signs, testifying Gods good will
toward us, and our thankfulness and obsequious dutifulness toward him. A
Testament is the last will of a Testator, whereby he at his death disposes of
his things what he would have done concerning them. Testament and Covenant of
like signification.
In Scripture the name of Covenant and Testament, to express significantly
this Gods Covenant, are used and taken alike for one and the same thing: for
both of them show our reconciliation with God, or the mutual agreement between
God and man. Why our reconciliation is called a Covenant.
This agreement and reconcilement is called a Covenant, because God promises
unto us certain blessings: and on the other side, demands of us, as a pledge,
our obedience, using withal certain solemn ceremonies to the confirmation and
strengthening of the contract. Why it is also called a Testament.
It is called a Testament, because this reconciliation was made by the death of
the Testator Christ coming between, that so it might be firm and ratified:
or, because Christ has purchased this our reconcilement with God by his death,
and has left it unto us, even as parents at their decease deliver their goods
unto their children. This reason is alleged in the Epistle to the Hebrews:
Heb. 9.15, 16, 17.
For this cause (says the Apostle) is he the Mediator of the new Testament,
that through death they which were called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. For where a Testament is, there must be the death of him that made
the Testament. For the Testament is confirmed when men are dead: for it is yet
of no force, as long as he that made it is alive. For while the Testator
lives, he retains a right to change, detract, or add any thing. The Hebrew
word Berith only signifies a Covenant, not a Testament: yet the Interpreters
translate it by the word (...), which word with the Greeks signifies both a
covenant and testament; whence it is gathered, that that Epistle was not
written in Hebrew (as some think) but in Greek. Acts 20.28.
Obj. A Testament is ratified by the death of the Testator: But God cannot die:
Therefore his Testament is not ratified, or at leastwise this reconcilement may
not be called a Testament. Ans. The Minor is to be denied, because God is said
to have redeemed the Church with his blood, therefore he died; but he died
according to his humanity: for Christ is the Testator, who is both God and man;
but he died according to his humanity only: 1 Pet. 3.18. The same is called an
intercession in respect of Christ, who by intercession works it: and
reconciliation in respect of us, who are reconciled.
witness Peter, who says, He was put to death concerning the flesh. Repl. But
Christ is the Intercessor, and God the Testator: Therefore the reconciliation
is not of force. Ans. They differ in person and offices: the person of Christ
differs from the person of the Father, and the holy Ghost in office, not in
efficacy and power; and in respect of him it is an intercession; in respect of
us, a reconciliation, or receiving into favor.

2. How a Covenant may be made between God and men.
THat Covenant could not be made without a Mediator: for we could neither
satisfy, nor come again in favor with God, no nor receive the benefit of
reconciliation procured by another. Furthermore, God in his justice would not
admit of us without sufficient satisfaction: we were the enemies of God,
therefore the entrance and access to God lay not open to us before he was
pacified by the merit of our Mediator, as it has been showed more at large
before in that question, Why a Mediator is necessary for us. The
reconciliation could not be plenarily accomplished without the satisfaction and
death of the Mediator. Again, without the Mediator regenerating us, we should
not have been able to stand to the conditions; and so had the Covenant been
made of no force.

3. Whether there be one or more Covenants.
There is but one Covenant in substance, two in circumstance.
THe Covenant of God is but one in substance and matter, but two in
circumstances: that is, it is one in respect of the more general conditions by
which God combineth or compoundeth with us, and we with God: but it is two in
respect of less principal conditions, or (as some speak) it is two, as
touching the manner of the administration thereof. There is but one in
substance, How one in substance.
1. Because there is but one God; one Mediator between God and men, Christ
Jesus; one mean of reconcilement; one faith; one way of the salvation of all
who are saved, and have been saved from the beginning. It is a great question,
Whether the ancient Fathers were saved by any other means then we are: which,
except it be well and circumspectly construed, obscureth with palpable
darkness the light of the Gospel. But these testimonies of Scripture do
lesson and school us the truth herein; Hebr. 13.8. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.1.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same also for ever. God has
appointed him over all things to be the head of the Church. By whom all the
body is coupled and knit together, etc. No man has seen God at any time: the
only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, John 1.18.
he has declared him. There is given no other name under heaven whereby we
must be saved. No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him. Acts 4.12. Matthew. 11.27. John 14.6.
I am the way the truth, and the life; no man comes to the Father but by me:
He means, I alone am the way by which even Adam attained salvation. Luke
20.24. John 8.56.
Many kings have desired to see these things which ye see, and have not seen
them. Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. All
therefore, as well under the Law as under the Gospel, who were to be saved, had
respect to the only Mediator Christ, by whom alone they were reconciled unto
God, and saved: Therefore there is but one Covenant. 2. The Covenant is only
one, because the principal conditions, which are termed the substance of the
Covenant, are the same, both before and since Christ's incarnation: for in both
Testaments, before and after the exhibiting of Christ, God promises remission
of sins to believers, and repentant sinners: and men bind themselves to belief
and repentance. There are said to be two Covenants, How two in circumstance.
the old and the new, as concerning the circumstances, and those conditions
which are less principal, which are the form of administration serving for
the principal conditions, that the faithful may attain unto them by the help
of these. Now, what these principal conditions are, shall appear out of that
which follows. A rule here may be observed: The diversity of Covenants is
known by the diversity of their conditions.
In all Covenants their conditions are ever to be considered: which if they be
the same, then are the Covenants also the same; if diverse, then the Covenants
also diverse; if partly the same, and partly diverse, then the Covenants are
also in part the same, and in part diverse, as in this Covenant.

4. In what the old and new Covenant agree, and in what they differ.
The old and new Covenant agree in three things:
WHereas the Covenant is one, and yet the Scripture speaks thereof as of two,
we are to consider wherein the old and new Testament concur and agree, and
wherein they differ. They agree, In their Author and Mediator.
In their Author, which is God; and in their Mediator, which is Christ.
Object. But some man will say, Moses was the Mediator of the old Covenant.
Ans. True, as in a type, adjoined to the Mediator which was signified, who
then also was Mediator, but now is sole Mediator without that typical
Mediator: For he is manifested in the flesh, and is no more covered with
types. In the promise of grace.
In the promise of grace, touching remission of sins, and life everlasting to
be given freely by and for Christ the Mediator, to those only who believe;
which promise was common to the old Church, as well as to us: For God promised
the same grace and mercy unto all who believe in the Mediator; In thy seed
shall the nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 22.18. Genesis 3.15. Genesis 17.7.
John 3.36.
The seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent. I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed. He that believes in the Son has life everlasting. We
believe, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, even as they
do. Now here we speak not in particular of the circumstances of grace; but in
general, of the promise of grace. But Covenants have the same corporal
promises also, but that only in general. In their condition in respect of us.
Genesis 17.1. Mark 1.15.
In their tenor and condition in respect of us: for in both God requires of
men faith and obedience: Walk before me, and be thou upright. And, Repent and
believe the Gospel. The new and o^d Covenant therefore agree, as concerning the
principal conditions of the Covenant, both in respect of God, and in respect
of man.

But the two Covenants differ, The old and new Covenant differ,
In promises of corporal benefits.
In the promises of corporal benefits: for the old Covenant had special
promises of some certain definite corporal blessings, as the promise of the
land to be given to the Church, of the form of ceremonial worship, and
Mosaicall policy or government to be observed in that region and nation until
the coming of the Messiah, and lastly, for the Messiah to be born out of that
people. But the new Testament has no such special promises of corporal
benefits, but only general; as, that God will preserve his Church unto the
end, and give it some abiding and resting place. In the circumstance of the
promise of grace.
In the circumstance of the promise of grace; for in the old Covenant the
believers were reconciled unto God, and saved for the Messiah sake which should
be exhibited, and for his sacrifice to come: in the new Covenant we are saved
for the Messiah being come and exhibited, and for his sacrifice already
offered. In the signs of the promise of grace.
In the rights or signs added to the promise of grace: In the old Covenant the
Sacraments were diverse and painful; as the Circumcision, the Passover, the
Sacrifices and Oblations: But the Sacraments in the new are few and plain, even
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. In cleernesse and evidence.
In cleernesse and evidence. The old had types and shadows of good things to
come, all things were figurative, as their Priests and Sacrifices, and
therefore the more obscure and dark: In the new is an accomplishment of these
types, and so all things are more clear, as well in the Sacraments, as the
doctrine thereof. In gifts.
In gifts: In the old the effusion and pouring out of the gifts of the holy
Ghost was more narrow and sparing; in the new it is more large and plentiful:
Jer. 31.31. 1 Cor. 3.9. Joel 2.28.
I will make a new covenant. If the ministration of condemnation was glorious,
much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. I will power
out my spirit upon all flesh etc. In continuance. Jer. 32.40.
In continuance: The old was but for a time, during until the coming of the
Messiah: the new is for ever; I will make an everlasting Covenant with them. In
their manner of binding.
In their bond, or manner of binding: The old Covenant bound them to the
obedience of the whole Mosaicall law, moral, ceremonial, and civil: the new
binds us only to the moral or spiritual law, and to the use of the
Sacraments. In extent.
In extent: In the old Covenant, the Church was enclosed and limited within the
Jewish nation, whereunto it became all others that would be saved to repair: In
the new the Church is spread over all nations, and there is an entrance into it
open to all believers of whatsoever nation, estate, or language.

Why the old Covenant is taken for the Law, and the new for the Gospel.
Here is to be observed, that the old Testament or Covenant is in Scripture
oftentimes taken by a figure of speech called Synecdoche (which we use, when we
take the whole for a part, or a part for the whole) for the law, in respect of
that part which is especially handled there: for in the old Testament the law
was more urged, and there were many parts thereof; the Gospel was then more
obscure. Contrariwise, the new Testament or Covenant is for the most part taken
for the Gospel; because in the new Testament a great part of Moses law is
abrogated, and the manifestation and knowledge of the Gospel is to us more
clear and ample.

Quest. 19. Whence know thou this?
Ans. Out of the Gospel, which God first made known in Paradise Genesis 3.15.
and afterward did spread it abroad by the Patriarks Genesis 22.18. and 12.3. and
49.10.
and Prophets Isa. 5.3. and 42.1, 2, 3, 4. and 43.25. and 45.5, 6, 22, 23. Jer.
23.56. and 31.32, 33, and 33.39, 40, 41. Mic. 7.18, 19, 20. Acts 10.34. and
3.22, 23, 24. Romans 1.2. Heb. 1.1.
shadowed it by sacrifices, and other ceremonies of the law Heb. 10.7. Col.
2.17. John 5.46.
, and lastly, accomplished it by his only begotten Son Romans 10.4. Gal. 4.4. and
3.24. Col. 2.17.
.

The Explication.
The order and correspondence of this question in the second part of the
Catechism, which the third question in the first part thereof.
THis nineteenth Question of the Catechism, which is concerning the Gospel, is
like to the third: For as there it is demanded, Whence know thou thy misery?
and answer is made; Out of the Law: So here the Question is Whence know thou
thy delivery? the answer hereof is, Out of the Gospel. Seeing then it has been
already spoken of the Mediator, we are necessarily also to speak of the
doctrine in which the Mediator is declared, described, and offered unto us:
that doctrine is the Gospel. Afterward we are also to speak of the mean
whereby we are made partakers of the Mediator and his benefits: that mean is
faith. First therefore the common place concerning the Gospel comes to be
handled, which is fitly annexed to the former doctrine concerning the Mediator
and Covenant between God and men: 1. Because Christ the Mediator is the
subject or matter of the Gospel, which teaches, who, and what manner of
Mediator this is. 2. Because he is the author and publisher of the same; for
it is part of the Mediators office to publish the Gospel, as it is said, The
only begotten, John 1.8.
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. 3. Because the
Gospel is a part of the Covenant, and the new Covenant is often taken for the
Gospel.

The principal Questions are:
1. What the Gospel is. 2. Whether it be any new doctrine. 3. How it differs
from the Law. 4. What are the proper effects of the Gospel. 5. Whence the truth
and certainty of the Gospel may appear.


1. What the Gospel is.
Three significations of the word Gospel.
THe Greek word (...), for which we use Gospel, signifies, 1. A joyful
message or news. 2. The sacrifice which is offered to God for this joyful
news. 3. The reward which is given to him who brings glad tidings. Here it is
taken for the doctrine or joyful news of Christ exhibited in th flesh: Luke
2.10.
as, Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, because to you this day
Christ is born. There is a difference also to be observed between the words
(...) and (...) for the word (...) is the promise of the Mediator to be
exhibited hereafter; How the words (...) and (...) sometimes differ in
Scripture.
the word (...), the tidings of the Messiah already exhibited. Nevertheless
this difference of these words is not perpetual, and it consists rather in
the letter and words themselves, then in the thing signified by the words; for
both of them declare the same benefits of the Messiah: but the difference is
only in the circumstance of time, and in the manner of his manifestation and
exhibiting, as appears out of these sayings; Abraham saw my day, John 8.56.
John 14.6. John 10.7. Ephesians 1.22. ^ebr. 13 8. What the Gospel (...)
and was glad. No man comes to the Father but by me. I am the door, etc. God
has appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church. Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, etc. Now, The Gospel is the doctrine revealed in
Paradise from heaven by the Son of God, the Mediator, presently after the fall
of mankind into sin and death: wherein freedom from sin, death, and from the
curse and wrath of God, that is, remission of sins, salvation, and life
everlasting, by and for the same his Sons sake our Mediator, is of the free
grace of God promised, and preached to all that believe in the Son of God,
and embrace repentance: by which doctrine the holy Ghost does forcibly work in
the hearts of the faithful, kindling in them faith, repentance, and the
beginning of everlasting life. Or out of the 18, 19, and 20 Questions of the
Catechism such a definition of the Gospel is framed: The Gospel is a doctrine
which God first made known in Paradise, and afterward spread it abroad by the
Patriarks and Prophets, shadowed it by sacrifices, and other ceremonies of the
law, and lastly, accomplished it by his only begotten Son; teaching, that the
Son of God, even our Lord Jesus Christ, is made of God unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; that is to say a perfect
Mediator satisfying for the sin of mankind, and restoring righteousness and
life everlasting to all them who by a true faith are engraffed into him, and
do embrace his benefits. This definition all the sums which are in Scripture
delivered of the Gospel, John 6.70.
do confirm: as, This is the will of him that sent me, that every man that
sees the Son and believes in him should have everlasting life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. ^^ke 24 47. John 1.17.
Through his Name was repentance and remission of sins to be preached to all
nations. The law was given by Moses; but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

By these and the like testimonies of Scripture it is manifest, that both the
Law and the Gospel preaches repentance; and that the instrument whereby God
does work in us repentance or true conversion, is properly the Gospel. But this
order in proceeding must be observed: First, the Law is to be proposed, that
thence we may know our misery: What order is to be observed in teaching the Law
and Gospel.
Then, that we may not despair after our misery is known unto us, the Gospel is
to be taught, which both gives us a certain hope of returning into Gods
promised favor by Christ our Mediator, and shows unto us the manner how we
are to repent. Thirdly, that after we attain unto our delivery, we wex not
careless and wanton, the Law is to be taught again, that it may be the level,
square, and rule of our life and actions.

2. Whether the Gospel has been always known in the Church, or whether it be
any new doctrine.
The perpetual continuance of the Gospel proved.
The Gospel sometimes signifies the doctrine of the promise of grace, and of
remission of sins freely to be given for the sacrifice of the Messiah, as yet
not manifested in the flesh; and sometimes the doctrine of the Messiah already
exhibited. In the latter sense and signification the Gospel has not been of
perpetual continuance, but began with the new Testament: In the former meaning
it has always been extant in the Church; for presently after man's fall it was
manifested in Paradise to our first parents, and afterward spread abroad and
expounded by the Patriarks and Prophets, and finally, at length consummated and
absolved by Christ, both in the fulfilling or full performance, as also in a
more clear declaration of those things which had before time been promised in
the old Testament. This is confirmed, By testimonies of Peter, Paul, and Christ
himself. Acts 10 43. 1 Pet. 1.10 Romans 1.2. John 5.46.
By the records of the Apostles, as of Peter; To whom also give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name all that bele^ve in him shall receive
remission of sins. Of the which salvation the Prophets enquired and searched.
Likewise of Paul; which (Gospel) he had promised before by his Prophets in the
holy Scriptures. Of Christ himself also saying, Had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me, for he wrote of me. By all the prophecies of the
Messiah.
The same is manifested by all the promises and prophecies which speak of the
Messiah. This is therefore diligently to be marked because God will have us
know, that there was and is, from the beginning of the world unto the end, one
only doctrine and way of salvation, which is by Christ: Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, the same also is for ever. Heb. 13.8. Joh. 14 6. and
5.46.
I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no man comes to the Father but by me.
Moses wrote of me. How (say you) wrote Moses of Christ? 1. Because he
recounteth the promises concerning the Messiah: Why Moses is said to write of
Christ. Genesis 12.3. Deuteronomy. 10.15. Number. 24.17. Gen 49.10.
In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. God shall raise up a Prophet etc. A
Star shall rise out of Jacob. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah until
Shiloh come. 2. Because he restrains these promises concerning the Messiah
unto a certain family, of which the Messiah was to be born, and to which
afterward the promise of the Messiah was more and more renewed and revealed.
3. The whole Leviticall priesthood, and the whole ceremonial worship, as the
sacrifices, the oblations, the altar, the temple and other things which Moses
described, had a respect, and were referred unto Christ: yea the kingdom also
and the kings were a type of Christ and of his kingdom: Wherefore Moses wrote
very many things of Christ. Object. 1. But Paul says, that The Gospel was
promised by the Prophets; Romans 1.2.
And Peter, that The Prophets prophesied of the grace which should come unto
us: 2 Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore the Gospel has not been always. Answ. We accept of the whole
reason as true, of the Gospel understood and taken in the second signification
above rehearsed, that is, of the doctrine of the promise of grace fulfilled by
Christ exhibited in the flesh, and of the evidence of this doctrine: for in
former ancient times the Gospel indeed was not, but was promised only by the
Prophets; to wit, How the Gospel is said to have been promised unto the Fathers.
1. As concerning the fulfilling of those things which in the old Testament
were foretold of the Messiah. 2. In respect of the more manifest knowledge of
the promise of grace. 3. In respect of a more large pouring out of the gifts of
the holy Ghost; that is, the Gospel then was not the doctrine of Christ already
exhibited, dead, and raised again from the dead, and sitting at the right hand
of his Father, as now it is; but it was a preaching of Christ which should
hereafter be exhibited, and perform all these things. Notwithstanding, there
was a Gospel, that is, some glad tidings of the benefits of the Messiah to
come, sufficient to the Fathers to salvation: according as it is said, Abraham
saw my day, and rejoiced. To him bear all the Prophets witness, etc. John
8.56. Acts 10.43. Romans 10.4. and 16.25. Ephesians. 3.5.
Christ is the end of the Law. Object. 2. The same Apostle Paul says, that The
Gospel is the mystery which was kept secret since the world began: and that, In
other ages it was not opened unto the sons of men. Answ. This reason has in it
a fallacy of division (as Logicians call it) dis-membring and dis-joyning
those things which are to be joined: for the Apostle in the same place
presently adds, as it is now; which clause is not to be omitted, because it
shows that in former times it was also known, though not so plainly, and to
fewer special men then now it is. It is also a fallacy in affirming that
simply to be said so, which was so said but in some respect: for it follows
not that it was simply and merely unknown then, or utterly covered and hidden,
because now it is more clearly, and that by more particular persons discerned;
for it was known unto the Fathers, though not so distinctly known as it is now
unto us: The one signifies the promise of Christ to come; the other the
preaching of Christ already come. John 1.18.
And hither properly belongs the distinction and difference of the words
(...), and (...) above expounded. Ob. 3. The Law was given by Moses, grace and
truth by Jesus Christ: Therefore the Gospel was not from the beginning. Ans.
Grace and truth did appear by Christ exhibited and manifested, to wit, in
respect of the fulfilling of the types, and full performance, and plentiful
application of those things which of ancient were promised in the old
Testament: But hereof it follows not, that they in the old Testament were
destitute of this grace; for unto them also was the same grace effectually
applied by Christ, and for Christ, but being as yet to be manifested hereafter
in the flesh; and therefore more sparingly and faintly then unto us. Whatsoever
grace and true knowledge of God was ever in any men, they had it by Christ,
Joh. 1.18. and 14.6. and 15.5.
as the Scripture says, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten
Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him unto us. No man
comes to the Father but by me. Without me ye can do nothing. Repl. But he
says, The law was given by Moses: Therefore not the Gospel. Ans. The law is
said to be given by Moses, because this was chiefly belonging to his office,
that he should publish the law; though withal he taught the Gospel, albeit
more obscurely and sparingly, as has been already proved; But it was Christ's
chief function to publish the Gospel; albeit he also taught the law, but not
principally, as did Moses: for he purged the moral law from corruptions by
rightly interpreting it, and did write it by the working of his holy Spirit in
the hearts of men; he fulfilled the ceremonial law, and together with the
judicial law abrogated the same.

3. How the Gospel differs from the Law.
Four differences between the Law and the Gospel.
THe Law and the Gospel agree in this, that each doctrine proceeded from God,
and that in both of them is entreated of the nature of God, and of his will and
works: howbeit, there is a very great difference between them both; 1 The Law
known by the light of nature. Romans 2.15.
In their revealings, or in the manner of their revealing. The knowledge of the
Law was graffed and engendered in the minds of men in the very creation, and
therefore is known unto all, although there were no more revealing of it: The
Gentiles have the effect of the law written in their hearts. The Gospel is not
known by nature, but is peculiarly revealed from heaven to the Church alone by
Christ our Mediator: The Gospel known by the light of grace only.
For no creature could have seen or hoped for that mitigation of the law
touching satisfaction for our sins by another (of which we have before
entreated) except the Son had revealed it: Matt. 11.27. and 16.17. John 1.18.
No man knows the Father but the Son and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee. The only begotten Son which is
in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. The law teaches what we
ought to be, but not how we may be as we ought. The Gospel teaches how we
may be.
In the very kind of doctrine, or in the subject or matters which they deliver;
for the law teaches us what we ought to be, and what we stand bound to perform
to God; but it administreth us no ability of performing this duty, neither
points it out the means by which we may become such as it requires us to be:
but the Gospel shows the means whereby we may be made such as the law
requires: for it offers unto us the promise of grace touching Christ's
righteousness imputed unto us by faith, no otherwise then if it were properly
our own, teaching us, that we by this imputation of Christ's righteousness, are
reputed just before God. Matt. 18.28. Luke 10.28. Mark 5.36.
The Law says, Restore that thou owe. Do this and live. The Gospel says,
Only believe. The law requires our righteousness; the Gospel admits of
another. Levit. 18.5. Matthew. 19.17. The Law and the Gospel are not contrary.
In the promises: the Law promises life to them that are just and righteous in
themselves, or with a condition of our own righteousness, and perfect
obedience performed by us; He that does them shall live in them. If thou will
enter into life, keep the commandments. The Gospel promises the same life to
them that are justified by faith in Christ, or with condition of another
righteousness, to wit, Christ's, applied unto us by faith. Neither for these
respects are the Law and the Gospel at ods one with the other: for albeit the
Law will that thou keep the commandments, if thou will enter into life; yet
does it not shut thee from everlasting life if another fulfill the Law for
thee: for it verily sets down one way of satisfying for sins, namely, by
thy self; but it does not exclude the other, that is, satisfying by another,
as has been heretofore showed. Romans 3.20. and 4.15. 2 Cor. 3.6. The Law is the
ministry of death.
In effects: The Law without the Gospel is the letter which kills, and the
ministry of death: By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. The Law causes
wrath, etc. and, The letter kills. By the letter is understood the outward
preaching and bare knowledge of those things which we ought to do: for it
teaches indeed our duty, and that righteousness which God requires at our
hands; but it does not make us able to perform that righteousness, neither
does it show us any hope to attain thereunto by another, but rather accuses
and condemns our righteousness. The Gospel is the ministry of life, The
Gospel is the ministry of life.
and of the Spirit; that is, it has the forcible operation of the holy Ghost
adjoined, and does quicken; because by it the holy Ghost, as by an instrument,
works faith and life in the elect: Romans 1.15.
The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.

The Gospel is the preaching of repentance.
It was said in the definition of the Gospel, and in the third difference
between the Law and the Gospel, that the Gospel requires both faith and
repentance, or new obedience, and so is the preaching both of remission of
sins, and of repentance. Against this Flaccius Sectaries keep a stir, and
reason after this sort: Ob. There is no precept or commandment belonging to
the Gospel, but to the Law: The preaching of repentance is a precept or
commandment: Therefore the preaching of repentance belongs not to the
Gospel, but to the Law. Ans. We deny the Major, if it be generally meant: for
this precept is proper unto the Gospel, that it commands us to believe it, to
embrace the benefit of Christ, and now being justified, to begin new obedience,
or that righteousness which the law requires of us. Repl. Yea, but the law
also wills us to believe God: Therefore it is not proper unto the Gospel to
command us to believe. Ans. Both the Law and the Gospel require faith. The Law
exhorts in general unto faith, and unto such and such works in special.
Both the Law and the Gospel commands faith and conversion to God, but
diversely; The Law only in general commands us to believe God, or to give
credit to all his promises, commandments, and threatenings, and that with a
denouncing of punishment except we do it: the Law says, Believe every word of
God; it wills therefore that we believe and obey this commandment also, by
which God in the Gospel commands us to return unto him, and to believe in
Christ. The Gospel exhorts in special unto faith, and in general unto works.
But the Gospel in special and expressly wills us to embrace by faith the
promise of grace by Christ, and to return unto God; that is, says not in
general, Believe all the promises and denouncings of God, etc. (for that it
leaves unto the Law:) but it says plainly and expressly, Believe this promise;
to wit, that thy sins are pardoned thee, and that thou art received of God into
favor by and for Christ; and return unto God. Further, it exhorts us both
inwardly and outwardly by the holy Spirit, and by the word, That we walk worthy
of the Gospel; that is, do such works as are pleasing to God; but this it does
only in general, not prescribing in particular, Thou shall do this or that,
but leaves this unto the Law: as contrariwise it says not in general,
believe all Gods promises, leaving this to the Law; but in special says,
Believe this promise; Fly unto Christ, and thy sins shall be forgiven thee.

4. What are the proper effects of the Gospel.
THe proper effects of the Gospel are, 1. Faith: because Faith is by hearing,
Romans 10.17. 2 Cor. 3.8. Romans 1.16.
and hearing by the word of God. The Gospel is the ministration of the Spirit,
the power of God unto salvation. 2. Through faith our whole conversion unto
God, justification, regeneration, and salvation: for by faith, as by the
instrument, whole Christ, together with all his benefits is received.

5. Whence the truth and certainty of the Gospel may appear.
THe truth and certainty of the Gospel appears, 1. By the testimony of the
holy Ghost. 2. By the prophesies which have been uttered by the Prophets and
other holy men. 3. By the fulfilling of those prophesies, which were
accomplished in the new Testament. 4. By the miracles whereby the doctrine of
the Gospel was confirmed. 5. By the end or property of the doctrine of the
Gospel; because that alone shows the way how to escape sin and death, and
ministers sound comfort unto afflicted consciences.

ON THE 7. SABBATH.
Quest. 20. Is then salvation restored by Christ to all men who perished in Adam?
Ans. Not to all Matt. 7.14. and 22.14.
, but to those only who by a true faith are engraffed into him, and receive his
benefits Mark 16.16. Joh. 1.12. and 3.16, 18, 36. Isa. 53.11. Psalm. 2.12. Romans
3.22. and 11.20. Heb. 4.3. and 5.9. and 10.39. and 11.6.
.

The Explication.
HAving declared the doctrine concerning the means of our delivery through
Christ, the question Who, and By what means they are made partakers of this
delivery, whether all, or only some, orderly follows. This twentieth Question
therefore is a preparation to the doctrine of faith, without which, neither the
Mediator, nor the preaching of the Gospel profits any man. Hereby also
carnal security is prevented or met withal, Gal. 2.17.
and that opprobrious contumely, that Christ is the minister of sin. The answer
to this question consists of two parts: 1. Salvation is not restored by
Christ to all that perished in Adam: 2. But to those only who by true faith
are ingraffed into Christ, and embrace his benefits. The former part is too too
evident by daily experience: John 3.36. John 3.5. Mat. 7.21.
He which believes not in the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him. Except a man be born from above he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven. The cause why all are not saved by Christ, Why all are
not saved by Christ.
is not the insufficiency of the merit and grace of Christ, (for Christ is the
full propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, as concerning
the worth and sufficiency of the ransom and price which he paid) but it is the
infidelity of men, whereby they refuse the benefits of Christ offered in the
Gospel; and therefore perish not through any defect of Christ's merit, but
through their own fault. The other part also is proved by Scripture: As many as
received him, John 1.12. Isa. 53.11.
to them he gave power to be the sons of God. By his knowledge my righteous
servant shall justify many. Now the reason why believers only are saved, is,
Why the faithful only are saved by Christ.
because they only lay hold on, and embrace the benefits of Christ; and because
in them alone God obtains the end for which he delivered up his Son unto
death: for the faithful only agnise the mercy and grace of God, and yield
thanks unto him for the same.

The sum therefore of all is, that though the satisfaction of Christ our
Mediator for our sins is most perfect, yet all are not delivered by it, but
they only who believe the Gospel, and do apply the merit of Christ by a true
faith unto themselves.

Object. 1. Grace exceeds the sin of Adam: If therefore for the sin of Adam
all men are cast away; much more by the grace of Christ all, and not believers
only, shall be saved. Answer to the antecedent. Grace exceeds and is above
sin, in respect of the sufficiency of the satisfaction, not in respect of the
application thereof: Wherefore, that all are not saved through the satisfaction
or obedience of Christ, the fault thereof sticks in men themselves, and is to
be ascribed unto the unbeleevers, who embrace not the grace of Christ offered,
but like ungrateful men reject it. Object. 2. Whomsoever Christ has fully
satisfied for, they are to be received of God into favor; for so does the
justice of God require: But Christ has fully satisfied for all the sins of all
men: Therefore all men are to be received of God into favor; or if this be not
done, God shall be unjust, or somewhat is derogated from Christ's merit. Answ.
The Major proposition being understood simply, and without any limitation, is
false. All are received into favor for whom Christ has satisfied, with this
condition, if they apply the satisfation of Christ unto themselves by faith:
This condition is expressly added; John 3.10.
So God loved the world, that he gave his Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but might have everlasting life. Object. 3. Adam by one
sin made all subject to condemnation; but Christ does justify only some:
The force therefore of Adams sin is greater to condemn, then of Christ's
satisfaction to save. Answ. The force of Christ's satisfaction is seen not in
the multitude of them who are saved, but in the greatness of the benefit.
We deny the consequence of this argument, because the force, excellency, and
efficacy of Christ's satisfaction is not to be esteemed by the multitude or
number of those men who are thereby saved, but by the greatness of the benefit
it self. For it is a greater work to deliver and save even one from
everlasting death, then to make all men by one sin guilty of everlasting death:
for be it that Christ should save even but one man, yet it was necessary, 1.
That he should pay in a finite time a punishment in greatness and value
infinite, not only for that one sin of Adam, but for other infinite sins which
follow it, of which every one also deserves infinite punishment. It was
required also, 2. That he should purge and take away, not only that original
and birth-sin, but also infinite others; 3. And should restore in him a perfect
conformity with God. Wherefore the grace of Christ in saving even one man, does
in infinite manner exceed the sin of Adam. Ans. 2. Again, that the force of
that efficacy which is in Christ's merit and benefit passes not through all
men, as the strength of Adams sin passed through all his posterity; the fault
hereof is in men, who do not as much apply unto themselves by a true faith
Christ's merit, as they do apply unto themselves the sin of Adam, both by being
born in it, and consenting unto it, and fostering it. Now the reason why all
men do not believe, nor apply this Christ's benefit unto themselves, is a
question of higher and deeper speculation, impertinent to this place. This may
suffice for answer herein, Rom 9.28,
God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. And he will so
show his mercy, that he will also exercise his justice.

Quest. 21. What is true faith?
Answ. It is not only a certain knowledge whereby I surely assent to all things
which God has revealed unto us in his word James 2.19.
, but also an assured trust Heb. 11.1, 7. Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21. and 10.10.
Ephesians. 3.12. Hebr. 4.6. James 1.6.
kindled in my heart by the holy Ghost Gal. 5.22. Matthew. 16.17. 2 Cor. 4.13.
Joh. 6.29. Ephesians. 2.8. Act. 16.14. Phil. 1.19.
through the Gospel Romans 1.16. and 10.17. 1 Cor. 1.21. Act. 10.44. and 16.14.
, whereby I make my repose in God, being assuredly resolved that remission of
sins, everlasting righteousness, and life is given, not to others only, but to
me also Romans 1.17. and 5.1. Gal. 3.11. and 2.16.
, and that freely, through the mercy of God, for the merit of Christ alone Ephesians.
2.8. Romans 3.24. and 5.19. Luke 1.77, 78.


The Explication.
THe doctrine of Faith follows: 1. Because faith is the means whereby we are
made partakers of the Mediator. 2. Because without faith the preaching of the
Gospel profits and avails nothing.

The Questions touching Faith are,
1. What faith is in general. 2. How many kinds of faith there are in
Scripture. 3. How faith differs from hope. 4. What are the efficient causes
of justifying faith. 5. What are the effects of it. 6. To whom it is given.


1. What faith is in general.
THe word fides or faith, according to Cicero's derivation, Whence faith has
his name. Cic. Offic. 1.
receives his appellation and name from the Gerund fiendo, which signifies
doing, because that which is covenanted is performed; and is defined by him to
be The assurance and truth of contracts, and whatsoever kind of composition;
yea, the very foundation of justice. The general nature of faith as it is
extended unto all things.
It is commonly defined to be A certain or grounded knowledge of propositions
or conclusions, to which we assent on authority of the assertion of true
witnesses, whom we may not except against or doubt of, whether it be God, or
Angels, or man, or experience. The general nature of faith as it concerns
only divine things, and is taught in Scripture.
But whereas in the most general distinction of faith, there is one kind of
faith in divine matters, another in humane; the question here is, what
Theological faith, or faith in divine things is. Wherefore we must give a more
strict difinition of faith taken in general, which notwithstanding must be
such, as that it comprise all the specials of faith delivered in Scripture. In
general therefore, The diverse acceptations and uses of the name of faith.
whatsoever faith is mentioned in Scripture, it is A certain knowledge firmly
yielding assent to all things which are delivered in the sacred Scriptures, of
God, his will, works, and grace, whereunto we condescend even because God
himself does affirm it. Or, it is to yield assent to every word of God
delivered to the Church, either in the law or in the Gospel, for that it is the
asseveration or avouching of God himself. Oftentimes faith is taken for the
very doctrine of the Church, or those things whereby we are out of Gods word
informed and instructed unto faith, or assent and belief: as when we use to
say, The Christian faith, the Apostolic faith. Oftentimes it is used for the
fulfilling of ancient promises, or the things themselves which are believed:
as, Before faith came we were kept under the law, and shut up unto the faith
which should afterward be revealed. Gal. 3.23.


How faith differs from all other kinds of knowledge.
Furthermore, albeit there be also other certain notices whereunto we firmly
give assent, as understanding, or apprehension of principles, science,
sapience, art, prudence (for the assent coming unto the notice, does confirm
and perfect it, so that what knowledge of a thing it had without assent, it is
imperfect and unprofitable) yet none of those are that faith, especially the
Theological, such as a little before is described: for to those notices or
apprehensions we do assent, either because they are naturally engraffed in our
minds, or for that they bring demonstrance, or some other true and certain
proofs. But the Theological assent or faith is not, neither arises it out of
the instinct of nature, neither out of sense or experience neither out of
demonstrations or reasons borrowed from Philosophy; but comes and depends of
a peculiar and supernatural revelation or divine testimony. That therefore
which is added in the former description, for the asseveration of God himself,
distinguishes Theological faith from all other knowledges, even the most
certain. And this general definition of Theological faith is necessary, that
we may not think, that out of Philosophy, or such principles as are naturally
known to all, are to be drawn reasons or arguments sound and sufficient to
confirm the articles of our faith; but may know, that the word of God, and
those good and necessary consequences and arguments which are framed out of it
are a supernatural light, and more certain then all, though most exact and
exquisite, demonstrances, either Natural or Mathematical of Philosophers.

2. How many kinds of faith there are in Scripture.
FOur sorts of faith are found rehearsed in Scripture; Historical, 2.
Temporary. 3. Working miracles. 4. Justifying or saving faith. The difference
of these kinds one from the other appears out of their definitions:
Historical faith is to know and think all those things to be true which are
manifested from above, What historical faith is.
either by voice, or by visions, or by oracles, or by any other manner of
revelation, and are taught in the books of the Prophets and Apostles; and thus
to be persuaded of them for the asseveration and testimony of God himself. It
is called historical, because it is a bare knowledge of such things as God is
said to have done, to do, or that he will do hereafter: of this faith these
testimonies of holy Scripture make mention; 1 Cor. 13.2.
If I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, etc. Which saying
notwithstanding may be construed of all the sorts of faith, James 2.19.
justifying faith only excepted. The devils believe, and tremble: for the
devil knows exactly both what things are written in the word, and also what
are not written, because he is a spirit witty, quick, and learned; he is
present, and sees whatsoever things are done in the Church, and also through
long experience has known the doctrine of the Church to be true. Acts 8.13.
Simon Magus believed; to wit, that the doctrine was true which the Apostle
Peter propounded: but he had not a justifying faith.

Temporary faith is to assent unto the doctrine of the Church, together with
profession and joy therein, What temporal faith is.
though not true and unfeigned; that is to say, not springing from a lively
sense of the grace of God toward them, but of some other cause whatsoever:
therefore it endures but for a time, and in the instant of affliction
vanishes. Or, It is to assent unto the heavenly doctrine which is delivered by
the Prophets and Apostles, to profess it, to glory therein, and to rejoice in
the knowledge thereof for a time; not for the application of the promise to
themselves, to wit, not for any feeling in their hearts of Gods grace toward
them, but for other causes; and therefore without any true conversion and
final perseverance in the profession of this doctrine. This definition is
drawn from the parable and words of Christ; He that receives seed in the stony
ground, is he which hears the word, and incontinently with joy receives it;
yet has he not root in himself, and dureth but a season: Mat. 13.20, 21.
for as soon as tribulation or persecution comes, etc. The causes of this kind
of joy are in a manner infinite, and diverse in diverse persons, yet all of them
temporary; at whose fading, such faith also as is grounded on them flitteth and
vanishes. Hypocrites rejoice at the hearing of the Gospel, Temporary faith is
led in a string with the commodities of the world, and with them does live and
die.
either because it is a new doctrine in their ears, or because it seems to
sooth and flatter their affections whilst it disburdeneth them of men's
traditions, as does the doctrine of Christian liberty, of justification, etc.
or because they haunt a licentious custom of sinning, or hunt after profits
and commodities, whether public or private, as riches, honor, glory, etc.
which then appears when the cross overtaketh them. For then, because they
have no root, they are parched and wasted with the heat thereof. Thus
hypocrites rejoice; they rejoice not as true believers, I mean, on a sense and
feeling of Gods grace working in them, and on an application unto themselves of
the blessings offered in the word; which one thing only in the faithful is the
cause that they are rapt with exceeding true and perfect joy; and the removing
of this cause suffices to make faith temporary. The difference of temporal
and historical faith.
This time serving faith differs from historical only in that joy which
accompanies it, and not the other: for the historical faith has a bare and
naked knowledge only; but temporary faith, besides this knowledge, rejoices
therein: for time-serving men receive the word with joy; whereas devils believe
historically* and yet are hereon touched with no joy, but rather tremble: they,
I say, joy not in that knowledge they have, but wish it were quite
extinguished. Nay farther, they profess not themselves to be followers of that
doctrine, though they know it to be true, but horribly persecute, and
maliciously oppugn the same. Notwithstanding in men, historical faith is
sometimes coupled with profession, and sometimes also severed from it: for
oftentimes men profess, for I know not what causes, that religion and truth
which in heart they hate: many also which are resolved, and know assuredly the
verity of Christian doctrine, notwithstanding oppose themselves, and set their
faces against it; and these are they which sin against the holy Ghost. Object.
Yea, but the devil has often professed Christ: therefore he does not oppugn
this doctrine. The devil professed Christ, that for his testimonies sake he
might be less believed. Mark 1.25. Acts 16.18.
Ans. He did this not for any desire of promoting and advancing Christ's
doctrine, but for the hatred he bare unto it, that by his testimony he might
cause it to be suspected, and might mingle therewith his own errors and lies:
therefore Christ does command him silence, as Paul also does in the Acts.

The faith of miracles is an especial gift of effecting some extraordinary
work, or foretelling some certain event by divine revelation: Or, What the
faith of working miracles is.
It is a certain persuasion springing from an especial revelation and peculiar
promise of God touching some miraculous effect which he would have done, and
foretells that it shall come to pass. For this kind of faith cannot be
drawn simply out of the general word of God, unless some singular promise or
revelation of God be annexed therewith: Of this faith the Apostle says; If I
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains: 1 Cor. 13.2.
for although this speech be understood of all the kinds of faith, excepting
justifying faith; yet it is especially referred to the faith of miracles. That
this faith is diverse from the other kinds, is proved by these reasons: 1. By
that saying of Christ; How it differs from the rest. Matt. 17.20.
If ye have faith as much as is a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto
this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove: But many holy
men who had a stable faith, and both knew the word of God, and rejoiced
therein, and applied it unto themselves, as Abraham, David, etc. yet did not
remove mountains: Therefore this is a diverse kind of faith from that
justifying faith which they had. 2. Many Exorcists, and the sons of Sceva in
the Acts endeavored to cast out devils, Acts 19.1^.
whereas they had not the gift of it, to wit, special revelation from above,
and therefore it fell out ill with them, the spirit of the possessed man
invading, disarming, and wounding them. Acts 8.13.
3. Simon Magus is said to have believed, and yet could he not work miracles;
and therefore he would have bought and gotten this power with money. 4. The
devil knows the story of the Scripture, neither yet does he work miracles;
because none besides the Creator is able to change the nature of things. 5.
Judas taught and wrought miracles, as did the other Apostles; therefore he had
an historical faith (yea, and perhaps a temporal faith) and the faith of
miracles, yet had he not a justifying faith; for he is called of Christ a
devil. 6. Many shall say unto Christ, John 6.70. Matthew. 7.22, 23.
Lord, Lord, have not we by thy name cast out devils? but Christ will answer
them, I never knew you: Wherefore the gift of working miracles is given to
hypocrites also. 7. The other kinds of faith extend to all things that are
written in the word, and therein proposed to be believed: but this of miracles
is appropriated and restrained to some certain works, or extraordinary effects
to come: therefore it is a distinct kind of faith, and different from the rest.

What justifying faith is.
in which definition, the general or common nature is, a knowledge and
steadfast assent; for of an unknown doctrine there is no faith, and it behooves
every man to know the doctrine before he believe it: 1. The material cause
thereof.
whence the Papists implicit faith is refuted. 2. The formal.
The difference or special nature, is the confidence and applying which every
particular man makes to himself of free remission of sins by and through
Christ: The property and peculiar affection thereof is to rest and rejoice in
God for this so great good: 3. The efficient.
The efficient cause is the holy Ghost: The isntrumental cause is the Gospel,
4. The isntrumental.
under which the use also of the Sacraments is comprehended: The difference
thereof from the rest.
The subject where it is seated is the will and heart of man. Justifying or
saving faith differs from the other kinds of faith; in that this only is the
certain confidence whereby we apply Christ's merit unto our selves: 1. In
nature. It is a confidence unmovable.
and we apply it unto our selves when every one of us do certainly resolve,
that the righteousness or merit of Christ is also given and imputed to us;
that we may be esteemed just and righteous of God, and also may be regenerated
and glorified. Confidence or trust is a motion of the heart or will, following
and pursuing some good thing, and rejoicing and resting thereon: for the words
(...) and (...), which signify belief, and to believe, come from (...), which
is to be strongly persuaded: Whence the word (...), to credit and believe, even
with profane authors is used in this sense, to wax confident, and to rest on
any thing: (...) 145.
as we read in Phocilides, Credit not the Commons, for the multitude is
deceitful: And in Demosthenes, Thou art confident on thy self, or buildest
too much on thine own person. Confidence is a motion of the heart, because it
is a following and pursuing of a good thing, and a desire of retaining that
good which a man already does enjoy: It is a rejoicing, because it is glad of
the present grace of God toward every of us, of full deliverance from the
guilt of sin, and from sin it self in part: and because by that which every
one enjoys in present he conceives hope of everlasting blessings to come,
as of everlasting life, and full delivery from all evil both of crime and
pain, and therefore is free from the fear of future evil: Matthew. 25.29. 1 Cor.
1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13.
To him that has shall be given. The holy Spirit given unto us is the earnest
and pledge of our full redemption. Again, Justifying faith differs from the
rest in this also, that this justifying faith is concerning all spiritual
gifts, and whatsoever belong to our salvation, 2. In object. It only concerns
spiritual things.
and is properly and simply, or absolutely called faith in the Scripture; and
is proper also and peculiar to the elect and chosen. The faith of miracles is a
certain gift whereby we are not bettered, which we may want without any
hindrance to our salvation: neither is it given to all the faithful, nor at
all times. Historical faith is a part of the justifying, and befalls all the
godly and hypocrites: but is not sufficient alone to salvation, because it
applies not to it self those benefits which are made known unto it out of the
word: Temporary faith hypocrites have. 3. In extent. It comprehends the rest,
but is not comprehended by them.
Justifying faith therefore differs from Historical faith, in that it
always comprehends Historical: but this is not sufficient to make a
justifying faith, as neither are the other two. And it differs from them all,
because by justifying faith alone righteousness and inheritance is obtained.
For if, as the Apostle says, we are justified by faith, and faith is imputed
for righteousness, 4. In effect and end. It only obtains the inheritance.
Romans 3.28. Romans 4.5.
and the inheritance is by faith; that faith then shall be one of these four:
But it is not historical faith, for then the devils also should be accounted
righteous, and heirs of the promise; neither temporary, for that is rejected by
Christ; nor the faith of miracles, for if so, Judas also should be heir:
Righteousness therefore and the inheritance is of justifying faith alone,
which indeed is properly, simply, and absolutely termed faith in the Scripture,
and is peculiar to the elect and chosen.

No man knows what justifying faith is, but he that has it.
Now, what justifying faith is, no man truly understands but he who has it
(for he that believes, knows that he does believe;) as he who never saw or
tasted honey, knows not of what quality it is in the taste, though you tell
him much of the sweetness of honey. But whosoever truly believes, that is,
has a saving faith, he both has experience in himself of these things, and
also is able to declare them to others. For, He being convicted thereof in his
conscience knows, Properties of justifying faith. John 3.36.
that whatsoever things are spoken in the Scripture are true and divine: For
faith is builded upon a certain or assured and divine testimony, otherwise it
were not a full persuasion. He finds himself bound to believe them: for if we
confess them to be true, it is then just and meet that we should assent unto
them. He principally respects, imbraceth, and applies to himself the
promise of grace, and of free remission of sins, righteousness, and life
everlasting by and for Christ, as it is said, John 8.36.
He which believes in the Son of God has life everlasting. He being
emboldned on this confidence, relyeth on the present grace of God, and out of
it does thus gather and conclude of further grace: By the present love of God
toward me, and the beginnings of the first fruits of the holy Ghost, which so
great blessings God imparteth unto me, I certainly resolve, and am persuaded,
that God will never change his good will toward me, since he himself is
unchangeable and his gifts without repentance: therefore I hope also for a
consummation and accomplishment of these blessings, that is, for plenary and
full redemption. He rejoices in the present blessings which he has, but most
of all in the certain and perfect salvation to come: and this is that peace of
conscience which passes all men's understanding. He has a will to obey the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles without any exception in doing or
suffering whatsoever is therein commanded. If I will believe God, I must obey
his will, and think that this his will is not revealed unto us from men, but
from him. Wherefore, a man endued with justifying faith does that duty which is
imposed upon him, strive the world and the devil never so much against him;
and undergoeth, bears, and suffers whatsoever adversities for the glory of
God cheerfully and boldly, having God his most benign and good Father. He is
certain, that his faith, though it be in this life imperfect and languishing,
and oftentimes very much eclipsed, yet being builded upon the promise of God
which is unchangeable, does never altogether fail or die; but the purpose
which it has of believing and obeying God continues, it striveth with doubts
and temptations, and at length vanquisheth, and in the celestial life which is
to come shall be changed into a full and most certain knowledge of God and his
will, where we shall see God face to face. 1 Cor. 13.12.
All this whosoever truly believes, he feels sensibly in himself; and
whosoever feels this sensibly in himself, he truly believes.

4. How faith and hope differ.
Faith apprehends things present: hope respects things to come.
JUstifying faith is not confounded with hope, though they both respect the
same benefits: for, faith takes hold of the present good; as remission of
sins, or reconciliation, and regeneration, or the beginning of obedience and
life everlasting in us: Hope eyeth the good to come; as the continuance of our
reconciliation, and the perfecting or accomplishment of everlasting life, or
our conformity with God; that is full delivery from all evil. Object. Life
everlasting is a thing to come: We believe life everlasting: We believe
therefore that which is to come; that is, faith is also of things to come, and
so faith is hope it self. Ans. The Major must be distinguished. Life
everlasting is to come: true, as concerning the consummation or accomplishment
thereof, in this respect it is not now simply believed, but hoped for. We are
saved by hope. Romans 8.24. 1 John 3.2. How life everlasting is a present, and
how a future good.
Now we are the sons of God; but it does not appear what we shall be. Life
everlasting is also a present good; 1. As concerning the will and unchangeable
purpose of God, who has decreed from everlasting that which he has begun in
us, and will also in due time accomplish it. 2. As concerning the beginning
thereof in this present life: for everlasting life is begun here in the elect
by the holy Ghost; and in this respect is not hoped, but believed: according to
those aphorisms and brief sentences of Scripture; He that believes in the Son
has life everlasting, John 5.24.
and has passed from death unto life. John 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ. By faith then we are certain, that those
blessings which as yet we have not, are not withstanding ours for Gods promise,
and for the unchangeable will in God to give them us: but in certain hope we
look for them as concerning their accomplishment. The sum is, There is one
and the same act and operation of faith and hope, but they differ in
consideration: It is called faith, as it does apprehend things to come as if
they were present: in regard of the unchangeablenesse of Gods will, it is
called hope, as it does certainly look for the bestowing of those things. And
in this sense the Apostle says, that faith is conversant in things hoped for:
Faith (says he) is the ground and substance of things hoped for; Hebr. 11.1.
that is, it is that which makes things which are hoped for to be extant and
present, and is the evidence of things which appear not, or are not seen, to
wit, as touching their accomplishment and consummation. Some reconcile the
difference of these two in this manner; Faith apprehends the promises
proposed in the Creed concerning things to come: Hope, the things themselves
promised which are to come. But this reconcilement is not so popular and easy
to be conceived by the vulgar fort, as is the other. Object. 2. Faith is the
evidence of things which are not seen: Therefore not of things present. Answ.
It is the evidence of things which are not seen, to wit, by the outward sense:
but they are seen by the eyes of the mind, even as if they did lie open to the
eyes of the body. Again, they are not seen (as is afore-shewed) in respect of
their accomplishment and consummation.

5. What are the causes of faith.
How the H. Ghost is the principal and efficient cause of faith. Ephesians. 2.8.
THe first and principal efficient cause of faith, both historical, temporary,
and of working miracles, is the holy Ghost: howbeit, he is cause of these by
his divine general working only: but he is cause of justifying faith by a
special kind of working. By the grace of God ye are saved through faith, and
that not of your selves: it is the gift of God, who enlightneth the mind, that
it may understand the word; and moves the will, that it may assent unto the
word once understood. Object. The devil has historical faith: It is
therefore wrought in him by the holy Ghost. Ans. Yea, even whatsoever faith is
in the devil is wrought by the Spirit of God, but that by a general and
universal working only (as has been said) whereby he works in all; not by a
special and proper action, because by such a kind of working the holy Ghost
fashioneth and frames a justifying faith in the elect alone For verily,
whatsoever knowledge and understanding is in devils and hypocrites, God
effects it by his Spirit; but not so as to regenerate or justify them, that
they might rightly acknowledge him to be the author of this gift, and magnify
him therefore; for after this manner he works faith in the elect alone. The
devils therefore and hypocrites have faith from the Spirit of God: but the
elect from the Spirit of God sanctifying them.

The word of God preached, the isntrumental cause of faith. Romans 1.16. Rom 10
17. 1 Cor* 4.15.
The isntrumental cause of faith in general, is the whole word of God
comprehended in the books of the old and new Testament, in which writings also
are contained many works and miracles of God besides the word. But the chief
and proper instrument of justifying faith is the preaching of the Gospel. The
Gosel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. This instrument does the
holy Ghost use (yet not as necessary in regard of his working; but arbitrary,
and at his own good pleasure) both to stir up faith in us, and to nourish,
strengthen, and increase the same. Wherefore ordinarily justifying faith is
never engendered in those who are of years to receive it, without the preaching
of the Gospel. Special revelation the cause of faith of miracles. The formal
cause of faith. The object of faith. The subject of faith. The ends of faith.
The cause of that faith which works miracles is not simply the word of God,
but there must necessarily come thereto an especial or immediate revelation
from God. The formal cause of justifying faith is a certain knowledge and
confidence in Christ. The object of it is whole Christ, and his benefits
promised in the word. The subject or part of man wherein it remains is the
understanding, will, and heart of man. The end or final cause, 1. The glory of
God, to wit, the celebration of his truth, justice, bounty, mercy which he
has showed in the sending of his Son, and in the giving of faith in him. 2.
Our salvation, that we may receive the blessings which are promised in the
word.

6. What are the effects of faith.
The effects of faith.
THe effects of justifying faith are, The justifying of us before God. Joy,
resting on God, and peace of conscience. Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God. Our whole conversion, regeneration, and all our obedience,
which follows faith, and begins at the same time with faith: For, by faith
God purifieth our hearts. Romans 5.1.
To the effects of faith appertain also the consequents thereof; that is,
increase of spiritual and corporal gifts, and the receiving of the things
themselves which faith aims at. Acts 15.9.
The first then and immediate effect of justifying faith is justification: from
this afterward flow all other benefits purchased by the blood of Christ, which
all we believe to be given us by faith, faith it self being the cause of them:
for, That which is the cause unto any cause of any effect, is likewise a cause
of that effect. If thererefore faith be the next cause of our justification in
respect of us, it is also a cause of those things which necessarily follow
justification: Thy faith has saved thee. Luke 8.48.
In a word: The effects of faith are justification and regeneration, which is
begun here, and is to be perfected in the life to come, Romans 3.28. and 10.10.
Acts 13.39.

7. Unto whom faith is given.
Justifying faith is given to all the elect, and to them only. Joh. 6.44 and
10.26. Matthew. 13.11. Acts 13.48. Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 10.16. 2 These.
3.2. Mat. 7.22.
JUstifying faith is only proper to the elect, and that to all of them: for it
is given to the elect alone, and to all the elect, even to infants, as
concerning some inclination: No man can come to me, except the Father which
has sent me draw him. Ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep. It is given
to you to know the secrets of heaven: but unto them it is not given. And they
believed as many as were ordained to everlasting life. Whom he predestined,
them also he called: and whom he called* them also he justified. Faith is the
gift of God. All have not hearkened to the Gospel. For all men have not faith.
Temporary faith, and the faith of miracles is given to those who are members of
the visible Church only, that is, hypocrites. Have we not by thy Name done
many great works? Cast out devils? But now nevertheless this faith of miracles
cease, which flourished in the primitive Church; for that now the doctrine is
sufficiently confirmed.

Historical faith all they have, who are by profession of the Church, whether
they be of the godly or reprobates; yea, and they also who are not members of
the Church, but enemies, as devils and tyrants. Historical is a part of
justifying faith: because there can be no assent or persuasion of a thing which
is not first known. Object. Historical faith is a good work: The devils have
historical faith: Therefore they have good works. Answ. Historical faith is a
good work, if it be joined with an application of those things whereto it
assenteth, that is, with confidence. Repl. Historical faith is a good work
though it be not joined with confidence, because it is an effect of the Spirit
of God: Therefore the devils have good works, even without peculiar application
and confidence. Answ. Historical faith is a good work in it self, Historical
faith which is good in it self, is made ill by an accident.
but it is made ill by an accident, for that the reprobate do not apply those
things to themselves, which they know and believe to be true: Wherefore the
devils are said to tremble; for that they do not think that God is toward
them also such as he is described in his word, good, merciful, etc. The sum
is: As the substance it self of the devils, and other things which they
retain still of their first creation; so also both the knowledge and faith
which they have concerning divine matters, are in themselves very good, because
they are the effects and gifts of God: but they are made evil by an accident,
even by reason of their abusing of them, for that they refer them not to this
end, as to show themselves grateful unto God the author of these good things,
and to magnify him for them. A believing inclination in infants, though not an
actual belief.
Against this, That all the elect are said to have faith, some thus reason;
Object. Many infants are of the elect, and yet have not faith: Therefore all
the elect have not faith. Ans. They have not indeed actual faith, as men of
ripe years; but they have a power or inclination to believe, which the holy
Ghost, as it fitteth for their capacity and condition, works in them; for
whereas the holy Ghost is promised unto infants, he cannot be idle in them:
Wherefore that remains still which before was confirmed, That all the elect
have faith. And further this I add, That faith is necessary for all the elect;
Faith and the profession thereof necessary for five causes.
and not only faith, but the confession of faith also to those which are grown
in years and understanding: Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain: therefore thou shall take it aright. Exodus 10.7. Mat. 10.32, 33.
He that shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in heaven. Let your light shine before men, etc. Matthew. 5.16.
but as a fruit full tree, manifests and shows it self by confession. For
with the mouth man confesses to salvation. And thou being confirmed, convert
thy brethren. 4 Romans 10.10.
Now we know that we have faith, 1
By the testimony of the holy Ghost, and by the feeling of a true faith in our
selves; that is, by a true and unfeigned desire of receiving the benefits
offered by Christ: Luke 22.32.
for he that believes, Three ways how to know that we have faith.
knows that he does believe, as the Apostle testifies; I know whom I have
believed. And, because we have the same spirit of faith, according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and
therefore speak. 2 Timothy 1.12. 2 Cor. 4.13. 1 John 5.10.
the certainty of faith, whereof we spoke in the definition of faith, some
dispute on this wise: Object. 1. They who may fall before the end of their life
into sin and damnation, cannot be certain of their salvation and everlasting
life; This is proved, because to be certain, and to be in possibility to fall,
are contrary one to the other: But we all may slide and fall away: It is false
therefore which is taught in the definition of justifying faith, to wit, That
everlasting life is given us, and so our faith to be certain and assured of it.
Answ. To be in possibility of falling or failing, that is, finally, is contrary
to the certainty of our salvation: But they who are once enriched by God with
true faith do not fall finally. Repl. 1. All that are weak may fall finally: We
are all weak: Therefore we may all fall finally. Ans. The Major is to be
distinguished: True faith may faint for a time, but cannot fall finally.
All that are weak may fall finally; true, if they stood by their own
strength: But we who are believers stand preserved and upheld by the grace and
power of God: Therefore can we not finally fall; for, whom God has once
embraced with his favor, them he will not, nor suffers to fall utterly from
his grace: Though he fall, he shall not be cast off; for the Lord puts
under his hand. Psalm. 37.24.
Repl. 2. But God has no where promised that he will keep and preserve us in
his grace finally. Answ. Yes, he has promised and expressed it both in the
place aforementioned, and elsewhere: John 10.28, 29.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of mine hand. My Father which gave them me is greater then all,
and none is able to take them out of my Fathens hand: I and my Father are one.
Romans 8.38.
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, etc. shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. Repl. 3. But it is
said, Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall: 1 Cor. 10.12.
Therefore perseverance depends not on God promising, but of our selves, And
therefore it is doubtful, standing upon a doubtful ground. Answ. This is a
fallacy, reasoning from that which is no cause, as if it were a cause. For by
this very exhortation he goes about to nourish, make perfect, and preserve
the safety of the faithful. For God uses such threatenings thereby to retain
the godly in their duty, that they may not wax proud, and please themselves.
But hereof it does not follow, that he permits the perseverance of the
godly in faith and grace to their own strength and arbitrament. Moreover, Paul
in that place speaks not to particular men, but to the body of the Church of
Corinth, in which many were hypocrites: Wherefore they who will truly believe,
must certainly resolve that God will save them: for if he will have us assured
of his present favor and grace toward us, he will also have us assured of
that which is to come, because God is unchangeable. Repl. 4. Solomon says,
Eccles. 9.1.
Man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred: Therefore we cannot
be assured of the election of God, neither resolve any thing of Gods present
favor, and so by consequent, neither of that which is to come. Answer to the
Antecedent: 1. Man knows not; true, as concerning second causes, or by events
of things, be they good or evil: for external and outward fortune is no
certain token whereby to judge of Gods favor. 2. Again, man knows not of
himself; but he knows it, God revealing it, and certifying us abundantly of
his love toward us by his word and Spirit. Repl. 5. Who has known the mind
of the Lord? Answ. Romans 11.34.
No man has known it before God has revealed it, neither after he has
revealed it does any man perfectly know it; but so much we know as may suffice
to our salvation: We all behold, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord with
open face, 2 Cor. 3.18. Romans 8.16.
and are changed into the same image, from glory to glory. It is the Spirit
which reveals and witnesses unto us, 1 Cor. 1.22.
that we are the sons of God.

Object. 2. But if the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, Ezekiel. 18.24,
he shall die in his sins: Therefore believers also may defect from godliness,
and fall from everlasting salvation, Ans. 1. That which is spoken but
conditionally is no positive assertion. Ans. 2. He in that place is called
just, not only who is truly just, but also who seems just in the eyes of men;
of which kind oftentimes time-serving hypocrites are, which believe for a
while, and afterward fall away: for a true just man is like a tree planted by
the waters side, whose leaf shall not wither: Psalm. 1.3, 4.
And the sons and heirs only are endued with true conversion and godliness;
Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And if
sons, then also heirs. Gal. 4.7. 1 Cor. 2.12, 16.
We have received the Spirit of God, that we might know the things which are
given unto us of God. We have the mind of Christ. When the Spirit of God, which
works in the sons and heirs of the kingdom their conversion and
sanctification, is called, 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians 1.14.
The earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the possession
purchased.

Object. 3. Paul exhorts the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.1. Matt. 26.41.
that they receive not the grace of God in vain: so Christ likewise bids us,
Watch, and pray. Ans. Thereby carnal security is forbidden, and certainty of
salvation, as also faith, tranquillity, watchfulness, and prayer is commanded:
for these are the necessary and proper effects of our election, and an
infallible argument of salvation: For all believers are elected; and Paul
teaches, Ephesians. 1.
That by faith we are made partakers of Gods adoption

Object. 4. Saul failed and fell away finally: Saul was one of the godly:
Therefore the godly also fall away. Ans. We deny the Minor, that Saul was one
of the godly, for he was an hypocrite. Repl. But he had the gifts of the holy
Ghost. Ans. He had such gifts of the holy Ghost as are common to the godly with
the reprobate: he had not the gifts of regeneration and adoption; and therefore
neither had he the holy Ghost sanctifying him, which is proper unto the elect.

Object. 5. The doctrine of the certainty of our salvation breeds security.
Ans. It breeds indeed a spiritual security by it self, in the elect alone:
and a carnal by accident, and that only in the wicked and reprobate; but not
at all in the godly.

Quest. 22. What are those things which are necessary for a Christian man to
believe?
Ans. All things which are promised us in the Gospel John 20.31. Matthew. 28.20.
Mark 1.15.
: the sum whereof is briefly comprised in the Creed of the Apostles, or in
the Articles of the catholic and undoubted faith of all Christians.

The Explication.
AFter we have treated of Faith, it directly follows now, that we speak of
the Object of faith, that is, the sum of those things which are to be
believed. Faith therefore in general apprehends the whole word of God, and
is strongly persuaded of the truth thereof, as appears out of the definition
thereof: But justifying faith properly eyeth the promises of the Gospel, or the
preaching of grace through Christ: Wherefore the Gospel is properly the object
of justifying faith; and it is properly termed* The doctrine of things to be
believed: as contrariwise, the law properly is The doctrine of things to be
done. Men's traditions therefore, the Popes ordinances, and decrees of Councels
are sequestered and excluded from being the object of faith; for faith can rely
on nothing but the word of God as on an immovable foundation. Now the decrees
of men are variable and uncertain, since every man is a liar; only God is true,
and his word truth. Romans 3 4.
Wherefore Christians, as they may not frame unto themselves any object of
faith: so neither may they receive any formed and delivered by others, but must
believe the Gospel only, Mark 1.15.
as the Scripture teaches; Repent and believe the Gospel. 1 Cor. 2.5.
That your faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
Now the sum of the Gospel, or of things to be believed, is the Apostles
Creed, whereof it follows that we treat.

Quest. 23. Which is the Creed?
Answ. 1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. 2.
And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord: 3. Which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary: 4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried, he descended into hell: 5. The third day he rose
again from the dead: 6. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand
of God the Father Almighty: 7. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead. 8. I believe in the holy Ghost. 9. I believe the holy catholic
Church, the communion of Saints. 10. The forgiveness of sins. 11. The
resurrection of the body. 12. And the life everlasting.
Amen.

The Explication.
THis word Symbol is derived from a Greek word, which signifies either a
common collation of diverse men to the making of a banquet: or, a sign, token,
and mark whereby a man is discerned from other. Such as is the military sign,
whereby fellows are decyphered from enemies. The Symbol, so termed in the
Church, is a brief and summary form of Christian doctrine: or a brief sum
or confession of the points of Christian religion, or Evangelicall doctrine.
Now it is called by the name of Symbol, because it is as a token or profession
whereby the Church with her members is discerned from all her enemies, and from
all other Sects. Some say, that this brief sum of Evangelicall doctrine was
called a Symbol, for that this doctrine was collated, as it were, and imparted
by the Apostles, and every one of them did bestow some part thereof: but that
cannot be proved. This reason may be rendered thereof more probable, that it was
called a Symbol, for that the Articles of faith are the square and rule
whereunto the faith and doctrine of all orthodox or right believing Christians
ought to agree and be conferred. The Symbol is called Apostolic, Two reasons
why the Creed is called Apostolic.
Because it contains the sum of the Apostolic doctrine, which the
Catechumenes were enforced to hold and profess. Because the Apostles delivered
that sum of doctrine to their Scholars and Disciples, Catholic, Why it is
called Catholic. An answer to a question moved touching other Creeds.
Here some demand a reason, Why, after the Apostles Creed, other Creeds, as the
Creed of the Council of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, with Athanasius his
Creed, were compiled and received in the Church. Answ. These Creeds properly
are not others, that is, quite different in substance from the Apostolic
Symbol, but are only a repetition and more ample declaration of this; in all
which certain words are added as an explication thereof, by reason of
Heretics, by whom, because of the shortness thereof, this was depraved: there
is no change either of the matter, or of the doctrine, but only of the form of
declaring it, as easily appears by comparing them together. Other important
and weighty causes there were, which might compel the Bishops and Doctors of
ancient Churches to compose and draw out these brief compendious forms of
confession; especially the Church then increasing, Four causes why other Creeds
were made and received in the Church.
and heresies growing with and in the Church. For instance in few; wily glosing
sophismes corrupt the writings of the Prophets and Apostles; for which very
cause also these Confessions were entitled Symboles. 4. That there might be
some perpetual rule extant in public, plain, brief, and easy to be known,
whereby to examine all manner of doctrine and interpretation of Scripture, to
approve and ratify whatsoever accords therewith, and refuse and disanull the
contrary. The Apostolic Creed preferred above other Creeds, because 1. The
phrase of it is most proper. 2. The time most ancient. 3. The copy most
authentical.

Notwithstanding, the Apostles Creed far surpasses the rest in authority: 1.
Because for the most part it literally consists of the proper words and
phrases of Scripture. 2. Because it is of greater antiquity then other Creeds,
and was delivered first unto the Church by the Apostles themselves, or by their
disciples and scholars: and since them successively from hand to hand
transferred unto us their posterity. 3. Because it is the fountain and
original draught, even an authentical rule of direction to other Creeds,
which for illustration of this, to prevent the fraudulent sleights and forged
corruption of heretics, have in universal and general Synods or Councels
been published, and authorized by the whole joint-consent of the Church.
The certainty of this Creed depends not on the authority and arbitrament of
men, or definitive sentence of Councels, but on the perpetual concordance of
holy Scripture with them, and of the whole Church since the Apostles time
retaining and holding fast the Apostles doctrine, and testifying to all
posterity, that they received this doctrine at the Apostles mouths, and the
mouths of their hearers; which consent is obvious to any man that daigneth to
view it with both eyes, and weigh it considerately. For certain it is, that no
Congregation of Angels, nor conventicle of men has any power of instituting
new laws touching the worship of God, or new Articles of faith binding the
conscience; for this is a work proper unto God: Neither may we believe God for
the testimony of the Church, but the Church for the testimony of God.

This doctrine touching the causes and authority of diverse Creeds is borrowed
out of Ursinus Admonit. Neustad. de Concordia Burgens. written Anno Dom. 1581.
where young Divines may, if they list, read a large discourse touching the
truth and authority of Ecclesiastical Writers learnedly discussed, from 117.
page, unto the 142. page of the said Tract: a brief Type and Table whereof I
have here decyphered.

THE TABLE.
The writings touching the doctrine of the Church are, 1. Divine, that is,
inspired immediately by God into the hearts of the Prophets and Apostles: such
as are the Canonical books of the old and new Testament. These alone are
simply in their sentences and words full of divine in^piration, and worthy
credit; and therefore are the sole rule of trial unto all others. 2.
Ecclesiastical, that is, written by the Doctors of the Church; and these are,
1. Public, to wit, written in the common name of the whole Church; which again
are subdivided into writings, 1. Catholic, I mean, Creeds and Confessions,
written in the name, and with the full consent of the whole orthodox and right
believing Church, received and allowed by the authority thereof: such as are,
The Apostles Creed. The Creeds of the Councels of Nice, Constantinople,
Chalcedon.
Athanasius his Creed.
2. Particular, namely, the Confessions of certain Churches and Councels; as
diverse Catechismes, and the Augustan^ Confession.
2. Private, that is, written in the name, and by the advice of some one
private man or more; as Common places, Commentaries, and such like.


ON THE 8. SABBATH.
Quest. 24. Into how many parts is the Creed divided?
Answ. Into three parts. The first is, of God the eternal Father, and our
Creation. The second, of God the Son, and our Redemption. The third, of God the
holy Ghost, and our Sanctification.

The Explication.
THe principal parts of the Apostolic Creed are three: 1. Of God the Father,
and our Creation. 2. Of God the Son, and our Redemption. 3. Of God the holy
Ghost, and our Sanctification: that is, of the works of our Creation,
Redemption, and Sanctification.


Ob. 1. Unto the Father is ascribed the Creation of heaven and earth: unto the
Son the Redemption of mankind: unto the holy Ghost Sanctification: Therefore
the Son and the holy Ghost did not create heaven and earth; How our Creation,
Redemption, Sanctification are each appropriated to some one person of the
Trinity, and yet all three persons have their joynt-working in them.
neither did the Father and the holy Ghost redeem mankind; neither do the
Father and the Son sanctify the faithful. Ans. It is a fallacy, grounding
upon that which is affirmed but in respect, as if it were simply affirmed: For
the Creation is given to the Father, Redemption to the Son, Sanctification to
the holy Ghost, not as they are simply an operation or work (for so should the
other two persons be excluded from it) but in respect of the order and manner
of working, which is peculiar and proper to every of them in producing and
bringing forth the same external work. A more open declaration hereof may be
this: The works of our creation, redemption, and sanctification are the
operations of the Godhead outwardly, that is, external operations which God
works on his creatures: and they are undivided, that is, common to the three
persons, which they by common will and power work in the creatures, by reason
of that one and the same essence and nature of the Godhead which they have: For
the Scripture attributes the Creation not only to the Father, but to the
Son also, and the holy Ghost: All things were made by it. John 1.3. Genes.
1.2. Matthew. 1.20. Psalm. 33.6.
The Spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters. That which is conceived in her
is of the holy Ghost. By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all
the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. Likewise, our Redemption is
attributed to the Father, and the holy Ghost: John 3.17. Titus 3.5, 6.
God sent his Son into the world, that the world might be saved by him. He
saved us by the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly.
And Sanctification both to the Father and to the Son: God has sent the Spirit
of his Son into our hearts, crying, Gal. 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Ephesians. 5.26.
Abba, Father. The very God of peace sanctify you throughout. Christ is made
sanctification unto us. Christ sanctifies the Church. All the persons
therefore create, redeem, and sanctify.

Why distinct operations or workings are attributed to the three persons.
Nevertheless, yet in respect of that order of working which is between them,
Creation is ascribed unto the Father, not excluding the other persons; but
because he is the fountain, as of the Divinity of the Son and the holy Ghost,
so also of those divine operations which he works and performs by the
Son and the holy Ghost. Redemption is ascribed unto the Son, not excluding
the other two persons; but because he is that person which executes the
Fathers will concerning the redeeming of mankind, and does immediately perform
the work of our redemption: for the Son only was sent into the flesh, and has
paid the ransom or price for our sins; not the Father, nor the Spirit. To the
holy Ghost is ascribed Sanctification, not excluding the other two persons from
this action; but because it does immediately sanctify us.

Object. 2. The external works of the Godhead (that is, such as the whole
three persons exercise not mutually one toward another, but execute in the
creatures) are indivisible, or cannot be divided, (that is, they are not
appropriated unto any one of the three persons without respect unto the other:)
But Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification are external works of the
Godhead: Therefore they are indivisible, and by force of good consequent there
needs no such distinction of them as is proposed. Answer to the Major; The
works of the Trinity are indivisible, but with retaining to each person his
proper and peculiar manner of working. All three persons therefore work on the
creatures, but yet that order still is inviolably kept; as that the Father
still is the fountain of the operations of the Son and the holy Ghost, and
does all things not of any other, but of himself, by the Son and the holy
Ghost: the Son does all things of the Father, by the holy Ghost: the holy
Ghost does all things of the Father and the Son, by himself. For, The Father
creates, but mediately by the Son and the holy Ghost; the Son from the
Father; and the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. The Father and the
holy Ghost redeem us, but mediately by the Son; but the Son immediately
from the Father, by the holy Ghost. The Father and the Son sanctify us, but
mediately by the holy Ghost; but the holy Ghost immediately from the Father and
the Son. But as concerning the works of the Trinity, which are called
outward and inward works, it shall be more fully enlarged when we come to
handle the last Question save one of the doctrine touching GOD.

Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa. 44.6. and 45.5. 1 Cor. 8.4, 6. Ephesians. 4.6.
Quest. 25. Seeing there is but one only substance of God, why namest thou these
three, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost?
Answ. Because God has so manifested himself in his word Genesis 1.2, 3. Psalm
33.6. Isa. 6.1, 3. and 48.16. and 61.1. Mat. 3.16, 17. and 28.19. John 12.40.
and 14.26. and 15.26. 2 Cor. 13.13. Gal. 4.6. Ephesians. 2.18. Tit. 3.5, 6. 1 John
5.7.
, that these three distinct persons are that one true and everlasting God.

The Explication.
IN this Question is contained the doctrine of the Church concerning one God,
Questions concerning God.
and the three persons of the Godhead. The principal questions therein are: 1.
Whence it may appear that there is a God. 2. What he is, or what manner of
God the God of the Church is whom we worship; and in what he differs from
idols. 3. Whether he be One only, and in what sense there are said to be many
gods. 4. What the name of Essence, Person, and Trinity signify, and how they
differ. 5. Whether these names are to be used in the Church, and whether they
are had in the Scripture. 6. How many persons there be of the Godhead. 7. How
they differ, and are to be distinguished one from another. 8. For what cause it
is necessary that the Doctrine of the Trinity be held in the Church.


1. Whether there be a God, and whence it appears.
THe great misery of man's nature cannot be sufficiently thought upon, that
whereas it was created to the bright knowledge, and even the very image of God,
it is fallen so far, as not only it is ignorant who, and what God is, but also
makes disputation, Three causes which have made men to doubt, whether there be
a God.
whether there be any God in heaven or no. The causes of this evil the Church
alone does understand: the first whereof is, The blindness and corruption of
man's nature after his fall: the next, The instigation of the devil, who would
have the whole opinion of God razed out of the minds of men; unto which comes
the horrible confusion of man's life and humane affairs, in that oftentimes the
wicked flourish, and the godly either are oppressed by them, or while they
perceive not the causes of these evils, and the secret government of God, they
fall to doubting, whether there be any God who has care over the world and
humane affairs. But that there is a God, The reasons which do prove there is
a God.
is proved by many main arguments common to Philosophy with Divinity. The
arguments are these:

The beautiful order of nature.
The beautiful and goodly order of nature beheld in the world; that is, the
disposing of every part of the world, and the continual succession of diverse
motions and operations therein, with constant and strict observation of their
stablished and perpetual laws, cannot be instituted and kept but of a wise,
understanding, and omnipotent nature, which is God. This argument is enlarged,
Psalm. 8.19.104.135.147.148. Acts 1. and 17. Romans 1.

The excellency of man's mind.
A reasonable nature, having some cause, cannot derive his original but from
an intelligent and understanding nature, for that the cause is not worse or
baser then the effect brings: But the mind of man is a nature endued with
reason, and has some cause: Therefore it has his being from an understanding
cause, which is God: Job 32.8. Psalm. 94.97. Acts 17.28.
Surely there is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding. Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, etc. We are also his
generation. The Minor of the precedent Syllogism is thus proved likewise by
reason: Whatsoever has a beginning, is from another, because it must needs be
from something, and of it self it cannot have being or beginning, because
nothing is cause of it self: but man's mind has a beginning: Therefore from
another, which other must needs be God.

The general rules and principles naturally ingendered in the mind of man.
The notions of general rules or principles born in us, and with us, such as
are the difference between things honest and dishonest, numbering, understanding
of consequences in discourse and reasoning, etc. cannot come by chance, or from
a sensible nature common to us with brute beasts, but are necessarily inbred
in us by some intelligent cause, which is God: whereupon we frame this
Syllogism; Notions are not engendered nor have their being but from a cause
intelligent (for no man makes another wise who himself is not wise:) But in
men there are notions not coming by use, nor received from men: Therefore they
are from God. Romans 2.15.
The Gentiles show the effect of the law written in their hearts. Man is the
image of God, etc.

This principle of it self naturally inbred in man; That there is a God.
The natural notion of this principle, There is a God. Principles are true,
because they are divine wisdom, and because the contrary or opposite thereto
being granted, nature is thereby destroyed. But, That there is a God, is a
principle; First, Because every one has private experience hereof in himself.
Secondly, All wise men confess it. Thirdly, All nations consent in it: for no
nation is so barbarous, but that it maintains some religion, and contendeth
and striveth for the advancement thereof, and supposes that there is some God:
Romans 1.19.
That which may be known of God is manifest in them (that is, in the minds of
men,) for God has showed it unto them.

The terrors of conscience in the wicked.
The terrors of conscience which are stricken into the minds of the wicked
after they have sinned, cannot be inflicted but by an intelligent Judge, which
discerns honest and dishonest things, detesteth those things which are
dishonest, beholds the minds and hearts of men, and exercises judgment
upon the minds: but in all the wicked is this torment: Isa. 66.24. and 57.21.
Deuteronomy. 4.24. Romans 2.15.
Their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched. There is no
peace, says God, to the wicked. God is a consuming fire. They show the effects
of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing.

Against the beasts of the world, who think the doctrine of God to be but a
cunning device of the wiser sort to keep the simple people in order.
And hence is apparent the impudency of Epicures and Academicks, who deem all
religion to be devices of subtle men, coined to this end and purpose, that the
rest of the common people might, through fear of a superior power, be kept in
good order. For first, if through deceivablenesse other men believe that God
is, and dread him; Why then are these men themselves, who will seem by their
sharp in-sight to espy the guile, most of all tormented with the conscience,
and privy acknowledgement both of this their blasphemy, as also of other
misdeeds? Moreover, the sole and bare asseveration and word of a few could not
have been sufficient, neither to persuade all mankind, neither to maintain the
persuasion once brought in, to all succeeding ages: neither does that lighten
the force of those arguments which are deducted from this notion, That there is
a God; and from the conscience, in that they say, There are many found who
neither believe there is a God, neither are moved with the conscience of their
sins: for although they covet never so much to persuade themseves that there is
no God, yet is their conscience always against them. And therefore it is most
false that these men imagine, that any one of the wicked is free from the
gnawing of his conscience: for how much the more every one despises God, and
all religion, and endeavors to repress the pricks of conscience; so much
the more is he tormented, and at every mentioning and signifying of God, he
trembles and shakes with horror: and how much the slowlier, with so much the
more severe dolor and pain is his security shaken from him. Whereupon we see
those whose whole life was profane and secure for the most part, when they are
oppressed with the terror of Gods judgment, to perish in despair.

Now that which is said, The ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for God:
Psalm. 10.4. and 14.1. and 53.2.
neither is God in all his thoughts. The fool has said in his heart, There is
no God: that this has not this meaning, as if the wicked were void of all
knowledge and fear of God, or do not confess that there is a God: but that
framing unto themselves another then he indeed is, who has manifested
himself; to wit, one that cares not for men's affairs, defends not, nor
delivers the good, and punishes the wicked; they place an idol in room of
the true God; David himself does sufficiently declare, whenas he describes
the same profaneness of the wicked in these words: For he has said in his
heart, Psalm. 10.12.
Tush, God has forgotten, he hides away his face, and he will never see it.

The punishments of the wicked: Which punishments are not to be imputed to the
Magistrates severity and wisdom, for two causes.
From the punishments of the wicked which they suffer besides the torments of
conscience: for the events of all times constrained men to confess, that their
sins are punished with grievous punishments in this life; and contrariwise, the
lot and end of the good to be more pleasant. Wherefore, there is a mind or
understanding power, which discerns honest things from dishonest, judge of
mankind, punishing the wicked, and defending the good. And that this may not be
ascribed to the wisdom or severity of Magistrates or other men, this
withstandeth and hinders: For that it must needs be that this natural
instinct, whereby men judge that offenders are justly punished, must proceed
from some mind which is enemy to wickedness. For that oftentimes by
mavelous, and unexpected and unlooked for means, they are drawn to the
justice and punishment of the Magistrates, whose sins before had been privy,
or who seemed to have been able by their own power or subtilty easily to escape
their hands: and that especially, for that many, who, through either the
negligence or white-liverdnesse of Magistrates are not punished by them, yet
run into calamities, and have allotted unto them ruefull ends. And when
transgressions and sins increase too much by their impunity, whole nations and
commonwealths, with horrible and manifest examples of Gods wrath, perish, as
the world in the deluge, Sodom by fire cast from heaven, Pharaoh in the red
sea, the Jews and many flourishing kingdoms by most lamentable overthrowes.
That these things cannot come to pass by chance, neither any other way then by
the judgment and power of him who is Lord of mankind and nature, both Gods
comminations and threatenings, and the conscience of every one, and the order of
justice, whereby these follow and ensue upon impiety, and the very hugeness,
weight, and greatness of things does convince. Wherefore it is said, The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, Psalm. 58.9, 10.
he shall wash his footsteps in the blood of the ungodly. Psalm 9.16.
So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous;
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. The Lord is known to execute
judgment. Now, albeit the wicked flourish often for a while, and the godly are
oppressed; yet nevertheless examples, which are fewer in number, do not
weaken the general rule unto which most events agree. But if it were so, that
fewer of the wicked did suffer punishment; yet those self same examples, though
but a few, would testify that God is, and that he is displeased with the
offenses of others also who seem to be less punished. But this is not true, no
not of any of them, that they are not punished in this life: for all those who
are not before the end of this life converted to God, if punishment do not
sooner overtake them, yet at length they die in despair; which punishment is
more grievous then all the evils either corporal or spiritual, and is the
beginning and testimony of everlasting punishment. Now in that this punishment
is not sufficient, it does therein agree with all, even the most tragical
cases of the wicked: and therefore we are taught by the doctrine of the Church,
that Gods le^ity which he does not seldom use in this life toward the wicked,
and his severity which he seems to show toward the godly, does not at all
weaken his divine providence and justice, but rather declares his goodness,
whiles by deferring of punishment, he inviteth the wicked to repentance; and by
exercising the godly with chastisements and crosses, he perfecteth their
salvation: and also it confirms the certainty of judgment after this life,
wherein perfect satisfaction shall be made by the wicked to Gods justice.

Commonweals wisely ordered.
A body politic wisely ordered by good and wholesome laws, could not be
decyphered unto men's understanding, but by some intelligent mind approving this
kind of order: and because the devil with the whole rabble and rout of wicked
ones pursue with deadly hatred these societies with their discipline, it must
needs be God that has thus long protected and defended it: Prove. 8.15.
By me kings reign, and princes decreee justice.

Heroical and noble instinct of mind.
Heroical instincts; that is, wisdom and excellent virtue in undertaking and
atchieving those works which surpass the common capacity of man's nature, such
as is the felicity and happiness of noble artificers, and governors, in
searching or polishing arts, and in finding out devices and counsels: likewise
the couragiousnesse of mind in performing the actions of virtue, and in
managing matters; such as was in Achilles, Alexander, Archimedes, Plato, and
others: All these give evidence, that there is some superior cause which
stirs up these motions and inclinations. Moses said of Joshua, The Lord
himself will go before thee, Deuteronomy. 31.8. Ezra 1.1. Jude 14.19.
he will be with thee. The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus. The spirit of
the Lord came upon him.

Certain and evident fore-tellings of events.
Certain and clear significations of future events, which neither by humane
sight or perceivablenesse, neither by natural causes or signs, could have been
fore-known; as the prophecies of the deluge, of the posterity of Abraham, of
the coming of the Messiah, etc. are necessarily known by his revelation alone,
who has both mankind, and the nature of all things so in his own power, that
nothing can be done but through his motion. Now this is God only; as himself
alleges this as his work alone, for proof of his divinity against all forged
and fained gods, Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that you are gods. Isa. 41.13. Ezekiel. 12.21.
That thing which I have spoken shall be done, says the Lord.

The ends of all things.
The ends and uses of things have not their being by chance, or from a nature
brutish and only endued with sense, but from some nature which is wise and
omnipotent, which is God alone. Now all things are most providently ordained to
their ends, and those also certain.

The constant order of efficient causes.
The order of causes and effects is finite, and it cannot be, that the process
and race of efficient causes should be of an endless and infinite extent.
Wherefore there must be some first and principal cause, which may either
mediatly or immediately produce and move the rest, on which also other causes
may depend: for in every finite order there is some beginning and principal.

2. Who, and what God is.
We must acknowledge God to be such as himself has manifested himself to be.
WHen it is demanded, who is the true God: we are to hold most firmly and
surely, that he alone is the true God, who even from the beginning of mankind
did not only manifest himself in the nature of things, but by the steps and
prints of his divinity shining therein, but especially in the Church, by his
word delivered, and other famous testimonies of miracles, deliveries, and
consolations, whereby he plainly teaches whom, and what he will be
acknowledged and published by us to be, and that he is not acknowledged or
worshipped of any but of them who think according to his word both of him and
his will; neither is the true knowledge of him found elsewhere then in this
word. The certainty of this position is hereof most manifest, for that all
those who imagine God to be other in essence, or nature, or will, then he has
testified himself to be in his own manifestations and revealings, do not
embrace and worship at all the true God, but another thing of their own framing
in stead of the true God, according to these sayings: Ye worship that which ye
know not: we worship that which we know; Joh. 4.22. and 5.23.
for salvation is of the Jews. He that honors not the Son, the same
honors not the Father which has sent him. Galat. 4.8.
But then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are
not gods. Ye were at that time without Christ, Ephesians. 4.12.
and were aliens from from the commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from
the covenant of promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world.
Whom ye then ignorantly worship, him show I unto you. Acts. 17.23. 1 John 2 23.
Whosoever denies the Son the same has not the Father.

But against these things seems that to be, which Paul says; Romans 1.19, 20.
That that which may be known of God is manifest also in men, estranged from
Christian Religion: for that God has showed it unto them. For the invisible
things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the
Creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they
should be without excuse. And, Acts 14.15.
That God in former ages did not leave himself without witness, and that out
of the whole nature of things: but chiefly by the mind of man and the
difference of things honest and dishonest; and by the punishments of the
wicked, it may in some measure be gathered, not only that there is a God, but
also what he is: and therefore many things are found to have been spoken truly
by the heathen and others concerning the unity and nature of God. But to these
objections we answer: that there are indeed some true things concerning God
manifested otherwise also then by the word delivered to the Church; but by them
notwithstanding who is the true God cannot be showed, Two causes why t^eglimsle
of nature is not sufficient to show who is the true God
and that for two causes: For first, Those things by themselves are not
sufficient: for to the knowing of the true God, it is requisite that we know
and profess, not somethings only, but all things which he opens of himself,
and would have known. Moreover, These self same true testimonies of God also
which remain in men's minds and in nature, when as even of these which might
be known by the help of nature, many things they do not know; many they feign
of their own, which have nothing agreeing with the nature and will of God: and
those things which they do retain, and in show of words profess, they far
otherwise understand then they are proposed of God, and declared in his word,
and in the Church understood: and so beholding and sounding in their mouth true
sentences and sayings concerning God, conceive nevertheless and foster false
opinions of him in their mind. This answer S. Paul himself expresses when he
adds, Romans 1.20, 21.
That they are inexcusable, because that when they knew God, they glorified him
not as God.

The ^o^ce of nature concerning God neither to be rejected no contemned, other
in ^esned of sufficiency, (...) ^^^-construing.
Now albiet Philosophical wisdom cannot therefore show who is the true God,
for that concerning the essence, nature, will, and works of God, so much as is
necessary to be known it does not teach, and is diversely depraved by men, so
that out of the Church remains no true knowledge of God; yet nevertheless,
that voice of the nature of things concerning God, ought not for these causes
to be rejected as false, or contemned as fruitless: for neither is that
straight ways false in it self which is perversely construed of men, neither
fruitless for all things nor to all men, which avails the reprobate nothing
at all to everlasting salvation. For God will also out of the Church bridle the
lewd and dissolute, by the testimonies which their conscience and punishments
give of his will, anger, and judgment, and according to them will he have the
life and manners of men ruled. He will have man's corruption and his justice
made more conspicuous and clear in punishing them who stubbornly withstand the
known truth. He will by natural testimonies, men's consciences showing the
imperfection thereof, have men stirred up to seek the true God in the Church,
as it is said, that men were therefore placed in the theater of the world, Acts
17.27.
That they should seek the Lord, if so be they might have groved after him and
found him. Hereof fee Dam^^^en i^^. (...) orth^^ ^id. Basil. ^o. 4. con^^unom.
Rultice Diacon^ c. 3. (...). Acephal. (...). these cap 1.^. (...) a. cap. 5.
(...) Me^a^^ 12. c. 7 (...) som^^^ Scip^oms.
He will also have them who are converted to him, to be more confirmed by the
consent of nature and the word, as the often alleging of natural testimonies
in the Scriptures declares. Lastly, he will, the imperfection of natural
knowledge being considered, have men's ignorance concerning God acknowledged,
and his mercy magnified, who discovers and opens himself in his word.

God cannot be defined; 1. Because he is immense. 2. Because his essence is
unknown unto us: yet some way he way be described according to the measure
which himself has revealed of himself; and that so, that the description of
him shall comprehend such attributes or properties, the persons, and principal
works of the Deity, as by them the true God may with half an eye be discerned
from idols.

The description of God according to Philosophy. The description of God
according to the ^u^es of Divinity.
Philosophically he is described on this wise; God is an eternal mind or
intelligence, sufficient in himself to all felicity, most good, and the cause
of good in nature. But Divinity has taught the Church of God a more full and
ample description of him, which is in this sort: God is a spiritual essence,
intelligent, eternal, infinite, other from all the creatures,
incomprehensible, most perfect in it self immutable, and of an immense power,
wisdom, and goodness, just, true, chaste, merciful, bountiful, most free,
angry and wroth with sin: which essence is the eternal Father, who from
everlasting begot the Son according to his own image: and the Son, who is the
coeternall image of the Father: and the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father
and the Son: even as it has been manifested from above, certain word thereof
being delivered by the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and by divine
testimonies, That the eternal Father, together with the Son, and the holy
Ghost, has created heaven and earth, and all creatures in them, and is always
at hand with them, to preserve, guide, and govern them by his providence, and
works all good things in all: and that in mankind made after his image, he
has chosen unto himself and gathered a Church by and for the Son, that by
his Church this one and true Deity may be according to the word delivered from
above, acknowledged, celebrated, and adored in this life, and in the life to
come: and lastly, that he is the Judge of the just and unjust.

In what the former descriptions differ.
This Theological description of God which the Church delivers, differs
from the Philosophical description, In perfectness; because the Church in her
description adds many parts by nature unknown unto men, as of the Trinity, of
Election, and of the gathering together of the Church by the Son, etc. In the
understanding and declaration of those parts which, being known by nature, are
common to both: for the Theological description declares them more certainly
and fully. In the effect or fruit; because by Philosophy or the light of
nature, men are not able to be brought to the true knowledge of God: Two causes
why men cannot by the light of nature attain unto the true knowledge of God.
both 1. Because it is so maimed and false by men's corruption, that we can suck
thence no true and sufficient notice of God: as also 2. Because when we know
every part, parcel, and particle thereof, it does not stir up our minds unto
godliness: that is, the love and fear of God.

The same Theological description teaches us how the true God, which the
Church worshippeth, differs from the false counterfeit gods three ways: A
threefold difference of the true God from false idols.
1. In attributes or properties. 2. In the persons. 3. In the works whereby the
persons are revealed: for God has declared himself by his works, that his
nature is such as his attributes import: Moreover, How in conceiving of the
whole nature of God, he that is instructed by the Spirit, goes beyond him whom
nature informs.
he shows that there are three distinct persons in one essence of the Deity,
since according to the works either of Creation, or Redemption, or
Sanctification, he receives diverse names and titles, and every person has
his proper appellation. God therefore differs from idols, In attributes.
Mercy.
In his attributes; because they who are not of the Church, understand aright
and fully no one property of God; they understand not what his mercy is,
because his Son is unknown unto them, or at least the doctrine concerning him
shamefully corrupted: they conceive not what his justice is, Justice.
because the impious and wicked ones believe not that God is so grievously
offended and angry with sin, that we stood in need of satisfaction for it, and
redemption from thence by the death of his Son: neither what his wisdom is,
Wisdom.
because the chief part thereof is expounded in his word, which the Gentiles
have not: neither what his truth is, because they are utterly ignorant of his
promises: Truth.
The like may be truly averred of all the rest. Contrariwise, the Church
attributes and ascribes to God all truth, justice, goodness, mercy, loving
affection and kindness toward men, which properties of God, other Sects are
either utterly ignorant of, or, having a glimpse of them, they wholly corrupt
and deface them. God differs from idols, In persons.
In persons; because Ethnicks and other Sects either know not, or acknowledge
not three persons in one divine essence: But the true Church acknowledges and
makes invocation to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one God consisting of
three persons, according as he has manifested himself in his word. In works.
In works; because they which are without the Church do not wholly acknowledge
or profess the works of Creation, and the government of all things; for they
do not think all things to have been created of nothing by the word of God
only: they deny that all generally, and each in particular, even the least, are
administered powerfully by the omnipotency of God; but ascribe very many to
chance, fortune, and humane wisdom: Much more are they altogether ignorant of
the works of the Churches salvation, namely, the reconciliation of men with
God, justification, sanctification, and full delivery from all sin and misery
by the Son and the holy Ghost. So then by these means God is discerned from
idols, and the knowledge of God revealed to his Church in his word, is
distinguished from that which Ethnicks have derived from nature.

An Explication of the description of God delivered by the Church.
GOd is an essence.) That is, a thing which 1. has his being from none, but
from himself. 2. is preserved or sustained of none, but subsisteth by
himself. 3. is necessarily. 4. is the only cause unto all other things of
their being: wherefore he is called Jehovah, as if you would say, being by
himself, and causing other things to be, to wit, according to his nature and
promises.

Spiritual.) 1. Because he is incorporeall: as being infinite, and
indivisible, and most excellent. 2. Insensible: For 1. experience teaches
this. 2. God is without sensible qualities, which are the objects of the
senses: and 3. He is immense. The eyes perceive only things finite, and which
are within a certain compass. 4. He is spiritual, because himself both
lives, and is the author of all life both corporal and spiritual. Object.
1. Against this opinion many places of Scripture have been heretofore by some
alleged, in which it is written, That God and Angels did appear, and were
seen, thereby to prove, that their nature is corporeal and visible. But we
are to know, that not the very substance of God and Angels, How God and Angels
appeared unto men.
but created shapes and bodies were beheld of men, made, carried, and moved by
the will and virtue of God or Angels, that by them they might make known their
presence, and use their ministry and service in instructing men of those things
which seemed good unto them. And these were sometimes by imagination
represented unto the interior senses of men; which also somewhere may, and
somewhere cannot be gathered out of the circumstances of the histories: as the
Angels appearing to Abrabam and Lot were invested with true bodies, as which
might be touched and handled: whether Micha before Achab saw with the eyes of
his body, or of his mind, the Lord and his Angels, is a matter of doubt. But
that those visible shapes were not the very substance of God, is hereby
manifest, for that the Scripture with great consent reaches. that God is seen
of no man, neither can be seen, and incomprehensible, and unchangeable: But
those visible shapes were not always the same. Object. 2. To these they add
that which is said, Genesis 32.30. Ex^d. 33.11. Deuteronomy 34.10. Deuteronomy 5.24. 2. Cot.
13.13. How God is said (...) seen face (...) ^ace.
that God was seen of Jacob face to face, and of Moses, and of all the people,
and that all of us shall see God face to face in the life to come. By which
Metaphor or borrowed speech is signified a clear and conspicuous manifestation
and knowledge of God, which is perceived, not-with the eyes of the body, but of
the mind; either by means, as by the word, by his works, and outward tokens,
and such as run into the senses, whence the mind may gather somewhat of God;
or without means, by inward revelation. And albeit in the life to come shall be
a farte more bright knowledge of God then now; yet to know God most perfectly
is proper to God only, as it is said, Not that any man has seen the Father,
save he which is of God, (...) c. 46.
he has seen the Father: So far is it that the invisible, infinite, and
everlasting Deity may ever be conceived by bodily eyes, whose nature is not to
perceive any objects but such as are finite and limited. Object. 3. They have
alleged also those sayings wherein the parts of man's body are attributed to
God. But these also are not properly, H^w the parts of (...) ^odva^e attri^^^ed
unto God.
but by a Metaphor spoken of God, whereby is signified to us a power in God,
working after an incomprehensible manner his works; a certain shadow whereof
are those actions which men do by the ministry and help of their bodily
parts: as, the eyes and ears signify the wisdom of God, whereby he
understands all things: the mouth, the publishing of his word: the face, the
declaration, tokens, and feeling of his divine goodness and grace, or severity
and anger: the heart, his love: the hands and arms, his power: the feet, his
presence. Object. 4. They have affirmed also, because man was made according to
the image of God, that therefore God has an humane shape: The image of God in
man does not argue a bodily shape in God. Ephesians 4.24.
Not marking, that the image of God consists not in the shape and figure of
the body, but in the mind, and integrity of nature, in wisdom,
righteousness, and true holiness. As for Tertullian, whereas he reasons,
that God is a body; that he speaks improperly therein, and abuses the word
body, in stead of substance, not only Augustine witnesses in his Epistle to
Quod vult Deus; but this is also an argument and proof thereof, because he
terms also the souls and Angels oftentimes bodies. Wherefore let us know,
that therefore we are taught the nature of God to be spiritual, Why we must
know God to be spiritual.
that we may not conceive of God any thing which is gross, terrene, carnal,
and unworthy his divine Majesty, neither should deem that he can be perceived
by our bodily senses, or in thought imagined, but should consider his nature by
his word and works: that we should not dare to represent him by any bodily
shape: and in a word, that we should remember that he is to be worshipped, not
with the gestures, or other things of the body, but with the mind and
spiritual motion of the heart. Lastly, seeing he alone inspireth into us
temporal and everlasting life, we should acknowledge the gift of both to come
from him: out of this fountain only we should seek it, and endeavor to refer
it wholly to his glory.

Two reasons why God is to be intelligent.
Intelligent.) 1. Because he is the cause both of the mind of man, and of the
notions shining in it, and also of that order which is in the nature of things
and Common-weals. 2. Because all intelligence or understanding of the creature
comes from him both in respect of the faculty, as also in respect of the
operation: For neither can the efficient and preserving cause of intelligent
natures, and of the understanding it self and order in nature, be but
intelligent and understanding. And therefore the holy Scripture also reasons
on this wise; He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? Psalm. 94.9.
or he that made the eye, shall he not see? Now this we are to hold against
those, who setting Nature in the place of God, imagine the world, and the
variety and order of things in it to arise from the matter, and the inclination
thereof to this form: when as notwithstanding these things could not have
their being from a cause not intelligent. We are to hold it also, thereby to
acknowledge not only true knowledge it self; but also all ability of
understanding, and the sagacity and capability of the senses and mind to
perceive to be the gift of God

Eternal.) That is, such an eternity which can have neither beginning, The
eternity of God without beginning or end. Psalm. 30.2.
nor any end of being agrees to God alone, both nature shows, forasmuch as
he is the first cause of all things, and of infinite perfection and power; and
the Scripture also recounteth: as, Before the mountains were brought forth, or
ever the earth and the world were made, thou art God from everlasting, and
world without end. But we are to observe, that not therefore only the eternity
of God is so often inculcated in the Scriptures, that in regard hereof he may
be discerned from things created: but also Because he will impart eternity
unto us, that is, he has purposed and promised that he will give us of his
eternal goodness and providence, eternal blessings, and will have continual
care of us through all eternity, and will have a kingdom in Angels and men,
whereof shall be no end: Therefore we are given to understand, God eternal
unto us.
that God is eternal to us, That we may oppose the certain hope of eternal
blessedness grounded upon his eternity, against the shortness of mortal
life, and against the frailty of man's condition: For seeing he is eternal, he
can; and seeing he promises, he will for ever preserve us with his protection:
For this God is our God for ever and ever. And, Psalm. 48.11. Psalm. 111.9.
He has commanded his covenant for ever. Wherefore, being upheld with this
consolation, let us neither refuse to suffer the short misery of this life,
neither prefer the short felicity thereof before eternal blessings: and
seeing God will be not only bountiful toward the godly, but judge also of the
ungodly eternally, let the cogitation of the eternal wrath of God keep and
hold us in the fear of God, that we may not desire to buy the fading show of
whatsoever good, with eternal misery.

God other and diverse from all creatures Three adversaries against whom we
are to uphold this doctrine;
Other from all his creatures.) That God is other from all his creatures we
must hold, Philosophers.
Against Philosophers, who will have the world, or nature it self to be God;
that is, either a general matter, or a power, or a mind and intelligence, or
some form to be infused, mingled, and tied to the bodies of the world, and them
to inform, quicken, sustain and move, as the soul sustaineth and moves man's
body. Which Virgil calls, The spirit of the world: Others, The soul of the
world. Manichees and Servetus.
Against those who imagine the creatures, either all, as Servetus; or some,
according to the doctrine of the Manichees, to spring from the very essence or
nature of God, deriving it self, as they speak, into others by propagation.
Profaners of God.
That all profane, unworthy, and idolatrous cogitation of God, whereby God may
be made like to any creature, may be excluded: For, that the essence of God is
far other then the essence of all the creatures, both nature and the word of
God shows, when it teaches that God is wise, and Creator* of the world: now
the world has many parts unreasonable, and it self cannot be Creator to it
self. It shows also that things are not derived out of the substance of God,
that being unchangeable and indivisible. And lastly, that the Deity is most
unlike and different from all things created, Because there can neither be, nor
be imagined any similitude of a finite nature and an infinite. How all things
are said to be of God.
Therefore, That all things are of God; it does not mean, that all things are
God, or the essence of God, or propagated from it: for all other things are of
God, not as begotten of him, Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 8.6. Romans 4.17.
or proceeding from him, as the word and eternal spirit of God; but as
created, that is, made of nothing: Who calls those things that are not as if
they were. celestial and divine: likewise, when it is said, We are the
generation of God: Acts 17.29.
this is not meant of the communicating of the divine substance, as if the soul
were derived from the essence of God, but of the similitude of properties and
of the creation: The soul therefore is said to be celestial and divine, that
is, adorned with celestial and divine powers and gifts, which although they be
a certain shadow of the divine nature, yet are they created qualities. be of
God, John 1.13. and 8 47. and 3.6.
to be born of God and his Spirit, and the sons of God, and spiritual: neither
is this understood of the propagation of the essence, but of the similitude of
the properties, or of the image of God, to the which they are refashioned by
Gods Spirit. which is joined unto the Lord is one spirit; 1 Cor. 6.17. 2 Pet.
1.4.
and Peter, That we are made partakers of the divine nature; we are taught,
both that the spirit of God dwells in us by grace, and is joined unto us; and
also, that there is begun in us, even now, a conformity with God, which shall
be perfected in the life to come. to be God, and to have a divine body: there
is not thereby signified a mutation of the divine nature into the humane, or of
the humane into the divine: but an inseparable conjoyning of two natures,
retaining their properties distinct, into one person, and a glorifying of the
humane nature, which indeed agrees to a nature, ruler and governor of all
things, but yet notwithstanding made and created.

Two things we are to learn by the immensity and incomprehensi^^lity of God.
Incomprehensible or immense.) That he cannot be comprehended in the cogitation
of any creature, so that what things he ascribes to himself in his word, how
great soever they be thought of us, yet are they always far greater: for the
power of the understanding, which reaches but to finite things cannot perceive
the form or perfect pattern of an infinite nature. The Deity cannot be
comprehended or circumscribed in place or space, or any limits; that is, the
essence of God is immense or unmeasurable, neither to be extended, nor divided,
nor multiplied: therefore it is all every where one and the same. Three reasons
to show that the power and essence of God is every where, whole, one and the
same.
1. Because and infinite power cannot be contained in an essence or nature
which is finite and limited. 2. Because the power of God is always every
where; and therefore his substance also, for that cannot be without this; yea,
it is the divine essence it self: And that the power or virtue of the
divinity, which has been spread perpetually in infinite manner, both before
and after the creation of the world, cannot be any where either in no substance
at all, or in any substance, but only in the very substance it self of God,
the Philosophers also, who conceived God to be infinite, have confessed.
Neither yet is it to be thought that the substance of the divinity is so
extended, that one part thereof is one where, or so multiplied, that another
part is another where; but that it being infinite is every where: and seeing it
cannot be divided into parts, as being immense and most perfect, to be all
every where: and seeing it is but one, that it is every where the same, so that
none can pierce into, or comprehend it, but it pierces into, Jer. 23.24.
and comprehends all things: Do not I fill the heaven and the earth says the
Lord? Not only the power, but the essence also of the divinity to be infinite,
does even hereby most certainly appear, Because there is one, the same and
whole substance of the three persons: For, The eternal Father, as he is
always, so at that time when Christ lived on earth, was he in heaven. And the
Word, or co-eternall Son of the Father, was in his body on earth; and yet
because there is but one and the same essence of the Father and the Son, both
the Father was with the Son on earth, and the Son with the Father in heaven, as
himself says; The Father is with me: and, Joh. 16.32. and 3.13 and 14.10.
the Son of man which is in heaven: and, I am in the Father, and the Father is
in me: so the holy Ghost was truly present in the likeness of a dove, and a
flame at the baptism of Christ, and at Pentecost, and now dwells in us as in
his temple; and yet is always with the Father and the Son in heaven, as the
Father and the Son are with him in all the Saints which are dispersed
throughout heaven and earth. And hence appears the third difference between
an infinite nature and a finite nature, or the third reason which is only
opened in the word of God, whereby the divine essence is incomprehensible, to
wit, by communication: whereas the whole is in such sort common to the three
persons of the Divinity, as not only it is in them as it is in the creatures,
but also is their very substance, and yet nevertheless remains in number one
and the same. Now, that it is proper to the Deity alone, Infinity or immensity
proper to God, not imparted to any creature for 4. causes.
nor imparted or communicated to any creature to be infinite or immense, or to
be every where at the same time, or to be the same in diverse places, is
apparent by these reasons; Lord, who is like unto thee? Jerem. 23.14.
that he is he who fills heaven and earth, he signifies, that there is no
other such besides him. John 3.13.
yet he affirms himself to be in heaven. Lib. 1. cap. 1.
as Dydimus in his Treatise of the holy Ghost: The holy Ghost himself, if he
were one of the creatures, should have at least wise a substance limited, as
all things which were made; for although invisible creatures are not limited
and circumscribed by place, yet are they limited by the property of their
substance: But the holy Ghost being in many, has not a limited and finite
substance.

How God is most perfect in himself.
Most perfect in himself.) God is moreover most perfect in himself: Because
he only has all things which may be desired unto perfect felicity and glory;
so that no way any thing may be added unto him to make him more glorious or
happy: and all the creatures have but only some parts and degrees of blessings
distributed unto them convenient for their nature and place, which the Creator
assigns and gives to every one. Because he receives no part of this most
absolute felicity from any other, but has all things in himself, and of
himself, and is alone sufficient to himself for all things; and therefore
needs no man's labor, or aid, or presence, but was alike blessed from
everlasting, before any creature was, as he is now after the creation of the
world: But contrariwise, all the creatures stand so in need of the goodness
and presence of God, that without it, they cannot only not any way be well and
in good state, but not so much as be at all the space of one moment. Because he
is not for himself only, but for the creating also, preserving, guiding, and
furnishing of all and every creature so sufficient, that he alone does give to
all of them all good things necessary and meet for them, as well eternal and
heavenly, as terrene and temporal; neither yet for all that does the least jot
depart either from his power, or from his happiness. Now all the creatures not
only cannot at all profit one another more then God works by them as the
instruments of his goodness; but neither they themselves, which are as it were
conduits, can have the least good in themselves, but what they have drawn from
God alone as the only fountain and wel-spring of goodness and felicity: Now he
alone is sufficient for all, and bestows all things, because there must needs
be some one first cause in nature of all good things: and he has all things in
his power, because, except he had them, he could not give them to others: and
except he had them of himself, he could not be the first head and fountain of
all good things. Prove. 16.4.
Object. 1. He is said to have made all things for himself. Ans. Not for the
aiding or increasing of himself, How God is said to have made all things for
himself.
as if he needed any thing, but rather for to communicate and show himself
unto his creatures he made them; because this is the nature of that which is
good, not only to preserve it self, but also to communicate it self to others.
Object. 2. He uses the creatures in accomplishing his works. Answ. This he
does, not as constrained thereto by any necessity of impotency, but of his most
free will and goodness, to show that he is able both ways, both without them,
and with them, to do whatsoever he will; that he is Lord of all things, both by
right, and by his power, and can use all things at his pleasure; and that he
also does vouchsafe his creatures this great and free honor, as to make them
the instruments of his bountifulness, and fellows, and disposers (as S. Paul
speaks) of his divine works. ^ Cor. 4.^.
Object. 3. We are willed to perform, exhibit, and offer obedience, worship,
honor, sacrifices to God, and to give him that which is his. Answ. Thereby is
taught, not what good comes more to God, but what good ought to be in us: for
as disobedience and despite against God makes not God, but the creature more
miserable; so obedience toward God, which is a conformity and agreement with
Gods law and mind, is the good and blessedness, not of God, but of the
reasonable creature; and this is said to be given or taken from God, not that
God needs it, or is profited thereby, but because men ought, by order of
justice to perform and yield it unto God: Psalm. 50.8. Luke 17.10.
as, I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor hee-goats out of thy folds.
And, when ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants. And if any man reply, That glory nevertheless tends
to his happiness and perfection unto whom it is given: we must know, That the
glory of God signifies, Two things signified by Gods glory.
The foundation of glory, to wit, the attributes or virtues which are in God
himself, and his divine works, and the beholding and approbation of them in
God: and in this sense can no man give him glory, neither can it be diminished
or augmented, but it was, and remains the same in him for ever; John 17.5.
according as it is said, Glorify me, O Father, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was. The agnizing and magnifying of the goodness
and works of God, The gl^ty which (...) God is (...) lable ^^r (...)
happiness, (...) neither does, ^or can make God more happy.
which is not in God, but in creatures endued with reason; and therefore may be
made less or greater; and being amplified or diminished, it increases or
diminishes the goodness, happiness, and perfection, not of God, but of the
creature. But if any man will further reply, That this very worship and
obedience profits him unto whom it is done: To grant this concerning the
creatures as who may be furthered and enriched by the mutual duties of each
other; yet will it by no means agree to God, seeing no man can help or harm
him, and the true agnizing and magnifying of God, as also the whole conformity
and agreement with him, is not his happiness and perfection, but the
creatures. Object. 4. To whom is given that which is due unto him, to him
something comes thereby more then be had before: Unto God is yielded our
obedience and worship, which is due unto him: Therefore somewhat comes to him
from us. Answ. The Major is true of that which is due of need or want, or which
he needs, Our obedience, through^ due to God, yet brings (...) increate to
him.
and is furthered thereby to whom it is given: But our obedience is no such
due, but that which God by order of his justice requires of us, and that not
for his, but our perfection and felicity. Lastly, if any man urge, That he who
rejoices, does receive some good of those things wherein he rejoices: And
therefore some fruit certainly to redound unto God out of our obedience and
salvation, seeing he pronounces that he rejoices therein: We grant verily,
that in men, rejoicing, and the like affections are stirred up by outward
objects: But we must not deem that our virtues are the cause of that rejoicing
which is in God: For therefore is a thing thought right and honest, because it
is agreeing to the will and nature of God: and because God from everlasting is
delighted with his own goodness and uprightness, and with things agreeing
therewith, therefore does he create and work such in men; and that everlasting
approbation or liking which was the cause why God created good things, is the
cause also why he now cherishes and preserves them being created. Gods
rejoicing in out obedience and salvation is the cause thereof: but not our
obedience and salvation the cause of his rejoicing.
Wherefore the everlasting rejoicing in God for our obedience and salvation is
the efficient cause of our obedience and salvation: but not contrariwise, our
obedience the efficient cause of that rejoicing in God, as it comes to pass
in men, who are affected by outward objects. Or thus, God rejoices at our good
as being an object, but not a cause; because objects are not the cause, but
effects of Gods approbation and rejoicing.

Unchangeable.) When God pronounces himself to be unchangeable, he shows
that he will be always such as he has been from all eternity: Three things
meant by Gods unchangeablenes. Five reasons of unchangeablenesse.
so that, 1. Neither his essence, nor whatsoever is proper thereto can be
augmented or diminished: 2. Neither his nature and will be changed: 3. Neither
himself has need to transport himself from place to place: This do
Philosophers, induced thereto by reasons, confess: For, Whatsoever is changed,
that must needs have either some outward cause, or some original or beginning
in it self of moving and changing, or both: But God cannot be moved or changed
by any thing which is without him; for so himself should not be the first
mover and maker of all that is good in nature. Neither can he suffer change
from any inward original beginning of change: For whatsoever is so moved or
changed, that must needs have parts, whereof some must move, and some be moved.
Now that God should be divided into parts, neither does his immensity suffer,
nor his great perfection: for seeing every part is imperfecter then the whole,
and in God is nothing which is not most perfect; it is impious to imagine any
parts in him: Wherefore, neither by any outward nor inward cause is he moved
or changed. Whatsoever is changed, that must needs be changed either to the
worse or the better, or into a state equal to the former: It is impossible
that God should be made worse; for he should so become of perfect, imperfect.
And to be made better is also impossible; for so he should have been once
imperfect: But neither can he be translated into an equal condition and
state, as thereby to leave some good which before he had, and to receive some
good which before he had not: for thus should he be neither before nor after
his change most perfect, as wanting some part of those good things which
belonged unto him. That which is infinite, neither can be made greater, for so
it should not have been infinite before; nor lesser, for so it should be made
finite. Seeing then both the essence, and power, and wisdom, and all the
virtues of God are incomprehensible, and all things in God immense; therefore
cannot any of them be either diminished or increased. God does not transport
and remove himself from place to place, as creatures; seeing by reason of his
immensity whereby he fills heaven and earth, he can neither depart, nor be
absent from any place. Seeing he is most wise, and therefore from everlasting
has most well purposed, decreed, and foreseen all things; change of purpose
and will cannot fall into him: And therefore God would have this in many places
of holy Scripture inculcated unto us, that his nature and will is subject to no
mutations, as being a thing most respecting his glory: God is not as man that
he should lie, Numb. 23.19.
nor as the son of man that he should repent. Has he said it then, and shall
he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? The counsel of
the Lord shall endure for ever, Psalm. 33.11.
and the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation. With whom is no
variableness, James 1.17.
neither shadow of change But God is said to repent. Ans. He is said to repent,
Two reasons why God is said to repent, when yet he does nothing which he
decretd not from everlasting.
not that he changes his will: but, 1. Because he earnestly detesteth sins,
and is not delighted, with the destruction of men. Two things means by the
Scriptures attributing humane passions to God.
That it is not a fained or dissembled, but an earnest, eternal, unchangeable
nature all will in God, a shadow and image whereof he would have the
affections and motions created in men to be: yet is it without all trouble, or
hindrance, or diminishing of his blessedness and joy. That he does those
things which men are wont to go, being stirred up by those affections which are
attributed to God; not that he, as men, being moved by a present or sudden
affection of the mind, does now first take counsel; but does now at the
length execute and do things which he decreed and appointed from all eternity.
Object. 2. The promises and threatenings of God of tentimes are not fulfilled.
Answ. The promises of God are always to be understood with an exception of the
cross of the godly, Gods promises and threathings conditional, and with an
exception.
and of the punishments and chastisements of such as depart from God, and sin;
or with a condition of perseverance in faith and godliness: and also
contrarily his threatenings with an exception of conversion and prayer, or with
a condition of perseverance in sin.

And these conditions are sometimes expressed, as Jer. 18 and 28. where plainly
is set down this rule of understanding Gods promises and threatenings: as, That
God will punish them who depart from him, unto whom he had promised blessings:
and will spare those who repent, to whom he had threatened punishment. And
sometimes they are closely understood, especially in the threatenings and
comminations, thereby even to wrest repentance, and more timely and earnest
prayers from us, by which, as means interposed and coming between, he has
decreed to save and deliver us. Repl. But these conditions are uncertain and
changeable: Therefore the will of God is also changeable. Answ. In respect of
the nature, will, and judgment of man, they are changeable; but in respect of
the counsel and providence of God, unchangeable and most certain: for God has
decreed from everlasting the means and ends of things; as also he has decreed
in whom he will, and in whom he will not work conversion. Ob. 3. He changes
many his precepts, and observances, and works, as the Mosaicall laws and
government. Ans. He changes them indeed, but so, as he would also from
everlasting that change; neither are all things appointed of God for
perpetuity; but he decreed from everlasting some things to last only for a
time. Wherefore be it to us out of all controversy, that God is unchangeable:
For, Gods unchangeablenesse one of his special differences whereby he is
distinguished from all creatures. Matt. 24.35.
This is amongst those especial differences whereby the Creator will be
discerned from all creatures, That he only can by no means be changed whereas
all other things both are diversely changed, and may at the only pleasure of God
be changed infinitely, howsoever for a while, so long as it is his pleasure,
they are, and seem arm and immutable, according as it is said, Heaven and earth
shall pass, but my word shall not pass. It is an assurance unto us, that all
things are governed by his providence.
Hence we may understand, and are assured, That all things in the world are
governed by the everlasting providence of God: For seeing no mutation happens
to God, it must needs be, that an his counsels were purposed from everlasting.
And seeing God both foreseeth all things unchangeably, and his counsels
concerning the event and end of things are certain and unchangeable; it must
needs be also that the second causes and means, or antecedents, without which
those events were not to follow, must be certain and unchangeable. And because
in things created, especially in humane affairs, there is a great uncertainty
and mutability, neither is there any cause of unchangeablenesse but the will of
God; God could not have appointed any thing certain or unchangeable concerning
the event and end, except he had also made all the means (by which the end is
attained unto, and which, as concerning their own nature, are most certain and
unchangeable) by his everlasting counsel and decree certain and unchangeable.
Isa. 14.27.
Wherefore it is said, The Lord of hosts has determined it, and who shall
disanull it. It is a mean to Keep (...) in our duty.
The whole use, and force, and declaration of the promises, threatenings, and
examples of Gods goodness, power justice, mercy, and wrath both old and new,
to teach us, and to erect us with comfort, or by fear to hold and keep us in
our duty and the fear of God, depends on Gods unchangeable nature: for all
those do then affect us, when we think that the same nature and will of God
which was in times past, is now also, and will be such to us repenting or
persisting in our sins, as we see it was in times past, and now is toward
others. And then do we truly rely upon the promises of God, when we know
that his counsel shall never be changed. It teaches us to submit our will to
Gods will.
This doctrine inclines men's minds to obedience and subjection, which is
necessary in asking things at Gods hands: that we desire not God to do those
things for us, or others, which he has before-time assuredly told us that he
will not do: and further, that we submit, and leave with reverence those things
to his pleasure, whereof he would not as yet have known unto us what he has
decreed. It is the ground of the comfort of the godly in this life.
The unchangeablenesse of Gods will is the ground and foundation of the hope
and comfort of the godly in this life: for it is most absurd to conceive of
God, that now he loves, and now he hates us; now he will assuredly give unto
us everlasting life, and a little after again he will not. And therefore when
once true faith and conversion unto God is begun in our hearts, and the Spirit
of God has begun to witness to our spirit that we are the sons of God, and
heirs of everlasting life, God will have us certainly to resolve, that as he
had this his will toward us from everlasting, so to everlasting he will not
change it, but will assuredly bring us, at his pleasure, out of this wicked and
miserable life, through all tentations and dangers whatsoever, to eternal and
everlasting life, according to that article of our faith, I believe life
everlasting.

Three things signifie^ by Gods omnipotency.
Omnipotent.) When as Omnipotency is attributed to God, thereby is understood,
That whatsoever he will, or whatsoever, not impairing his nature and majesty,
he is able to will, he is also able to perform. That he is able to perform all
those things without any difficulty and labor, even with his only beck and
will. That all the force and power of working and effecting any thing is so in
God only, that there is not the least ability or efficacy of any creature, but
what he continually imparteth and preserves at his pleasure: and therefore the
power of God is to be considered of us, not as being idle, but as creating,
sustaining, moving, and ruling all things: The reasons are, 1. God is the first
cause of all things; therefore he has all things in his power, and their
ability is so much as he gives unto them. 2. He does such things as can be
done by no created and finite power: as are the creation and governing of all
things the preservation of commonweals, the deluge. the delivery out of Egypt,
and all his miracles. 3 He is unchangeable; therefore in him to be able to do,
and to do, is the same which to will, and so of the contrary. But although all
men affirm God to be omnipotent, yet there is a double difference between the
sacred doctrine of the Church, Two differences between the doctrine of the
Church and Philosophy in conceiving of Gods omnipotency.
and Philosophy concerning Gods omnipotency: For, Yet a little while and I
shall shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, Hagg. 2.7.
and the dry land. That God cannot either sin, or will and allow of sin, or be
changed, or diminished or suffer any thing, or make things done undone or will
things flat repugnant and contradictory, or create another God, or some nature
equal to himself, or be perceived by bodily senses, or do other things proper
to a created or finite nature, or admit the same into himself; this does not
diminish or weaken, but rather augment and strengthen his power: For that is
the greatest and most perfect power which can neither be destroyed, nor
weakened, nor diminished; and that, none sustaining it, but only by it self.
But contrariwise, to be able to be corrupted and impaired is a token of
imbecility and imperfection.

Gods exceeding wisdom, whereby both he knows all things perfectly, and is
the fountain of all knowledge and understanding.
Of exceeding and immense wisdom.) That we may rightly, and with profit and
commodity know the power of God, it is necessary not to consider it but as it
is joined with his immense wisdom and goodness, which moderateth it. Further,
of his divine wisdom we learn, 1. That God does of himself, in one act or
view, under stand and behold perpetually and most perfectly. in mavelous
manner, and that unknown to us, himself and the whole order of his mind
declared in the nature of things, and in his word; and what agrees therewith,
and disagreeth; and all his works, and all the works of all creatures, past,
present, and to come; and all the causes and circumstances of all things. 2.
That all Angels and men have no more knowledge of divine and humane matters
then God does work and maintain in their minds: for among other things, the
most beautiful and sightly order which is in the nature of things, the ends
and uses of all things, the signification of future events, arts and sciences,
the everting and overturning of those devices which the devil and wicked men
have most craftily contrived against God and all the godly, do enforce all men
to confess, that these things could not proceed but from a most wise artificer
and author. Wherefore also the Scripture it self wills us to consider the
wisdom of God shining in these his works: Eccles. 3.11. Isa. 44.7.
God has made every thing beautiful in his time. Who is like me, that shall
call, and shall declare it, and set it in order before me, since I appointed
the ancient people? He takes the wise in their craftiness: Job 5.13.
and of these it concludes, that the wisdom of God is immense and
unconceivable; Psalm 147.5. Romans 11.33.
as, His wisdom is infinite. O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! But here again is to be observed a difference between
Philosophy and the word of God: I give thee thanks, O Father, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and men of understanding, Matthew. 21.25.
and have opened them unto babes.

Good. Six significations of the goodness of God in Scripture. Psalm 106.1.
and 143.10.1 John 1.5.
) The goodness of God signifies sometimes his bountifulness: as, Praise the
Lord because he is good: sometimes all the virtues, and whatsoever is spoken of
the nature of God: as, Let thy Spirit lead me through the right way. That which
also is meant by the name of holiness or sanctity and light: So in this place
by the name of goodness are understood, All those things which are attributed
to God in his word, and are represented and resembled in his image, as those
things which are termed good in Angles and men, as life, power, wisdom, joy,
righteousness, etc. For such is the nature of God, as it has manifested it
self in the Law and Gospel; and the goodness of the reasonable creature is an
image of the divine goodness: and therefore here also differ Philosophy and
the Scripture; in that Philosophy attributes only to God that his goodness
which was opened in the Law, and yet neither that wholly; but of his goodness
revealed in the Gospel it is altogether ignorant. By reason of the great and
huge difference between the Creator and the creature, we understand those good
things to be in God, which are agreeing to his divine nature and majesty: for
those which are proper unto created natures would not be good in God, but
rather a diminishing of his goodness. By reason of the immensity of his divine
nature, those things which are finite in creatures are in God infinite. And
therefore against sundry and diverse disputes of the Philosophers concerning the
chiefest good, we learn in the Church, that God is the chiefest good. Because
nothing is unperfect or not subsisting by it self in God: whatsoever is
attributed unto him is not in him, as forms or accidents in creatures: but such
is his essence and nature, in a manner not able to be comprehended by our
knowledge and understanding. His nature and will is a rule of that goodness
and uprightness which is in the creatures: for so far forth things are, and
are called good, as they agree with the will of God. God is the only fountain
of goodness, and the first cause of all good things: so shall all things have
so much goodness as God does create and maintain in them; Luke 18.9.
and in this sense it is said, There is none good but God only, even so as he
is most perfectly good, and the fountain of goodness.

The righteousness of God both general and particular.
Righteous.) The righteousness of God sometimes in Scripture signifies that
which is accounted righteousness before him, and whereby he makes us
righteous: and that elsewhere legal, which is holiness of life, or conformity
with the law of God, which God works in us by his Spirit begun in this life,
and to be perfected in the life to come; James 1.20.
as, The wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. Or
sometimes Evangelicall, which is the righteousness of Christ imputed to
believers, of the free mercy of God: as, Romans 3.21, 22,
But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, having
witness of the Law and of the Prophets, to wit, the righteousness of God by
the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe. Sometimes is
meant that righteousness whereby himself is righteous: and then also in many
places it signifies the faithfulness, or mercy and benignity of God, who,
according to his promises, preserves, defends, and delivers the faithful:
as, Psalm. 31.1.
Deliver me in thy righteousness. But when it is properly spoken of the
righteousness of God whereby himself is righteous, (as in this place) he is
called just, In respect of his general justice and righteousness, which is
the order or nature of his divine understanding and will, whereby God wills
and approves, does him self, and works in others unchangeably and
unspeakably such things as he has commanded in his law: and neither wills,
nor approves, nor works, nor causes, nor furthereth any thing whatsoever
disagreeth from this order, but horribly hates and detesteth them; as it is
said, The righteous Lord loves righteousness. In respect of his particular
justice and righteousness, which is the unchangeable will of God, whereby God
gives to him self, and will have given him by others that glory which is due
unto the chief good; as he says, I will not give my glory to another: and
punishes all sin with such punishment as is equal to the offense, that is,
with eternal, as in them who perish; or with equivalent, as in his Son Christ
sustaining the punishment for all those who are saved by him, according as it
is said; Matthew. 5.26.
Thou shall not depart thence until thou have paid the utmost farthing: And
cannot injure any creature, whatsoever he determines of him, or does unto
him, because he owes no man any thing; as it is said, Psalm. 145.17. Acts
10.34.
God is just in all his ways. God is no accepter of persons. Gods divine will
is the chief and perfect rule, and only square of uprightness; and therefore
God alone, because he is exceeding good* cannot of his own nature will, or
work any unjust thing: but the wills and actions of all creatures are so far
just, as they are made by God conformable to divine will. Now although all
confess God to be righteous and just, because God has imprinted this notion
and knowledge of him self among other in the reasonable creature: because he
is perfectly good, and therefore is the rule of perfect righteousness: because
he witnesses by examples of punishments and rewards that he hates and
punishes unjust things, and likes the just: because he is the Judge of the
world, to whom it belongs to compose, or set, and administer all things in a
just order: because lastly he owes not any thing to any nature, but by the
right of a Creator, it is lawful for him to dispose of all things at his
will, and therefore cannot be to any injurious; as it is said, When ye have
done all, say, Luke 17.10. Romans 11.35. Matthew. 20.15.
We are unprofitable servants. Who has given unto him first, and he shall be
recompensed? Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine own? Men not
able without the doctrine of the Church to conceive aright of Gods justice and.
righteousness.
Yet notwithstanding it is far off that men should judge aright of the
righteousness and justice of God without the doctrine of the Church, because
they have not the whole knowledge, not so much as of the law, wherein God made
known his justice, and can affirm nothing certain concerning the everlasting
punishments of sins, and are altogether ignorant of the punishment which the
Son of God sustained for sins. Moreover, men's minds are troubled, so that they
doubt Whether all things be governed of God in a just and upright order: Thee
causes which make men to conceive amiss of Gods justice.
When they see it go well with the bad, and ill with the good. And to this
objection the doctrine of the Church only is able to make answer, which shows
that God deferreth the punishments of the wicked and the rewards of the good to
another life; inviteth the ungodly by his mildness and lenity to repentance;
proves and confirms the godly by exercises and calamities; punishes and
chastises many for their sins who seem in men's judgments to be guiltless: It
goes therefore evil with the good, but not finally. Three causes of the
afflictions of the godly.
Now as he deferreth the punishment of the wicked, thereby to invite them to
repentance: so he afflicts the godly, Object. But justice requires, that
never any good should be done to the wicked, who rather were presently to be
punished. Answ. Except there be a reasonable and just cause why to defer
their punishment. Repl. But yet no harm should ever be done to the good. Ans.
Not to those who are perfectly good: But we in this life are not perfectly
good. Repl. We are perfect in Christ. Ans. And therefore we are not punished
of God, but only chastised, proved, and exercised, that so at length we may
be also perfect in our selves. that God does not cause and bring to pass that
no sin be committed, when yet he might most easily do it: but farther, that he
punishes sins which went before, with after sins, and passes at his pleasure
things from one to another, Exodus 12.35, 36.
as the Egyptians goods to the Israelites; and yet these things to be forbidden
us by his law: it seems unto them that God will, and does some things
contrary to his law. But these things are contrary to his law and justice, if
they be done by men; but if God do them, they are most just, and most
agreeable to his law: for creatures are bound one to another, one to provide
for another safety whatsoever he can; but God is bound to none. when they
hear that God does not give alike and equally to men who are all by nature
equal, that is, the sons of wrath; when as he converteth and saves some,
hardens and condemns others; they deem that by this reason accepting of
persons is laid upon God. But these men mark not, that then it is unjust to
give unequally to those who are equal, when a due and deserved reward is paid;
and that God does give his blessings unto men not of due, but of his free
bountifulness. Repl. Those things which are done according to justice, are
done as due: But that good should be done to those who are good, the order of
justice requires: Therefore good is done unto the good as due. Answ. All this
is true, if we talk of creatures: but if of God, not so; because the Creator
is bound to none, as the creatures are; neither can the creatures deserve any
thing of God, as they may one of another. Wherefore God punishes of justice,
but does good of grace and mercy; according as it is said, Luke 17.10.
When ye have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that
which was our duty to do. And if any man reply, That not men only, but God also
is bound by order of justice to spare, and to do well to the good, out of
those words of Abraham, Genesis 18.23.
Will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? It is to be observed,
that this bond is not of any desert or right that may make the Creator to
stand answerable to the creature, but of Gods promise and truth: for God did
most freely and of his exceeding goodness, when he ought nothing to any, bind
himself by promises indented to do good unto the godly; and this goodness of
God, and faithfulness in keeping his promises is often called justice: And
therefore it is well said, that it agrees not with God to afflict any
undeservedly, not because he should injure any, though he destroyed him not
offending; but because his mercy, and bountifulness, and truth does admit
this. These things are necessary to be ascribed of us to the justice of God,
that the cogitation thereof may ascertain us of the punishment of the wicked,
and of the deliverance of the godly from their injuries after this life; that
so we may patiently bear whatsoever he will lay upon us, Dan. 9.7.
as it is said, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us open
shame.

Six ways whereby we are taught the truth of God in Scripture.
True.) God teaches us in the Scripture to know his truth after this manner:
There is no creature which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are
naked unto his eyes with whom we have to do. Heb. 4.13.
nor wills, nor speaks things repugnant and contradictory: The Son of God,
2 Cor. 1.19.
Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, was not yea and nay, but in
him it was yea. Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, and every man a liar. My covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Psalm. 89.33, 34.
Matt. 24.35.
as, Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass away. Joh.
14.17. and 15.26. and 16.13. Prove. 12.22. Matthew, 24 51.
The Spirit of truth, who should teach us all truth. The lying lips are an
abomination unto the Lord: but they that deal truly are his delight. He will
give him his portion with hypocrites. Seeing then the truth of God is to be
considered out of his word and works, albeit men by nature confess that God is
true: yet are they ignorant wherein truth consists: for it is said, Thy word
is truth. John 17.17. Psalm. 89.5.
Thy truth in the congregation of the saints. Neither does the conscience or
the privy knowledge of any man's sins suffer him who knows not Christ the
Mediator to put any confidence in Gods promises; for, as it is said, All the
promises of God in him are yea, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and in him Amen, unto the glory of God. God dissembleth not, when he says he
will do that which yet he does not.
But if sometimes God foretold that he would do those things which he never
decreed to do, he did not therein dissemble: for what he threatened, that he
meant with this condition should so come to pass, except the conversion of men
and prayers come between; and what he promised, he meant with this condition,
if they repented, and either persisted in godliness, Luke 24.28, 29. Ezekiel.
14.9.
or needed not affliction and chastisement. Wherefore he would indeed have
punished the Ninevites if they had persisted in their sins: And Christ was
indeed departing, except his disciples had desired him to stay in the inn at
Emaus. As for that which God says, And if a Prophet be deceived, and has
spoken a thing, that He has deceived him: he signifies not thereby that he
deceives by instilling lies into false Prophets, How God is said to deceive a
deceived Prophet.
but that they are by him in just judgment delivered and given to be seduced by
the devil; as God is said to have given a lying spirit into the mouths of all
the Prophets of Achab. Repl. But yet God would that the false Prophet should
tell a false tale. Ans. 1 King. 22.22.
He would, but in diverse respects, and to a diverse end. God foretold victory
to Achab by an Irony, and that a sharp and bitter one, thereby to recall him
from making his expedition to war, and to punish him for not obeying, by
delivering him to be seduced by the devil: the false Prophets foretold
victory to flatter him, the devil to destroy him, and to die.

Why chastity is one of Gods properties.
Chaste.) There is made also mention of Chastity in the former description of
God, because amongst his especial and most notable differences, whereby he may
be discerned from devils, he will have truth to be, and chastity: for as God
will be acknowledged to be true, and will have truth loved of us, that it may
certainly appear that he is, and what he is, and that men may think and speak
the truth of him, and through his knowledge be partakers of everlasting life;
so the devil attempteth to fill the world with lies; that he may both darken
the glory of God, and, by forging lies of God, destroy mankind. Whereupon the
holy Ghost is called the Spirit of truth; John 8.44.
but the devil a liar and murderer from the beginning, and the father of
lies. And as God, both by reason of the exceeding purity of his nature, Ephesians.
5.23. Ezekiel. 16. Hos. 2.
as also because he will have the spousall love and conjunction of marriage to
be the image of the unspeakable love and spiritual conjunction between him and
the Church, will therefore have it accounted sacred and holy amongst men; and
as in these respects he is the lover and author of chastity, and does most
severely detest and punish all uncleanness, both internal and external,
which is repugnant to this order; as the examples of the Sodomites, of the
tribe of Benjamin, and others of all other ages and nations testify: So the
devil (both for his impurity, and also because whatsoever God would have held
most holy and venerable, that (for the hatred he bears to God) he studieth
most to deprave, and most foulely to deform) endeavors with obscenity and
filthiness horribly to pollute mankind, and to withdraw them from God.
Therefore it is said, This is the will of God, even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4.
and that you should abstain from fornication, that every one of you should
know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor.

Arguments of the mercy of God in preserving his creatures.
Merciful.) The mercy or favor and inclinable will of God to preserve his
creature, and especially mankind, the Scripture proposes unto us, opened by
these degrees: As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live. Ezekiel. 33.
and takes away punishments; inviting all men by his long-suffering to
repentance, if not one way, yet by the testimony of their conscience: hereof
he is said to be slow to anger. Exodus 35.6.
ever from sin and all evils, and comfort them also in afflictions. Repl.
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Rev. 7.17. and 21.4. Isa. 49.15.
Though a woman should forget her child, yet will I not forget thee. So God
loved the world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son. I will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy: Exodus 33.19. Isa. 43.25.
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. I, even I am he
that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember
thy sins. Romans 5.10.
but also who are his deadly enemies: When we were enemies we were reconciled
unto God by the death of his Son. They also of the wiser sort, which are out of
the Church, are compelled to attribute mercy unto God, because they see him so
mercifully to spare sinners: ^am 3.22.
whereupon Jeremie says, It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not. But because the perfectness of Gods
justice, and the privity of their own sins does not permit them to conceive any
firm persuasion of Gods mercy toward them neither know they ought concerning
the salvation of men by the death of his Son: therefore are they not able
either constantly or wholly to agnise Gods mercy. Object. 1. Mercy is a kind
of grief or sorrow: Therefore there is sorrow and grief in God. Answ. The
names of affections, when they are attributed unto God by an Anthropopathy,
they do not signify any passion or change in God, but an unspeakable either
dislike, or liking of the objects. God therefore is said to be merciful, 1.
Because he is against the destruction of his creature. 2. Because he does those
things which merciful men are wont to do. Isa. 1.24. Prove. 1.26.
Object. 2. God seems sometimes to rejoice in revengement. Ans. He rejoices
not in the revengement or punishment, but in the executing of his own justice.
Isa. 27.11.
Object. 3. It seems in some places of Scripture, that Gods mercy does not
extend it self unto the wicked. Ans. This is to be understood of that degree
of mercy wherewith he imbraceth his chosen: And yet he spares also the wicked;
neither rejoices at their destruction. Object. 4. But yet he saves not all,
whereas he is able to do it: Therefore he is not exceeding merciful, neither
merciful toward all. Answ. He does not save all for most just cause; for his
mercy is so to be exercised, that it hinder not the execution of his justice.
Object. 5. He does not take mercy on any, or receive any into favor without
the satisfaction of his Son: Therefore he does it not freely. Answ. That which
is concluded does not follow, because God of his free grace gives this
satisfaction it self, and applies it unto us: Now he gives a thing freely,
who gives the price of a thing for which the thing it self is given.

In what the boundtifulnesse of God is seen.
Bountiful.) God is also called bountiful, 1. Because he creates and
governs all things. 2. He is the only fountain of all good things, 3. which
befall to all creatures, 4. Yea, to the wicked, 5. Of his goodness, love, and
free mercy toward all creatures, 6. But especially toward mankind, which he
has made according to his image, and for whose sake he has created all other
things; 7. But in them also chiefly toward his Church, to whom he has opened
himself and his will; 8. And in this his Church, toward his chosen Angels and
men, to whom by his Son he gives life and glory everlasting. And further, whom
he is angry with, and on whom he inflicteth punishment, he is not angry with
their substance or nature which himself created, but with that corruption which
came by other means to his divine work: Romans 1.18.
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness. Object. No
creature visible is subject to so many evils as man: Therefore he is not
bountiful toward men. Answ. He is subject to these evils by an accident, that
is, because of sin: but withal he is enriched above other creatures, with
great blessings, even when he is out of the Church: but is most happy and
blessed if he repent.

For what cause God is said to be most free.
Most free.) God also alone is most free, because he alone by nature is such,
1. That no fault or misery can fall upon him. 2. Neither can he be constrained
of any. 3. Neither is he bound to any. 4. Neither is he subject or tied to the
rule or lore of another. Wherefore whatsoever he wills and does, that he
wills and does himself most freely, when, as much, and in what manner he
will; and what he will, that is most good and just. But here chiefly is
considered the freedom of will, or liberty from constraint; which is the power
and ability whereby God, without any necessity, has from everlasting decreed
the whole order of creation, preservation, and rule of all things, and does
accomplish the same, not being constrained or tied to other causes; yet so,
that he never swerveth from his rightnesse. To this bear witness his miracles,
and many examples of deliveries and punishments, and many places of Scripture;
as, Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in the heaven and earth, Psalm.
135.6.
in the sea, and in all the depth. It is not hard to the Lord to save with many
or with few. 1 Samuel, 14.6.
Object. 1. That without which second causes, which work necessarily, cannot
work, does it self also work necessarily: Without the first cause, which is
God, second causes, which necessarily work, cannot work: Therefore the first
cause also, which is God, works together with them necessarily. Answ. The
Major is true of such causes as work with absolute necessity: but it is false
of such as work only of a conditional necessity; that is, because it so
pleased God (who notwithstanding could move them otherwise, or else at all not
move them, or not so much as make them) that they should work, and should work
after that manner which they do work: Therefore all second causes depend on the
first, but not the first any way on the second. Object. 2. God is unchangeably
good: Therefore not freely good. Ans. This unchangeablenesse does not diminish,
but establish the liberty of Gods will: for it is not the unchangeablenesse of
a nature, but constraint and coaction which is contrary to liberty; and so much
the more freely the will chooses, with how much the greater and surer force and
motion it is carried unto her object. Object. 3. It is said also of particular
events, that God can only will those things which are best: But only those
things which he has decreed are best: Therefore he cannot will other things.
But answer is made to the Minor: What things God has decreed, those are best,
not before, but after his decree: for Gods will being the rule and square of
rightnesse, therefore are all things good, because he wills them. Wherefore
if he would have from everlasting had any other thing, that then should have
been best: As that Joseph should be sold, and made lord of Egypt, and give
sustenance to his fathers family, was best, because God would so. Now if God
would have any other way exercised Joseph, and taken vengeance on his brethren,
that should then have been the best. It follows therefore, that God wills
no other thing, after he has once decreed what he will have done: but that he
was able from everlasting to have decreed some other thing: for whatsoever he
would, that from everlasting he would most freely. Object. 4. Some places of
Scripture seem to intimate, that the will of God may be sometimes hindered by
his creatures: as, I desire not the death of the wicked. Ezekiel. 33.11. Mat.
23.37.
How often would I have gathered thee, and thou would not? Answ. These and
the like places only show with what God is delighted, and to what he inviteth
and calls all: but not what by his mercy and Spirit he has purposed to work
in every one. Wherefore this doctrine of the liberty and free will of God let
us diligently maintain, that both the glory of God may be vindicated from
Stoicall blasphemies; and in us faith, hope, invocating on God, and sedulity
and earnestness in performing our duty may be established, if, acknowledging
God most freely to govern all his creatures, we be neither secure in
prosperity, nor in adversity do cast away hope and good endeavors.

The anger of God against sin.
Angry and wroth with sin.) Lastly, in the description of Gods nature is put,
That he is angry and wroth with offenses and sins: which horrible anger and
wrath of God, whereby he detesteth and punishes all sins, although all the
wicked at length too late perceive and have experience of when they rush into
eternal despair; yet such his displeasure and indignation as God will have to
be known, they cannot so much as conceive who are without the Church, seeing
they neither judge all those evils to be sins, which God in his law threatens
he will punish with everlasting torments: neither know the death and
punishment of the Son of God, then which, God could not show a greater token
and argument of his anger against sin. The elect and chosen alone are thoroughly
moved by a right and saving knowledge thereof, gathered out of Gods punishments
and threatenings, to conversion and the fear of God. But the greatness of it no
man can fully conceive; according as it is said, Psalm. 90.11.
Who knows the power of thy wrath?

An Admonition to the Reader.
CHristian and courteous Reader, whereas in the conference of the two copies, I
found in the former a large Paraphrase delivered by U^sinus on the description
of God; and in the latter a brief Abstract thereof collected by David Pareus, I
judged it meet to retain the Paraphrase for help of weaker understandings, and
to adjoyn the Abridgement for help of weaker memories. If on this advertisement
thou advisedly peruse both the one and the other, I hope the fruit of both will
be neither to thee nor me lost labor.



A brief Epitome or Abridgement of the former large Explication of the
description of God.
GOd is an essence.) That is, a thing which has his being from none but
himself, and is preserved and sustained of none, but subsisteth by himself,
and is the only cause unto all other things of their being: therefore called
Jehovah, as if you would say, Being by himself and causing others to be.

S^i^ituall.) Incorporeall, invisible, and to no sense of man perceivable.
Likewise in that he lives of and by himself, and quickens or gives life to
other things. Joh. 1.18. and 4.24. Acts 17.24, ^8. (...).
Object. 1. He oftentimes appeared. Ans. True, in a bodily form assumed for a
time. Object. 2. He was seen face to face. Ans. That is, by the clear knowledge
of the mind, and not with the bodily eyes. Object. 3. He has the parts of a
man's body. Ans. Indeed they are ascribed unto him after the manner of men.
Object. 4. The bodily man is the image of God. Ans. Surely he is so in the
essence of his soul, in the faculties and uprightness thereof, Ephesians. 4.
in wisdom, righteousness, and true holiness; not in the shape and figure of
his body.

Intelligent.) Witness hereof is the mind of man, and the notions shining
therein, which all proceeded from God. Psalm. 94.9.
Now, He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?

Eternal.) Having neither beginning nor end of being: Thou art God from
everlasting, and world without end. Psalm. 90.2.


Other from the creatures.) Not Nature it self (as some dream) not the matter
or form, not any part, but the sole efficient, and the only maker of all
things: neither intermingled with any thing, but of a quite different, or other
essence, and utterly unlike all things. 1 Cor. 8.6. Acts 17.29.
Object. 1. All things are of God. Ans. I grant they are, by creation out of
nothing. Object. 2. We are the generation of God. Ans. Yea verily, by a
similitude of properties, John 1.13.
and by creation. Object. 3. The Saints are born of God. Ans. Questionless, by
regeneration through the holy Ghost. Object. 4. We are made partakers of the
divine nature. Answ. Undoubtedly, by the dwelling of God in us, and by our
conformity with him. Obj. 5. Christ is God and has a divine body. Ans. To wit,
by a personal union and glorification.

Incomprehensible.) 1. In our cogitation, and the cogitation of any creature.
2. In the unmeasurablenesse of his essence. 3. By communication of the essence,
which is in such sort the very substance of the three persons of the Divinity,
that it remains in number one and the same.

Most perfect in himself.) 1. Sole possessor of all blessedness. 2. And that
in himself, and of himself. 3. with sufficiency to replenish all other things.
Object. 1. The Lord has made all things for himself. Prove. 16.4.
Answ. Not to aid himself by them, but to communicate himself to them.
Object. 2. He uses the creatures ministry in accomplishing many of his
works. Answ. Not as needing, but honoring the creature. Object. 3. We yield
him worship. Answ. It is our debt, his due, and the issue is our good and
benefit alone. Object. 4. To whom is given that which is due unto him, to him
something comes thereby more then he had before. Answ. This assertion is
false of that which is due by order of justice, and pertains to the felicity
of the giver. Obj. 5. God rejoices in our obedience. Ans. He does so; our
obedience being an object not an efficient cause of his rejoicing.

Unchangeable.) 1. In his essence. 2. In his will. 3. In place, because he is
immense, and fills all things. Object. 1. God repents him of things done.
Ans. To repent, and such like humane affections are attributed to God by
Anthropopathy, or after the manner of men. Object. 2. He promises and
threatens that which he performs not at all. Ans. True; but a condition and
exception is always understood. Object. 3. He depends on a changeable
condition. Ans. To wit, changeable in respect of man's will, but not of Gods
decree and counsel. Object. 4. He changes his precepts, observances and
works. Ans. Namely, according to his everlasting decree.

Omnipotent.) 1. He can do, and does all things which he still. 2. And that at
his beck, without difficulty. 3. As having all things in his own power. Object.
Many things he cannot do. Ans. They are then the works of impotency and
imperfection, as to lie, to die.

Of exceeding wisdom.) 1. In beholding and understanding himself, and
perceiving at once the whole order of his mind and nature, which he does
perpetually, and exceeding perfectly. 2. In being the cause of all knowledge in
Angels and men.

Of exceeding goodness.) 1. Because Gods whole nature is such as is revealed
in the Law and the Gospel. 2. Because he is the cause and rule of all good in
his creatures. 3. Because he is the most supreme good. 4. Because he is the
very essence of goodness.

Just.) 1. In respect of his general justice and righteousness, whereby he
wills and works unchangeably such things as he has commanded in his Law.
2. In respect of his particular justice, whereby he immutably dispenses aright
rewards and punishments. In that he is the rule of righteousness, and square
of uprightness in his creatures. Object. 1. He does good to the evil, and
heapeth evils on the good. Answ. He does; but not finally, but only for a
time. Object. 2. He does not punish the wicked out of hand. Answ. For he
providently deferreth their punishments for special occasions best known to
himself. Object. 3. No harm should ever be done to the good. Answ. Not to those
which are perfectly good, which we in this life are not. Object. 4. He does
something contrary to his law. Answ. He abridgeth certainly something from his
general will by his special will. Object. 5. He gives to men of equal
condition unequal rewards. Answ. Yet gives he to each of them that which no
way is their due. Repl. They are due by order of justice. Ans. God is bound
unto no man. Repl. Promise is a debt. Ans. The promise of creatures, not of God
the Creator.

True.) 1. Because he has the true and certain knowledge of all things. 2.
Because he neither wills, nor speaks things repugnant or contrary. 3.
Because he faineth nothing, nor deceives any man. 4. Because he never changes
his mind. 5. Because he ratifieth his sayings by the events of things. 6.
Because he enjoyneth and prescribes truth to be kept of all. Object. 1. He
fore-telleth that which he will not have done. Ans. He fore-telleth that it
shall come to pass, but conditionally. Object. 2. He deceives the Prophets.
Answ. That is, Ezekiel. 14.9.
he in his just judgment delivers them up to the devil to be seduced.

Chaste.) 1. By reason of the exceeding purity of his nature. 2. Because he is
the lover and author of chastity. 3. Because he does most severely detest and
punish all uncleanness, both internal and external. 4. Because by this
notable note of difference he distinguishes himself from unclean spirits and
filthy devils: 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4.
This is the will of God, even your sanctification, and that ye should abstain
from fornication: That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in holiness and honor, etc. Levit. 18.24.
Ye shall not defile your selves in any of these things; for in all these the
nations are defiled.

Merciful.) 1. In that he will that all be saved. 2. For that he deferreth
punishment, and inviteth all to repentance. 3. In that he applies himself to
our infirmity. 4. In that he delivers the elect. 5. In that he gave his Son
to die for them. 6. In that he promises and performs all these things of his
own free goodness. 7. In that he does good unto the unworthy, and his very
enemies. Object. 1. Mercy is a kind of grief or sorrow. Ans. It is so in men,
but not in God. Ob. 2. He rejoices in revenge. Isa. 1.24. and 27.11.
Ans. As far forth as it is an execution of his justice. Ob. 3. He denies
mercy to the wicked. Ans. to the unrepentant. Object. 4. He saves not all when
he may. Ans. To wit, that with his mercy he may declare his justice. Ob. 5. He
receives none to mercy without satisfaction. Ans. No verily; but yet of his
free mercy bestows his Sons satisfaction on us.

Bountiful.) 1. Because he creates and governs all things. 2. Because he
does good unto all. 3. Yea, to the wicked. 4. Of his free love toward all
creatures. 5. But especially toward man. 6. And amongst men, chiefly to his
Church. 7. And herein also toward his chosen, giving them eternal life and
glory. Object. 1. He is angry. Ans. True, with the corruption of the creature,
not with the creature it self, and the nature and substance thereof. Object. 2.
He afflicts men. Ans. Namely, the impenitent.

Most free.) 1. Free from all fault, misery, bond, subjection, constraint. 2.
In that he does will and execute all things most freely and justly, when, as
much, and in what manner he will. Object. 1. Second causes work necessarily,
and yet work not without God. Ans. They work by a necessity of consequent, and
only conditional. Object. 2. God is necessarily good. Ans. Questionless, but
yet by a necessity of unchangeablenesse, not of constraint. Object. 3. What he
has once decreed, he necessarily wills. Answ. He necessarily wills it,
because he will not alter his decree, not by constraint. Obj. 4. His will is
not done sometimes; as, How often would I, and thou would not? Matthew. 23.37.
Ans. He would, that is, in his will apparent to the conceit and judgment of
man, not in his determinate secret counsel.

Angry with sin.) Horribly detesting and punishing all sin with temporal and
eternal pain.

3. Whence it may appear that there is but one God.
Whence first sprang the multitude of gods.
ALbeit God in the beginning did as certainly declare unto mankind, that he is
but one only, as what he is: yet the world, by the guile and deceit of the
devil (going about to spoil God of his honor, and to bear and vaunt himself
for God, and to destroy mankind for the hatred he bears unto God) and
through their own blindness and malice revolting from Gods divine
manifestations, and from the doctrine of our first fathers, have in horrible
madness forged a multitude of gods, yielding divine honors partly to
creatures, partly to imaginary gods, and forgetting the true God, or desiring
to join and couple other gods with him. And whereas there is no greater bond
then whereby the creature is bound to honor the Creator; and therefore no
more grievous sin then to obscure the glory due unto God, or to conveigh it
over to any other: God, that he might meet with this sacrilege, has often
testified and witnessed in his word, That there is but one God, not many; that
is, that there is but one divine Essence, eternal, of infinite power, wisdom
and goodness, Creator, Preserver, and Ruler of all things. And this is
proved, 1. By testimonies of Scripture-Deut. 6.4. and 32.39 Isa. 44.6. 1 Cor.
8.4. Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Timothy 2.5.
first, by express testimonies of Scripture: Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God
is Lord only. Behold now, for I am he, and there is no god with me. I am the
first, and I am the last, and without me there is no God. We know that an idol
is nothing in the world, and that there is no other God but one. One Lord, one
faith, one God and Father of all. One God, one Mediator between God and man,
which is the man Christ Jesus. The like proofs hereof may be read, Deuteronomy. 4.35.
Psalm 18.31. Isa. 37.16. and 45.21. Hos. 13.4. Mal. 2.10. Mat. 12.32. Romans
3.30. Gal. 3.20.

2. By arguments.
Secondly, it is confirmed by reason and argument: From the manner of revealing
himself. Isa. 44.7. Psalm. 86.8.
namely, such miracles, prophesies, and other works as cannot be done but by an
omnipotent nature. Who is like me, that shall call that which is past, and
shall declare it, and set it in order? etc. Among the gods there is none like
unto thee, O Lord: there is not one that can do as thou do. 2 reigns over
all, and alone governs all things; and therefore has sole supreme
sovereignty and majesty, can be but one: But the majesty of God only is
supreme, From the nature and kind of his majesty. Isa. 42.8. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Revel. 4.11.
and so great, that no greater can either be, or be imagined: I am the Lord,
this is my name, and my glory will I not give to another. Unto God only wise be
honor, etc. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power;
for thou have created all things. From his degree of perfection.
and all alone, is absolutely perfect: Now God is most perfect, seeing he is
the cause of all that is good in nature: Therefore nothing is more absurd, then
to imagine any thing to be God which is not most great, and most perfect: Lord,
who is like unto thee? Psalm. 89.7.
From his omnipotency.
By this argument the Monarchy of the world is in Daniel restrained unto one
God, when it is said, Dan. 4.35.
None can stay his hand, or resist his will. If we suppose and put more gods,
either each of them will be too weak to rule all, and so imperfect, and not
worthy the name and title of divinity; More gods would be either unperfect, or
superfluous.
or one will suffice for the guiding of the whole world, and so the rest shall
be idle, superfluous, and needless: But it is absurd to imagine God to be such
a one as suffices not for the wielding and managing of all things; or such a
one as is superfluous and idle: Wherefore there must needs be but one God, that
he alone may suffice for all. There can be but one infinite.
Wherefore there cannot be more, but one only God, which is infinite. But one
first cause.


The use of this Question is to teach us, that whereas God is but one; The use
of this Question.
therefore no other besides this one God is to be adored or worshipped: neither
is any good to be expected from any other save only from him, and to him alone
all thanks for all blessings are to be rendered. Obj. Many are called gods in
Scripture: Psalm. 82.6. 1 Cor. 8.5. Exodus 4.16. and 7.1. 2 Cor. 4.4.
I have said ye are gods. Many are, and are called gods in heaven and in earth:
Moses is called the god of Aaron and Pharaoh: yea, the devil is said to be The
god of this world. Ans. Two significations of the word God.
There is an ambiguity and double signification of this word God, which
sometimes signifies him who is by nature God, and has his being not from any
thing, but from himself, and by himself, and all other things are from him:
such a God is but one only. a God, either so entitled for some similitude of
the divine properties, dignity, and divine office and function: Gods in the
latter signification:
or an imaginary and fained god; such gods are many: Magistrates.
Judges and magistrates are entitled and called gods, not that they have the
divine essence communicated unto them, and are by nature God, but because of
their dignity and divine office which they bear in Gods stead; as it is said,
By me Kings reign: that is, Prove. 18.15.
because they are the Deputies and Vicegerents of God, by whom, as by his
instruments and servants, he exercises his power and judgments here on
earth: he therefore does furnish and arm them with wisdom, fortitude, power,
authority, and majesty, as much as is necessary and sufficient to bridle the
minds of the multitude, being desirous of licentiousness, and to hold and
keep them in fear and obedience: he does also vouchsafe them the honor of his
name, by calling them gods, that the subjects may thereby know, that they have
to deal not with men, but with God himself (whose Vicegerents they are)
whether they obey their magistrate, or repine against him: according to the
Scripture; Whosoever resists the power, Romans 13.2.
resists the ordinance of God. Angels.
The Angels also are called gods, both for the dignity and excellency of their
nature and gifts, power and wisdom, wherein they far surpass men: as also for
the divine office and function which God exercises by them in this world, in
defending the godly, and punishing the wicked: Psalm 8.6.
Thou made him little lower then the gods; that is, then the Angels: The
Angels are ministering spirits. Heb. 1.14.
The devil.
The devil is called the god of this world, for his great potency and power
which he has over men and other creatures by the just judgment of God. Idols.
Lastly, Many things are accounted gods in men's fancies and opinion, 2. Cor.
4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12.
and are so called by men, who worship the creatures as gods. So idols are
termed gods by a figurative speech of imitation. Jer. 10.11. Phil. 3.19. Exodus
20.3.
The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, shall perish from the
earth, and under these heavens. Whose god is their belly. Thou shall have no
other gods before me. But here the question is touching the true God, who is by
nature God, and has his being and his power not from any thing, but from
himself, and by himself, and all other things are from him. Such a God is but
one only.

4. What these names, Essence, Person, and Trinity signify, and how they
differ.
The explication of these words serve much for the understanding of the
unconceivable mystery of the Trinity; and therefore is it not to be read with a
running eye.
ESsence, in Greek (...), as it is used in this doctrine for substance, is a
thing subsisting by it self (that is, a thing having a proper being, not
sustained in another) although it be communicated to more. That is said to be
communicable, or communicated which is common, or may be made common to more:
that is said to be incommunicable which is not in more, neither can be affirmed
of more. Man's essence is communicable, and common to many men; but this essence
is in general common, not in particular, and in number: that is, the nature
and essence of all men is in general one, but not one in number; for every man
has his essence distinct from others, neither are all one man, but many men.
But the essence of God is communicable in particular: because the self same
Deity in number, and that whole and entire, is common to the three persons, and
is the substance of the three persons; and therefore the three persons are that
one God who created all things, not three Gods.

What a Person is.
A person is a thing subsisting, individual, living, understanding,
incommunicable, not sustained in another, neither part of another.

Subsisting) By which word is signified, that it is not an accident,
cogitation, decree, vanishing sound, or any created quality or motion.

Individual.) Not any general: but a particular one in number; and therefore
individual, and called individual.

Living.) No inanimate thing which has no life, as a stone.

Understanding.) Not a thing which has sense only, as are brute beasts, who
are things living and sensible, but not understanding; and therefore are no
persons.

Incommunicable.) Not the divine essence, which is common to three: not the
substance of man's nature, or any other thing created, which is communicated to
the thing begotten thereof, or thence derived: But a person cannot be
communicated.

Not sustained in another.) Not the humane nature of Christ: for this though it
be subsisting, individual understanding, incommunicable; yet is it no person,
because it is personally sustained of the Word; that is, so, that it together
with the Word, is the substance of one Christ, and, except it were subsisting
in the Word, should not at all be.

Neither part of another.) Not the soul of man, which though it be subsisting
by it self, intelligent, and not sustained by another, yet is it no person,
because, as long as it is contained in the body, it is part of man.

What difference between Essence and Person.
Hence appears the difference which is between the essence of God, and the
persons of the divine essence. In the Church by the name of essence is
understood that which God the eternal Father, and Son, and holy Ghost each of
them are in themselves absolutely, and is common to the three. By the name of
Person is signified that which each of these three are respectively, or being
compared one to the other: or is that very being of God considered respectively
to one and another; and distinct by a proper and peculiar manner of being and
subsisting from the others. In a word, Essence is the very being of God; or the
very eternal, and one only Deity: Person is the manner, after which that being
or essence of God is in each of these three, or the proper and several manners
of each of their beings. Wherefore in number there is one and the same being or
essence in God, that is, in each of these three who are God: but it is after a
diverse manner in God. God the Father is that Being, of himself, not from
another. The Son also is the self same Being or Essence, not from himself,
but from the Father. The Holy Ghost likewise is the self same divine Being
which the Father is and the Son; not from himself, but from the Father and
the Son. So then the Being or divine Essence of these three is one and the
same in number: Justin. (...) that is to ^ay, One being, but three manners of
being.
but to be, that is, to have this one divine Essence from himself, or to have
it communicated unto him from another, whether from one, or from two, notes,
and is the manner of subsisting: which manner is threefold, each severally
distinct; to wit, To be from himsefe. To be begotten of another. To proceed
from others: whence arise the three Persons, which are signified by the name of
the Trinity.

The sum of the difference between these two, Essence, and Person, is: The
essence is absolute and communicable; the person respective and incommunicable.
This may be made more manifest by exemplifying in a man: It is one thing to be
a man, another thing to be a father or a son; and yet one and the same is both
a man and a father: but he is a man absolutely, or in himself, or according to
his own nature; he is a father to another, or in respect of another namely, of
his son. Semblably, it is one thing to be God, another thing to be the Father,
or Son, or holy Ghost; and yet one and the same is both God and Father; God in
respect of himself or his own nature, Father in respect of his Son. Again, The
essence of a man who begets another, is communicated to him who is begot;
but the person or individual is not communicated: for the begetter brings
forth not himself, but another distinct from himself, the same essence
notwithstanding being communicated unto him; and no relative is his
correlative, or any part thereof: Therefore the son is not the father, nor the
father the son, although both be true man. So in like sort, the eternal Father
has by eternal generating communicated to the Son his essence, but not his
person; that is, he begot not the Father, but the Son: neither is the Father
the Son, or the Son the Father; albeit each is true God. God and man
communicate both their essences to another, but their man^r of communicating is
most different, and is much to be observed.
Now although this be like in God and man, that both do communicate to another
not his person, but his essence: yet is there an exceeding dissimilitude in the
manner whereby the divine essence being infinite, and the humane being created
and finite, is communicated to another; which dissimilitude is diligently to be
observed: For, In men, in the father and the son the essence is as distinct as
the persons themselves; the father and the son are not only two persons, but
also two men distinct in essences; so that the father is not that man which is
the son: But in God the persons are so distinct, that yet the essence remains
common one and the same; and therefore there are not three Gods, but the Son is
the same God in number which is the Father and the Son. In persons created, he
that begets and generateth does not communicate his whole essence to him
that is begotten, (for then he should cease to be a man;) but only a part,
which being allotted and severed out of the essence of him that begets, is
conveyed or derived into him that is begotten, and is made the essence of
another individual or person, distinct from the essence of the individual who
begets: But in uncreated persons, he that begets or inspireth
communicates his whole essence to him that is begotten, or proceeds, or is
inspired; yet so, that he who communicates does retain the same, and that
whole. The reason of both differences is, that the essence of man, as also of
other creatures, is finite and divisible; but the Deity (or essence of God the
Creator) is infinite and indivisible: and therefore the Deity may, being the
same, and whole, or entire, be together both communicated and retained.
Wherefore the eternal Father, and Son, and holy Ghost are that one true God:
and yet the Father is not the Son, or the holy Ghost; neither is the holy Ghost
the Son: that is, they are one God; not three Gods, but three persons
subsisting in one God.

Why the difference of Essence and Person is to be held.
This difference of essence and person is therefore to be observed and held,
lest, 1. The unity of the true God be distracted: or, 2. The distinction of the
persons be taken away: or, 3. Another thing be understood by the name of Person
then the truth of Gods word declares. Therefore these cautions are diligently
to be regarded: Person in the Deity no mere Relation.
That the word Person in this place does not signify only a relation or
office, as the Latins are wont to speak, Principis personam tueri, to defend
the person of the Prince, as of old Sabellius falsely taught; much less does
it signify the countenance or visible shape (as in these days Servetus
sported and trifled with the word Person) representing the form or gesture of
another, such as is the person of a stage player: but it signifies a thing
subsistent, truly distinct from others, unto whom it has a relation and
respect by an incommunicable property; that is, it signifies that which
begets, or which is begotten, or which proceeds; not the office, or
dignity, or degree of him that begets, or is begotten, or proceeds. Person
no separate thing from the essence.
That the persons are not any thing separated from the essence which is common
unto them; nor the essence is any fourth thing separate from the three persons;
but each of them are the very self same whole essence of the Divinity: But the
difference is this, that the persons are each distinct from the other, but the
essence is common to them three. And that the person is no other thing
subsisting, or other substance then the essence, may be understood in some sort
by the example of a man. One and the same man, or one and the same substance is
a father and a man, or a son and a man; and yet the manhood, or to be a man is
one thing; the fatherhood, or to be a father, another; but there is not one
subsistent which is the father, and another subsistent which is a man, but one
and the same subsistent is both, because both manhood and fatherhood is in him;
manhood absolutely, fatherhood respectively, as in regard of his son. What
reference essence has unto person.
Of the word Essence also it is further to be noted, that God, or the Deity, or
divine essence is not in respect of the persons, the same which the matter in
respect of the effect; because God is unchangeable, neither is compounded of
matter and form: Therefore we cannot say well, Three persons are, or consist of
one essence. Neither is it as the whole in respect of the parts; because God is
indivisible: Wherefore it is not well said, that the person is a part of the
essence, or the essence consists of three persons; for every person is the
whole divine essence, one and the same. Neither is it as the general to the
special; because essence is not the general to the three persons, nor person
a special to essence. But God is a more common name, because the essence of
the Deity is common to the three persons, and therefore may be affirmed of each
of them. But these names, Father, Son, and holy Ghost are more strict, because
the persons are indeed distinct, and cannot be affirmed the one of the other.
Therefore it is well said, God, or the divine Essence is the Father, is the
Son, is the holy Ghost: Likewise, The three persons are one God, or in one God.
Again, They are one and the same essence, nature, divinity, wisdom, etc. They
are of one and the same essence, nature, divinity, etc. Yet it cannot be well
said, They are of one God: because there is no one of these persons but is
whole and perfect God. Wherefore the divine essence is, in respect of the
persons, as a thing after a rare and singular manner communicated, in respect
of those things unto which it is common: For neither is there the like example
of community in any created things. For a general is a certain thing common to
many specials, and a general and special to many individuals; but yet so,
that they are affirmed of those many plurally, not singularly: as that the
father and the son (or, this father and son) are two living creatures, two men.
But we may not speak after this sort of God and the divine persons, as to say,
The Father and the Son are two Gods, two Spirits, two Omnipotents, etc. Because
there is but one God, one Spirit, one Omnipotent, etc. Wherefore that
affirmation, The Father is God, the Son is God, the holy Ghost is God, is a
true affirmation, affirming that which is more common of a thing which is more
restrict: that is, affirming the essence of the individual; which has in some
sort an analogy and proportion only with the special affirmed of his
individual, but it is not at all the same, nor of the same kind.

What the Trinity is.
By the name of Trinity, are understood the three Persons distinct in one
essence of the Deity by three manners of being or subsisting. Now Trinity and
Triplicity, as also Trinall and Triple differ: That is said to be Triple which
is comprehended of three essences, or is distinct by three essences. Trinall is
that which in essence is but one, and most simple, but has three manners of
being of subsisting. God therefore is not triple, because there are not more
essences: but Trinall; because he being one according to his essence, is three
according to his persons.

5. Whether these names are to be used in the Church.
Heretics of ancient carped at these terms, because they occur not in
Scripture: But we imitate aright the manner of speech which was usual in the
ancient and purer Church, and by their authority and example retain these
names: I am that I am. Again, I am has sent me unto you. Again, Exodus 3.^^.
it cannot be denied but that the word Jehovah answers to that we call
essence. So the word Hypostasis is used to signify a Person in the Epistle to
the Hebrews: Who being the engraved form of his person. Heb. 1.2.
Neither does the Church in any other sense call the persons the Trinity, then
as John says, that There are three which bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the holy Ghost.

Nevertheless, if there were a consent and agreement on the things, we should
easily come to an agreement about the words; for we detest contention and
brawling about words: Neither is the Church at controversy with other Gentiles
and Heretics about bare terms, but of this main substantial doctrine, That
the eternal Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost are one God; and yet
neither is the Father the Son, or the holy Ghost; nor the holy Ghost the
Father, or the Son, etc. Now, were it not that Heretics cannot away with this
doctrine, they would easily admit of the phrases of speech: But they therefore
abandon the terms, because they abhor the things and doctrine intimated and
signified by them.

Hence we easily answer this their objection: Obj. Words not extant in
Scripture are not to be used in the Church: But these names, namely, Essence,
Person, and Trinity occur not in Scripture: therefore they may not be used in
the Church. Ans. We expound the Major thus: That which is not in Scripture,
neither concerning the bare words, nor concerning the sense, is be omitted: But
the names themselves of Essence, Person, and Trinity, as concerning the things
lively insinuated by them, are extant in Scripture, as has been proved. Again,
Terms not extant in Scripture are to be omitted, if by sparing them the
substance of the things themselves be not endangered: But the drift and purpose
of heretics is no other, but with the terms to abolish, or at least deprave
the doctrine of the Church: Therefore they are to be retained to prevent their
attempts. Repl. But they breed contentions. Answ. This happens by accident,
by reason of contentious heretics.

6. How many persons there be of the Divinity or Godhead.
Three persons are one God, and one God is three persons.
IN one divine Essence are subsisting three Persons, and those truly distinct
one from another by their properties; namely, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost; each of which three persons notwithstanding are one and the same God,
eternal, infinite, and most perfect in himself. And these persons are
consubstantiall, co-eternall, without any confounding of their properties and
respects, as also without any disparagement or inequality between them. And,
That there are three persons, each of which are that one true God, Creator of
all things, is proved, By testimonies of Scripture, which are taken partly out
of the old Testament, and partly out of the new. The old Testament yields us
many testimonies: Genesis 1.2, 3. Exodus 3.2.
The Spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters. Then God said, Let there be
light. The Lord is said to have appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire out of
the midst of a bush. Acts 7.30.
Steven calls him, The Angel of the Lord, which is Christ the Son of God,
even that Angel of the great counsel. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
Isa. 61.1.
therefore has he anointed me, he has sent me to preach good tidings unto
the poor, to bind up the broken hearted. Here the Spirit is discerned both
from him that anointeth, and from him that is anointed. He is discerned also
by his gifts, because he says, Upon me, that is, dwelling in me, sanctifying
me: Therefore these be three diverse persons subsisting. But yet there are
both more, and more clear testimonies in the new Testament: Mat. 28.19.
Teach all nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and
the holy Ghost. The Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, John 14.26. John 15.27.
whom the Father will send in my name. When the Comforter shall come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds
of the Father. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13.13.
and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all. In
this saying of the Apostle, invocation is joined with an application and
distinction of the three persons: By grace, he means the benefits of Christ;
by love, the acceptance whereby God, for his Sons sake, does receive us into
favor; by the communion of the holy Ghost, his gifts which are common unto the
godly. There are three in heaven which bear record. God saved us by the
washing of the new birth, 1 John 5.7. T^t. 3.5, 6.
and by the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through
Jesus Christ our Savior: Here he makes three authors of our salvation.
Ephesians. 2.18. Gal. 4.6.
Through him we have an entrance unto the Father by one Spirit. God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts: Therefore it is one Spirit which
the Father and the Son sends. The same is proved by those places of Scripture
which give unto these three, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, the name
of Jehovah, and the true God. In like manner those places wherein those things
which are spoken of Jehovah in the old Testament, are in the new referred
expressly and most plainly to the Son and the holy Ghost. Those places which
attribute the same whole divine essence to the three; and show, that the Son is
the proper Son of the Father, most truly begotten of him; and the holy Ghost is
the Spirit of the Father and the Son, and that so proper and peculiar, as that
he is, and proceeds of God, which is the Father and the Son: The Son
therefore and holy Ghost have the same, and that whole essence of the Deity
which the Father has; the Son has it communicated of the Father, by being
born of him; and the holy Ghost of the Father and the Son, by proceeding from
them. Those places which give unto the three the same attributes or properties
and perfections of the divine nature; namely, eternity, immensity, omnipotency,
etc. Those places which attribute to the three the same effects or works proper
unto the Deity; namely, creation, preservation, and government of the world, as
also miracles and the salvation of the Church., Those places which yield to the
three equal honor and worship, and such as agrees to the true God alone. By
this consent therefore of the old and new Testament, it is confirmed, that one
God is three persons truly distinct, and those three persons are one God. By
this also we understand, that it is truly said, that the Father is other from
the Son and the holy Ghost; and the holy Ghost other from both: but not truly,
that the Father is another thing from the Son; and the Son another thing, and
the holy Ghost another thing: for, to be another thing, betokens a diversity
of essence: to be other, a diverse manner of existing, or a distinction of
persons: Now the three distinct persons have not a diverse Deity, but one and
the same in number.

It follows, that we should demonstrate of each several person of the Deity,
that they are true Subsistents, against Samosatenus and Servetus: that they are
distinct, against Arrius, Eunomius, and Macedonius: lastly, that they are of
the same, and not of only like essence, against the same heretics. But of the
person of the Father there is no controversy; and these scruples and doubts
touching the persons of the Son and holy Ghost shall more conveniently
hereafter in their proper place be cleared.

7. How the three persons of the Godhead are distinguished.
HEre we are first to observe and consider, Attributes common to the whole
three persons.
What the Scripture attributes as common to the whole three persons, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, which three are one God, and yet distinct in persons.
Effects in the creature common to the three persons.
What it ascribes to each particular, as peculiar unto him, and how it
distinguishes and discerns the persons. Common to the three persons are, 1.
All the essential properties of God, all which we comprehend in the name of
Deity: as eternity, infinity, omnipotency, wisdom, goodness, to have essence
from himself, or to be God of himself: 2. All external actions and operations
of the Divinity; that is, those effects which God exercises on his creatures,
and in them, or by them; such as are, creation, preservation, the government of
the world, the gathering together and tuition of his Church, etc.

The three persons distinguished two ways. 1. By inward works. 2. By outward.
Of the inward operations of the three persons.
These persons are distinguished two ways: First, by their inward works.
Secondly, by their outward works, or form of working without themselves. The
inward works or actions of the Divinity are those which the persons have and
exercise one toward another. The persons therefore are first distinguished
between themselves by these inward operations or properties: For, The Father
is, and existeth of himself, not from another. He begot the Son, and inspired
the holy Ghost after an unspeakable manner. The Son has his being from the
Father, begotten of him from everlasting; that is, he has the divine essence
communicated unto him from the Father, in such sort, as no tongue can express:
The holy Ghost proceeds from everlasting from the Father and the Son; that
is, has the same essence, but communicated unto him from the Father and the
Son, in a manner which cannot be uttered. Testimonies hereof are frequent: In
the beginning was the Word, Joh. 1.1, 14, 18.
and the Word was with God, and God was the Word. We have seen his glory, as
the glory of the only begotten Son of God. The only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of his Father, he has declared him. When the Comforter shall come,
John 15.26.
whom I will send unto you from the Father.

The order of the persons in subsisting.
The order therefore of the persons in subsisting is on this wise: The Father is
the first person, and as it were the fountain of the Divinity of the Son and
holy Ghost, because the Deity is communicated unto him of none; but he
communicates the Deity to the Son and holy Ghost. The Son the second Person,
because the Deity is communicated unto him from the Father by an eternal
generation. The holy Ghost the third person, because the Deity is communicated
unto him from the Father and the Son by an everlasting inspiration: in which
order they are reckoned up unto us in these Scriptures; Baptize all nations in
the name of the Father, Mat. 28.19.
and the Son, and the holy Ghost. There are three which bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost; and these three are one. Yet is not
the Father precedent in time before the Son and holy Ghost; nor the Son before
the holy Ghost; but only in the order of existing or working: For no person of
the Deity is former or later then another in time, dignity, or degree; but only
in that order whereby they issue and proceed one of the other. For never was
the Father without the Son, nor the Son without the holy Ghost, since the
Divinity is unchangeable. So God from everlasting was subsistent in himself,
and so he has revealed himself in his word.

Here heretics demand of us, What that eternal generation of the Son, Amb^.
de side ad Great. lib. 1. cap. 5. Aug. cont. Max. Arian. l. 3. cap. 14. Damasc.
orth. fid. lib. 1. cap. 10. How everlasting generation and proceeding differ.
and proceeding of the holy Ghost means, and how they differ between
themselves. Which although we confess, (as in former times also the catholic
and right believing fathers confessed of themselves) that it is not in man's
ability to express perfectly the manner of this everlasting generation and
proceeding, and of the natural distinction between them; yet we gather the
very thing it self from out of Scripture: that Generation is a communicating of
the divine essence, whereby only the second person of the Deity deriveth and
takes from the first person alone, as a Son from his Father, the same essence
whole and entire which the Father has, and retains the same: And, Proceeding
also is a communicating of the divine essence, whereby the third person only of
the Godhead receives from the Father and the Son, as the Spirit from him
whose spirit it is, the same whole essence which the Father and the Son have
and retain. Now both of them differ from Creation, How generation and
proceeding differ from creation.
because To be created of God, is when something is made of nothing at the
commandment and will of God: but To be conceived or begotten, and To proceed
or issue out, is when some other person is begotten of the substance of him
which begets; and is in unexplicable wise produced from all eternity out of
his substance from whom the proceeding springs; yet with this distinction,
that the Son has his subsistence from being born, the holy Ghost from
proceeding. Thus we conceive the thing it self, That thus it is, as far
forth as God for his glory and our salvation has thought meet to impart unto
us so deep and hidden a mystery; although we cannot attain to the cause Why
thus it is. Further, of that Question so long controversed between the Greek
and Latin Churches, Whether the holy Ghost were truly said to proceed from the
Father and the Son, and not from the Father alone; hereafter fit opportunity of
handling the same will be offered us in the doctrine concerning the holy Ghost.

Orthodoxal phrases to be observed, with their opposites to be avoided in this
mystery.
Here we are to note the usual proper phrases of Scripture, and the ancient
Church, in this difference of the persons between themselves. It is truly
said, God begat God: but not truly, God begat another God; or, begat
himself. True it is, The Father begat another: It is not true, that he
begat another thing, or, another God. True it is, The Son is that which the
Father is: Untrue, The Son is he, or the same person which the Father is. True
it is, The Son is begotten; The holy Ghost proceeds from the Father: And, The
Son is of, or from out of the Father; The holy Ghost is of, or from out of the
Father and the Son: And, Whatsoever the Son has, he has it from the Father,
and by eternal nativity or birth has received it from the Father; Whatsoever
the holy Ghost has, he has it from the Father and the Son, and receives it
by proceeding: And, the Son and holy Ghost have a beginning in respect of their
persons; and have their essence communicated unto them from some other: Untrue,
They have a beginning in respect of their essence: Sunt essentiati.
or, They are essenced, or have their essence produced from the Father; or,
They have their essence produced from some other. It is truly said, The first
person of the Deity begat the second of his own essence: The third person
proceeded from the first and second: But not truly, The divine essence begat
a divine essence: or, The person is begotten, or proceeds of the essence.
True it is to say, The divine essence is communicated: Untrue, The divine
essence is born, or proceeds: The reason is, because to be communicated is
not the same as to be begotten, but stretches farther. For, not whatsoever is
communicated to the begotten, is also begotten: but that is begotten, to which
the substance of him that begets is communicated.

2. Of the outward operations of the three persons.
Another difference of the persons arises out of the former, consisting of the
order of their external operations which they exercise toward the creatures,
and in them, and by them. For these actions, I grant, are wrought be the common
will, power, and efficacy of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: but yet that
order still of the persons being kept which they have in their subsisting: The
Father is the fountain, as of the persons, so of the operations of the Son and
of the holy Ghost; and he does all things not of any other, that is, no other
working by him, no others will preventing his, no other imparting to him power
or efficacy; but of himself, that is, as he subsisteth of himself: so he
understands and works of himself. But the Son and holy Ghost do not work
of themselves, but by themselves; that is, the Son works, the Fathers will
going before: the holy Ghost works, the will going before both of the Father
and the Son: The Father works by the Son and the holy Ghost, and sends
them, but is not sent of them: the Son works by the holy Ghost, sends him
from the Father into the hearts of the believers; but is not sent of him, but
of the Father: The holy Ghost works, and is sent from both the Father and the
Son, not from himself. All things were made Joh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2.
by him. The Son can do nothing Joh. 5.19.
of himself, save that he sees the Father do. For whatsoever things he does,
the same things does the Son also. I proceeded forth, and came Joh. 8.42. John
14.26. John 5.26.
from God, neither came I of my self, but he sent me. Whom the Father will send
in my name. Whom I will send unto you from the Father.

What the sending of the Son and holy Ghost means.
Now when the Son and holy Ghost are said to be sent, we may not understand this
sending as if it were any local motion, or as if it were any change in God:
but we must understand it of his everlasting will and decree of accomplishing
ought by the Son and holy Ghost; and of the execution and manifestation of this
his will by the working of the Son and holy Ghost: So says the Son, that he
was sent of the Father into the world; that he came down from heaven, and yet
that he was in heaven whilst he remained on the earth. So the holy Ghost,
though he were before in the Apostles, and dwelt in them; yet he is said to be
sent unto them in the day of Pentecost. Both these persons therefore were sent
into the world, not that thereby they became present somewhere where before they
were not; but because the Son wrought in the world whatsoever was the will of
the Father, and showed himself present and powerful according to his Fathers
good pleasure; as it is said, God sent forth his Son made of a woman. And
because ye are sons, Gal. 4.46.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries,
Abba, Father.

8. Why it is necessary that this doctrine of the Trinity should be held and
maintained in the Church.
The doctrine of the Trinity to be taught in the Church.
THis doctrine of the Trinity is to be learned and held in the Church, In
respect of Gods glory
In respect of the glory of God, that God may be discerned and distinguished
from idols: For God will not be matched with idols; but will have himself to be
worshipped and celebrated, and therefore known and agnized for such a one as
he has declared himself to be. In regard of our salvation.
In regard of our own salvation and comfort: No man is saved who knows not
the Father, and the Father is not known without the Son: For, No man has seen
God at any time: John 1.18. 1 John 2.23.
the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father. Again, No man is
freed and saved from sin and death without believing in the Mediator Christ;
He is very God and eternal life: 1 John 5.20.
But no man reposeth trust and confidence in the Son, when as yet he is not
known unto him; Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? Therefore we must first know the
Son, and then for the Son we must know the Father, that we may believe in him.
Likewise, no man is sanctified and saved by the holy Ghost, who knows not the
holy Ghost: For he who receives not the holy Ghost is not saved; according to
that saying of Scripture, Romans 8.9.
He that has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his: But no man
receives him whom he knows not: Therefore he who knows him not is not
saved. That no man receives him whom he knows not, is proved by those words
of Christ, The Spirit of truth the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, Joh. 14.17.
neither knows him. Except a man be born again of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Hence it manifestly appears, That
they which will be saved, must necessarily know the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. And they must know, that the Son and the holy Ghost are distinct
from the Father, but yet consubstantiall with the Father, and equal in
perfections, honor, worship, and therefore the same true God which is the
Father: For except God be known of us to be such as he has declared himself
to be, he does not communicate himself unto us, neither may we look or hope for
everlasting life from him. And what he has showed himself to be, we have
heard, namely, That he is the eternal Father, co-eternall Son, and
co-eternall holy Ghost. But among all points, there is none more sharply
oppugned by the adversaries of the truth then this doctrine of the three
persons in one Godhead, especially since the Son of God was manifested in the
flesh. It is not hard to espy the causes of this strife, for that indeed no
part of doctrine is more unknown and unsearchable to man's reason; as also for
that the devil, in hatred of God and men, attempteth with horrible fury to
darken and extinguish the glory of the Son of God incarnate.

The objections of heretics against the doctrine of the Trinity.
Look the general and special rules and solutions of sophismes forged against
the Deity of the Son of God.
1. ONe essence is not three persons; because, that one should be three,
implies a contradiction: Jehovah is one essence: Therefore not three persons.
Answ. The Major is true of a created and finite essence, which cannot be one,
and the same, and whole substance of three persons: But it comes short of
truth when it is averred of the infinite, individual, and most simple essence
of the Deity. Repl. A most simple essence cannot be the essence of three
persons: The essence of God is (as you grant) a most simple essence: Therefore
it cannot be three persons. Ans. This Major holds true in such an essence,
part of which instituteth another person; or which is multiplied according to
the number of the persons produced thence: but it fails in such an essence as
is the same, and whole entire in each person: For the exceeding simplicity of
this kind of essence is no may impeached by the multitude and distinction of
persons. Object. 2. Where there are three and one, there are four distinct
things: But in God are three persons and one essence: Therefore there are four
distinct things in God, which to grant is absurd. Answ. Where there are three
and one really distinct, there are four: But in God the persons are not really
distinct from the essence, (for the three persons of the Divinity are one and
the same divine essence) but they differ from it, and from one another,
mutually only by order and manner of subsisting. Object. 3. It is Sabellius his
heresy to entitle one substance with three names: The opinion of the Trinity
gives one substance three names: Therefore it is Sabellius his heresy. Ans.
In this Syllogism are four terms, by reason of the ambiguity of the word
Substance: for either the word Substance signifies in the Major a person, and
in the Minor an essence; or else one of the premises or propositions is false.
Object. 4. He who is the whole Deity, besides him there is no other in whom the
whole Deity likewise is: But the Father is the whole Deity: Therefore it is not
in another. Ans. The Major is false; because the same Deity which is whole in
the Father, is whole also in the Son, and whole in the holy Ghost, by reason of
the infinity of the divine essence, whereof there is neither more nor less in
each person, then in two, or the whole three. Object. 5. Where are distinct
operations, at leastwise internal, there are also distinct essences: But the
internal operations of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost are distinct: Therefore
also their essences are distinct. Answ. The Major is true of persons which have
a finite essence, but false of divine and infinite. Object. 6. The divine
essence is incarnate: The three persons are the divine essence: Therefore the
three persons are incarnate. Which conclusion being false, it follows that
some one of the premises was false. Ans. Here are mere particular
propositions, and therefore nothing can be concluded: for the major speaks
not of the divine essence generally, nor can be expounded universally, because
the divine essence was incarnate in the person only of the Son. Object. 7.
Jehovah or true God is the Trinity: The Father is Jehovah: Therefore he is the
Trinity; that is, the whole three persons. Answ. Here also the Major cannot be
understood universally: for, not whatsoever is Jehovah is also the Trinity. So
that of mere particulars nothing follows. Object. 8. No abstract name
signifies a substance: Trinity is an abstract name: Therefore it signifies no
substance. But God is a substance: therefore the Trinity signifies not God.
Answ. The Major is merely false: For these words, Deity and Humanity are
abstracts, and signify the substance and nature of God or man.

OF GOD THE FATHER.
Quest. 26. What beleevest thou when thou say, ON THE 9. SABBATH.
I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth?
Ans. I believe the everlasting Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has made
of nothing heaven and earth, with all that are in them Genesis chap. 1. Exodus
20.11. Job 33.4. and chapter 38. and chapter 39. Acts 4.24. and 14.15. Psalm. 33.6. Isa.
45.7.
, who likewise upholdeth and governs the same by his eternal counsel and
providence Psa. 104.2, 3. and 115.3. Mat 1^.29. Ephesians. 1.11. H^b. 1.3.
, to be my God, and my Father for Christ's sake Joh. 1.12. Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.5,
6, 7. Ephesians. 1.5.
: and therefore I do trust in him, and so rely on him, that I may not doubt
but he will provide all things necessary both for my soul and body Ps^lm
55.23. Matthew 6.26. Luke 12.22.
. And further, whatsoever evils he sends on me in this troublesome life, he
will turn them to my safety Romans 8.28.
, seeing both he is able to do it, as being God almighty Romans 10.12. and 8.38,
39.
; and willing to do it, as being a bountiful Father Isa. 49.4. Matthew. 6.32,
33. and 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.


The Explication.
I believe. One thing to believe God, another thing to believe in God.
I Believe in God.) We are to observe in this place, that it is one thing to
believe God, another thing to believe in God: For that shows a faith of
knowledge, or historical faith; this declares true faith or confidence: For
to say, I believe God, (if we speak properly) is, I believe there is a God and
he such a one, according to whatsoever is ascribed unto him, as he has
manifested himself in his word: to wit, that he is a spiritual essence,
almighty, etc. everlasting Father, Son* and holy Ghost. I believe in God, is, I
believe that he is my God; that is, I am persuaded that whatsoever God is, and
is said to be, he is all that, and refers it all to my safety for his Sons
sake; that is, to resolve that he is such a one toward me.

In God.) The name of God is here taken essentially for God the Father, Son, In
God. The word God in the Cre^d, is meant essentially to all three persons, not
personally to one. The Father. Esa. 9.6. Why the first person of the Trinity is
called Father. Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
and holy Ghost; because these words, I believe, with the particle in, are
referred after the same manner and meaning to the whole three persons of the
Deity: for it is as well said, I believe in the Son, and, I believe in the holy
Ghost, as, I believe in the Father.

The Father.) When the name of the Father is opposed to the Son, it is taken
personally, and signifies the first person of the God head, as here in the
Creed: bu^ when it is referred to the creatures, it is understood essentially,
and signifies the whole divine nature, as in the Lords prayer, Our Father
which art in heaven. In this sense the Son is expressly called of Isaiah. The
everlasting Father. Now the first person is called the Father, 1. In respect of
Christ his only begotten and natural Son. 2. In respect of all the creatures,
as he is Creator and preserver of them all. 3. In respect of the elect; whom
he has adopted to be his sons, and has made accepted in his beloved.
Wherefore God is our Father in respect both of our creation, adoption, and
regeneration. To believe therefore in God the Father, is to believe in that
God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to believe that ^e is my
Father, that is, has a fatherly affection toward me for Christ's sake, in whom
he has adopted me to be his son. Briefly, and in a word, it is to believe, 1.
That he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. That he is my Father for
Christ's sake. Object. I believe in God the Father: Therefore the Son and the
holy Ghost are not God, b^^^he Father only is God. Ans. This kind of reasoning
Logicians call a fallacy of composition and division, that is, either a
mis-joyning or dis-joyning of words in any clause or sentence not to be joined
or dis-joyned: for the word God is so to be joined with the Father, that it be
not separated from the Son and holy Ghost; for a comma point should be inferred
after these words, in God, on this wise: I believe in God, the Father, etc.
This is proved, 1. Because the name of God here in the Creed is put
essentially, and compriseth all the three persons, which by apposition, or for
farther explication, are placed in order in the Creed: as, I believe in God,
the Father: and in Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son: I believe in the holy
Ghost: For, I believe in one true God, who is the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: yet so, that neither the Father is the Son, nor the holy Ghost is either
the Father or the Son. 2. We expressly profess that we believe in the Son and
holy Ghost, no less then in God the Father: But we may not believe but in one
God. Wherefore, as we believe in the Father, in that he is God: so believe we
also in the Son and the holy Ghost, because they are God. 3. Most of the Greek
copies read, I believe in one God, to wit, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. 4.
Furthermore, if of these words of the first article it follow, that the Father
only is God, then of the same words by the like reason it should follow, that
this Father only is omnipotent and Creator of heaven and earth; which the
whole Scripture cries to be most false. But of especial consideration is this
name of God but only once mentioned in the Creed, thereby to signify that the
true God is but only one: but in no case is it put, as if thereby were
intimated that the Father only is called God.

Almighty.) To believe in God almighty, Almighty.
is to believe in such a one, 1. Who is able to do whatsoever he will, yea,
also those things which he will not, if they be not contrary to his nature; as,
he could have kept Christ from death, but he would not. 2. Who does all things
even with his beck and word only, without any difficulty. 3. Who alone has
power to work all things, and is author of that power which is in all his
creatures. 4. Who is also unto me almighty, and both can will direct all things
to my safety. Obj. God cannot lie, die, make that which is once done, undone,
etc. Therefore he is not omnipotent. Ans. God can do all things, which to do
argues any power or ability: But to lie, to die, etc. is no sign or part of
omnipoteny, but of infirmity and want of power. Now defects are in creatures
not in God; wherefore they are contrary to the nature of God. By inverting the
reason therefore, I thus conclude, God is not able to will or to do that which
argues impotency, and is against his nature: Therefore he is omnipotent.

Maker of heaven and earth.
Maker of heaven and earth.) To believe in the Creator, is to believe, 1. That
he is Creator of all things. 2. That he sustaineth and governs by his
providence those things which he has created. 3. That he has created my self
also to his own glory, and to the obtaining at length of my salvation; and that
I may be a vessel of mercy, he brings me to that salvation by his special
providence, wherewith he imbraceth his chosen. 4. That he has created all
other things for us, to serve for the salvation of his Church, to the praise of
his glory. More briefly thus: I believe in God the Creator; that is, I believe
that God has created me to celebrate and serve him: and all other things to
serve for my safety: 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: as if he should
say, All things are created for us, and we for God.

OF THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
Two sorts of Gods works. 1. General. 2. Special.
Gods general works are the works.
NExt unto the doctrine concerning God, the doctrine of the works of God is most
fitly placed: as we see to be done also in the Creed. The works of God are of
two sorts; general, and special: The general are divided into the works, Of
creation.
Of Creation (the works whereof are read in Genesis to have been accomplished
in six days, and are by daily increase furthered and multiplied in the world.)
Of preservation.
Of preservation, whereby God still sustaineth the heavens and the earth, and
the things that in them are, that they fall not to ruin and decay. Of
administration.
Of administration, whereby, through his immense and great wisdom, he
administreth and governs all things. These two latter are comprehended under
the name of his providence. And therefore next unto the creation is annexed the
place concerning Gods Providence. Gods special works are the works, 1. Of
reparation.
The special works of God are those which are wrought in the Church and
company of his elect and chosen, to justify, sanctify, and glorify them; and
are either works of reparation, or restoring, whereby he repaireth all things
which for the sin of man are subject to corruption: or of perfection and
accomplishment, 2. Of perfection.
whereby he brings all things to their certain appointed end: especially, he
perfectly delivers and glorifieth his Church. Here we are to treat of the
work of Creation, or, the Creation of the world: and the principal Questions
of Creation are these;

1. Whether the world was created of God. 2. How it was created. 3. For what
cause it was created.
1. Whether the world was created of God.
Five significations of the word world.
FIrst the words and terms are to be understood: The name of the world is
diversely used in the Scripture: 1. It signifies the universal frame of all
things, namely, heaven and earth, and all things which are in them, visible and
invisible, besides God himself: The world was made by him. John 1.10.
2. Worldly concupiscence. 3. All mankind. 4. The wicked, or those that are not
regenerate in the world. 5. The elect: That the world might believe. John 17.9,
21. John 3.16.
So God loved the world. Here we consider it in the first sense.

To create signifies three things.
To create signifies, 1. To ordain or constitute, as the Latins used it;
Creare Consulem, to create a Consul. 2. To make something of nothing, without
any motion, with a beck or word only; so it is taken in this place. 3. The
continuating of creation, or creation continued; which is the providence of God.

The creation of the world proved:
That the world has not been from everlasting, but had, when it seemed best to
the Creator, according to his eternal counsel and will, a beginning once,
and was created of that only true God, who has manifested himself in the
Church, that he is the eternal Father, and Son, and holy Ghost, we know, By
testimonies of Scripture.
By testimonies of holy Scripture, as by the whole history of the creation set
down by Moses. Likewise, Psalm. 33.6, 9. Psalm. 104. and 113. and 124. and 136.
and 146. Isa. 44. Acts 4.17.
out of other testimonies of Scripture very many: By the word of the Lord were
the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. He
spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood, or, was created. There are
other places also in the Psalms, where more largely and amply the wonderful
works of God, and the principal parts of the world created by God, are
proposed to be considered of us; that through the consideration thereof, we
may learn to put our trust and confidence in God. For this purpose did the Lord
himself propose unto Job his mavelous and incomprehensible works, conspicuous
in heaven and earth, Job 38. and 39.
and other things also created by him, to declare his justice, power, and
providence.

2. By reasons.
Furthermore, besides testimonies of Scripture, almost innumerable, it is
confirmed also by firm and true reasons, that the world was created of God;
such as these following; The originals and beginnings of nations and people
show it, which could not be fained of Moses, when as some remembrance and
memorial of them was then extant amongst many; which yet in process of time
perished. The novelty and latenesse of all other histories, compared with the
antiquity and ancientnesse of the sacred story. The age of man decreasing:
which shows that there mas greater strength in nature at the first, and that
not without some first cause it has decreased hitherto. The certain course and
race of times, even from the beginning of the world unto the exhibiting of the
Messiah. The constitution and founding of common-weals. The order of things
instituted in nature: which must needs have been produced and framed by some
intelligent mind, far superior to all things. The excellency of the mind of
men and Angels. These intelligent minds have a beginning: Therefore they have
it from some intelligent cause. The principles or general rules and natural
notions ingenerated in our minds. The trembling of conscience in the wicked.
The ends of all things profitably and wisely ordained: therefore by some cause
understanding and ordaining them. Lastly, Those other arguments and reasons
also, which prove that there is a God, prove in like manner, that the world was
created of God.

3 Natural reasons.
Thirdly, besides these reasons, it may be enforced by philosophical arguments
drawn out of the bosom of nature, That the world was created; and, that it was
created of God, although by them we are not able to demonstrate the time when
it was created: For, There is no infinite process in nature of causes and
effects; for if so, nature should never attain unto her end, even the producing
of effects: Therefore this world had a beginning. The noblest and excellentest
of all effects is the world: Therefore it proceeds from the noblest and
excellentest cause, which is God.

How the creation is unknown to Philosophers.
Other questions; as, Whether the world was created from everlasting, or in
time: that is, Whether it be an effect of equal perpetuity with his cause, and
so co-eternall; or, Whether it once so began to be, that before it had no
being. Again, Whether, if sometimes it were not, yet it was necessary that it
should be created: And, Whether it shall endure for ever: And if it endure,
Whether it shall remain the same, or it is to be changed. These and such like
questions cannot be decided by Philosophy: The reason is, because all these
things depend upon the mere will of God, the first mover of all things, who
does nothing of necessity, but with most absolute freedom. Now this his will
is not known to any creature, but to whomsoever God himself reveals it:
Therefore it is not manifested to heathenish Philosophers, but declared to the
Church alone: for they cannot possibly collect any thing hereof by proceeding
from a continuing effect unto his cause. It follows indeed, that there is
some cause of those effects: but it follows not, that those effects were
produced of that cause either at this, or that time, or from all eternity;
because a free agent may either act, or suspend his action at his pleasure. The
whole demonstration hereof is thus brought in form: No effect depending only
of such a cause as works freely or contingently, can be demonstrated by that
cause: But the creation of the world is such an effect: Therefore the creation
of the world cannot be demonstrated by the will of God, the first mover of all
things, that it either was made from everlasting, or in some beginning of time.
Arguments of Philosophers against the creation of the world.
Now, whatsoever arguments are brought of Philosophers against the creation of
the world, it is easy to perceive that these were not framed out of true
Philosophy, but by the imaginations of men; if the order of the generation and
mutation of things instituted in nature, which was created of God, be discerned
from creation.

Object. 1. It is absurd (say the Philosophers) to imagine that God is idle.
Ans. Nay rather, it is absurd to term him idle who administreth and rules the
world. Repl. This I grant; but he could not govern the world, when as yet the
world was not: Therefore the world not being created, God not idle, before the
creating of the world, but contemplating his own wisdom. Ephesians. 1.4.
he was idle. Ans. The consequence of this argument is denied: For God, before
the creation of the world, did contemplate and behold from everlasting, his
own wisdom; he begot the Son; from him flowed the holy Ghost; He chose us
in Christ before the foundation of the world to everlasting life; he decreed
to produce and create the world in time; and provided and prepared hell for
curious seekers and searchers into the hidden and secret counsels of God; as
Augustine prettily answered a certain African, demanding of him, what God did
before the creating of the world. He made hell (says he) for curious men,
which rush and break into his secrets.

Object. 2. They collect arguments also whereby to prove, That the motion or
mutation of things which now is, has been from everlasting. Whatsoever can any
way be moved or changed (say they) that either having been such from
everlasting, has admitted no change or motion, (which were absurd, and is also
denied of us;) or has been made such by some generation and motion: But there
is no motion or change, except there be something before which can be moved and
changed: Wherefore no motion of any thing can be brought which some other
motion has not gone before: and so there shall be no beginning of changes and
mutations. Ans. There is an untruth, and an unsufficient enumeration in the
Major; for that they, imagining that things could never be produced out of
other but by generation, take away from God the power of creating what he will,
even out of no matter pre-existent or being before. Wherefore our answer is,
That motion goes before a moveable thing which is generated, Motion goes
before any movable thing which is generated, but not before that which is
created.
but not which is created.

Object. 3. All motion before which was quietness or a ceasing of mutation,
has another motion going before it, whereby is removed the cause of that
quietness or let of mutation: But they say, that according to our assertion,
there is put a quietness before the first motion that ever was in the nature
of things: Therefore there must be some motion or mutation whereby the cause of
that quietness was taken away; and so there shall be no mutation which may be
said to be the first. There went not any motion before the beginning of motion
in nature, but only the creting will of God.
Answ. The Major is true of the mutation and intercourse of things now begun
after the creation, but not of the original of those mutations and changes
which we now see in the world: for the let and stay of them was in the will of
God only; which is not taken away; but being the same, and standing immovable
from everlasting to everlasting, begins and effects the beginnings, and
ends, and mutations, or motions of things, and also quietness or cessation,
and a continuance in the same state, most freely, and without any mutation or
change of himself. Seeing then this his divine will alone begins the motion
and mutation of things without second causes, as he did in the creation of the
world; it was not only not necessary, but not so much as possible, by reason
of the eternity and immutability of the divine will, that there should be any
other motion before the original and beginning of the motions and mutations of
nature. For God will from everlasting to everlasting, that all should then
begin to have their moving, mutation, and being when this beginning was made.
There is therefore an ambiguity in the word quietness: Two significations of
the word quietness in Philosophy.
for we grant the Major, as concerning that quietness which signifies a
privation in the subject: that is taken away by re-entry of motion: but the
Major is false, if it mean such a quietness as is an absolute denial of the
being of motion: this is taken away not by motion, but by the will of God,
which alone, without second causes and any motion, begins motion.

Object. 4. If time be eternal, then motion is also eternal; for time is the
measure of motion, whereby we judge how long or short all motion is: But time
is eternal; because every instant or point of time is the end of that time
which went before, and the beginning of that which follows: Therefore also
motion is from everlasting. Time, as it is taken for the measure of motion, is
not eternal.
Answ. The appellation of time here is ambiguous or doubtful, and therefore
causes a double answer: For if time be taken only for the measure of some
motion, the Major is true; but if it be taken for the during of any thing, the
Major is false, as it is manifest in the during of quietness, which during
also is time: So also eternity is time, without any mutation of the thing which
is eternal. So the Minor also is true, as concerning duration; but as
concerning the measuring of motion, it is false. Neither is it furthered by the
argument which is adjoined concerning an instant: For the first instant or
moment wherein any motion begins may be also without any precedent motion,
(for otherwise we should be fain to say, that all, even the shortest motions of
all things, were from everlasting.) And that instant is only the beginning, or
first point, or indivisible moment wherein time, by the will of God, began to
flow or multiply: but it is not the end of any time fore-past. So the first
point in a line has only line after it, not also before it: that is, it is the
beginning of the line, not also the end.

Object. 5. Whatsoever has a beginning has also an ending: The celestial
bodies have no ending: Therefore they had no beginning. Answ. The Major is to
be distinguished. Whatsoever has a beginning naturally, by motion or
alteration of a pre-existen subject, has an ending also, and is corrupted, to
wit, naturally, by motion: Heaven is not corrupted naturally, but by the power
of God.
The celestial bodies are not corrupted, that is naturally; for they have not
a matter which is capable of another form: Therefore they had no beginning,
that is, by natural motion: For by order of nature, corruption follows the
generation of one thing out of another. Now although heaven is not corrupted
naturally, yet it is corruptible by the absolute power of God, working without
any motion: for the omnipotency of the Creator is able most freely either to
preserve the same state, or to change, or to bring to nothing as well those
things which he forms out of other things, as which he produces out of
nothing.

Object. 6. God is eternal. Lib. 1. de Coelo cap. 9.
Heaven is the palace and seat of God: Therefore heaven is eternal. Ans. It
does not follow: for first, there are four terms in this Syllogism. For God is
one thing, Two causes why God is chiefly said to be in heaven.
and the palace and seat of God another thing, which is not God. In like manner
the body is the seat of the soul: but it follows not hereof, that the body
is a spiritual, intelligent, immortal essence, because the soul is. Secondly,
Heaven is the seat of God, not properly nor necessarily; because God, as being
an infinite essence, is in all things, and without all things. And Aristotle
himself witnesses, that he is without heaven: therefore he can be, though
heaven be not; neither needs he this tabernacle: But he is said to dwell in
heaven, though he fill all things with his essence and power: 1. Because he is
above all things, and the Lord and ruler of all. 2. Because he exhibiteth there
his glory, majesty, and grace more clearly and fully to be beheld and enjoyed
of the blessed Angels and men, then here on earth. Against the first answer,
Ubiquitaries reply in Aristotle's behalf, on this manner; The blessedness of
God is not without God, but is God himself. Heaven is the blessedness of God,
not any place: Heaven is the place of the blessedness of the elect: but not
God himself, or blessedness.
Therefore heaven is God himself. Ans. 1. Not only Aristotle, but the sacred
Scripture also does every where distinguish heaven from God, as the thing made,
from the maker thereof: and also opposes heaven to earth, so that it affirms
earth to be below, and heaven above us, where God communicates himself and
his blessedness unto the elect more clearly and fully then on earth. Heaven,
says God himself, is my seat, Isa. 66.1.
and earth my footstool. Wherefore, although heaven were somewhere taken for
heavenly blessedness, yet might it not be hereof inferred, that heaven
properly is not a place wherein the elect enjoy, and shall for ever enjoy that
blessedness: for also hell sometimes signifies hellish pains: yet so, that it
excludes not the place where the wicked, being truly severed from the godly,
shall suffer those pains and torments. 2. The Minor is false, if heaven be
taken for that blessedness which is God himself, being sufficient unto
himself in all things: for heaven is a thing created and finite; that
blessedness is uncreate and immense. And if it be understood of a created
blessedness, which is in us communicated from God, there are four terms in the
Syllogism: for the Major proposition speaks of an uncreated blessedness,
which is the very essence of God, neither is communicated at any time to any
creature.

The external respects and relations of God are not the mutation o^ perfection
of God, but of the creature.
Object. 7. He that is Lord in possession is happier then he which is Lord
only in possibility: But God before the creation was only in possibility Lord:
Therefore he is made happier by the creation. But this is absurd: Therefore
the world was from everlasting. Answ. He is happier that is Lord in possession;
true, if by the actual dominion and government there arise any more good unto
him then he had before: But unto God, by reason of his exceeding great
perfection, simpleness, and immutability, there could, or can nothing at all
come by his creation and dominion over his creatures: For, The respects and
appellations of Creator, Lord, Savior, Redeemer, Father of mankind, and the
like, which God in time assumeth unto him, do not appertain to Gods essence,
but signify the beginnings and mutations of creatures; that is, God is termed
Creator, not of any new action or form that is in him, but of the creatures,
which once began to be from him, when they were not at all before. Wherefore,
These respects, creation, dominion, and the rest, are in the creatures real
relations, but in God respects only of our consideration: and therefore the
Creator and creatures are relatives, not mutually, as the Schoolmen well speak
and judge; because not both of them, but one only depends of the other, and
is referred thereto really and formally, that is, the creature: for in the
Creator is nothing at all depending of the creature. For if the Creator and
the creature were relatives mutual, then these absurdities necessarily follow:
1. That God is not most perfect in himself. 2. That from everlasting both the
Creator was, as he is, Creator, and the creature. 3. Or some real thing to
have come in time to the divine essence. 4. And therefore the divine essence to
be mutable and compound. Wherefore relations in God do not make mutation, but
are attributed to God in respect of the creatures.

2. How God made the world.
The world created:
Of God the Father by the Son and holy Ghost. John 1.3. Genes. 1.2. Job 33.4.
THe world was created of God the Father, by the Son and the holy Ghost. Of the
Son it is said, All things were made by the Word: of the holy Ghost, The Spirit
of God moved upon the waters. The Spirit of God has made me.

Most freely without constraint.
God created the world and all things therein most freely, without any
constraint, not by any absolute necessity, but by necessity of consequence,
that is, by the decree of his will; which decree, though it were eternal and
unchangeable, yet was it most free: For neither was God tied to the creatures,
and sustaining of things: neither if he had not at all created the world, or
did annihilate it being created, and bring it to nothing, were he therefore
less good, or less happy.

Without motion.
God made the world with his beck only, word, or will, without labor,
wearisomenesse, motion, or any change of himself, that is, not by any new
action of his; but by his forcible will only, which from everlasting would that
things should on a sudden exist and be, at such a time as he had freely
appointed and decreed: Isa 40.28.
The Lord has created the ends of the earth; he neither faints nor is
weary. Now to work any thing with his beck and word only, and without labor,
is the highest and chiefest manner of working. For there are five kinds of
operations and agents. Five sorts of Agents.
Natural.
A natural agent. Agents with an appetite, as brute beasts.
That which works with an appetite. Men and Devils working with reason but
corruptly.
Men and devils. The blessed Angels working with reason also, but not
corruptly, and ever directed by a higher power.
Angels. God working most perfectly, and directed by none but by himself.
God: which three latter sorts are voluntary agents. The first therefore is of
things which work according to the quality and force of their own nature, not
being guided by any proper understanding or will of their own: such is the
operation of fire, water, medicinable herbs, precious stones. The actions and
operations of these are subject to the rule of those which are voluntary
agents, and are by them moved and directed to certain uses, and to the
performing of certain works. The second is of those which follow also the lore
of nature in working, but not without some proper appetite or desire of their
own, though the rule of reason be wanting: But nevertheless their action and
working is so ordered, that sometimes it is forced from them against their
will: Of this sort are the operations and actions of brute beasts. But these
also are subject to the rule and direction of God, Angels, and men: yet so,
that no violence is offered unto them; but what they do, moved by these
superior agents that they do of their own accord, according to their own
nature and force given them of God. The third is of men and devils, who also
work according to the quality of their nature, namely, by reason, and by
deliberation, and freely, but corruptly. The fourth is of good spirits, which
we call Angels, who likewise as men, work by reason and will, but not
corruptly: yet notwithstanding, both of them, both men and Angels, though they
work according to their nature freely, are not exempted from the decree and
direction of God. The fifth is the highest and supreme kind of working, which,
according to the nature of the first agent, flows from an understanding and
will, and that most pure, most perfect, and most right, neither is it subject
to the pleasure and disposing of any higher cause: Therefore this agent, which
is God himself, is most wise, most good, most free, and immense, which has no
need of any deliberation to go before; and does without motion, at his beck
and commandment only, work and guide all things which he will, and as he
will. Wherefore all things depend of his will, but he of none. He spoke, and it
was done; he commanded, Psalm. 33.69.
and it was created. Who quickens the dead, and calls those things which be
not, Romans 4.17.
as though they were.

The world was created of nothing.
God created all things of nothing, not of a pre-existent or fore-being matter:
nor of the essence of God, nor any matter co-eternall with God: for if God
created all things, nothing then is excepted besides the Creator himself; no
not the matter whereof all the rest were framed. Object. That which is produced
out of some pre-existent thing, is not created: Man was produced out of a
pre-existent thing, the earth, and the ribbe: Therefore he was not created.
But this is false; for the Scripture says, that God created man: All things
created of noth^ng, either immediately or mediately.
Therefore creation is not a production of a thing out of nothing. Ans. The
Major is not simply true, because those things also are said to be created,
whose matter whereof they came is of nothing. Man therefore was made of
nothing, not immediately, but mediatly, by reason of his matter, not the last,
but the first matter: for this at the beginning had a beginning from nothing,
and out of it afterward diverse kinds of things were formed. To this reason
also that may be added, namely, that that production also is called creation,
whereby a thing which was not before, is made suddenly, without any motion, by
the commandment of God only, out of a matter indeed, but yet such as has no
definite power in it self of producing any thing. Such a production being no
natural generation, and being after a sort not out of any matter, is rightly
called in the Scripture Creation. Wherefore it follows not. Some creation is
not of nothing immediately, neither of that which is simply no matter: Therefore
no creation is of nothing: for creation properly called, is a production of a
thing out of nothing. Object. 2. Of nothing is made nothing. Ans. This
principle and rule is true, as concerning that order which was appointed by God
in nature now created. Further, by such an agent as is created it self, nothing
is made of nothing: but that which is impossible to a creature, is possible to
God the Creator. Therefore that principle of the Philosophers, Of nothing is
made nothing, is to be understood, not of God, but of men, nor of the first
creation or extraordinary working of God; but of that order which is instituted
in nature now created. And it appertains to our comfort, that God has
created all things of nothing: for if he has created all things of nothing, he
is able also to preserve us, and to hinder the attempts of the wicked, yea, to
bring them to nothing.

All things of the world created most wisely, and very good. Gen 1 31. Amos 3.6.
God created all things most wisely, very good, that is, every thing in their
kind and degree perfect: All things were very good. Wherefore God was not the
cause of sin or deformity, but sin came into the world by man. Object. Death is
evil. Likewise it is said, There is an evil which the Lord has not done.
Answ. 1. God at the first creation made all things good: the evil both of
crime or offense, and of pain and punishment ensued upon man's disobedience. 2.
Death and calamities are evil, in respect of the creature which suffers
them, and in the judgment of flesh: but they are good, in respect of God, who
justly inflicteth them for sin, and does purge out that sin in the godly by
chastisements. Wherefore, after the fall of man, God was the author of pains
and punishments, because he is the Judge of the world, and because they are in
a respect good: but sin he does not cause, but only permit.

The world created in a certain time. Syrac. 18.1.
God created not the world in one moment, but in the space of six days: In the
seventh day God ended all his works. Object. He that lives for ever (says the
son of Syrach) made all things together: Therefore he made all in one moment.
Ans. He speaks not of a moment of time, but of the whole number of things:
as if he should say, Whatsoever are, they are all from God by creation. But
the cause why God created not all in one moment, Four causes why God created
not all things in a moment.
are these.

time, and even in the beginning of times. In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth, etc. namely, after the common account (this present year
of Christ, Genes. 1.1.
1601.) 5564 years since. For, from the creation of the world to the nativity
of Christ, According to Melancthons supputation, are 3963 years. Luthers
supputation, are 3960 years. Their supputation of Geneva, are 3943 years. The
supputation of Beroaldus, are 3929 years.



Therefore the world has continued,
According to Melancthon, 5564 years. Luther, 5561 years. Them of Geneva, 5544
years. Beroaldus, 5520 years.



The supputations accord very well one with another as concerning the grand
number, though in the lesser number some years are either wanting or abounding.
By these four supputations then of the most Learned of our time compared
together, shall be apparent, that at the utmost God created not the world
before these 5564 years past; and therefore it was not from everlasting, but
had his beginning.

3. For what cause God created the world.
THe ends of the creation of all things are some general, The ends of the
creation of the world.
some special and subordinate. The glory of God.
The first and chief end is the glory and praise of God, for which cause men
and Angels were principally created: for he would have his goodness, wisdom,
omnipotency, justice (which his properties he shows in the creation of all
things) be known and magnified of us: The Lord made all things for himself.
Prove. 16.4. Psalm. 103.22. Romans 11.36.
Praise the Lord, all ye his works. Of him, and through him, and for him are
all things. The knowledge of God.
The manifesting, knowledge, and contemplation of his divine wisdom and
goodness, shining in the very creation of things: For, that he might be
celebrated and magnified for his works, he was to create those things which
should know him, and should praise and magnify him, being known and manifested
unto them in his works. And to this purpose created he natures both endued with
reason, and without reason, that there might be both those which should praise
him, and the matter of his praise: The heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm.
19.1.
and the firmament shows the works of his hands. His providence.
The administration and governing of the world: For therefore he created the
world, that he might by his providence ever govern, rule, preserve it, and so
might perpetually show forth his mavelous works which he has done from the
beginning of the world, and now does, and will do; but chiefly that he might
administer the Church and congregation of elect Angels and men: Isa. 40.26.
Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these things. This
third end is subordinate, and serves for the second end. That he might gather
a Church.
To gather an everlasting Church of Angels and men, who should agnize and
magnify the Creator. That all things might serve for man.
That all other things might serve for the safety both of soul and body of
man, as also for the life, necessity, and delight of men; but especially, that
they might profit the elect, each thing in their due place, and might be to
them as ministers and instruments whereby God, blessing and increasing them,
might be lauded and praised of them: Subdue the earth, Genes. 1.28.
and rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the heaven, and over
every beast that moves upon the earth. Thou have made him to have dominion
over the works of thine hands: Psalm 8.6.
thou have put all things under his feet. Whether the world, or life, or death,
or things present, 1 Cor. 3.22.
or to come; All are yours. Only man he created for himself; the rest for man,
that they might serve man, and by man might serve God: Wherefore, when we place
creatures in the room of God, we cast our selves out of that degree in which we
were placed by God.

Why God would have this doctrine of the Creation to be delivered and held in
the Church.
This doctrine of the creation of the world, God would for these causes
especially have remain extant in the Church: That all might honor the Son as
they honor the Father. For by him were all things made. Col. 1.16, 18, 19.
And he is the head of the body of the Church: for it pleased the Father that
in him should all fullness dwell. 1 Cor. 4.6.
into their first state again: For God that commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, is he which has shined in our hearts, to give the light of
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. John 8.44.
The devil is a liar and a murderer from the beginning: and when he speaks
a lie, Romans 5.12.
he speaks of his own. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin. Romans 4.17.
in respect of second causes, seem impossible: He calls those things which
are not as if they were. Psalm. 8.4.
What is man, that thou art mindful of him; and the son of man, that thou
visitest him? Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thine hands.
Jerem. 45.4, 5.
and all his creatures: Behold, that which I have built will I destroy, and
that which I have planted will I pluck up, even this whole land: and seek
thou great things for thy self? seek them not. Romans 11.36.
Of him, and through him, and for him are all things. Acts 17.26, 27.
and in the world to come. He has made of one blood all mankind to dwell on
all the face of the earth, and has assigned the times which were ordained
before, and the bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if
so be they might have groped after him, and found him, though doubtless he be
not far off from every one of us.

OF ANGELS.
AMongst things created by God, the chief and principal are those natures
which are endued with reason, Angels and men. For in these he imprinted the
marks and image of his divinity, and would have all other things to be the
matter of his praise: but of these he would be known and praised, and unto them
was his will to impart and communicate his blessedness and joy.

The Questions concerning Angels are two:
1. What description is set down in the Scripture of good Angels. 2. What
description is delivered of bad Angels.


1. What good Angels are.
ANgels, both good and bad, as holy Scripture records, are spirits: 1. Angels
spirits or incorporeall substances. Luke 24.39. Coloss. 1.16. Heb. 1.14. 1
King. 22.21. The Angels themselves are not seen, but the bodies or shapes which
they take.
by which name here a spiritual person is understood; that is, a substance
incorporeall, invisible, individual, living, understanding, incommunicable,
not sustained in another, neither part of another: as, A spirit has not flesh
and bones. All which are in heaven and in earth, things visible and invisible.
They are all ministering spirits. There came forth a spirit, and stood before
the Lord. That therefore both in times past there appeared oftentimes good
Angels, when as the gathering and establishing of the Church, the doctrine of
God being not as yet plainly delivered, and the prophecies not fulfilled,
needed more extraordinary and miraculous revelations then now; and now adays
also not seldom appear bad Angels: this 1. does not prove their nature to be
visible or corporeal. For those visible shapes or bodies which may be seen or
felt, are diverse substances from the incorporeall essence of spirits, being
formed either of nothing, or of some matter, and carried and moved by a spirit
for a time, for the working and performing of certain actions. For, both they
put them off and lay them away again, and also they take forms of diverse sorts
and kinds; as, The serpent, by whom the Devil communed with Eve: Men's bodies,
Genesis 3.1. and 18.4. Exodus 3.2. 2 King. 2.11. and 6.17. The error of the
Sadducees. Acts 23.8. Act. 7.53.
whose feet Abraham washed: A flame in the bush appearing to Moses: A pillar of
cloud and fire in the desert: Horses and chariots of fire. And further, this
very thing refuteth the opinion of the Sadducees, Who said, that there was
neither Angel nor spirit: but that good Angels are cogitations and motions
raised by God in men, or happy events proceeding from God: and bad Angels,
evil and wandering affections, or lusts, or purposes and devices which come of
the corruption of nature: For, except they were living substances, and forcible
in working, they would not assume, carry, and move bodies and visible shapes.
Moreover, the Scripture attributes many things to them every where, which
agree not but to natures subsisting by themselves, living and understanding:
for the good Angels were those ministers, Gal. 3.19. Mat. 25.31. and 24.26. and
18.10. Luke 2 10. and 15.10. 1 Pet. 1.12. Mat. 22.30. Heb. 1.4. Psalm. 34.7.
John 8.44. Job 1.6. Mat. 8.28, 31. and 25.41.
by whom the Law was delivered in mount Sinai. They shall come with Christ when
he shall judge the quick and the dead. They know not the day of judgment. They
always behold the face of the Father which is in heaven. They rejoice for the
salvation of men. The elect shall be like unto them. Christ is made more
excellent then the Angels. They defend the elect. But the evil Angels did not
abide in the truth. They appear amongst the children of God. They invade and
possess the bodies of men and beasts. They shall be punished with everlasting
torments. Angels are also finite, that is, of a limited essence or nature, and
endued with a certain measure of strength and wisdom: For, although spirits are
not circumscribed in a certain compass of place, 2. Angels finite, both in
nature and in properties.
as bodies; yet their substance is neither infinitely extended, neither in more
places then one at the same time, neither is able in wisdom, or power, or
other properties to match and equal the immensenesse of the Creator. For they
are said to go from one place to another, and to be absent from one place, when
they are in another; as, Luke 1. Act. 10. and 12. and Dan. 10.

3. They were created. Psalm 148. Coloss. 1.16.
They were created by God of nothing in the very beginning of the world. Praise
ye him, all ye his Angels, praise him all his army. For he commanded, and
they were created. By him were all things created which are in heaven, and
which are in earth, things visible and invisible; whether they be thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers, etc. Moses made mention of the Angels
in general, though not in particular. Job 2.6. and 38.7.
Wherefore, albeit by Moses there is no mention made, in the story of the
creation, severally of Angels, as who, applying himself to the common capacity
of men, especially recounteth the visible works of God: yet, when as he says
that heaven, earth, and all the host of them was created, he implies also
Angels, which both are these very heavenly hosts and ministers of God, and are
often mentioned among them by Moses himself. How the Angels are called the
children of God.
And whereas they are called The children of God, it is not to be understood of
any co-eternity and propagation of their substance out of God, but of their
creation and conformity with God: and of the mutual love between God and them;
as in like sort also may be said of men.

4. They were created in holiness.
They were created all good and holy; that is, in their creation they were
enriched with strength, wisdom, liberty of will, holiness and righteousness,
whereby they might be conformed and like to God: as it is said, He saw all that
he had made, and lo, it was very good. Genesis 1.31. Psalm 103.20
And of the good Angels it is said, Ye his Angels that excel in strength, and
do his commandments, in obeying the voice of his word. Their Angels always
behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. Mat. 18.10. and 22.30. Luke
9.25. Esa. 6.2.
The elect shall be in the resurrection as the Angels of God in heaven. They
are called holy: Likewise, Seraphin, that is, flaming or shining, namely with
purity and divine wisdom, and with the love of God. But of the bad Angels it
is said, He abode not in the truth. The Angels which kept not their first
estate, John 8.44. Jude 6.
but left their own habitation, etc.

5. And confirmed therein.
Now, as these former (to be spirits, infinite, created by God of nothing, and
created good and holy) are in the Scripture delivered as common both to good
and bad Angels: So also the Scripture delivers those things whereby a huge
and exceeding difference appears between them. For the good Angels by the
especial grace of their Creator were so confirmed and established in that
sanctity and blessedness wherein they were created, that albeit they serve
their Creator with an exceeding and most free will, yet can they never revolt
from him, or fall from that state of righteousness and felicity wherein they
stand. 1 Timothy 5.2.
Wherefore they are called elect Angels, they are said always to behold the
face of the Father. Mat. 18.10. and 22.30.
Of those who are elected to everlasting life, it is said, that they shall be
like Angels. And this perseverance in their state they have, Job 4.18.
not by the peculiar excellency and virtue of their nature; as it is said, He
found no steadfastness in his servants, and laid folly upon his Angels: but of
the mere and free bountifulness of God toward them, by the Son of God keeping
and guiding them, that they may be joined to him as to their head, and remain
(together with elect men) the everlasting Church and Temple of God, magnifying
and praising God for ever. All things consist in him. It has pleased the
Father to gather together in one all things, Col. 1.17. Ephesians. 1.10.
both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, in Christ.

The good Angels were both created and confirmed, 1. Everlastingly to know and
magnify God for his goodness and bounty toward them and mankind: 6. To
worship and magnify God.
Praise the Lord all ye his hosts. Psalm. 103.21. Isa. 6.3. Luke 2 13. 7. To be
the ministers of God for the saving of the chosen.
They cry: Holy, holy, holy, the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his
glory: And they laud and praise God for the manifestation of the Messiah. 2. To
be the ministers of God for the accomplishment and maintaining of the safety
and salvation of the chosen, when as God by them declares his will, delivers
the godly out of dangers, defends them against the devils and wicked men: Or
also to punish the wicked who oppugn the Church: Ps. 34.7. and 91.11. John 5.4.
They serve also for the wicked.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways.
Now, although the wicked also and reprobate are defended by the Angels, and
receive other benefits not seldom at the hands of God; (as when after the
waters of Bethesda had been troubled by an Angel, whosoever then first stepped
in was made whole of his disease:) yet these benefits stretch no farther then
the commodities of this life, and (as other things which befall unto the wicked
in this life, whether good or bad) are turned to their destruction; but serve
for the defense and delivery of the chosen, for whose sakes God oftentimes,
like as he punishes the wicked, They are the ministers of the elect by Christ.
so also he enricheth them with his benefits. The ministry then and guard of
Angels properly belongs to the saints and chosen, unto whom, that being lost
by sin, is restored by the merit and benefit of Christ: for he is the head of
the Church, which consists of Angels and men, restoring that good will and
conjunction (which is between the members of the same body) between men and
Angels, and using at his good pleasure the ministry of Angels to safeguard and
defend his: Ephesians. 1.10. Psalm. 97.7. Heb. 1.4. Matt. 23.49. Heb. 12.22.
That he might gather together in one all things, which are in heaven and in
earth, in Christ. Let all the Angels of God worship him. He shall send his
Angels. Ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God,
the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels. Jacob saw a
ladder which reached from earth to heaven, on which the Lord stood, and the
Angels went up and down by it: Genesis 28.^2.
which signifies God and man the Mediator. Ye shall see heaven open, John
1.51.
and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

Why God uses the ministry of Angels, being able to ^r^ng what he will to
pass without them.
Now, God does many things by Angels, and sometimes by many together, which he
could as well do either without them, or by any one of them: Partly in favor
and regard of our infirmity; which unless it see it self environed with many
succors, defenses and instruments of his divine power and bountifulness,
falls presently of doubting of the providence, safeguard and presence of God;
as it is manifest by the example of Elisha's servant, 2 King. 6.1^.
and by those consolations and encouragements which promise unto the Church the
aid of Angels: Partly to show his power also over his Angels, who uses their
labor and ministry at his pleasure. Why the Angels are called, 1. Powers. 2
These. 1.7. 2. Principalities. Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.16. 3. The host of the Lord,
and the host of heaven. Psalm 103.21. and 148.2. 1 King. 22.19. Rev. 19.14. 4.
Cherubins.

Hereof the Angels are called the powers of the Lord Jesus, when he shall show
himself from heaven; that is, by whom he exercises his power. Likewise they
are called principalities, might, powers, dominions, created by the Son of God,
subject unto him being exalted at the right hand of God: because by them he
shows and exercises his principality or rule, might, power, and dominion.
Likewise, The host of the Lord, and the host of heaven: because both the number
of them is huge and great, and God rules over all of them as a Captain over
his soldiers, and does by them whatsoever he will. Hereof also are they called
Cherubins, that is, flying or winged: because they perform and execute with all
readiness and celerity the hests and commandments of God, and do each their
own parts and duty: Whereupon we pray, Let thy will be done in earth as it is
in heaven. They are also called gods; 5. Gods. Psalm 8.5. Hebr. 2.7. What is
meant by the names Gabriel, Raphael, and Michael. Dan. 10.13. and 12.2 Jude 9.
Rev. 12.7.
because the nature and Majesty of God shines in their strength, virtues,
functions, and mavelous works. Which is also signified both by the name of
Gabriel, that is, the strength of God; and by the name of Raphael, that is, the
medicine of God. For the same cause also the name of Michael, that is, who is
like God, is given to the Son of God, an Angel who is called the Archangel;
either because the Son of God is head of the Angels, or because God does
according to that measure, which seems best to him, distribute his gifts to
the Angels, and show forth his powerful operation by them.

2. Of evil spirits or Angels.
THey which now are evil spirits or Angels, although they also were at their
creation good, and adorned by God with the same holiness, and righteousness,
and blessedness wherewith the rest were: yet notwithstanding by their own
will, and that free, and therefore by their own fault, they averted themselves
from God, and revolted from his love, and from obedience due unto him, so that
they left the habitation of God, and no longer continued their conformity with
God, but ever burn with an horrible hatred of God and men; and that they may
despite God, force men to sin, and by force and fleights attempt to cast all
down headlong into destruction. God spared not the Angels that had sinned, 2
Pet. 2.4.
but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness,
Jude 6.
to be kept unto damnation. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Ye are of your father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. John 8.4^.
He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. When he
speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father thereof. 1 John 3.8.
He that commits sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the
beginning. John 13.25.
Satan entered into Judas. Satan filled Ananias his heart, that he should lie
unto the holy Ghost, Acts 5.8. Ephesians 2.2.
and keep away part of the price of the possession. According to the course of
this world, and after the Prince that rules in the air, the spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience. 2 These. 2.9. The devils appellations
with their reasons. 1. The wicked. 1 John 3.12. Ephesians. 6.16.
It is said of Antichrist; Whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore he is called, The wicked:
Cain, which was of the wicked. That ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. And every where in the Scripture he is called Satanas, that is, 2.
Satanas. 1 Chro. 21.1.
the adversary of God and men: And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked
David to number Israel. And he is in like manner called Diabolus (Devil,)
because he depraveth the word of God, 3. Devil.
and is a slanderer of men, as in Paradise, 4. Serpent.
and Job 1. and 2. And the Dragon that old serpent, Revel. 12. and 20. because
speaking by a serpent in Paradise, he seduced mankind through his subtlety,
neither cease he to seduce them still: The great Dragon, that old Serpent,
called the Devil and Satan, was cast out, which deceives all the world.
Again, The accuser of our brethren, 5. Accuser. Rev. 12.10. 6. Destroyer. Rev.
5.11. 7. The god and prince of this world. 2 Cor. 4.4. Joh. 12.31. and 14.30.
and 16.11.
which accuses them before our God day and night. And he is called Abaddon
and Apollyon, that is, destroying. He is also called The god of this world,
blinding the eyes of unbeleevers; and the prince of the world, both for his
power and forcible working which he shows on the wicked, and for that
tyranny which he exercises against the godly also by Gods permission: as
withal, for that obsequie, homage, and obedience which is done him by the
wicked, even those who profess the worship of the true God. Ephesians. 6. 1 Pet.
5. 1 Kings 22. 1 Cor. 10. John 8.

The refutation of the Manichees, who held two first causes.
By these places is made manifest the impiety of the Manichees, who fained two
causes, or two gods co-eternall: the one good, whom they called the light and
mind: the other evil, whom they termed the darkness and matter: the former
whereof had created good natures, the latter bad: abusing those testimonies of
Scripture where the Devil is called, The god and prince of the world, the
father of the wicked, author of sin and death, the power of darkness; and
standing most of all on this argument, That a good God should not make the
cause of evil. For neither has the Devil any more power, either over the
godly, or over the wicked, or over other creatures, for which he is called,
The prince and god of the world, then is granted him of God; as appears by
the first and second Chapters of the story of Job, Matthew. 31.22.
and by the invasion of the swine. Neither is the creation of the wicked, but
the corrupting and enforcing them to evil, attributed to the Devil. Neither
is there any need, lest God should be made author of sin, to make another
God of the Devil; seeing the Scripture teaches of Devils and men, that both
were created good and, holy by God: but the Devil revolting from God, and
seducing men, corrupted both himself and men.

The evil spirits are unchangeably evil, and damned.
And, although of their own proper and free will they rush and bend themselves
against God, yet by the just judgment of God they are so forsaken and abjected
of him, that they are without all change or alteration unrecallably evil, and
subject to everlasting torments. Wherefore Jude says, Jude ver. 6. Mat. 15.41.
that they are reserved by God in everlasting chains under darkness. And
Christ, Go ye cursed from me into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his angels: For, though doubtless these evil spirits were even
from their fall dispoiled of the celestial habitation and blessedness; yet
notwithstanding both they and reprobate men shall be at the last judgment
adjudged to more grievous punishment: as contrariwise, the felicity and glory
of the godly shall then at length, after the resurrection of their bodies, be
in all respects consummated and made perfect. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude ver. 6. Matt.
8.29.
Therefore these spirits are said to be reserved unto damnation, and the
judgment of the great day. And elsewhere also they themselves complain, that
Christ came to torment them before their time.

The causes why God permitted them to fall.
Furthermore, God permits them to fall into this wickedness, not only
thereby to show his wrath against sin in their everlasting pains: but also to
punish by them in this life the wicked, and also to chastise, or try and
exercise with temptations the elect. Mat. 25.41. 1 Samuel 16.14, 23. Psalm. 78.9.
For, fire is said to be prepared for them from everlasting. The evil spirit
of God came upon Saul, and vexed him. He cast upon the Egyptians the
fierceness of his anger, indignation and wrath, and vexation by the sending
out of evil Angels. But, Job 1.12.
Job is delivered to be afflicted of Satan for the trial of his constancy:
Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat. Luke 22.31. 1 Thessalonians. 2.17. 2. Cor.
12.7.
We would have come unto you, but Satan hindered us. Lest I should be exalted
above measure through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto me a
prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, because I should not
be exalted out of measure. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5.
Lest the tempter had tempted you in any sort, and that our labor had been in
vain. And Christ himself is tempted of Satan: Mat. 4.3, 6, 9.
and therefore verily he is called the tempter, for that he solliciteth and
inciteth men to sin, and to revolt from God, both by offering outward occasion
of sins, as also by stirring up the cogitations and inward motions of the will
and heart.

ON THE 10. SABBATH.
Quest. 27. What is the Providence of God?
Answ. The almighty power of God every where present Isa. 29.15, 16. Jer.
23.23, 24. Ezekiel. 8.12. Act. 17.25, 27.
, whereby he does, as it were with his hand, uphold and govern heaven and
earth, with all the creatures therein Heb. 1.3.
: So that those things which grow in the earth, as likewise rain and drought,
fruitfulness and barrenness Jer. 5.24. Acts 14.17.
, meat and drink Acts 14.17.
, health and sickness John 9.3.
, riches and poverty Pro 22.2.
, in a word, all things come not rashly or by chance, but by his fatherly
counsel and will Pro. 16.33. Matthew. 10.29.
.

The Explication.
The reason of the connection of the two places of Creation, and Providence.
Providence and creation one and the same thing, but diverse in consideration.
THe doctrine which treats of Gods providence is joined with the place which
treats of the creation; because the providence, that is, the preservation and
government of things created, does not differ from the creation in the thing it
self; (for that there is but one and the same will or power, or action of God
whereby things both begin to be and continue;) but they differ in consideration
only: For the omnipotent will of God is called creation, in respect of the
beginning, when things, by the force and power of his will, took their being:
it is called providence, as by the self-same power things are preserved:
Wherefore, Providence is the continuance and accomplishment of creation, or,
creation it self continuated and perpetuated. For we may not imagine that the
creation of the world is like to the building of a ship, which the Ship-wright,
as soon as he has finished it, commits to the government of some Pilot:
but we must hold this as a grounded truth, that as nothing had ever been,
except God had created them; so neither could they retain and keep their
being, neither their force of working, neither the very operation it self or
motion, no, not the space of one moment or minute of time, if God did not
preserve and move them effectually: And therefore the Scripture it self often
joyneth the preservation and continual administration of things with their
creation; and from hence reasons for Gods providence. And God is called
Jehovah, God is called Jehovah, 1. For giving: 2. For maintaining the being of
his creatures.
not only because he once gave to every thing, both small and great, their
being; but also because he maintains it in all, and moves them so, as that
he not only sees what is done in all things, but also causes and inclines
them to do that which he from everlasting would every of them to do. And by
this his providence he governs, administreth, rules, and preserves all
things that they be not brought to confusion. We cannot therefore have a full
and perfect knowledge of the creation, except we join with it the doctrine of
providence. Touching providence these three things are principally questioned:

1. Whether there be any Providence. 2. What Providence is. 3. Why the
knowledge thereof is necessary.
THe two former of these are discussed here under this twenty seventh Question
of the Catechism: the third is resolved in the twenty eighth Question
immediately following.

1. Whether there be any providence of God.
Philosophers errors concerning Gods providence.
COncerning this point of doctrine, three diverse erroneous opinions are found
amongst Philosophers. destiny. prescience or foreknowledge of God in all
things, but not a will decreeing, causing, and ruling all things.

The opinion of the Church touching providence.
Contrarily, the Church teaches out of the word of God, That nothing is extant
and comes to pass in the whole world, but by the certain and definite, though
yet most free and most good, counsel and purpose of God. There are two sorts
of arguments and proofs* whereby is confirmed, Two proofs of providence.
that there is a providence of God; Testimony of Scripure, and force of
argument. Scripture.
Testimonies of Scripture are these: He gives to all life, and breath* and all
things. Acts 17.25, 28.
In him we live, and move, and have our being. Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing, Mat. 10.29, 30.
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father? Yea, Ephesians.
1.11.
and all the hairs of your head are numbered. God works all things after the
counsel of his own will. Like to these are found infinite testimonies in the
Scripture, by which both Gods universal and particular providence are
established: for there is almost no point of heavenly doctrine which is more
diligently inculcated and urged in the old Testament, then the doctrine of Gods
providence. So in Jeremy, God reasons from the general to the particular;
that is, from the rule it self to the example: The general is, Chap. 27.5, 6.
I have made the earth, the man, and the beast that are upon the ground, and
have given it unto whom it pleased me. And presently he adjoyneth the
particular: Now have I given all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar
the king of Babel, my servant.

Reason.
The arguments whereby the Providence is avouched are of two sorts; whereof one
demonstrateth the thing that is in question, a posteriori, that is, from the
works or effects of God: the other a priori, that is, from the attributes, or
properties, or nature of God, whereon, as their proper cause, those effects
depend: yet more known proofs, and more common and obvious are those which are
drawn from the works or effects of God: For by these, as being more known unto
us, we learn and know the cause it self, even the nature and properties of
God: then, after we know the cause, we return back again from it to the
effects, and demonstrate them by this, and have distinct and perfect knowledge
thereof. And both these proofs and reasons are demonstrative, necessarily and
irrefragably proving that which is in question, and common to Philosophy with
Divinity. But the properties and works of God are better known of them which
are in the Church, then of them which are without. And further, the providence
of God is proved almost by the same arguments whereby it is showed that there
is a God.

The reasons drawn from the works of God for proof of his Providence.
1. Order.
THe order which is in the nature of things, that is, the most apt disposing of
all the parts, and the succession of motions and actions continuing by certain
and perpetual laws and courses, and serving for the preservation of the
whole. and for those ends whereunto things were ordained: for where there is
order, there is necessarily a cause ordaining and disposing the same. Psalm. 89.
and 10. and 135. and 147. and 148.
Now this order proceeds not from a mere sensible nature neither comes it by
chance or fortune: but contrarily he must needs be most wise who appointed and
settled this order in the nature of things, and so he also who by his providence
governs and rules nature.

The mind.
The mind and understanding which is in Angles and men. Man, which as it were
a little world, is ruled by a mind and understanding: much more then is the
great world governed by divine providence; as in the administering whereof more
wisdom is required. Whence it is said, He that planted the ear, shall he not
hear? Psalm. 94.9.
Or he that formed the eye; shall he not see?

The natural knowledge of the law.
The natural notions or principles ingraffed in our minds, or the law of
nature, or the difference between things honest and dishonest. He that has
ingraved in the minds of men the rule of directing their life, he will have men
to live according to that rule, and thereafter respects and governs their
life, actions, and events. But God has ingraved in the minds of men such a
rule, whereby to discern that which is honest from things dishonest: Therefore
he is both the beholder and Judge of man's life: As many as have sinned without
the law, shall perish also without the law: Romans 2.12, 13, 14, 15.
and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law. (For the
hearers of the law are not righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall
be justified, etc.) Plant. captiv. Hom. in (...).
And Plautus says, There is verily a God who both hears and sees what we
do. And Homer, God has an upright eye.

The terrors of conscience.
The terrors and torments of conscience in the wicked, which generally ensue
upon sin committed by them. These fears cannot be stricken into any without
some intelligent and understanding nature, which beholds and respects all
humane affairs, especially seeing the wicked cannot escape: Therefore there is
some revenger of sins and wickedness, who is God, and who inflicteth those
horrors, Rom 1.18. and 2.15.
and also who knows and regards all things, even the secrets of men: The
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. And Juvenal writing unto a friend of his, some way to
comfort him for the loss which he had suffered by trusting too much a
cousening and perjured Merchant: Why, says he, do thou think such fellows
to have escaped, whose mind, being conscious and guilty of the deed, possesses
them with astonishment? etc.

Rewards and punishments.
Rewards and punishments. He that at all times and in all places adorneth
virtue with rewards, and draws the wicked to punishment, he must needs rule
all mankind with his providence: But God yields more pleasant successes and
events to the good, which live with moderation and soberly, even to those that
are without the Church, and punishes heinous offenses with grievous
punishments in this life; yea, when men wink at them: Therefore God rules and
governs the whole world by his providence. The righteous shall rejoice when
he sees the vengeance: Psalm. 58.9, 10. and 94 10.
he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. And men shall say, Verily
there is fruit for the righteous; doubtless there is a God that judges in the
earth. He that nurtureth the heathen, shall not he punish? Like unto this is
the heathen Poets Axiom; Such things as a man does, such an end and fruit
thereof surpriseth him.

The maintenance and preservation of Common-weals.
The order and preservation of Common-weals. He that orders and setleth the
Empires and States of the whole world, preserves and maintains them against
the power, hatred, sleights, furies of devils, tyrants, and wicked men (which
are far more in number then the good, and wish rather the suppression, then the
maintenance of laws,) and at his pleasure alters and translateth them; it
must needs be that he takes care of, and guides the affairs, counsels, and
actions of men: But it is God, who alone is able to perform, and does perform
these things; for none, besides him, is mightier then the devil; and the order
of Commonweals and Kingdoms does always continue: Therefore God governs
all things by his providence. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice.
Prove. 8.15. Dan. 4.14.
That living men may know, that the most High has power over the kingdom of
men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and appoints over it the most
abject among men. And Tully says in a certain Oration, Pro Rabir.
Common-weals are governed far more by the aid and assistance of God, then by
man's reason and counsel.

Heroical instincts.
The virtues and singular gifts, or heroical instincts, and the excellency of
Artificers, which God bestows for the universal good and preservation of
man's society. And these things are far greater, then that they can proceed from
a thing merely sensible, without understanding; and more excellent, then that
they should be given of nothing, or gotten by men: nay rather, when God will do
things for the preserving of man's society, he gives us men endued with
heroical and noble virtues, inventers of arts and sciences, Princes valiant,
good, and wise, and other the like fit and able instruments: and contrary, when
he will punish us for our deserts, he takes away again such profitable and
preserving instruments from us: Therefore there is some disposer of these good
things, and so the governor of humane affairs: The Lord stirred up the spirit
of Cyrus. Esdras 1.1. Isa. 3.2. Dan. 2.21.
The Lord takes away the strong man, and the man of war, the judge, and the
prophets. He gives wisdom to the wise, and understanding to those that
understand.

Foretelling of things to come.
The prediction and signification of events, or of things to come, and the
excecution or accomplishment thereof. He that of himself does fore-shew
certainly unto men things to come, does not only foresee those things, but
also causes them, and has the whole nature of things so in his power, that
nothing can be done without his will and pleasure: But God alone does of
himself certainly fore-shew things to come: Therefore he does not only foresee
them, but also causes them, either by his own proper effecting them or
permitting them to be effected by others; and therefore governs humane
affairs: ^m 23.19. De Divinat.
Has he said, and shall he not do it? And Tully says, Are there gods, and do
they not signify or foretell things?

The ends or final causes of all things.
All things in the whole world, both great and small, are not only ordained,
but are also done, and tend to their certain and appointed ends: Therefore it
is God, who by his wisdom and power, as he destineth all things to their
ends, so also does bring them thereunto: Matthew. 4.4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

Reasons drawn from the properties or nature of God.
1. Because there is a God.
THere is a God: Therefore there is providence. For, that God should not rule
and govern the world created by him, has flat repugnancy with the nature of
God, (for the world can no more consist without God, then be created without
him) and they who deny providence, deny God to be God, and take away all
religion. From his omnipotency.
He is omnipotent, who has all things so in his own power, that with every
thing he may do what he will, and without his will nothing can be done: But God
is omnipotent: Therefore he has the whole nature of things in his power, and
effectually moves and governs all things at his own pleasure. From his
infinite wisdom.
It is the property of a wise governor to let nothing of that which he has
in his power to be done without his will and counsel: God is most wise, and
has all things in his power, and is present with them: Nothing therefore is
done in the world without Gods providence. From his exceeding justice.
God is most just, and Judge of the world: Therefore he, in ruling the world,
gives rewards unto the good, and inflicteth punishments upon the wicked. From
his perfect goodness.
God is most good: But that which is most good is most communicable: Therefore
as God of his infinite goodness created the world, to the end he might
communicate himself unto it; so by the same his goodness does he preserve,
administer, and rule the world created. Because he is the author of all good.
Every positive thing, and all good is from God, as the first cause and chief
good; and not only substances, but all their motions and actions are a certain
positive thing, and good: Therefore all motions also have God their first
cause, and are done by his will. Because he is the maker and disposer of the
means which bring to every end.
He that wills the end or consequent of any event, wills also the mean or
event which goes before: But God wills the ends of all things which are
done: Therefore he wills also all precedent events, either simply and
absolutely, or in some sort and respect. Because he is the first cause.
God is the first cause of all things: Therefore all things depend on him. From
his unchangeable foreknowledge of all things.
An unchangeable prescience or foreknowledge depends of an unchangeable
cause: God fore-knoweth all things unchangeably from everlasting: Therefore
this his foreknowledge must depend of an unchangeable cause. But there is no
unchangeable cause beside the will of God: Therefore all things depend and are
governed of the will of God. The sum of all is this: God is almighty, most
wise, most just, and most good: Therefore he ordained and created nothing
without some especial end and purpose, neither cease he to guide and direct
his works unto those ends for which he has appointed them, neither suffers
he those things to be wrought by chance, which he has made and ordained to the
manifestation of his glory: These things have thou done, and I held my tongue;
Psa. 50 21. and 77.9
and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy self, etc.
Has God forgotten to be gracious? My counsel shall stand, and I will do
whatsoever I will. Isa. 46. 10.


2. What the Providence of God is.
PRescience or foreknowledge, and providence and predestination differ each
from other; Prescience is the knowledge of God whereby he foresaw from all
eternity, not only what himself would do, but also what other his creatures
by his permission would also do: as namely, that they would sin. Providence and
predestination, although they both concern the things which God himself would
work and accomplish, yet herein they vary, in that providence extends it self
unto all the works and creatures of God; but predestination properly respects
reasonable creatures: For, What predestination is.
Predestination is the most wise, eternal, and unchangeable decree of God,
whereby he deputed and destined every man, before he was created, to his
certain use and end; as hereafter in its due place shall be more copiously
declared. But providence is the eternal, most free, unchangeable, What
providence is.
most just, wise, and good counsel of God whereby he works all good things
whatsoever are found in all creatures, and permits also evil things to be
done, and directs all things both evil and good, to his glory, and the
safety of his chosen.

1. Counsel. Psalm. 33.11. Isa. 46.10. Heb. 6 17. Isa. 14.26. and 19.17. and
28.29. Jerem. 32.19. and 50.45. Acts 2.23. Ephesians. 1.11.
The explication and confirmation of each part of this definition severally.
Counsel.) The providence of God is called in Scripture the counsel of God:
The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever. My counsel shall stand. God
willing to show the stablenesse of his counsel. Out of these testimonies it is
clear and apparent, that we are to understand by the name of providence not
only the bare science or knowledge of things present and to come, but also the
decree and effectual will of God: for the name of counsel comprehends both;
to wit, An understanding, or prescience and fore knowledge of things to come,
or to be done, and of the causes for which they are, Two parts of Gods
providence. 1. His knowledge. 2. His decree.

or are not to be done. Likewise, A will effecting or working a thing for
certain causes, and that in due time and order. Providence therefore is not the
bare foreseeing or fore knowledge, but the foreknowledge together with the
will of God: even as (...), which we translate providence, signifies with the
Greeks both a knowledge and a care of things.

2. Eternal.
Eternal.) Because seeing neither the ignorance of any thing, nor increase of
knowledge, or change of will falls into God, it is certain that he knew and
decreed all things from everlasting: The Lord has possessed me in the
beginning of his way. Prove. 8.22. Isa. 40.10. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Cor. 2.7.
Which declare the last things from the beginning, and from old the things that
were not done. He has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world.
We speak the wisdom of God which he had determined before the world.

3. Most free.
Most free.) That is, a decree which was made from everlasting, of all things
and events, as it pleased him of his great wisdom and goodness, when he had
perfect power otherwise to have directed his counsel, or else to have omitted
it, or to have things otherwise then he decreed to do them by his counsel:
Psalm. 115.3. Jer. 18.6.
He does whatsoever he will. As the clay is in the potters hand, so are you in
mine hand.

4. Unchangeable, 1 Samuel 15.29. Malac. 3.6.
Unchangeable.) Because neither error of counsel, nor any change or mutation
falls into God; but what he has once decreed from everlasting, that, as
being most good and right, does he will everlastingly, and at length bring to
pass. The Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent. I am the Lord, I change
not. So Numb. 33.10. Job 23.13. Psalm. 33.13. Prove. 19.21. Isa. 14.24, 25, 26,
27. and 46.10. Ezekiel. 12.28. James 1.17. Romans 11.29. Heb. 6.17.

5. Most wise. Job 12.13.
Most wise.) This is showed both by the wonderful course of things and even^s
in the world, and by the Scripture it self: With him is wisdom and strength,
he has counsel and understanding. Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God! So 1 Samuel 16.7. 1 King. 8.39.
1 Chro. 28.9. Psalm. 33.11. Job 36.23. Psalm. 33.15. and 139.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and 147.5. Prove. 8.30.

6. Most just.
Most just.) Because the will of God is the only fountain and the chief rule
of justice, and is manifested and declared in the law. Whatsoever therefore God
will, or has decreed, or does work, it is simply and in it self just, whether
we know, or not know the manner, 2 Chronicles 17.2.
how it is just: There is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of
persons. So Nehem. 9.33. Job 9.2. Psalm. 36.7. and 119.137. Daniel 9.7, 14.

7. Effectual in working.
Whereby God works.) This is added, that we may know the counsel of God not
to be idle, but effectual and forcible in working: For God not only once
created things, and bestowed on them a virtue and force whereby to work, but
also does preserve and move, by his presence and continual working, all things
at his pleasure, John 5 17.
according as Christ speaks, My Father works hitherto, and I work. No
creature, whether great or small, can either be, or move, or do, or suffer any
thing, Acts 17.28.
except God effectually preserve, move, and govern it. In him we live, and
move, and have our being. And God works all things by his sole and eternal
will, without any labor or motion: for to will in him, is both to be able, and
to do: and contrarily, his power and action is his very eternal and
unchangeable will: For in God the will is not dis-joyned from his efficacy and
working, as it comes to pass in creatures. The working or operation of God is
twofold; general, The general and special working of God.
whereby he sustaineth and governs all things, especially mankind. Special,
whereby he begins the salvation of his chosen in this life, and perfecteth
it in the life to come: 1 Timothy 4.10. Romans 8.14. Psalm. 33.16. The immediate
working of God.
God is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe. As many as
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. The eyes of the Lord
are over the righteous. Another division there is of Gods working, whereby it
is divided into immediate and mediate working. Immediate working is, When
beside, or contrary to the means and order settled by him in nature, he
works what he will; as in all miracles, which are described and declared to
this end, that we might learn, that God does work most freely, either by
means, or without them: For that all those miracles are not wrought without
divine power, both experience teaches us (inasmuch as they cannot be wrought
by the power of any creature;) and the Scripture witnesses: Psalm. 136.4. Exodus
8.19. Gods mediate working. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Isa. 38.21. Syrac. 38.1.
as, Which only does great wonders. This is the finger of God. Mediate working
is, When God by creatures or second causes produces those effects, to which
those creatures or causes are by the accustomed and common order of nature fit,
and so made of God: as when he sustaineth us by nourishments* and drives away
diseases by medicines. Take a lump of dry figs, and lay it upon the byle, and
he shall recover. So likewise God by his word written, read, heard* shows
unto us both his will and himself: Luke 16.26.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Moreover, The mediate
working or action of God is done sometimes by good, His mediate working
sometimes by good means, sometimes by bad.
sometimes by vicious and sinful instruments, as well natural as voluntary:
Yet so, that the work of God in them, and by them, is always most good, most
just, and most holy: For the goodness of Gods works depends not upon the
goodness, wisdom, and rightnesse of the instrument, but of God. As touching
good instruments, that by them God works very well, there is no controversy
among the godly: but of evil instruments, all think not the same.
Nevertheless yet, except we will deny, 1. The trials and chastisements of the
godly, or, 2. The punishments of the wicked, which are done by the wicked, both
to be just, and to proceed from the will, power, and efficacy of God; as also,
3. The virtues, and such actions and deeds of the wicked as have been for the
safety of mankind, to be the gifts and blessings of God; that is, except we
will deny that God is a just Judge of the world, and powerful in operation,
and the efficient of all good things; we must needs doubtless confess, that
God does also execute and accomplish his just and holy works and judgments by
evil and sinful instruments: Genesis 37 28. Number 23.8. Deuteronomy. 13.3. 1 Samuel 16.14.
2 Samuel 15.12. and 16.12.
So God sends Joseph into Egypt by his wicked brethren, and the Midianites:
blesses Israel by Balaam: tempts the people by false prophets: vexes Saul
by Satan: punishes David by Absalom, and by the curses of Shemei: Solomon by
rebellious Jeroboam: Roboam, by the traitorous people of Israel: tries Job by
Satan, and the Chaldees: 1 King. 11.31. and 22.15. Job 1. and 2. 1 Chronicles. 6.15.
carries away into captivity Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

All good things done by the will of God.
He works all good things.) Even in all creatures, both great and small, he
works good things. So that not only he does engender and preserve in them a
general power and force of working, but does also effectually move them, so
that without his will being effectual and working, that power and force never
in any thing shows forth it self, or is brought into act; that is, not only
all force of working, but also the act and operation it self is in all
creatures from God, as the efficient thereof, and directer: For, by the name of
good are understood, What things are said to be good.
1. The substances and natures of things. 2. Their quantities and qualities,
forces or powers, or inclinations. 3. Habits and faculties of the mind
conformed to the will of God. 4. Motions, actions, and events, as they are
motions, and agree with the law of God. 5. Punishments, as they are the
execution of Gods justice, are inflicted by God the most just and righteous
Judge of the world. All these, since they are either things created of God, or
something ordained by him, and agreeing with his divine law and justice, they
must needs partake both of the nature of good, and proceed from their
efficient, and by his providence continue and be directed.

God permits evil things.
9. He permits also evil things to be done.) Evil is twofold: the one of
crime or offense, which is sin; the other of pain or punishment, which is every
destruction or affliction, or forsaking of the reasonable creature, inflicted
by God for sin. Example of each signification and meaning is, If this nation,
Jerem. 18.8.
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of
the plague that I thought to bring upon them. But now, because the evil of
pain or punishment, The evil of punishment is a moral good, and is done by
God for three causes.
being the execution of the law, and declaration of Gods justice, is indeed
naturally evil, as it is a destruction of the creature; but is, in a
consideration a moral good, as it is agreeing with the order of Gods justice:
this sort of evils also, not only as it is an action or motion, but also as it
is a destruction or affliction of sinners, is to be ascribed to God, as author
and efficient thereof: 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
Ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord. There is no evil (to
wit, Amos 3.6.
of punishment) in the city which the Lord has not done. I the Lord make
peace, and create evil. Isa. 45.7.
Wherefore we account in the number of good things the punishments of the
wicked, and Gods judgments: which God not only by his unchangeable decree will
have done, but also does them by his effectual power and will. For although
the destruction be evil in respect of the creature who suffers it, yet it is
good in respect of the law and order of divine justice exacting it, and in
respect of God most justly inflicting it, and executing as it were the proper
and peculiar work of the Judge of the world. Object. 1. God made not death.
Answ. True, not before sin, Wisd. 1.13.
when he created all things. Object. 2. Thy destruction is of thy self,
Israel. Ans. True, Hos. 13.9.
as concerning the desert; but as concerning the effecting or inflicting of
their punishments, it is from God. Object. 3. He will not death. Ans. Ezekiel.
18.13. and 33.11. God will, and will not death.
He will not death with a desire of destroying, or that he delights in the
destruction, vexation, or perdition of his creature; neither would he it, or
would effect or cause it, if it were nothing else but a destruction and
perdition. But he wills it, and works it, and delights in it, as it is
the punishment of sin, and the execution of his justice, Isa. 1.24. Psalm 2.4.
Prove. 1.26.
or the delivery of his Church, or a chastisement, or trial, or martyrdom, or
ransom. Obj. 4. He will that all men shall be saved. 1 Timothy 2.2, 4. 2 Pet.
3.9. Ans. All men, that is, all sorts of men: For out of all sorts of men he
chooses his chosen.

Now, Evil of crime, as it is such, God does only permit, and not will. James
1.13.
Of evil of crime or offense, there is another consideration: For, These, as
they are sins, or evils of crime, are not considered as good. And Saint James
says of them, Let no man, when he is tempted (that is, when he is solicited
to evil) say, that he is tempted of God: Therefore God neither intends them
in his counsel and purpose, neither allows, nor works, nor furthereth, but
only suffers or permits them to be done of devils and men; that is, does
not hinder them from being done, when yet he could hinder them: partly to show
in punishing them his justice, and partly to show in pardoning them his mercy:
Gal. 3.22. Romans 9.17.
The Scripture has concluded all under sin, etc. For the same purpose have I
stirred thee up, etc. But in the mean season the forsaking of his creature, or
depriving him of divine light and rightnesse, and the action it self, which
devils and men sinning do against the law and will of God, he notwithstanding
by his general providence and efficacy wills and moves; but to such an end
as does best agree with his nature, law, justice and goodness, whether it be
known or unknown to us: Therefore sins are truly said to be done, not by the
will or working, but by the permission of God. The word permission in this
place is to be retained, because both it and others of the same force are
sometimes found in the Scripture; Genesis 20.6. and 31.7. Judge. 3.1. Psam 105.14.
Acts 14.16.
as, Therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. God suffered him not to hurt
me. He suffered no man to do them wrong. These now are the nations which the
Lord left, that he might prove Israel by them. Who in times past suffered all
the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. But yet we must expound it aright out
of the Scriptures, lest we detract from God a great part of the government of
the world, and humance affairs: For God neither wills, nor wills not sins
simply; but in some respect he wills, and in some respect he wills not,
but only permits them. Which, that it may the better be understood, Sin is
always both in a good subject, and to a good end directed by God.
we must know, that in every sin or evil of crime are two things; namely, The
material, or subject, and the formal; that is, the corruption it self, or
defect of rightnesse, sticking and inherent in the subject. The subject is a
thing positive, or a thing in nature, as an inclination, action; and therefore
does it partake of the nature of good, and is wrought and moved by God: But
corruption is not wrought by God, but came unto the subject by the will of
devils and men forsaking God: Wherefore no sin can be, or be imagined, which is
not in some good thing, and had adjoined unto it some consideration and respect
of good. Otherwise, God for his infinite goodness would not suffer it to be
done, neither should it be desired of any, neither should at all be: so that it
is truly said, That there cannot be put any thing which is the chief and
extreme evil, that is, such as does take away good wholly: for it should not
be desired but under some show and apparency that it had of good; neither
should it have a subject wherein to be, and so should destroy it self. But
albeit evil is always joined with good, Sin always is to be discerned from
good.
and does concur with it in the same actions or inclinations; yet these two
things are diligently to be severed and discerned, neither is the work of the
Creator to be confounded with the work of the creature sinning: lest either
God thereby be made the cause of sin, or the greatest part of the government of
the world and humane affairs be taken from him.

In sin God effectually wills,
Hereby may we understand, How far forth God wills sin, and how he wills
not, but permits it. The subject or matter.
He wills therefore sins, As concerning their matter, that is, the actions
themselves of men sinning, motions and inclinations to objects; as they are
only such, God wills, works, and directs them: for both they partake of
the nature of good; and if God simply would them not, they should not at all be
done. The ends.
As concerning the ends whereunto God destineth those actions which are sins;
that is, he wills the actions of sinners, as they are the punishments of the
wicked, or chastisements, or trials, or martyrdomes of the godly, or the
sacrifice of the Son of God for the sins of men: But these ends are most good,
and most agreeing with the nature, justice, and goodness of God: Therefore God
(the first cause of all good) wills, intends, and works these in the sins
or actions of the wicked; and by a consequent, also the actions themselves
which the wicked do in sinning; and by which, as means, God attaineth to those
ends. The forsaking of his creatures.
As concerning the withdrawing of his grace, that is, his divine light and
rightnesse: This withdrawing is an action proper to God, namely, his eternal
and forcible working will, destining whom it will to be forsaken. It is also
just and holy, because God is bound to none: and because it is either the
exploration and trial of the creature, or the punishment of sin. And this
withdrawing once being put, the inclinations, motions, and actions of the
creature cannot but err and swerve from the law of God, and be sins. Now as
the inclinations, The corruption of the action or inclination, God will not,
but permits.
motions, and actions of sinners are sins, that is, are repugnant to order and
nature, and swerve from the law of God, because they are done without the
knowledge of Gods will, and purpose of obeying him: so God neither wills, nor
ordains, nor allows, nor commands nor works, nor furthereth them: but
forbids, condemns, punishes, and suffers them to be committed of his
creatures, and to concur with his most just decrees, judgments, and works:
thereby to show, how necessary and needful for the creature is the grace of
the holy Ghost to fly sin, and to manifest his justice and power in punishing
sin. Wherefore the permission of sin is no idle permission, or a cessation and
ceasing of Gods providence and working in the actions of the wicked, as if they
did depend only upon the will of the creature: but this permission is of
efficacy, and works. It is permission, as concerning the formal cause of
sin, that is, corruption it self, which the creature has of it self, not by
any affection or working of God: but it is of efficacy, and working, as
concerning the motion and actions of the creature sinning, which God
effectually wills, and moves as also concerning the withdrawing of his
grace, and the ends whereunto he destineth, directs, and brings the actions
of them that sin. Three causes why God is said to permit sin.
God then is said to permit sin, will. For such is the liberty, wisdom,
goodness, and power of God, that no less by vicious, than by good
instruments, he most well, justly, and holily works what he will. Neither is
Gods work, by reason of either the goodness, or badnesse of the instrument,
more or less good: as neither the work of the wicked men is made good, for
that God does well use it. For God doing in all things what he will, wills
always, and does that which is right. The creature works together with God
working well, if God correct him.
Now that together with him working well the creature may also work well, it
is necessary that the special working of God therein concur with his general
working, that is, that he correct the creature by his spirit. When as therefore
God does move the creature only by a general working, and not by a special,
the creature does necessarily, though yet freely, swerve and defect from
rightnesse, God himself notwithstanding working holily, and accomplishing by
his creature the just and good work of his will and providence.

God corrects whom he will.
If any man demand, why then God does not correct vicious instruments, that God
using them well, themselves also may work well? God himself answers him, I
will have merry on whom I will have mercy: O man, Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15.20.
and 11.35
who art thou that pleadest against God? Has not the Potter power of the clay?
who has given unto him first, and it shall be recompensed? God performs
nothing of duty, but all of mercy unto his creatures. It is free therefore to
him, to do what, and in what sort, and how far forth, and to whom he will,
according as it is said. Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine
own? Math 20.15. What permission 15.


Permission therefore is the withdrawing of the grace of God, whereby God, when
he executes the decrees of his will by reasonable creatures, 1. Either does
not open his will, whereby he would have that work done, to the creatures. 2.
Or does not incline the will of the creature to obey his will in that action.
Or, Permission is the secret providence, or will and power of God, 1. Whereby
he effectually wills, moves, and moderateth the motions and actions even of
men sinning, as they are actions and punishments both of them and others: 2.
But sin it self he neither wills, nor works, neither yet hinders it, but
in his just judgment suffers it to concur with their actions. 3. And this
also he uses to the illustrating of his glory. This description of Gods
permission of sins, Permission of sin confirmed by sundry places of Scripture,
according as it was before described. Psalm. 5.4.
is confirmed by many places of Scripture: For first, that God neither,
wills, nor works sins, as they are sins, is confessed by all the godly, and
all such as are of found judgment: seeing both the infinite goodness of God
cannot be the cause of evil, which has in it no respect and quality of good:
and God himself does often avouch this of himself, I am not a God that loves
wickedness: Neither are there fewer places of Scripture, which teach most
clearly, that the actions of the wicked, which they do when they sin, are done
and ruled, though by the secret, yet by the good and just will of God: Joseph
says, Genesis 45.8. That he was sent of God into Egypt. We learn, Exodus 7. and
10. and 11. Deuteronomy. 2. Jos. 11. Judge. 3. and 4. that the indurating and hardening
of Pharaoh and other enemies of the Israelites, was wrought by the Lord, and
that to this end, thereby to punish his enemies, and to show forth his glory. 2 Samuel 12.11. and 16.10. and 24.1. Job 12.25. Psalm. 119.10. Esaias 20.6. and 63.17.
Lam. 3.37. Jer. 48.10. Acts 2.23. and 4.28. Romans 11.8. and 13.23. These and the
like places of holy Writ do show by two reasons or arguments, That God did not
permit without some working also of his own, but did effectually will that
working of Pharaohs will and others, whereby they opposed themselves against
Israel. For, 1. These Scriptures refer the cause of their indurating wrought
by themselves, to an indurating wrought by God, that is, that therefore they
would not the dismissing of the people, or the entering of a peace or league
with them, because God did incline their wills to this, that they should not
will it. 2. These Scriptures add further the final causes of this counsel
and purpose of God; even that his enemies might be punished, and the glory of
God magnified. For seeing God would the ends, he would also most justly the
means, by which he would come unto them: the Kings notwithstanding, and people
themselves neither respecting, nor knowing it, neither being enforced or
constrained thereto, and therefore sinning, and perishing through their own
fault and demerit. Moreover, by these few and other infinite places of
Scripture, it is apparent, that God, though by his secret, yet effectual
consent, motion, and instinct, does most justly work those actions or works by
his creatures, which they with sin perform: for because that they being
destitute of the grace of the holy Ghost, either are ignorant of the will of
God concerning those works: Or, when they do them, they respect not this, to
execute the known will or commandments of God, but to fulfill their own
lusts, against the law of God: Therefore they working together with God, work
ill, when God works well by them. For neither do the creatures therefore
sin, for that God does by their will and actions execute his judgments (for
then also should the good Angels sin, by whom God sometimes punishes the
wickedness of men) but because in their action they have no respect to Gods
commandment, neither do it to that end, as thereby to obey God. Further, that
God does in such sort permit sin, Permission is the withdrawing of Gods grace.
as that he does not illighten their minds with the knowledge of his will, or
does not bend their hearts and wills (which by his arcane and secret efficacy,
he inclines whither himself lists) unto this, as, for the obeying of God, to
pursue or fly these or those objects; that is, does not conform the wills of
sinning creatures to his will, Romans 14.23. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.
these sayings of Scripture witness: Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. If
there arise among you a Prophet or a Dreamer of dreams, saying, Let us go
after other gods, thou shall not hearken unto the words of the Prophet; for the
Lord your God proves you. Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes
in the land of Egypt, etc. Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 4. 1 Samuel 24.14.
and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day. Wickedness proceeds
from the wicked, All things present, past, and to come, are done by God.
but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

9. And directs all things both evil and good.) All things, I say,
whatsoever are past since the beginning of the world, or are now present, or
are to come throughout all eternity. Remember the former things of old: for I
am God, Esaias 46.5.
and there is none other God, and there is nothing like me.

To his glory.
To his glory.) That is, to the manifesting and magnifying of his divine
justice, power, wisdom, truth, mercy, and goodness.

To the safety of his chosen.
And to the safety of his chosen.) That is, to the life, joy, wisdom,
righteousness, glory, and everlasting felicity of his Church. And that to these
ends (even to the glory of God, and safety of his chosen) all the counsels and
works of God, and in them also the punishments of sin, are referred of God,
ought to be out of controversy: seeing in all them is beheld the glory of God,
and his fatherly care toward his Church. The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy work. Psalm. 19.1. Esaias 48.9. Rom 8.28. John
9 3. Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17, 22, 23. Eze. 16.61, 62, 63. Galat. 3.
For my names sake will I defer my wrath. We know that all things work
together for the best, unto them that love God. Neither has this man sinned,
nor his parents, but that the works of God should be showed in him. God uses
also sin or corruption it self (which yet himself works not, but sufferreth
to concur with his own action in the wicked.) 1. To show forth both his
justice in punishing it, and his mercy in remitting it. 2. To work in us a
hatred of sin, true humilty, and an imploring of Gods grace, and thankfulness
for our delivery from sin and death. The Lord has made all things for his own
sake, Pro. 16.4.
even the wicked but not wickedness) for the day of evil.

The degrees of Gods providence, whereby he tendereth the whole world, and
especially mankind, his chosen.
We are further to consider the degrees of Gods providence. For he respects
indeed, and governs all his creatures, but especially mankind, as being the
chief and principal amongst his works, and which being created according to
his image he has adorned with very many benefits above all other creatures:
And in mankind especially those, whom he has elected and chosen to eternal
life, whom with the blessed Angels he makes an everlasting Church, that in
them he may dwell, as in his Temple and habitation, and therefore does so
guide and rule them in the whole race of their life, as that all things must
serve for their safety.

Now have we explicated and made plain the definition of Gods providence,
whereout arises a Question greatly to be considered: which is, Whether Gods
providence extends it self to all things. Ans. Yea. The providence of God is
the governing and guiding of every particular thing.
to every little thing does the providence of God extend it self. And that all
things, both the greatest and the smallest of them, are ruled by the providence
of God, and that his providence is extended to all actions and motions of all
creatures, even of those that sin; so that all things, whatsoever are done,
come not to pass but by the eternal counsel and purpose of God, either
working them, as they have a respect and quality of good in them, or permitting
them, as they are sins, but moderating and governing all things, even sin it
self, and directing them to his glory, and the safety of his chosen, is evident
by this definition. But whereas this doctrine is either unknown unto many, or
contradicted by many, it requires a more ample declaration, and sounder
confirmation out of Scripture. That all things therefore, whether small or
great, are ordered by Gods providence, is confirmed both by very many
testimonies of Scripture, and also by reasons drawn from the nature of God.

Testimony of Scripture for Gods providence.
Of the testimonies which may be alleged for confirmation hereof, there are
certain orders and ranks: For, some are universal and general, which teach,
that all events universally are subject to Gods providence. Some are
particular, which prove, that each particular thing is ruled and guided by God.
The former of these testify and intimate Gods universal providence; the
latter avouch and ratify his special providence. Now the particular
testimonies concern either the creatures, or the events which daily befall the
creatures: And the creatures which they concern are either unreasonable,
whether living, or without life; or reasonable and voluntary agents, working
either well or ill. The events also which they respect, are either contingent,
or casual, or necessary. For the things which happen in the world are either
casual, and depending on chance, in respect of us, who discry not their true
causes: or contingent, in regard of their causes, which work but with
contingency: or necessary, by reason of their causes working necessarily in
nature. Now to God nothing is casual or contingent but all things are
necessary; although this necessity have a diverse manner in respect of good and
evil action.

A brief Table of things subject unto Gods divine Providence.
The whole world is governed by Gods providence; and in the whole world 1. All
things universally and generally: which Providence is called universal, or
General Providence. 2. Each particular thing specially: which kind of
Providence is termed Special or Particular Providence: And by this are
directed in special, 1. Every singular creature 1. Unreasonable, of which
sort, some are 1. Living. 2. Without life.
2. Reasonable, such as are 1. Angels, 1. Good, working freely and willingly
good. 2. Evil, working freely and willingly evil.
2. Men, 1. Good, working freely and willingly good. 2. Evil, working freely
and willingly evil.


2. Every singular event, 1. Casual, 1. Good. 2. Evil.
2. Contingent, 1. Good. 2. Evil.
3. Necessary, 1. Good. 2. Evil.




Now to all these heads, as it were, and principles, add we some such
testimonies as are most clear and famous: for there are infinite.

Gods general providence confirmed. Ephesians. 1.11. Acts 17.25. Number. 23.19.
Nehem. 9.6. Esaias 45.7. Wisd. 18.1.
The universal and general providence of God is witnessed by these: He
works all things after the counsel of his own will. He gives to all life
and breath, and all things. Has he said, and shall he not do it? and has
he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Thou have made heaven and earth,
and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that are in them. And thou
preservest them all. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and
create evil; I the Lord do all these things. Wisdom reaches from one end
to another mightily, and comely does she order all things.

Gods particular providence over creatures renewed with reason. Ge. 45.8. and
50.20. Exodus 4.11. Jos. 11.6. and 21.45. 2 Samuel 16.10. 1 Kings 22.20. Pro.
21.1. and 19.14 and 22.14. Esaias 10.5. Lament. 2.37. Dan. 4.32.
Of the special providence of God over reasonable creatures, the history of
Joseph yields us notable testimonies. Ye sent me not hither, but God. When
ye thought evil against me, God disposed it to good. Likewise the indurating
and hardening of Pharaoh, Exodus 3.4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14. Who has given the mouth
to man, or who has made the dumb, or the deaf, or him that sees? Have not I
the Lord? Therefore go now, and I will be with thy mouth. The Lord said unto
Josuah, Be not afraid for them, for to morrow about this time I will deliver
them all slain before Israel. There failed nothing of all the good things
which the Lord had said unto the house of Israel, but all came to pass. The
Lord has bidden him curse David. Who shall entise Ahab, that he may go and
fall at Ramoth Gilead? and so forth: Thou shall entise, and shall also
prevail. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord: he turns it
whither-soever it pleases him. A prudent wife comes of the Lord. The mouth of
strange women is as a deep pit. He with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall
therein. Likewise the Lord calls the King of the Assyrians the rod of his
fury. Who is he then that says, and it comes to pass, and the Lord
commands it not? According to his will he works in the army of heaven, and
in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him,
What do thou? Herod and Pontius Pilate, Acts 4.27.
with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel gathered themselves together, to
do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had determined before to be done.

His providence over creatures void of reason. Psalm. 34.20. Job 37. Psa. 104.
and 134.7. Genesis 8.1. Psalm. 147.8, 9. Mat. 6.20, 30.
Of his providence in creatures, which are without reason, whether they be
living or not living, testimonies are extant every where in the Sacred
Scriptures. The Lord keeps all the just man's bones. Likewise, He brings up
the clouds from the ends of the earth, and makes the lightnings with the
rain, he draws forth the wind out of his treasures. God remembered Noah,
and made a wind to pass upon the earth. Which gives to beasts their food,
and to the young Ravens that cry. Your heavenly Father feeds the fowls of
the air. If God so clothe the grass of the field, shall he not do much more
unto you?

4. Of the providence of God governing things contingent, fortu^ing, and
casual, these places of Scripture speak: If a man has not laid wait, 2. His
providence over things casual and fortuning, Exodus 21.11. Mat. 10.21, 30 Jo^
1.21. Prove. 16.33. Josua 7.
but God has offered him into his hand, then I will appoint thee a place
whither he shall flee. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of
them shall not fall to the ground without your Father? Yea and all the hairs
of your head are numbered. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it,
blessed be the Lords Name. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is of the Lord. Thus God opens the theft of Achan by lot.

Gods providence in necessary events. John 19.36. Exodus 12.46. Luke. 24.46.
Mark 18.7. Mat. 24.2^. John 10.2^. Two necessities depending on Gods decree.
Job 37.5, 6, 9, 10. Job 38.27, 28, 32. Psalm. 104.13, 14, 15.
Of Gods providence in necessary events, if their necessity depend on the
decree of God revealed in his word, we have these evidences: These things were
done, that the Scripture should be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be
broken. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise
again from the dead the third day. It must needs be that offenses shall come.
If it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. My sheep shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. If their necessity
depend on the order settled by God in nature, that i^, on natural causes
working by a natural necessity, we have also these proofs thereof: God
thundreth marvellously with his voice: he says to the snow, Be thou upon the
earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the rain of his power. The whirle
wind comes out of the South, and the cold from the Northwind. At the breath of
God the frost is given. He causes the bud of the herb to spring forth by
rain: he begets the deaw, the frost, the ice: he brings forth Mazzaroth
in their time, he guides Arcturus, he guides the motions of heaven, and
effectually works by them in these lower regions. He waters the mountains
from his chambers, and the earth is filled with the fruit of thy works. He
causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the use of man, that
he man bring forth bread out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart
of man, and oil to make the face to shine, and bread that strengthens man's
heart. He appointed the Moon for certain seasons: the Sun knows his going
down. Thou make darkness, and it is night.

To those testimonies of Scripture which ratify Gods providence in such
necessary events, as depend on his decree revealed in his word, those places
also may be added, which confirm the resurrection and raising again from the
dead of those bodies, which we carry about with us in this life: as, Who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,
Genes. 3. Job 10.
according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto
himself. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mor^all must put
on immortality. For seeing we see the substance of our bodies to be so many
ways changed and scattered after death, when as they are moldred into dust; it
follows therefore necessarily, that there is a providence of God, which
takes a most strait and exact care even of the smallest dust, whereby the
substance of out bodies so often altered and dissipated into infinite forms
and parts, is again in such wise to be recollected, gathered together, and
reduced to their first mass and form, as that not other, but the self same
bodies which we have in this life, shall rise again. Against these places of
Scripture alleged, some make exception, That the examples whereof these places
speak, are particular and prophetical events, administered by the special
counsel of God and that therefore there may not be framed a general rule
universally extending to all events. But against these we return a threefold
answer: For, 1. The like causes are found in all events, for which the
Scripture affirms those events before recited to have been done, or to be
done by the counsel and decree of God: namely, the glory of God, and the
safety of his chosen. The causes therefore of all events being like, we are to
judge alike of all. For all wise men confess, that a general is well gathered
out of the enumeration or numbering of many singulars or particulars, then, when
as there cannot be alleged any different or unlike example. Neither does any
of the godly, and such as conceive aright of the immeasurable wisdom of God,
deny, that God has most good reason for all things which are done, albeit they
are not known to us, whereby all things are referred to those two last ends.
Wherefore those things which God has not foretold, or has not by the
special testimony of his word showed to be done by his will, are no less to
be thought to depend upon his secret government, than those things which he
has by plain words expressed, that himself either would do hereafter, or
before had done. 2. We see the Scripture it self not only to attribute the
particular events of all, both specials and generals, unto Gods providence; but
further to transfer and apply the same to all the specials and generals,
which it speaks of singular and particular examples. Wherefore the Scripture
will have the same also to be understood of all individuals and singulars. For,
Genesis 8.1. Psalm. 135.7. John 9.3. Exodus 4.11. 2 Samuel 17.14. Psalm 53. 1 Kings
174. Mat. 10.29.
As God brought the wind upon the earth; so does he bring the wind out of his
treasures: As he would that he, of whom it is spoken, should be borne blind:
so does he make the deaf and the dumb, him that sees, and the blind: As he
destroys the counsel of Achitophel; so he frustrateth the counsels of the
Gentiles: As he commanded the Ravens to feed Elias; so one Sparrow falls not
to the ground without him: As Christ could not be taken before the time
appointed by God; so can no evil happen to any of us, but at such time and
place, and such manner, as pleases God. For therefore does the Scripture, to
teach us how to collect and gather, recount so many examples of Gods
providence. 3. There are also places of Scripture, wherein the general
referring of all things to the providence of God, is plainly expressed, or is
signified by a Synecdoche (which figure of speech we use, when we signify the
whole by a part, or a part by the whole) or by the comparing of lesser things
with greater, or greater with lesser. Ezekiel. 12.25.
The things that I shall speak, shall come to pass. And God speaks not only
those things which he reveals unto us, but whatsoever also from everlasting
he has decreed and purposed with himself. Infinite almost are the testimonies
which demonstrate, that the providence of God extends it self to all things:
but these now shall easily suffice. For by these verily it is apparent, That
even every the least and smallest thing, both good and bad, is ruled by the
providence of God: yet in such wise, as that those things that partake of the
nature of good, are not only done according to the providence of God (that is,
God not willing, neither commanding, nor working them, but permitting by his
providence, and directing them unto the ends by him appointed) but also by the
providence of God, as the cause: but those thigns which are evil, are done
according to the providence, but not by the providence of God, that is, God
willing, commanding, and working them. For all good things are done, God
willing them; evil, God permitting. And God wills those things, by his will,
which he likes, works, and commands. He permits those things, which he
neither likes, nor commands, nor works, nor furthereth: but which he
condemns, forbids, and punishes. That appears especially out of those
testimonies, which are alleged concerning reasonable creatures. For they show,
that all reasonable creatures, both Angels and men, and those both good and
bad, are ruled and governed by Gods providence; but so, that whatsoever good is
in them, that is from God himself, who works this in reasonable creatures:
but whatsoever ill is in them, is of themselves, being by nature evil, not of
God who is most good. All good things God himself works in reasonable
creatures: but evil things he permits in respect of other things that are
good.

The reasons and arguments to prove things to be done by the providence of God.
The reasons, whereby is demonstrated, That the providence of God extends it
self to all things, are almost the same with those which prove, that there is
a providence of God.

Gods omnipotency.
Nothing can be done without his will who is omnipotent: Therefore nothing can
be done, God simply not willing it, because he is omnipotent. Wherefore
whatsoever is done in the world, that must needs be done, God willing it either
simply, as God simply wills good things; or after a sort, as he in some sort
wills even those things which are evil.

His wisdom
It is proper to him that is most wise, not to suffer any thing, which is in his
power to be done, without his will and counsel. And how much the wiser he is
so much the more largely does his government extend it self: But God is a
governor infinitely wise, Isa. 40 2^.
and has in his power all things. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O
Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over of my God?
Therefore he suffers nothing to come to pass without his certain and
determined counsel. And further, if the number of things were infinite, yet
were God sufficient for the administering of them: seeing he is of an exceeding
and infinite wisdom. And therefore he easily takes care of all things that
are created; which although they be many, yet in themselves, and most of all in
respect of Gods infinite wisdom, they are finite and limited.

God wills the ends of all things.
He that wills the end or consequent of any thing or event, he wills also
the means or antecedent of that event, whereby the end is come unto: But GOD
wills the ends of all things, and events, whether good or bad: Therefore he
wills universally all things which are, and are done, if not simply, yet in
some sort and respect. For whatsoever things are, or are done in the world,
either they are the end and consequent, or the antecedent and mean, whereby to
attain unto the end. The Major is manifest. The Minor is thus proved: God will
that is good: But of all things there are some ends most good; otherwise God,
by reason of his immense goodness, would not permit them to be done. Prove.
16.4.
The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked for the
day of evil: Therefore the ends of all events are wrought by the will of God.

God is the first cause.
The first cause is that which does not depend of any other, but whereof all
second causes, and their actions and motions depend and are governed: But God
is the first cause of all things: Therefore God and his counsels and works do
not depend or are governed of any other, but all other things of him: neither
according to others actions does he determine of his, but himself decrees all
things so to be done: that is, God has not therefore determined or decreed any
thing, for that he foresaw the second causes would so do; but therefore all
things shall be so, for that they are so determined or decreed by him. Now, to
depend of another, is, upon consideration first had of another action, whether
present, or past, or to come, to be moved thereby to determine, and do a thing.

The unchangeablenesse of God. foreknowledge.
What God unchangeably fore-knoweth, he also unchangeably wills from
everlasting: But God from everlasting fore-knoweth unchangeably all things,
even those things which are most mutable: Therefore he would from everlasting
unchangeably all things, either simply, or in some sort and respect. The Minor
is manifest. The Major is thus proved: All certain and unchangeable prescience
or foreknowledge, depends on an unchangeable cause: But there is no
unchangeable cause besides Gods will: for all second causes are in themselves
changeable; and might not have been: Therefore Gods will alone is the cause of
his unchangeable prescience; that is, God therefore fore-knoweth that a thing
shall be so, because he wills and decrees it to be done so, either simply,
or in some respect. For if he simply would it not, it could never have been
done and fore-known of him. The sum is, Gods will and decree is the cause both
of the event, and of the foreseeing or knowing of it: but the foreseeing is
not the cause of the effect. Moreover, prescience in God is not severed from
his will and working, as in creatures: but they are both but one thing,
differing in consideration only. Has he said it, Mum, 23, 19.
and shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?

God the cause of all good, as it is good.
All natural good things are from God, as the first cause: But all the
faculties, motions, actions of all things, as they are merely such, are
natural good things; that is, things made and ordained of God in nature:
Therefore all are from God their author and effecter, and are wrought by Gods
providence. In him, we live, Acts 17.28.
and move, and have our being.

A confutation of certain Sophismes or Cavils, which are wont to be objected
against the providence of God, moving and governing all and every particular,
whether good or bad, great or small, most justly.
The first, of confusions, and things disordered in nature.
NO confused or disordered things have their being, or are governed by the
providence of God: But whatsoever things are under the Sun, are confused, 1
Cor. 14.3. Eccles. 1.4.
because all are vanity: Therefore they are not ruled and governed by divine
providence. Answ. The Confusions, as they are such, are not from God as
efficient of them, but directing them.
Major proposition, consisting of doubtful terms, is to be distinguished. No
confuse things (true, if they be simply confuse) are governed by the providence
of God, that is, the providence of God working them, as they are confuse. All
things that are under the Sun, that is, humane things are confuse and vain:
true, but not simply, so that no order and good at all lies hid, and is found
in that confusion. For if they were such, God, for his great goodness and
justice, would not permit them to be done. Wherefore, if by the confusion of
the world they collect and conclude, that there is no providence, there is more
avouched in the conclusion, then was contained in the premises; or they
proceed from that which is in some respect so, to conclude the same to be
simply and absolutely so. For whereas many things in the world are well
ordered, as the celestial motions, the preservation of the kinds of all
things, common-weals, the punishments of the wicked men, and many more, it may
not by this argument be concluded of all things, but of those only, which are
done against the order by God appointed, that they are not governed by his
providence: but those things, in which a most manifest order does appear,
shall be an evident testimony of Gods wisdom and effectual working. But if
then they conclude, that those disordered things are not ruled and governed of
God; so also shall there be more said in the conclusion, than was in the
premises. For it follows thereof, Not that the things confuse and troubled,
but that the confusion or troubling of order, which is in them, is not of God:
As the wicked were created of God, albeit their wickedness proceeded not from
God, but from themselves. For every thing is not necessarily avouched of the
concrete, or subject so qualified, which is affirmed of the abstract, or
quality it self. Wherefore, if it be again replied, putting this Major, That
disordered things are not, or are not ruled of God: and therefore many things in
the world not done by his providence; even thus too, is the Major diversely
faulty. For, 1. Be it that it be granted, that things disordered, if they be
simply such, are not, or are not ruled of God: There is order even in
disordered things.
yet cannot this be granted of them, if both confusion and order in diverse
respects be found in them. Now neither Devils nor men commit any thing so
repugnant to the order settled by God, wherein, albeit in respect of their
corrupt will it be most disordered, there is not yet the most wise order of
divine justice, power, and goodness lying hid under that consusion, which
themselves had caused: and for the most part also the same does manifestly
appear; the event, or God himself by his word declaring it. Great confusion
was there in the Jews detestable murder, when they crucified the Son of
God, and yet notwithstanding the hand and counsel of God has defined and
determined nothing with more wonderful order and wisdom, than the death of
his Son for our sins. All humane things therefore are vain; not in respect
of the will and decree, or providence of God (for if we respect it, they are
most well ordered, even such as in men's judgments seem most disordered) but
in respect of men, as concerning both the fault and punishment. For, 1. All our
things, God not illightning, correcting, and directing us by his Spirit, are
evil, and displeasing God. 2. They obtain not their expected and hoped
events, or those at leastwise not firm and stable, neither such, wherein sound
and solid felicity and blessedness does consist. 3. That wisdom also, which
is the knowledge of Gods will, and a true desire to be obedient thereunto, in
this life is joined with manifold errors, sins, and calamities: Therefore
humane matters are not ruled of God, that is, working them, as they are
confuse, and sins: but are ruled of God permitting sins, even as they are
sins, and directing them to most good ends; but working all that is good, even
those things which lie hid in things disordered and confuse. Moreover, The
evils which just men suffer, and the good which the unjust enjoy, seem
disordered in men's judgments: but according to the judgment of God, there is a
most just order in them, for those causes which are uttered in the word of God.
And those things are to be removed from the will and working of God, not which
in our judgment, but which in the judgment of God are disordered. Repl. They
who are against God, are not ruled and guided by God. Devils and wicked men are
against God: Therefore they are not ruled and guided by his divine providence.
Answ. We grant the whole reason in some respect, namely, that Devils and
wicked men are not ruled of God by his special providence, that is, The wicked
are not ruled of God so manifestly as the godly; and they withstand Gods
revealed will, but not his secret will.
by his holy Spirit lightning their minds with the knowledge of Gods will, and
inclining their hearts not to respect and execute in their actions their own
lusts, but the known will of God, and so themselves to work well together
with God, who by them works well. But they are ruled and governed of God, by
his general and secret providence or government, so that they cannot do any
thing but what God has decreed to do by them; and are the instruments of his
punishments and benefits, though themselves think and respect some other
thing. According to his will he works in the army of heaven, Dan. 4 3^.
and in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto
him, What do thou? The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers
of waters: Prove. 21.1.
he turns it whither soever it pleases him. God moves, inclines, Genesis
45.5, 7.
and rules the wicked will of Joseph's brethren in such wise, as not to kill
Joseph, but freely to sell him to the Ismaelites, that by this means he might
transport the family of Jacob into Egypt, nourish, and multiply them, and being
oppressed by long servitude and bondage, gloriously deliver them. Assure, though
a wicked and proud King, yet is called, The rod of the Lords wrath. Likewise,
the Assyrians are called, The sanctified of God, hired soldiers, Esaias 10.5.
doing service to God: whom yet their own ambition, cruelty and coveteousnesse
carried, to take weapons against the Jews. Likewise, everywhere in Scripture
God is said to infatuate and besot the wicked, to strike them with a
giddiness, to mad and amase them, to effeminate them, to fill them full of
fear, so that their spirits fail them at the noise of the falling of a leaf:
to rule the swords of the wickedwith his hand, to obdurate and harden their
hearts. By these and the like it is manifest, that even the deliberations,
counsels, and actions of the wicked, are subject to his divine providence and
government: and that it is not an idle permission in them, but an effectual
working of God, inclining their wills, and guiding their actions at his good
pleasure.

The second Sophisme, of the cause of sin.
OBject. 1. All the actions and motions of all creatures are done by the will
and working of God. Many actions (as the selling of Joseph, the Assyrians
warring against the Jews) are sins: Therefore sins are done by the will
and working of God, and by force of consequent, the opinion of universal
providence makes God the author of sin. Ans. There is a fallacy of the
accident in the Minor proposition. Actions are sins, Actions are no sins in
themselves, but by an accident.
not in themselves, and as they are actions, but by an accident, by reason of
the corruption of the instrument in those actions, which God works most
justly by him, he not respecting this, as to obey therein the known will of
God. This corruption or defect of the creature, and the action which God
works by the creature, concur together by an accident. For neither is
essential to other, neither the cause of other, but each is to other
accidentary. For both God would have wrought that self same punishment, which
he inflicted justly on the Jews by the Assyrians sinning, by an instrument not
sinning: and the Assyrian, if it had pleased God to correct his will, might
gave been notwithstanding the instrument of Gods wrath, and yet good, how great
soever severity he had exercised toward the Jews: As when God by his good
Angels slays the wicked host of the Assyrians. Sin therefore, which is in
the actions of the creature, is not done by the will and working of God, but by
an accident, to wit, as God wills and works those actions, which are sins
by the fault of the creature. The sum of all comes to this: The good action
of God, exercised by an evil and corrupt instrument, is no otherwise the sin
of the bad instrument, than water which comes pure out of the fountain, is
made impure, running through unclean places: or the best wine coming out of a
good vessel, wexeth sour and eager, being put in a corrupt vessel, according
to that of Horace, Unless the vessel be pure, Horat. lib. epist. 2.
whatsoever thou powrest in, sowreth: or further, than the good work of a good
Judge, is the evil work of an evil servant or minister: or the riding of a
good horseman, is the halting of a lame horse. In all these is a Paralogisme
or fallacy of the accident: that is, there is a proceeding from the essence or
thing it self, to that which is but an accident to the thing, and does but by
an accident concur with it: after this manner, The going of a lame horse is a
plain halting. The horseman wills and works the going of the lame horse:
Therefore he wills and works the halting. In like sort, the Devil is created
and sustained by God. The Devil is wicked: Therefore the wickedness of the Devil
is from God, as the author and effecter thereof. Both which reasons are alike
sophistical and false.

Many things in respect of the creatures are sins in themselves.
Repl. 1. Those things which are in their own kind sins, or unto which the
definition of sin agrees, they are in themselves sins. Many actions are in
their own kind sins, as theft, lying, adultery, murder: Therefore they are sins
in themselves. Ans. It is a fallacy, reasoning from that which is in some
respect so, to that which is simply so. For, the whole argument is granted
concerning actions prohibited by God, in respect of the creatures, as they are
committed of them against the law of God known unto them, either by general
or special commandment, or they are not done to that end principally, as
thereby to do and execute the known will of God. The reason thereof is
certain, and express in the Scriptures; because the will of God, revealed in
his word, is the only and surest rule of goodness and rightnesse in the
creatures. Wherefore, if those motions and actions accord to the will of God,
they are in themselves good and pleasing to God: but those actions which
disagree from his will, are in themselves sins, which God abhors and
punishes. Whatseever is not of faith, is sin: that is, Romans 14.23.
whatsoever rests not on the certain commandment of God, neither is done to
that end, no action evil in it self, in respect of God.
as thereby to obey the known will of God. But the argument on the other side
is false, if we respect the will of God moving and working all the motions and
actions of all creatures. The reason is, for that God alone by his own nature
can will, appoint, or do nothing that is unjust, whether he work by the good,
or by the wicked: Because seeing he is most good, his will only is the rule of
justice: and seeing he owes nothing to any man, he cannot to any man be
injurious. Wherefore to spoil another against the law and commandment of God,
is sin in it self, and theft. But God commanding, by an especial
commandment, the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, it was not theft, but a
work good in it self, both in respect of God, ^xod, 12.^
by this means punishing the unjustice of the Egyptians: as also of the
Israelites doing it to this end, that they might obey therein the special will
and commandment of God: which if they had done without this commandment, they
had committed theft.

Repl. 2. He that wills and works an action, which is in it self sin,
wills and works sins: God wills those things which are sins in themselves
in respect of man's will, but not in respect of his will.
God wills those actions, which in themselves are horrible sins; as are the
heinous offenses of Absolon, the lying of the Prophets, the cruelty of the
Assyrians making waste of Jury: Therefore God wills and works sin. Answ.
The Major is true of one, who works an action which is sin, and disagreeth
from the law of God in respect of his will, 1 Kin. 22.23. Esav 10.
who works it; and is not true of others: but the Assyrians actions, and of
others finning, which God effectually would, were sins, not in respect of the
will of God, but of the will of the men themselves sinning: For, though God
would the same thing; yet he would it not in the same sort that they. But that
this answer, as also the former, may be the better understood, and may be with
greater certainty opposed against the like sophisms, which humane reason in
great number frowardly wresteth against Gods providence, this general rule is
to be observed, the truth whereof is manifest, and the use great in Philosophy,
both Natural, and Moral, as also in Divinity. One and the same work or
action, A rale to be observed of good and evil causes, of one and the same
effect.
or effect in subject or matter, is in consideration, manner, and form made
most diverse, good and bad, according to the diversity of the causes both
efficient and final. For, in consideration and respect of a good cause, it is
good: in respect of a bad cause, bad: and a good cause is in it self a cause of
good; by an accident a cause, of an evil and bad effect, or vice, which is
inherent and remaining in the effect, by reason of a bad and vicious cause,
concurring in the producing of that effect: and contrary, a bad and evil cause
is in it self a cause of evil; but by an accident, of good: which good is in
the effect, by reason of a good cause concurring therewith to the producing of
that effect. Now then, whatsoever God does, cannot be but most good, and most
just: seeing both himself is most good, and has no scope or ends of his
counsels and works, but such as are most good, always agreeing with his nature
and Law: namely, his glory, and the safety and salvation of his chosen. But the
creatures action is then good, when both themselves are good, and have a good
end proposed unto them of their action: which end they have, when as they
execute the commandment of God either general or specialls being moved by the
cogitation of his commandment, whether they have, or have not any knowledge of
the counsel and purpose of God, why he commands this or that thing to be
done. And the action of creatures is evil, when hoth themselves are evil, as
also when, being forsaken and not corrected by God, they do a thing without
his commandment, or not to that end; as thereby to obey him. Wherefore that
work, the working and doing whereof is ascribed by the Scripture both to God
and to a corrupt and evil creature, must needs be good, in respect of God; and
evil, in respect of the creature: neither what is evil in that work, may be
attributed to God; neither what is good, unto the corrupt creature, but by an
accident. So the afflicting or wasting of the Jews was in subject and matter
one and the same work, which both God would, ordained, and wrought; and the
Assyrians executed: yet in consideration and respect, it was not the same, but
most diverse. For, in respect of God, purposing by this means to punish the
sins of the Jews, it was the power and most holy work of God: in respect of
the Assyrians, who were both wicked, cruel, ravenous, and bent not upon the
will of God, which they were ignorant of, but on the fulfilling of their whole
rapacity and hatred against the law of God, it was wicked robbery, the proper
work of the Assyrians (as it is expressly showed, Esaias 10.7.) which God neither
would nor intended, nor wrought in the Assyrians. Wherefore neither the proper
work of the Assyrians, can be attributed to God, nor the proper work of God
unto the Assyrians, but by an accident; because namely in one and the same
loss and waste which God brought upon the Jews by the Assyrians, the unjust
work of the Assyrians did, by an accident, concur with the most just work
of God. Even as a Judge is not therefore made a thief, nor a thief made a
Judge, because a just Judge puts to death a robber by an evil executioner,
and a thief; but one and the same slaughter is a just punishment, in respect
of the Judge; and murder, in respect of the executioner being a thief. So a
Captain lawfully waging war, and laying waste the country of his enemies,
does well: but the wicked soldiers, who fulfill therein, and follow their own
lusts, sin. So God afflicting Job, thereby to try him, does justly: Satan
and the Caldeans, spoiling and vexing him, for to fulfill their own lusts, and
to destroy him, do wickedly. Wherefore it is a most true rule: The end makes
the kind of action either the same or diverse.

God does not will or work sin it self, but only permits it.
Repl. 3. That which cannot be done, God simply not willing it, is done, God
willing it: But sin, as it is sin, cannot be done, God simply not willing it:
because God is omnipotent, Therefore sin must needs be done, God willing it.
And so it follows, that not only evils of pain and punishment, but evils of
crime and offense also, are done by the providence of God. Ans. The consequence
of this argument is to be denied: because the Major has not a sufficient
enumeration: for this member is wanting, namely, God permitting it. For that
which is not done, God not willing it, may be done, God either willing it or
permitting it: Or we may answer, that the Major has an ambiguity and
doubtful meaning in it. For, God to will a thing, is taken sometimes, as for
him to approve and work it: sometimes, for his permitting, or not hindering a
thing from being done. This, to permit, is in some sort to will, and that he
will not inhibit it, although he dislike and punish it. Sinthen is said to be
done, God willing it; not as if he does intend, like, and work sin, as it is
sin; but because he does permit it: that is, he by his just judgment suffers
sin, which rises from the corruption of his instruments, to concur in the
action, which he exercises by vicious and corrupt creatures, with his holy
work; while he indeed moves and bends them by objects whither himself
will, but does not correct them by his spirit, that so with God working well,
they also may work well, that is, according to the knowledge of his divine
will, and with purpose of being obedient thereunto.

not to bereave, but to be bereave of Gods knowledge is sin
Repl. 4. The privation or bereaving of the knowledge of Gods will, and of
rightnesse, is from God, as worker and effecter thereof. This privation is sin.
Therefore sin is from God as efficient thereof. Ans. There are four terms
in this Syllogisrne: For, privation in the Major is taken actively, to derive,
bereave, forsake, to withdraw the grace of his spirit, not to keep the
creature in that goodness, wherein he was created, nor to restore him to it,
being lost. This work of God is most just, nothing repugnant to his nature and
laws: either because it is the most just punishment of sin, or because God
owes nothing to any creature, and therefore cannot be injurious to any, or an
accepter of persons, whatsoever he does determine of his creature. In the Minor
privation is taken passively, and signifies as much as to want, or the want of
rightnesse, which ought by the right of their creation to be in reasonable
creatures. This want, because it is received, and is in the creatures, they
themselves willing and procuring it, against the law of God, it is sin in them,
and is not wrought by God: but God not continually ruling these reasonable
creatures by his holy spirit, it is in them voluntarily, without God either
furthering or enforcing it. Briefly privation comes from God, as it is a
punishment; and comes not of God, as it is sin, and repugnancy in the
creatures against the Law of God.

To rule sin is not to work them.
Obj. 2. When a creature is said to be ruled of God, it is meant, that his
actions are from God, and are directed to the glory of God, and the safety of
his chosen: But the creatures, even when they sin, are ruled of God. Therefore
sins are wrought by God. Ans. The conclusion pulls in more, than was in the
premises. For this only follows of them: therefore the actions also of
sinners, as they are actions (that is, as they are not sins; but motions
wrought by God) are from God, and are ruled of him. For he will the actions:
but the pravity and naughtiness of the action, which is from men, he will not.
Moreover, God through his great goodness rules and guides sins also, as they
are sins: yet not by working them, but by permitting them, and destining and
directing them to certain ends, and those most good.

Obj. 3. Of those things which are done by Gods providence, God himself is
author and efficient. But all evils, even of crime and offense, are done by the
providence of God. Therefore God is author of all that is evil. Ans. The Major
is to be distinguished: Those things which are done by Gods providence, that
is, Gods providence working them, or are done as proceeding from it, God
works them. But all evil things are done by Gods providence; yet not all
alike. Evils of punishment, because they have in them (...) respect and
consideration of good, are done as proceeding from the providence of God: for
God has from everlasting decreed them, and in time, order, and manner
determined by him, works them. Evils of crime, or sins, as they are such, are
not done as from or of the providence of God, but according unto the providence
of God; that is, they are done by the providence of God, not working them, but
permitting, determining, and directing them to most good ends, and most
agreeable to his nature and law. For evils of crime, or sins as they are such,
have not a respect and consideration of good in them, as evils of punishments
have. Therefore God did not decree or will to work them, but he decreed to
permit them, and not to hinder them from being done by others, and from
concurring in actions with the holy and sacred work of God, partly to exercise
his justice in punishing some, and partly to declare his mercy in forgiving
others.

The third Sophisme, of contradictory Wills.
He that in his secret will will that to be done which he forbids in his
law, has in him contradictory and flat repugnant wills: But God in his secret
will will that to be done which he forbids in his law, as robberies,
spoils, rapes, murders: Therefore he has contradictory wills. Ans. I. We
grant the whole argument, if therein be meant these evil actions in such sort
as they are committed against the Law by the creatures, and so become sins.
For in this sense God neither wills them, nor allows of them, but only as
they are certain motions, and punishments of sin. Answ. 2. The Major is to
be distinguished: He contradicts, or is contrary to himself, who will and
will not the same work, that is, in the same manner and respect: God will and
will not the same, but in a diverse manner and respect. He will and works
it, as it is a motion and action, and also a punishment of sin, or any thing
agreeing with his Law and justice, as a trial, or exercise, or martyrdom of
the godly. He wills not, neither allows or commands, nor works any
thing, as by reason of the corruption of the instrument, by which he exercises
his work: it swerveth from his divine justice and law. Now in a diverse manner
and respect, to will, and not to will the same, and yet to determine on that
part, whereof the reasons seem strongest, is not in us, much less in God,
absurd or repugnant. The waste of Israel, which the Assyrians wrought, God
wills as a punishment, which his justice of right did require: he wills it
not, but condemns, and afterward most grievously revengeth it in the
Assyrians, in as much, as it was not the execution of Gods wrath, but a
fulfilling of their own wrath and lusts against his law. So God wills, that
all should obey his word and be saved: 1. In respect of his love toward all:
for he is delighted with the death of no man. God wills the obedience of all,
as concerning his commanding it unto all: but not as concerning his secret
working of it in whom he will.
2. In respect of his commandment, and inviting of all to repentance. But he
will not that all be converted and so be saved, in respect of his working or
efficacy: that is, he commands all men indeed to repent and believe, and
promises life to all that believe; but he does not any where promise that he
will work by his spirit in all, that they should believe and be saved. For if
he would this, it must needs be, that either all should obey Gods commandments
and be saved, or that God should not be omnipotent. Repl. If God wills one
thing in signification, or by his commandment, and wills effectually, or by
his efficacy and working, another; he shall be changeable and a dissembler.
Answ. This does not thereof follow. God no dissembler.
For even when he wills effectually those actions which are sins, he does
indeed detest them, as they are sins: and when he commands obedience, he does
in earnest exact it of all. But this will of signification, or commandment of
God, does not testify, or declare, what he will work in all; but what agrees
with his mind, what he allows, what he requires, and what every one owes
unto him. God therefore dissembleth not, neither is contrary to himself:
because he does not in all places, nor at all times manifest his will unto his
creatures: and his will of punishing is not disagreeing from his law.

The fourth Sophisme, of contingency and liberty or freeness.
Gods government does not take away, but establish the liberty of the creatures
will.
THat which is done by the unchangeable decree of God, is not done contingently
and freely. But all things are done by the unchangeable decree, or counsel, or
providence of God: Therefore nothing is done contingently and freely. Answ. The
Major is either particular, and so concludes nothing, or being generally
understood, is most false. For, An effect which is the same in subject and
matter, is changeable and unchangeable, necessary and contingent, in respect
not of the same cause, but of diverse, of which together it is produced and does
depend, and whereof some are changeable, some unchangeable. In respect
therefore of the second and nearest causes, some effects are necessary and
certain, which are produced out of causes always working after one sort; some
are changeable, which have a changeable cause, that is, such as is not always
working after one sort, and producing the same effects. In respect of the first
cause, namely, the decree of God, which is unchangeable, all effects are
unchangeable and most certain, even those, which in respect of second causes
are most uncertain. As, That the bones of Christ should not be broken, it was a
thing contingent, in respect of the bones, which in their own nature might as
well have been broken, as not broken; as also of the Soldiers, who, as
concerning the nature of their will, might have chosen to do either; but in
respect of the decree of God, it was necessary: for by his decree were the wills
of the Soldiers so ruled, that they could not then, neither would choose the
contrary. Wherefore the unchangeablenesse of the decree of God, which is a
necessity by supposition, or conditional, does not take away either the
contingency of events, or the liberty and freeness of a created will, but
rather maintains, and confirms it. For God accomp^isheth his decrees by
reasonable creatures according to the condition of their nature, when as by
objects represented and showed to their understanding, he inclines and bends
their will, that it should with free and inward motion choose or refuse that
which seemed good from everlasting to God, and was decreed of him. For, if when
God works well by evil creatures, there is not taken away in them, through
the decree or providence of God, and his good working, that which is
accidental to them, that is, corruption: how much less shall that be taken
away, which is essential unto them, even to work freely? So the blessed Angels
are changeably good, as concerning their nature: but they are unchangeably and
necessarily only good, according to Gods decree and directing of them; and yet
freely: so that how much the more effectually they are moved by the Spirit of
God, so much the more freely, and with greater alacrity and propension they
will, and do only that which is good. Judas, the Jews, Herod, Pilate, the
Soldiers delivered and crucified Christ freely, Acts 5.28.
and with great willingness and pleasure, and yet they did whatsoever the hand
and counsel of God had determined before to be done.

Object. 2. That which is done by the unchangeable decree of God, is not done
contingently, but necessarily. All things are done by the unchangeable decree
of God: nothing is therefore done contingently, neither by Fortune nor Chance,
but all necessarily: which is the Stoickes doctrine of fate or destiny. Here,
before we answer to this objection, we must know the signification of the
words, and the difference between the opinion of the Stoickes and Christians.
Necessarily is that which cannot be otherwise than it is. The difference
between necessary and contingent things.
Contingent is that, which is indeed, or is done, but might notwithstanding not
have been, or have been done otherwise. Necessity therefore and contingency is
the order which is between the cause and the effect, unchangeable or
changeable. And because the effects follow of their causes unchangeably, either
in respect of the nature it self of the causes, or in respect of some
external cause, which designeth and appoints another cause to a certain
effect: and because also the effects themselves cannot be more unchangeable,
than are their causes: therefore there is said to be a double necessity: The
difference between absolute necessity, and necessity of consequence, or
supposition.
One absolute or simple, which is of them, whose opposites or contraries are
simply unpossible, in respect of the nature of the cause or subject whereof it
is affirmed: as are the essential and personal properties of God: to wit, God
is, God lives, God is just, wise, etc. God is the eternal Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. The other is necessity of consequence or by supposition, which is
the immutability and unchangeablenesse of those effects which follow of causes,
which causes being supposed or put, the effect must necessarily follow; but the
causes notwithstanding themselves might either not have been, or might have
been changed. So are those things necessary which God has decreed that they
should be done, in respect of the unchangeablenesse of his decree, which decree
yet God most freely made; that is, he might from everlasting either not have
decreed it at all, or have decreed it otherwise, according to those words:
Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will give me more
than twelve legions of Angels? Mat. 26.53.
How then should the Scripture be fulfilled? Likewise, Those things are called
necessary, which are done indeed by such second causes as are so made of God,
that by their own nature, they cannot do otherwise than they do; but yet may
be by God himself either taken away, or hindered, or altered and changed: As
the Sun, and the shadow going forward in consequence (or order of nature) with
the Sun; and yet consisting and standing still in that battle of Joshua, and
returning backwards in the days of Ezechias: the fire, burning bodies within
the reach thereof, which are capable of burning; and yet not burning the three
Children in the furnace of Babylon: or those things which are indeed in their
own nature apt to produce a contrary or diverse thing, or to forbear producing
of their effect; and yet notwithstanding, cannot do otherwise, because they
are so moved by God, or by other causes; which although they be not changed,
yet might have been changed; or when they work so, cannot withal not work,
or work otherwise, because two contradictories cannot be both at one time true.

Fortune and Chance.
Fortune and Chance are sometimes taken for the events themselves, or effects,
which follow causes that are causes but by an accident, by reason of such
causes as are causes by and in themselves, but not known to us: as when we
say, good or evil fortune, happy or unhappy chance. Sometimes they signify
the causes of such events: either the manifest causes, which are causes but by
an accident (as when any thing is said to be done by fortune, or by chance) or
the hidden and unknown causes, which are causes by and in themselves: As it is
said in the Poet: Omnipotent fortune and fate inevitable. And they are wont to
call that fortune, which is a cause by an accident in voluntary agents, whose
actions have some event, that seldom happens, besides their appointment: As
he that digging with purpose to build, finds treasure. Chance they call an
accidental cause in natural agents, whose motions have effects, neither
proper to them, neither always happening, and that without any manifest cause
directing it: as if a tyle falling from an house, kill one that passes by.

Fate or destiny. The difference between the Stoickes and the Churches doctrine
concerning Gods providence.
By the name of Fate or Destiny, sometimes is understood the decree and
providence of God: As that of the Poet, Leave off to hope that the fates of the
Gods are moved with entreaty. But the Stoickes by this word understood the
immutable connection and knitting of all causes and effects, depending of the
nature of the causes themselves; so that neither the second causes are able to
work otherwise than they work, neither the first causes can work otherwise
than does the second; and therefore all effects of all causes are absolutely
necessary. This opinion of the Stoickes, because it spoyleth God of his liberty
and omnipotency, and abolisheth the order and manner of working in second
causes, disposed by Gods wisdom, not only sounder Philosophy, but the Church
also rejects and condemns, and does openly profess her dissenting from the
Stoickes: Our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he will. With God shall
nothing be impossible: that is, which is not against his nature, Psalm. 115.3.
Luke 1.37.
or whereby his nature is not overthrown, as it is said, 2 Timothy 2.

Out of this then which has been spoken, we answer unto the argument, which
was, That which is done by the unchangeable decree of God, is not done
contingently, but necessarily: All things are done by the unchangeable decree
of God: nothing therefore is done contingently, neither by fortune or chance,
but all necessarily. First, we say, there is more in the conclusion than in
the premises, when the opinion of the Stoickes is objected to the Church: For
albeit the Church confesses all events in respect of Gods providence, to be
necessary: yet this necessity is not a Stoicall fate and destiny; because the
Church detendeth against the Stoickes, both liberty in God governing things at
his pleasure, and a changeablenes in second causes; and shows out of Gods
word, that God could both now do, and from everlasting have decreed many
things, which neither he does, nor has decreed. And therefore the Church also
has abstained from the name of fate, lest any should suspect her to maintain
with the Stoickes an absolute necessity of all things. Secondly, necessity of
consequence or supposition, does not take away contingency.
If removing Stoicisme, yet notwithstanding the necessity of all things, and
the abolishing of contingency, fortune, and chance, be objected: we make
answer to the Major by distinguishing the words. For those things, which are
done by the providence and decree of God, are done indeed necessarily; but by
that necessity, which is by supposition, or of consequence, not by simple
necessity or absolute: wherefore it follows, that all things come to pass,
not by simple and absolute necessity, but by that of supposition or
consequence. And necessity of consequence does not at all take away
contingency. The reason of this is: Because the same effect may have causes,
whereof some may produce it by an order changeable, some by an unchangeable
order; and therefore in respect of some it is contingent, and in respect of
some, necessary. For as the originals or causes of contingency in things, are
that liberty which is in the will of God, and Angels, and Men, and the mutable
nature of the matter of the elements, together with the readiness or
inclination thereof to diverse motions and forms: so the cause of absolute
necessity in God, is the very unchangeable nature of God; but the cause of that
necessity, which is only by consequent, is the divine providence or decree
coming between those things which are in their own nature mutable; and also
the nature of things created, which is framed and ordained of God to certain
effects, and yet subject to the most free will and government of God, either
according, or besides, or contrary to this order which himself has made. In
respect therefore of second causes, some things are necessary, which are done
by causes always working after one sort; as the motion of the Sun, the burning
of any matter put into the fire, if it be capable of burning: some things are
contingent, which have causes working contingently, that is, apt and fit to
produce, or to forbear producing diverse and contrary effects: as the blasts of
winds, the local motions of living creatures, the actions of men's wills. But
in respect of the first cause, that is, of the will of God, all things which
are, or are done in Gods external or outward works, are partly necessary,
partly contingent. Necessary, as even those things which have second causes
most changeable: as that the bones of Christ on the Cross were not broken by
the Soldiers, by reason of the unchangeablenesse or the decree and providence
of God: Contingent (by reason of the liberty of his eternal and unchangeable
decree, and the execution thereof) even those things, which, as concerning
their own nature, have second causes most unchangeable, as the motion of the
Sun and shadows. If therefore by contingency they mean the changeableness of
effects, What contingency is denied.
which they have by the natures of second causes, or by the power and liberty
of God, it does not follow that things are contingent, because of that
necessity which they have by the providence of God. For, this does not take
away, but preserves rather the nature, order and manner of working in second
causes ordained by God. But if by contingency they mean the changeableness of
second causes and effects, so floating and wavering, that they are not ruled
and governed by Gods providence, any such contingency the Scripture does not
admit or approve. Whether the motions of a creature are contingent or necessary.
Hereby we also understand, When it is demanded concerning the motions and
effects of creatures, whether they are to be termed necessary or contingent,
that some verily are more rightly and properly called contingent, than
necessary, though both contingent and necessary, are wrought by divine
providence. For they are rather to be called such as they are of their own
nature, and by the nature of their nearest causes, than as they are in respect
of Gods providence, which is a cause more removed, and farther off. And nothing
is more either certain or manifest, than that, according to the nature of
second causes, some things should be changeable, some unchangeable: yet by the
power of God, though all things in the creatures may be changed, they are made
notwithstanding unchangeable, because of the certainty of his decree and divine
providence.

So likewise we answer concerning fortune and chance. What fortune and chance
is denied.
For if by these names be understood such causes or events by accident, as have
no cause which is proper and by it self a cause, they ought to be far
abandoned from the Church of Christ. But if we understand thereby a cause
which is by it self a cause and proper, though unknown to our senses and
reason; or such causes by accident, which have notwithstanding some secret
proper cause adjoined; nothing hinders (in respect of second causes, which
are causes by accident, and in respect of our judgment, whereby we attain not
to the proper, and that which is by it self the cause of these events) that to
be, or to be a thing fortuning, or done by chance, which in respect of Gods
providence comes to pass by his most accurate and unchangeable counsel and
decree: according to those sayings. Mat. 10.29. Pro. 16.33.
One Sparrow shall not fall on the ground without your Father. And, The lot is
cast into the lap, etc.

The fifth Sophisme of the inutility or unprofitablenesse of means.
God is effectual in working by means which himself has freely ordained.
THat which shall be unchangeably and necessarily by the will and providence of
God, in vain to the furthering or hindering of that are means applied; as the
use of the ministry, the magistrates, laws, exhortations, promises,
threatenings, punishments, prayer, our study and endeavors: But all things are
done by the decree of God unchangeably, neither can they which work by the
providence of God work otherwise then they do: Therefore all those means are
vain and fruitless. Answ. It is not necessary that the first and principal
cause being put, the second and isntrumental cause should be removed and taken
away. In vain are second causes and means applied, if God had determined to
execute his decrees without means, neither had commanded us to use them: But
seeing God has decreed, by those means, in some to work faith and conversion,
some to bridle and keep under means, and some to leave excuselesse, and has
for that cause commanded us to use them; they are not in vain used and applied:
yea, when there comes no profit by these, yet they profit to this, that they
leave the wicked without excuse. As therefore the Sun does not in vain daily
rise and set, neither are the fields in vain sowed and watered with the rain,
neither bodies in vain with food refreshed; though God creates light and
darkness, brings forth the corn out of the earth, and is the life and length
of our days; so neither are men in vain taught, or do study to conform their
life unto doctrine, though all available actions and events proceed only from
God: for God from everlasting decreed, as the ends, so the means also, and
prescribed them unto us, whereby it seemed good to him to bring us unto them.
Wherefore, we using those means, do well, Three causes why we must use means.
and obtain profitable and fruitful events: but if we neglect them, either by
our fault we deprive our selves or others of those blessings offered by God; or
if God, even in this contempt of his word have mercy on us or others, yet our
conscience accuses us of open and grievous sin. Wherefore we must use means,
1. That we may obey God therein, who both has decreed ends, and ordained
means to those ends, and prescribed them unto us; neither tempt him, by
contemning these, to our own peril and danger. 2. That we may obtain those
blessings decreed for us according to his promise, and that to our salvation.
3. That we may retain a good conscience in using the means, although the
expected events do not always follow, either in our selves or others.

The sixth Sophisme of the merit of good and evil.
WHatsoever is necessary does not merit rewards or punishments: But all moral
good and evil is done necessarily: Therefore neither the good meriteth reward,
nor the evil punishment. Answ. This argument is handled by Aristotle in his
Ethics: Lib. 3. cap 5. No good work of the creature meriteth reward.
But the answer thereto is easy. First, The Major is either particular, and so
there is no consequence or sequel; or being generally taken, is false, and that
even in moral or civil consideration, to wit, in respect of those things
which are necessary by supposition, and yet are done freely, as the actions of
men. Secondly, We grant the reason, in respect of the judgment of God,
concerning good works: For the creature cannot merit any thing, no not by his
best works, of God; Romans 4.1.
because both they are due, and are the effects of God in us: And therefore the
more good things God works in us, so much the more he binds and indebteth
us to him. Wherefore in the godly, God crowns and rewards of his free
bountifulness not their merits, but his own gifts. But as touching evil
works, we deny the reason: For, they merit punishment, and that most justly:
Evil works merit punishment justly.
for although men forsaken of God cannot but sin; yet the necessity of finning
both was purchased by their own fault (as who freely and willingly departed
from God,) and remains in them joined and accompanied with great desire and
delight. Wherefore to this, that they should merit punishment, their own will
suffices, whereas especially the punishment was before denounced. This
solution or answer Aristotle himself gives us, Ibid.
when as he shows, That men are deservedly reprehended and punished for
vices, either of mind or body, though they cannot avoid them, or leave them,
because themselves are the cause of their own vices, and have purchased them
unto themselves of their own accord, and voluntarily.

Last of all, Certain places of Scripture wrested against Gods providence. John
8.44. James 1.13. Syrac. 15.20.
they wrest also certain places of Scripture, by false interpretations, against
Gods universal providence: As, When the devil speaks a lie, then he
speaks of his own. God tempts no man. He has commanded no man to do
ungodly, as also other the like places, which deny God to be the author of sin.
But, those places attribute unto the wicked, and remove from God the sins, as
lies, and temptations to s^n: but the actions themselves of the wicked, as they
are not sins, but operations and motions serving for the exercising and
manifesting of Gods goodness or justice, the whole Scripture shows to be
done by the will of God; and also, as they are sins, by his just permission:
as, Of Satan deceiving the Prophets of Achab: Of the false Prophets, by whom
God tries and opens the hypocrisy or constancy of men in true religion.
Acts 5.3. 2 Cor. 4.4.
Satan filled the heart of Ananias. The god of this world has blinded the
hearts of unbeleevers. In these and the like sayings also is discerned the work
of the Devil unjustly blinding men, to destroy them; and of God justly
blinding them by the Devil, Acts 5.38. Isa. 31.
to punish them. If this counsel be of men, it will come to naught. Woe be to
the rebellious children, that take counsel, but not of me. The counsels of
men are said to be not of God, but of themselves, in respect of the ends which
men, letting pass the will of God revealed unto them, respect not, and attain
not unto: but not in respect of the ends which God does respect and attaineth
unto, as well by the wicked not knowing or contemning his will, as by the
godly: or (which is in effect the same) the counsels of men are said to be of
them, not of God, as they are sins, that is, as they swerve from the known will
of God; but not as they are the execution of Gods either secret or known will.
2 Cor. 9.9.
God does not take care for oxen: Not principally, or not in such sort as for
men: For he gives also to beasts their meat. Those words then, Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn, were therefore spoken
especially, that God might thereby show, what he would have by men unto men to
be performed. So the wicked are often said to be cast out of the sight of God;
not that the providence of God is not extended to them, but that he does not
tender them with his mercy and bounty, as he does the godly. For the godly also
complain, That they are neglected of God* when they are afflicted: not that God
is not present with them in affliction; but that humane sense and judgment
suggesteth this unto us. Levit. 20 5.
And, God is said to set his face against the wicked, to cut them off.

Quest. 28. What does this knowledge of the Creation and Providence of God
profit us?
Answ. That in adversity we may be patient Romans 5.3. James 1.3. Job 1.21, 22.
Psalm. 39.10.
, and thankful in prosperity D^^^. 8.1^. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
, and have hereafter our chiefest hope reposed in God our most faithful Father
Psalm. 55.2^. Romans 5.4.
, being sure that there is nothing which may withdraw us from his love Romans
8.38, ^9.
, forasmuch as all creatures are so in his power, that without his will they
are not able not only to do any thing, but not so much as once to move Job
1.12. and 2.6. Prove. 21.1. Acts 17.25.
.

The Explication.
The causes why this doctrine is to be known.
THis doctrine of Gods providence is necessary to be known: The glory of God.
For the glory of God; for he will have us to ascribe to him most great
liberty, goodness, wisdom, power and justice: and this he will have us to
acknowledge and profess against the dreams and dotings of Epicures, Manichees,
and Stoics. But if the providence of God in moving and guiding all things,
even the least, both good and bad, be denied, these also his properties are
denied; and if these be denied, God is not worshipped and magnified of us, but
denied. Our own comfort and salvation. 1. Patience in adversity.
For our own comfort and salvation, that by this means there may be stirred up
in us, first, Patience in adversity; because all things come to pass by the
most wise, just, and available counsel and will of our heavenly Father: and
whatsoever either good or bad God sends us, in them we consider the fatherly
will of God toward us. Whatsoever comes unto us by the counsel and will of
God, and is profitable for us, that we ought to bear patiently: But all evils
come to us by the counsel and will of God, and are profitable for us:
Therefore we ought to bear all evils patiently. Secondly, That we may be
thankful for benefits received of God: Thankfulness for Gods blessings.
we ought to be thankful, because, Of whom we receive all good things both
corporal and spiritual, great and small, to him we ought to be thankful, and
worship him: But from God the author of all good things we have all things:
Therefore we ought to be thankful unto God, and to worship him. Now
thankfulness has two parts: 1. Truth, to acknowledge his benefits, and to be
thankful both in word and mind unto him. 2. Justice, to remunerate and
recompense. Or, Thankfulness consists, 1. In acknowledging of the benefit.
2. In celebrating it. 3. In remunerating it. 3. Confidence of future blessings.
Thirdly, That we may conceive a good hope and confidence of things to come:
when as God by his providence delivers us out of evils. He that has decreed
unchangeably to save, and is able, and will save believers, does never suffer
them to perish. Hope here signifies such a hope as resolves all things so to
be governed of God, as that also they shall hence-forward be profitable for our
safety, and that he will never suffer us to be pulled away or withdrawn from
his love; nor will ever so forsake us, that we perish: Because his will and
power in preserving and saving us is unchangeable, and far above the forces of
all his enemies. Exercise of godliness.
The desire and study of godliness, prayers and labors: because, although
God alone gives all good things, yet he gives them with this rule and order,
that they be desired and expected from him, and sought by our labor and study,
which must be guided by his word. Briefly, the ends of the doctrine of
providence are, 1. The glory of God. 2. Our patience in adversity. 3. Our
thankfulness in prosperity. 4. Our hope of things to come. 5. Prayer for the
obtaining of our hope.

All the grounds of religion shaken in pieces, if the providence of God be
denied.
By this it appears, That all the grounds and foundations of godliness or
religion are pulled a sunder, if the providence of God be once denied, such as
before it has been described out of the Scripture. For, 1. We shall never be
patient in adversity, except we know it to come from God our Father unto us. 2.
We shall never be thankful for his benefits, except we acknowledge them to be
given us from above. 3. We shall never have certain hope of our future delivery
from all evil both of crime and pain to be perfected and accomplished, except
we resolve, that the will of God of certainly saving all the elect is
unchangeable. 4. We shall never with assured confidence crave of God his
blessings promised us, especially those which are necessary to salvation;
neither shall we strive thereto with right endeavors and agreeable to Gods
word, except we be assured that God both has from everlasting decreed for us
those blessings themselves, and has destined and appointed the means whereby
they are received, and does also most certainly bestow those decreed and
promised blessings upon all, to whom he gives those means, and the lawful use
of them.

The second part of the Creed; Of God the Son, the Redeemer.
ON THE 11. SABBATH.
Quest. 29. Why is the Son of God called Jesus, that is, a Savior?
Ans. Because he saves us from all our sins Mat. 1.21. Heb. 7.25.
: neither ought any safety to be sought for from any other, nor can elsewhere
be found Acts 4.12. Job 15.4. 1 Timothy 2.5. Isa. 43.11. 1 Job. 5.11.
.

The Explication.
IN this second part of the Apostolic Creed, is treated of the Mediator. The
doctrine concerning the Mediator consists of two parts: 1. Of the person of
the Mediator. 2. Of his office. Of his person, the two former articles speak:
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, born of the virgin Mary. His office is summarily expounded in the jame
two articles, but particularly in those which follow, even the third part of
the Creed, wherein is treated concerning the holy Ghost. There are two parts of
his office; humiliation or merit, and glorification or efficacy. Of his
humiliation, whereby Christ has promerited for us his benefits, namely,
remission of sins, and reconciliation and atonement with God, the holy Ghost,
and life everlasting, these articles speak: He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, buried, descended into hell. Of his glorification, in
respect whereof Christ is effectual, and works forcibly in us, in applying
his merited blessings and benefits unto us by his Spirit, these articles speak:
The third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into heaven, sits on
the right hand of God the Father almighty: The seventh article touching his
coming pertains to the consummation of his glorification, when God shall be
all in all: From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. The
great wisdom and order in disposing the articles of our Creed.
Hence it appears with how great wisdom the articles were written and
applied to the question of the Mediator: For as it descends in order from
the first to the last step and degree of Christ's humiliation, which is
signified by his descension into hell, and is the feeling of the horrible
judgment and wrath of God against the sins of mankind: so it ascends from
the lesser glory, which began from his resurrection, to the highest and
greatest, which is betokened by his sitting at the right hand of God the
Father. The same order, and the same wisdom is seen in the first part of the
Creed. It is also apparent in the third part, which is as it were the fruit of
the articles going before, wherein are recited in most notable order the
benefits which Christ, promeriting by his passion, applies to us by his
Spirit. Christ's office and his benefits differ.
For the benefits of Christ are different from his office. His benefits are the
things themselves, which Christ has purchased for us, and bestows on us, to
wit, remission of sins, or our reconciliation with God, the giving of his holy
Spirit, and life everlasting. His office is to promerit those things for us by
his obedience, and to bestow them on us, by his own power and efficacy.

And in Jesus.) That is, I believe in Jesus Christ. We must repeat the words, I
believe; because as we believe in God the Father, so we also believe in the Son
of God: John 14.1, 11. John 10.30. John 6.29. John 3.36. John 5.23.
Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Believe me that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me. I and my Father are one. This is the work of God, that ye
believe in him whom he has sent. He that believes in the Son has everlasting
life. That all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father. This is a
certain and invincible argument of the Deity of the Son: for faith is a worship
due only to God.

OF THE NAME, JESUS.
But that it may be the better understood, that by the name Jesus, the office
of the Son of God the Mediator is designed, these four questions are to be
considered: 1. What is signified by the word Jesus. 2. From what evils he
saves or delivers. 3. How he saves. 4. Whom he saves.


1. What the name Jesus signifies.
THe question touching the name Jesus, concerns not so much the Etimologie
and peculiar sense which this name imports, but especially respects the
office of the Son of God therein employed. The word Jesus (in Greek (...), Mat.
1.21.
and in Hebrew Jehoscuah or Jescuah) signifies a Savior and Author of
safety: which Name God himself gave unto the Mediator 0166 0 in the new
testament. This true Etymon or original signification of this word is assigned
by the Angel, saying: For he shall save his people from their sins. Luke 1.31.
The Son of God therefore is called Jesus, in respect of his office, by an
excellency: 1. In that he is our Mediator, who saves and delivers from the
evils both of crime and punishment. 2. And that alone. 3. Yea, and most
perfectly: whether we respect the number of these evils, he delivers us from
them all; or the degrees of them, he has utterly annihilated the greatest,
yea, and smallest portion of them. And the salvation which he tendereth unto
us, is righteousness, and life everlasting. Jesus is our Savior.
This is gathered out of his very name, because he has not a bare title
without the thing it self, but farther therewith performs and executes the
office of a Mediator. Object. Many others were called by the Name Jesus, and
were Saviors of their People; as for example, Josuah the Captain of Israel,
and diverse other: Therefore from this name it is not necessarily argued and
enforced, that Christ only is our Savior. Answ. Others had this name, because
they were typical Saviors, prefiguring and resembling this true Savior.
Repl. Yea, but the Parents of Josuah, when they gave their young Infant this
name, could not so much as suspect that by him should come the delivery of the
people of Israel: Answ. What then? yet GOD knew, and thereupon so directed
their wills, that they should call him Josuah. Now there is a great difference
between those other, and this our Jesus. Differences between the true Jesus our
Saviuor; and others of the same name.
1. Others had this name imposed on them by the will of men; this our Jesus had
his name given him by an Angel. 2. Others were but types and shadows, this
was the true prefigured Jesus. 3. God by them bestowed only corporal and
temporal benefits upon his people the Israelites; but by this Jesus he saves
all the chosen, dispersed through the whole world, from all evils both of body
and soul, from sin and death everlasting. 4. they were only instruments and
ministers, by whom Christ gave safety, and benefits temporal to the people;
Christ is the author of all good things both temporal and eternal, and these
he by his own efficacy bestows on whom he will. Thus the Son of God is called
Jesus by an excellency above others, being the true Savior: 1. Because he
exempteth and freeth us from all evils of crime and pain. 2. Because he alone
works this freedom and delivery.

That the Son of God only is that Savior, is showed by the places of
Scripture following: There is no salvation in any other. 2. Jesus alone is our
Savior. Acts 4.12. John 3.18. 1 John 5.11. 1 Timothy 2.5. Esa. 43.11, 25. Romans
5.19. How the whole three persons are said to be Saviors.
For among men there is given no other name under heaven whereby we must be
saved. He that believes not in the Son is condemned already, because he
believes not in the name of the only begotten Son of God. God has given unto
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus. I am the Lord,
and besides me there is no Savior. I am he that puts away thine iniquities
for mine own sake. By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
Object. The Father and the holy Ghost also are our Saviors: Therefore not the
Son alone. Ans. 1. It is a fallacy, affirming that to be simply and wholly
so, which is but in some respect only so. True it is, they all save mankind:
but the difference is in the manner of their saving. For, The Father by sending
the Son.
The Father saves, as the fountain of our delivery; because he sends his
Son into flesh, by him to deliver us: but the Father himself is not sent.
The holy Ghost by being sent of the Son.
The holy Ghost saves, as an immediate effector or worker of regeneration,
sent from the Father by the Son into the hearts of the chosen. The Son only
by meant and efficacy.
The Son saves b^ his merit and efficacy, and thus becomes sole Mediator,
paying the ransom, giving the holy Ghost, regenerating and raising us up unto
life eternal. Wherefore this efficacy and effectual working it self, is
common to all three persons: yet the order and manner of working is different,
and appropriate to each. But the ransom, the Son onley has paid. The
particle alone executes all creatures from being Saviors. 1. Cor. 2.11.
Ans. 2. The Son is called the only Savior, in respect of the creature, to
whom he is opposed, and from whom he is descerned: that is, from the word of
salvation, not the Father and the holy Ghost, but the creatures only are
excluded. For no creature delivers from sin and death. So it is said, The
things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God: but it follows not
hereof, that the Father and the Son know not themselves. For the Spirit in that
place is compared with the creature, not with the Father and the Son.

2. From what evils he saves or delivers.
HE delivers us from all evils both of crime, and pain, most fully and
perfectly. From the evil of crime, for so the Angel testifies. He shall save
his people from their sins. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin; that is, that it may not be imputed unto us, Mat. 1.21. 1 John 1.7.
and that it may not reign in us, but be abolished, and so we at length leave
off to sin. Wherefore also he delivers us from all pain, and punishment. For
the cause being taken away which is sin, the effect is taken away, which is
punishment. Rom 8.1.
Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. I give
unto them eternal life. This salvation then, which this our Savior Jesus
Christ brings us, is righteousness and life everlasting. Seventy weeks, are
determined to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and to
reconcile the inquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. Dan 9.24. 1
Cor. 1.30.
He is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

3. How he saves.
Christ saves us, 1. By his merit.
HE saves us after two sorts; by his merit, and by his efficacy. 1. He saves
us by his merit or satisfaction; because by his obedience, passion, death, and
intercession, he has merited for us remission of sin, reconciliation with
God, the holy Ghost, salvation, and life everlasting. Testimonies hereof are
these; If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.2.
Jesus Christ the just. And he is the reconciliation for our sins and not
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world: that is, for the
sins of all sorts of men, of what soever age, place, or degree. The blood of
Jesus Christ the Son of God purges us from all sin. 1 John 17. Rom 3.25.
Whom God has set forth to be are conciliation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousensse by the forgiveness of sins. By the obedience of
one, many shall be made righteous. He was wounded for our transgressions, Romans
5.19. Esa. 53.5.
he was broken for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we
have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon us the
iniquity of us all. 2 Cor. 5.2. Gal. 3.13.
He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be
made the righteneousnesse of God in him. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, when he was made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, Galat. 4.4. Galat. 3.13.
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. God sent forth
his Son made of a woman, and made under the Law (that is, made an execration or
curse; For we are delivered not from the obedience, but from the curse of the
Law,) that he might redeem them that were under the Law, that we might
receive the adoption of the sons. Heb. 9.14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works,
to serve the living God? By the which will we are sanctified, even by the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once offered. By these and very many the
like places of Scripture, it is manifest that for Christ's merit we are not only
freed from punishment, the remission of our sins being obtained: but are also
reputed righteous before God, adopted of him to be his Sons, blessed, endued
with the holy Ghost, sanctified, and made heirs of everlasting life. By his
efficacy and powerful working.
Christ saves us by his efficacy, power, and operation; because he not only
obtains, by his meriting for us, remission of sins, and that life which we
had lost; but also applies effectually unto us, by virtue of his Spirit
through faith, the whole benefit of our redemption. For what benefits he
merited by his death, he does not retain them unto himself, but bestows them
on us. For salvation and life everlasting (which himself had before) he
purchased, not for himself, but for us, as being our Mediator. Therefore he
reveals unto us his Fathers will, instituteth and maintains the ministry
of his word, whereby he gives the holy Ghost, by whom he works in us both
faith, whereby we, applying Christ's merit unto our selves, may be assured of
our justification in the sight of God through the force thereof; and also
conversion, or the desire and love of new obedience. So by his word and spirit
he gathers his Church, he bestows and heapeth on in all blessings necessary
for this life, defends and preserves it in this life against the force of
Devils and the world, and against all corporal and spiritual assaults of all
enemies, even to the end; so that not one of those which are converted,
perishes finally: at length, their bodies being raised in the last day from
the dead, he fully delivers the Church from all sin and evil, advancing it
unto everlasting life and glory, and casting the enemies thereof into perpetual
pain and torment. To comprise the whole in a word, his efficacy by his word and
spirit regenerateth us in this life, The efficacy of Christ's merit performs
three things unto us. 1. Our regeneration. Mat. 18.17.
and preserves or sustaineth us being regenerate, lest we fall away, and in
the end raises us unto life eternal. Of his revealing himself unto us, and
regenerating us, speak these places; No man knows the Son but the Father:
neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him No man has seen God at any time: John 1.18.
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Mat. 3.11. John 15 26. Ephesians. 4.8, 10, 11. 1. John. 3.8.
He that comes after me, will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.
I will send unto you from the Father the Spirit of truth. When he ascended up
on high he gave gifts unto men. He ascended up on high, that he might fill all
things. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, 2. Our perseverance therein.
John 14.1. Mat. 28.20. John 14.18, 23.
that he might loose the works of the Devil. Of his raising us from death,
these Scriptures make evident mention: I will raise him up in the last day. No
man shall take my sheep out of mine hands. I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish. 3. Our Resurection from death. Joh. 6.54. and 10.28 1
Cor. 15.28. Ephesians. 5.27.
When all things shall he subdued unto him, he shall make unto himself a
glorious Church in the sight of God, which he gathers from the beginning of
the world unto the end. Hereby we may understand, that the giving of the holy
Ghost is a part of our salvation or delivery by Christ Jesus our Mediator. For
the holy Ghost is he by who Christ effectually performs this, which he, being
our Intercessor with his Father, has promised his Father in our behalf: that
is, he teaches us by illuminating our minds with the knowledge of God and his
divine will: and regenerateth or sanctifies, and guides and stablisheth us,
that we may begin the study of holiness, persist and profit therein, until sin
be fully abolished in us; and sin being abolished, death must needs be
abolished: which that he might together with death destroy, Christ was sent of
his Father into the world.

Christ is our most perfect Savior.
Christ saves us from all evils whether of crime or punishment, by his merit
and efficacy* fully and most perfectly, inchoating and beginning our salvation
in this life, but consummating and finishing it in the life to come. Which is
proved first, In that his merit is most perfect, and that for two causes before
expressed; 1. The worthiness of the person, because he that suffered it, is
God: (for, Acts 20.28.
God has purchased the Church with his own blood. Christ through the eternal
Spirit offered himself. Whence also it is that the obedience of the Son in
punishment or satisfaction surpasses the righteousness and punishment, or
satisfaction of all the Angels, and is a sufficient price and merit for so
many, and so great blessings.) 2. The greviousnesse of the punishments which he
sustained for us. Again, in that he in most perfect and absolute manner
applies and imparteth salvation unto us. Col. 2.10.
Ye are complete in him, that is, ye have all things appertaining to
everlasting blessedness, ye for Christ's sake are become the perfect and blessed
sons of God. Col. 1.19.
For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell. The blood
of Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleanses us from all sin, Now there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. John 1.7. Romans 1.8. Heb. 7.24,
25.
But this man, because he endures for ever, has an everlasting Priesthood:
Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him.

4. Whom he saves.
He saves all and only the Elect and Believers, which have been, are, or
shall be, even from the beginning, to the end of the world, and that both by
his merit, and by his efficacy. For in them only, which embrace the benefit of
redemption with a true faith, has God his end, even his worship and glory. For
he has decreed to gather and reserve a Church unto himself in this life, but
with this condition, that it apprehend that benefit, and be thankful for the
same. God so loved the world, John 3.16.
that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, John. 17.20.
but have everlasting life. I pray not for these alone; but for them also which
shall believe in me through their word, that they all may be one. I am the
living bread which came down from heaven: John 6.51. Ephesians. 1.4, 12.
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever. He has chosen us in
Christ, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love, and that
we should be unto the praise of his glory.

A brief sum of all that has bin said in four questions.
The sum of all that has been hitherto dilated and enlarged, may in brief be
thus concluded: Quest. 1. Who is he that saves us? Ans. The Son of God is
our Jesus, that is to say, our Savior. Quest. 2. Whom saves he? Ans. His
people, to wit, all and only the Elect which are given him of his Father.
Quest. 3. From what evils delivers he his Elect? Ans. From all sin, and the
punishments of sin. Quest. 4. By what means? Ans. Two manner of ways: by his
merit, and by his efficacy; and both these ways he most perfectly delivers
his chosen. The true meaning of the Article.


Now then, what mean the words of this Article, I believe in Jesus? This is my
beloved Son, Mat. 17.5. John 5.23.
in whom I am well pleased: Hear him: whom God will have worshipped and
honored of us. He that honoreth not the Son, the same honoreth not the Father,
which has sent him.

Quest. 30. Do they then believe in the only Savior Jesus, who seek for
happiness and safety of the Saints, or of themselves, or elsewhere?
Ans. No: For although in word they boast themselves of him as their Savior,
yet indeed they deny the only Savior Jesus. 1. Com.13.30*31. Gal. 5.4.
For it must needs be, that either Jesus is not a perfect Savior, or that they
who embrace him as their Savior with a true faith, possess all things in him,
which are required unto salvation. Heb. 12.2. Esaias 9.6. Col. 1.19.20. and 2.10.
1. John 1.17.


The Explication.
THis question is moved to convict such as glory in the name of Jesus, and in
the mean space seek for salvation, either wholly, or in part, without this
Jesus: as, in the merits of Saints, in Popes indulgences and pardons, in their
own Satisfactions, Works, Fastings, Prayers, Almsdeeds, etc. of which crew
are the Papists, Jesuits, and such like hypocrites of our times. The question
therefore is, Whether these do believe in the only Savior Jesus, or no? It
is answered, that they believe not; but whatsoever they vaunt in their words
and speeches, yet indeed they deny him. The collection of the whole answer is
concluded in this Syllogism, drawn from the description of an only and
perfect Savior: Whosoever is a perfect and only Savior, he bestows
salvation not jointly with others, nor in part only, but full, entire, and
whole: But this Jesus, the son of Mary, is that Savior, which is the only
and perfect Savior; whereof demonstration has been made in the former
question: Wherefore he bestows salvation neither jointly with others,
neither part thereof only, but he alone performs the whole, most
absolutely; and by a consequent, they who join Intercessours with Jesus, or
crave and expect any part of salvation elsewhere, do indeed deny the only
Savior Jesus. We may also frame it on this manner: They who seek for
salvation in any other than in Christ, whether in Saints, or in themselves,
etc. believe not in Jesus, as in their only Savior: But Papists and Jesuits,
laboring to establish meritorious works of their own, or of Saints, seek for
salvation in some other besides Christ Jesus: Therefore they believe not in
Jesus, as in their only Savior. The Minor of the Syllogism is granted by
them, and is a point of their doctrine. The Major is clear out of the
description of a perfect Savior, set down in the Major of the former
Syllogism. Object. To pray for others, is to make intercession. God will that
one should pray for another, as the Saints for Saints: Therefore he will that
one make intercession for another; and by a consequent, the glory of Christ is
not impeached, if the intercession of Saints be joined unto his intercession.
Answ. There is an ambiguity, both in the word Prayer, and in the word
Intercession. God will, that one pray and make intercession for another; but
this they must do, not standing on the worthiness of their own intercession
and merits: but on the worthiness of the intercession and merits of the only
Mediator Christ. Christ makes intercession for us, because he prays,
wills, and obtains, and effectuateth it himself, that for his own sacrifice
and prayers we may be received of God the Father into favor, and be reformed
according to his Image. Christ therefore makes intercession for us by the
vigor and virtue of his own proper worthiness and merits; for his own
worthiness he is heard, and obtains what he desires. After this sort do
not the Saints make intercession one for another. Wherefore seeing the Papists
feign, that the Saints do by their own merits and prayers obtain for others
grace, and certain good things at Gods hands, they manifestly derogate from
the glory of Christ, and deny him to be the only Savior.

ON THE 12. SABBATH.
Quest. 31. Why is he called Christ, that is, Anointed?
Answ. Because he was ordained of the Father, and anointed of the holy Ghost,
Psalm. 45.8. Heb. 1.9. Esaias 61.1. Luke 4.18.
the chief Prophet and Doctor, Deuteronomy. 8.15. Acts 3.22 and 7.37. Esaias 55.4.
who has opened unto us the secret counsel, and all the will of his Father
concerning our Redemption: John 1.18. and 15.15.
and the high Priest, Psalm. 110.4.
who with that one only sacrifice of his body has redeemed us. Heb. 9.12, 14,
28. and 10.12, 14.
and does continually make intercession to his Father for us: Romans 5.9, 10. and
8.34. Heb. 9.24. 1 John 2.1.
and a King, who rules us by his word and spirit, and defends and
maintains that salvation which he has purchased for us. Psalm. 2.6. Zach.
9.9. Matthew. 21.5. and 28.18. Luke 1 33. Joh. 10.28. Revel. 10. and 12. and 16.


The Explication.
What is signified by the name of Christ.
THe name of Jesus does rather summarily than expressly note the office of the
Mediator: and is as it were a proper name designing rather a certain person.
But the word, Messiah, or Christ, or Anointed, is properly an Epitheton of the
office, which being adjoined to the former, does more significantly declare the
proper and certain office of the Mediator: For it expresses metonymically
the three parts thereof, namely, to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. For
these three were wont to be anointed, and so to be designed to these
functions. Object. But it may be that Christ was anointed but to one of these
functions only. Ans. He is called in the Scripture a Prophet, a King, and a
Priest: And further, Christ was signified by anointed persons, whereof those
three sorts were in the Old Testament. And hence it comes to pass, that these
two names, Jesus Christ are often joined. For it is not enough to believe, that
there is a Savior, and that he is exhibited; but we must further also
certainly be persuaded, that this Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary, is that
Savior and Christ, promised in the Old Testament. Furthermore, concerning the
office of the Mediator, as it is designed by his name Christ, which signifies
Anointed, four things especially offer themselves to be considered: 1. What
the Unction or Anointing of Christ is, or in what sense he is called
Anointed. 2. What is Christ's Prophetical function. 3. What his Priesthood 4.
What his Kingdom.


1. What Christ's Unction or Anointing is.
Anointing in the Old Testament was a Ceremony, whereby, according to Gods
ordinance, Prophets, Priests, and Kings were anointed, either with some
special, or common oil: that it might stand for a testimony, to those who
were rightly anointed, that they were called of God to the administering of one
of these functions, and that they should be furnished from God with gifts
necessary for the performing of that whereunto they were called. For anointing
signified, undergo in executing the function committed unto them of God. We are
unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved. 2 Cor. 2.15. ^ Cor.
15.5^. The analogy or proportion between the sign and the thing signified.
Your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Further, the out ward anointing did,
as a sign, represent the inward, that is, the gifts of the holy Ghost, as the
things signified, by reason of a correspondent Analogy and proportion. For, as
oil makes the dry parts, being anointed therewith, lively, agill, and able
or fit to do their duty, and besides, to send forth a sweet savor: So the holy
Ghost furnishing them with necessary gifts, which are ordained to a function,
gives them strength and power, whereby they, being of themselves unfit to do
any good, are made fit and able to work, and accomplish things grateful unto
God: that is, the holy Ghost causes them to dispatch readily, and with
dexterity, the parts of that duty which is enjoined them, and to do things
acceptable to God, and availeable for the preservation of the Church.

Now, the anncinting of Jesus Christ is, The Lord would break him, Esaias 53.10.
and make him subject to infirmities: when he shall make his soul an offering
for sin, be shall see his seed, and shall prolong his days, and the will of
the Lord shall prosper in hid hand: He shall see of the travel of his soul,
and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many; for he shall bear their iniquities: Therefore will I give him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil. Jesus then, the Son of God and
Mary, Two causes why Jesus was also called Christ, that is, Anointed.
is called Messiah, or Christ, or Anointed: Because he was appointed of his
Father from everlasting, the Mediator, that is, the chief Prophet, Priest,
and King of the Church. This is confirmed by this reason: He that is to be a
Prophet, a Priest, and a King, and is called Anointed, he is in respect of
those three called Anointed. But the Mediator, which was called Messiah, or
Anointed, was to be the chief Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church:
Therefore he is in respect of those three, called Anointed, or Christ.
Again, the same is showed by many places of Scripture. Joh. 7.28. and 6.38.
I came not of my self, etc. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own
will, Heb. 5.5.
but his will which has sent me. Christ took not to himself this honor to be
made the High Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day
begat I thee, etc. The Lord swore, Psalm. 11.4. Heb. 13.8. Rev. 13.8. 1 Cor.
1.30.
thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck. Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, the same is also for ever. The Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world. Christ is made of God unto us, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. So he is often called the
Angel of the covenant, sent of old unto the Church. He is called Anointed, in
respect of the gifts of the holy Ghost, which were poured on him thick,
abundantly, and most perfectly; that is, all the gifts and graces, whatsoever
are in all the blessed Angels and Men, and those in the most excellent and high
degree, that he might be sufficient for the restoring, ruling, preserving of
his Church, and for administering of the government of the whole world, and for
the directing thereof to the safety and salvation of his Church. God gives him
not the spirit by measure. Wherefore God, John 3.34. Heb. 2.9. Esaias 61.1.
thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me: Therefore has the Lord anointed me. The
anointing therefore is of the whole person, yet with this difference, That it
is so applied to both natures, as it signifies the ordaining of them to the
Mediatourship. For he is Mediator according to both natures, who was always
present with his Church, Christ is anointed in respect of his humanity, not of
his Godhead: in respect whereof he is annointer
even before the flesh was born: But as his anointing designeth the
communicating of the gifts of the holy Ghost, so his humane nature only is
meant to be anointed. For his Godhead, because it is always in it self
goodness most perfect, and passing measure, is not anointed, but annointeth
and fills with gifts and graces both his own humanity, which his Godhead
does personally inhabit, as also the Elect and chosen. Wherefore one and the
same Christ, in respect of his diverse natures, is both anointed and annointer,
as raiser, and raised. For the Father annointeth with the holy Ghost, but by
the Lord: So that Irenaeus says pretily, Lib. 3. cap. 20.
That by the name of anointing was comprised and understood the three persons
of the Godhead; The annointer, the Father: the anointed, the Son: and the
anointing, which is the holy Ghost. Ob. But it is nowhere read, Christ
anointed spiritually.
that Christ was anointed. Ans. Christ was not anointed typically,
ceremonially, or sacramentally: but really, and spiritually, that is, he
received the thing it self, which was prefigured and signified by the
ceremonial anointing, which was the holy Ghost: as it is said, Wherefore God,
thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Psalm. 45.8. Heb. 1.9. Esaias 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me: Therefore has the Lord anointed me. As
therefore it was meet that Christ should be a Prophet, a priest, and a King,
not typical, but the very signified and true, that is, the great and high
Prophet, Priest and King: so it was necessary that he should be anointed not
with typical oil, but with the signified and true oil, which was the holy
Ghost: For such as the office was, such should the anointing be. But the
office was not typical, but the very thing it self: Therefore such also should
the anointing be.

Hence we learn and understand these two things: 1. That Christ has his name
not from the ceremonial anointing, Christ has his name, not from the
ceremonial anointing, but from the thing thereby signified.
but from the thing it self, which was thereby signified: because he is that
chief and high Prophet, Priest, and King, whom as types, the Prophets,
Priests, and Kings of the Old Testament, which were wont to be anointed with
external oil, did represent. The name therefore of the sign or type, that
is, anointed, is transferred to the thing it self, even to the High Priest,
Prophet, and King, Jesus. 2. That there is a great difference between this
Jesus Annnointed, and the Anointed of the Old Testament. Three differences
between Christ anointed, and the anointed of the Old Testament.
For, types, and shadows of this only chief and true Christ, that is, of this
King, Prophet, and Priest. Wherefore necessary was it, that they should yield
and give place to him being once exhibited. For the thing it self being come
and exhibited, the types cease. imperfect and weak. But in Jesus Christ it is
perfect and exceeding great. For in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
personally, so that he is both the Anointed, Colos. 2.9.
and Annointer. the gifts of the holy Ghost, and those many ways more
excellent than they are found in all the Angels and Men: because he had them in
the highest, both number and degree. Of his fullness have all we received. John
1.16. 1 Cor. 12.11. Ephesians. 4.7.
But the Anointed of the Old Testament received neither all the gifts, neither
in the highest degree, but divided, and according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, some more, some fewer, and some greater gifts than some; much less
were they able by their own power and virtue to work the same in others.
Object. God cannot be anointed. Christ is God: Therefore he could not be
anointed, no not with the prefigured or signified oil. Answ. In some respect
we grant this whole reason. Why God cannot be said to be anointed.
For Christ, as touching his Godhead, cannot be anointed with the gifts of the
holy Ghost: Because not one jot of the gifts of the holy Ghost can be added to
the Godhead, because of the exceeding perfection thereof. Because the holy
Ghost by whom the anointing is immediately administered, is the proper spirit
of Christ, no less proceeding from him, than from the Father: Wherefore he, as
he is God, has not any thing from the holy Ghost, neither does he receive him,
which is already his own, from any other, but gives him unto others, whom it
pleases him. As also no man can give thee thy spirit which is in thee, because
that which thou already have, cannot be given unto thee. Repl. According to
which nature Christ is anointed, according to the same he is a Mediator,
that is, the Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church. But according to his
humane nature only he is anointed: Therefore according to that only he is
Mediator. The Minor is thus proved: To be anointed, is to receive the gifts
of the holy Ghost: But according to his humane nature only he received these
gifts: Therefore according to that only he is anointed. Answ. The Major of
the former reason is made of a bad and faulty Definition; because the
Definition is of too straight and narrow a Compass: For, to be anointed, is
not only to receive the gifts: In what sense Christ may be said to be anointed
according to his Godhead.
but also to be designed to some certain office. In the former sense Christ is
anointed according to his humanity only: in the later, according to both
natures, Or we may answer, that the whole reason is faulty, because of an
ambiguity in the word Anointing. For in the Major, it is taken either for the
whole anointing, or for that part, which is an ordaining to an office: but in
the Minor it is taken for the other part only, which is the participation of
the gifts of the holy Ghost. Now then, according to which nature Christ is not
anointed (that is, neither severally by a designement to an office; neither by
both a designement to an office, and a receiving of the gifts of the holy
Ghost:) according to that nature, he is not Mediator. Christ according to his
Godhead is not anointed, both with a designment to an office, and a receiving
of gifts: yet is he, according to his Godhead, anointed by an ordaining or
designment to an office: Therefore he is a Mediator also according to his
Godhead.

Christ Mediator according to both natures.
Christ therefore is a Mediator, that is, the Prophet, Priest, and King of the
Church, in respect of both natures: For unto the office of a Mediator do more
actions concur, whereof some he executes by his Godhead, some by his Flesh;
yet so, that they are done and performed together, the properties of both
natures being as it were communicated. Wherefore, that we err not here, nor
conceive amiss, Two rules to be observed.
these two rules are to be observed: The properties of the one nature in the
Mediator, are attributed to the other in the concrete, that is, to the person;
yet still in respect of that nature whose properties they are: As, God is
angry, God suffers, God dies, to wit, according to his humanity. Again, The
man Christ is omnipotent, everlasting, everywhere present, namely, as
concerning his Deity. This is called the communicating of the properties, and
is a certain kind of Synecdoche. The names of the Mediatourship are attributed
to the whole person in respect of both natures, yet reserving still the
properties of each nature, and the differences of actions: For, to the
performing of the Mediatourship, the properties, or faculties and operations,
both of the divine and of the humane nature are required: so that each
performs his proper function with communion of the other.

2. What is Christ's Prophetical function.
HAving examined in the former question what Christ's Anointing may import and
signify, it remains that we prosecute in brief his threefold office, or
the three parts of the office of the Mediatourship, whereunto Christ is
anointed. Where were are to observe the Definitions of a Prophet, Priest, and
King: which are deduced out of the several functions which each of these
executed from all antiquity. The word Prophet, comes from the Greek word
(...), The signification of the name, Prophet.
which signi^ieth to publish abroad things either present, or to come. A
Prophet in general is, A person called of God, who publishes and expounds
unto men the will of God, concerning things either present, or to come; which,
without some revelation from God, remain unknown to us: as being such, to the
knowledge whereof men were not able by themselves to come. A Prophet is either
a Minister, Two kinds of Prophets. Two kinds of ministerial Prophets. What
the Prophets of the Old Testament were.
or the head and chief of the Prophets, which is Christ. Of ministerial
Prophets, some are of the Old, some of the New Testament. Of the New Testament,
some are specially so called, some only in general. The Prophets of the Old
Testament were persons immediately called and instructed of God himself,
either by instinct, or by dreams, or by divine visions, or by speeches had by
God with them, that they should declare to men, to whom they were sent, the
true doctrine concerning God and his Worship, and cleanse and clear it from
errors and corruptions; that they should recount and illustrate the promise of
the Messiah to come, and his kingdom and benefits, or remission of sins, and
eternal life, by and for him to be given to all Believers; that they should
foretell future events, good and bad, and rewards and punishments; that they
should guide, and administer, and order many counsels and offices, public or
civil, having divine and certain testimonies to warrant them, that they could
not err in such doctrine, precepts, and counsels, as they propounded in the
Name of God. Those testimonies were especially these: 1. The continual consent
of the Prophets in Israel, of Moses and the Patriarchs, both one with another,
Four testimonies of the truth of the doctrine delivered by the Prophets of the
Old Testament.
and with those first divine revelations, which were given at the Creation in
Paradise. 2. Miracles certainly coming from God. 3. The events of things
exactly answering to the sacred Oracles, and Predictions of the Prophets. 4.
The testimony of the holy Ghost, thoroughly persuading and convincing men's
minds concerning the truth of Prophetical doctrine. Such Prophets were Adam,
Seth, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and others, and afterward Moses,
and they who succeeded him among the people of Israel. A Prophet of the New
Testament specially so called is a person immediately called of God, What a
Prophet of the New Testament is. Acts 11.28 and ^1.11. Acts 21.4. 1 Cor. 14 4,
5, 29.
who, by divine instinct, and through special revelation of the holy Ghost,
does certainly foresee and fore-shew things to come: As were the Apostles, and
Agabus, and the Disciples, telling Paul through the spirit, that he should not
go up to Jerusalem, etc. A Prophet of the New Testament, l^^g n^rall, is
c^lled a^y, whosoever has the gift of understanding, expounding and applying
the prophecies and writings of the Prophets, who are properly so called, to the
present use of ^h^ church. So is this word used, 1 Corinthians. This function and
gift of prophesying, that is, of expounding and applying the Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles to the use of the Church, is at all times necessary: That
other of foretelling things to come, not so: and therefore it is but
temporary, and for a time.

Christ a prophet from the beginning of the Church (...) all c^^^^ty
The great and chief Prophet, which is Christ, is a person immediately
ordained of God, even from the beginning and cradle of the Church in Paradise
to all eternity, sent of the Father to declare the will of God toward
mankind, to institute and appoint a ministry* to teach by the Word and
Sacraments, the holy Ghost working together with him and lastly in the fl^^h to
preach the Gospel, and to make known in his flesh by his doctrine and works,
that he is the Some, consubstantiall, and of the same substance with the
Father, and auth^^^ of the Evangelike doctrine, giving by it the holy Ghost,
and kindling faith in the hearts of men sending Apostles, and gathering unto
himself a Church ^^t of mank^^de, of which he may be heard, invocated and
worshipped: Wherefore the Pro^^^ call function of Christ is, There pa^^^^^
C^^st, (...)
The ^^m, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. The
things the* have heard of the Father, M^^^ (...) 5 (...) 1^. and 6 10.
those speak I to the world: Likewise to refine and pu^^^^ the Law, and
worship of God from corruptions. He (that is, (...) 11.
Christ) has given some Apostles* some Prophets, and some Doctors, etc.
Therefore said the ^^s^ome of God I will send them Prophets and Apostles, etc.
I will give you a mouch ^^a wisdom, where against all your advers^ries shall
not be able to speak, nor resist. So the spirit of Christ is said to have
spoken by the Prophets. He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with
fire. Then opened he their understanding, Mat. 3 11. (...) 24.4^. 2 phe^ 5 ^0.
^^^ke 10.9. (...) ^^.14. and 2^.5.
that they might understand the Scriptures. Christ gave himself for the
Church, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water
through the word. They went forth and preached every where, and the Lord
wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed The Lord
opened the heart of Lydia, that thee attended unto the things which Paul spoke.
The Lord gave testimony unto the word of his grace. Briefly, the parts of
Christ's prophetical office are these three: 1. To reveal his Fathers will. 2.
To ordain a Ministry. 3. To teach the hearts of men, or to be effectual by
his ministry. And these three things Christ does and did perform even from
the beginning of the Church, and will perform to the end of the world, and
that by his own authority, power, and efficacy: and therefore Christ is called
the Word, Why Christ is called (...)
not only in respect of the Father, of whom in cogitation beholding himself,
and considering the image of himself not vanishing, but sub^sting,
consubstantiall, co-equall, co-eternall to the Father himself, he was
begotten: but also in respect of us, because he is that person, which spoke to
the Fathers, and brought forth the living and quickening word or Gospel out of
the bosom of the Father.

Seven differences between Christ and other Prophets.
By these things which have been now spoken, is also understood, what difference
there is between Christ, and other Prophets both of the Old and New Testament:
and why he is the chief Prophet and Doctor. The difference and eminence
consists in his nature and office. Christ (...)
Christ is the very Son of God, and God and Lord of all, and does immediately
utter the word of the Father, and is the Ambassador and Mediator sent of the
Father. Other Prophets are only men, and his servants, called, and sent by him.
Christ author of the doctrine: they preachers only of it. John 1.16.
Christ is author and revealer of the doctrine; and therefore the prince of
all Prophets: Others are signifiers of that which they have received from
Christ: For whatsoever knowledge and prophetical spirit is in them, all that
they have from Christ revealing and giving it to them: Therefore is the spirit
of Christ said to have spoken in the Prophets; neither has he opened only to
the Prophets the doctrine which he teaches, but also to all the godly. John
1.18.
Of his fullness have we all received, that is, all the Elect, even from the
beginning of the world unto the end. No man has seen God at any time: the
only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
Christ's gifts infinite: theirs finite.
His prophetical wisdom is infinite, and perfect, and therefore in all gifts
he excels others, even according to his humanity. Christ gives gifts and
receives not, they receive and give not. John 10.14.
This Prophet Christ appoints the ministry, sends and ordains Prophets
and Apostles, he gives the holy Ghost, and gifts necessary for the Prophets,
Apostles, and all Ministers of the word, to the performing of their duty. He
shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. He shall lead you into all
truth. Christ principally moves men's hearts: they instrumentally.
Christ himself is not only the author of the doctrine, and erecter and
maintainer of the external ministry, but also, by his own and other Prophets
voice and outward ministry, he preaches effectually to men inwardly through
the virtue and working of the holy Ghost. Others are only the instruments of
Christ, and that arbitrary, and at his disposition and direction. Christ's
doctrine full and clear: theirs dark and defective.
The doctrine of Christ, which being made man, he uttered by his own and by his
Apostles mouths, is much more clear and full, than the doctrine of Moses, and
the Prophets of the Old Testament. Christ is authorized by himself: they by
Christ.
Christ therefore has authority of himself; others from him: if Christ speak
we must believe him of him self: others, because Christ speaks in them.
These things are expressly proved by these places of holy Writ: At sundry times,
and in diverse manners God spoke in the old time so our Fathers by the Prophets:
in these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son. Heb 1.1. and 3.3. John
10.14. Mat. 17.3. Luke 10.16.
This man is counted worthy of more glory than Moses; inasmuch as he that
builds the house, has more honor than the house. The spirit of truth, which
I will send you, shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. He that hears you hears
me: and he that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

3. What Christ's Priesthood is.
A Priest, in general, is a person ordained by God to offer for himself and
others, oblations and sacrifices: to pray for others, and to instruct. A Priest
in general.
Under prayer is comprehended blessing, which is to wish them good from God.
There is one Priest which is signifying or typical, another signified.
Atypicall Priest.
The typical Priest was a person appointed by God, 1. To offer typical
sacrifices. 2. To make intercession for himself and others. 3. To declare to
the people the doctrine of the Law, and the promise of the Messiah, and true
sacrifice which was to come. Such were all the Priests of the Old Testament; of
whom one was the High Priest the rest inferior Priests* and these three
properties which we have reckoned, were common to the High Priest with the
other inferior Priests. But some things the High Priest had proper and
peculiar to himself: 1. That he alone entered into the Tabernacle, called the
Holiest of all, The Highpriests prerogatives under the Law.
or Sanctuary, and that but once every year, not without blond, which he
offered for himself and the people, burning incense there, and making
intercession for the people. 2. That his raiment was more gorgeous. 3, That he
was set over the rest. 4. That he only was consulted of questions or matters
doubtful, weighty, and obscure, whether appertaining to Religion, or to the
Common wealth, and did return the answers of God for the Princes and the
people. 5. And therefore did govern and order some counsels and offices of the
State and Kingdom, and did see that all things were lawfully administered. The
inferiors were all the other Priests of the Old Testament: whose office it
was, To sacrifice, to pray, to teach the doctrine of the Law, and the promise
of the Messiah to come, and to make intercession for themselves and others:
Wherefore, though the Leviticall Priests were a type of Christ; yet the most
notable type was the High Priest, for that he in more things represented Christ
out very true, celestial, and perpetual High Priest. Obj. 1. But it was the
Prophets office to teach: Therefore the Priests differed nothing from the
Prophets. Ans. Both of them both the Prophets and the Priests, did teach the
people: and it might so fall out also, that the same was both a Priest and a
Prophet; as it is read of Jeremy. But this was not perpetual, Three
differences between the priests and Prophets in the Old Testament.
but accidental: Because, 1. The Priests were ordained mediatly by men out of
one certain Tribe, namely, the Leviticall; but God immediately, and by himself
raised up Prophets out of any Tribe. 2. There is a great difference found
betwixt them, as touching their function of teaching. For the Prophets were
raised extraordinarily and immediately by God himself, and so received from
him the doctrine which they were to declare unto men. 3. They were so guided by
the special motion of the holy Ghost, that they could not err in that
doctrine, which they uttered unto men in the name of God. But the Priests, as
Priests, 1. Were ordinary Ministers of the old Church. 2. Were appointed by
men. 3. Were tied to the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, which they
learned, not from God immediately, but mediatly by men. 4. They might err in
doctrine and counsel, and did err often, when they departed from the law, and
were reprehended of the Prophets. Wherefore, as touching their function of
teaching, the Prophets differed from the Priests of the Old Testament, after
the same sort, as in the New Testament, the Apostles from other Ministers and
Teachers of the Church.

The signified, and true, and only High Priest is the Son of God, immediately
ordained by ^od the Father himself, Christ the true and prefigured High Priest.
and anointed by the holy Ghost, to reveal unto us the secret will of God,
and his counsel toward us, and by assuming humane nature, offer himself a
sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of all mankind: to obtain for us, by his
intercession unto the Father, remission of sins and eternal life: and lastly,
to apply effectually his sacrifice unto us, both by imputing it, and also by
illightening and moving the Elect, by his Word and Spirit, to receive it with a
true faith; having this testimony, that he is certainly heard of his heavenly
Father, for all those for whom he makes intercession: and withal, having
power to collect and gather his Church. Wherefore, there are four principal
parts of Christ's Priesthood. 1. To teach men both outwardl., speaking to their
ears by his voice, and the voice of his Ministers; and inwardly, speaking to
their hearts by the efficacy of his Spirit. 2. To offer himself a sacrifice
and ransom, full, sufficient, and acceptable unto God for the sins of the
world. Christ's intercession.
3. To make continual intercession for us unto the Father. For this
intercession is proper unto the Son not only because himself, living on
earth, in the time of his flesh, was made a suppliant and a sacrifice for us
unto his Father; but also because he earnestly and desirously will, according
to both natures, that the Father, for his sacrifice once accomplished on the
Cross, remit unto us our sins, and restore unto us righteousness and life:
and the Father, looking upon the sacrifice and will of his only beloved Son,
receives all Believers into his grace and favor: Wherefore the Son, in
respect both of his merit, and will to save us, and of his Fathers continual
beholding and looking thereon, has from everlasting made intercession, and
also does now and for ever in heaven, appearing before his Father, make
intercession for all the Elect and Chosen. To pray for the people, is a thing
common to all Priests: but, To make intercession both in heaven and earth unto
the Father for us, that our sins may be pardoned us, is only belonging to
this high and only Priest. Christ's applying of his merit unto us.
4. To apply his sacrifice unto all those, for whom he prays. And he
applies it: 1. When he procures, by prayer, the Father to impute it unto us,
that is, to receive us for it into favor, and for it to love us. 2. When
himself also, for the same sacrifice sake, John 17.19.
does receive us into favor. Father, for their sakes sanctify I my self. 3.
When he indueth us with true faith, whereby we also may apply his satisfaction
unto our selves, that is, may be assured, and think that it is our
righteousness, whereby we may stand in the presence of the Lord.

Four differences between Christ and other Priests.
Hereby also it is clear, in what other Priests differ from Christ. 1. These
teach only by their outward voice, and not by the inward working also of the
holy Ghost. 2. They do not make continual intercession, neither do they
always obtain what they ask. 3. These apply their benefits unto no man. 4.
They offer not themselves a sacrifice for the sins of others. For all these
things can be and are performed by Christ alone.

4. What is Christ's kingdom.
A King in general.
A King is a person ordained by God, to govern in a people, and bear rule
alone, according to honest laws, and to have power to reward the good, and
punish the bad, and to defend his subjects against their enemies, having no
superior Governor above him. The King of Kings, Christ, is a person
immediately ordained of God, to gather and rule by his word and Spirit his
Church, purchased by his blood; and to defend her, Christ a King of Kings,
being subject unto him, and serving him, against all her enemies both
corporal and spiritual, and to reward her with eternal rewards but to cast
her enemies into everlasting pains and torments. His name is called the word
of God. Rev. 19.12, 16. Christ's kingdom.
And he has upon his garment and upon his thigh a name written, The King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. Wherefore Christ's royal office is, To rule by his
word and Spirit his Church, gathered out of all Nations, from the beginning of
the world. For, that it may go well with us under this King, it is not enough,
if he outwardly teach us, what he would have us, his subjects to perform;
unless also by his Spirit he move our hearts and cause us to be obedient to
his commandment. To defend and preserve this his Church in this life, against
all both inward and outward, domestical and foreign foes: which also he does
perform, while not only by his powerful hand he is ever present with us, but
furnishes us also with those weapons, wherewith our selves also may constantly
and happily ^nter the combat, against our most mighty foes, and utterly
vanquish and discomfit them. This sacred harness and warlike furniture is
described Ephesians. 6.13. To make his Church partaker of the blessings of his
kingdom, and to adorn her, raised up from the dead, with everlasting glory
and bliss. To overcome and rule his enemies by his might and power, and at
length to thrust them down, being fully overcome and conquered, into eternal
torments.

We are in this place to observe the difference of the Prophetical, Priestly,
and Royal office, both of them who were in the old testament, and of Christ,
and of our selves. In the old restament, they were types, or typical Prophets,
Priests, and Kings. Christ is indeed the true Prophet, King, and Priest, which
they prefigured: we are Prophets, Kings, and Priests, by participation, as
having Christ's dignities communicated unto us. Now then, let us see what is our
Prophetical, Priestly, and Royal office.

Quest. 32. But why art thou called a Christian?
Ans. Because through faith I am a member of Jesus Christ, Acts 11.26.
and partaker his anointing; 1 Cor. 6.5.
that both I may confess his name, Act. 2.17. 1 John 2.27.
and present my self unto him a lively sacrifice of thankfulness, Mat. 10.32.
Romans 10.10.
and also may in this life fight against sin and Satan with a free and good
conscience, Romans 12.10. 2 Pet. 2.5, 9. Rev. 1.6. and 4 8, 10. Romans 6.12, 13.
Gal. 5.16, 17. Ephesians. 6.11. 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. 1 Pet. 2.11.
and afterward enjoy an everlasting kingdom with Christ over all creatures.
Mat. 25.34. 2 Timothy 2.12.


The Explication.
IN this thirty second Question we are instructed concerning the inunction, or
anointing of the faithful, namely, Of the communion of the faithful or
Christians, with Christ.
whence they are called Christians or Anointed; and, what is the duty of
Christians, and what their comfort; whereof this name does advertise them. Here
then is discoursed the common place, concerning the communion of Christ the
head of the faithful, his members, and of the functions of these his members.
Hereof four things come to be considered: 1. What is the anointing of
Christians, or whence Believers have the name of Christians, or Anointed. 2.
What is the Prophetical function of Christians. 3. What their Priesthood. 4.
What their Kingdom.


1. What is the Anointing of Christians.
LUke testifies, Acts 11.26. Who is called a Christian.
that the name of Christians first began to be used in Antioch, in the Apostles
time, when as before time they had bin termed by the names of Brethren and
Disciples. The name Christian is derived from Christ: and in general he is
called a Christian, who is a disciple of Christ, and follows his doctrine of
life: and who, being inserted into Christ, has communion and fellowship with
him. There are two sorts of Christians: some seeming or counterfeit, and
outward, but not true, that is, hypocrites: others seeming and true. For not
every seeming Christian, that is, who is in outward corversation a Christian,
is an hypocrite: seeing it is required of us; Mat. 5.16. Jame. 2.18. Mac. 7.23.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Show me thy faith by thy works: but
every hypocrite is a seeming Christian, to whom it shall one day be said, I
never knew you. Seeming and false-hearted Christians.
They are called seeming, but not true Christians, who being baptized, profess
in word and life, or ou^ward conversation, the doctrine and faith of Christ,
and are in the company of nose which are called, but are not partakers of
Christ's benefits, being destitute of true faith and conversion. Therefore they
are not the true and lively members of the Church. Mat. 20.16. and 7.22.
Seeming and true-hearted Christians.
Many are called, but few chosen. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven. They are both seeming and true
Christians, who, being received by baptism into the Church, acknowledge and
profess Christ's doctrine: and, being engrafted into Christ by a true faith,
are made partakers of all his benefits; and being regenerated by the holy
Ghost, lead a life worthy of true Christians. Furthermore, of Hypocrites we
are not her to speak: but of those, who are both without and within, that is,
are truly Christians, and anointed of Christ by the holy Ghost. The question
then is, Why we are called Christians? The causes hereof are two. 1. Because by
faith we are made the members of Christ. 2. Because by it we are made
partakers of his anointing: that is, we are called Christians for the
communication made unto us of Christ's person, What it is to be Christ's members.
office and dignity. To be the members of Christ, is nothing else, than to be
conjoined and united to Christ, by the same spirit dwelling both in him and us
and by this spirit to be enriched with such righteousness and life, as is in
Christ; to be conformed unto Christ: and seeing this righteousness, so long as
we remain in this mortal body, is imperfect, to be acceptable unto God for
the righteousness of Christ, which is imputed unto us. Of this our communion
with Christ these sayings make mention; We being many, are one body in Christ.
Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 6.15, 17. Ephesians. 4.15.
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? He that is joined
unto the Lord, is one spirit. In all things grow up into him which is the head,
that is, The similitude of man a body to declare our union with Christ.
Christ. Now the similitude of the head and members of the same body, is most
fit and appliable to declare that most straight and indissoluble conjunction of
us with Christ. For, members of the Church, being united by the holy Ghost
received through faith, are quickened, and are knit also among themselves, by
the means of mutual charity. Which charity and dilection must needs be there,
if we be joined unto the head. For the connection of the members with the head,
is the original and cause of the conjunction of the members among themselves.
For the quickening spirit of Christ does not flow out of one member into
another, but out of one Christ, as the head, into all the members of the
Church. I will send unto you from the Father, John 15.26.
the Comforter, the Spirit of truth.

Christ is our Head in three respects.
Christ is our head in three respects: In respect of his perfection: because he
is both God and man: and in gifts, as touching his humane nature excels all
creatures. In him dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily, etc. He
alone gives the holy Ghost. This is he, who baptizeth with the holy Ghost. In
dignity, or order: glory, Col. 1.9, 10 Mat. 3.11.
majesty, power, authority, which in his humane nature glorified, he now
openly shows forth and declares. For as God created all things by him: Heb.
1.2. and 3.6.
so he has made him heir of all things, and the ruler of his house. In
respect of his office: For he is the redeemer and sanctifier of his Church,
he is over every member of the Church, he ^^leth, governs, quickneth,
nourishes, and confirms them, so as they continue joined in him, with the
rest of the members. We are also in three respects the members of Christ:
Because by faith and the holy Ghost we are joined unto him, We are in three
respects Christ's members.
and also are knit together amongst our selves, as the members to the head, and
one with another. And this conjunction of the members of this body amongst
themselves, is no less requisite and behoovefull, for the safety of the
Church, than the conjunction of the whole body with Christ the head. For if
thou separate the arm from the hand, thou shall separate it also from the
head, and so it shall no more have life. Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Because we are quickened and
guided of him; and from him as the fountain, we draw all good things: so that
except we continue in him, we have not eternal life in us: as neither the
members sundred from the body, retain life any longer. If a man abide not in
me, he is cast forth as a branch, and withers. John 5.6.
Because as in man's body are diverse faculties and functions of the members: so
are the gifts and functions diverse of the members of Christ in the Church: And
as all the actions of the parts of the body are employed and referred to the
preservation thereof, so all the members of Christ whatsoever they purpose or
do, that ought they to employ and refer to the profit and utility of the
Church. As we have many members in one body, and all members have not one
office: so we being many, are one body in Christ. Romans 11.4. 1 Cor. 12.7.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal.

Whereas then now we understand what it is to be member of Christ, and how we
are his members; it will the more clearly appear, What anointing and
participation of anointing is. What it is to be partaker of Christ's anointing.
what it is to be partaker of Christ's anointing. Anointing signifies a
bestowing of gifts: and participation of anointing imports a communion of
Christ's gifts and office: or, anointing is a participation of all Christ's
benefits, and consists in the participation of Christ's Kingdom, Priesthood,
and Prophetical office. To be partaker then of Christ's anointing, is, 1. to
be partaker of the holy Ghost and his gifts: For the holy Ghost is not idle in
us, but works the same in us which he does in Christ; albeit Christ alone
has more gifts than we all: and those graces and gifts in Christ are far more
excellent in degree. 2. That Christ should communicate unto us his
Prophetical, Priestly, and Royal function.


2. What is the Prophetical function of Christians, that is, in what sense
they are, and are called Prophets.
CHrist makes us partakers of his Prophetical honor or office, not only in
this, that himself prophecieth unto us, Christians are Prophets in knowledge
and confession. Acts. 2.17. Mat. 10.32.
that is, effectually instructs us by his Word and Spirit, but also because
he wills and brings to pass, that we may also prophecy, by professing and
celebrating God: According as it is said, I will power out of my Spirit upon
all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father, which is in
heaven. Our prophetical office therefore is, 1. Rightly to understand and
embrace the doctrine, perfect and necessary to salvation, concerning God and
his will. 2. That every one in his place and degree profess the same, being
understood, faithfully, boldly, constantly, in word and life, thereby both to
celebrate God, and to bring many scholars and disciples unto Christ. The
difference between Christ's Prophetical function and ours, is, 2 Differences of
Christ's Prophetical function with ours.
1. That Christ has the spirit without measure, we by measure: For it is the
proper spirit of Christ which flows from him, and is poured into the hearts
of men: we have him by gift; He, being but one, has all the gifts of the holy
Ghost, and those in the most excellent degree: all we have but only some, and
those far inferior. 2. That Christ effectually teaches, by moving the
hearts of men to accord and assent. The sound and voice of others, without the
inward sound and voice of the holy Ghost, does only strike the cares, neither
pierces it unto the heart.

3. What is the Priesthood of Christians.
What our Priesthood is, and the parts of it.
THe office of a Priest is to teach, to pray, and to sacrifice: Wherefore our
Priesthood is, And thou, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.
Luke 22.32.
What our sacrifices of thanksgiving are.
and sanctified by the sacrifice of Christ: namely, to offer up unto him,
giving our members as weapons of righteousness unto God. Romans 6.13.
Let us therefore by him offer the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is,
the fruit of the lips, which confess his name. Heb. 13.15.
Thy prayer is heard and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of
God. Grace is given me of God that I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ
toward the Gentiles, Acts 13.31.
ministering the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable. Romans 15.15, 16.
that is, all calamities, persecution, contempt, banishments, and even death it
self for the confession of the truth, and the glory of God. Phil. 2.17. 2 Timothy
4.6. Col. 1.24.
Though I be offered. up upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am
glad. I am now ready to be offered Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and
fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake,
which is the Church. This Priesthood Christ communicates unto us: 1. When by
the efficacy of his spirit he works in us these forenamed sacrifices of
thanksgiving, How Christ makes us Priests.
which we offer unto God. 2. When by his merit and intercession unto his
Father, he causes our sacrifices, albeit unperfect and stained with our sins,
to be notwithstanding pleasing and acceptable unto God.

Our sacrifices different from Christ's sacrifice three wates.
Now our sacrifices differ, as well as the sacrifices of the old Priests, from
Christ's sacrifice. both of thankesgiving and propitiatory: We offer up only
sacrifices of thankesgiving. The old Priests also offered up sacrifices of
thanksgiving: because these belong to the whole Church, even from the
beginning, to the end of the world. But those sacrifices, which they offered
besides, were only typical. But no sacrifices of the New Testament are
typical, but either eucharisticall and of thankfulness, as are ours: or
propitiatory, as is the obedience of Christ ot^^, performed for us in suffering
our punishment. For he offered not a typical or figurative, but the real or
figured and signified sacrifice; as being not a typical, but the signified
Priest. both perfect: ours unperfect, and defiled with many sins. for it self,
and for the worthiness that is perfect in it self, and meriteth remission of
sins and eternal life of God for us: because it is the death of the very Son
of God. Our sacrifices merit nothing of God, and please him, not for
themselves, but for Christ's sacrifice, wherewith they are sanctified.

4. What is the kingdom of Christians.
Christians are Kings, 1. By partaking of his victory and royalty. 2. By having
in themselves through him, a power to overcome and over rule both their enemies
and all creatures. John 16.33. Rev. 3.21. Luke 22.30. Our royal office, 1 John
5.4. 1 Timothy 1.18. 2 Timothy 2.12. Mat. 25.34.

We are partakers of Christ's kingdom, Because he is our King, and does
communicate his victory and glory against his enemies and ours, with us, and
makes us by faith citizens of his kingdom, the sons of God, his brethren and
co heirs. Because, by the virtue and operation of his Spirit, he also makes
us Kings: that is, the Lords over all creatures, conquerors of our enemies, and
partakers of everlasting bliss and glory. Be of good comfort, I have overcome
the world. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne;
That ye may sit on seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Our royal
office therefore is, 1. That by the virtue of Christ's spirit (who has restored
unto us our lost royal and heavenly dignity, over all our enemies) we fight
continually against sin, the world, the devil, and the flesh, and overcome.
Which we do, when as by a true faith we are resolved, that we have remission
of all our sins: and when by the same faith we receive the holy Ghost to
repress sin, even in this life, as touching the beginning of our conquest. 2.
That at length all our enemies being, by the grace of Christ, fully brought
under, we enjoy eternal bliss and glory, that is, the heavenly kingdom,
which by the working of the holy Ghost is begun in us in this life, and which
we now possess in hope, but then shall in full possession inherit. Our
kingdom. 1 Cor. 3.21.
Fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience. If we suffer, we shall
also reign with him. Inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world. Briefly, our kingdom is, 1. That in Christ we are
Lords over all creatures. All things are yours. 1 John 5.4.
2. That we overcome our enemies by faith in Christ. Who has given us victory.
This is the victory that overcomes the world even our faith.

Four Difference between Christ's kingdom and ours.
There is notwithstanding a difference between the kingdom of Christ, and ours,
For, hereditary unto Christ: For he is the natural Son, and therefore by
nature King: but ours is by right of adoption. Christ, as the natural Son, is
ruler over his house, heir of all things. We are, by and for him, Heb. 3.6.
and 1.2.
the adopted sons of God. over all creatures simply, but especially over the
whole Church of the holy Angels and men. But we neither are, nor ever shall be
the Kings and head of the Angels, and the Church; but only over other
creatures, which are compelled to serve us, we are Lords: heaven, earth, and
all things shall serve us; we shall be adorned with glory, majesty, and no
common excellency of gifts, but with the highest prerogative over all wicked
men and devils, whom we shall judge, subscribing, and yielding our consents to
the Sovereign judgment of Christ in condemning and destroying them. Ye shall
sit upon twelve seats, Mat. 19.28.
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. by his own power; we, in him, and by him,
that is, by his grace and assistance. Be of good comfort, I have overcome the
world. John 16.33.
the scepter of his spirit and word, moving our hearts, and restoring in us the
lost image of God: we are ministers and administrators of the outward word and
rites; we cannot give the holy Ghost: as, I baptize you with water, Mat. 3.10.
1 Cor. 3 5.
but he that comes after me, he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and
with fire. Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos? but the ministers, etc.

The sum of all is: In the old testament were Prophets, Priests, and Kings*
typical: What it is to believe in Christ.
Christ is those three in signification, and in truth; we by participation from
him: Wherefore great is the use of this doctrine, 1. Unto consolation: Fot, to
believe in Christ, is not only to know, that Jesus is the anointed, that is,
the chief Prophet, Priest, and Kings but to be persuaded, that he is such also
unto me, and that I, being engraffed into him by faith, as a member into the
head, am daily sustained, governed, and quickened by him; and that he makes me
also partaker of his unction or anointing, that, by the working of the holy
Ghost, I may also be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. This is the unspeakable
advancement and dignity of Christians. Unto exhortation: For whereas we are all
Prophets and Doctors appointed by God, therefore we are to confess and
celebrate his name: whereas we are all Priests, it is our duty to offer up our
selves unto him as a lively sacrifice of praise and thankfulness: whereas we
are all Kings, it behooveth us to fight and war manfully aginst sin, the world
and the Devil, that at length we may bear rule over all our enemies, being
adorned with everlasting bliss and glory.

ON THE 13. SABBATH.
Quest. 33. For what cause is Christ called the only begotten Son of God, when
we also are the sons of God?
Ans. Because Christ alone is the co-eternall and natural Son of the eternal
Father, Ioh. 1.14. H^bt. 1.1, 2. John 3.16. 1 John 4.9. Romans 8.32.
and we are but sons adopted of the Father by grace for his sake. Romans 8.16.
John 1.12. Gal. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.5, 6.


The Explication.
UNder this question, the Common place touching the Godhead of the Son is
contained. Out of the words of the question an objection may be thus collected;
He which is the only begotten Son, has no brethren: but Christ has
brethren, for even we also are the Sons of God: Therefort he is not the only
begotten Son of God. Answ. For answer hereunto, we must put a distinction and
difference between Christ's and our manner of being Sons. Christ is the only
begotten Son, the natural, and proper Son of God: We are the sons of God,
adopted of the Father by grace through Christ. For further evidence in
illustrating this point, we are to explain in brief who are called sons, and
how many ways this name is used; and, this being done, to examine who are, and
are called the sons of God.

All sons are either born sons, or adopted sons.

Diverse sorts of sons.
Sons that are borne sons, are they who begin at one and the same time both to
be, and to be sons; and these are either sons borne of Parents; or sons borne
by grace. Sons borne of Parents, are properly called natural sons; to whom
the essence and nature of their Parents is communicated; and that either in
part, or wholly. In part the essence and nature of the Parents of whom we are
borne is communicated unto us men. Wholly the divine essence is communicated of
the Father unto Christ, as touching his Godhead. As then we are the natural
sons of our Parents: so Christ according to his divine nature is the natural
and only Son of God, of the same essence and nature with the Father, of whose
substance he was, after a manner altogether ineffable, John 5.26.
begotten from everlasting. As the Father has life in himself: so likewise
has he given to the Son to have life in himself. The eternal Father
therefore has communicated unto his Son the life whereby both himself by
himself lives, and whereby he quickneth all creatures; which life is that
one and eternal Deity, creatresse and defendresse of all things. Sons by
grace, are they who at one and the same time began to be, and to be sons of
God: but, that they are sons, this they have either by grace of Creation, or
by grace of Conception by the holy Ghost, and of the Union with the Word. The
sons of God by grace of Creation, are Angels, and Adam before the fall;
because God created them, that he might account them for his sons, and they
again acknowledge and magnify him as their bountiful and benign Father.
These indeed are unproperly called sons borne by grace: but yet such they
are, in as much as they began both to be, and to be sons. The Son of God by
grace of conception by the holy Ghost, and of union with the Word, is Jesus
Christ only, according to his humane nature: because as touching this he was
the Son of God by grace, even presently from that very moment, when hebegan to
be born man: and that therefore, because, by the virtue of the holy Ghost, he
alone was born of the substance of the Virgin, pure from all stain or
corruption, and so was personally united with the Word.

Adopted sons are they, who begin not at the same time to be, and to be sons:
but sometimes were, when yet they were not adopted, or sometimes were not sons,
or had their being ere they were such sons, and were made sons only by the law
and will of the Adopter, who endoweth them with the right and title of sons, so
that with him they are in the same place, as if they had bin born of him. After
this sort, that is, by adoption, Adam after his fall, and all the elect
regenerate are the sons of God; being adopted for the natural Sons sake,
Christ Jesus. But before they were adopted, they were the sons of wrath.

How Christ is the only begotten Son of God.
Out of this distinction of sons, it is clear both how we are the sons of God,
namely, by adoption; and how Christ is the only begotten Son of God, to wit,
two ways: According to his Divinity, because, as touching this nature, he
alone was from everlasting begotten of the substance of his Father: We have
seen his glory, John 1.14.
as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. According to his humanity
in some sort, (though unproperly) because even according to this also he was
born after such a manner, as never was any other besides him, to wit, of an
unspotted Virgin, by the power and virtue of the holy Ghost. Christ is farther
called the first begotten, According to his Godhead* both in respect of time,
and of worthiness: because he, before all, How he is the first begotten.
was begotten from everlasting of the Father; and is perfect God; and all were
made by him, and by, and for him are delivered, and receive the right of sons.
According to his humanity, in respect of his worthiness only and right: 1.
Because he was begotten after a singular manner. 2. Because he has his
subsistence in the person of the Word, to the unity whereof the humanity was
assumed. 3. Because he has by his merit purchased the right of sons for
others. 4. Because in gifts, works, majesty, authority, he unspeakably
excels all the sons of God, even Angels themselves, and is Lord and head of
them all. Unto Christ therefore, in respect of his humanity, agrees this,
which of old was signified by the type of the firstborn: For after the decease
of his father, the firstborn took two portions of his fathers goods, when as
the rest had each but one. Now the cause of that right was his office and
function: Genesis 27.29. and 37*
For he succeeded into the room of his father, so that he had authority over
his family, and the rest of his brethren, and did bear rule over them. So
Christ the Son of God has also right, according to his humanity, over the rest
of his brethren, and all the sons of God: and he, but one, has received more
and more excellent gifts, than have all the rest: because he is the Lord of his
Fathers house, the rest are his Ministers. Col. 1.15, 18.
Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature. He is
the beginning and the firstborn of the dead, that in all things he might have
the preeminence. How he is Gods own Son. Romans 8.32.
Christ is also called Gods own Son, because he was begotten and not adopted of
God. Who spared not his own Son. Here also we must observe the right forms of
speech to be used in Christ's and our filiation, son-hood, or estate of sons.
How he is the natural Son of God.
Christ according to his divinity is called Gods natural Son, because he is
begotten from everlasting of the essence of the Father. According to his
humanity he is not called Gods natural Son, but Gods Son by grace* by grace, I
say, not of adoption, but of conception by the holy Ghost, and of union with
the Word. The reason why, according to his humanity, he is not Gods natural
Son, is, because, according to his humanity, he is not begotten of the essence
of the Father. The reason why, according to his humanity, he is not Gods
adopted Son, is, because he was not made a son of no son, but in the same
moment wherein he began to be, began also to be a son. The Angels are called
the natural sons of God; but by grace of creation, as man also was before his
fall. The regenerate in this life are sons by grace, not of creation, but of
adoption. Grace therefore in respect of adoption, is as a general in respect
of a special: For there are three degrees or kinds of grace, to wit, grace of
creation, grace of conception by the holy Ghost and Union with the Word, and
grace of adoption.

A type or figure of the sons of God.
The sons of God are 1. Borne 1. Of parents: which sort of sons are properly
natural, to whom the essence of parents is communicated. 1. In whole, as the
divine essence of the Father is wholly communicated to Christ according to his
Divinity. 2. In part, as the essence of our parents is communicated unto us
only in part.
2. By grace of 1. Creation, as 1. Angels. 2. Adam before his fall.
2. Conception, by the holy Ghost, and union with the word, as Christ according
to his humane nature.

2. Adopted of 1. God, as Adam after his fall. All the elect regenerate.
2. Men, etc.


Another type.
Of the sons of God 1. One is Natural, to wit, the Word of the eternal
Father. 2. All the rest are by grace of 1. Creation, as Angels, and Adam before
his fall. 2. Conception by the holy Ghost, and union with the word, as Christ
according to his humanity. 3. Adoption, as Adam after his fall, and all the
elect regenerate.


Out of this distinction of sons, the answer to this objection before proposed
is more clear. Object. 1. He that has brethren, is not the only begotten.
Christ has brethren: Therefore he is not the only begotten. Ans. The Major is
to be distinguished. He that has brethren, to wit, of the same generation and
nature, he is not the only begotten. Christ has brethren, but not of the same
generation and nature: that is, not begotten of the substance of God the
Father, but only adopted of God the Father through grace. Our fraternity and
brotherhood with Christ.
Repl. How then are we the brethren of Christ? Ans. Our fraternity and
brotherhood with Christ consists in these four things: He that has a
generation or begetting unlike to the generation of other sons, is in respect
thereof said to be the only begotten: Christ, according to his humanity, has
a generation unlike to the generation of other Sons of God because he alone was
conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of a Virgin: Therefore Christ is called
the only begotten according to his humanity also, in respect of this temporal
and miraculous generation of the Virgin, and not in respect of any eternal
generation of his Father according to his Divinity. Ans. The Major is true of
such a son, as has a generation unlike in the whole kind; that is, both in
nature, and in the manner of the generation. But Christ according to his
humanity has a generation diverse from us, Why Christ according to his manhood
cannot properly be called the only begotten.
not as concerning his nature, but only in respect of the manner: For,
according to his humanity, he is consubstantiall with us, that is, he is true
man, having a humane nature, the same altogether with ours in kind: the
difference is only in the singular and miraculous manner of his conception,
and nativity of the Virgin: Wherefore although in respect of this generation
also of his Manhood, he is only begotten; yet in Scripture, and in the Creed
he is properly called the only begotten Son of God, according to his divine
nature, not according to his humanity: For acaccording to his humane nature he
has brethren of the same generation and nature: but according to his divine
nature he has no brethren, but alone was from everlasting borne of the
essence of the Father. Of no other is it said, that, The Father has given unto
him to have life in himself: and that, John 5.26. Col. 2.9. John 1.14. (...).
In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily: Therefore he is expressly
called the only begotten of the Father, not of his Mother. And the very word
only begotten properly respects the nature and essence it self, not the
peculiar manner of his miraculous conception: and it signifies one that is
begotten alone, and not one begotten after a singular manner alone. Object. 3.
Every son is either natural or adopted: Christ according to his humanity is
not the natural Son of God; He is therefore the Son of God by adoption. Ans.
The Major of this reason, albeit it may be granted according to civil
constitutions, yet it is false in divinity, because it compriseth not a
sufficient enumeration of the sons of God: For there are sons of God by grace,
as the Angels, Job 1.6.
which yet are not adopted sons. Thus is Christ according to his humanity the
Son of God, even by grace without adoption, as appears out of that
distinction of sons before delivered.

The meaning of the Article, I believe in Jesus the only begotten Son.
Now what is meant, when we say, I believe in Jesus, the only begotten Son of
God? Ans. The meaning is, 1. I believe that Jesus is the only begotten Son of
God, that is, the natural and proper Son, not having any brethren, begotten of
the substance of the Father from everlasting, very God of very God. But this
suffices not. For the Devils also believe this, and tremble: Therefore
hereunto is to be added, 2. I believe that for me, that is, for my salvation,
he is the only begotten Son of God: or, I believe that he is therefore the
natural Son, that he may make me a son by adoption, and may communicate to me
and to all the elect the dignity, and right of the sons of God; as it is said,
We have seen his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father.
John 1.14, 12. Mat. 1.17. Ephesians. 1.6.
As many as received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God. This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. God with the glory of his grace has
made us accepted in his beloved.

Of the Deity or Godhead of Christ.
WHereas this doctrine, concerning the only begotten Son of God, is a
foundation of our salvation, and we cannot believe that Christ is the only
begotten Son of God, and much less can believe in this only begotten Son of
God, unless withal we believe that Christ is true God, even the everlasting
Word, of the same substance, dignity, power and nature with the Father; it
remains therefore that herein briefly we deal against the Heretics who
impugn it. Four things are principally controversed touching the Godhead of
the Son.

1. Whether the Son of God, or the Word be a Subsistent, or Hypostasis, or
person in the flesh, and before the taking of flesh. That is, whether in Christ
man, there be, besides his soul and body, a spiritual nature or substance,
which was also existing before Christ borne of the Virgin, and wrought and
accomplished the works of God, and is the Son of God, and is so called in
Scripture. 2. Whether he be a person truly distinct from the Father and the
holy Ghost. 3. Whether he be equal unto the Father. 4. Whether he be
consubstantiall, that is, of one and the same substance and essence with the
Father.
We have therefore four principal conclusions to be proved in their order
against several Heretics.
1. That Christ borne of the Virgin, besides his soul and body, is a
subsistent or person. 2. That he is a distinct person from the Father and the
holy Ghost. 3. That he is equal to both. 4. That he is of the same essence
with both.
A double way of gathering testimonies of Scripture.
MOreover, there is a double manner of gathering arguments out of the
Scriptures, whereby the divinity of the Son and the holy Ghost, as also other
things questioned in divinity, are confirmed: 1. When the testimonies of
Scripture are gathered according to the order of the books of the Bible. 2.
When as certain orders or sorts of arguments or proofs are set, unto which the
testimonies of Scripture thereto belonging are referred. Both ways are good,
and both very often necessary for a Divine, when he privately considers and
examineth, or discusseth controversies and disputes of Divinity, and searches
what is true in them. The first way is more laborious, and repeating of the
same things: the later is more short and compendious, and more fit and
appliable both for teaching, and also that the grounds of the points and
opinions of Christian Religion may the more easily be conceived of the mind,
and more firmly stick and abide in the memory, for whatsoever need or use
thereof to come.

THE FIRST CONCLUSION.
The Son of God is subsistent in the flesh both of the Virgin, and before the
flesh.
THis Conclusion is to be proved and maintained against both ancient and
modern, or late up-start Heretics: ancient, as Ebion, Cerinthus,
Samosatenus, Photinus; modern, as Servetus, and others. The orders or sorts of
arguments which confirm this Conclusion may be either eight or nine in number.
To the first Class belong those testimonies of Scripture, 2 Class.
which expressly teach and distinguish two natares in Christ, and in which the
Word is discribed that he was made man, that he was manifested in the flesh,
John 1.14. Heb. 2.16. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 4.3. John 3.13. and 18.37. Heb. 2.14.
John 5.58.
and assumed or took flesh, etc. The Word was made flesh: He took the seed of
Abraham. God was manifested in the flesh. Every spirit that confesses not that
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. No man ascends up to heaven, but
he that descended from heaven, the Son of man, which is in heaven. For this
cause am I born, and for this cause came I into the world. Forasmach as the
children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
with them. Before Abraham was, I am: Therefore it is one nature which appeared
in the flesh, took flesh came down from heaven, and coming into this world,
was made partaker of flesh and blood, and was before Abraham: and another
nature which was assumed or taken, into which the former came, and in which it
appeared: For the assumer and the assumed are not all one. The Word took flesh.
Whereas then the Word took humane nature, he must needs be other from it, who
both was before the flesh taken, and was not converted or changed into it, but
has a subsistence diverse and distinct from the flesh which was assumed. The
argument is thus framed: The assumer is before that which is assumed: But of
the Word it is said, that he assumed or took flesh that he was made flesh:
Therefore the Son, the Word, was before the flesh he assumed. The Major is
manifest: The Minor is proved out of the fore-alledged authorities. Hitherto
also belong all those testimonies, which oppose in Christ his divine nature,
which did assume, to his humane nature or flesh, Romans ^.3. and 9.5.
which was assumed; and distinguish that from this: as, His Son, made of the
seed of David, according to the flesh. Of the Fathers concerning the flesh
Christ came: Therefore there is another thing in Christ besides his flesh,
according to which he is not of the Fathers, nor of the seed of David. Who
being in the form of God, took on him the form of a servant: Phil. 2.6.
Wherefore the form of God in Christ is one thing, namely, his divinity most
perfect: and the form of a servant another thing, even of his humanity weak,
base, and servile. Christ is called the Son and Lord of David: Therefore there
be diverse natures in him. Mat. 22.44. John 2.19.
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again: Wherefore
there is one thing in Christ, which is destroyed, even his body; and another
thing likewise which raises up his destroyed body, which is the Word, John
1.18.
who is called the only begotten Son.

Object. 1. The Word, in John, does not signify any person, which was
subsisting before the flesh borne of the Virgin: That John means by the Word,
a person subsisting before the flesh.
but only that visible Preacher or Teacher Jesus, who was made flesh, that is,
was a man mortal, weak, miserable, and abject. Answ. This is a notorious,
manifest, and impudent corrupting of this place: For it is easy for any man to
show out of the very narration of John, that the Word signifies an Hypostasis,
or person, which was existing before Jesus born of the Virgin: For, The Word,
1. was in the beginning, that is, was now before existing, when things were
created. 2. And that Word was God. 3. By whom all things were made. 4. Who is
the author of life and light: Therefore he is a person existing before all
things. 5. Which lighteneth every man that comes into the world, that is, all,
if not with spiritual, yet with natural light: Therefore he is their
illuminatour, who were before the flesh, which was borne of the Virgin. 6. Who
being in the world, and not known. 7. Yet came unto his own. 8. Being made
flesh, that is, assuming and taking humane nature of the Virgin Mary: For, that
these words, The Word was made flesh, have this meaning, The Word was made
flesh, by taking flesh, not by any conversion into flesh.
namely, that he who now from the beginning was in the world, was made flesh,
that is, man (which before he was not) not by any changing or mutation of
himself, but by assuming and taking humane nature, other places of Scripture
do demonstrate: He was partaker of the flesh he took the seed of Abraham. God
Was manifested in the flesh. The Word therefore assumed and took flesh, Heb.
2.14. 1 Timothy 3.16.
but was not converted into flesh: that is, the divine nature was distinct from
the flesh taken and assumed. Moreover, that Christ, man, was such a teacher,
The Word was a Teacher from the beginning of the World. John 1.9, 18. and 6.51.
who not only in the time of his flesh, but also before that was born, even
from the beginning of the world, pre^ched the will of his Father unto men, and
quickened them, both this very narration of John, and other very many places do
plainly show. He was the life, and the true light, which lighteneth every man.
No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom
of the Father, he has declared him. I am the living bread, which came down
from heaven, and gives life unto the world. Christ went by the Spirit in the
days of Noah, and preached unto the spirits that are in prison, 1 Pet. 3.19.
which were in time passed disobedient.

Object. 2. Christ, man, is, and is called God in the New Testament: Therefore
they corrupt the Scripture, who say, that in this visible man Jesus, is,
besides the flesh, an invisible nature, which was existing also in the old
peoples time without flesh: For to say this, is as if a man, instead of this,
Thou art a Scholar, should say, In thee is a Scholar. Answ. That Christ, man,
is true and by nature God, in respect of the nature or essence of the Godhead
in him personally united to his manhood, 1. Proved by testimonies.
is no corruption, but the very voice, mind meaning, and interpretation of the
Scripture. In him, that is, in Christ Jesus; dwells all the fullness of the
God head, that is, Col. 2.9.
the very full and perfect Godhead, which is but one; bodily, that is,
personally or substantially, so that it is of the substance of the visible man
Christ. In Christ therefore there is one thing which dwells, namely the
Godhead; another thing in which it dwells, even the Manhood, which is the
temple of the God head, and was shadowed and figured by the Mosaicall
tabernacle. Christ says of himself, Destroy this temple: John 2.19, 21. He. 9
11. and 10.20.
and the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews mentions the Tabernacle of
the humane nature; and calls the flesh a veil, to wit, of the Godhead: He
suffered in the flesh. The Word was made flesh and came unto his own: Romans 1.3.
Therefore there must be in the flesh another nature. Again, Made of the seed
of David according to the flesh: Phil. 2.6.
and declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the spirit of
Sanctification. Again, Being in the form of God, and equal with God, he took
on him the form of a servant. Esaias 5.14. and 9.6. and 25.6, 7, 8. etc. Jer.
23.6.
By him all things were made and do consist, both visible and invisible: he
gives the holy Ghost, lightneth every man that comes into the world: he alone
knows the Father, and he to whom he reveals him, etc. Lastly, that there is
a double nature or substance in Christ, both a finite, and an infinite, is
convinced and proved by the diversity and repugnancy of those properties which
are attributed to the same Christ, 2. By contrary properties
but cannot possibly be together in one and the same nature: Wherefore Christ,
man, is God, not created and made in time, by reason of the fullness and
excellency of his gifts, but eternal; subsisting before the flesh born of the
Virgin, and before all worlds, by reason of the eternal Godhead of the Word
dwelling in his Majesty personally.

To the second Class or order of Reasons, are referred those restimonies, 2
Class. Christ the proper Son of God.
which show Christ to be the proper or natural Son of God, because he was
begotten of the substance of his Father, and not adopted. The argument or
proof is this: the natural or proper Son of God, is of necessity partaker
of the divine nature of essence, or sub stance. But Christ, man, is the proper
Son of God: Therefore there is in Christ, besides his humane nature, which he
took of our kind, a nature or substance divine, in respect whereof he is and
is called the Son of God: that is, Christ is by nature the Son of God; and
therefore subsisting, and that before the flesh, from everlasting, because he
is the Son of the eternal Father, having the essence of the Father, in
number the same, and whole communicated unto him from the Father. The Major is
manifest by the definition of a proper or natural son: For a proper son is
he, who is procreated out of his substance, whose son he is, or he, who is
partaker of his fathers nature or substance. John 5.17 18. The place is
necessarily to ^e und^rstood, and so was taken of the Jews, of a natural son.
The Minor is proved by these testimonies of holy Scripture: My Father works
hitherto, and I work: Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him: not
only because he had broken the Sabbath; but said also that God was his Father,
and made himself equal with God. Because Christ called himself the Son of
God, not adopted, or by grace only, but natural, begotten of the substance of
the Father, and therefore equal with God; the Jews did therefore gather, 1.
That he challenged unto himself the works of God the Father: And therefore
because they deemed him to be a mere man, they would have slain him, as a
blasphemer and robber of Gods glory, both in this place, and John 19.7. And if
Christ had meant, that he was the Son of God by grace only, as are the Angels
and men elected, the Jews verily would not have reprehended that as a
blasphemy and treason against the Majesty of God: for then they should have
condemned themselves of the same crime; John 8.41.
because they say unto Christ, We have one Father, which is God. 2. Christ
also does not reprehend this collection of the Jews, or repel it as a
slander, but defends it as being good and necessarily true, in his answer
presently following; wherein he avoucheth, that whatsoever things the Father
does, the same does he also together with him, as being his Son: that by the
same authority, liberty, power, he raises the dead, and quickneth them who
believe in him, by which the Father does: that as the Father has life in
himself, so also has he given unto him, as being his Son, to have life in
himself, etc. Wherefore the man Jesus affirms that, which of it self and
demonstratively does thereof follow, and the Jews called blasphemy, namely,
that he is the Son of God, not by grace only, but proper and equal with God:
that is, that there is in him, besides humane nature, a divine also, which is
the Son, communicated unto him by an unspeakable generation or begetting from
the Father, and according to which he is equal with the Father, and the same
God which the Father is; For where the same power, operations, and works are,
there also is necessarily inferred the same nature or substance to be and that
equal. So Christ is called the proper Son of God. Romans 8.3.
God sending his own Son, that is, borne of his own substance: (or we are
otherwise also of God, being renewed by his spirit.) 32.
And. Who spared not his own Son.

Object. 1. It is not found any where in Scripture, that Christ is the natural
and co-eternall Son of God: Therefore it is but an invention of men, imagining
in him, besides his flesh, another substance, Christ the natural and
co-eternall Son of God, which is expressed in Scripture.
according to which he should be the eternal Son of God. Ans. Although these
very words are not in the very same Syllables extant in the Scripture; yet
there are found the like, and equivalent, or such as signify the same which
these do. For, The wisdom of God, which is Christ and his Son, is described
to be such, as was with God from everlasting before his works were made. And
further, John says, that the Word whom he called the Son, was even then in the
beginning of the world, and was God, creating and preserving all things; But
God is eternal, and before things were created, together with which also time
began, eternity only existeth, and may be imagined in mind. Moreover, he is
expressly called the proper Son of God; therefore he is the natural Son of God,
who has the natural essence of his Father, and that the same with his Father:
because the Deity is but one in number, Creatresse of all things: also he had
the same whole and entire, because he is indivisible: Wherefore the man Christ
is the same eternal God with the Father, by reason of the Deity, Christ is the
proper Son of God by nature, not by grace.
which he has simply alone, and the same with the Father; for there are two
eternals: he is also the natural and co eternal Son of the Father, because he
is another from the Father, as touching his person. Romans 8.32.
Repl. 1. Christ is called the proper Son of God, because he was made by God:
as also the Church is called the proper people of God. Answ. This is a
corruption of the place before cited out of Paul. For Paul opposes the proper
Son of God to us, and also to the Angels. For both the Angels and we are made
the sons of God, in respect either of our Creation, Adoption, and Regeneration
by the holy Ghost; or also in respect of both, as the regenerate: Therefore we,
being compared with Christ, are not the proper sons of God. For so he could not
be called the proper and only begotten Son. Wherefore he is, and is called the
proper Son of God, in that he alone was begotten of the substance of God the
Father. Repl. 2. The word (says Servetus) was indeed always in God; but it
was not the Son, but in respect of the filiation or son hood, which was to
come in the womb of the Virgin, or in respect of man to be borne of the
Virgin: that is, the Word in it self, was not any invisible hypostasis and
substance, which being begotten of the substance of the Father, and distinct
from him, was truly subsisting before the flesh borne of the Virgin; but was a
certain relucency, or reflexed shining in God, that is, that visible image or
shape, which appeared unto the Fathers in the Old Testament, and afterward
passed into the flesh, or into that visible man Jesus, who alone is the Son,
in respect of whom also the Word, or that visible shape, which alone he will
have to be the person, is called the Son. Answ. 1. By this is denied, that
Christ is the proper Son of God: because his humanity issued not from the
substance of God. 2. The Word is such a Son, as unto whom the Father gave to
have life in himself, as he himself has it in himself, who when things were
created was even then God, by whom all things were made; who was the life, and
the light of men etc. The Word therefore was (and that before Jesus born of the
Virgin) a living, intelligent, working hypostasis, or substance. 3. There
should have been no hypostaticall or personal difference between the Father
and the Son: because the Word, according to Servetus doctrine, had not his
proper hypostasis, whereby he should differ from the Father. So that the Father
should either have bin without the Son, or the Father should have bin the same
person with the Son, which is the heresy first broached by Sabellius.

Object. 2. He who is not named in the Scripture, before the taking of flesh,
the Son of God, was not the Son of God before his nativity of the Virgin:
Wherefore he was not the Son of God before. Answ. 1. We deny the Major; for
we know that Gods revelation and manifesting in the New Testament is clearer
than in the Old: And therefore, albeit it were true, which these would, that
the Son of God is not called the Son, but after the assumption of the flesh:
yet notwithstanding, seeing in many places it is showed most clearly; that the
Son, who took flesh, was before he took flesh: (as, The Word, who is the
only begotten Son of the Father, Joh. 1.13 and 5.17.
was in the beginning. By the Son all things were made. My Father works
hitherto, and I work:) it may not be said, that therefore the Son was not
before he took flesh, because he was not called before by his name. Ans. 2.
The Minor is not true: Christ named in the Scripture the Son of God before he
took flesh
For however the Old Testament be more obscure and dark than the New; yet is
he called by Solomon the co-eternall wisdom of God, begotten of God. Likewise
it was foretold that the Messiah should be God, and the Son of God and after
another manner than other sons. His name shall be called Immanuel. Esaias 7.14.
and 9.6.
He shall call his name wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The
everlasting Father. This is the name whereby they shall call him, The Lord our
righteousness. The Lord has said unto me, Jerem. 23.6.
Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee. Again, Kiss the Son. I
will be his Father, Psalm. 2.7, 12. 2. Sam. 7.14.
and he shall be my Son. Wherefore long before was he signified to be the Son
of God, who afterward was to be man.

Object. 3. If the divine nature of Christ was, without his humane nature, the
Son of God, there shall be made three sons, namely, his Divinity, his
Humanity, and whole Christ consisting of both natures. Christ but one Son,
though consisting of two natures.
Wherefore there was not any Son before Jesus was borne. Ans. The Antecedent
is most false. For, seeing the Word did take, join, and unite personally unto
himself not another person or Son of God, but another nature; this assumption
or taking, makes not more persons or sons; but it is one and the same person,
or one Son, having in him two natures.

Object. 4. If the God head of old, without the flesh, was the Son, and now two
natures are one Son, there shall be nevertheless two sons; one incorporeall,
the other corporeal: Wherefore there was not any Son before the flesh. Ans.
Neither is this Antecedent true: For one and the self same Son is of old
incorporeall, of one only nature, and only God; but now corporeal, of two
natures, and existing both God and man.

Object. 5. The humanity by it self is not the Son: Therefore neither the
Divinity by it self is the Son. Answ. This reason does not follow: because
there is great dissimilitude of the natures which are compared. The Word
existed, and was a person, and the Son, before the flesh was taken and
assumed. But the humanity was neither before the assumption, neither, being
assumed, did it make the person by it self. And therefore the humanity
severally is not the Son, but is in the Son, or is the other nature of the
Son: but the Word both separate and knit to the flesh, is the same Son: as
touching it self, it is the Son of God by nature; but as touching the assumed
nature or humanity, the natural son of man, and the Son of God by grace or
personal Union.

To the third Class of arguments also belong those sayings: which teach the
man Christ to be the only begotten Son of God. 3. Class. Christ the only
begotten Son of God. John 3.16. and 1.14.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son We saw the glory
thereof, that is, of the Word incarnate, as the glory of the only begotten
Son of the Father. For the only begotten is he, who has not any brethren of
the same generation and nature. But Christ, as touching his humane nature, Heb.
2.14. verse. 16.17.
has brethren. Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part with them. And a little after: He in no sort
took the Angels. but he took the seed of Abraham: Wherefore in all things it
became him to be made like unto his brethren. And a little before: He that
sanctifies, and they which are sanctified, are all of one; that is, of the
same nature humane: Wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren:
Wherefore, there is in Christ another nature, according to which he is the only
begotten Son of the Father, besides his humanity, according to which both he
has many brethren, and is sprung not of God, but of the seed of David.

Christ is called the only begotten by nature, not in respect of the manner of
his generation.
Obj. The man, Jesus, is called the only begotten, because he only was begotten
of the Virgin by the holy Ghost. It is a misconstruing and corrupt
interpretation of the word: For, only begotten, that he is also the proper or
natural Son. Now, such a one is said to be the only begotten, not for the
special manner only of begetting, but because he only was begotten of his
substance, whose Son he is called, or because he only has his essence issuing
from the substance of the Father. only begotten Son of the Father. John 1.14.18
1 John 4.9.
We saw the glory thereof, that is, of the Word; but not of the man Jesus, as
Heretics would have it: For there is no other Antecedent in that place, but
the Word: For these words go before: The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us: then follows, and we saw the glory thereof. If then the Word it self be
called, and is the only begotten; then Christ is called the only begotten in
this place, not in respect of the manner of his generation of the Virgin, but in
respect of his generation from everlasting of the Father. Words generation of
the Father, is often in Scripture discerned and distinguished from Christ's
generation, of the Virgin. The Evangelist, as we see, calls the Word the only
begotten of the Father. Of wisdom it is said, Prove. 8.25.
That before the mountains, that is, from the beginning, it was formed, or (as
the Chaldee Paraphrast interprets it) begotten: but we read in Matthew, Mat.
1.18, 25.
that Jesus, who is called Christ, was borne of Mary. The only begotten is
opposed to Angels and Men. But Angels and Men are the sons of God, either by
creation or by adoption, or by sanctification, after what sort soever this be
wrought by the holy Ghost: Therefore Christ must needs be called the only
begotten for this cause, even for that he is his Son by nature: For after this
manner he is the Son of God only, and truly, and simply severed from other
sons: Wherefore to this third rank or Class those places also should be
referred, which show that we are the sons of God by adoption, by and for that
only begotten Son: For, seeing grace is opposed to nature, and we are sons by
grace, it must needs be that Christ is the Son by nature.

4. Class. Christ the Son of God.
To the fourth Class belong those testimonies of Scripture, which attribute
the name of Son of God manifestly to the other nature also in Christ, which
subsisted by it self before and besides the flesh assumed, and did work all
things. And, seeing Servetus and others are here in an uproare, as it were, and
fight for this, that only the man Jesus, born of the Virgin, but not God, or
the Godhead, is called the Son in Scriptures, and that therefore before Jesus
was born, there was not any Son of God subsisting; we are diligently to gather
and collect those testimonies, wherein the name of Son is not attributed to the
humane nature only, but also to the divine. The argument therefore is this:
That which, subsisting before the flesh born of Mary, created the world, and
from the first beginning hitherto works the same things with the Father, the
same is a person, and that without the flesh, and before it: But the Son of God
is called that which, subsisting before the flesh, created the world, and from
the first beginning hitherto works the same things with the Father: Therefore
the Son is a person, and subsisting even without the flesh, and before it: that
is, Christ Jesus, born of Mary, has another nature besides his humane nature,
in respect whereof Christ, even before his humane nature was, truly existed,
and is called the Son of God. The Major of this reason is manifest: For, that
which works all works, and that with the same authority, liberty, and power,
wherewith the Father does, must needs be a living and understanding substance,
that is, a person. Now the Minor is proved by testimonies of Scripture: For the
very same, who is before all things, for whom, and by whom all things were
created, and do consist, who does all things likewise himself which the Father
does; is called the beloved Son of God, the first begotten of all creatures,
Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.1, 2. and 2.10.
by whom God spoke unto us in the last days, etc. But the flesh or humanity of
Christ is not before all things, is not Creatresse, but created in the last
times, John 5.19.
does not uphold or sustain all things with its word, beck, and effectual
will, but is it self sustained and upheld by the Word, who did assume and take
it: Therefore in Christ, besides his flesh, is another nature, which also,
before the flesh was miraculously conceived in the Virgins womb, was
subsisting, did work, and is the Son of God. Again, God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn it: John 3.17.
The Father sent the Son into the world, but the humanity of the Son was
borne in the world: Therefore he was his Son before he was sent into the
world. John 5.21.
The Son quickneth whom he will. No man knows the Father, but the Son,
Mat. 11.27.
and he to whom the Son will reveal him. But in the old testament, before
Jesus was borne of the Virgin, some were raised from the dead, and quickened:
for there were some from the beginning of the world, who knew God aright:
Therefore in Jesus, the Son of Mary, is another nature besides his flesh, which
is the Son of God, and subsisted from the beginning of the world, revealing God
unto men; not only to those of the godly who lived since he took flesh, but
to those also who lived before it. Again, He is called the Son, who came from
heaven, who being in earth, is in heaven; who came into the world, not as other
men, from the earth, but from above, Joh 3.13, 17, 19, 31. and 16.28.
out of heaven, from the Father. So that then he was before he came into the
world. But the flesh of Christ is not of heaven, neither came it from heaven:
therefore there must needs be another nature in him, in respect whereof he is
the only begotten Son of God, even before he took flesh of the Virgin. Again,
He that was manifested in the flesh is God, and therefore another nature from
the flesh: For God is one thing, 1 Timothy 3.16.
who is manifested; and the flesh another thing, wherein he is manifested. The
Son of God is he that was manifested in the flesh: For this purpose appeared
the Son of God, that he might take away our sins, and that he might loose the
works of the Devil: 1 John 3.5.
Therefore the Son of God, and another nature from the flesh; that is, the man
Jesus is the Son of God, in respect not only of his humanity, but also of his
divinity, which besides and before the flesh, existed in him, and by the
assumption of the flesh was made as it were visible and conspicuous: Wherefore
it follows also, and that necessarily, that that was a subsistent and a
person: For that which is by nature a son, is also a person: But Christ's
divinity or nature, which was also before his flesh, is the Son of God by
nature: Therefore it is a subsistent, and a person in the flesh taken or
assumed, and before it.

5. Class. The Word is a person before Jesus borne of the Virgin: and he is
the Son.
To the fifth Class belong those places of Scripture, which affirm Christ,
man, to be the Word incarnate: The argument is this: The Word is a person,
which both existed before Jesus was born, and now dwells personally in the
flesh taken of the Virgin. But that Word is the Son: Therefore the Son is a
person besides, and before the assumption of flesh. The Major is proved: 1.
Because those things are attributed unto the Word, which only agree to a thing
subsistent, living, intelligent, working, that is, to a person: For the Word
was before all creatures with the Father God: by him were all things made, John
1. 1 John 1. and 5. Rev. 19.
he was author of life and light in men: he was in the world from the
beginning, and not known: he has his own country and nation: he came unto it:
in his name men believe: he gives power to others to be the sons of God, by
his own authority and power: he does assume and take flesh, and is therein
manifested, seen, handled, converseth, and dwells amongst men. The Minor is
proved: John 14.18, 34. Rev. 2.18.
1. Because the Word is called the only begotten Son of God. 2. Because the
same properties are attributed to the Word, and the Son: For the Son is in the
bosom of the Father, revealing God unto men. By him the world was created. In
him is life: he was sent and came from heaven into the world. He took the seed
of Abraham. Likewise the life, which is the Word, was with the Father before
the incarnation and manifestation of Christ: Therefore God was even then the
Father of the Word, and the Word the Son of God.

But seeing the new Arrians do marvellously deprave, by their new and crafty
devised Sophismes, this notable place of John, concerning the Word, subsisting
before the flesh born of the Virgin, and creating and preserving all things,
that thereby they might rob and dispoile the Son of God of his true and
eternal Deity; it seemed good here to adjoyne those things which Zacharias
Ursinus some years since noted and drew out, as to be opposed against these
corruptions and forgeries, briefly indeed and barely after the manner of
Logicians; yet such as are learned and sound, whereby also the like corruptions
and wrestings of places of holy Scripture may easily be observed, discerned,
and refuted.

JOhn purposing to write the Gospel of Christ, in the first entrance proposes
the sum of that doctrine, which he purposed to deliver and confirm out of the
story and sermons of Christ. The argument of John's Gospel.
And seeing the knowledge of Christ consists in his person and office, he
describes both; and shows, that Christ is the eternal Son and Word of God
the Father, who, taking flesh, was made man, that he might be made a sacrifice
for our sins, and might make us, through faith in him, the Sons of God, and
Heirs of eternal life. This Word then, whom afterward he calls the only
begotten Son of the Father, he says now, to have been in the beginning: which
shows his eternity. In the beginning was.
These words of the holy Evangelist they corrupt and deprave, who raise again
Samosatenus his blasphemies from the pit of hell, expounding this beginning of
the beginning of the Gospels preaching, done by Christ. But contrary, Saint
John and the Church, even from the Apostles and their Scholars time, do
understand that beginning of the world, wherein Moses recounteth all things to
have bin first created by God: Genesis 1.
For John says, that the world was made by him: and further, that even then in
the beginning he was God, and that the true God Creator, which is only one,
and was in the beginning of the world. Repl. 1. Beginning does not signify
eternity: Therefore ye deprave it, who so expound it. Answ. We do not so
expound it, but that even then in the beginning of the world was the Word; and
therefore was before the Creation of the world: and whatsoever was before this,
was from everlasting: and so is the Scripture wont to speak; as Ephesians. 1.4. 1
Pet. 1.20. Pro. 8.22, 23. etc. where we may see a large place concerning
wisdom: whose eternity is there signified in this, that it is said to have
been before the creation of the world. Repl. 2. Beginning often signifies the
beginning of the Gospels preaching. Ye were with me from the beginning. I said
not to you from the beginning. Ans. This shows that sometimes it so
signifies, but not always. And we are still to construe it of that beginning
which the text shows; As also in other places: I am a and o, Rev. 1.^.
the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

The Word.) The corrupters say; The man Christ is called the Word, because he
speaks and teaches the will of the Father. We say, that he is called indeed
the Word for this cause, because he declares God and his will: but yet in
respect of his divinity, not of his humanity. The reasons hereof are, 1.
Because his humanity was not from the beginning of the world. 2. Because this
word was made flesh, that is, took on him humane nature. 3. Because this Word
did lighten all men from the beginning of the world, whosoever had the
knowledge of God, and how much soever they had. He was the life and the light
of men: lightning every man which comes into the world. No man has known the
Father, but the Son, and he, to whom the Son will reveal him. No man has seen
God at any time: the Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Repl. 1. It is said, Now God has spoken unto us by his Son. Heb. 1.1.
Ans. That is, by his Son made man. Repl. 2. He is not said any where in the
old Testament to have spoken. Ans. Yes, By the Angel of the Lord, who also
himself is Lord. Esaias 6.9.
Likewise, The Lord appeared speaking: whom Saint John affirms to have been
Christ. John 12.40.
Repl. 3. The Word is said to have been palpable, visible, and so forth. Answ.
That is, 1 John 1.
by reason of the flesh which he took. Repl. 4. But he is no where said to be
invisible. John 1.5, 10.
Ans. He is said to have been in the world, unknown: and this, John speaks
of him, as he was before his incarnation: And then he was in the world
invisible. Likewise, John 14.21. Mat. 28.20.
I and the Father will come unto him. And in the same place, I will not leave
you comfortless, I will come unto you. I am with you always unto the end of the
world: that is, invisibly, as in the Father. And if they will deny him to be
with us, because he is not seen, they shall also exclude the Father. Repl. 5.
He is with us in power and virtue; not in essence. Ans. This objection were
rather to be hissed out, than to be refuted, Jer. 10.17.
because he has not an infinite power and virtue, who has a finite essence.
The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, shall perish from the
earth: how much more then, the makers of such gods?

And the Word was with God in the beginning.) We interpret this, that the
Son was co-eternall with the Father, and so joined with him, that
notwithstanding he was distinct in person from him. They say, that this Doctor
and Teacher, the man Jesus, was known of God alone, and not men, but he was the
Messiah. Answ. 1. To be, or Not to be with one, when it is spoken of a person,
is never read in this sense, as to signify, to be known, or not known of one.
It is therefore an impudent forgery. 2. John himself expounds it: The Son
which is in the bosom of the Father: This does not only signify, to be
known: but also to be indeed in the Father, to be entirely loved of him, and to
be fellow and co-partner of the secret and hidden counsels of the Father. 3. He
says of himself, That he came down from heaven; That he came from the
Father, and came into the world; That he returns to the Father, with whom he
was before. This does not signify a knowing, or a not knowing, but an
existence and being. 4. By him all creatures were made of the Father: therefore
he was present with the Father. 5. He was in the world before he, being made
man, came unto his own: and yet not known: Therefore, to be in the world, and,
to be known of the world, are not all one: and by consequent neither is it all
one, to be with God, and, to be known of God. 6. Christ himself expounds it:
I in the Father, and the Father in me: This signifies not only a knowledge,
but a co-existence and joint being mutual.

And that Word was God.) We interpret; That the Word is true God, eternal,
Creator of heaven and earth: the same God with the Father, and therefore
diverse from him, as the Word from him that speaks by him, and the Son from
the Father, but having the same nature and essence of the Godhead in him,
which the Father has: as Christ himself says; I in the Father, and the Father
in me. He is every where in the Father: as the Father every where in him. But
they say: that he is God, in respect of his gifts, worthiness, excellency, and
office: but not by nature. Which they prove; because others also are in this
sense and respect called gods, which have not any divinity of themselves:
therefore Christ also after the same manner, seeing he also has his divinity
from the Father. Further, they add, that we make two gods, and deal
contumeliously with the Father. Answ. We make not two gods, because the Son
is one with the Father as God, that is, having the same essence in him which
the Father has: but is diverse and distinct from him as the Son, and having
in him the same Deity which the Father has, communicated. But they are
blasphemous, and contumelious against the Father and the Son; Because they
honor not the Son, John 5.23.
as they honor the Father. Now that Saint John understands a Son, not a
made, created and inferior God to the Father, and a diverse God from him, is
proved and confirmed by many reasons, but some few shall now suffice. 1. Simply
and absolutely without restraint to any certain circumstance, none is called
God in the Scripture, besides the only true God, eternal creator of the
world. 2. That the Word was God before things were created, and is the Creator
of all things, S. John does teach. 3. He shows that he is the author and
fountain of life and knowledge in men, even from the beginning: For this
signifies the true light, that is, which is properly, and by it self, light
it self, and the original of light in others. 4. This Word gives power to be
the sons of God. John 1.12.
This none can do but the true God alone. 5. We are to believe in his Name.
But we must believe in none, but God only, as himself proves, that therefore
they must believe in him, because they believe in God. 6. John Baptist says,
that he baptiseth with the holy Ghost: And Christ himself often says, that
he will send the holy Ghost from the Father. John 1.33.
But no man can send the Spirit of God, and work by him in the hearts of men,
but only he, whose proper Spirit this is, namely, God, Esaias 40.3. Joh. 1.23.
and 3.28. Luke 3.4, 8. John 5.13.
7. John Baptist is called the forerunner of Christ, who should prepare his
way: But he prepares the way of the Lord. 8. Christ himself says, That the
Father will, that all should honor the Son, as they honor the Father. But no
creature, albeit excellent, can be equalled in honor with the Creator. 9.
Every where he is called the true God, 1 John 5.20. Romans 9.5. Act. 20.28. He.
1.8, 10. and 3.3.
and the Lord. This is the true God and eternal life. Who is God over all
blessed for ever, Amen. God has purchased his. Church with his own blood. The
scepter of thy kingdom, is a scepter of righteousness. Thou, Lord, in the
beginning have established the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine
hands. Christ is counted worthy of more glory, than Moses, inasmuch as he which
has builded the house, has more honor than the house, and he that has
built all things is God. 10. He is said, to have come down from heaven, yet
so, that he remains in heaven: to come unto his, together with his Father, to
be with them unto the end of the world. Therefore he is of an infinite
essence, every where present, and working both in heaven and earth. But his
humane nature is finite: The Godhead is after another sort communicated unto
Christ, than unto creatures.
Therefore he is God in respect of another nature. Now to that which has been
objected, concerning the communicating of the Deity unto others, whereby they
are called gods, we answer, by distinguishing the diversity thereof: For unto
others it is communicated by a created similitude of the Deity, either of
nature; that is, by divine properties created which are not equal with the
Creator; so are the Angels: or of office; so Moses is called called god, and
all Magistrates. Luke 1.32.
But unto the Son Christ, it is communicated by the nature or essence it self,
so that the very Deity is his substance. Which we thus prove: 1. He is the
only begotten and proper Son of God, the Son of the most High, who also is
himself the most High. But he is the proper Son, to whom the substance of the
Father is communicated: As the Father has life in himself, John 5.26.
so likewise has he given to the Son to have life in himself: Therefore the
Son also is God of himself, living, and the fountain of life. Wherefore this
communicating of the Deity, makes him equal with God, and the same God with
the Father: So far off is it from proving the contrary. Repl. 1. Power was
given to him, John 5.27.
being man: Therefore it was not given him by eternal generation. Ans. It was
given to the Word by generation, to man by union of the Word. Repl. 2. It was
given him after his resurrection. Ans. Then was given him the full authority
and liberty of using that power, which he had always.

All things mad by the Word.
All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing.) We interpret;
That all creatures were made by him in the beginning: and that also by him is
gathered out of mankind, and regenerated, through the working of the holy
Ghost, an everlasting Church. They construe it; That by all things, are meant
those things which are wrought in the new creation: that is, in the collection
and regeneration of the Church by the Gospel, which is called the second
creation. Answ. 1. We grant this point, (not the whole interpretation, but
only this point, of the creation) and if this were the sense, yet hereof would
it also follow, That Christ were very God, and by nature God: The second
creation also, which is regeneration, proves Christ God. 1 Cor. 3.6, 9. Heb.
3.4, 6. Ephesians. 1.33. and 4.8, 10.
1. Because to work the first and second creation by his own nature, power,
and operation, is the proper work of one and the same very God. God gave the
increase. So then is neither he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods
building. He that has built all things is God. And Christ works this new
creation, not as an instrument, but by his own proper virtue. Which is his
body, even the fullness of him that fills all in all things. He ascended up
on high, he gave gifts unto men, he ascended far above all heavens, that
he might fill all things. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets: By whom
all the body receives increase. I give unto them eternal life. He
sanctifies the Church, John 10.2^. Ephesians. 5.2^.
and cleanses it by the washing of water through the word. 2. Because no man
can give the holy Ghost, but he that is very God, whose proper spirit it is.
But the second creation is not wrought, but by the holy Ghost, whom Christ the
worker and effector of this creation sends: Therefore he is very God and
Lord. 3. Because the new creation is the regeneration of the elect to eternal
life. This began even from Adam, albeit it was wrought in regard of the
Mediator which was to come. And it was wrought by the same Mediator, the
Son, in regard of whom, or for whose sake, it was wrought ever since the
beginning: For Christ, as by his merit, so by his efficacy and virtue, is
Savior not only of a part, but also of his whole Church and body, which
consists of all the elect and sanctified even from Adams time. By whom all
the body receives increase. Ephesians. 4.1^. Esaias 9.^.
The everlasting Father, author, preserver, propagator, and amplifier of his
Church through all ages of the world. The Ruler that should come forth out of
Bethlehem, Mieah 3.2.
was given from everlasting to he the Head and Savior of the Church. He shall
be peace, even before he came out of Bethlehem, and the Savior of his Church
against the Assyrians and all her enemies. Genesis 3.83.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. This victory and
conquest over the Devil, began even from the beginning of the world* David
acknowledges the Messiah also to be his Lord, a Priest, and a King, not only
that was to come in the flesh, Psalm. 110.^.
but even now present, to whom now long before God had said, Thou art a Priest;
that is, whom he had already ordained to this office, living* working, and
preserving the elect. There is one God, and (...) Mediator between God and
man, 1 Timothy 2.5.
which is the man Christ Jesus* Therefore this man is the Mediator of all from
the very beginning: he is the Mediator, obtaining, and giving the blessings,
which he has obtained, unto all. I give unto ^h^m eternal life. John 10.38.
Ephesians. 1.22. 1 Pet. 1.11. and 3*
He has appointed him over all things, to be the head to the Church. The
Spirit of Christ in the Prophets. By the Spirit he went and preached unto the
spirits that now are in Prison, Ephesians. ^.2^
which were in time passed disobedient. Ye are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cor^e^-stone.
Which place is diligently to be observed: For then, either Christ is the head,
foundation, sanctifier, and Savior of a part of the Church only, which is
most absurd: or he was this from the beginning of the world. He is made the
builder of the house, whereof Moses also was a part. Heb. 3.3. and 13.^^
Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. Ans. 2. We deny
their interpretaion: For S. John there speaks of the first creation. Which
we show: 1. Because he speaks of the second afterward. As many as received
him, to them he gave power to be the sonne^ of God. Of his fullness have we
all received. Grace and truth ^ame by Jesus Christ. Now he therefore sets
down the first creation before, because both creations are the work of the
same. That therefore he might show, that the second creation was wrought by the
Word, it was necessary for him to teach, that the first also was wrought by it:
For the same is the Creator and Repairer of the world. 2. Because he says,
the world was made by him. Repl. The world here is taken for the Church. Ans.
No: For he adds, And the world knew him not: The same world which was made by
him, knew him not: Therefore he means the wicked, whether elect, or
reprobate. 3. Other places demonstrate the same, My Father works hitherto,
John 5.17.
and I work: Wherefore both of them from the beginning of the world, Ibid. v.
19.20.
work the works of both creations. Whatsoever things the Father does, the
same things does the Son also. The Father shows him all things, whatsoever
he himself does: Therefore, not only the works of the second creation, but
also of the first creation, preservation, and administration of the world. In
the same place it is said; As the Father quickneth, so the Son quickneth whom
he will: But the Father was from the very beginning the giver of corporal and
spiritual life. By him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which
are on earth, things visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, Co^ 1.16,
17.
or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all things were created by him,
and for him: And he is before all things: and in him all things consist. Thus
far of the first creation: that which follows, speaks of the second
creation. Repl. 1. All these speak of the instauration of the Church. Ans. No:
Because that comprehends also the Angels. Repl. 2. The Angels also were
restored by Christ, and joined to their head. Ans. But the new creation is
called a restoring from sins and death, to righteousness and life: this
agrees not to the Angels. Repl. 3. By whom also he made the worlds. Heb. 1.2.
The worlds, that is, the new Church. Ans. 1. God made the old also by him:
because it is one Church, having one head and foundation. 2. The Greek word'
(...) which is used in that place, signifies in Scripture the world, not the
Church. And further, when it is there added, Bearing up all things by his
mighty word, those words speak of the preservation not only of the Church,
but of all things. And moreover he renders a cause, why he is the heir not
only of the Church, but of all creatures, namely, because he is the Creator
and Preserver of all things. Thou, Lord, in the beginning have established the
earth, and the heavens are the work of thine hands. Repl. In these words he
converteth his speech to the Father, to prove, that he was able by his power
to lift up the Son to divine majesty. Answ. This is an impudent shift and
elusion: 1. Because it is said before, But unto the Son; which appertains to
both places of the Psalm cited by the Apostle. 2. Because the Psalm does
entreat of Christ's kingdom: and therefore those words which there are spoken of
the Lord, are to be understood next and immediately of his person; secondarily,
and mediately of the Father. Repl. 1. If he made all things, then the Father
made them not by him. John 5.^9.
Ans. Both he made them, and they were made by him. Whatsoever things the
Father does, the same does the Son also: And yet the Father does them by him.
Repl. 2. The Creator cannot be compared with the creatures: But Christ is
there compared with the Angels: Therefore creation of things is not attributed
unto Christ. Answ. He is not compared with the creatures in any proportion,
but without proportion. This, the place it self of the Psalm proves: The
heavens shall perish, but thou do remanine. Repl. 3. If he were Creator and
equal with the Father, he could not sit at his right hand. Ans. We may
invert this, and say of the contrary rather, if he were not equal, he could
not sit at his right hand: Because none but the omnipotent and true God is able
to administer the kingdom of heaven and earth. Who being in the form of God,
Phil. 2.6. Esaias 45.23. Romans 14.11. Esaias 41.12 Rev. 1.18. and 22.23.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Thus says the Lord that created
heaven, Every knee shall bow unto me: This is said of Christ. Again, I am, I
am the first, and I am the last. My hand has laid the foundation of the earth,
and my right hand has spanned the heavens: when I call them, they stand up
together. These words Christ applies unto himself.

In it was life, and the life was the light of men.) We interpret, that the
Son of God is by himself the life, In the Word was life.
as is the Father, and the fountain, giver and maintainer of all life, as well
corporal and temporal, as spiritual and eternal, in all from the very
beginning of the world. John 5.26.
He has given to the Son to have life in himself, as the Father has life
in himself. They construe it: That the man Jesus is the quickner and giver of
life, because in him is the life of all, that no man without him, and all by
him are saved. These are their words. Unto which we reply: If he give eternal
life to all, so that no man has it without him: Therefore, either no man was
quickened before he was born of Mary (which were absurd) or, he was the quickner
and giver of life from the beginning: Even as John affirms this of him, as
being verified in him also before he was made flesh: Neither can this be
understood only of his merit, whereby he deserves this life for men: For, that
life is in him, signifies that he is, John 5.21. and 10.26.
by his efficacy and effectual working, the quickner and reviver, as himself
expounds it, and the adversaries themselves confess. So are we also to
understand his illightning of men, that is, the knowledge of God, the author
whereof he was in all, even from the beginning, as himself says, No man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And
John Baptist says, Mat. 11.27. John 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time: the Son has declared him.

The light shines in darkness.
And the light shined in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.)
We interpret it, That this word, even from the beginning, has both by
natural light, and by the voice of heavenly doctrine, showed God unto men: but
those who were not regenerated by his Spirit, have not known this light. They
say, That he shined not before he began to preach. Ans. 1. If so, then should
he not have been the true light, that is, the author of light and the
knowledge of God, but only a minister thereof, as was John Baptist: but the
Evangelist in this respect makes John Baptist diverse from Christ. 2. He
should not have been the illumina^or of all men: which yet themselves are feign
to confess. Christ himself says of himself, and Saint John here of him, He
lights every man that comes into the world, that is, either with natural
light, or spiritual.

He was in the world, and the world was made by him: and the world knew him
not.) We, as touching the time hereof, say, He was in the world.
it was from the beginning of the world unto his incarnation: all which time
the Son of God has in the world, which was created by him, showed God unto
men, but is not known of men. They construe it of the time of his preaching,
when he was not heard, but despised and persecuted. Ans. 1. S. John teaches
the plain contrary: He was (says he) the life and light of all men: and
again, He lights every man that comes into the world: Therefore before his
preaching and his nativity of the Virgin. 2. John says, That he was in the
whole world meaning thereby all mankind: because he opposes to this world, his
own nation and country, to which he came. 3. He says, That Christ was not
known of that world, which before was made of him. Now the new world are the
elect regenerated, who, after they are created, that is, regenerated of him,
know him. 4. After that, being in the world, he was not known of it; then
lastly, He came unto his own, that is, unto the Jews, being born of them, and
manifesting himself unto them in the flesh, which he took. But he was no
less despised of these. If then he was first despised of the world, and
afterward of his own (for this the order of the prophecy requires) he was
despised before his preaching and incarnation, because in his flesh he
manifested himself, to none before the Jews. Other places also show, that he
existed before his incarnation. I was daily his delight, rejoicing always
before him: Prove. 8.30.
And took my solace in the compass of his earth, and my delight is with the
children of men. 1 Pet. 3.18.
He was quickened in the spirit, by the which he also went and preached unto the
spirits, which were, in times passed, disobedient, that now are in prison.

He came unto his own.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not.) Here John begins to
speak of his coming into the flesh, which he took of the Jews, unto whom he
was promised; and of his ministry among the Jews: and of their contempt
toward him. They sound this part with the former, as if it were spoken of the
same time. But the course of his speech shows, that his meaning is, that
Christ was before in the world not known, and afterward came to his own, and
was not received: because, although he was not already in the world, yet then
he came unto his own: Therefore here is understood a new coming, a new
manifestation whereby, after a singular and new manner, he began to be in his
own country and people; which was then done, when he was born of Mary, and from
thence forward.

The Godhead of the Son.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name.) Here is a triple proof of his divinity.
1. None can give power to be the sons of God by his own power and authority,
but God himself. But Christ, not only as a Minister and Messenger, but in his
own name, and of his own authority gives this power and right: Therefore he is
God himself. 2. He that makes others the sons of God, must regenerate them by
the spirit of God, and make them partakers of the Fathers nature. This none
does or can do but God himself: Therefore Christ is by nature God. 3. He gave
this power to them that believe in his name. But faith must not rest on any
creature, but on God only: Therefore Christ is no creature, but the eternal
God.

And the Word was made flesh.) Saint John declares the manner how that Word
came unto his own: The Word was made flesh.
namely, that he was made man, and that weak, mortal, like unto us in all
things, except sin: Therefore he says, he was made flesh, and conversed among
men for a season. Now he was man, not by any change, but by taking the humane
nature unto his Godhead. They construe it, That this Doctor or Teacher was
(not, was made) a man weak, (...).
and base. Which they will prove: Because, say they, the Greek word signifies
oftentimes not to be made, but to be, as John was a man, where the same Greek
word was used. Ans. 1. The word signifies more commonly to be made, as, All
things were made by him: The world was made by him. In both which places, as in
others also, the same Greek word is used. 2. It signifies in this place also,
that he was made. 1. Because it was showed before, that the Word signifies a
subsistence or person, which was from the beginning of the world. 2. He began
to be flesh when he came unto his own. Now he teaches, that Christ did before
time lighten all men that came into the world, and was in the world not known,
when he came unto his own: Therefore he not only was, but was made flesh,
which before he was not. 3. Other places of Scripture, which teach the same in
other words, do not admit any other sense or meaning. He took the seed of
Abraham. He took part of their flesh and blood. He took on him the form of a
servant, when as he was before in the form of God. Heb. 2.16.14. Phil. 2.7. 2
Cor. 8.9. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 4.23.
He being rich, for your sakes became poor. God is manifested in the flesh,
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. There is one thing therefore in Christ,
which came in the flesh; and another thing, which was the flesh it self,
wherein that came. Repl. The place Hebr. 2. means his delivering of us. Ans.
First, the words which go before: Secondly, the sense shows, that he
speaks not there of any qualities, but of the very humane nature; when as he
shows, that therefore Christ was necessarily to have been true man, because
men were to be delivered by him through his sacrifice.

The Word full of grace and truth.
And the Word dwelt among us full of grace and truth.) Christ fulfilled all the
promises and types and figures of the Law, and did truly perform the office
of a Redeemer and Mediator, not only by his merit, but also by his power and
efficacy, as afterward is added out of John Baptists Sermon, that this truth
and grace befell unto us through Christ, and of his fullness all, who ever are
saved, have received. Which S. Paul says, even that we are consummated and
made perfect in him: which would not be, except the fullness of the Godhead
did dwell in him personally.

The glory of the only begotten.
And we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father.) This glory is the divine power, which he showed in his miracles, in
his transfiguration upon the Mount, in his resurrection from death, his
ascension into heaven, his sending of the holy Ghost, his power and efficacy by
his Ministry. Now thus far they agree and confess the same. But when we
say further: This glory testifies him to be the only begotten Son of ^od,
that is, the Son of God by nature, begotten of the substance of the Father,
w^^ is also himself the very tr^^ eternal God, Maker of all things: here they
shake hands with us and dissent: For they say, That he is called the only
begotten, not because he is the Son of God by nature, but because he was
borne after a singular manner, namely, of a Virgin, conceived by the holy
Ghost. But this reason is not sufficient: 1. Because if he be not a Son of
the substance of the Father, but either by creation, or by adoption, or by
conformation with God, either from the womb, as in Christ conceived by the
holy Ghost; or afterward, as in other men, he shall not be the only
begotten: For, so are others also the sons of God, both Angels and Men, though
not in that degree of gifts, yet in the manner of generation: Wherefore it
remains, that he be the only begotten Son by nature, after which manner, no
other is the Son of God. 2. Because, for that which he is here said the only
begotten, he is other-where said to be the proper Son of God: And he is the
proper Son, who is of the substance of his Father: he that is of another
substance, is no proper Son. John 5.18. Romans 8.32.
3. He is said to be such a Son of the Lord, as who is also himself the Lord:
which as it is manifest by other places of both Testaments, so it is said of
John Baptist, that he shall go before Christ, who is called of the Angel
Gabriel, The Son of the most High, and the Lord God of the children of Israel,
Mat. 3.3. Luke 1.35, 6^.
whose hearts John Baptist shall turn unto him, and should go before his
face. And of Zachary he is called the most High, whose Prophet and Forerunner
John Baptist should be, whose way he should prepare, and unto whose people he
should give knowledge of salvation.

NOw let us return unto those Orders and Classes of arguments and reasons,
whereby we prove the eternal subsistence of Christ. 6. Class. The wisdom of
God is a subsistent or person: and Christ is that wisdom. Prove. 8.22.
Unto the sixth Class are referred those testimonies, which testify Christ to
be the wisdom of God. The argument is this: The wisdom of God is eternal,
and subsisting before Jesus was borne. But the Son is that wisdom of God:
Therefare the Son is eternal and subsisting before Jesus born of the Virgin.
The Major of this reason Solomon confirms in the place afore-signified, where
he ascribes those things to wisdom, which fall not into any, but which is
subsisting, living, and working: as, That it subsisted in God before things
were created, That it was begotten, etc. The Minor we prove, 1. Because Solomon
says, That that wisdom was begotten of God. And, To be begotten, when it is
spoken of such a nature as is intelligent in understanding, is nothing else,
than to be a son: For, although it be truth, there is made an exhortation there
to the study of heavenly doctrine: yet notwithstanding the name of Wisdom to
be doubly there used, and a transition to be made from the doctrine which is
the wisdom or light created in the minds of men (that thereby authority might
be gotten to this wisdom with them) to the uncreated Wisdom, that is, to God
himself, the author and fountain of the other, those things which are there
attributed unto it, do manifestly convince. 2. Christ the Son of God is called
Wisdom, and the person which teaches us Wisdom: Therefore said the Wisdom of
God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles. Luke 11.49. 1 Cor. 1.24.
But unto them which are called, we preach Christ, the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. 3. The same proper functions are attributed by Solomon to
wisdom, Wisd. 7. and 8. and 9. and 10.
which elsewhere are attributed to the Word, and are more at large declared in
the book of Wisdom.

To the seventh Class belong those Scriptures, which speak of the office of
the Mediator. The argument is this: The Mediator, 7. Class.
without whose merit and present efficacy, there could be no friendship or
amity joined between God and sinful men, The Mediator has always bin.
must needs have been always in the Church from the very beginning of the
world. This proposition those things confirm, which have been before spoken of
the Mediator and his office. But the Son of God only (not the Father nor
the holy Ghost) is that Mediator, by and for whom the faithful also of the
old Church were reconciled unto God: Therefore the Son of God was subsisting
from the very beginning of the world. The old Church might have been received
into favor for Christ to come: but by him it could not, except he was then
being: for there can be no efficacy or force of him that is not. Whence it is
necessarily proved, that Christ was before his incarnation: for there cannot be
friendship between God and men without a Mediator now existing or being. But
in the old Testament there was friendship between God and men, that is,
Believers: Therefore either he or some other was Mediator of that Church:
there was no other but he only, 1 Timothy 2.5.
because there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
But that there cannot be any amity between God and men, without a Mediator now
already being, shall also appear by that which follows: For, it is the
office and function of the Mediator, not only by deprecation, or entreaty, or
sacrifice, to appease and pacify the Father, but also to confer and bestow
all the benefits which he obtains by his power and efficacy upon believers,
to make the will of God known to men, to institute a ministry, to collect,
gather, Matthew. 11.17.
and preserve the Church, and that wholly. No man has known the Father, but
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him: Therefore neither did
Adam know God but by the Son, and by a consequent the Son existed at that
time. Hitherto are referred the testimonies, not only which speak of Christ's
merit to come, Ephesians. 1.22. and 2.20.
but of his efficacy also and power: He has made all things subject under his
feet, and has appointed him over all things, to be the head of the Church. Ye
are built upon the fundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone. Christ therefore is the foundation,
head, upholder, and governor of the Church: and therefore also he was before
the Church was. I am the way, the truth, John 14.6. and 10.28. and 1.4, 9.
and the life. I give unto them eternal life. In it was life, and the life was
the light of men. That was the true light, which lighteneth every man that
comes into the World. Through him we have both an entrance unto the Father by
one spirit. Ephesians. 2.11. and 4.11. 1. Pet. 1.11.
He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers. The spirit of Christ is said to have been in the
Prophets, foretelling the sufferings that should come unto Christ. Hebr. 3.5,
6.
Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a witness of
the things which should be spoken after. But Christ is as the Son over his
own house. John 17.2.
As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to all them that thou have given him. Therefore it is Christ, who from the
beginning of the world did reveal the will of God unto men, appoint and ordain
a ministry, collect, govern and save his Church; wherefore he is the builder:
which seeing it is apparent, that he has done from the beginning of the
Churches birth, John 6.39.
it is not to be doubted of, that he has always been subsisting. This is the
Fathers will, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing.
Wherefore he saves his Church; and therefore has always been, because the
Church has always been saved and preserved.

To the eight Class are those places referred, 8. Class. The Angel spoken of
in the Old Testament, was Christ the Son of God. Chap. 3.1.
in which both the name and property of Jehovah are attributed unto the Angel,
who appeared in the Old Testament unto the Fathers, and was the leader of the
people: whom to have been the Son of God, Christ, both the Church has
always confessed, and the Scripture does witness it. The Prophet Malachy has
a notable testimony: Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the
way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall speedily come to his temple:
even the messenger of the Covenant, whom ye desire. This speaks Christ
himself by the Prophet, which is also confirmed by this argument? Whose way is
prepared, he is Christ; but he that promises, is he whose way is prepared:
Therefore he that promises is Christ. The Major is manifest: for not the
Father, but Christ was looked for, and he followed John Baptist. The Minor is
proved out of the text it self: Behold I send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me. Wherefore Christ was before he took flesh, because
he sent his messenger, and was also before he took flesh, very God. For he
calls flesh his temple, to which he says he will come. Flesh called the
temple of God.
But none has a temple builded in worship of him, but God: Therefore it is
blasphemous to say, that Christ was not before he took flesh. Neither does
that hinder, because he speaks in the third person; The Lord will come to his
people. For he sufficiently shows who that Lord is, namely, not the Father,
but the Son. I the Lord who sent John before me, and who am the messenger of
the Covenant. And further, it may be that the Prophet does not continue in
making Christ speak, but represents the Father himself, speaking of sending
the Son: Unto the Son he says, O God, thy throne is for ever and ever. Christ
Jesus is the Apostle and High Priest, Psalm. 45.6. Heb. 1.8. and 3.3. and 13.8.
Two reasons pro^ing that that Angel was Christ.
the builder, heir, and Lord of his Church. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to
day, and the same is also for ever. The argument therefore is this: The
Messenger, or the Angel sent of old unto the Church was a subsistent, or
person. That Messenger is the Son of God, Christ: Therefore the Son of God
was, before Jesus was borne of the Virgin, truly existing, did work, and was
ruler over his Church. The Minor is proved, 1. Because, To be God, and, To be
sent of God, for to teach, collect, govern and save the Church, that is, to be
the Mediator, are things proper unto the Son of God, Christ, not to the
Father, or the holy Ghost. Exodus 3. and 4. Genesis 32.28, 30. and 48.15, 16.
But these properties of the Son are attributed to this Messenger or Angel, as
author and effecter. 1 Cor. 10.1.
Therefore the Messenger or Angel, God, and Christ, are one and the same person.

9. Class. The divine nature in Christ both was before the flesh, and is the
Son of God.
In the ninth Class are contained those testimonies of Scripture, which
affirm Christ Jesus to be by nature God, and the Son of God: The argument is
this: Christ's Divinity existed before Jesus borne of the Virgin. Christ's
Divinity is the Son of God: Therefore the Son of God existed before Jesus
was borne. The Major of this argument is confirmed by the reasons already
alleged: For, 1. God is manifested in the flesh, which he took. 2. Christ is
the proper or natural Son of God, and not man only. 3. Christ is the Word. 4.
Christ is the Wisdom subsisting. 5. Christ is the Mediator. 6. Christ is
that Messenger or Angel sent of old unto his Church. 7. In Christ is not any
created Godhead, but that eternal Deity, which alone is true God: For unto
Christ not only the name, Romans ^.5. 1 Timothy 3.16. 2 John 5.2. Esaias 9.6. Jerem.
23.6.
but all the properties also and perfections of the true God are every where
ascribed in Scripture: as omnipotency, infinite wisdom, omniscience, or all
knowledge, immensity, the creation and governance of things, the salvation of
the Church, the working of miracles: And the attributing and giving unto him of
the properties of the true God, yields us a more firm proof of his Divinity
than does the attributing of the name of the true God, or of the Lord: For the
names of God may after a sort be expounded metaphorically: but the divine
property attributed unto Christ, cannot be wrested to any other meaning: If
therefore we fence and guard our selves with such testimonies, the adversaries
of this doctrine cannot consist, or stand; but, will they, nill they, they
shall be forced to confess, that Christ was, before he took flesh: And if he
were before he took flesh, he was either the Creator, or Creature: But he was
no Creature, both because he created all things, and because also he is called
Creator: Wherefore, seeing the true God has been from everlasting, his
Godhead also, which is true God, must needs be subsisting from everlasting.

The Minor is likewise confirmed by the former argument. 1. The nature which
took flesh is God, and the Son of God; for neither the Father, nor the holy
Ghost took flesh: Therefore the Son, otherwise the Son of God, is not by nature
God. 2. The humane nature in Christ is not the natural Son of God: Therefore
the Divine nature must be that Son. 3. The Divine nature in Christ is the Word.
4. It is Wisdom. 5. According to it Christ is Mediator. 6. The Deity of
Christ is the Angel and Messenger of the Lord, sent of old unto the Church:
Therefore the Deity of Christ is the Son of God.

THE SECOND CONCLUSION.
Christ the Son of God, is a person really distinct from the Father and the
holy Ghost.
We are to hold, that the Word is a person distinct from the Father, against
Noetus and Sabellius, and their Sectaries, who would have the same to be the
person of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, which in respect of
diverse functions and actions, is now called the Father, now the Son, now the
holy Ghost: And therefore were they called Patripassians. Also against
Servetus, who confounded the Son and the holy Ghost.

That the Word, or Son of God, is diverse and distinct from the Father and
the holy Ghost, not in office only, but also in subsistence and person; is
proved by four arguments: No one person can be both Father and Son in respect
of himself.
None is the same person with him, whose son he is, nor with him who
proceeds or flows from him: (otherwise, the same thing, in one respect,
should be relative and correlative.) But the Word is the Son of the Father, and
from the Word the holy Ghost proceeds, and is given: Therefore the Word is
neither the Father nor the holy Ghost. Christ another from the Father. John
5.32, 37. and 9.16. and 5.19. and 14.16.
Christ expressly calls himself another from the Father and the holy Ghost:
There is another that bears witness of me, namely, the Father, in the same
Chapter. My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. The Son can do
nothing of himself, save that he sees the Father do. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter. Three persons expressed in
Scripture. 1 John 5.7. Genesis 1.26. Joh. 10.30. and 14.26. and 15.26.
The Scripture does plainly affirm, that the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost are three: There are three which bear witness in the heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one. Let us make man in
our image: he does not say, I will make; but, Let us make. I and my Father are
one: he does not say, am, but are. The Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things. When the
Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father, he shall testify of me.
Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. The holy Ghost descended in the shape of a Dove, the Son was
baptized in Jordan, and the Fathers voice was heard from heaven: Mat. 28.19.
Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. The properties of the
persons are di^tinct and diverse.
The attributes of properties of the persons, namely, sending, revealing, and
their offices are diverse. The argument is this: Whose properties are distinct,
they are in themselves distinct. But the properties of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost are distinct: Therefore the Son is neither the Father, nor the
holy Ghost. The Minor is proved: because the Son only, and not the Father, or
the holy Ghost, was begotten of the Father; conceived by the holy Ghost; made
flesh; sent into flesh; manifested in the flesh; made Mediator; baptized; did
suffer, and died. The Father of himself works by the Son. Mat. 11.^9.
The Son not of himself, but of the Father by the holy Ghost; the holy Ghost
of the Father, and of the Son. No man knows the Son but the Father,
neither knows any man the Father, but the Son. These words cannot be
expounded after this sort; No man knows me, but I, and no man knows me, but
I, As the Father knows me, (...) 14.13.
so know I the Father. The sense of these words cannot be this: As I know me,
so I know me: The Son of God therefore, Christ, is another from the Father and
the holy Ghost.

THE THIRD CONCLUSION.
The Word is equal with the Father.
THat the Word, or the Son of God, Christ, is no made God, or inferior to the
Father, or created of the Father before other things, as Arius, Eunomius,
Samosatenus, Servetus, and others the like Heretics imagined; but is by
nature true and eternal God, and equal unto the Father in Godhead, and in
all essential perfections of the Godhead, is confirmed, (...) 16.^^. C^^ 2.9.
By testimonies of Scripture: We are in him that is true, that is, in his Son
Jesus Christ. The same is very God, and eternal life. All things that the
Father has are mine. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily
As the Father has life in himself, so has he given unto the Son also to have
life in himself. Jo^ ^3 ^. Ph^^. ^^
Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the Son also: that all
men should honor the Son, (...)
as they honor the Father. But the Father is to be honored as God: Therefore
Christ is God equal in honor with the Father.

Christ (...) God (...).
He that has the whole essence of the Godhead, is necessarily equal with the
Father: But the Son of God has the whole essence of the Godhead communicated
unto him: (for this, because it is infinite, is indivisible: therefore the
whole must needs be communicated unto whomsoever it is communicated:) Therefore
the Word, or Son of God, is equal in all things, with the eternal Father in
the Godhead. The Minor is proved. Generation or begetting is a communicating
of the essence: the Word was generated or begotten of the essence of the
eternal Father^ because he is his Son, proper, natural, and only begotten:
Therefore the whole Deity was communicated unto the Word.

He has the same properties of the Godhead.
The Scripture gives the same properties and perfections of divine nature unto
the Son, which it does unto the Father: as namely, eternity, omnipotency,
immensity, omniscience, the searching of the heart and reins. He is eternal:
Prove. 8.25. John 1.1. John 3.13. Ephesians 3.17.
For, Before the mountains were settled, and before the hills, was I begotten.
In the beginning was the Word. He is immense or unmeasurable: No man ascends
up to heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the Son of man which is
in heaven. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. He is omnipotent:
Whatsoever things the Father does, John 5.19. Phil. 3.21. Heb. 1.3.
the same things does the Son also. According to the working, whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto himself. Bearing up all things by his mighty
word. He is omniscient, or of infinite wisdom, knowing all things: His name
shall be called Counselor. Esaias 9.6. Mat. 11.27.
No man knows the Son, but the Father: neither knows any man the Father,
but the Son, etc. He is the searcher of hearts: But Jesus did not commit
himself unto them, John 2.24, 25.
because he knew them all. And had no need that any should testify of man: for
he knew what was in man. Now we know that thou know all things. He is the
sanctifier of his Church: John 16.30. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it; That he might sanctify it,
and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word. He is unchangeable:
Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass. He is truth it
self, and the fountain of truth: Mat. 24.38. John 0781 0 8.14. John 14.6.
Ephesians. 5.2.
Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true. I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life. He is of unspeakable mercy: Even as Christ has loved us,
and has given himself for us to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to God. He is angry against sin, John 3.16. Rev. 6.16, 17.
and takes vengeance thereof; yea of hidden sins: He that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Fall on us, and
hide us from the presence of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? The
Son therefore is God by nature, and equal to the Father.

All general effects and works common to the whole three persons; as that he
is Creator: John 1.3. Heb. 1.3.
By him were all things made. Likewise, that he is the preserver and governor
of all things: Bearing up all things by his mighty word. 2. It appropriateth
unto him certain special offices and functions, appertaining to the safety of
his Church; as that he sends Prophets, Apostles, and other Ministers of the
Church: As the Father sent me, so send I you. John 20 21. Ephesians. 4.11.
He therefore gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers. That he furnishes his Ministers with necessary
gifts and graces: I will give you a mouth and wisdom, where against all your
adversaries shall not be able to speak, John 1.18.
nor resist. That he reveals unto us his spiritual doctrine: The only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him unto
us. That he confirms this doctrine by miracles: And they went forth, and
preached every where: Mark 16.20. 1 Cor. 11.23. Mat. 28.19. Rev. 22.16. John
16.14. John 10.14, 16.
And the Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that
followed. That he instituted Sacraments: I have recived of the Lord that which
I also have delivered unto you. Baptize them in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. That he reveals things to come. I Jesus have sent
mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the Church. He shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you. That he gathers the Church: I am the good
Shepherd, and know mine, and am known of mine. Other sheep I have also, which
are not of this fold: them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice,
and there shall be one sheepfold, and one Shepherd. That he inlightneth the
understanding and hearts of men: No man knows the Father but the Son, and he
to whom the Son will reveal him. Mat. 11.27. Luke 24.45. John 1.33. Titus
2.14. John 15.5. Gal. 2.20. Mat. 11.28. John 14.27.
Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.
That he governs the actions and lives of the godly: Without me ye can do
nothing. Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me. That he
ministers comfort in temptations: Come unto me all ye that are weary and
laden, and I will ease you. Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you.
That he strengthens and defends us against the temptations of Satan, and
preserves those that turn unto him by a true faith, John 16.33. John 10.28.
John 14.14. 2 Cor. 12.8.
even unto the end: Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. My sheep
shall not perish for ever, and no man shall take them out of mine hand. That he
hears those that pray unto him: If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will
do it. I besought the Lord thrice, and he answered me; My grace is sufficient
for thee. That he forgiveth sins, justifies, and adopteth unto us to be the
sons of God: Esaias 53.11. Mat. 9.6.
By his knowledge my righteous servant shall justify many. That ye may know
that the Son of man has power to remit sins on the earth. As many as received
him, John 1.12. John 10.28. 1 John 5.20. Acts 10.42. Acts 17.31.
to them he gave power to be the sons of God. That he gives life everlasting:
I give unto them eternal life. This same is very God, and eternal life. That
he judges the world: It is he that is ordained of God a Judge of quick and
dead. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed. These divine works
attributed unto the Son, differ so from the divine properties which are
attributed unto him, as effects from their causes: so that then his properties
work them.

Esaias 42.8. He has equal honor given him.
and works. I will not give my glory to any other. But the Scripture gives
equal honor and worship to the Father and the Son: Therefore they are truly
equal in Godhead, and in all the perfections thereof. The Minor is confirmed,
1. By testimonies, Psalm. 97. Heb. 1.6. Rev 5.13. John 5.23. John 14.1. Psalm.
45.7. He^. 1.8. Acts 30 28. 1 Timothy 16.
proving that he is worshipped of Angels, and the whole Church. Let all the
Angels of God worship him. That all should honor the Son, as they honor the
Father: Faith and hope are due unto him: Ye believe in God, believe also in
me. 2. He is called God absolutely and simply, as is the Father. 3. The
Epithetes or titles of divine honor, which are every where in the Scriptures
attributed unto the Son: as, God blessed for ever: The great God, and Savior:
The Lord himself from heaven, The Lord of glory: The Lord of lords, and King of
kings: power and eternal Kingdom: Sitting at the right hand of the Father: The
Bridegroom, Husband: Head of the Church: God of the Temple, which are all the
Elect: Trust, and belief in him: Invocation: for he is worshipped of the
Church of God, and Bridegroom of the Church, at all times, and in all places:
Thanksgiving for his divine benefits. Furthermore, albeit the name of God
(especially being put absolutely and without restraint) does evidently prove
the Sons equality with the Father, as it has been said: yet seeing that
signifies more things, and is also applied to others, who are not by nature
God, we are diligently to collect, and to have in a readiness those
testimonies, in which, things proper to the true God only, are attributed to
the Son, which agree to none else, who are called gods, and whereby God himself
discerns himself from other creatures, and forged gods: For unto whom the
essential properties of any nature or essence do truly and really agree, unto
him the essence it self must needs be given. Object. 1. He that has all
things of another, is inferior to him, of whom he has them. The Son has all
things of the Father: Therefore he is inferior unto the Father. The Son has
all thing, from the Father, not by grace, but by nature.
Ans. The Major holds, and is true of such an one, as has any thing by the
grace and favor of the giver: for he might not have it; and therefore is by
nature inferior: but it is false of him, who has all those things by his own
nature, which he himself has, of whom he receives them: For seeing he cannot
but have them, it cannot be, that he should be inferior, or should have less
than he, of whom he receives them. But the Son has all things of the Father,
which the Father has, and that by nature and absolute necessity; that is, in
such sort, as that the Father cannot but communicate unto him all things which
himself has belonging to his divine Majesty. John 5.26. John 17.^0.
As the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the Son to
have life in himself. All mine are thine, and thine are mine. Therefore he is
equal unto the Father in all things. Obj. 2. He that does whatsoever he does
by the will of another interposed and going before, is inferior unto him. The
Son wills and does all things by the will of his Father going before:
Therefore he is not equal unto the Father in virtue, The Son does all things
with the content of the Father, in like manner, as the Father.
dignity, and essence, Ans. The Son does all things* his Fathers will going
before, not in time and nature, but in order of persons; so that he wills or
does nothing, which the Father also wills not and does: and whatsoever the
Father wills and does, the same also the Son wills and does likewise, that
is, with equal authority and power: Wherefore, the society and order of the
divine operations does not take away, but does most of all settle and establish
the equality of the Father and the Son, as also of the holy Ghost.

THE FOURTH CONCLUSION.
The Word is consubstantiall with the Father.
THese three former Conclusions being declared and set down, namely, That the
Son is subsisting, or a person; That he is distinct from the Father; That he
is equal with the Father; the fourth is easily gotten and obtained against the
New Arrians, to wit, That he is consubstantiall with the Father, which is also
in like manner to be understood concerning the holy Ghost: For either this must
be granted, or of necessity there are made three Gods, which they, though in
words they deny it, yet in very deed affirm, when they frame and feign three
essences and spirits. They grant that the Son is like-substantiall, that is, of
like essence and nature with the Father, which ^^^^deed true; but this is not
enough: For the words Consubstantiall, and Like-substantiall, differ: For,
like-substantiall signifies more persons, and like essences; as, three men are
like-substantiall: For they are both three persons, and three essences of like
nature; that is, agree in humane nature. But consubstantiall signifies one
essence and more persons. Thus in the Godhead is not like-substantiall, (...)
because there are not three Gods; but consubstantiall, because there are three
persons of one and the same divine essence: For there is but one Jehovah, that
is, one divine essence, which is the same, and is wholly in every of the three
persons, and therefore every of them are that one God: besides which essence,
whatsoever is, it is a creature, not God. The Father indeed is one person, and
the Son another person, but the Father is not one God and the Son another. John
says, There are three which bear record in heaven: but they are three persons,
not three Gods, which bear this record. We therefore hold against Arrius, that
Christ was not only like-substantiall, but also consubstantiall with the
Father; that is, has the same individual divine essence with the Father. The
Latin Church turns the Greek word (...), consubstantiall, taking substance
for essence: It is therefore the same that co-essentiall, that is, of one and
the same essence. The arguments which show the Father and the Son to be of one
and the same essence, are these: 1 Jehovah Deuteronomy. 6.4. The English translations
retain not the word Jehovah; but use The Lord instead thereof, which is the
signification of Jehovah: and therefore in effect all one. Jerem. 23.6. Esaias
25.9. Hag. 2.9. Zach. 2.8. Malac. 3.1.
is but one essence, or one God: But the eternal Father, and the Son
co-eternall with the Father, are that Jehovah: Therefore these two are one
essence, and one God. The Minor is proved, 1. By those places of Scripture,
which call the Son Jehovah; This is the name, whereby they shall call him,
Jehovah, (or the Lord) our righteousness. The expected God and Savior is
called Jehovah: But the Messiah is the expected God and Savior, who in the
same sense is called, The Desire of all Nations: Therefore the Messiah is that
Jehovah, whereof the Prophet speaks. The Deliverer of the Church sent from
Jehovah, which is the Messiah only, is called Jehovah. He is called Jehovah,
whose forerunner was John Baptist: But John Baptist was the forerunner of the
Messiah, or the Son of God, Christ: He therefore is called Jehovah. Hitherto
belong all the places, in which are given to the Angel or Messenger of Jehovah,
both the name of Jehovah, and the divine properties and honors: But that Angel
was the Son of God, not the Father: Therefore the Son is Jehovah. Again, the
Minor is also hereof manifest, Joel 2.31. Psalm. 68.18. and Ephesians. 4.8. Psalm.
95.9. and 1 Cor. 10.9. Psalm. 97.7. and Heb. 1.6. and Psalm. 102.6. and Heb.
1.10. Esaias 8.14 and 28.16. and Luke 2.34. and Romans 9.33. Esaias 41.4. and Rev.
1.17. and 21.6.
for that, what things in the Old Testament are spoken of Jehovah, those in the
New are referred unto Christ: as, He that ascended on High, and gave gifts, is
Jehovah: and the same is Christ. Jehovah was tempted in the desert, and the
same is Christ. He that is to be worshipped, and is Creator of all things, is
Jehovah: and the same is Christ. The stone of offense, The first and the last
is Jehovah: and the same is Christ. Lastly, the same is proved by those
testimonies, which attribute things that are proper to Jehovah, unto Christ
also, as author and effecter, or worker of them.

2. The true God is but one, The Son is the true God, equal with the eternal
Father in Godhead, properties, works, and honor, as has bin before declared.
This same is very God and eternal life. Christ which is God over all, blessed
for ever: Therefore the Son is that one and the same God, or that selfsame
divine essence which is God.

3. Whose essence is distinct, their spirit is not one in essence, which
proceeds of both, and is proper unto both, but is either of a diverse
essence, or compound: whether he be of a part, or of the whole essence of them,
of whom he proceeds. But one and the same is the Spirit of the Father and the
Son, proceeding of both, proper unto both, and by him both work effectually.
Gal. 46.
God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts: Therefore the Father and
the Son are one essence, and the same God: Otherwise each essence should have
his proper spirit, and diverse.

4. Unto whom the eternal Father communicates the same essence which himself
has, and that whole, he is of the same essence with him. Unto the eternal
Son, the eternal Father communicates his essence, the same, and whole:
Therefore the Son is of the same essence with the Father. The Minor is
proved, because Christ is the only begotten and proper Son of the Father,
begotten therefore of the essence of the Father. But the divine Essence or
Godhead, by reason of the immensity and great simpleness thereof, can neither
be multiplied, nor divided: Therefore the Father communicates the same, and
that whole, unto the Son. Wherefore, as in respect that it is the whole essence
of the Godhead which is commmunicated unto him of the Father, he is co-equall
with the Father: so in respect that it is the same which the Father has and
retains, he is co-essentiall and consubstantiall with the Father.

Certain general heads of those reasons, wherewith Heretics, both old and
new, oppugn this Doctrine, That there is both an equal, and one and the same
Godhead of the Father and the Son, and also of the holy Ghost: with Rules,
whereby answer may be easily and soundly made unto their objections.
1. THe Heretics build on most false principles and grounds; such as this is:
If the Father begot one of his substance, he could also have begotten more, and
the Son also might beget another, 1. Rule.
or more sons. For answer, this Rule is to be held: We are to judge of God
according to his own word, not according to Heretical brains: and he is to
be acknowledged such as he reveals himself in his word, as being the
eternal Father with the only begotten Son, and the holy Ghost: For God has so
revealed himself, that he begot the Son, and that one Son only: Therefore we
ought to rest here, and not to imagine false conceits of our own.

2. They reason out of natural principles or grounds: which are such as are
true in things created and finite, but false in God, who is an essence
infinite: as, Three cannot be one: Three persons really distinct, cannot be one
essence: An infinite person cannot beget an infinite person. That which
begets, and that which is begotten, are not one and the same essence.
Likewise, He that communicates his whole essence to another, does not himself
remain the same which he was. To this we answer by another Rule: 2. Rule.
Those principles which are true of a finite nature, are foolishly and
impiously translated to the infinite essence of God. And arguments of this sort
are refuted not by a simple denial of them, but by distinguishing between
natures capable and incapable of those principles whereon they ground.

3. Of the properties of the humane nature in Christ, they infer the
inequality and diversity of his Godhead. As, Christ suffered, died, etc.
Therefore he is not God. The Rule whereby we answer to this, 3. R^el.
is: Those things which are proper to the humane nature, are not to be drawn to
the divine nature: For Christ died not as God, but as man.

4. They confound the office of the Mediator with the nature or person; that
is, they go from the office to the nature: As, Christ is sent of the Father:
Therefore he is inferior to the Father. 4. Rule.
The Rule to answer this, is: The inequality of office does not infer
inequality of nature or persons. Or, as Cyril says, The sending and obedience
take not away the equality of power or essence. So the Father is said to be
greater than the Son, not in nature or Godhead, but in manifestation: For not
the Father, but the Son, was made base and miserable in the humane nature
assumed. Where then Christ says, that his Father is greater than he, it is
meant in respect of his humane nature, and in respect of his office of the
Mediatourship.

5. They exclude and shut out the Son and the holy Ghost from those things
which are attributed unto the Father, as the fountain of all divine operations:
As, The Son says, that his works are the works of the Father: Therefore he
is not author of them, neither does he those works of his own power, but only
is the instrument, whereby God the Father does them. The Rule and Answer hereto
is; 5. Rule.
Those things which are ascribed unto the Father as fountain, are not removed
from the Son, or the holy Ghost, to whom they are communicated, that they may
have them their own, and proper: For the Son works likewise, and in like
manner: Unto whom the Father likewise did give to have life in himself.

6. They detract those things from the Son and the holy Ghost, (...) John 5.26.
whereby the Divinity in the person of the Father is discerned from creatures
or false gods. To which, this Rule answers: 6 Rule.
As often as in Scripture one person of the Godhead is opposed to creatures or
false gods, and is discerned from them, the other persons are not excluded from
the Godhead, but only those things are excluded, against which the comparison
is made. Or, The divine properties, operations, and honor are so attributed to
one of the persons, as that notwithstanding they are not taken away from the
other persons of the Godhead, but only from creatures. Again, A superlative
or exclusive speech used of one person, does not exclude the other persons of
the Godhead, but creatures and feigned gods, unto whom the true God, either in
one, or in more persons, is opposed. John 10.25.
The Father is greater then all; that is, then all creatures; not then the Son,
or the holy Ghost. I give eternal life unto them; that is, no creature does
give it: For both the Father also and the holy Ghost do quicken and give life.
The Father only knows the day of judgment; that is, no creature. That they
may know thee to be the only very God: Mat. 24.26. John 17.3.
here the Son is not excluded from true Deity, but Idols and false gods, to
which God the Father is opposed.

7. They wrest the phrase of Scripture to another sense: as, 1 Cor. 15.24. 7.
Rule.
The Son shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father. The Rule for answer to
this, is: Of the phrase of Scripture we must judge according to the whole
Scripture, that is, by marking circumstances of the Text alleged: and by
conference of other places with it. The Son shall deliver up the Kingdom unto
the Father, not by laying it down, but by manifesting it, or changing the
form thereof: For the Father also reigns now: neither shall the Son ever
cease to reign. Likewise, he shall deliver it, by subjecting all things under
him. So the Father also delivers the Kingdom unto the Son, neither yet does
he forgo it. The Son does nothing; to wit, nothing of himself, or without the
precedent will of his Father: yet he does something by himself from his Father.

Other Rules, whereby the objections of the Arrians are dissolved.
1. NOthing hinders, why they, who are equal in nature, may not be in degree
of office unequal.

2. That which the Father has given unto the Son, that he should ever have
it, he will never demand of him again: but that which was but for a certain
time given and committed unto him, the same he must meeds depart from and
resign.

3. That consequence does not hold in reason, which is brought from a thing
that is respective, to a thing that is absolute.

4. That is said of the person in the concrete, which is proper only to one
nature, but not otherwise than in respect of that nature, unto which it is
proper.

5. There is a double wisdom: one existing in the creatures, which is the
order of things in nature wisely disposed, and the doctrine or knowledge as
well of nature and the law, as also of the Gospel. Another wisdom is
subsisting in God, which, when it is opposed unto the creatures, is the very
divine mind, or eternal decree, as touching the order of things, in the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: that is, it signifies the three persons:
but when it is distinguished from God, then it is taken for the Son of God the
second person only. The former wisdom existing in the creatures, is created:
the other subsisting in God, is uncreate.

6. God absolutely named in the Scripture, is never meant, but of very God
himself.

7. Whereas the Son and the holy Ghost are of the Father; and the Father
works by the Son and the holy Ghost, neither was humbled as the Son; the
Scripture does oftentimes, especially in Christ's speeches, understand by the
name of the Father, the Son also, and the holy Ghost.

8. When God is considered absolutely, or by himself, or is opposed to the
creatures, the three persons are comprehended: but when he is opposed to the
Son, the first person of the Godhead is understood, which is the Father.

9. The name of God being put simply or absolutely, is essentially taken, that
is, for the Godhead it self, and compriseth all three persons: but when the
property of any person is joined therewith, it is taken personally.

10. The Scripture distinguishes the persons, when it opposes, or compares
them among themselves, or expresses their personal properties, whereby it
restrains the name of God, common to them all, to one certain person: and it
means them altogether, when it opposes the true God to creatures or false
gods, or considers them absolutely, according to his own nature.

11. That which began at some certain time to be manifested, may not thence be
concluded never to have been before.

12. The Son is wont to refer that to the Father, which yet he has common
with the Father, not making any mention of himself, when he speaks in the
Mediators person.

13. The Son is said to see, learn, hear, and work, as from the Father in
respect of both natures, yet not without a difference still remaining: For unto
his humane understanding, the will of God is made known, by revelation: But his
Godhead does by it self, and of his own nature, know and behold from
everlasting most perfectly the Fathers will.

14. The external operations of the three persons, if they were distinct, they
should make verily distinct essences: because one working, and another ceasing
there should be diverse essences: but the internal operations, because they
are the communicating of one and the same whole essence, make not a diversity,
but an unity of essence.

15. When God is called the Father of Christ, and the faithful, it does not
hereof follow, that he is after the same manner their Father and his.

16. The Father was never without the Son, nor the Father and the Son without
the Spirit, inasmuch as the Godhead can neither be augmented, nor lessened,
not changed.

17. It follows not, that whosoevers person is from another, his essence also
is from another.

18. As often as in Scripture one person of the Deity is opposed to creatures,
or feigned gods, and is distinguished from them, the other persons are not
excluded from the Deity, but the creatures only, between whom and the true God
comparison is made. This we must also observe in all exclusive and superlative
speeches.

The principal arguments against the Divinity of the Son and the holy Ghost,
together with the answers unto them.
1. ONe essence is not three persons: for, one to be three, does imply a
contradiction. God is one essence: Therefore there cannot be three persons of
the God head. Ans. The Major is true of an essence created and finite: that
cannot, being one, be the same and whole substance of three, or be three: but
it is false of the infinite, most simple, and individual essence of the
Godhead: For this, as it existeth one and whole together in many, nay, in
infinite places and things; so may it be, remaining one, the same and whole
essence of more: yea, and moreover it is necessary so to be; seeing the
generation of the Son, and the proceeding of the holy Ghost, is the
communicating of the essence of the Father.

2. Whose operations are distinct, their essences also must needs be distinct.
The eternal operations of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are
distinct: Therefore they have also distinct essences. Answ. The Major of this
reason is true of persons having a fi^ite essence: but being understood of the
divine person, it is false, if it be meant of those internal operations,
whereof the Minor speaks. Wherefore, inverting the Major, we return it
back upon the adversaries themselves: Whereas the internal operations, namely
the generation of the Son, and the proceeding of the holy Ghost, are the
communicating of the Fathers essence whole and the same in number; it must
needs be, that there is not a diverse or distinct, but one divine essence of
all three persons.

3. That which has a beginning, is not eternal: but the Son and the holy
Ghost have their beginning, or original from the Father: Therefore they are
not eternal. Answ. That is not eternal, which has a beginning of essence, or
nature, and time: But the Son and the holy Ghost have a beginning or
original of person or order, or of the manner of existing, but not of essence:
For this they have one and the same in number with the Father from everlasting;
and that is void of all beginning and original, and existeth necessarily, from
no other but of it self. His goings forth have bin from the beginning, and
from everlasting. Now glorify me, thou Father, Micah 5.2. John 17.5.
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was. Repl. But he who has his original of person from another, is not
Jehovah: But the Son and the holy Ghost have their original of person from
the Father: Therefore they are not Jehovah. Answ. The Major is a false ground:
For the Scripture does plainly teach both of them, namely, both the Son and
holy Ghost, to be Jehovah. As the Father has life in himself; so has he
given likewise to the Son to have life in himself: John 5.26.
and yet the Scripture wu hall affirms, that both have their original of
person from the Father: For the Father begot not the essence, but the person,
by communicating unto him his own essence the same and whole.

4. The faithful are one with God, not in essence, but in consent of wills. But
the Father and the Son are in such sort one, as the faithful are one with
God. Father, keep them, that they may be one, as we are one: Therefore, John
17.11, 21.
the Son is one with the Father in conjunction of wills only, and not in
unity of essence. Answ. There is more in the conclusion, than in the premises.
For the particle, only, which is stitched to the conclusion, is not in the
Minor proposition: Wherefore of a Minor, which is but particular, an universal
conclusion is ill inferred, after this manner: There is a certain unity
between the Father and the Son, such as is between God and the faithful:
Therefore all unity which is betwixt them is such. Wherefore we say, that the
faithful are one with God and among themselves, in will only, or conformity,
or conjunction of minds. The Father and the Son are one both in will, and
furthermore in unity of essence. I and the Father are one. John 10.30. and
14.10. Heb. 1.3.
I am in the Father, and the Father is in me. Who is the ingraved form of his
Fathers substance. Wherefore if a wider and more ample conjunction be put, a
straiter conjunction is not thereby excluded.

5. He that is the whole Godhead, is not any one person of the Godhead, or
there is not any one besides him, in whom likewise the whole Godhead is. But
the Father is the whole Godhead: Therefore the Father is not any one, but even
all the person that is of the Godhead, neither are there more persons, wherein
that Godhead is. Ans. We deny the Major: because the same Godhead which is
in the Father, is whole also in the Son and the holy Ghost. For by reason of
the immensity and undividablenesse thereof, that is communicated of the Father,
even the same entire and whole both to the Son and to the holy Ghost, so that
there is neither more nor less of the Godhead in every person, than either in
two, or in all three.

6. The divine essence is neither begotten, nor proceeding of another: But the
Son is begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeds: Therefore they are not the
same divine essence, which the Father is. Answ. Of mere particulars, nothing
can follow or be concluded. The Major cannot be expounded generally. For it is
false, That whatsoever is the divine essence, he is not begotten or proceeding.

7. The divine essence is incarnate. The three persons are the divine essence:
Therefore the three persons are incarnate. Answ. Of mere particulars there
follows nothing. The Major speaks only of the Son: For it is false, being
taken generally: as, Whatsoever is the divine essence, is incarnate; this
general proposition is false: For the divine essence is incarnate only in one
of the persons, which is the Son: not in all three.

8. The Mediator between God and man is not God himself: But the Son is the
Mediator between God and man: Therefore he is not God. Answ. The Major is
apparently false, because by the same reason it might be argued, that the
Mediator between God and men, is not man. Repl. The Major is thus proved: God
cannot be less than himself, or inferior to himself: But the Mediator with
God is less and inferior unto God: Therefore he is not God. Ans. The Minor
is true only in respect of Christ's office, in which sense Christ is inferior
unto God, not in respect of his essence and nature: according to the fourth
Rule; The inequality of office does not infer inequality of nature or
persons. Repl. 2. The Son is Mediator with Jehovah: But the Son is Jehovah:
Therefore Jehovah is Mediator with himself. Ans. Nothing follows of mere
particulars: For the Son is not Mediator with all that is Jehovah, but with
the Father. Rep. 3. Therefore the Father only is pacified toward us: and, by a
consequent, he alone is the true God, not the Son, or the holy Ghost: For he
is the true God, who is pacified by the Mediator. Answ. We deny this sequel:
For there is but one will of the three persons, and that agreeing in all
things: Wherefore, the Father being pleased and pacified for the Sons
satisfaction in our behalf, the Son also and the holy Ghost are pacified,
and receive us into favor for the same satisfaction. Rep. 4. Whom the Son
pacifieth, with him he is Mediator: But the Son pacifieth not only the
Father, but himself also: Therefore he is Mediator with himself; which to
grant were absurd. Answ. First, we answer to the Major: that the Son is
properly said to be Mediator with him whom he so pacifieth with his
satisfaction, that the decree and purpose of atonement may seem to have
originally issued from him. Now this is the Father alone: Therefore in this
sense the Son is not Mediator with himself, but with the Father alone.
Secondly, we answer to the Minor: That it is not absurd to say, that the Son
is Mediator to, or with himself: For it is no inconvenience, that he should
manage both functions, namely, of God admitting the reconciliation; and of the
Mediator, making the reconciliation, each in a diverse respect. The former of
these, by virtue of his divine nature; the later, by reason of his office of
the Mediatourship.

9. Christ does everywhere discern and sever himself from the Father: he has
a Head, he has a God, he is less than the Father: Therefore he is not the
same God with the Father: or, he is not equal and consubstantiall with the
Father. Answ. He discerns and distinguiseth himself from the Father, 1. In
person. 2. In office, as he is Mediator, but not in Godhead. So, He has a
Head, and a God, and is less than the Father, 1. As touching his humanity, in
nature and office. 2. As touching his Godhead, not in nature, but in office
only, and in the manifestation of his Godhead: For they which are in nature
equal, may be unequal in degree of office.

10. This is (says Christ) life eternal, John 17.3.
that they know thee to be the only very God: Therefore the Son and the holy
Ghost are not very God. Ans. In this place are opposed, not the Father, and the
Son, or the holy Ghost; but God, and Idols, and Creatures: Therefore these are
excluded, not the Son, or the holy Ghost. 2. There is a fallacy of severing and
dividing clauses of mutual co-herence and necessary connection: For it
follows in the Text: And whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ: Therefore, herein
also consists life eternal, that Jesus Christ, sent of the Father, be
likewise known to be very God: as it is said; The same is very God and life
everlasting. 1 John 5.20.
3. There is a fallacy in transferring the particle Only unto the subject
Thee, unto which it does not belong, but unto the predicate God, which the
Greek Article, in the original does show: For the sense is, (...).
that they know thee the Father to be that God, who only is very God. Repl. But
this argument follows: Maximilian is Emperor: Therefore Rodulph is not. Why
then does not this follow: The Father is God: Therefore the Son is not God?
Ans. These persons are finite, and their essence cannot belong to more: but the
Father and the Son are persons infinite, and their essence may be of more,
namely, of three persons.

11. Jehovah, or the true God is the Trinity. The Father is Jehovah: Therefore
the Father is the Trinity, that is, all three persons. Ans. Mere particular
propositions conclude nothing. And, if the Major be expounded generally, after
this manner: Whatsoever is Jehovah, is the Trinity, it is false: for that which
is Jehovah, may be some one person of the Trinity. The Syllogism therefore is
faulty, because Jehovah is not taken in the same signification in both the
premises: For the name Jehovah in the Major is taken absolutely and
essentially for the three persons (for one and the same Jehovah or true God, is
the Father, and Son, and holy Ghost jointly) but in the Minor it is taken
personally, for one person of the Godhead, that is, the Father, who is Jehovah
of himself. Repl. Jehovah is one in number: Therefore it is always taken in
Scripture after the same manner. Ans. Jehovah is one in number of essence, not
of persons.

12. Where are three and one, there are four: But in God are three and one, to
wit, three persons and one essence: Therefore there are four in God. Ans. The
Major is to be distinguished: Where are three, and one really distinct, there
are four: But these three in God are not another thing distinct in the thing
it self from the essence; but each is that one essence, the same and whole, as
they differ from their essence only in their manner of subsisting or of being.
The manner of existing, is not a diverse substance from the existence, being, or
essence.

13. Christ according to that nature, according to which in Scripture he is
called Son, is the Son of God: But according to his humane nature only he is
called Son: Therefore, according to that only, and not according to his divine
also, he is the Son of God: and so by a consequent, the Son is not very God.
Ans. The Minor is false: John 3.16. and 5.18. Rom 8.32. John 5.17, 19. John
1.18. Heb. 2.16. John 3.13, 17. John 1.14.
For Christ is called the only begotten and proper Son of the Father, and
equal with the Father. The Father has created all things by the Son. The Son
from the very beginning works all things likewise, which the Father does. The
Son revealed the Fathers will, of receiving mankind into favor, unto the
Church, before his flesh was borne. The Son was sent into the world, descended
from heaven, and took flesh. But the Word, which is God, is the only begotten
and proper Son of God, and took flesh. And not the humane, but the divine
nature of Christ is Creatresse, and works with equal authority and power
with the Father, and descended from heaven: Therefore God, or the Godhead, or
divine nature of Christ, is both called in the Scripture, and is the Son: and
by a consequent, the Son is that one true and very God. These Objections we may
compare with those that are before set down in the Common place, concerning
the Trinity of the persons: For, with whatsoever Sophismes the Trinity it self
and divinc essence is impugned, with the selfsame also is each Person
assaulted: and contrariwise, with whatsoever Sophismes one person is impugned,
with the same the whole essence of the Deity is assailed. Besides, some
objections were there only proposed, which are here more fully assoiled. You
may read more of this point, Vol. 1. Ursin. from page 115. to page 125.

Quest. 34. Wherefore call thou him Our Lord?
Ans. Because he, redeeming and ransoming, both our body and soul from sins,
not with gold nor silver, but with his precious blood, and delivering us from
all the power of the Devil, has set us free to serve him. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
and 2.9. 1. Cor. 6.20. 1. Tim. 2.6. John 10.28.


The Explication.
Here we are to observe these two things:
1. In what sense Christ is called Lord. 2. For what causes he is our Lord.


1. In what sense Christ is called Lord.
TO be a Lord, is, to have right and power granted by Law, either divine or
humane, over some thing, or person, as to use and enjoy it, and to dispose
thereof at thy own will and pleasure. Christ therefore is our Lord: 1. Because
he has dominion over all things, and over us also: and has care of all
things, and of us especially; that is, rules, preserves, and keeps us as
his own, to eternal life and glory, as being bought with his precious blood.
None of them is lost, John 17.12. John 10 28.
whom thou gave me. None shall pluck them out of my hand. 2. Because all
things are subject unto him, and we are bound to serve him both in body and
soul, that he may be glorified by us. Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your body and in your spirit, Cor. 6.20.
for they are Gods.

Quest. To which nature then is the name of the Lord to be referred? Ans. To
both: like as also the names of Priest, Christ is out Lord according to both
his natures.
King, and Prophet. For, the names of the office, benefits, dignity, and
bountifulness of Christ toward us, are affirmed of his whole person, not by
communication of properties (as the names of his natures and properties are)
but properly in regard of both natures: For both natures of Christ will and
work our redemption: For the humane nature of Christ is made the price of our
redemption, by dying for us: his divine nature does give and offer that price
unto the Father, and does, by the virtue of his Spirit, effectually apply it
unto us, sanctify, rule, save and defend us against our enemies; and does all
these things, the humane nature being privy thereunto, and most earnestly
willing it. Christ then is our Lord, not only in respect of his Divinity, which
created us; but also in respect of his humanity, which redeemed us: For the
person of Christ, even as he is man, is Lord over all Angels and men.

2. For what cause, and how many ways he is our Lord.
CHrist is Lord, Christ our Lord, 1. By right of creation. John 16.15.
By right of creation and government. Of this rule and dominion it is said, All
things that the Father has are mine: For by him, and in him, are all things
created, and by his mighty word; that is, by his forcible pleasure and will, or
providence, they are sustained and governed, and whatsoever good is in all the
creatures, that wholly proceeds from him. And this is a most general
dominion, which extends it self unto all creatures, even unto Devils and
wicked men, albeit not altogether after the same manner to us, and to all the
wicked and devils: For, 1. He created us to eternal life: but them to
destruction. 2. The dominion which Christ has over the wicked and Devils,
consists in the right of requiring and commanding, of exercising his power,
and bridling his enemies: that is, he has right and power over the Devils and
the wicked, to do with them what him lists, so that without his will and
pleasure they cannot so much as move themselves; and if it were his will, to
bring them to naught, as the history of the possessed man in the Gospel
testifies: And he permits them, Mark 5.20.
by bereaving and destituting them of the grace of his Spirit, to run headlong
into sin and eternal destruction. He has also over us right and power to do
with us what him lists: but he furthermore keeps and guardeth us as his own
flock and proper people, whom he has purchased with his blood: he governs us
also, and guides us by his Spirit: he works in our hearts faith and
obedience, that we may do things acceptable unto him, and so fenceth us
against all the remptations of the Devil, and the flesh, that we may never fall
from him: Therefore he is our Lord after a far other sort, than of the Devils
and the reprobates.

By right of redemption.
He is our Lord by right of redemption: For he alone, paying the ransom for
us, delivers us from the power of the Devil: by his Spirit regenerateth us,
and causes us to begin to serve him: and in this liberty, whereunto he has
brought us by his merit and power, he also preserves us, against all, both
outward and inward enemies, even unto the end: and being raised from the dead,
he fully enfreeth and delivers us from all sin and misery, and endoweth us
with eternal bliss and glory. The manner of our redemption is most precious,
since it is a thing of greater moment to redeem us with his blood, than with
money: Therefore he has the greatest right of possession in us. And seeing
he has delivered and freed us, it is manifest that we were servants: and
truly so we were, and are by nature servants and bondslaves of the Devil,
from whose tyranny Christ has delivered us; and hereupon now are we the
servants of Christ: because us, who were by nature his enemies, and deserved to
be destroyed of him, he notwithstanding preserved and delivered: For The reason
of this derivation of the name Servant could not be expressed in English, as it
is in Latin, from whence our English word comes. Servi (which signifies
servants) comes from Servando, that is, saved or preserved.
Servi, or servants, were first so named by the Romans, from servando, which is
in signification preserved; because, when in wars they might have been slain
of their enemies, they were preserved. But this dominion of Christ over us is
special, that is, extends it self only to the Church. Object. If we be
redeemed from the power of the Devil, then a ransom has been paid him for
our redemption: For from whose power we are redeemed, unto him is the price
and ransom due. But God gave not him the ransom: Therefore we are not
redeemed from the power of the Devil. Ans. From whose power we are redeemed,
as having been supreme Lord over us, and holding rightly his dominion over us;
unto him the price and ransom is due: But the Devil is no supreme Lord, but
the executioner of the supreme Lord, which is God, who alone has, and holds
by right dominion over us. The Devil indeed has enthralled us unto himself by
the just judgment of God for our sin, and took us by force, and invaded us
though we were another right and possession: But Christ, that stronger armed
man, satisfying for our sins, brake the power of the Devil, and enfranchised
us, being freed from the yoke of his tyranny: Wherefore, in respect of God,
Christ redeemed us; for unto him he has paid the price: But he has delivered
us, We are said to be redeemed in respect of God, we are delivered in respect
of the Devil.
or set us at liberty in respect of the Devil: For we are given unto Christ
our Redeemer to be his own, neither has the Devil any more right or power
over us: And this Christ's Dominion over us cost him enough, who therefore also
has care of it, and preserves it. Of that dominion we dispute especially in
this place: For the Devil does not acknowledge Christ to be such a Lord unto
him, as we confess him to be unto us, because he has redeemed us, and because
he guides us with his Spirit.

By right of preservation.
In respect of our preservation, Christ is our Lord, because he defends us
unto the end, and keeps and safe-guardeth us to eternal life: not only by
defending our bodies from enemies, but our souls also from sins: For our
preservation must be understood not only of our first freedom from the power
of the Devil, but also of the continual guarding of us, and the consummation
of all his benefits. Of this dominion himself speaks: None of them are lost
which thou gave me. No man shall pluck my sheep out of my hands. He keeps
the wicked to destruction, Joh. 17.22. and 10.28. and 6.37.
and defends their bodies only.

In respect of Gods ordinance.
In respect of Gods ordinance: because the Father ordained the Word and this
person, Christ, unto this, that by him he might work all things in heaven and
in earth: For Christ is not in this respect only our Lord, in that he saved
us: that is, delivered us from our enemies, and of enemies made us the sons
of God: but also because the Father gave us unto him, manifested unto us, to be
our Prince, King, and Head, Feb. 1.2. John 6.17. and 7.5. Acts 5.31. Ephesians.
1.22.
and has made him heir of all. He has made him heir of all things. All
that the Father gives me shall come to me. Thine they were, and thou gave
them me. Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a Prince and Savior,
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. God has made all
things subject under his feet, and has appointed him over all things to be the
head of the Church. Now whereas he is our Lord after a far more excellent
manner than others: we also are far more bound to his allegiance and obedience:
For he is so our Lord, that he does indeed with us what he will, and has full
right and power over us: but yet he uses that his power to our salvation only:
For we receive daily of this Lord, more, and by infinite parts more excellent
benefits, than do any other throughout the whole world: And therefore we ought
always to acknowledge the dominion and power, TWO parts of our acknowledging
Christ's dominion over us.
which Christ has over us. Which acknowledging of his dominion is, A
profession of so great a benefit of Christ, as, that he has vouchsafed to be
our Lord, and to set free us his enemies into this so fruitful and glorious a
liberty. A confession of our bond and duty: For Christ being so merciful a
Lord unto us, we ought both in word and life to profess our selves as his
servants, to be bound to faithful subjection and obedience unto him in all
things, that he may be magnified of us for ever.

What is then the meaning of this article, I believe in Christ our Lord? Ans.
Three diverse speeches are here to be observed: The meaning of the Article, I
believe in Christ our Lord.
1. To believe that Christ is Lord. To believe this, is not sufficient: for we
believe also that the Devil is Lord, but not of all, or ours, as we do believe
Christ to be Lord of us all. 2. To believe that Christ is Lord, and that of
all, and also ours. Neither is it enough to believe this: For the Devils
believe also that Christ is their Lord, as he has full right and authority,
not only over all other things, but over them also, to determine of them
whatsoever pleases him. 3. To believe in Christ our Lord, that is, so to
believe Christ to be our Lord, that in him we place our trust and confidence,
and be thoroughly persuaded, that by him we are wholly freed and delivered from
all evil, and are defended and safeguarded against all our enemies: and this
is it, which we especially ought to believe. When as therefore we say, that we
believe in our Lord, we believe, 1. That the Son of God Christ is Creator of
all things, and therefore has power over, and is Lord of all creatures. John
16.5
All things that the Father has are mine. 2. But especially of his Church,
which being purchased with his own blood, he guides, defends, and preserves
by his spirit. 3. And that I am also one of his subjects, whom, being redeemed
from the power of the Diven, he mightily preserves, rules, makes obedient
unto him, and at length enricheth with eternal glory: that is, I believe that
hitherto I have been by and for Christ preserved, and shall hereafter be
preserved of him through all eternity: and lastly, that he uses and will use
his dominion and power, which he has, as over all other creatures, so over
me, unto my salvation, and his own glory.

ON THE 14. SABBATH.
Quest. 35. What beleevest thou when thou say, He was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary?
Ans. That the Son of God, who is, John 5.20. Joh. 1.1. and 17.3. Romans 1.3.
Col. 1.15.
and continues true and everlasting God, Romans 9.5.
took the very nature of man, of the flesh and blood of the Virgin Mary, Gal.
4.4. Luke 1.31, 42, 43.
by the working of the holy Ghost, Matthew. 1.20. Luke 1.35.
that withal he might be the true seed of David, Rom^n. 1.3. Psalm. 132.11. 2 Samuel 7.12, Luke 1.32. Acts 2.30.
like unto his brethren in all things, Philip. 2.7. Heb. 2.14, 17.
sin excepted. Heb. 4.15.


The Explication.
The adversaries against whom this doctrine of Christ's taking flesh of the
Virgin is maintained.
THE Explication of this Question is very necessary for the convincement and
suppression of ancient and late Heretics, who denied, and now deny that the
flesh of Christ was taken out of the substance of the Virgin: For the
Eutychians argue thus: Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost: Therefore the
flesh of Christ was produced out of the substance of the Divinity, or out of
the essence of the holy Ghost, and by this means the divine nature was changed
into the humane. The particle by, in the Article conceived, etc. implies not a
material, but an efficient cause.
Ans. The fallacy of this argument is drawn from an abuse of misconstruing of a
common phrase of speech: For the terms, by the holy Ghost, or of the holy
Ghost, do not signify unto us a material, but an efficient cause; so that
the flesh of Christ proceeds not out of the essence of the holy Ghost, as out
of the matter whereof it was made; but the whole man Jesus Christ was conceived
in the Virgins womb by the virtue and working of the holy Ghost, as appears
out of the words of the Angel: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke 1.35.
and the power of the most High shall over-shaddow thee. Christ is called the
seed of Abraham, the son of David: Therefore he took his flesh of these
Fathers, not of the holy Ghost. And as we are born of God, because he made us,
not that we are of his substance: So Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost,
that is, he was conceived by the virtue and operation of the holy Ghost, not
that he was conceived of the substance of the holy Ghost. Object. If in this
article, He was conceived of the holy Ghost, the particle Of imply not a
material cause; then, in like sort, the Article which follows, Born of the
Virgin Mary, the same particle Of cannot imply a material cause; and so Christ
cannot be said to have taken his flesh of the Virgin. Ans. The case is not
alike in both of these: but in this latter Article it must needs signify a
material cause. The reason is, because it was necessary that Christ should
come of the seed of David: But when it is said, Three reasons why the particle
ex, signifying by or of, though in the Article, Born of etc. it import a
material cause, yet it does not so in the Article, Conceived of etc. Three
things to be observed in the Conception
He was conceived of the holy Ghost, the particle Of intimates no material
cause. The reasons are, 1. Because if this were true, it could not be true
which follows, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. 2. Because God is not
changeable, and therefore the Deity is not changed into flesh. 3. Because the
Word took flesh, and was not changed into flesh.

What then does Christ's conception of the holy Ghost signify and import? Three
things thereby are signified: The forming of Christ's flesh. Luke 1.35.
That the mass of his humane nature was created, or formed in the womb of the
Virgin miraculously, and besides the order of things disposed of God in nature,
by the immediate working and operation of the holy Ghost, without the seed and
substance of man. The power of the most High shall over-shadow thee. Object.
But we are also made of God. Answ. We are made of God mediately, Christ
immediately. The sanctifying of Christ's flesh.
That the holy Ghost did the same moment, and by the same operation, cleanse
this mass, and, from the very point of the conception, sanctify it in the
mothers womb: that is, (since it became not the Word, Four causes of this
sanctifying.
the Son of God, to assume unto himself a nature polluted with sin) he
therefore caused, that original sin should not issue into it: and that for
these causes; He has made him to be sin for us which knew no sin, 2 Cor.
5.11.
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. He^. 2, 11. and 7,
16.
For he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one. Such
an High Priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners. God is a consuming fire. Deuteronomy. 4.2^.
it is the will of God, and the truth: For Whatsoever is borne of flesh, which
is sinful, and not sanctified, is flesh, falsehood, and vanity. Object. But he
was borne of a mother, which was a sinner: Why then should not Christ have sin?
Answ. The holy Ghost does best know how to sever sin from man's nature: For sin
is not the nature of man, but came else-whence, even from the Devil. Mary
therefore was a sinner: but the Mass of flesh, which was taken out of her
substance, was by the operation of the holy Ghost at the same instant
sanctified, when it was taken. The uniting of his flesh to his God head.
The third thing which is sanctified, in that Christ is said to be conceived by
the holy Ghost, is the union of the humane nature with the Word: For the flesh
of Christ was together both created or formed, and also sanctified, and united
to the Son, of the holy Ghost immediately, but of the Father and the Son by the
Spirit.

The sense and meaning then of this Article, Which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, is, The full meaning of the Article, conceived by the holy Ghost.
1. That the holy Ghost was the immediate author of the miraculous conception
of the flesh of Christ. 2. That he separated all uncleanness and contagion of
original sin from this conceived offspring. 3. That he united, in the very
moment of the conception, the flesh with the Word in a personal union.

It is added further in the Creed, that he was born of the Virgin Mary; that
is, of the Virgins substance: Five causes why Christ was born: of the Virgin
Mary namely, that we might know him to ^e,
and that chiefly for these causes: True man.
That the truth of the humane nature, assumed by the Son of God, might hereby be
signified unto us: to wit, that he was conceived by the power of the holy
Ghost, and born true man of the substance of Mary his Mother; that is, Though
the flesh of Christ were miraculously conceived, yet it was taken and born of
the Virgin. T^^^ seed of David.
That we might know Christ our Mediator to be the true seed of David, that is,
to be true man and our brother, who has humane flesh, made not of nothing,
neither else-whence, but issued from the seed of David, Isaac, and Abraham, of
whom also the virgin Mary her self came; yea of the very self same mass of
Adam, whereof both they and we are. The Messiah.
That it may certainly appear unto us, that this Jesus born of the Virgin, is
that Messiah promised unto the Fathers: Behold a Virgin shall conceive, Esaias
7.14. Genesis 3.15.
and bear a Son. The seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent:
For it was foretold by the Prophets, that the Messiah, the Redeemer of
mankind, should be borne of the stock of David, and that by a miraculous
conception and birth, having a Virgin for his Mother: Wherefore seeing both
(that is, both the prophesies, and the miracles) are in this Jesus fulfilled,
there can be no doubt, but that this is the Messiah, true man, and true God,
the reconciler of God and man. Without sin.
That this Christ's birth of a Virgin might be a testimony that he is pure and
without sin, sanctified in the womb of the Virgin, by the virtue of the holy
Ghost. A sign of our new birth. John 1.13.
That we might know the Analogy which is between Christ's nativitie and the
regeneration of the faithful: For Christ's birth of the Virgin is a sign of
our spiritual regeneration, which is not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Quest. 36. What profit take thou by Christ's holy conception and nativitie?
Ans. That he is our Mediator, He. 7.26, 27.
and does cover with his innocence and perfect holiness my sins, in which I
was conceived, that they may not come in the sight of God. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 1
Pet. 3.18. 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 8.3, 4. Esaias 53.11. Psalm. 32.1.


The Explication.
Two benefits of Christ's conception and nativity.
TWO benefits we reap from Christ's conception and nativity. Confirmation of
faith.
A confirmation of our faith, that he is the true Mediator. Consolation.
A consolation, that we through this Mediator are justified before God. The
reason hereof is: because he cannot be a Mediator between God and men, who is
not himself man, who is not righteous, who is not united with the Word, that
is, who is not by nature true God and true man, and of sufficiency and ability
to bestow on us his salvation purchased for us. For such an High Priest it
became us to have, which is holy, harmless, underfiled, separate from sinners,
and made higher than the heavens. What is the meaning then of this Article, I
believe in Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.26.
which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary? The meaning
of the Article, I believe in Jesus Christ, conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the Virgin Mary.
The meaning thereof is, 1. I believe that this natural Son of God, conceived
and born after this manner, was made true man after a mavelous order, and the
same to be one Christ, having two natures united by personal union, one to
another, which are his divinity and his humanity, and to be sanctified from his
mothers womb, by the holy Ghost. 2. I believe farther, that he, being true God
and true man, but one Christ, was holy from his mothers womb, to redeem and
sanctify me, (which he could not do, unless sanctification and union were in
him) and that I, for his Sons sake so conceived and borne, have the right of
the adoption of the sons of God.

THE COMMON PLACE OF THE TWO NATURES IN CHRIST.
NExt after the Article of the Conception and Nativity of Christ, for the
better understanding thereof, follows not unfitly the Common place, Of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, or, Of the two natures in Christ, and their
personal union; wherein these questions following are more copiously to be
discussed.

1. Whether there be two natures in the Mediator. 2. Whether they be one, or
two persons. 3. If they be one person, what manner of union that is of them,
and how made. 4. Why this personal union was necessary to be made.
1. Whether there be two natures in Christ our Mediator.
Two natures in Christ.
THat there are two natures in Christ, this one reason shows by good
demonstrance: Essential properties which are opposite, cannot be in the same,
nor be affirmed of the same thing in respect of the same nature or cause.
Vigil. Vigil. lib. 4.
One nature does not receive in it self a thing contrary and diverse. But in
one and the same Christ are, and are affirmed of him properties diverse and
contrary, divine and humane, finite, infinite, passible, impassible, and such
like: Therefore there must needs be diverse natures in him, humane and divine.
And that the very divine nature, Creatresse of all things, is in Christ, has
been already proved. It remains that we show, a true humane nature to be in
him, and that such as ours is, and perfect, consisting of a body, and a
reasonable soul, of which, Christ true man, and of our kind and nature.
as of essential parts, is made a third substance, to wit, this particular
humanity, which the Word, having taken once into the unity of the person, does
never lay away again. Which we are to hold against Heretics both old and new,
Marcionites and Swenkfieldians; whereof some deny Christ's flesh to have been
formed of the Virgins substance, but will have it brought down from heaven into
the Virgin, or begotten in her, of the substance of the holy Ghost. Others
fancy Christ to have, instead of true flesh, the likeness, semblance, and
apparency of a man's body. Others acknowledge indeed, that he has a true body,
but not an humane soul, the room whereof is supplied by the Word united unto
the body.

Against these and the like errors, The truth of Christ's humane nature is
proved:
the sentence and doctrine of the Church is confirmed By plain places of
Scripture, which testify, Christ, Mary's By Scripture. Luke 1.31.
Son, to have been made like unto us in all things, that is, in essence, in
properties, in infirmities, sin only excepted. Lo, thou shall conceive in thy
womb, and bear a Son. Seeing then the Virgin conceived this her Son in her
womb, bare it until the usual time of delivery, and was delivered of it, as
other women use to be of their children; it follows, that his flesh was nor
brought from heaven, or elsewhere taken, which should but pass only through
the womb of the Virgin, but was formed in the Virgins womb, of her seed and
substance. He that sanctifies, and they which are sanctified, are all of one:
Hebr. 2.11, 14, 15, 16.
wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren. And a little after: For as
much as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part with them. Again, In all things it became him to be like to
his brethren: Therefore he has a humane nature of the same kind wholly with
ours: Hereof he is called, The fruit of Mary's womb, Luke 1.42. and 2*7. Gal.
4.4. and 3.16. Romans 1.3. and 9.5. Luke 3.
The first begotten Son of Mary, Made of a woman, The seed of Abraham, Made
of the seed of David, Borne of the Jews concerning the flesh, The Son of
Abraham, of David, and the Son of man. And also his pedigree and stock,
concerning the flesh, is deduced unto Adam: Therefore he was begotten of the
substance of his mother, and issued from the same seed of Adam, from which we
did. Christ proves himself to be a true man, and not a spirit, by this, that
a spirit has no flesh and bones, as he has, and retains, even after his
resurrection. Apollinaris the Heretic said, Luke 24.39. The error of
Apollinaris refuted
That Christ's body indeed was a true body; but instead of a soul, he had the
Word only. But this man is easily refuted, because Christ should not then have
been like unto his brethren in all things, except sin. And Christ himself
does plainly confess, Mat. 26.38. Luke 2.52. John 10.18.
My soul is very heavy, even unto the death. He is said to have increased in
wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and men: and, to lay down his
soul, and take it again. But, to increase in wisdom, and, To be heavy and
sad, do neither agree unto a body, which is a reasonlesse thing: neither unto
the Godhead, which is not obnoxious to changes and passions. Hitherto belongs
also that, Father, Luke 23.46.
into thine hands I commend my spirit. And when he had thus said, he gave up
the ghost. This cannot be said of Christ's Godhead: For, that being immense and
infinite, is every where; neither does a removing from one place to another
agree unto it: it is not laid down, and taken up again; that is, it never
departed, or was severed from the body, but remains always united unto it.
Wherefore, there must needs be in Christ, besides his body and his Godhead, a
true humane soul, which did truly suffer and abide in Christ these changes,
and the like.

By divine promises and prophecies. Genesis 3.15. Esaias 7.14. Matthew. 1.1. Luke
1.42. Romans 1.3.
It is confirmed by divine promises and prophecies. For the Messiah in the Old
Testament was promised to be such a one, as should be the seed of the woman, of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. But this Jesus, the Son of the Virgin Mary, is that
promised Messiah: Therefore he must needs be the true man, issuing of the blood
and posterity of the Woman and the Fathers, and therefore to have been indeed
begotten of the substance of Mary, and to have taken true flesh.

By his office of Mediatourship.
The office of the Mediator confirms the same. The sin of men, in respect
of Gods truth and justice, could not be punished in any other nature, than in a
humane nature, which should be of the same kind with ours. But in the
Mediator, which is Jesus Christ alone, our sins were to be punished:
Therefore he must needs be true man who has humane flesh, not created of
nothing, or borne else-whence, but sprung from the blood of Adam, as well as
ours. Moreover, it was necessary for Christ, not only to take, but also to
retain our nature for ever: because God has decreed to bestow, and does
bestow the benefits, which Christ by his death has purchased for us, by this
man Christ, upon them only who are, and remain ingraffed into his mass and
flesh, as members into their head, or branches into their Vine. 1 Cor. 15.21.
John 15.6.
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. If
a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and withers. Lastly, It
behooved Christ to be made, and to continue our brother for ever; that as he is
flesh of our flesh, so we also of the other side might be flesh and bones of
his flesh and bones, by the same spirit dwelling in us. Ephesians. 5.30. John.
5.56. Ephesians. 4.12, 16. Romans 8.11.
We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Wherefore, except
Christ had indeed taken our nature, without which he cannot be our brother, we
should lose that comfort ever needful and necessary for us, which consists
in the brotherhood only of Christ with us: I am of his flesh, and of his bones.

Object. 1. The flesh of Adam ( that is, humane flesh issuing from Adam by
generation unto his posterity) is sinful. The flesh of Christ is not sinful:
Therefore the flesh of Christ is not the flesh of Adam. Answ. The Major
proposition has a fallacy of the accident. For it is not necessary, that of
whatsoever the accident of a thing is denied, of the same, the thing also, or
subject of the accident should be denied: because an accident does so cleave to
the thing wherein it is, as it may be separated from it. Sin is not of the
nature of man's flesh, but an accident only thereof
Sin is not of the essence and nature of humane flesh (for that was created
pure of God) but sin came otherwise, by the defection and falling of our first
Parents from God. Seeing then the flesh of Adam is sinful only by an accident,
it follows that the flesh of Christ is only in respect of that accident, not
the flesh of Adam, but is, as touching the substance, the same flesh with the
flesh of Adam. Wherefore, they deal like Sophisters, who deny the flesh of
Christ, for that it is void of sin, to be the same in substance, or essence,
or kind, with the flesh of Adam. For he that could in the beginning create
humane flesh pure of nothing, he is able also by his omnipotent power, and
special working, so to form it of the substance of the Virgin, being a sinner,
as withal, to let and stop any issuing of sin thereunto; that is, to make it
pu^e and holy. There is no new or strange thing therefore, if the omnipotent
Lord has taken humane substance, without the accident sin, into the unity of
his person. Wherefore this their argument shall be rather thus inverted: The
flesh of Adam is true flesh. Christ's flesh is the flesh of Adam: and therefore
Christ's flesh is true flesh, and, by a consequent, Christ is true man.

See the explication of the 35 Question of the Catechism.
Object. 2. That which is conceived and begotten of another, is of the same
substance with him. The flesh of Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost:
Therefore the flesh of Christ is no creature, but came down from heaven,
issuing from the substance of God. Answ. There is a fa^^acy in the diverse
understanding of the particle of: For that in the Major signi^^eth the matter
or material cause, in the Minor the efficient cause only, that is; That which
is conceived or begotten of another, transfusing, or passing his substance, or
part of his substance into the thing begotten; this is of the same essence with
him who begot it: Christ's flesh was conceived by the holy Ghost; not that he
transfused, or passed his substance into flesh begotten, but because in
miraculous sort he formed in the Virgins womb of her substance the body of
Christ, so that it should not be contaminated or polluted with original sin.

Object. 3. In God are not two natures. Christ is God: Therefore there are not
two natures in him. Ans. Mere particulars do in force nothing. For if the
Major be taken universally, it is false: Whosoever is God, in him are not two
natures: this general proposition is false. The Major therefore is true, as
touching God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, but not as touching God the
Son incarnate. Repl. 1. But nothing can be added unto God, by reason of the
great perfection and simplicity of his nature. Christ is God* Therefore the
humanity could not be added to his divine nature. Answ. Nothing can be added to
God by way of perfection, that is, whereby his essence may be changed and
perfected: but by way of copulation or union. Now, in that God the Word joined
the humane nature unto him personally, there came no change or great perfection
thereby to the Word which took it, but to the nature which was taken. Repl. 2.
Humane nature cannot come unto him, 1 Timothy 6.^^.
who dwells in the light that none can come unto. Answ. This is true, if so
God of special grace does not assume and take it unto him. Repl. 3. But it is
ignominious for God to be a creature. Christ-man, is God. Answ. The changing of
the Godhead into a creature, would have been ignominious and reproachful unto
the Word, but that the Godhead should be united unto a creature, is most
glorious unto God, as who by that means has demonstrated and made known his
infinite both goodness, and wisdom, and justice and power, to the whole world.

2. Whether Christ be one person, or more.
IN Christ are two perfect natures, whole and distinct: and double properties
also and operations natural: but one person, which subsisting in both these
natures, divine, and humane, is truly designed by the concrete terms or voices
of both natures. For it is requisite that one and the same should be Mediator
both by merit, and by power or efficacy. But they who make two persons, make
also two Christ's with Marcion and Nestorius, See Iren. Lib. 3. cap. 17. advers.
haeret.
The one a man passive and crucified, the other God, not crucified, and only
assisting the man Christ by his grace.

Object. 1. In whom are two things, which in themselves make two whole persons,
in him also are two persons. But in Christ are two things which make two whole
persons: (namely, the Word, which is by it self a person, subsisting from all
eternity, and the body and soul, which being united, make likewise a person)
Therefore, in Christ are two persons. Answ. We deny that part of the Minor, to
wit, That the body and humane soul do, as in other men, so also in Christ,
concur to make a created person of the humane nature, and diverse from the
person increate and eternal of the Word. For albeit the humane nature in
Christ, compounded of a body and reasonable soul, is an individual and
particular, or singular substance, as being from other individuals of the same
nature distinguished by certain properties and accidents: yet neither was it,
or is it a person of subsistence: For, 1. A person is that which is not only a
particular, or singular thing, but also it self consists, and subsisteth in
it self, and by it self, not sustained in, or of any other: but Christ's
humane nature, now from the very first beginning thereof, depends, and is
sustained by the person of the Word: For, it was at once both formed and
assumed of the Word into unity of person, and made proper unto the Word:
before, and without which assumption, or personal Union, it neither was, nor
had been, nor should be; so that this Union being dissolved and loosed, it must
needs follow, that this flesh, and this soul should be brought to nothing:
Therefore Christ's humane nature has not any subsistence, or person proper unto
it self. 2. It belongs to the nature or definition of a person, that it be
an individual, incommunicable, and also no part of another. But the nature,
which the Word took and assumed, belongs to the substance of one Christ, a
part also of whom it is after a sort: Therefore in it self, and by it self,
it is no person.

Repl. That which appertains to the substance of a person, and is a part
thereof, cannot be a person. The Word appertains and belongs to the
substance of Christ, and is after a sort a part of him, as well as the
humanity: Therefore neither shall the Word be by this reason a person. Answ.
That which is part only of a person (that is, is so a part, that besides of it
self it is no person) is no person: or, that which is a part of a person, is
not a person; true, it is not that person, whose part it is. Thus the Major
proposition, if it be understood simply, or universally, is false. For a
reasonable soul existing in the body, is not a person, but a part of a humane
person, which the soul, together with the body does make: yet notwithstanding
the same soul, being loosed from the body, is a person by it self; not that
compound and mortal person, whereof it was a part, that is, an humane person,
but a person most simple and immortal, as are the Angels; because it
subsisteth our of the body by it self, neither is a part of another: So may it
be said of the Word, if it be construed aright, and with indifferency, That the
Word in it self, and by it self, is not the whole person of Christ, or the
Mediator, as he is Christ and Mediator: that is, is not that whole thing,
which is Christ, who is not only God, but also man: and yet is in it self, and
by it self, the perfect and whole person of the God head, truly subsisting
before the flesh was that is, the only begotten Son of God. For this self
fame person existing in it self from everlasting, and remaining for ever most
simple and uncompound, is, by the assuming of man's nature, made in time after a
sort compound, that is, the Word incarnate. Wherefore, in respect of the person
considered in Union, or incarnate, the Word is rather considered as a nature;
and both it self, and the humane nature may be called as it were, the parts of
whole Christ, and are so called also of many of the ancient Fathers, which were
sound in faith; not that the flesh assumed did add any part to the subsistence
of the Word: or, as if of the persons of the Word and the humane nature, as
being imperfect parts, were made another perfect person of a certain third
essence; consubstantiall with neither of those two natures, of which it is
compounded; but because the person of the Word altogether one and the same,
which, before the flesh was taken, consisted in the divine nature only, does
now after the taking of the flesh, subsist in two perfect natures, divine and
humane, suffering no commixtion, confusion, or mutation: that is, The person of
the Mediator is said to be constituted of two natures, divine and humane, as
it were of parts, because these two are necessarily required, and do concur
to the absolving and accomplishing of the work of our redemption. In this sense
therefore, both by ancient and later Divines, and also by the Schoolmen, are
used well, and without danger, these phrases and speeches: Christ's person is
compounded: The two natures are, as it were, the parts of Christ: The person of
Christ is, consists is constituted, is made of, or in the two natures of God
and man: The two natures concur, or come together into one person and
subsistence: They make one hypostasis, or subsistence: Both natures belong, and
concur to the substance of one Christ: Both are of the substance of belong,
and concur to the substance of one Christ: Both are of the substance of
Christ: The humanity with the Word; or contrary, The divine person or
subsistence with the humane nature, does constitute, or make the substance of
one Christ. Of the Word and the flesh assumed, as of substantial parts, does
one Christ consist. By these and the like phrases of speech used of this
mystery, singular, and surpassing all capacity of man's wit, the Orthodoxall,
that is, men of a right and sound judgment in points of faith, will signify,
and some way express this only: That the two natures are so united, and linked
in that one person of Christ, as that they exist wholly in that one person or
subsistence, which is, perfect and whole, proper to the Word from everlasting
by nature; and is, whole, made in time the person of humanity also now assumed
and destitute of the proper personality thereof: and this is made by grace of
union; so that the devine subsistence, or person of the Word, being in it self
most simple, and most perfect, does notwithstanding subsist truly and
individually in the two natures. Wherefore, seeing the thing it self is
clear, and agreed upon among them who are of right judgment, and sound in
faith, we are not odiously to jarre about words; especially, since that
concerning these supernatural things, no words of humane speech can be found,
which may at all suffice for the expressing of them. But as it is not well
said, The person took the person, or the nature took the person: So these
speeches are true, and agreeable to faith; The person took the nature:
Likewise, The nature took the nature. For the divine Nature is not here
considered absolutely, or essentially, but in person of the Word, or personally.

Object. 2. God and man are two persons. Christ is God and man: Therefore there
are two persons in him. Answ. The Major is true, if we understand it of God and
man, as they are not united. But Christ is God and man by Union. In this
therefore there is a f^llacy of mis-joyning some words, and dis joining others.
For in the Major God and man are taken dis-junctively, or, both apart: but in
the Minor con-junctively, or, both together. Repl. The Word united to it self
a body and soul: Therefore a person. Answ. True it is, he united them to
himself, but this he did by a personal union: not that this body and soul
should as a person subsist apart, or by themselves, but that they might subsist
in his person. Repl. 2. If he united the essential parts of a person, he also
united a person. But he united the essential parts of a person: Therefore also
a person. Answ. The Major is true only of such parts, as subsist by themselves:
but Christ's body and soul had not subsisted at all, not do subsist now, save
in this union of the Word with them. Repl. 3. That which subsisteth not by it
self, is more imperfect than that which subsisteth by it self. Christ his
humanity does not subsist by it self. Therefore Christ's humanity is more
imperfect than ours. Answ. 1. If that which subsisteth by it self be opposed
to this, To be an accident, which existeth by being in another, this part of
the Minor proposition is false, That Christ's humanity does not subsist by it
self: because that also is a substance. But in this disputation, Subsisting by
it self, is opposed to that, which is indeed substance, but yet depends of
another, and consists in another, So we say, that mankind, and the
universal, or general kinds of all things do not subsist in themselves, but
in their singulars, as the common nature of all men subsisteth not by it self,
but in particular men. Wherefore, for further answer, we say, that the Major
proposition, being simply and generally taken, is false. For the soul of man
being loosed from the body, does subsist by it self: the same, while it
remains in the body, subsisteth not by it self, but united with the body:
neither yet is it therefore to be thought more imperfect, when this rather does
most make to the perfection thereof. For it is created of God to this purpose,
that it should, together with the body, constitute and absolve the essence of
man, and should be a part thereof. So the soul and body of Christ were created
to that end, as to be the proper soul and body of the Son of God, and to
depend personally of him. That therefore Christ's humanity has his subsistence
not in a created person proper unto it by nature, but in the eternal
hypostasis and person of the Word, it is so far from bringing any
imperfection thereunto (for the subsistence or manner of subsisting does not
change the nature or essence of a thing) that rather the greatest ornament,
glory, and eminency comes thereby unto it: and this is the chief and
principal difference, whereby it differs and is discerned from all men, and
also from the blessed Angels.

Object. Revel. 1.18.
3. A dead and an everliving thing are not the same subsistent, or person.
Christ was dead, and yet everliving: Therefore he is not one person. Ans. The
Major is either particular: or being taken generally, it is false. For one and
the same subsistent, truly and individually subsisting in diverse natures, even
as Christ is, may be said to be dead and everliving: as one and the same man,
is both mortal and immortal in respect of diverse natures, whereof he is made
and does consist.

3. What manner of union this is of the two natures in Christ and how made.
THe Union of the flesh with the Word was not made in the essence or nature, or
in any essential property, but in the person of the Word. That this may be the
better understood, we must observe: 1. What it is to be united in nature, or
into nature. 2. What likewise to be united in person, or into, or unto one
person, or according to subsistence.


1. What it is to be united in nature.
Twofold union in nature.
First, Those things are said to be united in nature or essence, which, as
essential parts, are coupled to the full perfection or constitution of one
nature, or essence, or kind; that is, Whatsoever things then are essential
parts of a perfect thing, they are said to be united in nature, and unto, or
into one nature. which are one in nature, essence, or kind; or, which are one
essence, or of one essence and nature: or, have one common essence or unity of
nature; or, are joined and agree in one essence. So two men are said to be
united in nature; that is, are one in kind, or of the same humane nature. The
three persons of the Godhead are united in essence; that is, are one in
essence, or are of one and the same divine essence in number, or have the same
Godhead in common. So likewise, To be united in properties or perfections
natural, or essential, is to get or have the same, Union in properties.
or like equal properties essential. Which is indeed nothing else, than to be
made, and be one nature, or more substances of the same nature and essence. So
two men are united in natural properties and perfections, because they have
the same in kind, or the like, and therefore are of the same humane nature. The
air in the chimney, which gets the perfections or qualities of the fire as
being now become a flame, and the fire of the burning coals, which fireth and
inflameth the air next unto it, are two substances of the same properties, and
fiery nature, and therefore are said to be united in nature and essential
properties; that is, they are two fires in number, but in kind and nature they
are one. Likewise the three divine persons are united in essential properties;
that is, have the same essential properties: which is nothing else, but that
they are one essence, one and the same God.

2. What it is to be united in person.
THose things are said to be united in person, which are one person; that is,
which although they differ in natural properties, yet exist in one and the
same individual subsistence: or have altogether the same subsistence. So the
soul and body of man are united and concur unto one person, because they
being united, do make one person, or one subsistent, incommunicable, not
sustained in another, or of another. The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
are not united in person, or personal properties: because they have these, not
the same, but distinct. By this which has been said, it is manifest, that the
Union in nature and natural perfections, is an equality of properties and
nature; but the personal union is, when two unlike natures are coupled, so
that each retains his natural properties and operations whole and distinct,
but yet have both one and the same subsistence wholly: or, it is the joining of
two natures different in properties, to constitute the substance of one
individual, or person; that is, such a connection or knitting of them together,
as they are one individual, subsisting by it self, or the substance of one
individual.

But that in Christ the Union of the flesh with the Word is not essential, Why
the union of the flesh with the Word cannot be essential.
made in the nature, or any essential property of the God head, is showed by
these reasons: essential, it would follow, that the humanity, once assumed and
taken, was equalled with the Godhead in essential properties, and so by a
consequent, to be made of the same nature and essence with the Word. So
Vigilius shows, Lib 4., The ancient heresies into which they fall, who
maintain an Essential Union.
that the Eutychians held two substances to be in Christ of the same nature.
Wherefore, they who will have the essential properties of the Godhead to be
really communicated and common with the flesh, so that the flesh should truly
and really be, and be called omnipotent, omniscient, and whatsoever else the
Godhead is: they indeed (howsoever in words they mightily stand against it)
hold this Union to be made in essential properties and in nature, and both with
Eutyches and Swenckfield, they confound both natures, and take away the
difference between the creature and the Creator: and also with Nestorius, they
frame and make two persons, and so bring in a quaternity. For albeit they say,
that they in their confusion, or (as themselves call it with their Master
Swenckfield) deifying and majesticall exaltation of the flesh, do retain the
substance of the flesh: yet two substances, having really the same and like
perfections, are two subsistents or persons of one nature, as are two men, and
whatsoever other individuals of the same kind or nature. Lastly, with Sabellius
and the Patripassians they incarnate the whole Trinity. For there is one and
the same essence in number of the divine person, and the same essential
properties. Wherefore, that which is united, and equalled with one of these
three according to essence, must needs be also united, and equalled with the
rest.

Wherefore the Union of both natures in Christ is personal, or, according to
the subsistence proper unto the Word, both natures keeping and retaining in
that Union, their properties whole and unconfounded. For the Word did not, by
uniting humane nature unto it, make the same Godhead, or God, and omnipotent,
immense, and infinite: but it took the manhood, which retains still the
properties belonging unto it, and so did join and knit it unto it self, as to
be one person with it, and the substance of one Christ. Neither is it absurd,
that a thing which neither is made, or is one with another in kind, neither any
Homogeneall part thereof, should yet exist in the same subsistence with it, or
should subsist in it self, wherewith it is united. For a graffe has his
subsisting in a tree of another nature or kind. The same is the subsistence
both of the sprig ingraffed, and of the tree sustaining the sprig: that is,
they are one and the same individual tree; yet have they, and so do reaine
natures in properties most diverse. The like reason is there in the two natures
of Christ, both subsisting in, or of the same person of the Son. Object. The
humane nature is united with the Word in person, but not in nature: Therefore
the person is divorced and sundered from the nature. Again, The person only
of the Son is united with the humane nature: Therefore not the divine nature
it self of the Word. Answ. In both these arguments is a fallacy from that
which is no cause, as if it were a cause, and both offend in this: for that
they, who so reason against the maintainers of true doctrine, and men sound in
faith, either know not, or are not willing to distinguish between these two
phrases of speech, To be united in nature, and to be united to, or with a
nature: when notwithstanding, the difference is very great, and most familiar,
and known unto the Schoolmen. For, To be united in nature is to be equalled,
that is, to be made one essence or nature with another: To be united to, or
with a nature, is to be coupled and joined therewith to one subsistence or
personality. Wherefore the flesh is united to, or with the Word, not in nature,
or in essential properties; that is, it is not made with the Word one essence,
neither made equal unto it in omnipotency, wisdom, and nature (for so should
the whole Trinity be incarnate) Yet it is united to the omnipotency, wisdom,
nature, and essence of God, not simply, but of God the Word. Now, this is
nothing else, than the flesh to be united to the person of the Son, or to the
Word in person, which person is the very divine nature or essence, omnipotent,
wise, and whatsoever else is proper to the Godhead.

But albeit the flesh taken or assumed is truly united, both to the person, and
to the nature of the Word. (For the person is not any several thing, or really
differing from the essence, but is the essence it self): yet is it well said,
that the flesh is united to the Word in person only: and likewise, that the
person only of the Word is incarnate. The reasons hereof are, 1. Because, not
the Father, nor the holy Ghost were incarnate, but the Son only. 2. Because
the first and nearest term of this union is the person only of the Word,
assuming and taking the flesh, but not the Godhead. For the person only is
proper unto the Word: the essence of the Godhead is common to him, and the
same with the Father and the holy Ghost. This is plainly taught by the sixth
Toletan Council, Council. Tolet. 6. cap. 1.
in these words: in these words: The Son only took the humanity in
singularity of person, not in the unity of divine nature; that is, in that
which is proper unto the person, not which is common to the Trinity. And
Rusticus in his Dialogue against the Acephalists: Not God the Word by the
divine nature; but the divine nature by the person of God the Word, is said to
be united to the flesh. And a little after: Wherefore both God the Word and his
nature is incarnate: he by himself, and in that he is in himself: his nature
not so, but by the person. God the Word then as touching himself, is united to
the flesh; for he is made one person, and one subsistence with the flesh: but
as touching his nature, he is conjoined rather than united; because there
remain still two natures.

Wherefore either foul and shameful is the folly, or notorious the malice and
slander of certain smatterers, that of this very Orthodoxall and sound
position, not of the Schoolmen only, but of Councels also, and ancient
Fathers, (viz. The flesh is united to the Word, in person only, or according
to subsistence, and this only makes the proper difference of personal union)
they infer, that by this means the divine nature of the Word is drawn away
from the personal union. But let them again, and again look unto it, lest by
that their real communicating of the essential properties of the Godhead
(which are the very divine Essence common to the Son with the Father and the
holy Ghost) which communication they will have to be the personal union, which
they define by it, they overthrow as well the eternal Godhead of Christ, man,
as also the manhood it self; and withal plainly incarnate the whole Trinity.

That then one and the same Christ is, and is called truly and really the very
eternal God, immense, omnipotent, Creator; and true natural man, finite,
weak, subject to passion, and sufferings, and a creature: the only cause is the
unity of person subsisting in two natures perfect, whole, and really distinct,
divine and humane. For every individual and person is denominated or named of
the natures or forms, and their properties and operations concurring or
subsisting in it. Wherefore, seeing in the same individual person of the Word
do truly subsist, and belong to the substance of one Christ, these two most
diverse natures; unto one and the same Christ, of which soever nature he be
called, do agree, and are affirmed of him all the attributes and properties,
both divine and humane, but after a diverse manner: For, the attributes which
agree to Christ in respect of the personal union, are of two sorts: some are
attributes or properties of the natures, others of his office. The natural
attributes are those, which are proper to each nature; whether the same be
essential, belonging to the essence of the thing, or which necessarily follow
and accompany it, without which the nature cannot consist: or accidental,
which may be away and wanting without the destruction of the nature. The
essential properties and perfections of the Godhead are, To be eternal,
uncreate, immense, every where present, not to be circumscribed in place,
omnipotent, omniscient, and the like; which are the very essence of the
Godhead; as also to create, to give the holy Ghost, to regenerate. The
essential attributes of the humanity are, To have a soul understanding,
immortal, and a body compounded of the elements, consisting of skin, blood,
flesh, bones, veins and sinews, having a certain and definite greatness
figure, proportion, and collocation, or locablenesse of parts: and therefore to
be circumscribed in one place, to be solid, visible, palpable, and such like.
These Christ retains for ever, because without these, nothing can be a humane
nature. The accidental properties of the humanity are those infirmities which
ensued upon sin: which infirmities, Christ, together with the humane nature it
self, assumed, and took without sin. For he took the form of a servant, which
by his Resurrection and Ascension he laid down again. The attributes of his
office are called those, which agree not to one nature only, but to both
together; that is, it agrees to the whole person, according to both natures,
as being the compound of both.

A rule to be observed, as touching the attributes or properties of both
natures in Christ.
BOth natures, and their properties are truly and really affirmed of the person
and of themselves interchangeably, in concrete terms or voices: yet so, that
the proper predicate, which is proper unto one nature, is attributed to the
person, not according to both natures, but according to that only, to which it
is proper. The reason is, for that one and the same persons subsisting in two
natures, has, and retains for ever, really, the properties of both natures:
and also, because one and the same person is signified by the concrete voices
of both natures. And therefore one and the same man is living and corporeal
according to diverse natures, and the corporeal is living by the soul only;
and contrarily, the living is corporeal by the body only (for both soul and
body are of the substance and essence of the same man): so likewise one and the
same Christ is God eternal, immense, omnipotent, according to the Godhead
only: is man, the Virgins Son, created, finite, infirm, and did suffer,
according to his humanity only: so likewise, God is man, borne of a Virgin,
anointed with the holy Ghost, and suffered, according to the flesh; And, man
is God, eternal, creator, omnipotent, gives the holy Ghost, not according to
the humane nature, but according to the divine. For the sense and meaning of
these speeches is: The person which is God, Creator of all things, omnipotent,
by reason of the Godhead; the self same person is man, a creature, infirm,
by reason of the flesh subsisting in it.

But, notwithstanding, one nature, and the properties thereof, whether they be
uttered in abstract, or in concrete voices, cannot be affirmed of the other
nature or form, truly and really. The reason is: Because the union is not made
in the nature; that is, two natures are not made one nature: and because in
neither nature, the properties of the other do really exist, neither can
exist. For the natures do not communicate each to other their essential
properties, as neither do these impart their essence; that is, one nature does
not receive the properties of both natures. Wherefore these kinds of speeches
are false: The Godhead is the manhood, or man; was conceived, borne, did
suffer, was dead: and again, these: The manhood is the Godhead, or God, is
eternal, immense, uncircumscribed in place, omnipotent, gives the holy Ghost,
does regenerate. For all these are no more true, and to be admitted than those,
A soul is a body, or corporeal, mortal, visible; and a body is a soul, or a
spirit, invisible, immortal.

Object. 1. The whole person of Christ is really omnipotent, everywhere,
eternal, etc. The humanity and the Godhead are the whole person of Christ:
Therefore both are really omnipotent, every where, eternal, etc. Answ. This
argument the Ubiquitaries, who most of all ground upon it, and often use it,
have borrowed from Swenkfieldians, who commonly in their books reason thus:
Whole Christ is the natural and only begotten Son of God, is the true and
the same God, of the same infinite power and majesty with the eternal Father,
conceived, borne of the Virgin, suffered, was dead, rose again, ascends into
heaven, sends the holy Ghost. But both natures belong to the whole person of
Christ: Therefore Christ, according to his humanity also, is the natural Son
of God, begotten of the substance of the Father from everlasting, and
consubstantiall with the Father, and the same God with the Father, who is
Creator of all. If then the Ubiquitaries collection be lawful also and sound,
this doubtless of the Swenkfieldians, is lawful also and sound: but if the
Swenkfieldians collection be corrupt, and smelling of Eutyches heresy, then
that of the Ubiquitaries cannot be at all good and sound. But indeed, both
collections are Eutychian and Sophistical. They are Eutychian because two
natures, which are made equal in properties essential, or, which get, and
have the same, or equal essential properties, are indeed made one nature and
substance, or are two substances of one nature: both which opinions take clean
away the nature of the humanity, and trans-form it into the Godhead: but the
latter does further make two persons in Christ of the same nature. They are
also Sophistical: because, whether the person of Christ be considered in it
self, as it was a person being but one and perfect, and before the
incarnation, subsisting in one nature only: or whether it be considered, as it
is incarnate, and now subsisting in two natures; yet still the transition and
passing from the person to the nature, is faulty and Sophistical. For neither
is it necessary that what is truly in, and attributed unto a person, the same
also should be really in all things concurring in that person, and be affirmed
of all. The reason is, because the parts, or natures, though united in the same
person, yet retain their properties and operations unconfounded. Wherefore,
that which is proper unto the Godhead, cannot agree unto the person, in
respect of the flesh also, but only in respect of the Godhead. Whole man
understands, discourses, and has motion of will; yet he does not this by
his finger or body, but by his mind only: whole man is mortal, and does go,
eat, and drink; yet none but a madman, or an Epicure, will therefore say, that
the soul also is mortal, or does go, eat, or drink. So not half, but the
whole person of Christ was before Abraham, and from everlasting did create, and
does preserve all things, and took flesh: But the flesh neither was from
everlasting, neither did create, nor does preserve all things, nor took flesh,
but was created; and being assumpted and taken, is sustained of the Word, and
in it. So whole Christ was wounded and dead, yet not his Godhead, nor his
soul. This is well and learnedly declared and explicated by Damascene, in
these words, Whole Christ is perfect God, but not the whole of Christ: that is,
not both natures are God. For he is not God only, L^^. 3. Cap. 7.
but also man. And Whole Christ is the perfect man, but not the Whole of Christ
is man. For he is not man only, but God too. For the Whole, signifies the
nature: Whole, the person.

Wherefore if the Ubiquitaries will at all have the illation and enforcing of
their conclusion on these premises to be necessary; the Major proposition must
be expounded after this sort: The person is God, creator, omnipotent, every
where whole, that is, as concerning all that, which it is, or in which it does
subsist, or which does belong unto it. But the Major taken in this sense, is
false, and most absurd, as was showed a little before: For the true sense
thereof is this; The person is every where whole, that is, without division or
sundring of natures, or subsisting undividably in two natures. But the humanity
is not that whole subsisting in two natures. Not every thing then that agrees
really to the person, agrees also really to the flesh. And albeit the person
does subsist in the humanity and the Godhead mutually, united one to the
other: yet, as it has been said, it is not hereof enforced, that, because the
person is every where, therefore the humanity should be, in proper substance,
present every where. For this is proper to the Godhead, neither is it really
communicated to any creature, or is in any. Rep. The divinity is one person in all places, but especially with the Church. The divinity is but half Christ:
therefore only half Christ is present with the Church. Answ. 1. There is an
ambiguity and doubtfulnesse in the words, half Christ: For, if by half
Christ, they understand one nature, which is united to the other in the same
person, the whole reason may be granted: namely, that not both, but one nature
only of Christ, though united to the other, that is, his Godhead, is present
with us, and all things, in his proper substance, in all places, and at all
times. But they, by half Christ, understand, craftily and sophistically, the
one nature separated from the other: as if the Godhead were made to be with us
bare and naked, and not incarnate. But in this sense the Minor is false, and
the Ubiquitaries own invention. For the same Word, by reason of the
immensnesse, and infinity of his essence, is whole every where, without his
manhood; yet so, that he withal is, and abides whole in his manhood,
personally united thereunto. Wherefore, the Word neither is, nor works any
where not united to the flesh; albeit the flesh, because it has not an
infinite essence, but retains it circumscribed in place, is not made to be
present substantially in all those places, in which the Word incarnate, or the
Word man is. 2. There is an ambiguity also, and double signification in the
word Presence: For the presence, whereby Christ is present with his Church is
not of one kind. Wherefore, if the Major be understood of the presence of his
substance in all places, and of his being amongst us, and all other things, it
is true: For the substance or essence of the Godhead only, and not of the
manhood too, is immense, and exceeding all measure, always existing and being
the same and whole in all things. But it is false, if it be understood of the
presence of his virtue or efficacy. For, according to this, not only whole
Christ, but also the whole of Christ is present with his Church only: that is,
not only his divinity, but his humanity also: but so, as the difference
notwithstanding is kept of both natures and operations. The humanity therefore
of Christ is present with all the elect, in what soever places they be
dispersed through the whole world; not by any presence substantial of the
flesh in the bread, and within their bodies: but, 1. By the efficacy and
perpetual value of his merit. For God the Father does even now behold the
sacrifice of his Son, once accomplished on the Cross, and receives us for
that, as a sufficient ransom and merit, 1 John 1.7.
into his favor. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, purges us from all
sin; that is, both by his merit, and the efficacy or virtue of his merit. 2.
By the efficacy also of his humane will: because Christ, according to his
humanity also, earnestly both would and will, that we be of God received into
favor, quickened, and glorified through that his one only sacrifice. Thou art
a Priest for ever: and also whatsoever he will, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.6.
yea with his humane will, that he powerfully effects and works, not by the
power of his flesh, but of his Godhead, or spirit omnipotent; whom, not the
flesh, but the Godhead of Christ only sends into the hearts of the elect and
chosen: John 6.63. Romans 8.11.
It is the spirit that quickneth the flesh profits nothing. God shall quicken
your mortal bodies by his spirit dwelling in you. 3. He is present with us by
conjunction and union. Because all those that are to be saved, must needs be
engraffed and knit together, even into Christ's humane nature; that being
engrafted into his humane mass, they may be quickened, as branches live fastened
to the Vine, and members coupled and joined to the head: which joining yet of
us with the flesh of Christ, is not made by any natural connection of Christ
and our flesh, or by any existence of Christ's flesh within our substance, or of
ours within his, but by faith and the holy Ghost, in Christ our head, Ephesians.
3.17. Romans 8.9. Ephesians. 5.30.
and dwelling in us his members. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.
If any man has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. We are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: And they twain shall be one flesh:
This is a great secret, etc.

Object. 2. Whatsoever is to be worshipped and adored, is omniscient,
omnipotent, and every where present, that is, has the essential properties of
the Godhead really communicated with it. Christ's flesh is to be adored, or is
adorable, because whole Christ is adored. Therefore Christ's flesh is really
omniscient, and omnipotent, and present every where. Ans. This very same reason
is among the principal arguments whereby the Swenkfieldians endeavor to frame,
after Eutiches manner, a Majesty, and deifying of the flesh of Christ: but both
these, and the Ubiquitaries are deceived, and deceive by the ambiguity and
diverse taking of the word, adored. That is omnipotent and omniscient which is
adored; that is, which is adored in respect of it self, or for it self. The
humane nature is adored, not for it self, or according to the proper nature of
it self (for that were idolatrous;) but it is adored for the Godhead united
therewith personally. Wherefore of the adoration of whole Christ, is but ill
inferred the omnipotency also of his flesh. For the reason does not follow,
from the honor of the person, to the properties of the natures. Repl. That
which is adored by reason of another, is also really omnipotent, and omniscient
by reason of another. Christ's flesh is adored by reason of the Godhead, in
whose person his flesh subsisteth: Therefore Christ's flesh is also really
omniscient, and omnipotent, by reason of the Godhead. Ans. The Major is false,
as is this: That which is made base and humiliated by reason of another thing,
is also by reason of another thing obnoxious and subject to alteration. For the
Word was made base, or humiliated by reason of the flesh, and in the flesh,
neither yet the Word it self, or the Godhead, felt any change or alteration:
but is humiliated, and so said to be after another manner, because the Word
does not show his Godhead in the flesh, which he took in the form of a
servant. So then, albeit the adoration of Christ, God and man, does presuppose
in him omnipotency, omniscience, presence every where, and the searching of
hearts and reins: yet is it not of necessity that the humane nature also,
which by reason of the Godhead, united to it in the same person, is adored,
should be really omnipotent, omniscient, and every where. For the adoration of
Christ, is the honor and worship which agrees, and is yielded one and the
same to whole Christ, man and God, keeping notwithstanding the differences in
natures, of the properties, and operations, whereon Christ's office and honor
does depend. For, to adore and worship Christ, is, by the agnizing and
knowledge of his person and office, to crave of him with a true trust and
confidence, that those blessings which he has promerited and promised, he
will, as our Mediator, perform and give to us, according to the proper will
and operation of each nature. This adoration consists of diverse parts,
compriseth both natures; and keeps their properties and operations, though
united, yet still distinct; and craveth, that whole Christ in performing his
promised benefits, will work those things by his Godhead, which are proper to
his Godhead, and by his flesh, those things which are proper to his flesh. For
his benefits are no otherwise to be craved and asked of him, than as himself
will, and does perform them to us: and he performs them still, keeping the
difference of both natures. Wherefore, they who crave of Christ the Mediator,
the benefits promised in the Word, do necessarily acknowledge him omniscient,
the searcher of hearts, omnipotent, present every where, of himself beholding
and hearing our necessities and complaints. This agnizing, and this honor is
proper to God, and agrees, and is yielded to Christman, in respect of his
Godhead only, and not of his humanity. For in one act, or view unchangeable,
to behold, know, and understand, from everlasting of himself, all things past,
present, and to come; but chiefly the needs, wants, necessities, and desires of
his whole Church. Again, to send the holy Ghost into the hearts of all the
elect and chosen, who have been even since the beginning of the world, and by
his spirit, to teach them within, to justify, regenerate, comfort them, and to
give to them eternal life; these, I say, are not proper to flesh created and
finite, but to a nature infinite, omnipotent, and existing from everlasting.
Therefore Christ promises the holy Ghost to his Disciples, which is the spirit
of truth, wisdom, fear, prayer, grace, etc.

But although after that manner which has been spoken of, the Godhead only,
and Christ by reason of his Godhead, does behold and do all things, and is
adored of us: yet, his humanity also does behold, understand, and hear our
necessities, desires, complaints, and prayers; yet after another sort, that is,
not of it self, but by the God head, revealing and showing our desires to the
humane understanding, which is united to it. And further, it performs those
things which we crave, both by the efficacy of his merit, and by intercession
made incessantly to the Father for us, whereby he wills, and obtains of his
Father all blessings for us: and by the force and omnipotency, not of his
flesh, but of his Godhead united thereunto, by which Christ-man does
effectually apply to us those benefits which he has obtained for us of his
Father. Now, to acknowledge, when we worship Christ the Mediator, these things
in him, and to profess the same both in words, gestures, and actions, is the
honor which is due, and is exhibited by us to his humanity by reason of the
Godhead united thereto: yet so, that this veneration of his humanity is not
separated from the honor which agrees to Christ, according to his Godhead.
For, with one and the same particular and individual invocation and worship we
speak to, and honor whole Christ, God and man, according to the properties of
both natures, which he retains, and will have also now in his glory, and for
ever to be attributed to him unitely, but yet distinctly; that is, As the
person and office of the Mediator, so the adoration or worship is compound,
having parts, whereof some agree to the Godhead, some to the flesh: and as in
the office, so also in the honor of the person, the properties and operations
of the natures are not separated, neither yet confounded; but being united, are
distinguished. Wherefore, as it does not follow, The Godhead in Christ is
Redemptresse by reason of the flesh assumed: Therefore it is always subject to
sufferings, and mortal, did suffer, and was dead: So there is no necessity in
this Ubiquitary argument: Christ's humanity is adored by reason of his Godhead:
Therefore the same is also really omniscient, omnipotent, and after the same
manner to be adored, as is the Godhead. The reason is, because of the
fellowship or conjunction of office and honor in the person, the same
properties and operations in natures are wrongly and heretically inferred. The
sum of all is: That Christ's humanity is adored by reason of his Godhead;
comes not thereof, as if his humanity also were really omniscient, and
omnipotent, as is the Godhead: (For by reason of these and other like
properties is the Godhead only invocated) but because it does truly know,
understand, hear our necessities, cogitations, desires, prayers, the divine
intelligence and understanding, which is united to it, revealing and opening
them unto it: and also because what we crave at Christ's hands, the same it
effectually performs, not by the bones, sinews, hands, fingers, feet; but by
the force and power of the same Godhead.

Furthermore, that manner and form of speaking, whereby the properties of one
nature are really attributed to the person denominated of the other nature, or
of both natures, is usually called the communicating of the properties:
Likewise, The communicating of names; because the names and attributes of both
natures are affirmed of the same person, and of themselves interchangeably, by
reason of the unity of person consisting of both natures. The communicating of
properties has some resemblance of the figure in speech called Senecdoche, and
is termed by many Synecdoche, because that is affirmed of the whole person,
which agrees unto it only in respect of one of the natures, as a part. It is
also called a mutual and interchangeable attribution, because as humane
properties are attributed unto God, in respect of the humanity: so divine are
attributed unto man, in respect of the divinity: As, God suffered, Man is
omnipotent. So likewise, the communicating of names. For, Man is God, and God
is man, by reason of the personal union of both natures.

A rule to be observed concerning the attributes or properties of the office of
Christ Mediator.
THe names of Office and Honor agree unto the whole person, in respect of both
natures; keeping still the difference in natures of properties and operations.
These attributes are rightly affirmed of subjects, both concrete and abstract,
that is, both of the person and of the natures. For it is well said, The
Godhead quickneth, the manhood quickneth; and, God or man quickneth.

The attributes of office are, To be the Mediator, to make intercession, to
redeem, to save, to justify, sanctify, purge from sins, to be Lord and
Head of the Church, to be worshipped, to hear, and such like. These offices
require the properties and operations of both natures not separated, neither
yet confounded, but conjoined and distinct. For even for this very cause was it
necessary that the two natures should be united in Christ Mediator; that, what
neither nature could do, being set apart, in the work of our Redemption, that
Christ, subsisting in both joined together, might do and accomplish by both.
As therefore the natures themselves, so their properties also or faculties of
working and operations are proper, and remain diverse and distinct; yet so, that
they concur to the effectuating and working of one effect, or work, and
benefit, as parts and communicated labors. For albeit the natures do always
labor and work together in the office and benefits of the Mediator, and
neither without other: yet does not therefore one work the same which the
other does: But each works, according to his property and force of working,
only that which is proper to each nature, and not that also which belongs
unto the other. As neither the soul does that which is proper to the body,
neither the body that which is proper unto the soul, each doing their proper
function. So likewise the humanity accomplisheth not that which is proper to
the Godhead, nor the Godhead that which is proper to the manhood: but the
same Christ executes and performs one and the same office and benefit, by
both natures, which he has in him as parts of his person; the Word working
according to the property thereof, what belongs to the Word; and the flesh in
like manner executing according to the peculiar and proper faculties thereof,
and not according to others, that which belongs to the flesh. For the
properties and operations proper to each nature, are not common to both
natures, but to the same person consisting of both natures.

Wherefore in such like phrases of speech concerning Christ's office, which are
called of the ancient (...), (that is, communicatings, or such as make things
common) the properties and operations of natures are to be distinguished from
the office of the person, and from the honor which, in respect of the office,
is due unto the person: likewise, one effect, or act The antropall, (that is,
both of God and man) or work, or benefit, from one operation or action as the
whole from a part. The office is common to both natures: but the natures proper
faculties of working, and actions in executing that office, are not common to
both natures. For that the same should be both proper and common, does imply a
manifest contradiction. So the work and benefit of whole Christ, is a certain
whole thing, and is as it were compound, and common to both natures: but there
are two parts hereof, and diverse operations, proper to each nature, which are
wrought jointly, and belong to the same person, which is Christ, God and man,
that is, both are wrought of one person according to diverse causes and
originals of working, or according to diverse natures, but not by one and the
same nature.

By these grounds it is easy to dissolve and assoile most of the sophismes and
cavils, with which at this time both the Swenckfieldians, ard Ubiquitaries are
wont to gloss and blanch that their real communicating of essential
properties in natures, and their Eutychian deifying of Christ's flesh, and to
thrust the same upon the simp^e for the true majesty of Christ himself. For
thus they reason: The office and benefits of the Mediator, his Redemption,
intercession, purging from sins, quickening, sitting at the right hand of the
Father, his dominion and Lordly power over all creatures, his presence with the
Church, beholding, ruling all things, raising the dead, judging both quick and
dead, all these agree to Christ according to both natures: Therefore the hum^
^^y, as well as the divinity, is also it self really omniscient, searcher of
hearts, omnipotent, present in the substance of his body, at the same moment,
in all places, does of it self know all things, hear our complaints and
prayers, give the holy Ghost, and work by him in the hearts of the chosen,
faith and conversion: and to conclude, in respect of these things, the humanity
it self also is for it self adorable, and to be adored, as well as the
Godhead. To these, and the like, there is one, and a ready answer, namely:
That it is ill going from the person, and from the office and honor of the
person, to the properties and operations of the natures: Or, The society and
conjunction of the office and honor, does not cause or infer the same
properties or operations of both natures: Or, In the affirmation of the office
and honor are not signified the same properties of both natures, nor the
working of the same operations; but the conjunction or concurrence of distinct
operations, proceeding from distinct properties, to the same effect or action
Theantropall, that is, of God and man. The reason is, Because of redemption,
quickening, adoration, and the like, which are the functions, benefits, and
worship of the whole person, there are more and diverse manners and parts, which
will agree really to one and the same person, but not to one and the same
nature, but some to the Godhead only, some only to the manhood. Wherefore
this Major of the reason is false: Whatsoever things agree unto Christ, God and
man, according to both natures, the same also do agree after the same manner,
and as touching all parts to both natures. For, it does not follow, Because the
Godhead is Redemptresse, therefore also it suffered, and was dead.

Now, That those things which in the person and office of the Mediator are,
and abide proper unto one nature, neither are made, nor are by reason of the
union, common to both natures, may be showed at large: but now let these few
suffice: manhood, but the man-Christ has indeed in his substance the eternal
and immense Godhead. quickening and redeeming are properties of the office,
common to both natures; but not after one and the same manner. But omnipotency
is the whole Majesty of the Godhead, according to the supposition of the
Ubiquitaries: For so Schmideline writes in the 142. conclusion of his
disputation of the Lords Supper, and of the communicating of the properties,
had at Tubing, in the year 1582. In the word omnipotency I comprise the whole
Majesty of the Godhead. And in his 143. conclusion, Omnipotency is the very
essence it self of the Godhead, etc. Therefore, If Gods omnipotency be really
communicated to Christ's humanity, so that this also is, by reason of the
omnipotency communicated unto it, really omnipotent; of necessity then, by
reason of the same omnipotency really communicated, Christ's humanity shall be
indeed an essence subsisting of it self, and by it self, incorporeall, eternal
immense, Creatresse of all things: that is, God himself, blessed for ever, and
so by consequent, the divine person. For an essence intelligent, subsisting by
it self, and which also is God, must needs be the person. And these are the
fruits of real communicating of properties in natures.

The participation of the Godhead, exaltation and majesty of the flesh, and
such like, is not a real communicating of the essential properties of the God
head made into the humane nature, or an omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotency;
that is, a Godhead of the manhood. (For such a communicating should not
perfect, but destroy the manhood. and convert it into the Godhead, and
dissolve the personal union of distinct natures) but it is, 1. The very union
of the humanity with the Word, in such sort, as it, being created and finite,
does, together with all the essential properties thereof, subsist, not in a
created person of the same humane nature, but in the increate, and eternal
person of God the Word: by reason of which union, God the Word (but not the
Godhead) is, and is called truly man: and contrary, man (but not the manhood)
is, and is called truly eternal God. No dignity and eminency can be imagined
greater than this, neither does it agree to any, but to the flesh of Christ
only. 2. It is the excellency of gifts. For, these Christ's humanity received
without measure; that is, all whatsoever, and most great, and most perfect,
that may fall into a created and finite nature. 3. The office of the Mediator:
to the performing whereof, the united, but yet distinct, properties and
operations of both natures do necessarily concur. 4. The honor and worship,
which, by reason of the Mediatourship, agrees, and is given to whole Christ
according to both natures, keeping still, as was before said, the difference of
properties and operations in natures.

Now, whatsoever testimonies some bring either out of the Scriptures, or out of
the Fathers which were sound in faith, thereby to prove that their Eutychian
transmutation, and a third kind of communicating forged by themselves; that is,
exequation or equalling of natures; all those testimonies indeed belong either
to the grace of union of the natures, which is signified by the communicating
of properties; or, to the grace of Christ's headship, which compriseth the
office and honor of the Mediator, which are affirmed of whole Christ by way
of communicating: or to the habitual grace; that is, the created gifts, which
Christ received without measure, which are properly affirmed of the flesh or
humanity. These gifts, which are also called graces, are not properly effects
of the personal union, as are the attributes or properties of the natures and
office: 1. Because they are communicated to the manhood, as well of the Father
and the holy Ghost, as of the Word or Son. For he is said to have received of
the Father, the spirit without measure; that is, abundantly: likewise, to be
anointed with the holy Ghost. And, if the gifts were effects of the union, it
would follow of necessity, that the flesh was united, not to the Son only, but
to the Father also, and the holy Ghost. 2. The union of the flesh with the Word
was from the very moment of the conception always most perfect. But the
consummation and perfection of gifts was not until the accomplished time of
his resurrection and ascension. For he was indeed humble, weak, and contemned:
he was indeed ignorant of some things: he did indeed increase in wisdom,
stature, and in favor, not with men only, but also with God himself. 3. The
flesh, when it was in the state of humility, had not immortality, or a nature
not subject to sufferings, or the like; and yet remained it always united with
the Word. Wherefore the habitual gifts or graces of the humanity, for which it
is also in it self really wise, mighty, just, holy, follow not the personal
union in respect of dependency, as the effect follows, and depends of his
cause: but only in respect of order: Because, indeed, the humane nature was
first to subsist and be, before it were enriched with gifts: and it subsisted
united to the Word in the very first moment of the conception. But after what
manner the humanity is united unto the Son of God, has been said before. For
by the special and miraculous working of the holy Ghost, in the womb of the
Virgin, of her blood was the flesh of Christ formed, sanctified, and united
according to subsistence, or personally unto the Word.

4. Why it was necessary, that the two natures should be united in the person
or subsistence of the Son of God.
FOr what cause Christ our Mediator was to be together both a true and perfect
just man, and true (that is, by nature) man, and withal true God, has been
declared of us before in the Commonplace of the Mediator. For the work of our
Redemption could not have been compassed and finished by the Mediator, without
the concurrence of diverse natures and operations in the same person. For albeit
he suffered, and died in the flesh; yet his passion and suffering could not
have that force and efficacy to redeem, justify, and sanctify us; neither
could Christ have applied those benefits unto us, except he had been withal
true and natural God.

Of the incarnation of the Word, the confession made by the Fathers of Antioch,
against Paulus Samosatenus.
This confession in taken out of the Acts of the first Ephes^^e Council,
WE confess our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten before all worlds of his Father,
but in the last times borne according to the flesh of the Virgin by the holy
Ghost, subsisting in one person only, made of the celestial Godhead and
humane flesh. Whole God and whole man. Whole God also with his body, but not
according to his body God; whole man also with his Godhead, but not according
to his Godhead man. Again, whole adorable also with his body, but not
according to his body adorable. Whole adoring also with his Godhead, but not
according to his Godhead adoring. Whole increate also with his body, but not
according to his body increated. Whole formed also with his Godhead, but not
according to his Godhead formed. Whole consubstantiall with God also with his
body, but not according to his body consubstantiall: as neither also, according
to his Godhead he is co-essentiall with men: but he is according to the flesh
consubstantiall unto us, existing also in his Godhead. For when we say he is
according to the spirit consubstantiall with God, we do not say he is
according to the spirit co-essentiall with men. And contrarily, when we affirm
him to be according to the flesh consubstantiall with men, we do not affirm
him to be according to the flesh consubstantiall with God. For as according to
the spirit he is not consubstantiall with us (for according to this he is
consubstantiall with God): So, on the other side, he is not according to the
flesh co-essentiall with God: but according to this he is consubstantiall with
us. And as we pronounce these to be distinct: and diverse one from the other,
not to bring in a division of one undivided person, but to note the distinction
and unconfoundablenes of the natures and properties of the Word and the flesh:
so we affirm and worship those as united, which make to the manner of the
undivided union or composition.

Vigilius Lib. 4. against Eutyches.
IF there be one nature of the Word and flesh, how then, seeing the Word is
everywhere, is not the flesh also found everywhere? For when it was in the
earth, it was not verily in heaven: and now because it is in heaven, it is not
verily in the earth: and insomuch it is not, as that, as touching it, we look
for Christ to come from heaven, whom, as touching the Word, we believe to be in
the earth with us. Wherefore, according to your opinion, either the Word is
contained in place with the flesh, or the flesh is everywhere with the Word;
whereas one nature receives not any contrary or diverse thing in it self: and
it is a thing diverse and far unlike to be circumscribed in place, and to be
everywhere: and seeing the Word is everywhere, and the flesh is not
everywhere; it is apparent, that one and the same Christ is of both natures,
and is everywhere as touching the nature of his Godhead, but is not
everywhere as touching the nature of his manhood: is created, and has no
beginning: is subject to death, and cannot die: the one he has by the nature
of the Word, whereby he is God: the other by the nature of his flesh, whereby
the same God is man. Wherefore that one Son of God, and the same made the Son
of man, has a beginning by the nature of flesh, and has no beginning by the
nature of his Godhead: was created by the nature of his flesh, and was not
created by the nature of his Godhead: circumscribed in place by the nature of
his flesh, and not contained in any place by the nature of his Godhead; is
lower also then the Angels by the nature of his flesh, and is equal with the
Father according to the nature of his Godhead: died by the nature of his
flesh, and never died by the nature of his Godhead. This is the Catholic
faith and confession, which the Apostles delivered, the Martyrs established,
and the faithful hitherto hold and maintain.

ON THE 15. SABBATH.
Quest. 37. What beleevest thou when thou say, He suffered?
Answ. That he, all the time of his life which he led in the earth, but
especially at the end thereof, sustained the wrath of God both in body and
soul, against the sin of all mankind, Esaias 53.4. 1 Pet. 2.24. and 3.18. 1 Timothy
2.6.
that he might by his passion, as the only propitiatory sacrifice, Esaias 53.10.
Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 John 2.2. Romans 3.15. Heb. 9.28. and 10 14.
deliver our body and soul from everlasting damnation, Gal. 3.13. Colos. 1.13.
Heb. 9.12. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
and purchase unto us the favor of God, righteousness, and everlasting life.
Romans 3.25. 2 Cor. 5.21. John 3.16. and 9.51. Heb. 9.15. and 10.19.


The Explication.
NOw have we in few words expounded those Articles of the Apostolic Creed,
which entreat of the person of Christ; and have withal declared in the
exposition thereof, those things which are necessary for us to know, both of
the Divinity of Christ, and of his humane nature, which was taken by the Word
of the seed of David, united personally with the Word by the virtue of the holy
Ghost, and begotten in mavelous manner of the Virgins substance: The course
of order requires, that now consequently we expound and declare those Articles
which treat of the office of Christ: and first of all of his Humiliation, or
humbling, which is the former part of Christ's office, whereunto belong these
Articles; He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried: He
descended into hell. After we have expounded these, we will come unto the rest
of the Articles, which speak of his Glorification; which is the other part of
Christ's office. The Passion of Christ does follow next his Conception and
Nativity: Two causes why Christ's passion follows his nativity immediately in
the Creed. The fruits to be gathered out of the story of Christ's life.
1. Because in his Passion and Death consists our salvation. 2. Because his
whole life was a continual passion, suffering, and calamity. Yet
notwithstanding, many things may, and ought to be profitably observed out of
the story of the whole race of his life on earth, set down by the Evangelists.
For that does show, 1. This person to be the promised Messiah, seeing in him
concur, and are fulfilled all the prophecies. 2. That story is a
consideration or meditation of that humility or obedience, which he performed
unto his Father. Hither belong those things, which are especially to be
considered in Christ's Passion: 1. The history it self of Christ's Passion
agreeing with Gods sacred Oracles and Prophecies. 2. The causes or fruits of
Christ's Passion. 3. His example, that we are also to enter into eternal life
and heavenly glory, by suffering death, as did Christ. But, for fuller
explication, these four Questions touching Christ's Passion are to be
considered: 1. What is understood by the name of Passion, or what Christ
suffered. 2. Whether he suffered according to both natures. 3. What was the
impellent cause of Christ's Passion. 4. What the final causes or ends and
fruits thereof.


1. What is meant by the name of Passion, or what Christ suffered.
BY the name of Passion is understood the whole humiliation, or the obedience
of Christ's whole humiliation, all the miseries, infirmities, torments,
ignominies, pains, and griefs, unto all which Christ for our sakes was subject
and obnoxious, as well in soul, as in body, from the point of his nativity,
until the hour of his death and resurrection. For the chief part of his
pains and dolours, were the torments in his soul, wherein he felt the ire and
wrath of God against the sin of mankind. But principally by the name Passion is
signified the last part of his humiliation, even the last act of his life, Mat.
26.38. and 27 46. Esaias 53.4, 6, 10. Christ's sufferings.
wherein he suffered extreme torments of soul and body for our finnes. My
soul is very heavy, even unto the death. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Surely he has carried our sorrows. The Lord has laid upon him
the iniquities of us all. The Lord would break him, and make him subject to
infirmities. What then did Christ suffer? He suffered, Mat. 8.17. John 4.7. and
19.28 Hebr. 4.15.
was weary, was stricken with sadness and griete, etc. The son of man has
not whereon to lay his head. Luke 9 58. Mat. 12.24.
and contempt: I am a worm, and not a man. He has neither form nor beauty:
when we shall see him, there shall be no form that we should desire him. Psalm.
22 7. Esaias 53.4.
He was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Hebr. 4.15.
he found the sense and feeling of the wrath of God against the sins of all
mankind to be laid upon him. Hereof it was, that he cried with a loud voice; My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as if he should say; Why do thou not
drive and put away from me such torments? Mat. 27.46.
We see then, what, and how great things Christ has suffered for us. Quest.
But whereas the divine nature was united to the humane, how could it be that
the humane nature should be so broken and weakened, that he should break forth
into such out cries: especially seeing other Martyrs have been much more stout
and courageous in their torments? Why Christ was more weakened is his Passion,
than other Martyrs in theirs.
Ans. The cause hereof was the diversity of the punishment which Christ
endured, from that which other Martyrs abide. Saint Laurence lying on the
grid-iron, felt not Gods dreadful wrath against his own sins, and the sins of
mankind (the whole punishment whereof was laid on the Son of God, as Esaias
says, Christ was stricken, and humbled for our iniquities) Saint Laurence, I
say, then felt not God angry and striking, but reconciled and appeased with him
and gracious and favorable toward him: neither sustained he (as Christ
sustained) the horrors of death and hell; but had great comfort in that he
suffered for the confession of the Gospel, and was assured of remission of his
sins by, and for the Son of God, on whom God laid them, as it is said: Behold
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. John 1.29.
Hence is it that S. Laurence may seem to have bin more stout and courageous in
his martyrdom, than Christ in his Passion. And hereof it was that the humane
nature of Christ, though united to the Godhead, did sweat blood in the Garden,
and brake into that outcry: My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat
27.46,
not that there was any separation of the natures, but because the humanity was
for a time forsaken of the Divinity, Lib. 3. adverl. haetel. Three differences
between Christ's Passion and men's sufferings.
in as much as the Word (as Irenaeus speaks) was at quiet, and assisted not,
nor delivered the afflicted manhood, until a sufficient Passion was finished
and fulfilled. Christ's Passion therefore differs from the torments of other
men, 1. In the very form: for Christ felt the whole wrath of God, both in his
body, and in his soul; others not so. 2. In the impulsive cause: for Christ
suffered not for his own sins, but for ours. 3. In the end: for Christ's
Passion is the ransom and only propitiatory sacrifice for our sins; the
sufferings of other men are no ransom, but either punishments, or trials, or
witnessings of the truth.

Object. 1. The order of Gods justice, permits not that the innocent and
righteous should suffer for the unrighteous. For it is the point of justice to
punish the guilty offenders. But Christ was an innocent. Therefore Christ's
Passion seems to overthrow Gods justice. Ans. The righteous may not suffer
for the unrighteous, unless these conditions concur in his Passion. 1. That
of his own accord he offer himself to punishment. 2. That he so voluntarily
offer himself to punishment, that he be able also to pay a sufficient ransom
for the offenders, whose punishment he undergoeth. 3. That he be able to
preserve himself from perishing therein, and able to recover thence. 4. That
he effect in those for whom he satisfies, that they offend no more hereafter.
5. That he be of the same nature which the offenders are, for whom he
satisfies. If such a satisfier be deputed, Gods justice is no way impaired.
For thus, both he that suffers, and they for whom he suffers are saved. Now
Christ is such a satisfier. For Christ both performed all the forenamed
conditions, and is not only a man of the same nature with us, but we in a
nigher degree of conjunction with him are his very members. In regard whereof,
his punishment becomes our punishment: and the Apostles every where teach,
that we all suffered and died in Christ. For when the head is afflicted, all
the members suffer with it. More of this argument shall be spoken hereafter in
the Article of the remission of sins. In a word, these conditions must
concur to this, that one should satisfy for another: 1. This satisfaction
must be sufficient. 2. It must be voluntary. 3. It must content him to whom it
is due. These all are found in Christ's satisfaction.

Object. 2. Between the satisfaction and the crime there must be some
proportion: But between one man's Passion, and the sins of infinite numbers
of men there is no proportion: How then may the ransom of Christ alone answer
for the sins of an infinite number of men? Answ It may, and that for these two
causes: 1. For the dignity of the person suffering, because he is true God, and
a pure and unspotted man. 2. For the grievousnesse of his punishment; because
he suffered that which we should have suffered for ever. His passion therefore
is equivalent to everlasting punishment; yea it surpasses it. For that God
should suffer, is more then that all the creatures should perish everlastingly.
It was the strangest miracle that ever happened, that the Son of God should cry
on the Cross, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Repl. God cannot die and suffer:
Christ suffered and died: Therefore he is not God. Answ. God, that is, the
person which is only God, cannot suffer, or is impassible, according to that
whereby he is God. But Christ is not only God, but man withal. Or we may
grant the whole reason: For Christ was not God according to that wherein he
suffered and died, that is, his humanity. Repl. If Christ be not God according
to that wherein he suffered, then it is false which is said; God has purchased
the Church with his own blood. Answ. This was spoken by a communicating of the
properties; but this was in the person, not in the nature: that is, that
person, which is God and man, purchased the Church by his blood which he shed
in his manhood. What the communicating of properties is.
The communicating of the properties, is, to attribute that to the whole
person, which is proper unto one nature, and this is attributed in a concrete
voice, not in an abstract: because the concrete voice signifies the person in
which are both natures, and the property of that nature whereof something is
affirmed. But the abstract name signifies the nature which is in the person,
but not the person. And therefore it is, that nothing hinders, why that which
is proper to one nature, may not be affirmed of the whole person, so that
property it self be in the person: but contrariwise, of the abstract name,
only the properties of that nature are affirmed unto which they properly
belong. As of the Godhead (which is the abstract name) no property of the
manhood may be affirmed, but only the properties of the Godhead; because the
Godhead signifies not the person which has both names, but only the divine
nature it self. But of God (which is the concrete name) the properties not of
the Godhead only, but of the manhood also may be affirmed: because God
signifies not the divine nature, but the person which has both the divine
nature, and the humane.

Object. 3. There is no proportion between temporal punishment and eternal.
Christ suffered only temporal pains and punishments: therefore he could not
satisfy for eternal punishment. Answ. There is no proportion between
temporal and eternal punishment, if they be considered as being both in the
same subject: but in diverse subjects there may be. The temporal punishment of
the Son of God is of more value and worth, than the eternal punishment of the
whole world, for diverse causes heretofore alleged.

Object. 4. If Christ satisfied perfectly for all, then all must be saved. But
all are not saved. Therefore he satisfied not perfectly for all. Answ. Christ
satisfied for all men, as concerning the application of his merit and
satisfaction. True it is, that Christ fulfilled the Law two ways. 1. By his
own righteousness. 2. By satisfying for our unrighteousness; and both these
he performed most perfectly. But the satisfaction is made outs by our private
application, which is twofold: the former is wrought by God, when he
justifies us for his Sons merit, and causes us to cease from sin; the latter
is effected by us through faith. For we then apply unto our selves the merit of
Christ, when by a true faith we are persuaded, that God remitteth our sins for
his Sons sacrifice and satisfaction: and without this application, Christ's
satisfaction avails us nothing.

Object. 5. There were also propitiatory sacrifices in Moses Law. Answ. There
were no sacrifices which might properly be termed expiatory: but those that
were, were shadows only of Christ's sacrifice, which only is propitiatory.
Hebr, 10.4. 1 John 1.7. 1 John 2.2.
For it is impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away
sins. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. He is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

2. Whether Christ suffered according to both natures.
CHrist suffered not according to both natures, neither according to his
Godhead, but according to his humane nature only, both in body and soul. For
his divine nature is immutable, impassible, immortal, and very life it self;
which cannot die. Now, he so suffered according to his humanity, that by his
death and passion he made satisfaction for infinite sins of men. And the
divinity sustained and upheld the humanity in the griefs and pains thereof,
and raised it again to life, when it had been dead. Christ was put to death
concerning the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit. 1 Pet. 3.18. and 4.2.
John 2.19. Rev. 1.18. John 10.18.
For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that
he might bring us unto God. Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up again
in three days. I was dead, and lo I am alive. I have power to lay down my
life, and to take it up again. These testimonies prove that there was another
nature in Christ besides his flesh, which other nature neither suffered nor
died.

Irenaeus says: As Christ was man, that so he might be tempted: Lib. 3. cont.
hares.
so he was the Word, that so he might be glorified: The Word indeed and Deity
so resting in him, that he might be tempted, crucified, and suffer death; and
yet united to his humanity, that so he might overcome temptation, death, etc.
Object. God purchased the Church with his own blood: therefore the Godhead
suffered. Ans. It does not follow: Acts 20.28.
because an argument from the concrete (which is God) to the abstract (which is
the God head) is of no consequence. Again, the kind of affirmation is altered.
God is said to have dyed, by a figurative speech, which is Synecdoche (use when
we signify the whole by a part, as whole Christ by God) and by a communicating
of the properties. But when it is said, The God head died, this affirmation
admits no figure, seeing the subject in it is a mere abstract. The concrete
signifies the subject, or person having the nature or form: but the abstract
signifies the bare nature and form only. Wherefore; as the argument does not
follow, A man is compounded of the clements, and is corporeal: Therefore his
soul also is corporeal; (this cannot follow, because all things agree not to
the form, which agree to the subject; the soul is the form of man, man is
the essential subject of the soul) So neither does it follow; Christ-God
died: therefore Christ's Godhead died: For, from the concrete to the abstract,
the reason does not follow.

3. The causes impellent, or motives of Christ's Passion.
John 3.16.
1. THE love of God toward mankind. So God loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son. 2. The mercy of God toward man fallen into sin. Of his
mercy he saved us. Titus 3.5.
3. The will of God to revenge the injury of the Devil, who in reproach and
despite of God averted us from him: and maimed the image of God in us, in
despite of the Creator.

4. The final causes or ends of the Passion.
THE final causes and fruits of Christ's Passion are all one, save that they
differ in diverse respects. For in respect of Christ, who suffered, they are
termed final causes: in respect of us, they are called fruits. The final
causes or ends of his Passion are. 1. The manifesting of the love, goodness,
mercy, righteousness of God, while he punishes his Son for us. 2. That his
Passion might be a sufficient ransom of our sins, or the redeeming of us. The
chief final causes then are, The glory of God, and our salvation. To the
former final cause belongs the knowledge of the greatness of sin, that we
may know how great an evil sin is, and what it deserves. To the latter
belongs our justification, wherein all the benefits are comprehended, which
Christ merited, by dying, and by his freeing himself from death. Hence know we
that death is not now pernicious and hurtful to the godly, and therefore not
to be feared.

Quest. 38. For what cause should he suffer under Pilate as being his Judge?
Answ. That he being innocent and condemned before a civil Judge, John 18.38.
Mat. 27.24. Luke 23.14, 15. John 19.4.
might deliver us from the severe judgment of God, which remained for all men.
Psalm. 69 5. Esaias 53.45. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.


The Explication.
MEntion is made of Pilate in Christ's Passion: Because Christ did receive from
him a testimony of his innocence; that thereby we might know that he was
pronounced innocent by the voice of the Judge himself. That we might know that
he, though innocent, was notwithstanding solemnly condemned. That we might be
advertised of the fulfilling of the prophecy: E^ck. ^1.27.
I will over-turne, over-turne, over-turne it, and it shall be no more, until
he come, Cor 49.10.
whose right it is, and I will give it him. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo come. For then was
the Scepter taken from Judah, when Christ was a little after condemned of
Pilate a Roman governor, of whom before he was absolved. This circumstance
therefore is diligently to be considered in Christ's passion, that we may know
him to be the Messiah: because al conditions are fulfilled in him, which are
required in the Messiah. Whereof this Prophecy, Why Christ was to be solemnly
condemned.
of the taking away of the Scepter from Judah, was one. Quest. But why was it
requisite that Christ should suffer under a Judge; and be condemned by order of
law? That we might know that Christ was condemned of God himself also, and
therefore that he satisfied God for us, that we might not be condemned in Gods
severe judgment; even as he also suffered death for us, that we might be
delivered from the power of death. For the head and governor of ordinary
judgment is God himself. To be examined, that his innocence might appear. 2.
To be condemned, that it might appear, that he being before pronounced
innocent, was now condemned, not for his own fault, but for ours; and so his
unjust condemnation might be in stead of our most just condemnation, 3. To be
put to death, both that the Prophecies might be fulfilled, and also that it
might appear that both Jews and Gentiles did put Christ to death.

What it is to believe in Christ which suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Quest. Now, what is it to believe in Jesus Christ, which suffered under
Pontius Pilate? Ans. To believe that Christ suffered, is so to believe, as to
have an historical faith only of Christ's passion, and not to repose any
confidence in him. To believe in Christ which suffered, is to believe not only
that Christ suffered, but also to repose and place our trust and confidence in
Christ's suffering and passion. Thus to believe, is,

Quest. 39. But is there any thing more in it that he was fastened to the
Cross, than if he had suffered any other kind of death?
Ans. There is more. For by this, I am assured that he took upon himself the
curse which did lie on me. Gal. 3.13.
For the death of the Cross was accursed of God. Deuteronomy. 21.23.


The Explication.
THe death of the Cross is an exaggeration or aggravation of Christ's
punishment, and a confirmation of our faith. For if Christ be crucified, Four
causes why God would that Christ should die the death of the Cross.
then, 1. He took the curse; for this death was a type of the curse. 2. He bare
it for us, seeing in himself he was just. Now, for these causes would God have
his Son to suffer the punishment of so ignominious a death: Cursed is every one
that hangs on a tree. Paul teaches: Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, when he was made a curse for us: for it is written, Gal. 3.13
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Ancient types of this death of
Christ on the Cross.
For the old sacrifices, which shadowed the sacrifice of Christ, were laid on
the wood, and before their burning were lifted up on high by the Priest,
thereby to signify that Christ should be exalted and lifted up on the Altar of
the Cross, there to offer himself an holy sacrifice unto his Father for us.
The same was shadowed in Isaac, who being laid on the wood, was to have been
sacrificed of his Father. Lastly, the brazen serpent which Moses set up upon a
pole in the wilderness, depainteth this kind of punishment. John 3.14. and
12.32.
Christ himself interprets of himself this type of the brazen serpent: As
Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lift
up. And I, if I were lift up from the earth, will draw all men unto me,

The meaning of the Article, I believe in Christ crucified.
What is it then To believe in Christ crucified? Ans. It is to believe that
Christ was made obnoxious for my sake to Gods curse, to redeem me from the
same.

ON THE 16. SABBATH.
Quest. 40. Why was it necessary for Christ to humble himself unto death?
Ans. Because the justice and truth of God Genesis 2.17.
could by no other means be satisfied for our sins, but by the very death of
the Son of God. Romans 8.3, 4. Heb. 2.14, 15.


Here we are to consider,
1. How Christ is said to have been dead. 2. Whether it was requisite and
necessary that Christ should dye. 3. For whom he died.


1. How Christ is said to have been dead.
Marcions heresies.
IT is needful to move this question, because of the Heretics who have depraved
the sense of this Article. Marcion denied that he dyed indeed: as also he
affirmed the whole ordinary dispensation and ministry of the humane nature in
Christ, and all those things which he did undergo for us, to have been but
imaginary, and that he only seemed to be as a man, but was not a man.
Nestorius separated the two natures in Christ; Nestorius heresy.
neither would have the Son of God, but man only to have died. Do not boast
thou Jew (says Nestorius) thou have not crucified God, but man. The
Ubiquitaries believe that the humanity of Christ, The Ubiquitaries. heresy.
from the moment of his incarnation, was so endowed with all the properties of
the Godhead, as that only in this the humanity differs from the Godhead,
that the humanity has by an accident, whatsoever the Godhead has by, and of
it self. Hereof it comes, that they imagine that Christ was in the time of
his death, yea when he was enclosed in the Virgins womb, in heaven, and every
where, not only as touching his Godhead, but with his body too. This is it
which they call the form of God. Phil. 2.6.


Wherefore, against all these we affirm, and in the Creed believe, that Christ
died truly and corporally, even by a true divulsion and separation of his soul
from his body, 1. Christ died truly.
and that a local separation; so that not only his soul and body were not
together every where, but were not together in one place; the soul was not
where the body was, Matthew. 27.50. Mark 15.37. Luke 23.46. John 19.30.
nor the body where the soul was. Then Jesus cried again with a loud voice,
and yielded up the Ghost. Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the Ghost.
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And when he had said these words,
he gave up the Ghost. He bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost. Object. But as
virtue, that is, his divinity, is said to have gone out of him; so also he gave
up the Ghost. Answ. There is a dissimilitude in these: Because the divinity
remaining united with the humane nature, yet did work abroad without it. The
soul did depart from the body. The reason of this dissimilitude is, because
the act of his divinity is increate and infinite, but the act and power of his
soul finite and created. But yet this is further to be added, 2. Christ died
without breach of the union of his two natures.
that although his soul was truly separated from his body, yet the Word
notwithstanding did not forsake neither body nor soul, but remained
nevertheless joined both to body and soul: and therefore the two natures in
Christ were not divelled or sundered by that divulsion of the soul and body.
Object. Why then cried he, Matthew. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Answ. Because of his delay and
deferring of help and succor: For the two natures in Christ ought not to have
been divelled or sundred, because it is written, God has purchased the Church
with his own blood. And he was to be the Son of God, who should die for our
sins, Acts 20.28.
that he might be a sufficient price for them. Hereby also it does clearly
appear, That The union of both natures in Christ is no Vbiquity: For the soul
being separated from the body, was not in the grave with the body, and by a
consequent not every where, because that which is every where, can never be
separated: and yet in death, and in the grave the union of both natures
remained and continued.

2. Whether it was requisite and necessary that Christ should die.
IT was requisite and necessary that Christ, to make full satisfaction, not
only should suffer, but also should die: In respect of the justice of God, that
so his justice might be satisfied, which required the death of men, by whom it
was violated: For the hurting and offending of the greatest good, is to be
expiated with the greatest punishment, or with the utmost destruction of
nature; that is, with the death of the guilty condemned for sin, according to
that, The wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.
But Christ succeeded in our stead, and took on him our person, who had sinned,
and had deserved death, not only eternal, but temporal also: For we deserved
destruction, which is the dissolution of the soul from the body, whereon
ensues the dissolution of the body, as a house is said to be subverted and
destroyed, when one part is separated from another. Now it was requisite that
the Son of God should die, that he might be a sufficient ransom for our
sins: For no creature could have sustained such a punishment, as should have
been equivalent to eternal punishment, and yet withal should have been
temporal. Object. They have deserved eternal punishment, whosoever are not
reconciled to God by Christ; therefore the souls ought not to be separated
from their bodies, that they might suffer eternal damnation. Ans. It does not
follow; but this rather, That therefore both body and soul must be together,
that they may suffer it, which at length shall so come to pass: Therefore it
was necessary that Christ should die for us, and his soul be separated from
his body. In respect of Gods truth, that the truth of God may be satisfied: For
God threatened and denounced death, when ever we sinned: which denouncing was to
be fulfilled after sin was once committed: And this is that commination or
threatening pronounced by God himself, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall die the death. Obj. But Adam did not presently die. Ans. Truly, he
forthwith died not a bodily death, Genesis 2.17.
howbeit he became mortal straight upon it, and by little and little he daily
died, and even now already had he died spiritually eternal death, and now was
dead; I heard (says he) thy voice, and I was afraid, because I was naked.
Genesis 3.20.
There was a terror in him, and a feeling of Gods wrath, a strife with death,
the loss of all the gifts both of body and mind. But there followed the
equity, moderation and lenity of the Gospel: For God had not expressly said,
that he should certainly die wholly, and presently: For so had he perished for
ever. Wherefore the Son offered a mitigation and lenifying, raised him up to a
new life, that notwithstanding he should remain subject to the corporal death,
which yet should not be deadly and pernicious unto him. In respect of the
promise made to the Fathers, both by words, He is brought as a sheep to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before be shearer is dumb, Esaias 53.7.
so opens he not his mouth: and by sacrifices, whereby God promises that
Christ should die such a death, as should be an equivalent price for the sins
of the whole world. This could not be the work of a mere creature, but of the
Son of God only: and therefore it was requisite and necessary, that the Son of
God should suffer so grievous a death for us. Ob. Then they do not satisfy
Gods justice, who are punished, because their punishment is endless and
eternal. Ans. They satisfy by eternal punishment. Rep. So then might we also
be delivered from the curse by our selves. Ans. So then shall we never be
delivered, but shall sustain punishment eternal, which is without end. 4.
Christ also himself has foretold, that it was necessary that he should die:
Except I go away, John 9.7.
the Comforter will not come unto you. John 13.8.
If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me. In this question
therefore three memorable circumstances concur: 1. That it was necessary that
Gods justice should be satisfied. 2. That this satisfaction was to be made by
death. 3. That it was to be accomplished by the death of the Son of God alone.
Out of this which has bin said, we may draw these doctrines: 1. That sin is
most of all to be eschewed of us, which could not be expiated but by the death
of the Son of God. 2. That we ought to be thankful to the Son of God, for this
his so great a benefit of unspeakable grace and favor bestowed upon us. 3.
That all our sins, how many, how great, and how grievous soever they be, are
expiated and done away by the death alone of Christ.

3. For whom Christ died: Or, whether he died for all.
WE must answer this question by distinguishing the terms thereof, that so we
may reconcile such Scriptures as carry a show of contrariety: For in some
places Christ is said to have died for all, Testimonies of Scripture alleged
on both sides.
and for the whole world: as, Who is a reconciliation for our sins, and not for
our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. That by Gods grace he might
taste of death for all men. 1. That Christ died for all. 1 John 2.2. Heb. 2.9.
2 Cor. 5.1415. 1 Timothy 2.6.
We thus judge, that if one be dead for all, then were all dead. And he died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them, and rose again. Who gave himself a ransom for all
men. Contrariwise, in as many places Christ is said to have died, prayed,
offered up himself, 2 That Christ died not for all, but for many. John 17.9.
Mat. 20.28. Mat. 15.24. Mat. 1.21. Mat. 26.28. Heb. 9.28. Esaias 53.11. Ephesians.
5.25.
etc. only for many, only for the elect, for his peculiar people, for his
Church, for his sheep, etc. Not for the world, not for the unfaithful. I pray
for them: I pray not for the world; but for them which thou have given me, for
they are thine: that is, for the elect alone. The Son of man came not to be
served, but to serve, and to give his life for the ransom of many. I am not
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. He shall save his people
from their sins. This is my blood of the New Testament, that is shed for many
for the remission of sins. Christ was once offered to take away the sins of
many. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall
bear their iniquities. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it.

A twofold reconciliation of such Scriptures as plead for All: 1. B
restraining All, to all that believe.
What shall we say then? Is Scripture disagreeable with Scripture? No verily.
Howbeit it seems so, unless these general and particular Aphorisms be
reconciled by some pithy and plausible distinction. The distinction and
reconcilement of these places is twofold, either of which is true and sound.
1. Some interpret these general allegations, of the whole number of the
faithful, or of all the believing: because the promises of the Gospel do
properly appertain to all the faithful, and because the whole course of
Scripture restrains those promises to the believing. Whosoever believes in
him, John 3.16. Romans 3.22. Acts 10.43.
shall not perish. The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all, and upon all that believe. Through his name all that believe in him shall
receive remission of sins. S. Ambrose expounds the general texts of
Scripture on this wise: Lib. 1. cap. 3. de vocat. Gent.
The people of God, says he, have their fullness, and although a great number
of men neglect or cast from them the grace of their Savior, yet there is a
certain special university of the elect and fore-knowne of God, severed and
discerned from the generality of all, to this intent, that a whole world might
seem to be saved out of a whole world; and all men might seem to be redeemed
from out of all men. Thus is there no repugnancy, no contrariety between these
Scriptures: For all true believers are those many, that peculiar people, that
Church, those sheep, those chosen, which were given unto Christ, and for whom
Christ gave himself.

By the distinguishing between the sufficiency and efficacy of Christ's death.
Others reconcile these Scriptures by a distinction of the sufficiency and
efficacy of Christ's death: For certain wrangling Sophists there are, who admit
not this restriction of these general promises to the faithful alone: that
is, they deny that the letter of Scripture enforces any such restriction: and
for proof of their conceit, they quote and allege certain places, which seem
to impart redemption and salvation not only to the faithful, but to Hypocrites
also and Apostates: as that of Peter; Denying the Lord which has bought them.
And, Has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins: 2 Pet. 2.12. 2
Pet. 1.9.
all which Scriptures, it is manifest, are to be understood and interpreted
either of the vain glorying of Hypocrites of their redemption and
sanctification, or of the extent and sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction.
Wherefore, that we be not forced to maintain frivolous contention, with such
crabbed perverse disputers, touching the restriction of these general promises
before specified; and for more sound and ample answer unto those places
concerning the redemption of Hypocrites, some choose rather (and not unfitly as
I suppose) to interpret those Scriptures in show contrary one to the other,
partly of the sufficiency, and partly of the application and efficacy of
Christ's death. They answer therefore that Christ died for all: And again, died
not for all, in a diverse respect. How Christ is said to have died for all men;
and again not to have died for all men.
1. Christ died for all men absolutely and without exception, as touching the
sufficiency of the price which he paid. 2. Christ died not for all men, but
for the elect alone, and the faithful, as touching the application,
participation, and efficacy of his merit and Passion. The reason of the former
is, because Christ's ransom is of such weight and worth, that it may serve and
be sufficient to purge and cleanse all the sins of all men; if at least all men
would apprehend by faith this salve of sin. For it can no way be said that it
is insufficient, lest this blasphemous inconvenience (which God forbid) should
follow: That some cause of the destruction of the wicked, rests in the defect
of the merit of the Mediator. The reason of the latter is, because all the
elect and faithful, and they alone, do by faith apply unto themselves the
merit of Christ's death, and by his application obtain the efficacy thereof,
even their justification and salvation: according to that saying of Scripture;
He which believes in the Son has life everlasting. The rest are excluded from
this efficacy of Christ's death by their own infidelity, according as it
follows in the same place; He which believes not, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. Wherefore, John 3.36.
whom the Scripture cancelleth from the participation of the efficacy of
Christ's death, for them Christ cannot be said to have died with respect of the
efficacy of his death, but in respect only of the sufficiency of his sacrifice:
because the death of Christ is sufficient to save them, if they believed: but
it saves them not, because they believe not.

If any demand what the will of Christ herein was, whether he had a will to die
for all; he is answered by the same distinction. For as he died, so would he
die. Whether Christ would die for all men.
As therefore he died for all, in respect of the sufficiency of his ransom;
but for the faithful alone, in regard of the efficacy of the same: so would
he also die for all in general, as concerning the sufficiency of his merit;
that is, he would in most sufficient manner demerit for all, by his death,
grace, righteousness, and life everlasting; seeing he would that nothing
should be wanting on his part, that there should be no defect in his merit,
that so all the wicked and reprobate might perish without excuse: But for the
elect alone he would die, as touching the efficacy of his merit; that is, he
would not only sufficiently merit grace and salvation, but also effectually
impart them on the elect alone; namely, he would give unto them faith and the
holy Ghost, and accomplish or effect in them, that they should apply unto
themselves by faith, the benefits of his death, and so obtain the fruits
thereof. In this sense Christ is well said to have died in a different manner
for the faithful and unfaithful. Neither has this interpretation any
inconvenience consequent thereon; but accords not only with Scripture, but
even with very experience also: both which testify unto us, that the salve of
sin and death is most sufficiently and plentifully offered in the Gospel unto
all; but it is applied, and it cures the faithful alone. The whole current of
Scripture restrains the efficacy of redemption to some particulars only, as
to Christ's sheep, to the elect, and to the believing: whereas on the other side
it apparently abandoneth and sequestreth from the grace of Christ the reprobate
and unfaithful, as long as they remain such: What concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has the believer with the infidel? Again, 2 Cor. 6.15.
Christ prayed for the Elect only and believing, and such as hereafter should
believe on him: I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou have given
me. If Christ would not pray for the world, to wit, for the unfaithful, much
less would he so die for them, John 27.9.
as by his death to effect their salvation: For it is a less thing to pray for
a man, than to die for him: and intercession and suffering of death, are the
two individual or inseparable parts of Christ's sacrifice; of which if Christ
deny the ungodly the one, who is he that dares reach out unto them the other?

Lastly, the sounder Fathers and Schoolmen do thus restrain these texts of
Scriptures, The opinion of Fathers herein. Aug ad cap. ob. cap. 1 in Ioh.
tract. 52. and sermon. 137. de temp. Cyr. in Ioh. lib. 11 cap. 19. Prosp^r ad
cap. Gallorum Lumb. lib. 3. did. 22 Sum. de ve^it. Mat. 26. Quaft. 7.
and distinguish on them as we do: especially Augustine, Cyril, and Prosper.
Lombard thus writes; Christ offered up himself to God the Trinity for all men,
as touching the sufficiency of the price paid: but for the elect alone, as
touching the efficacy, because he wrought salvation only for the Predestinate.
Thomas says, The merit of Christ, as concerning the sufficiency thereof,
equally belongs unto all, but not concerning the efficacy which happens,
partly by reason of free will, and partly by reason of Gods election, whereby
the effects and fruits of Christ's merits are mercifully bestowed on some; and
by the just judgment of God are withheld from others. This is the language of
other Schoolmen also. Whence it is evident, that Christ so died for all, that
notwithstanding the benefits of his death properly concern the faithful alone,
to whom only they are availeable. Object. 1. The promise of the Gospel is
universal, as appears, in that Christ says, Come unto me all. And again,
That every man might be saved; Also, That he might have mercy on all:
Therefore it concerns not the faithful alone. Ans. The promise indeed is
universal, but in regard of the faithful and penitent. For to extend it unto
filthy dogs and hogs, that is, to the reprobate, were open blasphemy. There is
(says Ambrose) a certain special university of the elect, and fore-knowne of
God. severed and discerned from the generality of all. This manner of restraint
is deduced out of the very letter of the promise: John 3.16. Romans 322.
That every one which believes should not perish, but have everlasting life.
The righteousness of God by the faith of Christ Jesus unto all, and upon all
that believe. Come unto me all ye which labor and travel, and I will
refresh you. He is rich unto all that call upon him. Whosoever shall call on
the name of the Lord shall be saved. Mat. 11.28. Acts 2.21. Heb. 5.9. Mat. 7.6.
He is made the author of salvation unto all that obey him. And out of the
words of Christ. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, and cast not pearls
before swine. Obj. 2. Christ died for all: Therefore his death appertains not
to the faithful only. Answ. Christ died for all, as touching the merit and
sufficiency of his ransom: for the faithful only, as touching the application
and efficacy thereof: For, inasmuch as the death of Christ is imparted unto
them, and profits them only, it is rightly said to appertain properly unto
them alone, as before has bin proved at large.

Quest. 41. To what end was he buried also?
Ans. That thereby he might make manifest that he was dead indeed. Act. 13.29.
Mat. 27.59, 60 Luke 23.52.


The Explication.
THE causes of Christ's burial are many: For, He would be buried in testimony
of his true death, that we might know that he was dead indeed: For the living
are not buried, but the dead only. As then after his resurrection he offered
himself to be seen, handled, etc. for evident proof of the truth of his body,
raised from death: so after his death he offered his body to be felt, and
buried, that men might know it to be a dead crops. Hither belong some parts of
the story penned by the Evangelists; as that Christ was pierced with a lance,
that he was taken down from the Cross, that he was anointed, and wrapped in
linen clothes, etc. For these are good evidences of the truth of his death.
We therefore by his burial are ascertained of his true death and by his death
assured of our redemption: For our salvation consists in his death, the
testimony whereof is his burial. That the last part of his humiliation,
whereby he did debase himself for our sakes, might be accomplished: For
burial was a part of the punishment, curse, ^^n. 3.19.
and ignominy which we had deserved: as it is said, To dust shall thou return.
A dead body is indeed void of sense and feeling; but yet notwithstanding
ignominious it was for the body to be committed to the earth, as any other dead
corpse. As then Christ's resurrection from the dead and death is a part of his
glory: so his burial, that is, the debasing of his body to be in the same
state with other dead carkases, is a part of that humiliation which he
sustained for our sakes. He would be buried, that we might not be afraid of
the grave, but might know that our head Christ had sanctified our graves by his
burial, that now they are no longer graves unto us, but chambers of quiet
repose, until we be raised again unto life. That it might be apparent or
manifest, as concerning his resurrection, that he had truly overcome death in
his body, that by his own power and vigor he had shaken off death from
himself, and that his resurrection was not imaginary, but a resurrection of a
reviving corpse. That he might confirm in us an hope of the resurrection: to
wit, that the time shall once come, when we after his example shall be buried,
and by his power shall rise again; knowing that Christ our head has laid open
the way unto us by the grave and death, to celestial glory: and therefore
shall we be raised out of the grave, though we die and give up the Ghost. That
we being spiritually dead, that is, to sin, might rest from sin. We are buried
with Christ by baptism into his death, Romans 6.4.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so
we also should walk in newness of life. Thou Psalm. 16.10. Esaias 53.9.
shall not leave my soul in hell. He made his grave with the wicked.

Quest. 42. But since that Christ died for us, why must we also die?
Answ. Our death is not a satisfaction for our sins, Mar. 8.37.
but the abolishing of sin, and our passage into life everlasting. Phil. 1.32.
John 8.24. Romans 7.14.


The Explication.
HEre is answer made unto that objection, If Christ died for us, why then die
we too? For he should not die for whom another has already died: otherwise,
the satisfaction would seem double. Answ. He, for whom another died, should
not die, as thereby to satisfy, that is, so that his death should be any merit
or satisfaction: but there are other causes why we must die: For we die; not
to satisfy the justice of God, but by death, as a mean, to receive those
gifts, which Christ by his death has merited for us. For this our temporal
death, What our temporal death is.
is 1. An admonition of the remnants of sin in us. 2. An admonition of the
greatness of sin. 3. A purging and cleansing of us: For by death are purged
out the relics and remains of sin in us. 4 A translating into eternal life:
For by corporal death is the passage of the faithful made into eternal life.
Repl. If the cause be taken away, the effect is taken away; but the cause of
death in us, which is sin, is taken away by Christ: therefore the effect also,
which is death it self, ought to be taken away. Ans. Where all cause is taken
away, the effect also is taken away: but in us all cause of death is not taken
away, As concerning the purging out of sin; albeit it be taken away, as
touching the remission of sin: Or we may answer unto the Minor proposition;
that sin is indeed taken away as touching the guilt, but it is not taken away
as touching the matter of sin, which as yet remains to be purged by little
and little, that we might be exercised in prayer, and repentance in this life,
until in another life we be perfectly discharged from the relics of sin.

Quest. 43. What other commodities receive we by the sacrifice and death of
Christ?
Answ. That by the virtue of his death, our old man is crucified, slain, and
buried together with him, Romans 6.6.
that henceforth evil lusts and desires may not reign in us, Romans 6.6, 12.
but we may offer our selves unto him a sacrifice of thanksgiving. Romans 12.1.


The Explication.
THis Question concerns the fruits and commodities of Christ's death Here also
the end of Christ's death, and the fruits of the same, are all one thing (as we
have before showed in his Passion) considered with diverse respects. For those
ends which Christ proposed unto himself in dying, they become fruits unto us
in receiving and apprehending them. The fruit therefore and commodity of
Christ's death is the whole work of our Redemption. Justification or remission
of sins,
Justification or remission of sins: because the justice of God requires, that
God should not punish a sinner twice: but he has punished our sins in Christ:
Therefore he will not punish again the same in us. The blood of Jesus Christ
purges us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.
as well original as actual; as well of fact, or doing what we should not, as
of omission, or not doing what we should. So then we are justified, that is, we
are freed from the guilt as well of punishment as of crime, by the death of
Christ. The cause of this effect is the death of Christ. The gift of the holy
Ghost and regeneration.
The gift of the holy Ghost, and, through his working, regeneration, and a new
life: because Christ by his death has not only obtained for us pardon of our
sin, and reconciliation with God, but also the gift of the holy Ghost, that by
his working and virtue the old man might be crucified with Christ: that is,
that by the holy Ghost, through the efficacy of Christ's merit, and our
engraffing into him, our corrupt, and as yet not regenerated nature might be
abolished in us: and that of the contrary, righteousness might be begun in us,
the image of God (destroyed by the Devil in us) might be restored, and we, by
the same spirit, moved to show and yield all thankfulness for so great a
benefit. Christ is made unto us righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and
redemption. Ye are complete in him, 1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 2.9.
which is the head of all principality, etc. The death of Christ is the
impellent or motive cause in effectuating as well our justification, as our
regeneration, in two respects. 1. In respect of God: because for the death of
Christ God pardons us our sins, and gives us the holy Ghost, and restores
in us his image. Being justified in his blood. Romans 5.9, 10, Gal. 4.6.
Being reconciled to God, through the death of his Son. Because ye are sons.
God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries
Abba, Father. 2. In respect of us also it is an impellent cause: because they,
who apprehend Christ's merit by a true faith, and apply his death unto
themselves; for them it is impossible to be unthankful, or not endeavor to
live to the praise and honor of his name, which is, to begin newness of life.
The application of Christ's death, and the consideration thereof, will not
suffer us to be ungrateful, but forces us to love Christ again, and prove
therein our thankfulness for so inestimable a benefit. No man therefore may
imagine any remission of sins without regeneration: and he lies unto himself
and the world, who boasts of Christ's death applied to himself, yet has no
desire to live godly and holily to the honor of Christ. For all, after they are
once justified, prepare and address themselves to do those things which are
grateful unto God: For regeneration, or the desire and endeavoring of obeying
God, cannot be separated from the applying of his death unto us, nor the
benefit of regeneration from the benefit of justification. All who are
justified, are also regenerated and sanctified: and all who are regenerate, are
also justified. Object. The Apostle attributes our regeneration to Christ's
resurrection: why then is regeneration here attributed to his death? 1 Pet. 1.3.
Answ. It is attributed unto Christ's death, as touching his merit: for he
merited regeneration for us by dying. And it is attributed to Christ's
resurrection, in respect of the applying of it; for, by rising from the dead,
he applies unto us regeneration, and gives us the holy Ghost. Eternal life.
Eternal life is also the fruit of Christ's death. God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. John 3.16. 1 John. 5.12.
God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

The meaning of the Article, I believe in Christ dead.
Now what is it, To believe in Christ dead? Ans. It is to believe, that Christ
has not only suffered extreme torments for my sake, but also death it self,
and has by his death obtained for me remission of sins, and reconciliation
with God, and consequently also the holy Ghost, who begins in me a new life,
that I may again be made the Temple of God, and at length attain unto
everlasting life, wherein I shall worship and magnify God for ever.

Quest. 44. Why is there added, He descended into hell?
Ans. That in my greatest pains and most grievous tentations, I may support my
self with the comfort, that my Lord Jesus Christ has delivered me, by the
unspeakable distresses, torments and terrors of his soul, into which he was
plunged both before, Psalm. 18.5, 6. and 116.3. Mat. 26.36. and 27.46. Heb. 5.7.
and then especially when he hanged on the Cross, from the straits and
torments of hell. Esaias 53.5.


The Explication.
Two things are here to be handled: 1. The true sense and meaning of this
Article. 2. The use.

1. What the true sense of this Article is, or what the descent of Christ into
Hell signifies.
HEll in Scripture is taken three ways: For it signifies, The Grave. Three
significations of hell in Scripture.
Then ye shall bring my gray-head with sorrow unto hell. Thou wile not leave
my soul in hell: neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption.
The place of the damned: as in the story of the rich man and Lazarus. The
Glutton being in hell in torments, Genesis 42.38. Psalm. 16.10.
lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom. If I
lie down in hell, thou art there. The pains of hell, that is, the terrors
and torments of the soul and conscience. The pains of hell gate hold upon
me. Luke 16.23. Psalm. 139.8.
The Lord brings down to hell, and raises up: that is, into exceeding
pains and torments, out of which afterward he again delivers. Psalm. 116.3.
In this third sense it is taken in this Article: For it cannot be understood
in the first sense, of the Grave. 1. Because it is said before, He was buried.
If any say, Why he I is not here taken for the grave.
that this latter Article is an exposition of the former, he says nothing: For
as often as two speeches expressing the same thing are joined together, so that
the one is an exposition of the other, it is meet that the latter be more
clear and open than the former, which here is clean contrary. For. To descend
into hell, is more obscure than to be buried. 2. It is not likely in this so
brief and succinct a Confession, that the same things should be twice spoken in
other words. Neither can this place be understood of the place of the damned;
Why hell is not here taken for the place of the damned.
as is proved by this division: If Christ did locally descend into Hell, he
descended either as touching his Godhead, or as touching his soul, or as
touching his body. Not as touching his Godhead: (For this is everywhere) Nor
as touching his body: (For that rested in the grave three days, as was
prefigured by Jonas, the type of Christ, Because no part of Christ could be in
hell.
neither rose it from any other place, but from the grave.) Nor us touching his
soul, 1. Because Scripture no where expresses and mentions it. Because
Christ, dying on the Cross, Luke 23.46. and23 4^. Christ's soul descended not
locally.
said of his soul: Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: And to the
Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Therefore the soul of
Christ after his death, was in the hand of his Father, in Paradise, not in Hell.

And that cavil little steadeth the Adversaries of this doctrine, that he
might be also in the hand of his Father, that is, in his Fathers protection,
even in Hell: according to that, Psalm. 139.8.
If I lie down in Hell thou art there; that is, there also will God have care
of me, and there also will he keep me, that I perish not; for one place
interprets another: And he had said before unto the Thief, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43.
that is, in the place and state of the blessed, where both of us shall be free
from these pains; that is, he speaks of felicity and liberty, which is not
in hell: for his meaning is, both of us, who now suffer, shall this day be in
Paradise, a place of everlasting salvation or happiness, where, being
delivered from all torments we shall enjoy most pleasant quiet and repose. But
Paradise is neither hell, nor in hell, which is the place of torment. Whereupon
also it is clear, that Christ spoke this to the Thief, not of his Godhead,
but of that which suffered, which was his soul: For the Godhead was not with
the Thief, neither did Christ suffer, or was elivered as touching his
Godhead, but as touching his soul. If Christ did locally descend into hell.
Because there was no cause why Christ should descend. Jo^^ 39.30.
he descended either to suffer, or to deliver the Fathers thence, as the
Papists affirm. But he descended not to suffer; because now all things were
finished on the Cross: as Christ himself also hanging on the Cross said, It
is finished. He descended not to deliver the Fathers: 1. Not to suffer.
1. Because he did this before in suffering for them on the earth. 2 Not to
tree the Fathers out of the Limbo. Wisd. 3.1. Luke 16.26.
2. He did the same by his power, and efficacy of his Godhead, from the very
beginning of the world, not by the descension of his soul or body into hell.
The Fathers were not in Limbo; Therefore they could not be delivered thence: as
it is said. The souls of the just are in the hand of God. Between you and us
there is a great gulf set. so that they which would go from hence to you
cannot; neither can they come from thence to us. And in the same place, Lazarus
dying, is said to be carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, not into
Limbus Patrum.

Some think that Christ indeed descended not into hell either to suffer, 3.
Not to triumph over Death and the Devil, and affright them. 1 Pet. 3.19.
or to deliver the Fathers thence, but to show there the Devil and death his
victory, and to strike a terror into them. But that Christ descended for this
cause, is no where found extant in Scripture. They object unto us first that
place of Peter: By the which he also went and preached unto the Spirits that
are in prison, which were in time passed disobedient. Answ. Peter's meaning in
this place is not as these men conjecture, but is on this wise: He says,
Christ went; that is, being sent from the beginning, of the Father, unto the
Church: By his Spirit; that is, by his Godhead: To the Spirits that are now in
prison; that is, in hell: He preached in time passed, When as yet they lived,
and were disobedient; namely, before the Flood: For then he preached to the
disobedient* when they were disobedient: But they were disobedient in the time
of Noah: Therefore Christ preached by Noah, and by the Fathers, inviting the
disobedient to repentance. Farther, if Peter here spoke of the descension into
hell, yet this was not their opinion who pretend the broaching of it, but the
Papists, who affirm and teach, that Christ preached in hell unto the Fathers,
and delivered them. 1 Pet. 4.6.
They bring another place of Peter: The Gospel was also preached unto the
dead. Answ. That is, unto those which are now dead, or were then dead when
Peter wrote this, and who then lived, when the Gospel was preached unto them.
They wrest and misconstrue also a place of Paul: Ephesians. 4.9.
Christ descended into the lowest parts of the earth. Answ. Into the lowest
parts of the earth, that is, into the earth, which is the lowest part of the
world: For one part of the earth is not opposed unto another, but the earth is
opposed unto heaven, and the humiliation of Christ is thereby signified. This
interpretation is proved by the scope and drift of the Apostle, who makes in
that place an opposition of Christ's great glory, and his great humiliation. So
on the other side, Christ ascended into the highest paris of heaven; that is,
into heaven* into the highest part of the world. These places therefore make
nothing for the descension of Christ into hell: and were it so, that these
places, alleged to establish this opinion, were to be understood of a local
descension of Christ into hell; yet would they not make for them, but rather
for the Papists, who teach, that Christ preached unto the Fathers in hell, and
thence delivered them. Now if these testimonies help not the Papists, much
less will they help them: For, it is certain, that it cannot be thence
proved, that Christ descended into hell, to strike a terror into death and the
Devil. This opinion indeed is not impious or ungodly, and is approved by many
of the Fathers; so that we are not to contend maliciously with any therein: yet
I leave it, because it is not grounded on any firm reasons, neither can be
gained by witness of Scripture; and contrary reasons are at hand easy to be
had: For, 1. After his death, when he had said, It is finished; the soul of
Christ rested in the hands of his Father, into which he had commended it. And,
2. If he descended to triumph, this Article should be the beginning of his
glorification: but it is not likely, that Christ took the beginning of his
glorification in hell: For it is apparent by the opposition of the Article
following, that Christ's descension was the lowest degree of his humiliation.
And yet I confess withal, that Christ struck a greater terror into the
Devils, but that was by his death, whereby he disarmed and vanquished the
Devil, Sin and death: and without doubt, the Devil perceived himself
conquered by the death of Christ.

Hell signifies in this place the terrors and torments of the soul.
What means then this Christ's descension into hell? It signifies, 1. Those
extreme torments, straights and griefs which Christ suffered in his soul,
namely, the wrath of God against sinners, and that such as the damned feel,
partly in this life, and partly in the life to come. 2. The exceeding and
extreme ignominy and reproach which Christ suffered. That Christ suffered these
things, is proved by the testimony of David before alleged. The griefs of
hell caught me: Psalm. 116.3.
which is said of Christ in the person of David. There are other the like
sayings whereby the same is proved: The Lord would break him, and make him
subject to infirmities. Esaias 53.10. Mat 26.31.
My soul is very heavy, even unto the death. The same do those his vexations
also show in the Garden, when he sweat blood: because, The Lord has laid upon
him the iniquities of us all: Luke 22.44. Esaias 53.6.
Therefore he cries out; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The same
is also proved by these reasons: 1. Christ was to redeem not only our bodies,
but also our souls: Therefore he ought to suffer not only in body, but in
soul also. 2. Christ was to deliver us from the pains and torments of hell:
Therefore he of force must suffer them: which being so, he either suffered
them before his death, or after death. The Papists themselves confess, that
he suffered not after death: Therefore it must needs be, that he suffered them
before death. But these pains he suffered not in the body, for the sufferings
of the body were only external: Therefore he suffered those griefs in his
soul. 3. It is very convenient, that the extremest and most grievous part of
Christ's Passion (which was these dolours of mind) should not be passed over
without mention in the Creed: But if the Article of Descension into hell
concern them not, they should be left unmentioned; since that the former
Articles treat only of the external sufferings of the body, which Christ
suffered without him. There is no doubt therefore, but that by this Article the
ghostly passions, or sufferings of his soul are signified. This is the true
meaning of the Descension into hell; and we are to maintain and defend
against the Papists, that which is certain; namely, that Christ so descended,
as has been proved in this discourse: Howbeit, if any man be able to maintain
with sure grounds and proofs that Christ descended in any other sense, it is
well: I cannot. Object. 1. See D. Tho. Bills. Bish. of Winchin his Tract.
touching the redemption of mankind, Page 154. etc. John 19.30.
The Articles of faith are to be understood properly, and without any trope or
figure. Answ. True, except an Article, being taken according to the proper
signification, be disagreeing from other places of Scripture. But this Article
of Christ's descension into hell, being taken properly, is much repugnant to
that saying of Christ, It is finished: For if Christ fulfilled and finished all
the parts of our Redemption on the Cross, there was no cause why he should
descend into hell, that is, into the place of the damned. Object. 2. The
terrors and torments of the soul in Christ went before his burial. But the
descension into hell follows his burial: Therefore the descension into hell
concerns not those torments. Ans. The Minor of this Syllogism is faulty, in
alleging that for a cause which is no cause: For in the Creed, the descension
into hell follows the burial, not that it was performed after the burial,
but because it is an illustration of that which went before touching the
Passion, Death and Burial, lest any thing should be detracted from them: as if
it were said, He suffered not only in body, he died not only a bodily death,
he was not only buried; but also suffered in soul the extremest vexations,
and hellish dolours, such as all the reprobate shall suffer for ever. The
chiefest therefore and weightiest part of Christ's passion follows in good
order: For the Creed proceeds from the griefs of the body to the vexation and
anguish of the mind; and from the visible Passion to the invisible, as it were
from a less to a greater matter and circumstance.

2. The fruits and use of Christ's descension into hell.
CHrist descended into hell: 1. That we might not descend thither, but rather
that he might free us from the eternal pains and torments thereof. 2. That
he might transport and carry us triumphantly with him into heaven. What it is
to believe in Christ, who descended into hell.
Wherefore, to believe in Christ, which descended into hell, is to believe,
that Christ sustained for me in his soul infernal and hellish pains and
torments, and that exceeding ignominy, which is due unto the wicked in hell:
that thereby I might not descend into hell, and that I might never be forced to
suffer them; all which otherwise I should suffer in hell eternally: but that of
the contrary rather I might ascend with Christ into heaven, and there enjoy
with him exceeding happiness and glory for ever and ever. This is the use and
profit of this Article of Christ's descension into hell.

ON THE 17. SABBATH.
Quest. 45. What does the Resurrection of Christ profit us?
Answ. First, by his Resurrection he vanquished death, that he might make us
partakers of that righteousness which he had gotten us by his death. Romans
4.25. 1 Pet. 1.3. 1 Cor. 15.16.
Again, we are now also stirred up by his power to a new life. Romans 6.4. Col.
3.1 etc. Ephesians. 1.3. and 2.5
Lastly, the Resurrection of our head Christ, is a pledge unto us of our
glorious resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.20, 21.


The Explication.
THus far have we continued the Treatise of Christ's humiliation: It remains
that we proceed unto his glorification, for which he rose the third day from
the dead: For the humiliation of the Mediator was not to endure for ever; but
it was enough that he suffered once and died: notwithstanding the efficacy and
power thereof, in preserving and maintaining the blessings issuing and flowing
thence with full stream, endures for ever. Now in Christ's Resurrection two
things are especially to be considered; the history, Two things to be
considered in Christ's resurrection.
and the fruit thereof. In the history we are to observe, Who rose.
Who it was that rose from the dead; 1. The history, and therein.
to wit, Christ, both God and man, in that body in which he died: For this the
Word never put off. How he rose.
The manner of his rising: which was, that he, who was verily dead, revived
from death, recalling his soul to his body, and gloriously came forth of his
Sepulcher on the third day, according to the Scriptures; and that both by his
Fathers, and his own force and power, I say, not the power of his flesh, but of
his Godhead: For he was raised of the Father by himself; because the Father
works by the Son. The testimonies of his rising.
The testimonies of his true resurrection. He showed himself openly to many
women and Disciples; the Angels bare witness thereunto, 4. The fruits of
Christ's resurrection.
etc. The fruits of Christ's resurrection are expressed in these questions
following.

The chief questions of Christ's Resurrection are,
1. Whether Christ rose again. 2. How he rose. 3. For what cause he rose. 4.
What are the fruits of his resurrection.


1. Whether Christ rose again.
INsidels believe, that Christ died, but believe not that he rose from death.
Nevertheless, that Christ rose again, is proved by the restimonies of Angels,
Women, Evangelists, Apostles, and other Saints, who after his resurrection saw
him, felt him, and talked with him. And we were to believe the Apostles in
respect of the authority which they had from heaven, although they had not seen
him.

2. How Christ rose.
THe manner of Christ's Resurrection is declared by these circumstances
following: Christ did rise truly and indeed, so that his soul did truly and
indeed return unto his body, from which it was severed by death, Truly.
and he did truly come forth even out of the grave also, in despite of the
Watchmen, they being withal amazed and stricken therewith. He rose the same
person which he died: the same Jesus Christ, God and Man, according to the
nature, wherein he suffered, namely, In his true body.
according to his humane nature, even the true humane nature, and the same in
essence and properties, and that not deified, but glorified, all infirmities
thereof being done away. Behold my hands and my feet: for it is I my self,
handle me, and see me; for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have. And truly, nothing else could rise again, Luke 24.39.
but that which had fallen. The same body therefore which fell, did rise again:
which is the greatest comfort unto us: For he must have been one and the same
Mediator, who should merit for us a communicating and participation of those
benefits which we had lost by sin, and who should restore the same unto us, and
apply them to every one. Again, except Christ flesh had risen, neither should
ours rise. He rose by his own power; that is, he put death to flight, and
shook it from himself, quickened his dead body, reunited it to his soul, By
his own power. John 2.29. John 10.18. John 5.21. Romans 4.24. and 8.11.
and restored un to himself a blessed, heavenly and glorious life, and that by
the might and power of his Godhead. Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up again. I have power to lay down my soul, and have power to
take it up again: As the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, so
the Son qu^ckneth whom he will. Obj. But the Father raised him: For it is said,
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, etc.
Therefore he raised not himself. Ans. The Father raised the Son by the Son
himself, not as by an instrument, but as by another person of the same essence
and power with the Father, by which the person does ordinarily work: The Son is
raised* of the Father by himself, himself has raised up himself by his
Spirit: For, John 5.19.
Whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the Son also. He rose
the third day by his Fathers and his own power, The third day.
1. Because the Scriptures (in which are understood all the prophecies and
types under the Law) do show, that Christ ought to rise the third day: as for
example, we may instance in Jonas, who fore-shewed Christ. 2. Because his body
was to rise, not being tainted with any corruption: and yet not forthwith the
first day, that his death might undoubtedly be known; but the third day after
his Passion on the Cross. The circumstance therefore of the third day, is
inserted in the Creed, that the truth might be correspondent to the type, and
we ascertained, that this Jesus is the Messiah promised to the Fathers, because
he alone rose the third day.

3. For what cause Christ rose.
CHrist rose, The glory of the Father and the Son. Romans 1.4. John 17.1.
For his Fathers and his own glory: Declared to be the Son of God by the
resurrection from the dead. Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may also
glorify thee: For the glory of the Son is the glory of the Father.

Because of the prophecies. Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.27.
In respect of the prophecies which were uttered of his death, and of his
resurrection. Thou shall not leave my soul in the grave, neither shall thou
suffer thine boly One to see corruption. When he shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, Esaias 53.10. Mat. 12 39.
and shall prolong his days. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied. No sign shall be given unto it, save the sign of the
Prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three days, and three nights in the Whales
belly; so shall the Son of Man be three days, and three nights in the heart
of the earth. As yet they knew not the Scripture, Mat. 25.54.
that he must rise again from the dead. In regard of these and other such
prophecies, it was necessary, that Christ should die and rise again, that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled. How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled,
which say that it must be so? to wit, because of Gods unchangeable decree
revealed in the Scriptures: of which decree the Apostles in the Acts speak,
Acts 4.27, 28.
saying: Doubtless, against thine only Son Jesus, whom thou have anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel,
gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done. Hither also belong Christ's own predictions
hereof. Mat. 17 23. John 2.19.
They shall kill the Son of Man, but the third day he shall rise again. I will
raise up this Temple again.

The worthiness of the person rising. Acts 2.14. John 3.35.
For the worthiness and power of the person that rose: For, for this cause it
was impossible, that Christ should be held of death, as Peter testifies: and
that, 1. Because Christ is the beloved and only begotten Son of God: The Father
loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands. So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son. etc. 2. Christ is true God, and
authout of life: I am the resurrection, and life. John 5.26.^1. and. 10.28.
As the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the Son to
have life in himself. As the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them,
so the Son quickneth whom he will. I give unto them eternal life. It had been
absurd then, that he should not be raised, but sleep in death, who gives life
to others. 3. Christ is righteous in himself, and, by dying, satisfied for our
sins, which were imputed to him. Now where sin is not, there does not death
reign any more. With one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified. Heb. 10.14. Romans 5.10.
In that he died, he died once to sin; but in that he lives, he lives to God.

The office of the person.
In respect of the office of the person who rose: which, had he remained in
death, he could not have discharged: For, 1. The Mediator, who was true God
and Man, should reign for ever: Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, the
Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of righteousness. Psalm. 45.7. 2 Samuel
7.13, 14.
I will stablish the throne of his Kingdom for ever: I will be his Father, and
he shall be my Son. I have sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail
David. Psalm. 83.34, 35, 36. Ez. 37.23, 24.
His seed shall endure for ever: and his seat is like as the Sun before me.
He shall stand fast for evermore as the Moon, and as the faithful witness
in heaven. They shall be my people, and I will be their God, and David my
servant shall be King over them, and they all shall have one shepherd. The
Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, Dan. 7 27. Esaias 9.7. Luke 1.33.
shall be given to the holy people of the most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all powers, shall serve and obey him. The increase of
his government and peace shall have none end. Of his kingdom shall be no end.
It was therefore needful, that the humane nature, which was the seed of David,
should be raised, that it might reign. 2. The Mediator, who was to be our
brother and true Man, should ever make intercession for us, and as an
everlasting Priest appear for us before God. Psalm. 10.4. Romans 8.34.
Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. It is
Christ which is dead, yea, or rather which is risen again, who is also at the
right hand of God, and makes request for us.

3. Christ Jesus the Mediator, which is to be true Man, should be Mediator
both by his merit, and by his efficacy or power. For it sufficed not, that he
died for us: but he was further to bestow through his power, his benefits upon
the Church and us all, who by dying or by his death, had obtained for us
righteousness, that is, the holy Ghost, life, and glory eternal: For both
belong unto the Mediator, who therefore obtains them for us by his
intercession and death: But he could not have bestowed them, had he remained in
death; since then he should have had no being. And he who is not, or has no
being, works nothing. In him also the same benefits are therefore placed by
the Godhead, that he should make us partakers of them. John 1.16.
Of his fullness have all we received.

Neither ought it to seem any marvel, that Christ does bestow the same
benefits on us, which he obtained of the Godhead, by his death for us. For a
man may both obtain a thing of one for another, and also bestow the same on
him for whom he obtained it: As, be it that one makes request for thee unto a
Prince for a gift of a thousand crowns: the Prince does this for his sake that
requested it, and bestows also that gift on him that he may bestow it on
thee: he then shall obtain this gift for thee of the Prince, and withal shall
bestow the same on thee. Now, albeit Christ could have bestowed the benefit of
his death upon us by his Godhead, by the means whereof we are justified and
regenerated, and begin faith, and new life by the holy Ghost: yet
notwithstanding, as God decreed, by man to raise the dead (for by man came the
resurrection) and by man to judge the world; 1 Cor. 15.21.
so also has he decreed to bestow these gifts by Jesus-Man, that the same
might be and continue Mediator, who is true God and Man. Therefore also it was
requisite, that Christ should remain for ever our brother, and our head; and
that we of the other side, being ing^affed into him by a true faith, should
always remain his members. John 15.4.
Abide in me, and I in you. For in the seed of David is grounded our salvation.
My servant David shall feed them for ever. Now, he had not continued our
brother, Ezekiel. 34.23.
neither ^ad we been his members, if his humane nature had continued in death.
Which thing all the testimonies do confirm, which attribute an eternal
kingdom unto ^he seed of David. For on that kingdom is our salvation
grounded: and the kingdom of Christ the Son of David could by no means have
been eternal, if his hunane nature had continued in death. Ob. But in the old
Testament, before his incarnation or humiliation, Christ, without his humanity,
did bestow the same benefits on the Fathers which he bestows on us in the new
Testament, and was no less, before the taking of flesh, Mediator, than since;
also he did the same things before his coming, which he does after his coming
in the flesh. Therefore it was not necessary that Christ for this cause should
become man, and suffer death. Answ. But neither had he then done those things,
except he should have been afterward man, and have continued always man: so
neither now should he do the same, if he had not risen, and if he did not
retain the nature which he took for ever. John 5.27.
The Father has given the Son also power to execute judgment, in that he is
the Son of Man.

Our salvation. Romans 4, 25.
He rose for our salvation: and that in three respects: 1. For our
Justification. Our Lord Jesus Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and
rose again for our Justification. Now, the resurrection of our Mediator was
requisite for our justification: 1. Because, without the resurrection, his
satisfaction had not been perfect, nor his punishment finite: and except his
satisfaction had been perfect, and his punishment finite, we could not have
recovered out of everlasting death, from which the Mediator was so to deliver
us, as that he should utterly overcome it in us. If then our Mediator was
utterly to vanquish and overcome death in us, he ought then so to die, as to
overcome death first in himself, and so to fulfill indeed that which was
foretold; Death is swallowed up into victory. O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54. Mat. 27.42.
where is thy victory? and so should confound his enemies, which cast in his
teeth: He saved others, himself he cannot save.

Again, Except Christ had overcome death, he could not have bestowed his
benefits on us, which by his death he had merited for us; (but it belonged to
the same party to merit and bestow the Mediators benefits on us, as has bin
heretofore proved:) neither should we know that he had satisfied for us,
because if he had continued in death, it had been a certain argument that he
had not satisfied, but was overcome of death, and of the burden of sin. For
where death is, there is sin: or if he had satisfied, and yet had remained in
death this had bin contrary to the justice of God. Wherefore Christ was to
rise, as well for this end; that he might fully accomplish his satisfaction for
us: as also for this; that we might know that he had fully accomplished it, and
had promerited benefits for us: and finally to this purpose, that himself
might apply the same unto us: that is, that by his merit and efficacy, we might
be perfectly saved and justified. 2. Christ rose for our regeneration. For
justification, or remission of sins suffices not, without the inchoation and
beginning of a new life. 3. For the preservation or continuance of his benefits
toward us, our raising again unto life, and glorification. God will by this
means everlastingly quicken and glorify us, that being inserted, and
engraffed into the mass of his Son, that is, his humane nature, we may for
ever be carried of it, 1 Cor. 15.21.
and out of it draw life. By man came death, by man also came the resurrection
of the dead. For these causes it was necessary, that Christ should rise again,
that is, that his soul, which was laid down from the body, should be again
joined with the same body. What resurrection is.
For resurrection is nothing else than a conjunction or re-uniting of the same
body with the same soul.

4. What are the fruits of Christ's resurrection?
THe questions are diverse, Wherefore Christ rose: and, What fruits Christ's
resurrection brings unto us. For, all the causes of Christ's resurrection are
not fruits of his resurrection: and after a diverse manner are the causes and
the fruits of his resurrection considered: and moreover, the benefits of
Christ, bestowed by his resurrection, are one way considered as causes of
Christ's resurrection; to wit, in as much as it was necessary that he should rise
from death to bestow them on us: and otherwise as fruits of the same; namely,
in as much as by the power of his resurrection he bestows them on us.

Furthermore, the fruit of Christ's resurrection is of two sorts: the one
respecting Christ; Romans 1.4.
the other, us. For first (as the Apostle says) He is declared by the
resurrection to be the Son of God: even the only begotten and wel-beloved
Son of God, who is also God himself. For he revived by his own power, which
is the property of God alone. John 1.4. and 5.26.
In him was life. As the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he
given to the Son to have life in himself. Again, Christ's humane nature also
was by his resurrection adorned with heavenly gifts, immortality, and that
glory which becomes the nature of the Son of God. God wrought according to
the working of his mighty power in Christ, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his right hand in the
heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and
domination, and every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in
that which is to come. And has made all things subject under his feet, and
has appointed him over all things, to be the head of his Church. The fruit of
Christ's resurrection which respects us, is of many sorts. But, to speak in
general, All the benefits of Christ's death are also the fruits, which we
receive by his resurrection. For Christ's resurrection makes that his death
has his effect. Christ by his resurrection does apply unto us those benefits,
which he merited for us by his death; and by this means, the same are the
benefits both of his death and resurrection, which are otherwise merited for
us, than they are bestowed on us. For it was not necessary that the very act of
meriting and deserving should dure all the time both of the old and new Church;
but only the act of bestowing or applying the same: and therefore it was
necessary also that the Mediator should be continually, that he might bestow
always those benefits on the Church, which he was once to merit. For this
cannot be done without a Mediator: and therefore neither can the Church be for
one moment without a Mediator. In the old Church Christ the Mediator did
bestow on the Fathers the benefits of his death to come, by the force and
efficacy of his resurrection to come: now he bestows them on us, by the
efficacy of his resurrection already past.

The fruits of Christ's resurrection are: 1. A testimony of his perfect
satisfaction, and of the application of his benefits.
It remains now that we in special reckon the chief fruits, which the
resurrection of Christ brings unto us.

First, then by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, We are confirmed and
warranted, 1. Of his merit, That he has fully and perfectly satisfied for our
sins. For one only sin, not being satisfied for, had withheld Christ
still in death. He was cast into such a prison, as that, except he had paid the
utmost farthing, he had never been let go: But he was let go and dismissed;
therefore he paid the utmost farthing. In regard therefore of this his merit,
we have remission of sins, and are justified before God. 2. We are confirmed
of the application of Christ's benefits, which could not have been bestowed, if
he had not risen: For, as was said before, it was necessary that the self-same
Mediator, being man, should merit and bestow gifts, and therefore should rise
again. Whereas then he is risen, we are assured not only that he has merited
for us, but also that he is able, and does bestow on us the fruit of his merit.
Wherefore well says Saint Paul, Rom 4.25.
That Christ is risen again for our righteousness, that is, to confer and
apply righteousness unto us.

The giving of the holy Ghost.
A fruit of Christ's resurrection is the gift of the holy Ghost, by whom Christ
regenerateth us, and gives us eternal life. It behoved him first to shake off
death from himself, and afterward from us: it behoved us to be engraffed into
him, as into our head that from him the holy Ghost might be derived unto us.
Wherefore, after his resurrection, he obtains the holy Ghost for us, and
bestows it on us, and by the holy Ghost engraffeth us into himself,
regenerateth and quickneth us. Before time, the godly were also endued with the
holy Ghost, and regenerated, but more sparingly than now in the New Testament,
and yet both by the force and virtue of his resurrection, which was then to
come. For the holy Ghost, by whose virtue and operation only we are
regenerated, cannot be given but by the resurrection and ascension of Christ
into heaven. The holy Ghost was not given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. John 7.39.


Our resurrection Five reasons hereof.
The resurrection of our bodies is a fruit of Christ's resurrection: For Christ's
resurrection is a pledge for our resurrection: Because Christ is our head, and
we his members. Now, it is expedient for the heads glory, that the members be
glorious. Christ indeed should be by himself, though he had no members, or if
his members continued in death; but he should not be head, because he is not
head, but in respect of his members: neither should he be a King without a
kingdom, according to the nature of correlatives, whose very being depends
upon necessary relation which one has to the other: and, according to the
nature of correlatives, a glorious head does require glorious members, and such
as are correspondent unto it. Because, if Christ be risen, he has also
abolished sin: If he has abolished sin, either he has abolished his own
sin, or ours: but not his own, therefore ours. If he has abolished our sin,
he has abolished death also: For, if the cause be taken away, the effect
likewise is taken away. The wages of sin, is death. Further, Romans 6.23.
if he has abolished death, and that by a sufficient satisfaction for our
sins, which satisfaction he has showed and declared by his resurrection to be
sufficient; it is certain that his resurrection is a most certain testimony of
our resurrection: for he having performed a sufficient satisfaction for the
sins of his members, the members cannot remain in death. But the resurrection
of Christ the head, is an argument of the perfect satisfaction for the sins
of his members. Therefore Christ's resurrection is also an argument of the
perfect resurrection of his members. As the first Adam received the blessings
for himself, and all his posterity, and lost the same from all: So Christ, the
second Adam received life, and all other gifts for himself and others, and
therefore also will communicate eternal life with us. Seeing the same spirit
dwells in us which did in Christ, he shall work also the same in us, which in
our head he did. For the spirit is always alike, neither could he work in the
head, and sleep in the members. Therefore seeing Christ has raised himself up
by his spirit from the dead, he will verily also raise us up. If the spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: Romans 8.11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, because that his Spirit dwells in you. Because Christ is man, and our
brother: for except he were man, we should have no hope of the resurrection of
our flesh. For, 1 Cor 1^.11.
by man came the resurrection. Therefore, for his tender love and affection, he
will not leave us in death, and so much the rather in regard of his power and
glory. For, if he, being dead, raised himself, much more being alive shall he
be able to raise us up: and if in the time of his humiliation he had power to
raise himself, much more may he raise us out of the grave now he reigns in
glory a^ the right hand of his Father. Object. 1. Then the wicked shall not
rise again: because Christ's resurrection is neither an argument, nor the cause
of the resurrection of the wicked, but of the godly only. Answ. There be other
causes for which the wicked shall rise again; even for the just judgment of
God, whereby he has appointed them to eternal pains. For the same thing may
have more effects, and diverse causes. Object. 2. These are the benefits of his
death: therefore not of his resurrection. Ans. They are of his death, as by it
he deserved them: of his resurrection, 1. In respect of the manifestation of
them; for by his resurrection he declared, that those benefis were purchased
for us: For, by escaping from this punishment, he made plain proof of his
full and perfect satisfaction for sin. 2. In respect of the application of
them: Because, by his resurrection he applies his benefits unto us. 2 Cor. ^.9.
He being rich, was made poor, and being poor, was made rich again, that he
might enrich us. Object. 3. The effect is not before the cause. The cause of
these benefis (which is his resurrection) was not before the first
resurrection: therefore, neither the effect, that is, the benefits themselves.
Answ. The resurrection was not, as touching the accomplishment thereof, but in
the counsel of God, and in efficacy and virtue, it was in the Old Testament.
For, then also were men received into favor, they were endued with the holy
Ghost, and received the other benefits: but for and by the Mediator, which was
in time appointed to be humbled and glorified.

Knowledge that Christ is the prophesied Mel^ias.
By Christ's resurrection we know him to be the Messiah, as in whom the
prophecies were fulfilled.

Assurance that he is the Mediator.
By it we are assured, that he now executes the office of the Mediator, that
he applies unto us the benefit of redemption, that he preserves us
perpetually in that righteousness which he has applied unto us, that he
begins in us a new life. and so does also assure and ascertain us of the
consummation and accomplishment of eternal life; all which he could not do,
except he had risen again.

Affurance that he will always defend his Church.
Seeing he now lives, and reigns for ever, we are certain that he will
preserve and defend his Church.

The consummation of all his benefits.
The last, though not the least fruit of Christ's resurrection, is, The
consummation and perfecting of all his benefits, and the glorifying of his
Church. For Christ did therefore die, and is therefore risen, and has
therefore perfectly delivered us from sin, that we may be joint heirs with him
of his kingdom and glory. Col. 1.18. Romans 8.17.
He is the firstborn of the dead. We are the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ. He shall conform, and make us like unto himself, because
we live by the same spirit whereby he does. And this spirit is not unlike
himself. Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you: he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because
that his spirit dwells in you. John 14.3.
I will come again, and receive you unto my self; that where I am, there may
ye be also.

The sum of the fruits of Christ's resurrection is, that seeing Christ is
risen, it is manifest that he is declared to be the Son of God; and, as
touching his humanity, is endowed with that glory which becomes the nature of
the Son of God; and further, that he endueth us also with his spirit,
regenerateth us by the virtue of his spirit, and will at length consummate and
perfect the new life begun in us, and make us copartners of the same his
glory, felicity and everlasting life.

The meaning of the Article, He rose again from the dead.
Now, what is the meaning of this Article; I believe in Christ which rose again
the third day from the dead? Answ. The meaning hereof is, that I believe, 1.
That Christ did truly recall his soul into his dead body, and quickened it. 2.
That he retained a true soul and true body; but both now glorified, and free
from all our infirmities. 3. That he rose by his own virtue and power. 4. That
he rose to this end, to make me a partaker of his righteousness,
sanctification, and glorification, which he had purchased for us by his death.

Quest. 46. How understand you that, He ascended into heaven?
Answ. That Christ, his Disciples looking on, was taken up from the earth into
heaven, Acts 1.9. Mark 16.19. Luke 24.^1.
and yet still is there for our sakes, Hebr. 9.24. and 4.14. Romans 8.34. Col.
3.1.
and will be, until he come again to judge the quick and the dead. Acts 1.11.
Mat. 24.30.


The Explication.
Christ's ascension into heaven, is a local, true, and visible translation and
removing of Christ's body into that heaven, which is above all visible heavens,
to that light which is not to be come unto, to the right hand of God, where he
now is and remains, and whence he shall return to judgment. What Christ^
alcension is.
In this Article (as in the former touching the Resurrection) two things are to
be considered: the history, and the fruit. In the history these circumstances
are to be examined: 1. Who ascended: The same Christ which suffered and died.
2. According to what part of him: According to his humane nature. 3. Whither:
Up into heaven, above these visible heavens. 4. By what means: By the power
alone of his own Godhead. 5. To what end: Even to be our head and heavenly
Bishop. 6. In what manner: Visibly, his Disciples beholding him, by a true and
local elevation of his body out of earth into heaven. 7. When: The fortieth
day after his Resurrection. 8. Where: In Bethany, at the mount of Olives. Of
the fruits we shall have fit occasion to entreat in the forty and ninth
Question of the Catechism. But all these nine Questions even now proposed, may
be reduced unto these five immediately following.

1. Whither, or to what place Christ ascended. 2. How he ascended. 3. Wherefore
he ascended. 4. What is the difference between Christ's ascension and ours. 5.
What are the fruits of Christ's ascension.
1. Whither Christ ascended.
JEsus Christ-man, when he was together with his Disciples in Bethania forty
days after his resurrection; after he had often proved and confirmed his
resurrection, his true flesh and humanity to his Apostles, ascended, in their
sight, into heaven. Heaven in Scripture signifies, 1. The air: Behold the
fowls of the heaven. 2. The skiey region, and celestial Spheres; When I
behold thine heavens, What heaven signifies. Mat. 6.26. Psalm. 8.4. Ephesians. 4 10.
the works of thy fingers. He ascended far above all heavens, namely, these
visible heavens. 3. The place of the blessed, which is that space immense, most
lightsome, glorious without, and above the whole world, and the visible
heavens: where God shows himself to the blessed Angels and men, where is
prepared the seat of our bliss with Christ and the Angels. God is said to
dwell there, not that he is contained or circumscribed in any place, but
because there does his glory especially appear unto the blessed Angels and
men. It is called in Scripture the new world, the new heaven, the heavenly
Jerulem, Paradise, the bosom of Abraham. This heaven is not everywhere, but
above, separate from earth and hell Between you and us there is a great gulf
set, Luke 16.25.
so that they which would go from hence to you cannot; neither can they come
from thence to us. Heaven is my seat, and earth is my footstool. In this
third signification is heaven here taken. Esaias 66.1.
Christ then ascended into heaven, that is, Acts 2.21.
was carried up into the place of the blessed. The holy Ghost came from heaven
in the day of Pentecost. 2 Kings 2.11. 2 Cor. 12. 2.
Elias was taken up into heaven. Paul calls it the third heaven. Into this
heaven, namely, into the place of the blessed, Christ ascended, and now is
there, and shall thence come again to judgment, as many most evident places
of Scripture testify unto us, which that Devil, the subtle Sophist and
deceiver, shall never be able to wrest or elude. While they beheld, he was
taken up: for a cloud took him up out of their sight. Acts 1.9, 10, 11.
And while they looked steadfast toward heaven, as he went, behold two men
stood by them in white apparel: Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand
ye gazing into heaven? John 14.2.
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye have
seen him go into heaven. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: that
is, many houses, in which we may dwell and remain. I go to prepare a place for
you. He was taken up into heaven. Luke 24.5^. Mark^ 16.19. Acts 7.56.
He was taken up. I see the heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the
right hand of God. He saw with his bodily eyes, endued from above with a new
seeing force and sharpness, beyond, and through all the visible heavens,
Christ in the same humane nature, Colos. 3.1. Ephesians. 4.10.
in which he had been annihilated and humbled. Seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. He ascended far above
all heavens. He is extred into heaven. Heb 4.14 and 7.26 and 9^4. Phil. 3.20.
Made higher than the heavens. He is entered into very heaven, to appear now
in the sight of God for us. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ. Object. But we converse on
earth: Therefore heaven is in the earth. Answ. Our conversation is in heaven.
1. In respect of the hope and certainty we have thereof. 2. In respect of the
inchoation, or beginning which we have here of that heavenly life, which is to
be consummated in the world to come. In this heaven, that is, in the house of
God and all the blessed, Christ ascended. God would therefore have us to know
the place whereinto Christ ascended: 1. That it might be apparent that Christ
is true Man, and that he vanished not away, but does continue, Three causes why
the place whither Christ ascended is made known unto us.
and shall continue for ever true Man. 2. That we might know whither our
cogitations were to be converted, and where we ought to invocate and call upon
him, that so Idolatry might be avoided. 3. That we might know our dwelling
place into which Christ will bring us, and in which we shall converse and dwell
with Christ.

2. How Christ ascended into heaven.
CHrist ascended into heaven, first, not simply, but in respect of his humane
nature only: In respect of his humane nature only.
and that the very same, which was borne of the Virgin, dead, buried, and which
rose again. He that ever is in heaven, did not ascend into heaven, for then he
should have been sometime out of heaven. But the Son of Man was ever in
heaven: Therefore he is not ascended. Answ. He that ever was in heaven, as
touching that whereby he was ever there, that is, his Divinity, did not ascend;
and so we grant Christ according to his Divinity not to have ascended; for that
was before in heaven: and as when Christ was on earth, the same did not
therefore leave heaven: so when he is now in heaven, his Divinity does not
therefore depart from us. Cyprian says; The Lord ascended into heaven, not
where the Word of God before was not (since he was always in heaven abiding in
the Father) but the Lord ascended thither, where the Word, being made flesh,
sat not before. Object. 2. That which descended, did also ascend. His Divinity
did descend: Therefore it did also ascend. Ans. The signification of descending
is not here proper. His Divinity is said to have descended, that is, to have
opened and manifested it self in place where before it had not.

He ascended locally or bodily, Locally.
that is, truly going from one place to another. He translated his humane
nature from a lower place, by a real and most proper translation, or removing
into an higher place, even into heaven: which could not have been done, if he
had been in body everywhere. That Christ did ascend locally, these places of
Scripture convince. Mat. 26.11. John. 16.7.28. and 12.8 and 6.62. Acts 1.9.
Colos. 3.1.
Ye shall not have me always. If I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you. What then, if ye should see the Son of Man ascend up, where he was
before? While they beheld, he was taken up. He was taken up into heaven. Seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

Christ ascended visibly into heaven. Visibly. Acts 1.9.
For his assumption and taking away from his Apostles* was conspicuous and
apparent to the sight; While they beheld, he was taken up. And they beheld him
ascending up so long, until a cloud took him up out of their sight.

He ascended by his proper power, that is, by the virtue of his Godhead: as
also by the same he rose from the dead. By the power of his Godhead.
This Jesus by the right hand of God has been exalted

He ascended when he had conversed on the earth forty days after his
resurrection: and that therefore, Acts 2.33. The fortieth day after his
resurrection.
1. That he might assure men of his Resurrection: and of the truth of this
flesh. To whom also he presented himself alive, after that he had suffered, by
many infallible tokens. 2. That he might instruct his Disciples concerning his
Kingdom, Two causes why he ascended not until 40. days.
and recall into their minds that which he had spoken before, and farther add
some other things: and so might ascertaine not them only, but us also of his
Resurrection and of the truth of his flesh, or humane nature. Acts 1.3.
Forty days was he seen of them, speaking of those things which appertain to
the Kingdom.

He shall so come, as ye have seen him go into heaven. Whom the heavens must
contain, till, etc. Acts 1.
Object. 1. Beyond heaven there is no place: The Ubiquitaries objections.
Therefore the ascension into heaven is no local translation. Ans. Beyond
heaven there is no natural place, such as Aristotle defines to be a
superficial extremity of a body containing, and yielding to a body contained:
but there is a supernatural or heavenly place: which, what manner of thing it
is, cannot here be learned by discourse of man's wit and reason, but only by a
celestial view and beholding, which the Angels already enjoy, and we shall one
day have in heaven. Sufficient it is for us, that we, leaving to search
curiously, what it is, now know and believe that such a place there is,
according to these testimonies of Scripture: I go to prepare a place for you. I
will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye
be also: And, Whither I go, ye know. Father, John 14.2, ^, 4. John 17.24,
Colos. 3.1.
I will that where I am, they which thou have given me, be with me. Seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. These
and the like testimonies do teach us, that the heaven whereinto Christ
ascended, and which is above these visible heavens, is truly a place. For the
particles, Above, Whither, and Where, do express a place: This kind of place
Aristotle neither knew, nor believed, seeing he knew not the Scriptures. Repl.
Yet at least (say the Ubiquitaries) Christ was translated out of a place into
that which is not a place; whence we thus conclude: That which is not in any
place, is everywhere: Christ is not in any place, Non locum.
because he ascended above and beyond the visible heavens, beyond which there
is not any place: Therefore Christ is everywhere. Answ. 1. We deny the Major,
that the same is everywhere which is not in any place. For the highest or
farthest heaven is not in any place, neither yet is it everywhere. 2. The
Minor is true of a natural place; which is defined to be the superficial
extremity of a body so compassing and containing any thing within it, as it
self also is compassed and contained within another. We grant, Christ is
translated thither where is no place, to wit, natural; and Christ is now in no
place, that is, no natural place. But these assertions are false, if we speak
of a supernatural place, which does contain, but is not it self contained;
and such a supernatural place is beyond the visible heavens, and in it Christ
now is according to the Scriptures.

3. Their supposition, or ground, whereon they build their argument, is in
every part denied by us. That Christ was taken or translated out of a place,
we have many maine proofs; whether he were translated into a place, or that
which is no place, it skilleth not: This follows, Therefore he changed place.
So then Christ's humane nature is finite, and does change place; and therefore
is not everywhere. For, To be everywhere, and to change place, are
contradictory. And therefore also his Godhead, which alone is infinite,
eternal, and everywhere, is not said to change place. But here the
Ubiquitaries seek a shift, that they may not be hurt by this weapon; That which
changes place is not everywhere. Christ's body changes place: Therefore that
is not everywhere. They grant the Major of this Syllogism to be true, taking
the words after one manner; but here they contend, that the words are taken
after a diverse manner: As, that Christ's body is everywhere, that is, after a
manner of majesty, or in manner as it is a majesticall body; it changes place,
in manner of a natural body, or as it is a natural body. But they escape not
a contradiction by this cavil. For the diverse manner which takes away a
contradiction, must not fall into the same, and be all one with the words
themselves, for the clearing of which they are brought. For so it is made a
mere Tautology, or speaking of the same thing, and a begging of that which is
in question: as if I, imitating them, should say, This air is light, according
to the manner of light; and it is dark, as touching the manner of darkness.
Again, This man is poor, as touching the manner of poverty; and is rich, as
touching the manner of riches. Thus is the same affirmed of the same. For, the
manner of poverty, is nothing else but poverty: and the manner of riches,
nothing but riches. So also these manners, which they feign and imagine in the
Major proposition, are altogether the same with the things which are affirmed:
that is, the same in them is affirmed of the same, and so these manners are
that in which lies the contradiction: For they say, Christ's body is every
where, according to the manner of majesty. Being demanded what they mean by
majesty, they answer, omnipotency and immensity. To say then, Christ's body is
everywhere, as touching the manner of majesty, not as touching the manor of a
natural body, is nothing else even by their own judgment, than Christ's body
to be everywhere according to the manner of immensity, or infinity; and not to
be everywhere according to the manner of finitenesse. Now verily they trimly
take away the contradiction by thus distinguishing: For the manner of
immensity, is nothing else but immensity: and immensity, and, to be immense,
are both affirmed of the same. Wherefore, as these are contradictory, To be
everywhere, and, To change place, or, Not to be everywhere: so are these also
contradictory, The same body to be immense, and, To be finite: Immensity and
finitenesse to agree unto the same; or, the same body to be everywhere, or
immense, according to the manner of immensity or majesty, and not to be
everywhere, but to change place, and to be finite, according to the manner of
finitenesse, or a natural body. Wherefore it is manifest, which was before
also confirmed, That Christ ascended locally, and that therefore this Article
is to be understood of Christ's local ascension.

Object. 2. Contraries or opposites ought to be expounded after the same
manner, that the contrariety and opposition may be kept; But these Articles,
He ascended into heaven; He descended into hell; are opposed one to the
other: Therefore as the Article of Christ's descension is taken in a figurative
meaning, that is, of his great humiliation; so ought also the Article of his
ascension to be taken of his great majesty, not of any local motion. Answ. We
answer, first to the Major: Opposites are to be expounded after the same
manner; except such manner of explication be disagreeing from the Articles of
faith, and from other places of Scripture: But this Article the Scripture it
self understands of a local ascension, Acts 1.11.
He shall so come, as ye have seen him go into heaven: howsoever it
understand that other of a spiritual, as we have heretofore proved. And that
thus we understand both these Articles, the Analogy of faith requires. 2. We
deny the Minor. For these two Articles are not opposed: For his ascension into
heaven is not the furthest degree of his glory, as his descension into hell is
the furthest degree of his humiliation. But the furthest and highest degree of
his glory, is his sitting at the right hand of the Father. Therefore as
touching this Article, of his sitting at the right hand of his Father, we grant
the Major; For unto this Article is the descension into hell opposed: whereupon
also the Scripture does not interpret properly, but figuratively, these two
Articles of Christ's descension into hell, and of his sitting at the right hand
of his Father. 3. If Christ's ascension be construed of any equalling of his
manhood with his Godhead, all the other Articles, concerning the true
humanity of Christ, shall be utterly overthrown^.

Mat. 23.20.
Quest. 47. Is not Christ with us then until the end of the world, as he has
promised?
Ans. Christ is true God, and true man: and so according to his manhood, he is
not now on earth: Hebr. 8.4. Matthew. 26.11. John 16.28. John 17.11. Acts 3.21.
but, according to his Godhead, his majesty, his grace, and Spirit, he is at
no time from us. John 14.18. Matthew. 28.20.


The Explication.
THis Question is a prevention of an objection of the Ubiquitaries, who argue
thus: Object. But Christ promised, that he would be with us until the end of
the world: Therefore he did not so ascend into heaven, but that he is now
also on earth, and that everywhere in his humane nature. Answ. They infer
more in their conclusion then the premises enforce. Christ is with us in that
spiritual union, whereby we his members are joined to him our head. And
further, he speaks of the presence of his whole person, to which he
attributes that which is proper unto the Godhead. In like manner he says
before his passion, when as yet he conversed on earth with his Disciples; I and
my Father will come unto him, and will dwell with him: this he speaks, John
14.23
as touching his God head, which was, and is in heaven, and by which, as the
Father is with us, so he is: otherwise we might reason also thus, I go away,
says Christ: Therefore he is not at all with us. But it is attributed
improperly to his other nature, namely, to his humanity, What the personal
union of two natures in Christ is.
that he abides with us in respect of that personal union, which is the
secret and wonderful indissoluble uniting and knitting of the two most diverse
natures of Christ, divine and humane, into one person, so that these two
natures, being in such wise linked and conjoined, absolve the essence of
Christ's person, and one nature should be destroyed, if it were sundered from
the other; both notwithstanding retaining their peculiar and several
properties, whereby one is distinguished from another. Saint Augustines
Explication is on this manner: That which Christ says Lo, Tract. 50. in Johan.
I am with you always unto the end of the world, is fulfilled according to his
Majesty, Providence, and unspeakable Goodness: But as concerning that flesh
which the Word took, and after which he was borne of the Virgin, taken by the
Jews, crucified on the Cross, taken down from the Cross, wrapped in linen
clothes, laid in the Sepulcher, manifested in the resurrection; as concerning
it, ye shall not have him always with you. Why so? Because, as concerning the
presence of his body, he conversed forty days with his Disciples; and they
accompanying him to see him, not to follow him, he ascended into heaven, and is
no longer here. For, He is there; sitting at the right hand of God: and, He is
here; for the presence of his Majesty has not left us. Again, according to
the presence of Christ's majesty, we have Christ always: according to the
presence of his flesh, it was truly said unto the Disciples; Ye shall not have
me always. For the Church enjoyed him a few days, as concerning the presence
of his flesh; now it lays hold on him by faith, but sees him not with
corporal eyes. Christ therefore is present with us, 1. By his spirit and
Godhead. Five manners of Christ's presence.
2. As touching our faith and confidence, wherewith we behold him. 3. In
mutual dilection and love, because he loves us, and we him, so that he does
not forget us. 4. In respect of his union with humane nature; that is, in the
conjunction of the soul with the body: For the same spirit is in us, and in
him, who joyneth and knitteth us unto him. 5. In respect of that hope, which we
have of our consummation; that is, that certain hope which we have of coming
unto him.

Quest. 48. Are not by this means the two natures in Christ pulled asunder, if
his humanity be not wheresoever his divinity is?
Answ. No: For, seeing his divinity is incomprehensible, and everywhere
present; Jer. 23.24. Acts 7.49.
it follows necessarily, that the same is without the bounds of his humane
nature, which he took to him, John 3.13. Col. 2.9. John 3.13. John 21.15.
Matthew. 28.6
and yet it is nevertheless in it, and abides personally united to it.

The Explication.
THis Question is another argument and instance of the Ubiquitaries. For thus
they argue: Object. In Christ's person the two natures are joined in an
unseparable union: Therefore, wheresoever Christ's Godhead is, there also must
his humanity needs be. Answ. These two natures remain in such sort joined and
united, that their property remains distinct, and neither is turned into
other: which would fall out, if each nature were infinite and everywhere.
Repl. Those two natures, whereof one is not where is the other, are sundered,
neither remain personally united, but are separated: In Christ are two
natures, whereof one, which is his humanity, is not where is the other, which
is his Godhead: Therefore the two natures in Christ are not united, but
separated. Answ. The Major is true, being understood of two equal natures;
that is, either both finite, or both infinite; but false of unequal natures;
that is, of those whereof one is finite, and another infinite. For the finite
nature cannot be at once in more places: but the infinite nature may be at once
both whole in the finite nature, and whole without it: and this may we indeed
consider and observe in Christ. For his humane nature, which is finite, is but
in one place: but his divine nature, which is infinite, is both in Christ's
humane nature, and without it, and even everywhere. Repl. There must
notwithstanding be made a separation in another part, where the humane nature
is not, though there be no separation where it is. Answ. Not at all: Because
the Godhead is whole, and the same in the humane nature, and without it.
Gregory Nazianzen says: The Word is in his Temple, and is everywhere, but
after a special manner in his Temple. Repl. If Christ's humane nature be not
adorned with divine properties, it follows, that there is no difference
between Christ and other Saints: For no other difference can be found, but the
equalling of his manhood with his Godhead. For the difference between Christ
and the Saints, is either in substance and essence, or in properties: but not
in substance; because the whole Godhead dwells as well in the Saints, as in
Christ: Therefore in properties. Answ. We deny that there is any difference
between Christ and the Saints either in substance, or in properties, or gifts:
for this enumeration or reckoning is not perfect and complete. There is wanting
a third difference, whereby Christ is distinguished from all Saints, namely, the
secret personal union of both natures, which is in Christ, not in the Saints.
For in Christ dwells the fullness of the God head bodily; so that Christ-man
is God, and Christ-God is man: and thus the God head dwells not in the
Saints. Repl. It is said, God has given him a name above every name. Ans. 1.
God has given him such a name, that is, together with his Godhead: For as the
Godhead, so the properties of the Godhead were given him of the Father. Three
pestilent weeds growing in the Ubiquitaries garden.
2. God gave such a name to him, that is, to Christ man by personal union, not
by any exequation or equalling of both natures. For as the Godhead* so are the
properties thereof given. By these three objections it appears, that the
Ubiquitaries (of whom these things are brought) fall into foul errors.
Nestorianisme
Into the error of Nestorius, because they sunder the united natures in
Christ, whilst, instead of the union of the natures, they substitute the
exequation and equalling, or the operation and working of one by the other. For
two things, two spirits, and two natures may be equalled, or mutually work one
by another without personal union. Iuty chianisme.
Into the error of Eutyches, because they confound the same natures.
Artianisine.
They disarme us of those weapons, wherewith we should fight against Arians and
Sabellians. For they do foulely enervate and weaken all those places, which
prove Christ's divinity, by drawing them to the equalling of his humane nature
with his divine.

3. Wherefore Christ ascended into heaven.
CHrist ascended, first, for his own and his Fathers glory. For his Fathers
and his own glory. Ephesians. 4.10. Phil. 29.10, 11.
For, He was to have a celestial Kingdom: Therefore he might not abide in
earth. He that descended, is even the same that ascended far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things. Wherefore God has also highly exalted
him; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, and that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father.

For our sakes.
He ascended in respect of us, and that for four causes: To make intercession
for us. Romans 8.3, 4.
That he might gloriously make intercession for us. Christ is at the right hand
of God, and makes intercession for us. Now, he makes intercession for us: By
the worth of his sacrifice already offered: which is so great, that the Father
in regard thereof ought to receive us into favor. By his own will, whereby he
uncessantly desires, that the Father should receive us into favor at the view
and remembrance as it were of the sacrifice performed by him in his body. By
the consent of the Father, approving this will and desire of the Son,
accepting the value of his sacrifice as a ransom for our sins, and together
with his Son, receiving us into favor. On this wise does Christ by his
intercession apply unto us the benefits and merits of his death. To this
application, was required his whole glorification, the parts whereof are his
Resurrection, Ascension, and Session at the right hand of the Father. Object.
He made intercession for us also on earth. Answ. This intercession was made, in
respect of the intercession to come. For of that condition he made intercession
before, that, having accomplished his sacrifice upon earth, he should present
himself for ever a Mediator in the celestial Sanctuary. That we might also
ascend. John 14.2, 3.
That we might also ascend, and might be assured of our ascension. I will
prepare you a place. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places, that is,
places to abide for ever: for he speaks of continuing. Christ ascended:
Therefore shall we also ascend. The consequence is good, because he is the
head, and we the members: also he is the first-begotten amongst many brethren.
That he might send the holy Ghost. John 16.7.
That he might send the holy Ghost, and by him gather, comfort, and defend his
Church from the Devil, unto the worlds end. If I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you. Which (holy Ghost) he shed on us abundantly through
Jesus Christ our Savior.

Object. He gave the holy Ghost both before, and after his resurrection:
wherefore he went not for that cause away, as to send the holy Ghost. Answ. He
had given him indeed before, but not in such plentiful manner, as in the days
of Pentecost. That sending of the holy Ghost, which was from the beginning of
the world in the Church, was done in respect of Christ to come, who should at
length reign in humane nature, and give largely and in abundant manner the
holy Ghost. Before his ascension he gave him not in such plenty, because of the
decree of God, who purposed to do both by man glorified: And the sending of
the holy Ghost was the chief part of Christ's glory. Therefore it is said, As
yet was not the holy Ghost, that is, John 7.39.
the wonderful and plentiful sending of the holy Ghost, because Christ was
not as yet glorified. Except I go away, the Comforter shall not come unto you.
John 16 7.
This was the cause why the sending of the holy Ghost was deferred until the
ascension. 4. That he might promise for us in the sight of God, that he would
bring to pass, that we should no more offend.

4. What is the difference between Christ's ascension and ours.
Christ's ascension and ours agree, They agree.
For we shall ascend into the same place whither he ascended. Father, I will
that they, which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am, that they may
behold my glory. But they differ, John 17.24. They differ.
No man has ascended into heaven (that is by his own proper virtue) but the
Son of man. We shall ascend by, and for him. I go to prepare you a place. I
will that they which thou have given me, be with me, John 3.13. John 14.2. and
17.24.
even where I am. by a participation: not in the same degree and dignity with
him. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as
I overcame, Revel. 3.11.
and sit with my Father in his throne. Christ therefore ascended as head of the
Church: we shall ascend as members of this head, that we may be partakers of
his glory. Whole Christ ascended: but not the whole of Christ: because he
ascended as touching his humane nature only, and not as touching his divine,
which also is on earth: But the whole of us shall ascend, because we have only
a finite nature; and that but one.

ON THE 18. SABBATH.
Quest. 49. What fruit does the ascension of Christ into heaven bring us?
Answ. First, that he makes intercession to his Father in heaven for us 1 John
2.1. Romans 8.34.
. Next, that we have our flesh in heaven, that we may be confirmed thereby, as
by a sure pledge, that it shall come to pass, that he who is our head, will
lift up his members unto him John 14.2. and 17.24. and 20.7. Ephesians. 2.6.
. Thirdly, that he sends us his Spirit instead of a pledge between him and us
John 14.16. and 16 7. Acts 2.33. 2 Cor. 1.21. and 5.5.
, by whose forcible working we seek after, not earthly, but heavenly things,
where he himself is sitting at the right hand of God Col. 3.1.
.

The Explication.
5. What are the fruits of Christ's ascension?
1 His intercession; which has three parts.
THe chief fruits of Christ's ascension, are: first, His intercession; which
signifies, The perpetual virtue and strength of Christ's sacrifice. Both wills
in Christ, both humane and divine, propitious and favorable unto us, whereby
he will that for his sacrifice we be received of his Father. The assent of his
Father, approving this his Sons will, and accepting of the value of his
sacrifice as a ransom for our sins: and as the Father receives us, so does he
also. In sum, it is the will both of the Father and the Son, that Christ's
oblation and sacrifice should be available unto us for ever. Object. But before
Christ's ascension, yea before his coming, there was intercession. Ans. 1. That
depended of this which was to be after the ascension; that is, it was made in
respect of his intercession to come, as also the whole receiving into favor
from the beginning of the world. For he our Mediator, made intercession
before, with this condition, that he, accomplishing his sacrifice, Hebr. 5.6.
should appear for ever in the heavenly Sanctuary. Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech. 2. That intercession in the Old Testament was
not such as it is now in heaven. For in the Old Testament the Mediator made
intercession for the worth of his sacrifice and ransom one day hereafter to be
paid: and the Father received the Fathers of the old Church into favor, in
regard of this ransom afterward to be paid: but now he receives us for
Christ's ransom already paid. So also sins in the time of the Law were
remitted, and the holy Ghost given, for the sacrifice which was to come: but
now both these are sealed unto us for Christ's sacrifice already performed. And
the value of Christ's sacrifice continues for ever, because, Hebr. 10.14.
With one offering he has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. And
the surcease of Christ from offering any more sacrifices, is no argument of an
imperfect, but rather of a perfect sacrifice. For if he should often sacrifice
after the manner of the Levitical Priests, he should therefore sacrifice often,
because he is not able with one sacrifice to make perfect them which come unto
God. But he made all perfect with one sacrifice: wherefore he now executes the
office of his Priesthood, not by often offering and meriting, but by often
applying to us (through the infinite worth of his sacrifice) grace,
righteousness, and his holy spirit; which is a weightier work, than if he
iterated his sacrifice. Our ascension into Heaven. John 14.2.
Our glorification or ascension: For seeing Christ our head is ascended, we are
certain, that we also shall ascend into heaven, as being his members. I go to
prepare a place for you. And though I go to prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be
also. Object. But Elias and Enoch ascended before Christ: Therefore Christ is
not by his ascension the cause of our ascension. Answ. They ascended in respect
of Christ's ascension, which was to come. Christ's ascension and glorification,
is the cause and example of our ascension and glorification; because, except he
were glorified, we should not be glorified. For the Father has decreed to give
us all things by the Messiah, and has put all things in his hands. And how
should Christ have given us a Kingdom, except himself first, as being the
firstborn, had taken possession thereof? but for this cause also he ascended
into heaven, that he might there reign: Therefore he will translate his
Citizens thither. And seeing we are his members, and he our head is already
ascended, and glorified: Therefore shall we also ascend, and be glorified.
Where I am, there shall also my servant be. John 12.26. and 14.3.
I will receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

The sending of the holy Ghost.
The sending of the holy Ghost, by whom he gathers, comfort, and defends
his Church to the worlds end. He was given also to the godly which were under
the Law, before Christ's ascension and coming. But that was, 1. In respect of
this ascension and glorification of Christ, which was then to come, and whereof
that sending and pouring out of the holy Ghost is not a fruit only, but also a
part: and so in respect also of this sending, which was now after Christ's
ascension accomplished, the holy Ghost was given unto the godly in the Old
Testament. 2. Now after Christ's glorification it was given more abundantly, as
in the day of Pentecost: that which also was foretold; And it shall be in the
last days, says God, I will power out my spirit upon all flesh. Now, J^el
2.28. Acts 2.17.
that Christ did not power out the holy Ghost in such plenty before his
ascension, that befell only, as before was said, in respect of the decree of
God: For God would that the holy Ghost should be given by the Messiah, as well
man as God: wherefore man also was to be glorified, who should do this. It is
expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will
not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you. John 16.7.
By the efficacy and working of this his spirit we seek things above, because
there is our treasure, there are our goods; and that because Christ has
therefore ascended, that he might make those good things ours, which were there
long before. And this is the Apostles argument, Col. 3.1. There are other
fruits also of Christ's ascension: For, Remission of sins. John 16.10.
it is a testimony, That our sins are fully pardoned us, who do believe. For
except he had suffered the punishment for sins, he could not have entered into
the throne of God: For where sin is, there is death also. He shall reprove
the world of righteousness, because I go to my Father. Conquest or victory
over death.
It is a testimony, That Christ is indeed Conqueror of death, sin, and the
Devil. The comfort of the Church. John 16 7. Ephesians. 4 8.
It is a testimony, That we shall never be left destitute of comfort: because
he therefore ascended, to send the holy Ghost. If I go not away, the Comforter
will not come. When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. The defense of the Church.
It is a testimony, That Christ will for ever defend us, because we know that
our head is a glorious head, and placed above all principalities.

The meaning of the Article, He ascended into heaven.
Now what it is to believe in Jesus Christ, which ascended into heaven? Answ. It
is to believe, 1. That he did truly, and not in show only ascend into heaven,
and now is there resident in his humanity; and, sitting at the right hand of
his Father, until he thence return unto judgment, would be called on by us.
2. That he has ascended for our sakes, and now appears in the prescence of
God, makes intercession for us, sends us his holy Spirit, and will one day
take us unto himself, that we may be where he is, and reign with him in
glory.

Quest. 50. Why is it further said, He sits at the right hand of God?
Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Col. 1.18.
, by whom the Father governs all things Ans. Because Christ therefore is
ascended into heaven, to show thereby, that he is Head of the ChurchMat. 28.18.
John 5.22.
.

The Explication.
Christ's sitting at Gods right hand, differs from his ascension:
TO sit at the right hand of God, and, to ascend into heaven, are things
different: for one may be without the other. Wherefore this Article differs
three ways from the former: In order.
Because in this Article is declared the end of his ascension: For Christ did
therefore ascend into heaven, that he might sit at the right hand of the
Father. In continuance.
Because Christ sits always at the right hand of the Father, but into heaven
he ascended but once. In end.
The Angels do ascend, and we shall also ascend into heaven; but yet neither
they, nor we shall sit at the right hand of God. For, To which of the Angels
said God at any time, Sit at my right hand, Heb. 1.13.
until I have made thine enemies, thy footstool? much less did God say thus
unto any man, Christ alone excepted. The Questions of Christ's sitting at the
right hand of the Father, are: 1. What the right hand of God signifies in the
Scriptures. 2. What it is to sit at GODS right hand. 3. Whether Christ did
always sit at Gods right hand. 4 What are the fruits of Christ's sitting at the
right hand of the Father.


1. What the right hand of God signifies.
THe right hand, as also other members, are attributed unto God by an
Anthropopathy, or resemblance after the manner of men: and in Scripture the
right hand of God signifies, Him has God lift up with his right hand, Acts
5.31. Psalm. 118.16. Exodus 15.6.
to be a Prince and a Savior: The right hand of the Lord has done valiantly.
Thy right hand, O Lord, has bruised the enemy.

2. What it is to sit at Gods right hand.
TO sit at Gods right hand, is to be a person equal to God in power and glory,
by whom the Father works immediately, and governs all things. They commonly
define it to be, to reign in equal power and glory with the Father. That is
true indeed of Christ: for he does all things likewise as does the Father, and
is endued with the same power with the Father, which also he exercises. But
the Son has always so reigned: and the same agrees also to the holy Ghost,
who yet is not said in the Scripture to sit, neither does sit at the right hand
of the Father; because the Father does not govern all things, especially his
Church, immediately by the holy Ghost, but by the Son. Wherefore this
definition, which is commonly received, is not sufficient and perfect. Some
confound his sitting with his ascension, and say it is all one: But we have
already showed and proved a difference; and it is absurd, that in so short a
Confession should be an idle speaking of the same thing twice. This phrase of
speech is taken from the custom of Kings, Whence the phrase of Christ's sitting
at Gods right hand arises.
who place those, whom they honor, at their right hand and have their
assistant assessors, to whom they commit the power of government: So Christ is
said to sit at the right hand of the Father; because the Father will rule and
govern by him immediately all things both in heaven and earth. This Session
therefore is the supreme dignity and glory given by the Father unto Christ
after his ascension: Or, the peerlesse exaltation of the Mediator in his
Kingdom and Priesthood.

Christ alone sits then at the right hand of God the Father; that is, he is
that Mediator and person omnipotent, by which the Father governs all things
immediately: but especially, by which he defends the Church against her
enemies. And this glory and Session of Christ at the right hand of the Father,
Four things wherein Christ's sitting at Gods right hand consists.
is, The perfection of Christ's divine nature, that is, the equality of the Word
with the Father, which he did not then receive, but ever had. Which his
Divinity, though for the whole time of his humiliation it lay hidden and
undiscried; yet it afterward showed forth it self with power and majesty. The
perfection and exaltation of Christ's humane nature. This perfection compriseth,
1. The personal union of the humane nature with the Word; Col. 2.9.
In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. 2. The excellency of
gifts; wisdom, power brightness, glory, majesty, and other graces far greater
and more in number, than are bestowed on all men or Angels* and therefore in
which he far excels both men and Angels. Joh. 1.16. and 3.34.
Of his fullness have all we received God gives him not the spirit by measure,
The perfection or the excellency of the office of the Med^atour, that is, the
Prophetical, Priestly and Royal function, which Christ now (as the glorified
head of his Church) does in his humane nature gloriously exercise in heaven:
For now he is our glorious intercessor, he is the glorious giver of the holy
Ghost, and the mighty preserver and defender of his Church. This excellency of
Christ's office is the very exalting of Christ in all his functions: that is,
the laying down of the infirmity of Christ's humane nature, and the perfection
of glory: which was due unto Christ, both in respect of his office, as being a
Prophet, King, and Priest; and in respect of his person, as being God. Mat.
28.18.
All power is given unto me both in heaven and earth. The perfection of Christ's
honor, that is, the adoration, worship and reverence, which equally, as to the
Father, is yielded unto Christ both of Men and Angels, because he is adored and
magnified of all, as the Lord and Prince of all. Let all the Angels of God
worship him. Psalm. 97.7. Heb. 1.6. Phil. 2.9.
He has given him a name above every name. By these and the like speeches are
signified the parts of Christ's sitting at Gods right hand. But the name,
whereof is spoken in the words of the Apostle before alleged, is the
excellency of the person and office of Christ, and a declaration of both by his
visible majesty, that all may be forced to confess, that this is the King, by
whom God rules all things. So also did Stephen see him standing on Gods right
hand, adorned with visible majesty and glory, and worshipped him. Christ had
some parts also before of his excellency, both of his office, and of his
person, but he then came to the full perfection of all, when being taken up
into heaven, he was placed at the right hand of the Father.

A more full description of Christ's sitting at Gods right hand.
By these parts now of Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father, the
definition of his sitting may be made more full in this wise: When Christ is
said to sit at the right hand of the Father, he is said, to have the same and
equal power with the Father: To excel all Men and Angels in his humane
nature, both in gifts bestowed on him more and greater than on them, as also in
visible glory and majesty: To show himself Lord of Men and Angels, and of all
things that are created: in the name of the Father, To rule and administer
immediately his Kingdom in heaven, and the whole world, and chiefly, To govern
by his power immediately the Church: Lastly, To be acknowledged and magnified of
all, as chief Lord and Head. But how, and how many ways Christ is called our
Head, has been heretofore fully handled in the 32. Question of the Catechism.
Christ may be said to sit at Gods right hand in respect of both natures. 1. How
in respect of his humanity.
The Session therefore at the right hand of God, is, the honor not of the
Father, or the holy Ghost, but proper to the Son alone: and is indeed the last
degree and consummation of honor, which the Son obtained in both natures, but
diversely in each of them. For, in respect of his humane nature, it is a real
communication of heavenly gifts, or perfect glory, which the humane nature or
manhood of Christ enjoyed not before the ascension: But, as concerning his
divinity, his session at the right hand of God is no change thereof; 2. How in
respect of his divinity.
but a bare laying aside that humiliation, whereunto it had subjected it self;
and a manifestation of that glory which he had always with the Father, and had
concealed in the time of his humiliation; and a title of full and free
challenge, whereof the Godhead in the assumption of humane nature had as it
were discharged it self: For as the Godhead humbled it self, so also it was
again exalted and placed at the right hand of the Father; namely, John 17.5.
it was gloriously manifested in the flesh. Father, glorify me, etc.

Many objections are by this definition refuted: As, 1. The holy Ghost also is
equal with God the Father: Therefore we may truly say, that he also sits
at the right hand of the Father. Ans. It does not follow; because the reason is
grounded on an ill definition: For although the holy Ghost be (as well as the
Father and the Son) Head, and Lord, and Ruler of the Church; yet does it not
agree to the holy Ghost, but to Christ alone, to sit at the right hand of the
Father: because he alone took humane nature, was humbled, dead, buried, rose
again, ascended, and is Mediator. And further, the Father works immediately
by the Son only: but by the holy Ghost the Father does not work immediately, but
through the Son. For the same order is to be kept in their operation and
working, which is in the persons. The Father works not By himself, but Of
himself, because he is of none: The Son works By himself, not Of himself,
because he is begotten of the Father: The holy Ghost works by himself, but
from the Father and the Son, from whom he does proceed: Therefore the Father
works immediately by the Son; because the Son is before the holy Ghost, yet
not in time but in order: but mediatly the Father works by the holy Ghost:
and therefore the Son, the Mediator, is rightly said to sit at the right hand
of the Father, but not the holy Ghost. Obj. 2. Christ before his ascension was
always the glorious Head and King of the Church: Therefore he cannot now be
first after his ascension, said to sit at Gods right hand. Ans. Again, this
reason also is grounded upon a bad definition. Christ was always glorious, but
he was not always advanced and exalted in the office of the Mediatourship, to
wit, in his Kingdom and Priesthood. Now first he began to have the
consummation and perfection of glory, which before he had not: that is,
gloriously to rule and administer his Kingdom and Priesthood in the heavens.
Obj. 3. Christ says; To him that overcomes will I grant to sit in my throne
with me: Therefore we also shall sit at the right hand of the Father. Ans. We
shall sit there by participation of glory: where this must be also granted,
that the same is the throne of the Father and the Son. In the same throne many
may sit, but not in the same dignity, but some in higher room, and some in
lower. Many Counselors sit near the Prince; but the Lord Chancellor only
sits at his right hand. And so Christ will not give that chief dignity and
glory given him of his Father unto any other. Repl. But to sit at Gods right
hand, is also to live gloriously and blessedly: and this agrees to us. Ans.
This is not a full and sufficient d^finition; because a blessed life agrees
both to us and Angels: but the sitting at Gods right hand does not. Whereupon,
these Articles were adjoined together; He ascended into heaven: He sits at
the right hand of God the Father.

3. Whether Christ did always sit at the right hand of God.
THis Question should not be needful, except men's curiosity had made it such.
To the explication whereof is required the distinction first of natures, then
of time.

Now as concerning Christ's divinity: always sits at the right hand of the
Father, How Christ always sat at the right hand of the Father, according to
his divinity.
as sitting signifies an equal power and honor: which Christ has, even the
same with the Father. For Christ's divine nature was from everlasting equal
with the Father in honor and power. Likewise, as, To sit at the right hand of
the Father, signifies, To be the head of the Church: For by the Word the
Father did from the beginning always preserve the Church, as also by him he
created all things. In this sense Christ was placed by his eternal generation
at the right hand of the Father. he was ordained to this his office of
Mediatourship from everlasting. For he was from everlasting ordained to the
Mediatourship, yea even according to his divinity. always sit, according to
his divinity, at the right hand of God, in that he begun from the very
beginning of the world, to execute, and has executed this his office. How he
sat not always according to it, but was there placed.
And Christ, according to his divinity, was in this respect after his ascension
into heaven, placed at the right hand; in that his divinity then began to show
it self glorious in his body: which in the time of his humiliation had hid it
self from being openly manifested and declared. For in the time of his
humiliation, which was when he lived on earth, his Godhead also had humbled it
self, not by making it self weaker: but by hiding it self only, and not
showing it self abroad: Therefore thus Christ also according to his divine
nature, was placed at his Fathers right hand, namely, by laying down that
humility, which he took on him for our sake, and by showing forth that glory,
which he had with his Father before the foundations of the world were laid
(but had hid the same in the time of his humiliation): not by adding any thing
unto it, which it had not before, neither by making it more bright and
powerful, neither by manifesting and declaring it before God, but unto men,
and by using fully and freely his right and authority; which right and
authority, Christ's humanity had as it were laid down in the taking up and
assumption of humane nature: John 17.5.
Therefore he says; Now glorify me, thou Father, with thine own self,
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. This glory he had
not with men: Therefore he prays, that as he had it always with the Father,
so he might manifest it unto men. Wherefore this is not to be taken, as if the
Word received any change or alteration of his Godhead: but in that sense only
which has been said.

Now, as concerning Christ's humane nature; according to it he was then first
placed at the right hand of the Father, when he ascended into heaven: then he
attained to his glorification, when he received that, which before he had not.
Luke 24.26.
For thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his glory.

The Ubiquitaries arguments drawn from Christ's sitting at his Fathers right
hand.
Object. 1. He that sits at Gods right hand is everywhere. Christ sits
at Gods right hand: Therefore he is everywhere. Ans. This reason we grant in
respect of the communicating of the properties to the person. But if it be
further concluded, that according to the flesh he is is everywhere, there will
be more in the conclusion, than was in the premises.

Object. 2. The right hand of God is everywhere. Christ's humane nature sits
at the right hand of God: Therefore his humane nature is everywhere. Ans. We
deny the consequence of the whole reason: because there are four terms in
this Syllogism: For, The right hand of God, and, To sit at the right hand of
God, is not all one. The Minor should thus proceed: The humane nature is the
right hand of God: But so it is false. Neither yet is the Major simply true,
that he which sits at Gods right hand, sits everywhere. For apart of the
sitting at Gods right hand, Acts 7.56.
is also that visible glory and majesty, wherewith Christ's humane nature was
endowed, and wherewith Stephen beheld him endued in heaven. This is not
everywhere, but only in that place, where his body is seated and remains.

Obj. 3. He ascended into heaven, to fill all things, that is, with the
presence of his flesh. Ephesians. 4.10,
Ans. It is a fallacy in misconstruing the word. He ascended to fill all
things, that is, with his gifts and graces, not with his flesh, bones and skin.
These are the monsters and dotings, whereby the Devil carries Gods glory into
derision. Repl. That nature which has received omnipotency, is everywhere:
Christ's humanity has received omnipotency: Therefore it is everywhere. Ans.
The nature which has received omnipotency by a real transfusion and
communication of the properties, is everywhere: but not that which has
received it by personal union only, as the humane nature of Christ. But yet
notwithstanding many things have been bestowed by real transsusion on Christ's
humanity: to wit, other qualities, than which he had on the Cross, and in his
humiliation. Likewise far more and greater gifts than those, which are bestowed
either on Angels or on Men, were heaped on Christ's humane nature after his
ascension: and in respect of those gifts bestowed on him, Christ is placed,
according to his humane nature, at the right hand of his Father; but according
to his Divinity, he is placed at the right hand of the Father, as he being
glorified, and taken up into heaven, has showed forth the same in his flesh*
and has attained unto the perfection of glory, or the highest degree of
glorification, as touching his humanity.

ON THE 19. SABBATH.
Quest. 51. What profit is this glory of our head Christ unto us?
Ans. First, that through his holy Spirit, he powers upon us, his members,
heavenly graces Acts 2.33. Ephesians. 4.10.
Then, that he shieldeth and defends us by his power against all our enemies
Psalm. 2.9. and 110.1, 2. John 10.28. Ephesians. 4.8.


The Explication.
4. What are the fruits of Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father.
THe fruits of Christ's sitting at the Fathers right hand, are all the benefits
of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ glorified: As, 1. His intercession
for us. 2. The gathering, governing and guarding of the Church by the Word and
Spirit. 3. His defending of the Church against her enemies. 4. The abjection
and destruction of the enemies of the Church. 5. The glorification of the
Church, and abolishment of all infirmity, whereunto it was enthralled. These
fruits of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God arise out of the office and
person which he sustaineth. The benefits of the Kingdom of Christ glorified.
The fruits or benefits of the Kingdom of Christ glorified, are, that he
rules us by the ministry of the Word, and the holy Ghost, that he preserves
his ministry, that he gives his Church resting places, and is forcible by
doctrine in converting the chosen: that he will at length raise up from the
dead his chosen and elect, abolish all their infirmites, glorify them, wipe
away all tears from them, enthronize them in his throne, and make them Priests
and Kings unto his Father. The benefits of the Priesthood of Christ glorified.
The fruit of the Priesthood of Christ glorified, is, that he appears,
presents himself, and makes request and intercession for us in heaven, and
that forcible, so that the Father denies us nothing through the virtue and
force of his intercession. Hence arises that consolation and comfort: Because
our King and Head, our flesh and our brother sits at the right hand of the
Father; therefore he shall give unto his Citizens a rich treasure, even his
holy Spirit: Therefore he shall at length glorify and quicken us his members:
Therefore he shall power out plentifully on us his celestial blessings, that
is, a true acknowledgement of God, faith in him, repentance of our sins, and
all other Christian virtues; and all this shall he perform unto us, both in
respect of his brotherly love, as also in regard of his office, who is our
Head. Because also we have such an High Priest, which is set down at the right
hand of the Father, there is no cause why we should doubt at all of our
salvation: he shall keep it safe for us, and at length most assuredly and
certainly bestow it upon us. No man shall pluck my sheep out of my hand. John
10.28. and 17.24.
I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am.

The meaning of this Article, He sits, etc.
Now what ought each man's particular application of this Article touching
Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father be? Ans. Even this; I believe,
that Christ, now possessed of supreme divine majesty, makes intercession for
me and all the Elect, and applies unto us his sacrifice, that by him, and for
his sake, the Father may give unto me life eternal: also that he governs
and protecteth me in this life against the Devil and all danger, and will at
length glorify me, and endow me with life everlasting.

Quest. 52. What comfort have thou by the coming again of Christ to judge the
quick and the dead?
Ans. That in all my miseries and persecutions I look with my head lifted up,
for the very same, who before yielded himself unto the judgment of God for
me, and took away all malediction from me, to come Judge from heaven Phil.
3.20. Luke 21.28. Romans 8.13. Tit. 2.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
, to throw all his and mine enemies into everlasting pains Mat. 25.41. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7.
, but to translate me, with all his chosen, unto himself, into celestial
joys and everlasting glory Mat. 25.34.
.

The Explication.
IN this Article three Common-places fall in one, and meet together, which are
diverse in themselves; namely, of Christ's second coming, of the end of the
world, and of the last judgment. Of these places we will speak jointly, as
which are linked between themselves; yet so that we chiefly handle that of the
last judgment. For to little purpose were it for us to think of Christ's
second coming, except we did further consider, to what end he should come. The
chief Questions of the last judgment are:

1. Whether there shall be any judgment. 2. What that judgment is. 3. Who
shall be Judge. 4. Whence, and whither he shall come to judge. 5. How he shall
come. 6. Whom he shall judge. 7. What shall be the sentence and execution of
this judgment. 8. For what causes this judgment shall be. 9. When it shall be.
10. Why God would have us certain of the last judgment. 11. Why he would not
have us certain of the time. 12. Why God deferreth that judgment. 13. Whether
it is to be wished for.
1. Whether there shall be any judgment.
THis Question is necessary: For the Scripture also has foretold, that there
shall come in the later times mockers, who shall account this Article for a
fable. Where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers dyed, 2 Pet.
3.4.
all things continue alike from the beginning of the Creation. The last
judgment cannot indeed be demonstrated out of Philosophy: but neither is there
any thing in Philosophy against it. But the whole certainty thereof is grounded
on divine Prophecies, The certainty of the last judgment is not to be sought
in Philosophy, but in Divinity.
or on the Doctrine of the Church. For, although the Philosopher perhaps would
say somewhat, as seeing a little through a mist: as, That it should go well
with the good, and ill with the evil; and, That it is not likely, that man was
born to this misery: yet, by reason that man has lost the knowledge of the
righteousness, goodness, and truth of God; we cannot know out of Philosophy,
that any judgment shall be: much less with what circumstances it shall be.
The arguments which Philosophy yields, are forcible indeed in themselves, but
are not made known but in Divinity: and therefore the arguments themselves are
only made forcible and of strength in Divinity. Wherefore, we will draw
reasons and proofs out of Divinity, or the Doctrine of the Gospel, by which it
may appear that there is a last judgment.

Six proofs of the last judgment.
As I beheld in visions by night, behold, Dan. 7.13.
one like the Son of Man came in the clouds of heaven, and approached unto
the Ancient of days, and they brought him before him. And he gave him
dominion, and honor, and a kingdom, that all people, nations and languages
should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be
taken away, and his kingdom shall never be destroyed. And again a little
before: The Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the
hair of his head like the pure wool, Verse. 9, 10.
his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery
flame issued and came forth before him, thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousands stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books opened. The
beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning fire.
Likewise, out of the prophecy of Enoch, alleged by the Apostle Jude: Jude 14,
15.
Behold, the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints to give judgment against
all men. Moreover, out of the sermons of Christ, especially in Mat. 24.25.
Likewise, out of the sermons of the Apostles: Acts 19 31. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
He has appointed a day* in the which he will judge the world in righteousness,
by that man whom he has appointed: whereof he has given assurance to all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead. The Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Arch angel, and with the trumpet
of God. It is appointed unto men that they shall once die, Heb. 9.27.
and after that comes the judgment. And I saw a great white throne, Rev.
20.11, 12.
and one sat on it, etc. And I saw the dead, both great and small, stand
before God; and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is
the book of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works. Neither is the certainty of the last
Judgment apparent only by these and the like plain testimonies of Scripture,
but is deduced also out of other places by good consequence: and hence are made
those forcible arguments, which the Philosophers saw but by a glimpse. from the
end, whereunto mankind was created. God necessarily obtains his end: but to
this end did he create mankind, that man should be the image of God, and the
everlasting temple of God, wherein he should be worshipped: to whom he would
communicate himself, perfect wisdom, righteousness and goodness, and would
impart his blessedness: which, whereas it is now performed unto us, and seeing
it cannot be that God should create so most excellent a creature to perpetual
misery, we necessarily infer that there shall be a change: For God will
obtain his end, and will not suffer the temple of the holy Ghost to be utterly
consumed of rottenness. This blessedness is a part of Gods image, according
to which man was made: but this the Devil has destroyed; therefore God shall
restore it, who is mightier than the Devil. And although the end for which man
was created, is hindered diverse ways in this life, yet God will at some time
obtain it. Wherefore, it is not only (as the Philosphers reason) likely and
probable, that man was not made for these miseries: but it is also most
certain, that the most excellent of all creatures was made to a better end.
Wherefore there must needs be at length a change. By this argument is confirmed
the happiness of our bodies; according to that of Saint Paul, Know you not
that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.
which is in you? from the justice, goodness and truth of God, which
requires, that it may go full well with the good, and with the evil full
ill. Philosophy knows not that God is so just, good and true, that he will
have the righteous to enjoy full and perfect blessedness. But this comes not
to pass in this life: nay rather it goes well with the wicked and evil, in
this life: Therefore there must remain another life, wherein this shall be.
The holy Scripture uses this argument, as in S. Paul: 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 6.
It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you. Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure, and
likewise Lazarus pains: Luke 16.25.
now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. Gods decree, whereby he
ordained and purposed with himself from everlasting to raise the dead.
Wherefore God being unchangeable, will not cancel and revoke this his decree.
A register and copy thereof we read in Ezekiel; and presidents or examples we
have Enoch, Chap. 3.^.
Elias and Christ: Gods omnipotency, whereby he is able to effectuate and
accomplish things contrary to reason. This argument Christ uses against the
Pharisees: Mat. 22.29.
Ye err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God. the glory of God,
since God created man that he should magnify him for ever; which cannot be, if
there were no resurrection nor judgment. All other proofs and arguments may be
referred unto these.

2. What is the last judgment.
IN every wordly judgment are the Accused, the Accuser, the Judge, the Cause,
Examination, and Hearing of the cause, the Law, according to which judgment is
given, the Sentence of absolution, or condemnation, and the Execution thereof
according to the Law. Worldly judgment then in general, is an inquisition or
examination of a cause by an ordinary and lawful Judge, according to just
laws; and a pronouncing of sentence, and the execution thereof according to
the just laws. Now it is easy to define this last judgment of God, which he
will execute by Christ. This Judge has no need of inquisition or examination
of the cause, or of witnesses, and accusers, seeing he himself will make the
works of all manifest, because he is himself the searcher of hearts: Therefore
there shall be only the Judge, and the offenders on whom sentence shall be
given, and the law; according to which, sentence shall be given and executed.
The definition of it is this: 1. The last judgment is a judgment which God
shall exercise in the end of the world by Christ, The definition of the last
judgment.
who shall then visibly descend from heaven in a cloud, in the glory and
majesty of his Father and Angels, by whom also then shall be raised from the
dead all men, which have died since the beginning of the world, unto the end
thereof: but the rest, who are then living, shall be suddenly changed, and all
presented before the tribunal seat of Christ, who shall give sentence on all,
and shall cast the wicked with the devils into everlasting torments, but shall
receive up the godly unto himself, that they may, with him and blessed Angels,
enjoy eternal happiness and glory in heaven: Acts 1.11. A more brief
definition.
He shall so come as ye have seen him go into heaven. It may be defined more
briefly on this wise: The last judgment shall be a manifestation of the hearts
and inward thoughts of all men, and a declaration of all their actions, and a
separation of the just and unjust, who ever have lived, or shall live from the
beginning of the world unto the end, proceeding from God by Christ: and a
pronouncing of sentence on these men, and an execution thereof, according to
the doctrine of the law and Gospel: the issue whereof shall be the perfect
delivery of the Church, and the final abjection of wicked men and devils into
everlasting punishment.

The confirmation of each part.
The parts of this definition we will now in few words confirm: a manifestation
of the just and unjust: For, the books shall be opened, that the secrets of
hearts may be laid open. Rev. 20.12.
a separation of the just and unjust: For, Christ shall place the sheep on his
right hand, but the goats on his left hand. of God by Christ. Mat. 25.28.
If of God, then shall it be a most divine and just judgment: If God be
unrighteous, how shall he judge the world? It shall be made and wrought by
Christ: because, Romans 3.6.
The Father has committed all judgment to the Son. John 5.22. Acts 17.13.
God has appointed to judge the world by a man. a pronouncing of sentence;
because the judge shall say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father: To those on the left, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat.
25.34.41.
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. an everlasting execution: And
these shall go into everlasting fire, and the righteous into life eternal.
according to the Law and Gospel; that is, they shall be pronounced and declared
just or unjust before the tribunal seat of Christ. For the absolution of the
just shall be principally according to the Gospel, but shall be confirmed by
the law: The condemnation of the unjust shall be principally by the law, but
shall be confirmed of the Gospel. Sentence shall be given on the wicked
according to their own merit: Sentence shall be given on the godly according
to Christ's merit, applied unto them by faith; a testimony and witness of which
faith shall be their works: Therefore also shall the godly confess, that the
retribution of rewards comes not by their merit, but by his grace: they shall
say, When saw we thee hungring or thirsting? By nature we are all subject unto
the wrath of God; but we shall be pronounced blessed of God, Mat. 25.37.
not in Adam, but in the blessed seed, even in Christ: Therefore the sentence
shall be given according to the Gospel.

Object. Unto every man shall be given according to his works: Therefore
judgment shall be given to all, Romans 2.6.
not according to the Gospel, but according to the doctrine of the Law. Ans. In
this sense, shall be given also unto the elect according to their works: not
that their works are merits, but in that they are the effects of faith.
Wherefore then unto the elect shall be given according to their works; that
is, they shall be judged according to the effects of faith: and to be judged
according to faith, is to be judged according to the Gospel. Two causes why
Christ will in the last ^ay rather judge us according to the effects of faith,
than according to faith.
Now Christ shall rather judge according to works, the effects of faith, than
according to faith: 1. Because he will have it known to others why he so
judges; lest the ungodly and condemned persons might object, that he gives us
eternal life unjustly. He will prove by our works, the fruits of our faith,
that our faith was sincere and true, and that therefore we are such as to whom
life is due according to the promise. Wherefore he will show them our works,
and will bring them forth as restimonies* to refute them, that we have in this
life applied unto us Christ's merit. 2. That we may have comfort in this life,
that we shall hereafter, according to our works, stand at his right hand.

3. Who shall be Judge.
CHrist shall be the Judge, John 5.22, 27.
the same person which is the Mediator. For the Father has committed all
judgment unto the Son, and has given him power also to execute judgment,
Acts 10.42. and 17.31 The Father and the holy Ghost shall judge by consent and
authority.
in that he is the Son of Man. He has committed all judgment unto the
Son. He is ordained of God, a Judge of quick and dead. He will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed. Neither yet are
the Father and the holy Ghost removed from this judgment. But Christ
immediately shall speak and give sentence, and that in his humane nature. And
when he speaks, God shall speak, and when he judges God shall judge; not
only because he himself is God, but because the Father shall speak and judge by
him. The judgment then shall belong unto all the three persons of the
Godhead, as concerning their consent and authority: but unto Christ, as
touching the publishing and executing of the judgment. For Christ shall
visibly give sentence of all, The Son by visible pronouncing of sentence. The
Church by approbation. Luke 21.30 Four causes why Christ-man shall judge the
world.
which sentence he shall also together execute. The Church also shall judge, as
touching the approbation and allowing of his judgment: as Christ says, that
the Apostles shall sit on twelve seats, and shall judge the twelve tribes of
Israel; that is, that they shall subscribe unto Christ's judgment, and shall
approve his sentence. Furthermore, the causes, why Jesus Christ man, shall be
Judge, are these: glorified by the same Mediator, by whom, and for whom it was
justified. God will judge the world in righteousness, Acts 17.31. Mat. 24.30.
John 5.27.
by that man whom he has appointed. They shall see the Son of Man come in
the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. The Father has given power
to the Son to execute judgment, in that he is the Son of Man. Heb. 2.11.
Ephesians. 5.30.
Brother and Head, will be gracious unto us, and will not condemn those whom
he has redeemed, and purchased with his blood; nay, whom he has vouchsafed to
make his brethren and members. These are the three things then which comfort
us: 1. The person of the Judge; for he is our brother, and our flesh. 2. The
promise of the Judge; for he has promised and said, He that believes in the
Son, John 3.36. and 5.24.
has eternal life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word,
and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation* but has passed from death unto life. 3. The final cause or
end of his coming to judgment: For he shall come to set his Church at liberty,
and to cast the wicked into eternal destruction. the justice of God: Because
the world has contumeliously dealt with Christ, refusing his benefits: Zach.
12.10. John 19.37.
therefore They shall look on him whom they have pierced, that he may the
more confound his wicked enemies, who shall be forced to behold him their
Judge, John 12.47. and 3.17.
whom they have so much withstood. Object, Christ says, that he came not to
judge or condemn the world: How then should he be our judge? Answ. Christ in
these places speaks of his first coming, which was not to judge the world,
but to save it: but at his second coming, he shall come to be the Judge of the
quick and the dead.

4. Whence, and whither Christ shall come.
WE look for our judge Christ from heaven: For whither the Apostle saw him
ascend, from thence shall he come. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7. Mat. 26.64. Phil. 3.10.
The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of the power
of God, and come in the clouds of the heaven. From heaven then, where he
sits at Gods right hand (not out of the air, or the sea, or the earth: Acts
1.11.
For as ye have seen him go into heaven, so shall he come.) He shall descend
into the clouds; that is, he shall descend from heaven visibly into this region
of the air, as he did indeed visibly ascend. These things are necessarily
proposed, that the Church may know whence to expect their Judge and Redeemer:
For as he will have it known whither he ascended, so also will he have it known
whence he shall come again: that he might thereby signify that he has not
laid away that humane nature which he took.

5. How Christ shall come to Judgment.
He shall come, 1. Truly, visibly and locally; not imaginarily. Mat. 24.30.
They shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of the heaven: and so shall
know him to be God by his visible majesty. As ye have seen him go into
heaven, so shall he come: Acts 1.11.
But he ascended visibly and locally: therefore he shall descend also visibly
and locally. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced. 2. He shall come
furnished and prepared with glory and divine majesty, with all the Angels,
Zach. 12.10.
with voice and trump of the Archangel, with divine power, to raise the dead,
and to separate the godly from the wicked, and to cast these into everlasting
torments, but to glorify them for ever. The Son of man shall come in the glory
of the Father, that is, he shall come furnished with a heavenly multitude of
Angels, and full of majesty: and that not by necessity, but by his power and
authority, showing himself to be Lord over all creatures: and that with such
glory, as only agrees and is proper unto the Father. Whereupon withal is
gathered, that Christ is not a secondary God, but the second person of the
Godhead, equal with the Father. For God will not give his glory to another.
3. He shall come suddenly when the wicked looked not for him. When they say,
Peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3.
peace, he shall come as a thief in the night.

6. Whom Christ shall judge.
He shall judge all men, both quick and dead, and also the wicked Angels. Now
men are called quick or dead, in respect of the state which goes before this
judgment: As, they which shall remain alive until the day of judgment, are
called the quick and living: all the rest except these, are called the dead:
and these at the day of Judgment shall rise; the other which remain then alive
shall be changed. Which change shall be unto them instead of death: and so We
shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ. Object. But he that
believes in the Son, 1 Cor. 15.51. Romans 14.10.
shall not come into judgment: and so it follows, that all shall not be
judged Ans. He that believes, shall not come into the judgment of
condemnation, but shall come into the judgment of absolution. Wherefore we
shall be judged, as the word judgment is more largely taken for both
condemnation and absolution. The Devils shall not then be judged, that is,
condemned: but they shall be judged in respect of the publishing of the
judgment already passed on them, as also in respect of aggravating of the
judgment. Object. The Prince of this world (says Christ) is already judged
and condemned: John 16.11.
Therefore he shall not then be judged. Ans. The Devil is already judged, but
that only, 1. By the decree of God. 2. In the word of God. 3. In his own
conscience. 4. As touching the beginning of his condemnation: But then he shall
be so judged, having the sentence proclaimed publicly on him, that he shall
not be able to attempt any thing more against God and the Church.

7. What shall be the process of the last Judgment, and the sentence and
execution of it.
John. 5.28. 1 Cor. 15.53.
For, All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall come
forth. The living shall be changed, and their mortal bodies shall be made
immortal, and they shall be gathered from the four coasts of the world.
necessity, but with authority: not as if he had need of the Angels ministry,
but thereby to show himself to be Lord of the Angels and of all creatures: and
this shall be for the majesty and glory of our Judge. Sentence shall be given
(which also we did touch before in the second question) on the wicked
principally, according to the Law: yet so, as it shall be with the approbation
of the Gospel. Sentence shall be given on the godly principally, according to
the Gospel; yet so, that the Law shall allow and like of it. The Elect shall
hear the sentence out of the Gospel, according to the merit of Christ
apprehended of them by faith, the testimonies of which faith shall be good
works. Come ye blessed possess ye the kingdom. Mat. 25.34, 35.
But the wicked shall hear the terrible and dreadful voice: Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire. There shall be a casting of the wicked into everlasting
pains, and an advancing of the godly to everlasting happiness and glory. For
then shall Christ perfectly glorify us, and shall take us unto himself. I
will come again, John 14.3. 1 These. 4.17.
and receive you unto my self. We shall be caught up with them also in the
clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
The wicked shall be cast apart from the godly, with the Devils, and shall be
adjudged to eternal pains. Object. He that believes not, is condemned
already: Therefore the wicked are even now already condemned, and shall not
then first be condemned. Ans. As we said the Devils were already judged, so
also are the wicked already judged and condemned: namely, 1. In the decree of
God. 2. In his word, inasmuch as this decree of God is revealed in his word. 3.
In their own conscience. 4. As concerning the beginning of their judgment.
But then the wicked, together with the Devils, shall be judged by proclaiming
and publishing of that Judgment. For then shall be, 1. A manifestation of Gods
judgment, that they perish justly, who perish. 2. The wicked shall further
also suffer punishments and torments of body, which now is buried. 3. The
wicked and the Devils punishments shall be aggravated; and they shall be so
sharply looked unto, and kept under that they shall not be able any more to
hurt the godly, or to despite God and his Church. A great gulf placed between
us and them shall shut up all passage from them, so that they shall cease to
harm us.

8. For what causes this judgment shall be.
THe chief and principal cause is the decree of God. For therefore shall the
last judgment be, because God has said, and decreed that it shall be.
Wherefore it must needs be so: That so God may have his end. That he may show
and declare perfectly and wholly his goodness and love toward us, that he may
be worshipped in his temple, which is, in his chosen, that the Son of God may
have his kingdom, and his citizens glorious, and such as beseem him. 2. A
less principal and subordinate cause is, both The salvation of the Elect, who
are here vexed, and the damnation of the wicked, who here do flourish; for
therefore also shall the last judgment be, that it may go well with the good
and ill with the bad: And of this shall the godly take matter to magnify and
praise God. The last judgment shall be because of Gods justice. Here is not a
full and perfect execution of Gods justice, for the wicked must be in perfect
and full evil state both in body and soul. In a word, the causes of the last
judgment are, That God may utterly cast away the wicked, deliver and free his
Church, dwell in us, and be all in all things.

9. When the judgment shall be.
1. THis judgment shall be in the end of the world, in the end of days: For
there are three parts of the during and continuance of the world: 1. Before the
Law. 2. Under the Law. 3. Under Christ. That part of the during of the world
which is under Christ, is called the end of the world, the end of days, the
last time: namely, the continuance of time from Christ's first coming, until
his second: Wherefore there shall not be so long space between Christ's first
coming and his second, as was from the beginning of the world unto his first
coming: for we are fallen into the last days, and daily see the signs which
were foretold concerning the judgment: Babes, it is the last time, and as ye
have heard that Antichrist shall come, 1 John 2.18.
even now are there many Antichrists; whereby we know that this is the last
time. But the year, the month, the day of this judgment is not known of
Christ himself, 1. As touching his humane nature. 2. As touching his office
and Mediatorship, inasmuch as that requires not, that he should declare unto
us the time of judgment: Mark 13.32.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
neither the Son himself, save the Father.

10. Wherefore God would have us certain of the last judgment.
THe time of the judgment to come is unknown to us; but as it is most certain
that that judgment shall come, so God also would have us know the same, 1. In
respect of his glory: that we might be able to refute Epicures, who account
this heavenly Doctrine of the divine judgment to come for a fable; and from
the confusion which now is in the world, infer, that the world is not
governed by God; or if so, then he is unjust; for, It should go well, say
they, with the righteous: But it does not so: Therefore God either cannot
perform it, or stands not to his promises, or there is no providence. Unto
which their cavil we answer; That because in this life it goes not well with
the godly, it shall go well with them at length after this life. 2. God will
have us know it for our comfort: that we may comfort our selves amidst our
evils and miseries with this, that at length shall come a time when we shall
be delivered out of this corruption and rottenness. 3. That we may retain and
keep our selves in the fear of God, and our duty, and that others also may be
reclaimed from evil. This judgment shall be: let us endeavor therefore that
we may be able to stand in this judgment. The Scripture uses this argument
both ways, both to comfort us, and to hold and keep us in our duty. Christ
shall at length judge the wicked and our enemies; suffer we therefore
patiently persecutions. Romans 14.10.
We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: therefore live we
godly. Luke 21.36.
Watch therefore and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy to
escape all those things which shall come to pass, and that ye may stand
before the Son of man. 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons
ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness? 4. That the wicked may be
left excuselesse: for they are warned sufficiently, that they should be ready
at every season, lest they should say, they were oppressed unawares.

11. For what cause God would not have us certain of the time of judgment.
ALbeit it be most certain that the last judgment shall at length be; yet the
day of that judgment is altogether uncertain: Mark 13.32.
Of that day and hour no man knows, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
nor the Son himself, save the Father. Now the causes why God would have it hid
from us are these: Mat. 24.43. and 25.^3.
lest perhaps the day overtake them unawares: If the good man of the house knew
at what watch the thief would come, he would surely watch. Watch therefore;
for ye know neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man will come. Luke
19.13.
Occupy till I come.

12. For what cause God deferreth that judgment.
He deferreth it, Noah's time: and that his deferring might leave the wicked
and obstinate without excuse: Romans 2.4. and 9.22.
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance? God suffers with patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction.

13. Whether the last judgment be to be wished for.
WE are doubt less to wish for the day of judgment, because it is an undoubted
sign and token of that difference whereby the elect are discerned from the
reprobate; which declaration the godly do earnestly desire. Moreover, it shall
be a delivery out of those miseries in which we are: Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Revel. 22.17.
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come Lord Jesu: which they say not, who are not
ready to receive the Lord; for the wicked tremble and shake at the mention of
that judgment.

The meaning of the Article, I believe in Jesus Christ, which shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.
What is the meaning then of this Article, I believe in Christ, which shall come
to judge the quick and the dead? Ans. I believe, 1. That Christ shall certainly
come, and that at his second coming there shall follow a renewing of heaven and
earth. 2. That the self-same Christ shall come, who for us was born* suffered,
and rose again. 3. That he shall come visibly and gloriously to deliver his
Church, whereof I am a member. 4. That he shall come to abject and cast away
the wicked into everlasting pains. Our comfort by Christ's coming.
By these we receive great and sound comfort also and consolation: For seeing
there shall be a renovation or renewing of heaven and earth, we have a
confidence and trust, that our state also shall be at length other, and better
then now it is: seeing Christ shall come, we shall have a favorable Judge; for
he shall come to judge, who has merited righteousness for us, who is our
Brother, Redeemer, Patron, and Defender: seeing he shall come gloriously, he
shall also give a just sentence and judgment, and shall be mighty enough to
deliver us: seeing he shall come to deliver his Church, great cause why we
should cheerfully expect him: seeing he shall abject and cast away the wicked
into everlasting torments, let us suffer patiently their tyranny. To conclude;
seeing he shall deliver the godly, and cast away the wicked, he will also
deliver, not cast away us; and therefore it is necessary that we repent, and be
thankful in this life, and fly fleshly security, that we may be in the number
of them whom he shall deliver.

ON THE 20. SABBATH.
Quest. 53. What beleevest thou concerning the holy Ghost.
Ans. First, that he is true and co-eternall God with the eternal Father and
the Son 1 John 5.7. Genesis 1.2. Isa. 48.16. 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. Act. 5.3, 4.
: Secondly, that he is also given to me Gal. 4.6. Mat. 28.29, 30. 2 Cor. 1.22.
Ephesians. 1.13.
, to make me through a true faith partaker of Christ and all his benefits Gal.
3.14. 1 Pet. 1.2. 1 Cor. 6.17.
, to comfort me Joh. 15.26. Acts 9.31.
, and to abide with me forever John 14.16. 1 Pet. 4.14.
.

The Explication.
IN this last part of the Apostolic confession are contained six Articles;
whereof the first speaks of the person of the holy Ghost: the next of the
Church, which is gathered, confirmed, and preserved by the holy Ghost: the
four Articles following are of the benefits bestowed by the holy Ghost on the
Church, and of the communion of Saints: 2. of remission of sins: 3. of the
resurrection of the flesh: 4. of everlasting life. Touching the holy Ghost,
three things are especially to be considered; his person, his office, his gifts
and works. But for more full and ample explication hereof, these Questions
following are each in their order to be examined.

1. What the name It is here to be noted, that this Question serves more
properly for the Latin, which uses this name Spiritus only; when as we in
English use as much, or more rather, the word Ghost then Spirit, when we speak
of the third person.
Spirit signifies. 2. Who, and what the holy Ghost or Spirit is. 3. What is
the holy Ghosts office. 4. What, and of how many sorts his gifts are. 5. Of
whom the holy Ghost is given, and wherefore. 6. To whom, and how far forth he
is given. 7. When, and how he is given and received. 8. How he is retained and
kept. 9. Whether he may be lost, and how. 10. Wherefore he is necessary. 11.
How we may know that he dwells is us.
1. What the name Spirit signifies.
THe name spirit is sometimes taken for the cause; sometimes for the effect.
When it is taken for the cause, it signifies a nature incorporeall, and
living, of a spiritual essence, wielding, moving, and stirring something; and
this nature is either create, or uncreate. Uncreate, and so God essentially and
personally is a Spirit; that is, incorporeall without any bodily dimension or
quantity, invisible; God is a Spirit. Create, and so the Angles, whether good
or bad, are in this sense spirits: John 4.24.
Which makes his Angels spirits: And after the same manner the souls of men
are called spirits; Genesis 2.7.
He breathed in his face breath of life, that is, he sent a spirit or soul
into him: Psalm. 104.4, 29.
When thou take away their breath, they die. When the word spirit is taken
for an effect, it signifies, 1. The air moved. 2. The moving it self, and
motion of the air. 3. The wind, and moving vapors. 4. Spiritual affections
or motions, good or bad. So it is said The spirit of fear: And contrary. The
spirit of princes, that is, courage: likewise, the spirit of fornication. 5.
New spirit signifies the gifts of the holy Spirit: as, 1 These. 5.19.
Quench not the spirit. In this doctrine which we have in hand, Spirit
signifies the cause stirring and moving; namely, the third person of the God
head, which is forcible in the minds and wills of men: And this third person of
the Godhead is called a Spirit, Why a Spirit.
Luke 1.35.
The power of the most High. holy; Why holy.
Because he in himself, by himself, and of his own nature is holy. Because he
is hallower or sanctifier; that is, he immediately halloweth, or sanctifies
and makes holy others. The Father and the Son sanctify by him, and therefore
immediately.

2. Who, and what the holy Ghost is.
THe holy Ghost is the third person of the true and only Godhead, proceeding
from the Father and the Son, and co eternal, co-equall, and consubstantiall
with the Father and the Son: and is sent from both into the hearts of the
elect, to sanctify them unto eternal life. Here are we to say the same
things of the Godhead of the holy Ghost, which have been spoken before of the
Godhead of the Son: for this definition is also to be proved and confirmed by
the same four parts: Four conclusions concerning the Godhead of the holy Ghost.
1. That the holy Ghost is a person. 2. That he is the third person, or that he
is other and distinct from the Father and the Son. 3. That he is true God with
the Father and the Son, or that he is equal to the Father and the Son. 4. That
he is of the same God head with the Father and the Son, or that he is
consubstantiall unto both. All these that testimony of the Apostle jointly
proves: No man knows the things of God but the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2.11,
12.
Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things which are given unto us of God. Also that
other else where: All these things works even the selfsame Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.11.
distributing to every man severally as he will. But we will proceed to treat
of each of these in their order.

The holy Ghost is a person, proved by sive reasons:
That the holy Ghost is a person, is proved, By his apparitions. Luke 3.12.
Acts 2.3.
By his apparitions, because he has appeared visibly: The holy Ghost came
down in a bodily shape like a Dove. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like fire, and it (that is, the fire, or the holy Ghost) sat upon each
of them. Seeing then the holy Ghost descended in bodily shape upon Christ, and
sat upon the Apostles, it follows that he is subsisting: for no quality or
created motion of minds or hearts is able to do in like manner: For an
accident does not only not take upon it any shape, but stands in need of
something else in which it self should consist and be. Neither is the air the
place or subject of holiness, goldinesse, love of God, and other spiritual
motions, but the minds of men. By his title, God. 1 Cor. 3.16. Acts 5.3, 4. See
also Isa. 40.7, 13.
He is proved to be a person, because he is called God: Know ye not that ye
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Why has
Satan filled thine heart, that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? Thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God. Howsoever then the adversaries of this
doctrine grant the holy Ghost to be God, yet this cannot be, but he must be a
subsistent or person, Acts 28.25. Ephesians. 4.4, 30.
seeing God is a being: but our goldinesse, goodness, godly motions, and other
divine affections cannot be called God. Because he is the author of our
baptism.
He is a person, because he is the author of our baptism, and we are
baptized in his name, that is, by his commandment and will. But we are not
baptized by the commandment and will of a dead thing, or of a thing not
existing; neither are we baptized in the name of the graces or gifts of God.
By his properties.
Because the properties of a person are attributed unto him; as that he
teaches, that he distributeth gifts even as he will, that he comfort,
Luke 12.13.
confirms, rules, reigns: likewise, that he sends Apostles, John 16.13.
Luke 2.26. Acts 1.16. and 10.19. and 20.23.
that he speaks in the Apostles: The holy Ghost shall teach you in the same
hour what you ought to say. So also he declares the things to come: The
Spirit of truth will show you the things to come. He gives prophecies of
Simeons death, of Judas the traitor, of Peter's journey to Cornelius, of Paul's
bands and afflictions which should betide him at Jerusalem, of a falling away,
and of the deceivers in the last times, of the meaning of the high priests
entrance into the holiest of all, 1 Timothy 4.1. Heb. 9.8. and 10.15. 1 Pet. 1.11.
Romans 14.26. Acts 5.9.
of the first tabernacle, of the new covenant, of Christ's sufferings, and his
glory which should follow after them, and such like: he makes request for us
with sighs, which cannot be uttered; he cries in our hearts, Abba, Father; he
is tempted by them who lie unto him, he is a witness in heaven with the Father
and the Son, he commands and wills that the Apostles be separated; and
lastly, he appoints teachers in the Church: All these things are proper unto
a person existing, intelligent, endued with a will, working and living. 1 John
5.7.
By his distinction from Gods gifts.
Because he is plainly dishinguished from the gifts and graces of God. All
these things works the self-same Spirit, distributing to every man severally
as he will. There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: Wherefore the
gifts differ much from the Spirit it self. Obj. The gift of God is not a
person: 1 Cor. 12.11. Ibid. ver. 4. Acts 2.38.
The holy Ghost is called the gift of God: Therefore he is not a person. Ans.
The Major is false, if it be universally taken: for the Son being given, is the
gift of God, and yet is a person. The holy Ghost is called the gift of God,
because he is sent from the Father and the Son. John 15.26.
I will send the comforter unto you from the Father. Or we may answer; He is
called a gift, in respect that he was sent, and dwells in the hearts of the
saints to whom he is given; and is such a gift as works by his virtue and
power the rest of his gifts and graces. Now that, to proceed, signifies to
exist, or to be from both, I prove; Because Paul calls him the Spirit of God,
which is of God, and in God: Of God; Because the Spirit flows from the Father
and the Son. In God; Therefore he is somewhat of God himself. Other spirits
are not in God, that is, in the substance of God. And what is in God, that is
the very essence of God.

That the holy Ghost is other, that is, distinct from the Father and the Son,
we prove against those who say, He is the subsistent of the Father, namely, the
Sabellians. Four proofs that the holy Ghost is distinct from the Father and the
Son.
Which we prove, From his appellation or name.
From the very appellation, in that he is called the Spirit of the Father and
the Son: For none is his own Spirit, as none is his own Father, and none is his
own Son: Therefore he is other from both. Object. That which is common to all
the persons ought not to be distinguished and severed: The name Spirit is
common to all the three persons: Therefore it ought not to be distinguished.
Ans. This whole reason we grant, if it be understood of the essence of the
persons, and not of their order of being and working: for as he that breaths,
and the breath it self differ; so he that inspireth, and the spirit are
different: he that proceeds is one, and he another from whom he proceeds:
the third person of the Godhead is one, and the first or second another. But
the holy Ghost is said to be the third person of the Godhead, and this is not
in that respect, as if there were in God any first or last in time; but in
respect of the order or manner of being; because the holy Ghost has his
essence from the Father and the Son, from both which he proceeded from
everlasting; as also he is the spirit of both. In like manner the Son is called
the second person, because he is of the Father; the Father the first person,
because he is of none. By express testimony of Scripture.
The holy Ghost is in express words called another: I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter. There are three which bear record in
heaven, the Father, John 14.16. 1 John 5.7.
the Word, and the holy Ghost; and these three are one: The holy Ghost
therefore is a distinct person from the Father and the Son. By his sending from
the Father and the Son.
He is sent of the Father and the Son: Therefore he is another from both; for
none is sent of himself: One may come of his own will or of himself; but none
can be sent of himself. John 15.26. and 14.26.
I will send him unto you from the Father. The Father sends him in my name.
By his distinct attributes from the Father and the Son.
The holy Ghost has distinct attributes or properties personal from them. The
holy Ghost proceeds only from the Father and the Son. He alone appeared in
the shape of a Dove, in the likeness of fire; not the Father or the Son.
Christ is said to have been conceived, not by the Father or the Son, but by the
holy Ghost, that is, by the immediate virtue and efficacy of the holy Ghost.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke 1.1^.
and the power of the most High shall over-shadow thee. Wherefore he is another
from the Father and the Son; which is diligently to be observed: for the
adversaries hereof, being convicted of the person of the holy Ghost, grant that
he is a subsistence, but of the Father: and thus they argue or reason, Object.
The virtue and power of the Father, is the Father himself: The holy Ghost is
called the virtue and power of the Father: Therefore the holy Ghost is the
Father himself. Ans. This reason is sophistical, because virtue is not taken
for the same in the Major, for which it is taken in the Minor: for in the Major
it is taken for the power of the Father; in the Minor for the person by whom
the Father shows forth his power.

equal with the Father and the Son, these arguments do prove: Four proofs
that the holy Ghost is equal with the Father and the Son.
His proceeding from both.
The essence of the Father and the Son is communicated unto him; because he
proceeds from both, and is the Spirit of both: But there is nothing in God
which is not his essence: Seeing then that is indivisible, it must needs be
whole and the same communicated unto him, which is in the Father and the Son.
As the spirit of man which is in man is of the essence of man: so the Spirit of
God which is in God is of the essence of God. By this it appears, What is the
proceeding of the holy Ghost; namely, the communicating of the divine essence,
whereby the third person of the Godhead alone receives the same and whole or
entire essence from the Father and the Son, as from him whose Spirit he is: as
also the begetting of the Son is a communicating of the divine essence, which
the second person of the Godhead alone receives, as a Son of his Father,
whole and entirely the same which the Father has and retains.

His proceeding from the Son proved three ways.
And, That the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son also, is proved by certain
reasons: Spirit; If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.
Romans 8.9. Gal. 4.6.
He has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts. The Spirit of his
Son; that is, not given unto the Son of the Father; but existing and
proceeding, as of the Fathers, so of the Sons substance, seeing the Son is
equal and consubstantiall with the Father. John 15.26. John 20 22.
Receive the holy Ghost. He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.
John 16.14.
But seeing the holy Ghost is true God, consubstantiall with the Father and the
Son, he cannot receive any thing but of him of whose substance he is.
Wherefore he proceeds of the substance of the Son, because he receives that
of him which is the Sons.

His divine attributes:
The holy Ghosts equality with the Father and the Son is proved by those divine
attributes and properties which are attributed and communicated to the holy
Ghost: as, Eternity.
Eternity; because he created heaven and earth, and because God was never
without his Spirit: Genesis 1.2.
The Spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters. Immensity.
Immensity, or unmeasurablenesse, as who dwells whole and entirely in all the
elect: Romans 8 9. 1 Cor. 3.16. 1 Timothy 1.14.
The Spirit of God dwells in you. Through the holy Ghost which dwells in
us. Omnipotency.
Omnipotency; because he, together with the Father and the Son, created and
preserves all things: Psalm. 33.6. 1 Cor. 12.1.
By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made, and the hosts of them by the
Breath of his mouth. All these things works even the self same Spirit,
distributing to every man severally as he will. Omnisciency.
Omnisciency; that is, 1 Cor. 2.10.
the knowledge of all things: The Spirit searches all things, even the deep
things of God. Infinite goodness and holiness.
Infinite goodness and holiness, and the causing of goodness and sanctity in
the creatures: Psalm. 143.10. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Let thy good Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness. Ye are
sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
Unchangeablenesse.
Unchangeablenesse: Acts 1.16.
This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled which the holy Ghost spoke.
Truth infallible.
Truth not to be doubted of, and the fountain of truth: When the Comforter shall
come, John 15.26. 1 John 5.6.
even the Spirit of truth. The Spirit is truth. Mercy unspeakable.
Unspeakable mercy: The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
Ghost which is given unto us. Romans 5.5. and 8.^6.
The Spirit also helps our infirmities Indignation against sin.
Indignation against even hidden sins: They rebelled, and vexed his holy
Spirit. The blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.
Isa. 6^.10. Mat. 12.31. Acts ^.9. Ephesians. 4.30.
Why have ye agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Grieve not the
holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed.

His divine works.
The same divine works which are attributed to the Father and the Son, are also
attributed to the holy Ghost; and these, both the general and universal
works, as the general creation, preservation, and government of the whole
world: His Spirit has garnished the heavens. The Spirit of God has made me,
and the breath of the Almighty has given me life. And also singular and
special effects; as miracles: John 26.13. and 33.4. Mat. 12.28. 1 Cor. 12.4.
I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God. There are diversities of gifts, but
the same Spirit. Likewise, those works which properly belong to the salvation
of his Church; as the calling and sending of Prophets: The Lord God and his
Spirit has sent me. Isa. 48.6. Acts 13.2. and 20.28.
The holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul. Take heed to all the
flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers. The bestowing of
competent and fit graces for the ministry on ministers: The holy Ghost shall
teach you. Luke 1^.12 2 Cor. 12.7.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. The
publishing of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: Holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 1 Pet 1.21.
The instituting of Sacraments: Baptize them in the name of the Father, Mat.
28.1^.
the Son and the holy Ghost. Whereby the holy Ghost this signified, Heb. 9.8.
that the way into the Holiest of all was not yet opened, while as yet the
first tabernacle was standing. The foretelling and prophesying of things to
come: he will show you the things to come. John 16.13. Acts 11.28. 1 Timothy 4.1.
Agabus signified that there should be a great famine. The Spirit speaks
evidently, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith. The
gathering of the Church: Ephesians. 2.22.
In whom also ye are built together to be the habitation of God by the Spirit.
1 Cor. 12.13.
By one Spirit are we all baptized into one body. The enlightening of men's
minds: John 14.26. and 16.13. Ephesians. 1.17
The holy Ghost shall teach you all things. He shall lead you into all truth.
God gave unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation through the knowledge of
him. Regeneration and sanctification: John 3.5.
Except a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.^8.
etc. We are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord. The governing of the actions and whole life of the godly:
As many as are led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.14.
they are the sons of God. They were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach
the word in Asia. Acts 16.6.
Comforting in temptations: The Comforter is the holy Ghost, John 14.26.
whom the Father will send in my name. Acts 9.31.
The Churches were edified and multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost. I
will power upon the house of David the Spirit of grace and compassion. Zech.
12.10.
The strengthening and preserving of the regenerate against the force of
temptation, even unto the end: The Spirit of strength shall rest upon him. Isa.
11.2. John 14.16. Ephesians. 1.13.
He shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. In
whom also ye are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. The pardoning of
sins, and adopting the sons of God: Ye have received the Spirit of adoption.
Romans 8.15. ^ Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Ye are justified in the
name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The bestowing of
salvation and life everlasting: John 6.63.
It is the Spirit that quickens. If the Spirit of him which raised up Christ
from the dead dwell in you, Romans 8.11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, because that his Spirit dwells in you. Judgment and sentence against
sin: John 16.8.
When the Comforter shall come, he shall reprove the world of sin. Mat. 12.23.
The blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

His divine honor.
Equal and the same honor is given to the holy Ghost, which is given both to
the Father and the Son. To no creature, but to God alone is to be given divine
honor, that is, honor proper to God only: But this is given to the holy
Ghost: Therefore he is God equal with the Father and the Son: 1 John 5.7.
There are three which bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
holy Ghost, and these three are one: The holy Ghost therefore is the same true
God with the Father and the Son. Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost: By this testimony
we are taught, Mat. 18.19.
1. That we are baptized also into the name, faith, worship, and religion of
the holy Ghost. 2. That the holy Ghost is author also of baptism and the
ministry. In like sort also we believe and put our trust in him: Let not your
hearts be troubled: I will pray the Father, John 14.1, 16.
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever. That sin which is committed against him is not remitted; therefore we
sin against him. We are his temple: Ye are the temple of the holy Ghost* 1 Cor.
3.16.
and the Spirit of God dwells in you. The Apostles in their Epistles wish
unto the Churches grace and peace from the holy Ghost: The communion of the
holy Ghost be with you. Cor. 13.13.
Object. 1. He that is sent, is not equal with him that sends: The holy
Ghost is sent, and the Father and the Son send him: Therefore the holy Ghost is
not equal with the Father and the Son. Ans. We deny the Major: For Christ that
is sent may be equal with him that sends: for Christ also being sent of the
Father, yet is equal with the Father; this sending does not betoken any
servile subjection. Object. 2. He that receives of another, is not equal with
him that gives: The holy Ghost receives of the Father and the Son: Therefore
he is not equal with both. Ans. The Major is true of one that receives of
another but a part, and not the whole; but the holy Ghost receives the same
and whole essence of the Father and the Son. Again, it is true of him that
receives in time, or successively: but the holy Ghost receives before all
time. Thirdly, to the Minor we say, that he received, as touching the ordaining
and sending of him unto us, to teach us immediately: but this sending
establishes and confirms his equality, because it is a divine work: and the
ordaining of him to teach us immediately, does not lessen, but strengthen his
equality. Obj. 3. The Father made all things by the Son: therefore he made the
holy Ghost by him also. Answ. The Father made all things by the Son; John 1.3.
that is, all things that were made, because it is said, And without him was
made nothing that was made. But the holy Ghost is not made, but proceeds from
the Father and the Son.

Three proofs that the holy Ghost is consubstantiall with the Father and the
Son.
IIII. That the holy Ghost is consubstantiall, that is, one and the same true
God with the Father and the Son, is proved by these reasons: Because he is
the Fathers and the Sons Spirit. But the divine essence cannot be multiplied,
as neither can another be created, nor the same divided: Therefore the
selfsame, and the whole must needs be communicated to the holy Ghost, which
is the essence of the Father and the Son. From both which the holy Ghost
proceeds, as the Spirit of God in God, and of God. There is but one true God.
The holy Ghost is true God: therefore the holy Ghost is that one and the same
true God with the Father and the Son, consubstantiall with both. There is but
one Jehovah, that is, but one divine essence or being, one essentially: who
alone is of none, but himself communicates his being to all things, and
preserves it in them. The holy Ghost is Jehovah: See (...) ^6.1, 34. Heb. ^7,
8, 9, 10. Lev. 16.11, 12. and 2 Cor. 6.16. Deuteronomy. 9.2^. and Isa. 63. Psalm. 95.7.
and Heb. 3.7. Isa. 6.7. and Act. 28.25. and 1.16. and 4.24, 25.
therefore he is the same with the Father and the Son, God consubstantially
with both. Object. He that is of another, is not consubstantiall with him, or
is not the same with him, of, or from whom he is: The holy Ghost is of the
Father and the Son: Therefore he is not the same with them, or
consubstantiall. Answ. The Major is true in creatures, but not in God. 2. There
is an ambiguity in this term, to be of another: He that is of another, and
has not the same or whole essence, is not consubstantiall: But the holy Ghost
has the same and whole essence, and therefore it follows only, that he is
not the same person. Therefore by inverting the argument we answer; that he who
is of the Father, and from the Father, is consubstantiall with him, as likewise
with the Son, of, and from whom he also is.

3. What is the office of the holy Ghost.
THe office of the holy Ghost is sanctification, Sanctification the office of
the holy Ghost. The parts of his office are five. Spirit (...), copulatqu^,
^^guqu^; Et cen ol^tur^^^ ^^a salutis^^^.
which is wrought immediately by him from the Father and the Son, and therefore
he is called The Spirit of sanctification. The chief parts of his office are,
To teach, To regenerate, To unite with Christ and God, To govern. To comfort,
To confirm or strengthen us. The holy Ghost therefore, To teach us. John
14.26. and 10.13.
Teaches and illuminateth us, that we may know those things which we ought,
and may conceive them aright, according to Christ's promise: The holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things: and bring
all things to your remembrance, which I have told you. The Spirit of truth will
lead you into all truth. So he taught the Apostles at Whitsontide, when they
were raw before, of Christ's death and his kingdom: he kindled in their hearts a
new light, he powered into them the miraculous knowledge of tongues and
fulfilled the testimony and record of Joel. Hereof he is called in Scripture,
The Teacher of truth, the Spirit of wisdom, revelation, understanding, counsel
and knowledge, etc. To regenerate us.
He regenerateth us, when he endoweth us with new qualities, and puts new
inclinations in our hearts, that is, he works faith and conversion in the
hearts of the chosen. John 3.5.
Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. I baptize you with water to amendment of life: but he that
comes after me, Mat. 3.11.
he will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. This baptism which
is wrought of Christ by the holy Ghost is the very regeneration or renewing it
self, the same which was signified by the outward baptism of John, and of
other ministers. To unite us with Christ.
He conjoyneth us with Christ, that we may be his members, and may be quickened
by him, and so makes us partakers of all Christ's benefits. I will power out my
Spirit upon all flesh. Joel 2.28. 1 Cor. 6.11, 19.
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Know ye not that your body is the
temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, 2 Cor. 12.3, 4, 13.
whom ye have of God? No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost. There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. By one Spirit we
are all baptized into the same Spirit. Hereby we know that he abides in us, 1
John 3.24.
even by the same Spirit which he has given us. To rule and govern us.
He rules and governs us: Now, to be ruled and guided by the holy Ghost, is
to be instructed with wisdom and counsel in the actions of our life and
vocation, and inclined to follow those things which are right and good, and to
perform the duties of love and charity toward God and our neighbor: Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And they
began to speak with tongues, Acts 2.4.
as the Spirit of God gave them utterance. To comfort us. Acts 5.41.
He comfort us amidst our afflictions and dangers. The Apostles, who were
first flying away for fear of the Jews, now being erected by the comfort and
solace of the holy Ghost, come forth into open place, and rejoice when they are
to suffer for the confession of the Gospel: John 14.16.
He will give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. To
confirm us in faith.
He confirms us which stagger and waver in faith, and assures us of
salvation; that is, he continues and cherishes in us Christ's benefits unto
the end: So he made the Apostles courageous and bold, who were before timorous,
and wrapped and entangled with many doubts. These things we may plainly see, if
we compare that Sermon which Peter made at Whitsontide, with their speech who
went to Emmaus, who say, Luke 24.21. John 16.22. and 14.16.
We trusted that it had been he which should have delivered Israel. Hereof
Christ says: Your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from
you. He shall abide with you for even. Hence is he called the Spirit of
boldness: and the seal of our inheritance.

Diverse titles of the holy Ghost.
These are the chief and principal parts of the holy Ghosts office, who, in
respect of this his office, has diverse titles of commendation in the
Scripture: for hereof he is called, The Spirit of adoption. Romans 8.15, 16.
The Spirit of adoption; because he assures us of the fatherly good will of
God toward us, and is a witness unto us of that free goodness and mercy
wherewith the Father imbraceth us in his only begotten Son. Therefore by his
Spirit we cry, Abba, Father. The seal of our inheritance. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians.
1.13, 14.
He is called the earnest and seal of our inheritance; because he assures us of
our salvation: It is God which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us: who has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of the Spirit
in our hearts. In which Gospel also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. Life,
or Spirit. of life. Romans 8.2.
He is called life; because he quickneth us: or (as the Apostle says) The
Spirit of life, who mortifieth the old man, and quickens the new The law of
the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of sin
and of death. Water. Ezekiel. 36.5. and 47.1.
He is called water, whereby he refreshes us, being almost dead in sin,
purges out sin, and makes us fruitful, that we may bring forth the fruit of
righteousness unto God. Fire. Matthew. 3.9.
He is called fire; because he does daily burn up and consume concupiscences
and vices in us, and kindles our hearts with the love of God and our
neighbor. The fountain of living water. Rev. 21.6. and 7.17.
He is called the fountain; because celestial riches do flow unto us from
him, and by him. The Spirit of prayer. Zech. 12.10. Romans 8.2^.
He is called the Spirit of prayer; because he stirs us up unto prayer, and
instructs us to pray: I will power upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace, and of prayer, and they shall
look upon me. The Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what to
pray as we ought. The oil of gladness. Hebr. 9.
The oil of gladness; because he makes us joyful, forward, and lively:
Wherefore God, even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness. The
Comforter.
He is called the Comforter; because he works faith in us, and purifieth our
consciences, and so comfort us, that we exult and rejoice in afflictions.
The Intercessour.
He is called Intercessour; because the Spirit makes request or intercession
for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed. The Spirit of truth, etc.
He is called lastly, the Spirit of truth, of wisdom, of joy, of gladness, of
fear of God, of boldness, and the like.

Object. 1. Those parts of the Spirits office before specified are not proper
to the holy Ghost, but belong also to the Father and the Son. Therefore they
are not well assigned to the holy Ghost as proper. Answ. They belong also the
Father and the Son, but mediately by the holy Ghost: But unto the holy Ghost
they belong immediately. Rep. But after the same manner also it seems, that
the preservation of things, the invention of arts and sciences, and the like,
are to be attributed as proper functions unto the holy Ghost: for those also
does the Father and the Son work by the holy Ghost; according as it is said,
The Spirit of the Lord fills all the world. Wisd. 17.
Ans. To the assigning of a work as proper unto the holy Ghost, is required,
not only that it be immediately done by him; but in such wise also, as that he
be acknowledged and worshipped therein. Now there does the holy Ghost work
properly where he sanctifies and halloweth; for therefore also is he called
holy.

Object 2. It was said before, that the holy Ghost is the earnest of our
inheritance: But Saul and Ju^as had the holy Ghost, neither yet obtained they
the inheritance, but were reprobate: Therefore the holy Ghost is not the
earnest of our inheritance. Ans. Saul and Judas had the holy Ghost,
a^^oncerning some gifts of the holy Ghost: but they had not the Spirit of
adoption. Repl. But it is the same Spirit. Ans. It is the same Spirit indeed,
but does not work the same things in all: For he works adoption and
conversion in the elect only. Here therefore we are to entreat of the gifts of
the holy Ghost, and their differences.

4. What, and of how many sorts the gifts of the holy Ghost are.
Two sorts of the holy Ghosts gifts.
ALl the gifts of the holy Ghost may be referred to the parts of his office
before rehearsed; namely, our illumination and enlightening, the gift of
tongues, the gift of prophecy, of interpretation, of miracles; our faith,
regeneration, prayer, strength, 1. Common to both godly and ungodly.
and constancy, etc. These gifts are of two sorts: Some are common to the godly
and ungodly: some are proper to the godly and elect only. Those again which are
common to the godly and ungodly are twofold; for some of them are given but to
certain men and at certain times; as the gift of miracles, and of tongues,
prophecies, the faith of miracles; and these were necessary for the Aposties
and the primitive Church when the Gospel was first to be dispersed: therefore
they were miraculously bestowed on them. Some are given to all the members of
the Church, and at all times; as the gift of tongues, the gift of
interpretation, sciences, arts, prudence, learning, eloquence, and such like;
all which pertain to the maintenance and preservation of the ministry: These
are now also given to every member of the Church, according to the measure of
Christ's gift, as the calling and vocation of every member needs; though they
be not miraculously bestowed as they were on the Apostles, 2. Proper unto the
godly.
but attained unto by labor and study. The gifts of the holy Ghost proper unto
the godly, are all those things which we comprehend under the name of
sanctification and adoption: as justifying faith, regeneration, true prayer,
unfeigned love of God and our neighbor, hope, patience, constancy, and other
gifts profitable to salvation; John 14.17. Romans 8.16, 26.
these are all conferred on the elect alone in their conversion: Whom the world
cannot receive. The Spirit witnesses with our spirit that we are the sons of
God. The Spirit makes request for us with sighs which cannot be expressed.
Hence is he called the Spirit of adoption. Obj. Many out of the Church have had
tongues and sciences: The tongues therefore and sciences are not the gifts of
the holy Ghost. Ans. The tongues and sciences out of the Church are also the
gifts of the holy Ghost, but by a general working of God, which is without the
true knowledge of him. But in the Church the tongues and sciences are the gifts
of the holy Ghost joined with the true knowledge of God.

Moreover, all those gifts (as we have said) are fitly referred to those five
principal parts before numbered of the holy Ghosts office, as the knowledge of
tongues and of sciences to his function of teaching; and that miraculous and
extraordinary gift of tongues, partly to his function of ruling (for the holy
Ghost did rule and govern their tongues;) partly to his function of teaching
and confirming. So also the gift of prophecy and interpretation belongs to
his office of teaching: for he teaches both by illightning the minds within
by his virtue, and by instructing them without by the word. The institution and
ordinance of the Sacraments appertains to his office of teaching, but chiefly
to his office of confirming. Faith and conversion belong to his office of
regenerating and conjoyning us with Christ. That he is the Spirit of prayer,
instructing us how to pray, belongs to his office of ruling and governing. In
like sort, the rest of the gifts may be referred to certain parts of the holy
Ghosts office.

5. Of whom the holy Ghost is given, and wherefore he is given.
1. Of the Father by the Son.
He is given of the Father and the Son, and also by the Son of the Father, but
not by the Father: for the Father gives the holy Ghost from no other, but from
himself as who is of no other but of himself, neither works from any other
but from himself: The Son gives the holy Ghost from the Father, from whom also
himself both works and is. That he is given of and from the Father, 2. Of the
Son from the Father. Acts 1.4. and 2.17.
these testimonies do confirm: He commands them to wait for the promise of
the Father. I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter. John 14.16, 17.
The Father will send him in my name. That the holy Ghost is given of the Son,
these testimonies do prove: I will send you from the Father the Spirit of
truth. If I depart, John 15.26. and 16.7.
I will send him unto you. Since he by the right hand of God has been exalted,
Acts 2.33.
and has received of his Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear. Wherefore the Son also gives him, but in
this order, that the Son sends him from the Father; whence is gathered a
strong argument for proof of Christ's Godhead: for who gives the Spirit of
God, and who has any right or title unto him, but God? for the humane nature
of Christ, so far off is it that it should have this right and power to send
the holy Ghost, that contrarily it self was hallowed and sanctified by the holy
Ghost. What is meant by the giving of the holy Ghost.
Now we are to understand this giving of the holy Ghost by the Father and the
Son, as that both of them is effectual and forcible by him, and that the holy
Ghost works on a precedence of the will of the Father and the Son: For we
are to mark and observe the order of operation or working in the persons of the
Divinity, which is such in working as it is in subsisting; the Fathers will
goes before, the will of the Son follows, and the will of the holy Ghost
follows them both, yet not in time, but in order. Why the holy Ghost is given.
The cause wherefore he gives us the holy Ghost, is none other but only of his
free election, through the merit and intercession of his Son: Ephesians. 1.3.
Which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ, as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. John
14.16.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter. The Son
gives us him, or he is given by the Son, because he has obtained for us by
his merit that he should be given unto us, and he by his own intercession
bestows him on us.

6. Unto whom the holy Ghost is given.
To all who partake of any of his g^fts. To all the Church. How to the elect.
THe holy Ghost is said to be given unto them to whom he communicates his
gifts, and who acknowledge him. Wherefore the holy Ghost is given to diverse
parties, according to diverse gifts. He is given to the whole Church or
assembly of those that are called; that is, both to the elect, and to
hypocrites; but in a diverse manner to the one and the other: To the elect he
is given, not only as concerning his common gifts, but also as concerning his
proper and saving graces: that is, not only as concerning the knowledge of Gods
doctrine, but also as concerning regeneration, faith, and conversion: because,
besides that he kindles in them the knowledge of Gods truth and will, he does
further also regenerate them, and endow them with true faith and conversion.
He is therefore so given unto them, that he works and effectuateth in them
his gifts of their salvation, and that themselves also may know and feel by
those gifts imparted unto them, the holy Ghost dwelling in them. And further,
he is no otherwise given unto them then as themselves also be willing and
desirous of him; and then is augmented and increased in them if they persevere.
How to hypocrites. John 14.17.
But to hypocrites the holy Ghost is given only as touching the knowledge of
doctrine, and other his common and general gifts: The world cannot receive
him, because it sees him not, neither knows him. Hence it is apparent, how
the knowledge of tongues, sciences, and the like gifts bestowed on the heathen,
differ from those which are bestowed on the Church: for they, who amongst the
heathen excelled in the knowledge of tongues, and good arts, and things
profitable, had indeed the gifts of God, but not the holy Ghost; whom none are
said to have, but they whom he has sanctified, and who acknowledge him to be
the author of the gifts received.

7. When, and how the holy Ghost is given and received.
The holy Ghost is given, 1. Visib^y.
THe holy Ghost is then given when he imparteth or communicates his gifts, as
has been already proved. And he is given either visibly, when he bestows his
gifts adjoining outward signs and tokens; or invisibly, when he bestows his
gifts without signs or tokens. He was not always given visibly, but at
certain times, and for certain causes: yet was he more plentifully powered on
men in the time of the new Testament, then before in the time of the old; for
so had Joel prophesied: Joel 2.28.
In the last days I will power out of my Spirit. So he was given visibly unto
the Apostles and others in the primitive Church: Act. 2.3. and 10.44.
There appeared unto them cloven tongues like fire, and it sat upon each of
them. The holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. I saw the holy
Ghost come down from heaven, etc. And these and other like speeches are so to
be expounded, as that the sign takes the name of the thing it self; and
therefore that is affirmed of the thing which agrees unto the sign; by which
sign the holy Ghost witnesses his presence and efficacy. So also John saw the
holy Ghost descending on Christ in bodily shape like a dove: Luke 3.22.
He saw then the shape of a dove, under which God showed the presence of his
Spirit. Wherefore we must not think that there is any local motion in God, The
sending of the holy Ghost is no local motion.
but his presence and operation, which he shows and exercises in the
Church: For the holy Ghost is spread abroad everywhere, and fills both
heaven and earth; in which respect he is said to be given, sent, powered out,
when by his effectual and forcible presence he does create, stir up, and by
little and little perfect his gifts in the members of the Church. 2. Invisibly.
He always was and is given unto the Church invisibly, from the beginning unto
the end of the world; for he spoke by the prophets: and he which has not the
Spirit of Christ is none of his: Romans 8.9.
yea, without the holy Ghost there never had been, 3. By means of hearing the
word, and receiving the sacraments.
never should be any Church. He is given after an ordinary way by the
ministry of the word, and by the use of the Sacraments; and 1. In manifesting
himself unto us through the studying and meditation of the doctrine of the
Gospel: for when he is known of us, he will communicate himself unto us; and
when he shows himself to be known of us, he does also renew and reform our
hearts: So did he work in the elect by Peter's sermon in the day of Pentecost:
Acts 2.37. and 10.44.
Likewise he wrought in Cornelius and the rest there present by the same Peter
speaking. But yet notwithstanding he does so work by the word and sacraments
as that he is not tied to those means: 4. Freely, to that he is not t^ed to
them
for he converted Paul in his journey, and he furnished John Baptist with his
gifts in his womb. Now when we say, he is given by the ministry of the word
and sacraments, we mean this of persons of a competent age, and repute this way
for ordinary, and speak of that visible sending of the holy Ghost, whereby
several men in the Church partake of his accustomed or ordinary gifts, ^al
4.6. Romans 8.9.
and whereof it is said, He has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts
etc. He which has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. 2. He is given by
working a desire of him in the elect: Luke 21.13.
for he is given to them that desire him. Hence is drawn a forcible argument
to prove the Godhead of the holy Ghost: for to work effectually by the
ministry is proper to God only: 1 Co^. 3.7.
Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. Mat. 3.11.
I baptize you with water to amendment of life: but he that comes after me,
will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. The Gospel is the power of
God, Romans 1.16.
because the holy Ghost is forcible in working by it: whereupon also the Gospel
is called the ministration of the spirit. 2 Cor. 3.8.
Now the holy Ghost is received by faith. Wherein also after that ye believed,
Ephesians. 1.13.
ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. The world cannot receive the
Spirit of truth, because it neither sees him, nor knows him. Object. But
faith is the gift and fruit of the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: 1
Cor. 12.3.
Therefore the holy Ghost goes before faith: How then is he said to be
received by faith? Answ. 1. The working of the spirit is in order of nature
before faith, but in time both are together: because the first beginning of
faith is the receiving of the holy Ghost. 2. Faith being once begun, the holy
Ghost is more and more received, Galat. 5.6. Acts 15.9.
who works aftewards other things in us by faith. As it is said, Faith
works by love. By faith men's hearts are purified.

8. How the holy Ghost is retained.
THe holy Ghost is retained and kept for the most part by the same means by
which it is given and received. He gave some to be Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13
some to be Prophets for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all
meet together in the unity of faith. Psalm. 1.2.
He that does meditate in the Law of the Lord day and night, shall be like a
tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will bring forth her fruit in due
season. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, Colos.
3.16.
teaching and admonishing your selves. Unto him that has, shall be given. He
that is righteous, let him be righteous still. Mat. 13.12. Revel. 22.11. Ephesians.
4.30.
Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Hither may be referred a desire of avoiding evil company and sin.
For he that will avoid sin, must avoid all occasion of sinning. Luke 11.13.
Mat. 17.21.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that
desire him? This kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting. The same may
we see in that panoply or complete harness, which the Apostle describes.
Likewise, Ephesians. 6.14.
it is confirmed by the example of David, who prays, Psalm. 51.11.
That God will not take his holy Spirit from him. And when thou art converted,
Luke 22.32. Mat. 25.29.
confirm thy brethren. Unto every man that has, it shall be given; and from
him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away.

9. Whether, and how the holy Ghost may be lost.
How he is lost of Reprobates, and how of the Elect.
HE may be lost of Hypocrites and Reprobates finally: that is, so as they shall
never recover him: and totally; that is, so that they shall retain none of his
graces. Of the Elect, he is never wholly lost, but only as touching many
gifts: because they always retain some gifts, as David's example testifies
unto us, who said; Restore to me the joy of thy salvation. Take not thine holy
spirit from me. Psalm. 51.11, 12.
Neither is he finally lost of the Elect, because at length they return to
repentance. But of the Reprobate he is altogether or wholly lost, and finally;
so that they never receive him. Object. But the holy Ghost departed from Saul:
Therefore he may also depart from the Elect. Ans. He departed from Saul; but
not the spirit of regeneration; for he never had him: only the spirit of
prophecy, prudence, courage, and other gifts, wherewith he was richly endowed,
left and forsook him. For he was elect and chosen, not unto life, but unto the
Kingdom, as Judas was unto an Apostleship. Repl. Yea, but the regenerating
spirit also departs; because David prays, Psalm. 51.12.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation. Ans. He is lost oftentimes, as
concerning some gifts of regeneration, but not wholly. For it cannot possibly
be, that the godly should retain no remnants; seeing they do not sin to
death, but only of the infirmity of their flesh, inasmuch as they are not yet
borne again. This Saint John teaches expressly, saying; Whosoever is borne of
God, sins not: for his seed remains in him, neither can be sin, because
he is borne of God. David in his fall lost the joy of his heart, the purity of
conscience, and many other gifts, which he coveteth to have restored unto him.
But the holy Ghost he had not utterly lost: for if so, how then could he have
said, Take not thine holy spirit from me? wherefore he had not utterly lost
him. A man (says Bernard) never abides in the same state: either he goes
backward or forward. For this difference is to be observed and held for the
assoiling of that question; How namely the perseverance of the Elect may be
notwithstanding certain, albeit they lose the holy Ghost: which is, because
they are never wholly and finally destitute of the holy Ghost. Five means
whereby he is lost.
Now the holy Ghost may be lost five ways, and those contrary to those other
means, whereby he is retained: By contempt of the Ecclesiastical Ministry.
By neglecting the Word and Doctrine. For Paul willedth Timothy, To stir up
the gift of God which was in him: and also teaches him how they may be done;
By giving attendance to his reading, 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4.14.
to exhortation, and doctrine. by carnal security, and by giving our selves to
commit wickedness against our conscience. By neglect of prayer. By abusing the
gifts of the holy Ghost; as when they are not employed to his glory, and to the
safety of our neighbor. Unto him that has, shall be given: from him that has
not, Luke 8.18.
even that he has shall be taken away.

10. Wherefore the holy Ghost is necessary.
HOw necessary and needful the holy Ghost is, and for what causes, does
clearly appear by these places of Scripture. Except that a man be borne of
water and of the Spirit, John 3.5.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Flesh and blood cannot inhabit
the Kingdom of God. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any think, as
of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God. 1 Cor. 15.50. 2 Cor. 3.5. Romans
8.9.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Hence we may thus
conclude: Without whom we cannot think, much less do ought that is good, and
without whom he can neither be regenerated, nor know God, neither attain unto
the inheritance of the celestial Kingdom; without him we cannot be saved. But
without the holy Ghost these things cannot be done, by reason of the corruption
and blindness of our nature: Therefore, without the holy Ghost it cannot be,
that we should be saved: and so it follows, that he is altogether necessary
for us unto salvation.

11. How we may know, that the holy Ghost dwells in us.

WE know that we have him, by the effect, or by his benefits and blessings in
us: as by the true knowledge of God, by regeneration, faith, peace of
conscience, and the inchoation or beginning of a new obedience, or by a
readiness and willingness to obey God. Romans 5.1, 4.
Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God. The love of God is shed
in our hearts. Again, we know it by the testimony and witness which he
bears unto our spirit, that we are the sons of God. Moreover, most certain
testimonies and tokens of the holy Ghost dwelling in us, are; comfort in the
midst of death, joy in afflictions, a purpose to persevere in faith, sighs,
and ardent prayers, a sincere professing of Christianity. 1 Cor. 12.3 ON THE 21
SABBATH.
No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. In a word, by
faith and repentance, we know that the holy Ghost dwells in us.

Quest. 54. What beleevest thou concerning the holy and Catholic Church of
Christ?
Ans. I believe that the Son of God Ephesians. 5.26. John 10.11. Act. 10.28. Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13.
, does from the beginning of the world to the end, Psa. 71.17, 18 Esaias 59.21. 1
Cor. 11.26.
, gather, defend, and preserve unto himself Mat. 16.18.
by his Spirit John 10.28, 29, 30.
and Word, out of whole mankind Psalm. 129.1, 2 3, 4, 5.
, a company chosen to everlasting life Esaias 59.21.
, and agreeing in true faith Romans 1.16. and 10.14, 15, 16, 17
: and that I am a lively member of that company Ephesians. 5.26.
, and so shall remain for ever Genes. 26.4. Revel. 5.9.
.

The Explication.
The Questions to be observed:
1. What the Church is. 2. How many ways it is taken. 3. What are the marks
thereof. 4. Wherefore it is called one, holy, and Catholic. 5. What is the
difference between the Church and Commonweal, or civil State. 6. Whence it
is, that the Church differs from the rest of mankind. 7. Whether any man be
saved out of the Church.


1. What the Church is.
WHen the Question is, What the Church is, it is presupposed, that there is a
Church; so that it is not necessary to make question, Whether there be a
Church: For there was always, and shall be some Church, sometimes greater,
sometimes lesser; because Christ always was, and shall remain for ever the
King and Head, and Priest of the Church; as hereafter in the fourth Question of
this Commonplace shall more plentifully be proved. Now, as concerning the name
Ecclesia (which we call the Church) it is natively a Greek word, The original
of the name.
and comes from a word which signifies, to call forth. For the custom was in
Athens, that a company of the Citizens were called forth, by the voice of a
Crier, from the rest of the multitude, as it were, namely, and by their
hundreds, to an Assembly, wherein some public speech was had, or to hear
relation made of some sentence or judgment of the Senate. And thus differs
the word Ecclesia from Synagoga, or Synagogue. How it differs from Synagogue.
For Synagoga signifies any manner of Congregation, be it never so common and
inordinate. But Ecclesia betokens an ordained Congregation, and such as is
called together for some cause. From hence the Apostles translated the name,
Ecclesia, to their purpose, terming the Church by it, for resemblance and
likeness sake. For the Church is Gods Congregation, neither coming together by
chance without cause, nor being inordinate: but called forth by the voice of
the Lord, and the cry of the Word, that is, by the Ministers of the Gospel,
from the Kingdom of Satan, to hear or embrace Gods word. This Congregation
or company of those which are called of God to the knowledge of the Gospel, the
Latins, keeping still the Greek word, call Ecclesia. The Dutch word Kyrc
(which, by adding letters of aspiration, we call in English Church) seems to
come from the Greek word (...), which signifies, The Lords house, The meaning
of the word Church.
or, Gods house. But it shall be requisite, that we a little more fully define
what the Church is. The Church of God is a Congregation, or company of men,
chosen from everlasting of God to eternal life, which, from the beginning of
the world to the end thereof, The definition of the Church.
is gathered of the sons of God out of all mankind by the holy Ghost and the
Word, consenting in true faith, and which the Son of God defends,
preserves, and at length glorifieth with glory and life everlasting. Thus is
the true Church of God defined, whereof the Creed does properly speak.

2. How many ways the Church is taken.
The false Church The true Church is.
THE Church is taken either for the true Church, or for the false. The false
Church is unproperly called the Church, and is a company, arrogating unto
themselves the title of Christ's Church, but which do not follow the same, but
rather persecute it. The true Church is either Triumphant; 1. Triumphant.
which even now triumphs with the blessed Angels in heaven, and shall have
their full accomplished triumph after the Resurrection: 2. Militant. The
Militant Church is, 1. Visible.
or Militant; which in this world fights under Christ's Banner against the
world, the flesh, and the Devil. This Militant Church is either visible or
invisible. The visible Church is a company among men, embracing and professing
the true and incorrupt Doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, and using the
Sacraments aright, according to Christ's institution, and professing obedience
unto the Doctrine: in which company are many unregenerated, or hypocrites,
consenting notwithstanding and agreeing to the Doctrine: in which also the Son
of God is forcible to regenerate some by the virtue of his Spirit unto
everlasting life. Or, it is a company of such as consent in the Doctrine they
profess, wherein notwithstanding are many dead and unregenerate members. Mat.
7.21. and 13.21, 42.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. Hither pertain the parables of the Seed and the Tares: likewise, of the
Net gathering both good and bad Fish. The invisible Church is a company of
those which are elected to eternal life, 2. Invisible.
in whom a new life is begun here by the holy Ghost, and is perfected in the
life to come. This Church, as long as it warfareth and sojourneth on earth,
always lies hid in the visible Church. It is otherwise called the Church of
the Saints. They which are in this invisible Church, never perish; therefore
neither are any Hypocrites therein, but the Elect only, John 10.28. 2 Timothy
2.19. Why it is called invisible.
of whom it is said: No man shall pluck my sheep out of mine hands. The
foundation of the Lord remains sure, and has this seal; The Lord knows
who are is. It is called invisible, not that the men therein are invisible, but
because their faith and godliness is invisible, neither is known of any but of
themselves, in whom it is; and because we are not able certainly to distinguish
or discern in the visible Church the true godly from the Hypocrites.

Moreover, both these parts of the true Church, both visible and invisible, are
either universal or particular. The universal visible Church.
The universal visible Church is the company of all those which profess the
Doctrine, wheresoever in the world they be. The particular visible Church, The
particular visible.
is also a company of those which profess the doctrine, but in some certain
place. The visible Church is universal, in respect of the profession of one
faith in Christ, and of one Doctrine and worship. But it is particular, in
respect of place and habitation, The universal invisible.
and of diversity of rites and customs. So also the invisible Church is
universal: as all the Elect, in whatsoever place they be, and whatsoever time
they lived, have one faith: again it is particular, as either in this or that
place they have the same faith. Now, all particular Churches are parts of the
universal: and the visible, are parts of the universal Church visible, as
also the invisible are parts of the universal Church invisible. And of this
personal visible Church does the Article or Creed speak properly, I believe
the holy Catholic Church. For, besides that the universal invisible Church is
Catholic, it is also nobilitated with this title, that it is Holy. Further, in
this is the true communion of Saints between Christ and all his members. What
difference between the visible and invisible Church. Romans 8.30.
There is almost the same difference between the visible and invisible Church,
which is between the whole and part. For the invisible lies hid in the visible
as a part in the whole. Which appears out of this place of Paul; Whom the
Lord predestined them also he called. This calling, whereby the Lord calls
us, is of two sorts; inward and outward. The inward Saint Paul says was
wrought according to the purpose of saving men: and the Elect are called by
both; Hypocrites are called only by the outward calling. And in respect of
this outward calling is the Church called visible, and the Church of the
called; where are Hypocrites also. But the invisible is called the Company or
Church of the Elect and Chosen. Object. 1. If the whole be visible, the part
also is visible. Answ. That part also is visible, as concerning men elected, or
as they are men, and as they profess the Doctrine of the visible Church: but
it is not visible, as concerning the godliness or faith of men, or as
concerning faith and repentance in men. Object. 2. They which are in the
Church, perish not, as the definition of the Church affirms: Many Hypocrites
are in the Church: Therefore either Hypocrites shall not perish; or it is
false, that they which are in the Church perish not, Answ. They which are in
the invisible Church perish not; and of this was our definition. But the Minor
proposition speaks of the visible Church, in which are many Hypocrites.
Object. 3. Where the invisible Church is not, neither is the visible: In the
time of Popery was not the invisible: Therefore there was not the visible. Ans.
I deny the Minor. For there also were remnants; that is, there were always
some mingled with those dregs, who held the foundation, some more purely, some
less. In sum, The Church was oppressed, but not extingnished.

The Church of the Old Testament and the New.
There is also another division of the Church, into the Church of the Old
Testament and of the New. The Church of the Old Testament is a company or
congregation, embracing the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, and making
profession, that they will embrace in Jury the Mosaicall Ceremonies, and keep
them; and as well in Jury, as also out of Jury, embrace the things signified by
those Ceremonies: that is, believing the Messiah which was to be exhibited. The
Church of the New Testament has not these differences, because all believe in
the Messiah already exhibited. This Church is a company embracing the Doctrine
of the Gospel, using the Sacraments instituted by Jesus Christ, and believing
in him, being exhibited the true Messiah.

3. what are the tokens and marks of the Church.
Profession of the true doctrine.
THe marks of the true Church are, Profession of the true, incorrupt, and
rightly understood Doctrine of the Law and Gospel; that is, of the Doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles. There concur withal oftentimes errors; but yet
notwithstanding this mark is sure, if the foundation be kept, albeit stubble be
builded thereon: yet so, that those errors of stubble be not maintained. The
right use of the Sacraments.
The right and lawful use of the Sacraments. For amongst other ends of the
Sacraments, this is one, that this company of Gods Church may be discerned from
all Sect and Heretics. Profession of obedience to the doctrine. Mat. 28.19, 20.
Profession of obedience to the Doctrine or Ministry. These three marks of the
Church are contained in those words of Christ: Go and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost:
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And we are
to hold and keep these notes and marks, 1. In respect of Gods glory, that
enemies may be discerned from sons. 2. In respect of our own salvation, that we
may join our selves to the true Church. Object. 1. There were in all ages great
errors, both public and private in the Church. Against the first mark.
Ans. 1. But still the foundation was held, on which some built gold, some
stubble. 2. Errors are not defended by the Church: and this mark stands
sure, if the foundation be held, though on it stubble be built, so that such
errors, and such stubble be not maintained.

Against the third mark.
Object. 2. In many Churches, which profess true doctrine, this third mark is
not seen: Therefore they are no Churches. Ans. 1. There are many in them, who
indeed yield and endeavor to yield obedience. 2. All obey, acknowledging by
their profession, that sins ought not to be maintained. But it is necessary,
that this third mark should be added: because they should mock God, Against all
the foresaid marks. Not all that challenge these marks are the Church, because
all have them not, though they challenge them. The ordinary succession of
Bishops no necessary mark of the Church.
who would say that they received this Doctrine of Christ, and would not frame
their lives according unto it. Object. 3. But those which all Schismatics and
Heretics do challenge unto them, are not the marks of the true Church. But
all of them do challenge these unto them: Therefore they are not marks of the
true Church. Ans. I deny the Major. For we are not to see whether they
challenge them, but whether they have them. So also would it follow, that the
heavenly blessings, which are proper to the true Church, are theirs also,
because they challenge them. Object. 4. Without which the Church cannot be,
that is a mark thereof. But without the ordinary succession of Bishops the
Church cannot be: Therefore it is a mark thereof. Ans. By ordinary succession
in the ministry, is meant the succession of Ministers, in the same doctrine
and administration of Sacraments. And if the proposition be so understood, it
is true: for such a succession is nothing else, then those notes which we have
put. But in the conclusion of this objection, is understood, that there should
be an ordinary succession into the same place, whether they teach the same
doctrine, or a diverse from it. And so also it should be a tying of the Church
to a certain City, Region, and so forth. But in this sense the Minor and
Conclusion are false.

4. Why the Church is called one, holy, and Catholic.
One, for consent in faith and doctrine.
THe Church is called one, not in regard of the cohabitation, or the near
dwelling of the members thereof, or for their agreement in rites and ceremonies
of their Religion; but in respect of their consent in faith and doctrine. It is
also called Holy, because it is sanctified of God by the blood and spirit of
Christ, that it may be like unto him, not in perfection, but, Holy, 1. for
imputed righteousness.
By imputation of righteousness; because Christ's holiness and obedience is
imputed unto it. For inchoative righteousness.
By inchoation of righteousness; because the holy Ghost does renew it by
little and little, and cleanse it from the filth of sin, that all the members
may begin all the parts of obedience. For the use to which it is consecrated.
Catholic in respect of place, time, and the members thereof.
Because it is consecrated to an holy and divine use, and therefore sequestered
from the rout of wicked ones, who are without the Church. It is called
Catholic, 1. In respect of place: because it is spread through the whole
world. For there is one universal Church of all places, and degrees of life,
neither is it tied to a certain place and kingdom, or to a certain
succession. 2. In respect of time: because there is but one true Church of all
times, which also is at all times so Catholic, as that it is dispersed through
the whole world, neither is it at any time tied to any certain place. 3. In
respect of the men, who are members of the same: For the Church is gathered out
of all sorts of men, all states, kindreds, and nations. It is not Catholic,
because it possesses many kingdoms: For Catholic is a title given unto the
Church in the Apostles time; for before time the Church was limited within
narrow bounds. Now, that there is but one Church of all times and ages, One
Church of all times and ages.
from the beginning of the world unto the end, it is out of doubt. For, 1. It
is manifest, that the Church has ever been. Neither can Abraham's days be
objected, as if before he was called, there had been no worship of the true God
in his family, and himself had been after his calling alone without any
others. For, before his calling, he held the foundation and grounds of doctrine
of the true God, though it were darkened with superstitions mingled therewith.
Again, Melchisedech lived at the same time, who was the Priest of the most
high God; and therefore neither was Abraham after his calling alone, but there
were others besides him, worshippers of the true God, whose Priest was
Melchisedech. 2. That the Church, as it has been ever, so shall it also
continue ever, appears by these testimonies: My words shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed. If the night and day may be
changed, Esaias 59.21.
then shall my Covenant also be changed. I am with you always unto the end of
the world. Jer. 33.20. Mat. 28.20.
Moreover, Christ was ever, and ever shall be King, Head, and Priest of the
Church. Wherefore the Church was ever, and ever shall be. And hence also it is
manifest, That the Church of both Testaments, is one and the same: that which
is confirmed also by the article following. For Christ is the sanctifier of his
Church, who is common to men of both Testaments.

Hitherto appertains the question of the authority of the Church. The Papists
maintain, that the authority of the Church is greater then the authority of
the Scripture. But this is false: For the Church made not the Scripture, but
the Scripture made the Church. They urge S. Augustine his testimony. S.
Augustine against Manichaeus his Epistle, cap. 5. shows how he was brought to
the faith of the Catholic Church. For he says, That he obeyed the Catholics,
when they said, Believe the Gospel: and there he brings forth that common
saying, I would not believe the Gospel, except the authority of the Catholic
Church moved me thereunto. By the testimony therefore of the Church he was
moved to read the Gospel, and to believe, that heavenly doctrine was contained
therein. But does he, after he believed the Gospel, promise that he would
believe the Church more then the Gospel, if the Church determine or propound
any thing, which is either contrary to the Gospel, or can be proved by no
testimony of Scripture? This doubtless Augustine never meant. Nay, elsewhere he
denounces Anathema, and bids a curse to come to them, who declare any thing
besides that that we have received in the writings of the Law and Gospel. And
in the selfsame place he witnesses, That he, because he believes the
Gospel, cannot believe Manichaeus, for that he reads nothing in the Gospel of
Manichaeus Apostleship: Therefore traditions or ordinances of the Church bring
us unto the Scripture, and tie us to that voice, which sounds in the
Scripture.

The Papists wrangling about Traditions.
But here it must be observed, how honestly and fairly the Papists deal. For
wheresoever they meet with the word, Tradition, that by and by they wrest to
their traditions, which cannot be proved out of the Word of God: as when Paul
says, I delivered unto you that which I received; Straight-wayes they cry out,
Hear you traditions? I hear; but read on there in the words following, Paul
himself by writing declaring what those traditions are: I delivered unto you,
how that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scripture. And that he
was buried, and that he arose the third day, according to the Scripture. Here
you hear Paul's traditions to be double things written: For first, they were
taken out of the Scripture of the Old Testament. Secondly, they were committed
to writing by Saint Paul himself. So Paul says of the Lords Supper, I have
received of the Lord, that which I have delivered unto you. 1 Cor. 11.23.
But this traditions, after the Evangelists, himself also has set down in
writing. 2 These. 3.16.
The Jesuits cite the saying of Paul, Withdraw your selves from every brother
that walks inordinately, and not after the traditions which ye received of
us. But a little after, in the same Chapter he describes what tradition he
means, as it is manifest to him that looks on the place. And yet will they
thence prove, that many things are to be believed, which cannot be proved by
any testimony of Scripture. The like impudency they show in another testimony
taken our of Luke. Acts 16.4.
They delivered them the decrees to keep, ordained of the Apostles and Elders,
which were at Jerusalem: Ibid. 15.23.
When a little before he witnesses, that those decrees were set down in
letters written by the Apostles.

How the Church may be said not to err.
That opinion, or saying of the Papists, The Church does not err, is true after
this sort: 1. The whole does not err, though some members thereof do err. 2.
It does not err universally, although in some points of doctrine it may. 3. It
erreth not in the foundation.

5. In what the Church differs from the Commonweal.
Seven differences between the Church and Commonweal.
THe Church differs from the Commonweal:

6. Whence arises the difference of the Church from the rest of mankind.
Three sorts of men in the world
THere are three sorts of men very much different one from another: For, Some
men are even in profession estranged and alients from the Church; as who deny
faith and repentance: and therefore are open enemies of God and the Church.
Others are called, but not effectually; which are Hypocrites, who profess
indeed the faith, but without any true conversion unto God. Others are called
effectually; which are the elect, who are but a little portion, according to
that of Christ: Many are called, Mat. 20.16. Election puts the difference
between the Church and others.
but few are chosen. Now the difference being known, let us in a word see what
is the cause of this difference. 1. The efficient cause of this difference is
the Election of God, willing to gather unto himself a Church in earth. 2. The
Son of God is the mediate executor of this his will and purpose, the holy
Ghost the immediate. Acts 14.16. Romans 9.18. John 6.37. Romans 8.19, 30.
3. The word of God is the isntrumental cause: In times past God suffered all
the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. God has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardneth. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me.
Those which he knew before, he also predestinate to be made like to the Image
of his Son: and whom he predestinate, them also he called, etc. By these
words we are taught, that the promise of grace is general in respect of the
Elect, or Believers. God verily would have all to be saved; and that, 1. In
respect that he loves the salvation of all: But the Elect only have attained
to that salvation. 2. In respect that he inviteth all to salvation: But the
rest have been hardened. Romans 11.7.


7. Whether any one may be saved out of the Church.
NO man can be saved out of the Church; None saved out of the Church. John 13.5.
Because without the Church there is no Savior; therefore no salvation also.
Without me you can do nothing. 2. Because whomsoever God has chosen and
elected to the end, which is eternal life, them he has chosen to the means;
which is the inward and outward calling. The elect therefore, though they be
not at all times members of the visible Church, yet they are all made such
before they die. Object. Therefore election is not free. Answ. It is free,
because God chose freely, both to the end, and to the means. But after he has
once destined and ordained men to means, he never changes: We here also are
to hold against the Anabaptists, that Infants, which are borne in the Church,
are also of the Church.

OF PREDESTINATION.
THis common place of Predestination or election and reprobation, arises out
of the former place of the Church, and is joined with it. The special questions
are;

1. Whether there be Predestination. 2. What it is. 3. What is the cause
thereof. 4. What are the effects thereof. 5. Whether it be unchangeable. 6. How
far it is known unto us. 7. Whether the Elect be always members of the
Church and the Reprobate never. 8. Whether the Elect fall from the Church and
the Reprobate remain ever in the Church. 9. What use there is of this
doctrine.
1. Whether there be Predestination.
WHen the Question is, Whether there be Predestination, then this is the
Question, Whether there be any such counsel of God, which has severed some to
be saved, and others to be reprobate. Some say that Election, when as mention
thereof is made in Scripture, is taken for some excellency, for which a man is
worthy to be elected or chosen: As we may say, A choice and gallant horse. So
also they interpret Reprobation; but falsely: for it is the eternal counsel
and purpose of God.

That there is Predestination, Predestination proved by testimony of Scripture.
Mat. 20.16. John 15.16. John 10.16. Ephel. ^.4, 5. Acts 18.10. Acts 13.64. Romans
2.30. Reprobation proved by Scripture.
that is, election and reprobation in God, these testimonies of Scripture do
confirm: Many are called, but few are chosen. Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you. Other sheep have I also which are not of this fold. He chose
us in him before the foundation of the world. He predestined us to be adopted
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.
I have much people in this City. As many as were ordained unto eternal life,
believed. Whom he predestinate, them also he called.

Of Reprobation, these places in special make mention. God does show his
justice on the vessels of wrath. It is given unto you to know the secrets of
the kingdom of heaven: Romans 9.22. Mat. 13.11. Jude 4. Mat. 11.25. John 10.26.
Prove. 16.4.
but to them it is not given. Who were before of old ordained to this
condemnation. Thou have hid these things from the wise. Ye are not of my
sheep. He has made all things for his own sake: even the wicked for the day
of evil.

Object. 1. But the promise of grace is universal. Answ. It is universal, in
respect of the faithful, that is, it belongs to all those who believe. But
it is particular, in respect of all men. Our adversaries say, that those which
are converted may fall away. Which is to weaken and diminish the general
promise. Repl. But it is said, 2 Timothy 2.4. Mat. 10.16 Mat. 13.15. Places of
Scripture reconciled concerning Gods will to save, and not to save men. Prove.
1.26.
That God wills that all men be saved. Answ. But contrary, Many are called,
but few chosen. This peoples heart it waxed fat, says the Lord, lest they
should return, that I might heal them. And here it is said, that God wills
that some be not saved: therefore these testimonies are contrary one to
another. God forbid. God wills that all be saved, as he is delighted with the
salvation of all. Albeit, elsewhere it is said, That he rejoices at the
destruction of the wicked; yet he rejoices not thereat, as it is a vexation or
destruction of his creature, but as it is an execution of his justice. 2. He
wills that all be saved, in as much as he inviteth all to repentance: But he
will not have all saved, in respect of the force and efficacy of calling. He
does good to all, if so be they might have groaped after him, and found him.
The elect obtain it, Acts 17.27. Romans 11.7.
the rest are hardened. He says verily unto all, Honesty of life pleases me:
ye owe it unto me. But he says not to all, I will work it in you; but to the
elect only, because from everlasting it has so pleased him.

Object. 2. He that gives unequally to those that are equal, is an accepter
of persons. Answ. It is true. 1. If he gives to those which are equal,
unequally, for any outward causes or respects, that is, for such causes as are
not that condition, in respect of which, equal rewards or punishments were to
be given, or not to be given: that is, when the cause which is common to both,
is neglected, and other things regarded, which are not the cause, as riches,
honors, and the like. But here God respects not these personages, but
requires faith for the receiving of this benefit, and conversion, and gives
eternal life to them which have these, and denies it to them which have them
not. 2. He that gives unto those which are equal, unequally, being bound to
any, were an accepter of persons. But God gives most freely, of his mere
mercy and grace. He is bound to no man: because we were his enemies, therefore
he might most justly have excluded all. And if unjustice should any way fall
into God (which God forbid that we should think) he should be unjust, and an
accepter of persons, in that he gives any thing at all. Whereas then he has
mercy on some, and not on others, he is no accepter of persons: as if thou,
being moved with pity and compassion, should give a farthing to one beggar,
and a penny to another, thou art not therefore an accepter of persons. Why
then, O man, accusest thou God, that he has mercy on whom he will, and has
not mercy on whom he will not have mercy, seeing he is bound unto none? Mat.
20.15. Romans 11.35.
Is it not lawful for me (says Christ) to do as I will with mine own? Is
thine eye evil because I am good? Who has given first unto the Lord? To know
this, is behovefull for the glory of God.

Object. 3. It is meet and just, that he who has taken a sufficient ransom
for all sins, should receive all men into favor. God has received a
sufficient ransom in his Son, for the sins of the whole world. Therefore
he should receive all men into favor. Christ's ransom, though sufficient for
all; yet not applied to all, does not save all. John 17.9.
Ans. It must not only be a sufficient ransom for all, but must be also
applied unto all receiving it by faith: but it is not applied unto all; because
it is said, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me.
Repl. 1. A sufficient ransom ought to be applied unto all. That a sufficient
ransom ought to be applied unto all, is proved, because this is a property of
infinite mercy to do good unto all. Ans. We deny that infinite mercy
consists herein. It consists not in the number of those that are saved, but
in the manner, how they are saved. Moreover, he will not give this benefit unto
all, because he is withal most wise and just. He may and will together
exercise both his mercy and his justice. God so loved the world, that he has
given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish; but have eternal life. He that believes not, is condemned already.
Repl. 2. He that takes a sufficient ransom for all, and yet does not save
all, is unjust: because he takes more than in equity he should. God takes a
sufficient ransom for all; and yet does not save all: Therefore he is unjust.
Answ. 1. He is unjust, except himself give that ransom. But God gave it:
Therefore he takes of his own, not of ours. 2. The sufficiency of the ransom
does not bind God to the receiving of all, but the applying of it. But he has
not entered into any bond, that he will apply that ransom to all.

God not unjust, though he afflicts some for his glories sake.
Object. 4. He that afflicts some for his own glories sake, is an unjust God.
But God is not unjust: Therefore he rejects not or afflicts any for his
glories sake. Answ. 1. The Major proposition is false, being generally taken:
For, although it be true in creatures, yet it is false in God; because God is
the chief good, and greatest regard ought to be had of the chief good. Now
the chief good, that is, Gods glory, did require, that not only his mercy, but
his justice also should be manifested. 2. He is unjust, who afflicts some,
and that without any trespass or fault of their own. For God, for his glories
sake, does suffer some to perish, while themselves willingly perish and fall
away. 3. God is bound to none to save them, as neither he was to create them.
He suffers men to fall into sin: but, 1. Themselves willing y falling. 2.
Himself not being bound to save them. 3. Being bound to have more regard of
his own glory, than of men's salvation.

Object. 5. He that destineth to the end, destineth also to the means. whereby
we come to the end. God (according to this doctrine) destineth some to the end,
that is, damnation: Therefore he destineth them to the means also, which are
sins. For, that sins are the means to come to damnation, is proved,
because that it is a mean, without which we cannot come to the end; as, none
can come to damnation without sin. Answ. Means are of two sorts. Some, which
go howsoever before the end, that is which he uses who tends to the end, and
by the help whereof he obtains and accomplisheth the end which he intends.
Other means there are which come indeed unto the end, but are not done by him
which intended the end. Those he may suffer or admit, but it follows not,
that he wills them. Wherefore, I answer unto the Major: He that wills the
end, wills also the means which himself works, and by which he works to
obtain the end which he intends: but not all means; otherwise there shall
be more in the conclusion, than in the premises. Neither wills he also those
things which he permits, that is, he hinders them not from being done, if
they hinder not his end.

God, in calling all and yet saving but some, does not dissemble.
Object. 6. He that calls all, and yet will save but some only, dissembleth:
God does so: Therefore he dissembleth. Ans. Of mere particulars naught
follows. Or, there is a fallacy in putting that which is no cause, for a
cause. Wherefore, to the Major we answer: He does not do it to illude men: but
either to leave all without excuse, or to invite them to repentance. And
further, if you understand the Major generally, it is to be denied: because
there may be another cause: and if it be so taken, it is thus to be
distinguished; He that calls all, and yet will save but some only, to illude
men, or to deceive them, he dissembleth: if he call them indefinitely, or with
a mind not willing to work in them to obey. But God never promised, that he
would work this in all. Wherefore there is no contradiction in these
propositions: All ought to do it, and, I will work in some to do it; because
the same thing is not denied in the one, which is affirmed in the other: but a
diverse thing.

Object. 7. They, whose salvation depends on the secret counsel of God,
cannot have comfort. The secret counsel of God, as touching our salvation, is
revealed unto us. Romans 5.1. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Romans 8.16. 1 John 3.24. and
4.13.
Our salvation depends on the secret counsel of God: Therefore we cannot
have comfort. Answ. We cannot have comfort before it is revealed unto us. But
that secret counsel of God is opened unto us by his Son and the holy Ghost.
Likewise, by the effects: Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God.
He has sealed us, and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. He
that has created us for this thing is God, who also has given unto us the
earnest of the spirit. The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God Hereby we know that he dwells in us, and we in
him, even by the spirit which he has given us. Wherefore before this
manifestation or revealing it holds true, that we can reap no comfort out of
Gods secret decree and counsel; but after the revealing thereof it is false.

Object. 8. That which is done in vain, no man should endeavor: But the
reprobate do in vain repent, because it is impossible that they should be
saved. Ans. This is true, if any knew that they were reprobate: But God will
have no man so to determine of himself. 2. It is a contradiction to be a
reprobate, and to show repentance; for if they did repent, then were they not
now reprobates. Therefore there comes no danger by this absurdity.

The elect are therefore without danger, because they are wary and circumspect.
Object. 9. That danger which is not, need not be taken heed of: But unto the
elect there is no danger of condemnation: Therefore they need not take heed
thereof. Ans. The Major is true, if there should be no danger whether heed be
taken or not taken. But there is no danger unto the elect, that is, being
heedfull and bewaring of any danger that is to come: But all the elect are
heedfull, circumspect and wary; and those who are not heedfull are not elect:
For, from whom God averteth and turns away this danger, he works also in
them to be very wary, and to take good heed thereof: Whom he predestinate, them
he justified. They therefore do amiss, Romans 8.30.
who think to receive comfort without any desire of good conscience. Repl. But
if they must take heed and beware, they are uncertain. Ans. No; because they
have this as a spur to go forward and persevere. But to be certain, and not to
have a desire of repentance and amendment of life, implies a contradiction: as
if thou should say, I am certain of my reward, therefore I will not run: for
a reward is not given but to him that runs. These propositions do one
mutually follow another, To be certain of salvation: and, To have a desire of
conversion and amendment of life.

2. What predestination is.
The difference between predestination and providence.
PRedestination differs from providence, as a special from the general: For
providence is the eternal counsel of God concerning all creatures; but
predestination is the eternal counsel of God concerning the saving of men and
angels. Wherefore predestination is the eternal, most just, and unchangeable
counsel of God, of creating men, of permitting their fall into sin and
eternal death, of sending his Son into flesh, that he might be a sacrifice;
and of converting some by the word and the holy Ghost for the Mediators sake,
and saving them in true faith and conversion, justifying them by and for him,
raising them up to glory, and bestowing on them eternal life: and of leaving
the rest in sin, and eternal death, and raising them up to judgment, and
casting them into eternal pains. Here is spoken of men which shall be saved,
and not saved: therefore to them only, and not to angels, does this definition
of predestination agree.

The parts of predestination are, Election and Reprobation. Election is the
eternal, Election.
unchangeable, free, and most just decree of God, whereby he has decreed to
convert some to Christ, to preserve and keep them in faith and repentance, and
by him to give them eternal life. Reprobation is such a decree of God, as
whereby he has decreed to leave some, Reprobation.
according to his most just judgment, in their sins, to punish them with
blindness and damnation, and condemn them being not made partakers of Christ
everlastingly. That election likewise, as also reprobation, are both the decree
of God, these and the like sayings do prove: I know whom I have chosen. His
grace was given to us before the world was. John 13.18. 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 9.18.
He has mercy on whom he will. But therefore election and reprobation were
made by counsel, and therefore both are a decree, and that eternal; because
there is no new thing in God, but all from everlasting; and the Scripture does
manifestly say, Ephesians. 1.4.
that God has chosen us before the foundation of the world. Seeing then he
has chosen us, he has therefore rejected the rest; that which the very word
of choosing does show: For, whatsoever is chosen, the same is chosen, other
things being rejected.

3. What are the causes of predestination, or election and reprobation.
THe efficient and motive cause is the good pleasure of God: It is so, O
Father, The efficient cause of our election, Gods good pleasure; not any thing
in us. Ephesians. 2.3.
because thy good pleasure was such. God has not foreseen any thing in us, for
which he should choose us, for there can be no good in us, as of our selves,
seeing we are by nature the children of wrath as well as others. For if any
good be found in us, that he does work wholly in us: and he works nothing in
us, which he has not decreed to work from everlasting. Wherefore the alone
gracious and free good pleasure of God, or the alone free mercy of God, is the
efficient and motive cause of our election. Our election I say, is of grace,
and free; that is, not in respect of any good foreseen in us: Romans 9.18. John
15.16.
He has mercy on whom he will, that is, he freely gives what he gives. Ye
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. God has predestinate us to be
adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, The cause of reprobation is in GOD.
Ephesians. 1.5.
according to the good pleasure of his will. See further, Romans 9.11. Col. 1.12.
2 Timothy 1.9, 10. In like manner also the efficient cause of reprobation is the
most free good pleasure of God. For we being all by nature the children of
wrath had all perished, if sin were the cause of reprobation. Wherefore the
cause of reprobation is not in men themselves, but that is in God his will of
showing forth his justice. Therefore of particular men, why this man is
elected, and the reprobated, there can be no other reason given, but the good
pleasure of God only. But the cause of damnation is altogether in men, which is
sin. For God will declare his justice in the damnation of the reprobate. He
therefore condemns no man, not ordains unto condemnation, unless it be for
sin: neither wills he the damnation as it is damnation, but as it is a just
punishment. Now punishment takes not place but there where sin was before
seated. The cause of damnation is the free will of devils and men.
The principal cause therefore of damnation, is the free will of Devils and
men; because of their own accord they fell from God. But the first cause of
salvation is, the eternal and free election of God, whereof God foresaw no
cause in us, why he would convert us unto Christ rather than others; why he
would save and redeem us out of the common and general destruction, wherein
all were plunged rather than others. The supreme final cause of Predestination
is Gods glory: and the last and proper final cause of election, is the
manifestation of Gods goodness and mercy in freely saving the Elect. The next
and nearest final cause of our election, is our justification, when God does
in his Son freely account us for righteous. Both which final causes the
Apostle compriseth in these words: He has predestined us to the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us freely accepted in his
beloved. Ephesians. 1.6.
Likewise of the contrary; The first final cause of reprobation, is the
declaration of Gods justice, severity and hatred against sin in the
reprobate. Romans 2.9.
God would to show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long
patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction.

Object. 1. God did foreknow our works: therefore he chose us for our works.
Ans. He did foreknow those good things which he purposed to work in us, as also
he foreknew the persons; otherwise he could not have foreknowne any good
works: So could he not have foreseen any evil, except he had purposed to
permit the same.

Object. 2. Whomsoever God chose in Christ, them he found in Christ: for he in
Christ benefiteth none but those who are in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3.
God chose us in Christ. Therefore he found us in Christ: that is, he foresaw
that we should be accepted of Christ, that we would believe rather than others,
and would become better than others, and therefore he chose us. Answ. We deny
the Major. For the reason alleged holds not true in election, but in the
effects of election, and in the consummation of Christ's benefits, which are
imparted unto none, but such as are in Christ by faith: according to that
saying of Christ: Except ye abide in me, John 15.4.
ye shall have no life in you. In election, and the first cause thereof it is
apparently untrue, by that testimony of Paul, which the objection cites. For
he chose us before the foundations of the world were laid, not because we would
be, but that we should be holy and blameless: Ephesians. 1.3.
not because we were already in Christ, but that he might engraffe us into
Christ, and adopt us to be his sons. Wherefore our foreseen faith and
holiness is not the cause, but the effect of our election in Christ. He chose
us not then being sons, but hereafter to be adopted sons. Augustine says, He
chose not us, because we were then holy, neither yet because we would hereafter
prove holy, but be rather chose us to this end, that in the time of grace we
might be holy through good works. But the Pelagian here, contradicting the
truth, says; God foreknew who would be holy and unspotted by reason of their
free will, and therefore he in his foreknowledge chose them such as he knew
they would be. But the Apostle here stops the mouth of the Pelagian, whilst
he says, that we should be holy.

Object. 3. Christ's merit applied unto us by faith is the cause of our
election: Therefore not the good pleasure of God. Answ. Christ's merit is not
the cause of election, but is reckoned among the effects thereof, and amongst
the causes of our salvation: He chose us in Christ; that is, as in the head:
Wherefore he first chose the head, and ordained him unto the Office of the
Mediatourship, as Peter testifies. Afterward he also chose us as members in
that head: 2 Pet. 1.10. John 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Wherefore
Gods love, that is his free election, is the cause of his sending of the Son:
and not the sending of his Son the cause of his love.

Object. 4. Evil works are the cause of reprobation; Therefore good works are
the cause of election. Answ. Evil works are not the cause of reprobation; but
of that which follows reprobation, that is, of damnation. For if sin had been
the cause of reprobation, we had been all reprobates, because we are all the
sons of wrath: Romans 9.11, 12.
For ere the children were born, and when they had done neither good nor evil,
that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by works, but
by him that calls; it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.
Good works go not before in him that is to be justified, much less are they
the cause of election: but they follow in a man being instified, and draw their
original and their perpetual efficacy and virtue from Gods mere grace.

4. What are the effects of Predestination.
THe effect of election is the whole work of our salvation, The effects of
election. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7.8, 11. John 6.39.
and all the degrees of our redemption. 1. The creation and gathering of the
Church. 2. The sending and giving of Christ the Mediator, and his sacrifice.
3. Effectual calling of men to his knowledge, which is the conversion of the
elect by the holy Ghost and the World. 4. Faith, justification, regeneration.
5. Good works. 6. Final perseverance. 7. Raising unto glory. 8. Glorification
and eternal life. The effects of reprobat on. Romans 9.17. Mat. 11.21. Isa. 6.9.
The effects of reprobation are, 1. The creation of the reprobate. 2. Privation
of Gods grace. 3. Blinding and hardening. 4. Perseverance in sin. 5. Raising to
judgment. 6. Casting into eternal torments.

Obj. 1. Diverse or contrary causes have contrary effects: The effects of
election are good works: Therefore evil works are the effects of reprobation.
Answ. The Major is not always true in voluntry causes, which can work
diversely, and yet produce no contrary effects; as in this place there is a
dissimilitude: Because God purposed only to permit evil works, but to work
good in us. But the proper cause of evil works is the devil and evil men.
Obj. 2. But God hardens and blinds men: Blindness is an effect of
reprobation, and a sin: Therefore sin is an effect of reprobation. Ans.
Blindness is a sin in respect of men who admit it, and as it is received of
them, and purchased by their own demerit; but as it is inflicted of God, it is
a just punishment: and, that God does deliver some from that blindness, is of
his mercy. Obj. 3. Hardness or induration is an effect of reprobation, and is
a sin: God is author of reprobation: Therefore of hardness also and of sin.
Ans. Hardness is an effect of reprobation; but so, that it is done according
to reprobation, but comes not from it. Hardness, and blindness, or
excecation are according to reprobation, or according to predestination, as
they are sins: but they are effects of reprobation or predestination, as they
are most just punishments.

5. Whether Predestination be unchangeable.
Predestination unchangeable.
PRedestination is firm, sure, and unchangeable; which may appear even by this
general reason: because God is unchangeable, and does not depend on the
interchangeable course of things, but the same rather depends on his decree.
What therefore he has from everlasting decreed, of saving the elect, and
condemning the reprobate, that has he unchangeably decreed: And therefore both
election and reprobation is firm and unchangeable. For, whom he would, and has
decreed from everlasting should be saved, them also he now will, and so
hereafter perpetually. The same also we are to think concerning reprobation;
neither are there wanting testimonies of Scripture, John 6.36.
whereby the same is confirmed. This is the Fathers will, Isa. 46.10.
that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing. My counsel shall
stand, and I will do whasoever I will. Mal. 3.6. Joh. 10.28, 29. 2 Timothy 2.19.
I am the Lord, I change not. None shall pluck my sheep out of my hand Ye
believe not, for ye are not of my sheep. The foundation of God remains sure,
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. The foundation which Paul so
calls, is the decree of saving the elect. 1. Because it is the beginning and
wellspring of our salvation, and the end thereof, and of all the means tending
to salvation. 2. It is called the foundation for the surenesse and firmness
thereof, because the same is never shaken. These things are needful for us to
know, that we may have firm comfort and consolation, that we may believe
eternal life, and so all other articles of Christian faith. The reason is
often repeated, and therefore often to be meditated of; because he that
denies himself to be certain of the grace to come, is uncertain also of the
present grace of God: For God is unchangeable.

6. How far forth Predestination, or Election and Reprobation is known unto us,
and whether we may and ought to be certain thereof.
IT is unknown unto us in general, as, That some are elect, and some
reprobate: but not in special, Every man ought to be assured of his own
election in special.
Whether this or that man be. But of our own election every of us not only
may, but also ought to be in special certain and assured. And verily thereof
we shall be certain by the effects thereof, namely, by conversion; that is, by
true faith and repentance. For that we may believe and know that we are
certainly chosen to eternal life, we are bound to believe in Christ, and to
believe also eternal life. But this we cannot believe, except we have true
faith and repentance. And as every one ought to have both those; so every one
ought certainly to hold, that he is of the number of the elect; otherwise they
shall accuse God of lying. We rejoice under the hope of the glory of God.
Christ is our intercessour, working our everlasting salvation. Romans 5.2.
I believe everlasting life: that is, not spiritual life only, but
everlasting also, which being here begun, I carry hence with me everlasting
life. Neither only in special does every one know his own election by faith
and conversion; but it is in general also known, that some are elect. And in
general thou ought not only to hope, The election of others is to be
believed in general.
but also certainly to believe that there are other besides thee elected. For
thou art bound to believe the article of the Church, that it has been at all
times, and now is: but thou alone by thy self art not the Church; and
therefore thou must not say with Elias, I am left alone. But* to discern of
particulars, and of every single man, 1 King. 19.14.
is not thine to do. Thou art notwithstanding well to hope of the election of
others, even as concerning every particular man. In general, is the whole
election of all known: in special, there is a diverse consideration of
himself and of others.

Of reprobation, no man ought to judge or determine any thing certainly, either
as touching his own, No certainty of reprobation either concerning our selves
or others.
or as touching others reprobation before the end of his life: for he that is
not yet converted, may hereafter be converted before he die. No man therefore
ought to judge of others that they are reprobates, but to hope well of them:
and of himself every man ought certainly to believe that he is an elect; for we
have a general commandment, that all believe the Gospel and repent.

7. Whether the elect be always members of the Church, and the reprobate never.
THe elect are not always members of the Church; The elect are then first
members of the Church, when they are regenerated. Romans 8.9. 1 Cor. 6.11. Col.
1.13.
but then first when they are converted and regenerated by the holy Ghost: for
it is said, If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.
Likewise, the Church is called holy: But then first are the elect holy, when
they are converted: for Saint Paul expressly says, And such were some of you;
but ye are washed. He has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.
Now some are born, live, and die in the Church: others are not born in it* but
are called, either soon or late, unto the visible Church: some both to the
visible and invisible Church: as the thief on the Cross: as also those of the
Gentiles, of whom Christ spoke, I have other sheep which I must bring. Also,
John 10.16. Acts 18.10.
I have much people in this City: namely, through mine election. Some either
are borne in the visible Church, or come unto it, who nevertheless are not
members of the invisible and who sometimes depart from the visible. Such are
the reprobate, who are not always estranged from the Church, but are sometimes
made members of the visible Church, though at length they depart from it. They
went out from us. 1 John 2.19. Acts 20.29.
Grievous Wolves shall enter in among you. Object. All that believe, are
always members of the Church: but all the Elect do believe, because these
terms are mutually affirmed one of another, To be saved, elected, To believe.
(For all believers are elected, and to be saved; And, all who are to be saved,
and are elected, do believe,) Therefore all the elect are always members of
the Church. Ans. These terms indeed are mutually one affirmed of another, but
yet with a certain limitation: All true believers, and all that are to be
saved, are elected, and that always and at all times: but all that are
elected, are both believers, and to be saved; but yet not always: The elect
are to be saved always, but are not both believers, and to be saved always:
For at one time they may be said that they are to be saved, and at another,
that they are all believers, at another, that they are saved, Thus far then
are these terms mutually affirmed each of other, as that all the elect do
believe, or shall believe before the end of their life. For now is the time of
grace: then shall be the time of judgment. Object. 2. Christ notwithstanding
calls those, which are not as yet converted of the Gentiles, his sheep: I
have, says he, other sheep, which are not of this fold, that is, of this part
of the Church, which is to be gathered out of the Jews. Wherefore, those other
sheep seem to be of the general flock. Ans. They were then sheep according to
the providence and counsel of God; but they were not sheep, as concerning the
fulfilling of his decree: that is, they were predestined sheep. In sum: The
elect are not always members of the Church: but yet it is required of
necessity, that in this life they be brought unto the Church, though it be
sometimes even at the very point of death. This is it, which is said, that all
the elect must in this life begin eternal life. The reprobate are indeed
sometimes members of the Church, neither are they always estranged from it:
but their coming is no true coming to the holy Church: neither are they ever
members of the invisible Church, that is, of the Church and company of Saints.
For from this they are ever aliens.

8. Whether the Elect may fall from the Church, and the Reprobate abide always
in the Church.
The Elect cannot fall wholly and finally from the Church.
THis question is declared and laid open by those things which are spoken of the
unchangeablenesse of Election, and of the perseverance of the Saints and godly.
The Elect, when they are once indeed come unto the Church of the Saints, they
may sometimes fall from it, but wholly and finally forsake it they never can.
Not wholly: because they never so defect or fall, that they can become enemies
of God and the Church. Not finally; because they persist not in this Apostasy,
but at length return to repentance. They went out from us, but they were not
of us: 1 John 2.19. Esaias 42.3. John 10.28.
for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. A bruised reed
shall he not break: and the smoking flax shall he not quench. No man shall
pluck my sheep out of my hand. All the reprobate and hypocrites do at length
finally depart from the Church, and, The reprobate at the length fall finally
from it.
together with those gifts which they had, they lose also those gifts which
they seem to have. Object. The godly also oftentimes fall away, as David and
Peter. Answ. They fall, but neither wholly, nor finally: Which also befell unto
Peter; for he retained still in his mind the love of Christ, although for fear
of danger he denied him. He acknowledged also afterward his offense, and did
truly repent him thereof. Saint Angustine prettily says: Peter's faith failed
not in his heart, when open confession with the mouth failed him. David also
did not wholly fall away, but being rebuked of the Lord by the Prophet, he
truly repented, and showed that his faith was not quite dead, but in a slumber
rather for a season: therefore he prays on this wise; Psalm. 51.13.
Take not thine holy Spirit from me. Wherefore the saints and the elect of God
never fall away; but hypocrites and the reprobate do at length wholly and
finally revolt and fall away; for they do so at last fall away, that they
never return to repentance: And because the true love of God was never in them,
and so neither themselves ever were of the number of Gods elect saints;
therefore no marvel though at length they wholly and altogether depart and
fall away from the Church.

9. What is the use of this doctrine?
THe use of this doctrine is, That the glory of our salvation be in whole
ascribed and given to God: 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that thou have not received? That we may have sure and certain
comfort. This we shall have, when as we shall not doubt of those things which
are here taught; and that especially if every of us be certainly persuaded that
the decree of God of saving his elect is altogether unchangeable; and further,
that himself also is of the number of the elect, even a member of the
invisible Church, and therefore shall never depart from the Church and
communion of saints. The meaning of the Article, I believe the holy catholic
Church.
To believe therefore the holy Church, is, to believe that in this visible
company and society are some true repentants and truly converted, and my self
to be a lively member of the invisible and visible Church.

Quest. 55. What mean these words; The communion of saints?
Answ. First, That all and every one who believes are in common partakers of
Christ and all his graces, as being his members 1 John 1.3. Romans 8.32. 1 Cor.
1.12. 1 Cor. 6.17.
. And then that every one ought readily and cheerfully to bestow the gifts and
graces which they have received to the common commodity and safety of all 1
Cor. 12.21 and 13.15. Phil. ^*4, 5, 6.
.

The Explication.
What communion in general is. Three parts of all communion.
THe Articles following are concerning the benefits of Christ, which either
heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be bestowed on the Church by the holy
Ghost. Communion is a respect or reference between two or more parties which
have the same thing in common. The foundation and ground of this relation is
the thing it self which is common: The relative is that property of the thing,
to wit, that it is common: The term which the community of this thing
respects is the possessours themselves, which have common fruition of one or
many things. What the communion of saints (...).
The communion therefore of saints is an equal participation of all the
promises of the Gospel: Or, it is a common possession of Christ and all his
benefits; and a bestowing of gifts by the head Christ on each member of his
body for the salvation thereof. Your parts thereof. 1 Union with Christ.
It signifies therefore, 1. A conjoyning of all the saints with Christ as
members with the head, wrought by the holy Ghost, who dwells in the head and
in the members, conforming and making them like unto their head; yet reserving
still this proportion, that in the head he works all graces, and that most
perfectly; in the members he works those gifts which are convenient for every
one, and so much as is for every one requisite and necessary: Or, An union and
coherence of the Church with Christ, and of the members amongst themselves: and
that union with Christ is with the whole person of Christ, to wit, with both
his divine and humane nature. For the communion of the person is the foundation
of the communion of the benefits, according to these sayings; John 13.4, 5.
I am the Vine, ye are the branches. Abide in me, and I in you: As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. By one Spirit are we all baptized into one body. He
which has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. He that is joined unto the
Lord is one Spirit. Hereby know we, 1 Cor. 12.13. Romans 8.9. 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 John
4.13.
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.
Participation of Christ's benefits.
The communion or participation of all Christ's benefits. For all the saints
have the same reconciliation, redemption, justification, sanctification, life,
and salvation by and for Christ. All the saints have the same benefits common
which are necessary to salvation. There is one body and one Spirit, even as ye
are called in hope of your vocation, Ephesians. 4.4.
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, etc. Distribution of special gifts.
The distribution of special gifts. These particular gifts also are common to
the whole Church, which are bestowed on some members of the Church for the
salvation of the whole body, Ephesians. 4.12.
even for the gathering together of the saints, for the work of the ministry,
and for the edification of the whole body of Christ. But they are so
distributed unto every member, as that some excel and go before othersome in
gifts and graces in the Church: for the gifts of the holy Ghost are diverse,
and, To every one of us is given grace, Ephesians. 4.7.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Use of these gifts to Christ's
glory, and the good of the Church. An error concerning this communion refuted.
An obliging or binding of all the members to employ or refer all their gifts
to the glory of Christ their head, and to the salvation of the whole body, and
of every member mutually. Hence it is clear how absurd their fancy is, who
contend that the communion is a subsistence or personal being of Christ's body
among our bodies, or of our bodies blended and mingled with his. The same is
refuted by that often alleged comparison of the head and members: For those
are co-herent and grow together, but are not in mixture, or mingled one with
another. Whence also we may easily judge of that communion which is in the
Sacraments: for the Sacraments seal nothing else but that which the word
promises: But to let this pass. The same former error is also hereby
refuted, in that this communion must be continued for ever; for, to this end
does Christ communicate himself to us, that he may dwell in us: wherefore,
such as is his abiding and dwelling, such is his communion: But Christ's abiding
and dwelling is perpetual: Therefore his communion also is perpetual. This
argument is most strong and firm; and therefore for the assoyling of it, they
have been fain to devise their Ubiquity. For, The original of the Ubiquity.
For, to obtain that other communion which they would have, they must needs
affirm that Christ dwells always bodily in all his saints. The faithful are
called saints in three respects: 1. Imputatively, that is, Why the faithful
are called saints.
in respect of that Christ's sanctity and holiness is imputed unto them. 2.
Inchoatively, that is, in respect of that conformity and agreeableness with
the law, which is inchoated or begun in them. 3. In respect of their
separation, because they are selected and separated from all other men: and are
called of God to this end, ever to worship or serve him. By this then which
has been spoken, it appears what it is to believe the communion of saints:
namely, The meaning of the words of the Article.
to believe that the saints (of which number I certainly assure my self to be
one) are united by the Spirit unto Christ their head; and that from the head
gifts are powered down upon them, both those which are the same in all necessary
to salvation; as also those which being diverse, and diversely bestowed upon
every one, are requisite for the edification and building of the Church.

Quest. 56. What beleevest thou concerning remission of sins?
Answ. That God, for the satisfaction made by Christ, has put out all
remembrance of my sins 1 John 2.2. 1 John 1.7. 2 Cor.5.19.
, and also of that corruption within me Romans 7.23.24, 25. Jer. 31.34. Micah
7.19. Psalm. 103.3, 10, 12.
, wherewith I must fight all my life time, and does freely endow me with the
righteousness of Christ, that I come not at any time into judgment John 3.18.
John 5.24,


The Explication.
The chief Questions here to be considered are:
1. What remission of sin is. 2. Who gives it. 3. For what. 4. Whether it
agrees with Gods justice. 5. Whether it be freely given. 6. To whom it is
given. 7. How it is given.


1. What remission of sins is.
REmission of sins is, the purpose of God not to punish the sins of the
faithful, and that for the satisfaction of Christ. Or, it is the pardoning of
deserved punishment, and the giving or imputing of another righteousness; to
wit, the righteousness of Christ. But more fully it is defined on this wise:
Remission of sins is the will of God, which to the faithful and elect imputes
not any sin, but remitteth to them both the blame and punishment of their sin;
and therefore does in like sort love them, as if they had never sinned, and
delivers them from all punishment of sin, and gives them eternal life
freely for the intercession and merit of Jesus Christ the Son of God, our
Mediator. Now albeit God, for the merit of his Son, remitteth our sins to us;
yet he afflicts us as yet in this life, not thereby to punish us, but
fatherly to chastise us. Neither yet because God does not punish us for our
sins, must we therefore think that he is not displeased with them; for he is
highly displeased and offended with the sins also of his saints and chosen,
although he punish them not in them, because he punished them in his Son: For
God does not so remit sins, as if he accounted them for no sins, or were not
offended at them; but by not imputing them unto us, and not punishing them in
us, and by reputing us just for another satisfaction, which we apprehend by
faith. It is all one therefore to have remission of sins, and to be just.
Object. The law does not only require us to avoid sin, but to do good also:
Therefore it is not enough that our sin be forgiven, but also good works are
needful and necessary that we may be just. Ans. The omission of good is all
sin: he that can do good, James 4.17.
and does it not, is a sinner, and accursed. But God does not hate us, neither
has he a will to punish us for those sins for which Christ has sufficiently
satisfied: in whom also we have remission of these, and all other our sins, so
that by his only merit we are reputed just before God.

2. Who gives remission of sins.
REmission of sins is given of God only, who (as the Prophet Isaiah says)
puts away our iniquities. Remission of sins is the work of all three
persons. Chap. 43.25.
And this is done both of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost; for we
are baptized in the name of all three. Now baptism, as also is said of John's
baptism, Matthew. 9.6.
is wrought for remission of sins: and of the Son the Scripture affirms
plainly, Acts 5.9.
That the Son of man has power to remit sins. Likewise it is said of the holy
Ghost, Ephesians. 4.30.
That he was tempted, that he was offended and grieved: Wherefore he also has
power to remit sins: for none can remit sins, but he against whom sin is
committed, and who is offended by sin: And Christ also in plain words in the
Evangelists speaks of the sin against the holy Ghost. Now the cause that God
only, that is, Matthew. 12.31. Mark 3.29. Luke 12.10. Why God only can forgive
sin.
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost only remit sins, is this; Because none
but the party offended can remit sins: But only God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost is offended by our sins: Therefore God only can remit them; and
consequently no creature is able to grant ought of this right of God. Whereupon
also David says, Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight.

Object. But the Apostles also and the Church remit sins, Matthew. 18.18.
because it is said, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
what whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Whosesoever sins
ye remit, they are remitted unto them; John 20.23.
and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained: Therefore not only God
remitteth sins. Answ. How the ministers and the Church are said to rem^t sins.
The Apostles remit sins, in that they are the signifiers and declarers of Gods
remission. Likewise also the Church remitteth sins, when, according to the
commandment of God, she pronounces remission of sins to the repentant.
Again, one neighbor remitteth sins and trespasses unto another, as concerning
the pardoning of the private offense. But God only freeth us from the guilt of
sin by his own authority: God only washes us clean from sin in the blood of
his Son. In a word, God only remitteth unto us all sins, that is, original and
actual, whether they be of omission, or of ignorance: Which heals all their
infirmities. Psalm. 103.3. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

3. For what remission of sins is granted.
REmission of sins is granted not verily of any lenity, Remission of sins
granted for Christ's intercession and meant. 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 John 1.7. Col. 1.19,
20.
which is repugnant to justice: but, 1. Of the free mercy of God, and of mere
grace, and Gods free love. 2. For the intercession and merit of Christ applied
by faith: Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God. The blond of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. It
pleased the Father that in Christ should all fullness dwell: and by him to
reconcile all things to himself, and to set at peace, through the blood of his
cross, both the things in earth, and the things in heaven. Heb. 12.24.
Ye are come to Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel. By Christ we have
redemption through his blood, even forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.7.
according to his rich grace. For entreaty cannot be made without satisfaction:
because that we are to desire that God would yield somewhat of his justice.

4. Whether remission of sins agrees with Gods justice.
Gods justice satisfied for sin by Christ, though it be remitted unto us.
IT is true indeed, that it behooveth God, as a just Judge, not to leave sin
unpunished; and therefore not to remit it, except some satisfaction be
interposed. But neither does God leave it unpunished; for he punishes sins in
Christ, or in the sinners themselves most sufficiently. God pronounces us in
such sort just, as he pronounces us not to be obnoxious to punishment, because
of the most perfect satisfaction of Christ: and this does not contrary or
cross the justice and truth of God. Object. The justice of God requires, that
they be punished who sin: Therefore such a remission of sins as is granted
without sufficient punishment of the party sinning, is impossible, or does
contrary and cross the justice of God. Ans. It is contrary to Gods justice not
to punish sin at all; that is, neither in him that sins, nor in any other
who undergoeth the punishment for him that sins. Repl. To punish one that is
innocent in place of him that has offended, is repugnant also to Gods justice.
Ans. True, if the innocent party be such a one, who, 1. Will not undergo the
punishment. 2. Is not of the same nature with the offender. 3. Is not able to
suffer sufficient punishment. 4. Is not able to recover out of it: for God will
not have him that is innocent to perish for an offender. 5. Is not able to
restore and convert the offender, that he may thenceforward cease to offend;
and further, to give him faith, which may embrace and receive this his benefit.
But all these conditions are in Christ, as clearly appears by the testimonies
following: Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2.
to be an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. I lay
down my life for my sheep. John 10.18. Isa. 53.5. 2 Cor. 5.15.
He was wounded for our transgressions. Christ died for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them, and rose again. John 2.19. John 10.17. Ephesians. 5.25. Titus 2.14.
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. I lay down
my life, that I may take it again. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify it. He gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works.

5. Whether remission of sins be freely given.
Our sins remitted freely, in respect of us, though they cost Christ full
dearly.
ALbeit God remitteth not our sins unto us, except a most sufficient punishment
be first paid for them: yet he remitteth them freely unto us for Christ's sake,
whom our debt cost enough. Object. If he pardoned them for Christ's
satisfaction, then does he not remit them freely. Ans. He remitteth them freely
in respect of us, that is, without any satisfaction of ours, and pardons them
for the satisfaction made by another. Repl. And he that after this sort
pardons, does not freely pardon: for this is a rule; What a man does by
another, that he seems to do by himself: Wherefore we our selves pay it, in
paying it by Christ. Ans. God also gives us freely this price and ransom,
John 3.16.
that is, this satisfier and mediator Christ, who is not bought of us: So God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

6. To whom remission of sins is given.
Remission of sins given unto all the elect, and to them only. John 3.36. Acts
10.43.
REmission of sins is given to all the elect, and them alone, because it is
given to them all and alone who believe, and none believe but the elect only:
for the reprobate never have true faith and belief; therefore they never
obtain remission of their sins: He that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name
all that believe in him shall receive remission of sins. Yet all the elect have
not always remission of sins; but all believers have it always, because they
only have remission of sins who believe that they have it. But this the elect
do not always believe; but then first, when they are converted and endued with
faith: yet in respect of the secret and fore-determined purpose of God, they
have always remission of sins. Now infants have remission of sins, because
they have faith and conversion in aptitude and inclination, though not actually.

7. How remission of sins is given.
Remission of sins given by faith, through the working of the holy Ghost.
REmission of sins is given by faith alone; by which, being wrought and kindled
in us by the holy Ghost, we receive the same: Therefore it is then also given,
when by faith it is received. God verily decreed from everlasting to pardon in
Christ, for his satisfaction, the sins of the elect: but he does actually
forgive all and every faithful man their sins then, when reputing them for
just, he works by his holy Spirit in their hearts a sense and feeling of that
pardon, whereon they may for ever rest settled and confirmed: Therefore the
purpose and decree of God of remitting sins is everlasting; but the executing
and performance thereof is, when by faith we apply remission of sins offered
unto us in the Gospel. So also God does always love his elect: but that love
is not powered out in their hearts before their repentance. For they have that
certain testimony of conscience by the gift of the holy Ghost, that they are
loved of God, and so have their sins remitted, who truly convert and repent.

ON THE 22. SABBATH.
Ques. 57. What comfort have thou by the resurrection of the flesh?
Answ. That not only my soul, after it shall depart our of my body, shall
presently be taken up to Christ her head Luke 6.22. and 23.43. Phil. 1.21, 23.
but that this my flesh also, being raised up by the power of Christ, shall be
again united to my soul, and shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ
Job 19.25, 26. 1 John 3.2. Phil. 3.21
.

The Explication.
The chief Questions hereto belonging are:
1. Whether the soul be immortal. 2. Where it abides being separated from
the body. 3 What the Resurrection is, and the errors concerning the
Resurrection. 4. Whence it may appear that the Resurrection shall certainly
be. 5. What bodies shall rise. 6. How. 7. When. 8. By whom, and by whose power.
9. For what end the Resurrection shall be.


1. Whether the soul be immontall.
BEsides, that this Question belongs to the Article of the resurrection, The
causes for which this question is to be moved.
the ^xplication also the^eof in it self shall not be altogether unprofitable
or fruitle^^: For, not now onl^ do they begin to dispute against the
immortality of the soul, but the Sadduces also denied it; as they likewise that
said, Matthew. 22.23. 2 Timothy 2.17.
the resurrection was past already unto him that believed; neither made any
other resurrection besides that spiritual resurrection of the regenerate.
Likewise also some Anabaptists deny the immortality of the soul. Moreover,
Paul, the ^hird, Pope of Rome, when he was breathing out his soul, and ready
to die, said That now at length he should try and know three things whereof in
his whole time he had much doubted: 1. Whether there were a God. 2. Whether
souls were immortal. 3. Whether there were any hell. Oftentimes also in the
Psalmer, and in Solomon we meet with these and such like Aphorisms: Eccles.
3.19. Psalm. 115.17.
Man dies like a brute beast. The dead shall not praise thee, O Lord.
Wherefore it ought not to seem strange if this question be moved, neither shall
it be altogether vain and needless; both because it serves for the
controuling and refuting especially of Epicures: as also because it makes for
the better understanding of some places of holy Scripture. But because there
have been, and even now are, who have taught, That the soul of man, like as of
brute beasts, is nothing else but life, or the vital power, arising of the
temperature and perfection of the body; and therefore dies, and is
extinguished together with the body, and (as some of them speak, who will seem
to believe the resurrection of the dead) does sleep when the body dies; that
is, is without motion or sense until the raising of the body: which indeed is
nothing else, then that the soul is mortal* that is, a mere quality only in
the body, and when the body is dissolved, becomes nothing; because if it were
an incorporeall substance, it could not be without sense and motion. Against
these we are to hold the records of Gods word and writ, concerning the
spiritual and immortal substance of man's soul: The soul an incorporeall
substance.
That the soul of man is not only a form, or perfection, or temperament, or
force and power, or an agitation arising out of the temperature of the body;
but a substance incorporeall, living, understanding, dwelling in the body, and
sustaining and moving it, these places following of holy Scripture do show:
Psalm. 48. His soul shall be blessed in life. Heb. 12. God is called the Father
of spirits. And it is said of the faithful; Heb. 12.9, 22.
Ye are come to the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable
Angels and to the spirits of just and perfect men. No man knows the things of
a man save the spirit of a man which is in him. 1 Cor. 2.11.
In these and the like places of Scripture, both the soul of a man is called a
spirit, and the properties of a living and understanding substance are
attributed unto it. Wherefore, to no purpose do the adversaries of this
doctrine oppose those places, in which the name of the soul is taken for the
life and will of man: as, Mat. 5.25.
The soul is more worth then meat. I put my soul in my hand. For by the
fore-alledged places it is manifest, Job 13:14.
that this is not general, but is used by a figure of speech, whereby we call
the effect by the name of his cause.

Now the immortality of the soul is proved by many places of holy Scripture:
The soul immortal. Luke 23.43.
Christ hanging on the cross, said to the thief, This day shall thou be with
me in paradise: But he could not be there in body, because that was dead and
buried: Therefore his soul was gathered with Christ's in Paradise, and so
consequently the soul lives. Phil. 1.23.
Paul says, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ: he speaks of the
rest and joy, which he should enjoy with Christ. But they who feel nothing,
what can their joy or happiness be? Wherefore they also are refuted in this
place, who say, men's souls sleep, Wisd. 3.1. Mat. 22.^2. Luke 23.46. 1 Cor.
5.8.
and so withal deny the immortality of the soul. The souls of the just are
in the hands of God. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living:
Therefore the souls live. Into thy hands I commend my spirit. When we remove out
of the body, we go unto the Lord. Wherefore the souls sleep not, as some
Anabaptists will have them, but enjoy immortal life, and celestial glory with
the Lord. The souls of the godly that were killed, Revel. 6.10.
are said to cry with a loud voice under the Altar, saying: How long Lord,
holy, and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth? Luke 16.21.
Wherefore the souls live. Lazarus is said to be carried into Abraham's bosom:
and out of the same place also it is apparent concerning the souls of the
wicked. For the rich Glutton is also, of the contrary, said to be carried down
to hell. These testimonies therefore of Scripture teach and confirm most
evidently, that not only in the body before death, and after the resurrection
of the body, but also in the whole space and time coming between, the souls
are, live, feel, understand, out of the body, though the manner of their
operations without the body be to us unknown. Wherefore also this gift of
immortality has some similitude with God, who alone, 1 Timothy 6.16.
as the only fountain and author of life, has immortality. Lastly, the
resurrection of the flesh presupposes the immortality of the soul: so that we
believe the one with the other. For that the same body should rise again,
necessary it is, that it be quickened with the same substantial form it once
enjoyed, which is the soul. For not every change of an accidentary form
makes another individual; but one and the same individual still remains,
as long as one and the same matter is quickened with the same essential form.
Now, if the soul die, and God create another soul, and seat it in the body,
then not the same, but a diverse form quickneth the body; and so it shall not
be the same Individual. But it shall be the same Individual, as in the fifth
of these questions it is proved: Therefore it must needs be quickened with the
selfsame soul.

But furthermore, Man should have lived immortally, if he had not sinned. Romans
5.12. Romans 6.23. Genesis 3.24.
That man should have led a blessed life immortally, and for ever, not in soul
only, but also in body, if he had not purchased death and mortality unto
himself by sin, is proved, 1. Because by sin death entered into the world,
as the wages of sin. 2. Because we, being freed from sin by Christ, are
also freed from death. 3. Because God himself did withdraw from man, being
made by sin subject unto death, the sign or sacrament of immortality, which
was the fruit of the tree of life. Wherefore their objections are naught worth,
who imagine the soul after death to sleep or vanish away. Genesis 2.7. 1 Cor.
15.45.
For Adam is said to have been made a living soul, not simply, as these will
have it, like as other living creatures are termed in the same place living
souls; but as being made to the image and similitude of God, which he has not
in common with other creatures.

Sundry places of Scripture (alleged against the immortality of the soul)
interpreted according to their right s^nse and meaning.
In the day that thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou
shall die the death. Answ. He does not threaten unto man the destruction or
extinguishing of his soul, but eternal death, that is, the horrible feeling
and terrors of Gods wrath and judgment, and to live forsaken and cast from
God, subject to all miseries and torments: an adjoynt of which death, is the
separation of the soul and body, which at that time, through the mercy of God,
that mankind might be saved, was deferred. For so was Adam dead, while yet he
lived in Paradise, according to Gods denouncement, Genes. 2.17. Ephesians. 2.5.
Ephesians. 5.14.
even as soon as he had eaten of the forbidden fruit. So in eternal death
live all the damned and reprobate: Whose fire shall not be put out, and their
worm not die. So they are said to be dead through sin, who live in sin
without repentance. And, he is willed to rise from the dead, who is reclaimed
from sin to God: Romans 7.10, 11.
and S. Paul says, he was dead through the knowledge of his sin, and the wrath
of God.

The dead are said to sleep. Acts 7.60.
Ans. But this is by a Synecdoche.
figure of speech, translating that which is proper unto the body, to the whole
man. For that this belongs to the body, which is to be re-called from death
to life, as it were from sleep to wake again, many places declare, as: Behold,
now I sleep in the dust. For, not the soul, 1 Cor. 1^.30.
but the body only sleeps in the dust and grave.

Object. 3. The Preacher says, The condition of the children of men and the
condition of beasts, are even as one condition unto them: Therefore there is no
immortality of soul. Ans. 1. It is a fallacy, concluding that which is in some
respect so, to be simply so. Indeed, the condition of both man and beast is
equal, as touching the necessity of dying imposed on both; for men, as well as
beasts, must needs once die and depart out of this life, because men are not to
continue here for ever; but it is decreed that all must die, and so they have
here no settled place: But the Preachers meaning is not, that the condition of
man and beast is all one concerning the event ensuing after death; for the
souls of beasts are extinguished and vanish away then when their bodies die:
but the souls of men (as has been proved by the fore-rehearsed testimonies)
remain alive after the death of their bodies. Ans. 2. We deny the Antecedent:
for the Preacher speaks of man's death, not as he himself thought of it in
his own heart; but as it seems in the sense and judgment of the wicked and
profane vulgar sort of men, built and grounded on the outward apparent
likelihood of events betiding both the good and evil. For to the doctrine of
Gods providence and just judgment, whereby one day the good shall be crowned
with good things, and the evil recompensed with evil; to this, I say, he
adjoineth, by way of objection, a lamentable complaint of man's erroneous
judgment.

Object. 4. Blessedness and the kingdom promised to the godly is said then
first to fall unto them at the last day. Ans. These places show not, Mat.
24.25. Mark 13. Dan. 12.
that the souls of the godly do not presently, when they depart from their
bodies, enjoy celestial blessedness and joy; but that at the last day, when
their bodies are raised again, their felicity and glory shall be consummated
and made absolute: for so we pray, Thy kingdom come, when yet God now also
reigns in us.

Object. 5. He that is blessed and happy before the resurrection, is not
without the resurrection most miserable: But we, without the resurrection,
should be of all men most miserable; If in this life only we have hope, we are
of all men most miserable: 1 Cor. 15.9.
Therefore we are not before the resurrection blessed and happy. Ans. to the
Major. He is not miserable without the resurrection, who can, not only before
it, but without it also, be blessed: But we are in such wise blessed before it,
that notwithstanding without it following and ensuing, we cannot enjoy that
former blessedness; because God has joined with so inseparable a knot the
beginning, and proceeding, and finishing or perfection of the elects
blessedness, that none can have the beginning, who must not come to the end
and consummation thereof. Wherefore, either we must rise again, or we must want
also that celestial blessedness before the resurrection. If the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: Romans 8.11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies.

Object. 6. These all through faith are dead, and received not the promise:
Heb. 11.39.
Therefore they received not their Country. Answ. 1. Although they dying had
not found their country: yet would it not follow of these words, that they are
not at all, or have no sense after death: for he that is not, or has no sense,
seeks not his country. 2. The author of that Epistle does not speak of the
life after death, which is led in the celestial country, 2 Cor. 5. but of
this life, in which the faithful walking their pilgrimage, sought for the
celestial country, not finding their country on earth.

Object. 7. They are flesh, a wind that passes away, and comes not again.
Answ. By these and the like speeches the brevity of man's life, and the frailty
and perishing of all humane affairs without God, is described and bewailed.
For, as here they are compared to a wind eft-soons vanishing away; so Psalm.
103. they are compared to dust, grass, and flowers of the field. Likewise, He
shoots forth as a flower, Job 14.2.
and is cut down, and vanishes as a shadow. All flesh is grass. Isa 40.6.
But if they urge the very word in these speeches, it will follow, that not
only after death there is nothing remaining, but that there is not any
resurrection, when he says, a wind that passes, and comes not again: as
flowers and shadows, whereunto man is compared, do so perish, that they are
not recovered.

Object. 8. I am counted as the slain lying in the grave, whom thou remembrest
no more. Ans. In these words the Prophet does not signify either himself,
Psalm. 88.5.
or the dead to be exempted from Gods providence; but he complains that he
is forsaken of God, even as the dead seem to men not to be cared for of him:
and therefore he speaks not according to the sense of faith, but of his own
opinion, and weakness, and misery, who judges those to be forsaken and
neglected of God, whose delivery for a while he does defer. But what faith in
the mean season suggesteth and tells the godly, even when they wrestle with
temptation, he shows, when he says, The just shall be in everlasting memory.

Object. 9. His spirit departs, Psalm. 112.6.
and he returns to the earth, then his thoughts perish. Ans. Here he says
not, Psalm. 146.4.
the spirit or soul of man perishes, or vanishes, or dies, or it is bereaved
of sense; but that it departs, to wit, from the body wherein it dwells: and
that not the spirit, but the man returns to his earth; that is, as concerning
his body, which was made of earth, as it is written, Genes. 3. and Eccl. 12.
And lastly, he says, that his thoughts perish; which is not, that the soul is
after this life bereaved of reason, judgment, and sense of the mercy or wrath
of God; but that his purposes and counsels are made frustrate, which man in
this life had settled with himself to bring to pass: Psalm. 112.10.
in which sense it is said, The desire of the wicked shall perish.

Object. 10. They gather also other sayings, which take away all praising and
worshipping of God from the dead: As, Will thou show a miracle unto the dead?
Or shall the dead rise and praise thee? Psalm. 88.10.
But in such speeches death and hell, or the grave, have two significations.
They who are spiritually dead, whether before, or after the death of the body;
that is, they who are deprived of Gods grace, and forsaken and rejected of God,
and are in hell, that is, in the place and torments of the damned, or else in
this life despairing and destitute of comfort, shall not praise God at all,
neither in this life, nor in the life to come. But they who are dead, not
spiritually, but corporally only, albeit they shall not praise God in this life
while their bodies are in hell, that is, in the grave; yet in the soul they
shall not cease to acknowledge and praise God in the other life, until (when
receiving their bodies again) they shall magnify him in both, in the
celestial eternity. But in the mean season, because God will also be agnised
and magnified of men in this life; therefore both the whole Church, and every
one of the faithful, not only pray that they may not fall into that forsaking,
and into that sense of Gods wrath wherewith the wicked are oppressed: but also
desire that they may be in this mortal life preserved and defended, until the
end thereof by God appointed be expired. For the Saints do not simply stand in
fear of the bodily death and grave; but that they may not be forsaken of God,
neither fall into desperation and destruction, or their enemies insult against
God when they are overthrown: this with daily and ardent prayers and petitions
they beg and crave continually.

Now that which the adversaries add further, Psalm. 146.2.
I will praise the Lord during my life: as long as I have any being I will sing
unto my God. Answ. This makes nothing with them: for he restrains not the
praising of God to the time of his mortal life; but only he says, that he
will spend all that time in Gods praises, which notwithstanding in many other
places he extends to continue through all eternity: as, Psalm. 34.
I will praise the Lord continually. But oftentimes this particle until, or,
as long as, signifies a continuance of the time going before some event,
without any excluding of the time following: as, He must reign, until he put
all his enemies under his feet. 1 Cor. 15.25.


Object. 11. Let him cease and leave off from me, that I may take a little
comfort, before I go, Job 10.20.
and shall not return. Answ. He denies in these words that he shall return
into this mortal life, and to converse among men in this world: but he denies
not that he in the mean season has his being, and does live, until again he
see God in his flesh, Chap. 17.26.
even the same Job, who then was afflicted. Object. Why dyed I not when I came
out of the womb? So should I have slept then and been at rest, Job 3.11, 13.
etc. Answ. Here also Job does not deny the souls after death to be, live,
feel, and understand; but only he says, the miseries of this present life
are not felt. If they urge, that neither the evils of the life to come are
felt; because then Job should wish for a bad change: we answer, that Job
wishes not for the death of the wicked, but of the godly. But if they add
further, That Job does make Kings and Princes also, which gather gold unto
them, small and great, that is, all men, good and bad, partakers of this rest:
our answer is out of the process and course of his whole speech, that Job does
not teach here, what is the state of men after this life, but only desires to
be rid of his present misery; and therefore, through humane infirmity and
impatiencie, does compare the sense and feeling of his present miseries with
the death and state of the dead, whatsoever it be: as they, who are grievously
tormented with present distresses and calamities, prefer any thing whatsoever
before that which they suffer. So also, Chap. 7. he speaks as one despairing
of delivery in this life. Chap. 7, 7.10.
Remember that my life is but a wind, and that my eye shall not return to see
pleasure: For so he expounds himself, when he adds, He shall return no
more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more. So likewise Chap.
17. My breath is corrupt, Verse 1.
and the grave is ready for me: They are words of one despairing of life and
salvation, God being wroth and angry. But when it is said; If he set his heart
upon man, and gather unto himself his spirit and his breath, All flesh shall
perish together: Chap. 34.14, 15.
it is not said that the soul does sleep, or perish, but that by the departure
thereof, the body dies, and is dissolved.

Further they add, If presently after death the godly were blessed, then
injury was done unto them, who were called again into this mortal life: But
to this we answer, That neither God can be injurious to any man; whereas he is
in no man's debt: neither can any thing happen better, or more acceptable unto
the godly, then to serve for the manifesting of Gods glory, either by life or
by death: as it is said; As always, Phil. 1.20.
so now, Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by
death, etc.

Last of all, if they say, That the soul has neither sense nor action, but by
bodily instruments; and therefore being naked and destitute of these, is
destitute also of sense, motion, and operation: To grant unto them this
Antecedent, of the soul being in the body: yet notwithstanding of the soul
freed from the body, both learned Philosophers confess the contrary, and the
Word of God testifies the contrary: as, We know in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.
and we prophecy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be abolished.

2. Where, and in what estate it abides, being separate from the body.
THe Papists dream that the souls of men pass out of their bodies into the
fire of Purgatory, there to be purged from their sins, some sooner, some
later, Not in Purgatory as the Papists teach. Li. 4. di. 21. cap. ^.
according as they in their life time more or less loved the transitory pelf
of this world, as Lombard speaks. Contrariwise the Scripture teaches us,
that not any fire after death, but only the blood of Christ in this life
cleanses our souls from all sin. It farther instructs us how that the
souls of the faithful deceased, are not plunged into the place of torment,
there to be refined from the dross of their sins; but are gathered unto
Christ, and into Abraham's bosom: and on the other side, that the souls of the
wicked are forthwith cast into hell, whence there is no retire, and are now
tormented with infernal flames, but yet reserved to more grievous tortures of
that everlasting fire, which at the time of Christ's coming to judgment, The
estate of the souls of the godly. Luke 23.46. Acts 7.59. Luke 16.22. Phil.
1.3. 2 Cor. 5.8. The estate of the souls of the wicked. Mat. 10.28.
the wrath of Jehovah shall kindle. Of the estate of the souls of the godly
these places yield testimony: Into thy hands I commend my spirit. Lord Jesus
receive my soul. And so it was, that the beggar died and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom. Therefore he feared not Purgatory. The faithful
covet to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord: therefore they
pass not through Purgatory first, before they approach unto the sight of the
Lord. Of the state of the souls of the ungodly, these places make sufficient
evidence; Fear him who is able to cast both body and soul into hell fire. The
glutton straight after his burial was in hell torments, and cried, I am
tormented in this flame: Luke 16.23.
whence he shall never escape. Wherefore the souls of the wicked leaving their
bodies are not forthwith transported into Purgatory, whence there may be a
gappe or way to escape; but are violently thrust down into the unspeakable fire
of hell.

3. What the Resurrection is, and the errors concerning it.
THe word Resurrection signifies sometimes man's spiritual conversion unto
God: The signification of the word. Rev. 20.5.
As, This is the first Resurrection. But in this Article the resurrection of
the flesh is, A restoring of the substance of our bodies after death, even of
the same matter whereof they now consist, and a reviving and quickening of the
same bodies with life immortal, and incorruptible, by the same immortal soul,
whereby they now live, which God will work by Christ in the end of the world,
by his divine virtue and power: which restoring also shall be of the Elect unto
eternal glory, The parts of it.
but of the reprobate unto eternal pains: That is, there shall be,

Three errors concerning the Resurrection.
The errors held of the Resurrection, are of three sorts. The Sadducees say
that there is no Resurrection, Acts 23.8.
neither Angel, nor Spirit. regeneration; but the bodies they denied to rise at
all, although the souls of the godly have fruition after death of everlasting
happiness. Hymeneus and Philetus seem to have been authors of this heresy; of
whom the Apostle says: 2 Timothy 2.18.
Which, as concerning the truth, have erred, saying, that the resurrection is
past already, and do destroy the faith of some.

4. Whence it may appear that the Resurrection shall certainly be.
Probable proofs of the Resurrection yielded by Philosophy, but no necessary
demonstrance.
IT may be verily collected probably, out of Philosophy, that there shall be
sometime a Resurrection: but no necessary demonstration can be yielded thence,
that the Resurrection shall certainly be. For in Philosophy are many
principles, which accord not with the sacred writings of Gods Spirit. Again,
in Philosophy, the knowledge which it has of Gods justice and truth is but a
maimed reason. But in the holy writ of God, Proofs hereof out of Scripure.
the reasons are firm and true. Hence alone therefore is demonstration given
for the most certain accomplishment of the Resurrection. And this, Testimony.
By testimony of Scripture: Reason.
By reason drawn out of the Scripture.

The testimonies of Scripture, which confirm the certainty of the Resurrection
hereafter to come, Testimonies of Scripture for demonstrance of the
Resurrection. Job 19.25, 26. Esaias. 26.19. Ezekiel. 37.12.
are most evident, and those taken both out of the old and new Testament. I am
sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth: and
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my
flesh. The dead men shall live, even with my body they shall rise. I will open
your graves, and cause you to come out of your sepulchers. And many of them
that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, Dan. 12.2. Job
5.28, 29.
and some to shame and perpetual contempt. The hour shall come, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice: And they shall come forth
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. John 6.40. 1 Cor. 15.13. 1 Thessalonians.
4.14. Rev. 20.12.13.
I will raise him up at the last day. If there be no resurrection of the dead,
then is Christ not risen. And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching
vain, and your faith is also vain. If we believe that Jesus is dead, and is
risen; even so them, which sleep in Jesus, God will bring with him. And I saw
the dead, both great and small, stand before God: and the sea gave up her dead
which were in her, and death and hell delivered up the dead.

The reasons which are drawn also out of Scripture, are diverse: Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; and God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. But he
should not be the God of whole Abraham, nor the God of the living except the
body of Abraham should one day be raised. God is the God of the whole man, not
of a part only; but he should not be the God of the whole man, but of a part
of man only, if the body did never rise again. Mat. 22.32.
This reason Christ uses against the Sadducees. an everlasting kingdom: but
this he shall not have, Psalm. 45.
if our bodies should always continue in death: for neither would it suffice
that our souls are immortal, or eternal, without our bodies. For that
Christ's kingdom may be eternal, he must have eternal subjects, and those
wholly eternal. Therefore our bodies also shall rise, that so we whole may be
subject eternally unto Christ our King. Adam to lose; nay, Christ restored to
us all that which Adam lost and destroyed by sinning; yea far more and
greater things by his merit. Adam lost from us, among other gifts, the eternal
life also of our bodies: therefore Christ has restored it unto us, and
consequently, our bodies shall certainly rise again. The wages of sin is
death: Therefore sin being abolished, Romans 3.23.
death shall be abolished: and death being abolished, we shall rise again to
everlasting life.

4. What bodies shall rise.
The same bodies shall rise.
THe bodies which shall rise, shall be not only humane bodies, but even the
selfsame also which we now in our life time carry about with us, and not
others created of Christ, as the Anabaptists will have it. For Job says, In
this flesh shall I see my Lord: Job 19.26. Ephel. 6.8. 1 Cor. 15.53.
I shall be covered with this my skin. And the Apostle says, Every man shall
receive in his body, according to that he has done. This mortality must put on
immortality. If then the bodies which have finned shall receive accordingly;
not other bodies, but the same shall rise. Therefore in the African Churches it
was said, I believe the resurrection of this flesh. Cyprian in expos. Symb.
And the very word it self of rising enforces as much for nothing can rise
but that which is fallen. This is the resurrection (says Ambrose) as is
intimated by the sounding of the very word, that that which fell, may rise;
that which was dead may revive. Wherefore seeing our bodies shall rise, no
other bodies shall rise or be quickened, then those which have fallen, and are
dead; or no other, then those which do fall and die. The justice also of God
enforces as much: De side resurrect. cap. 19.
For this (says Ambrose) is the order and course of justice, that because the
actions of the body and soul are common to both, the body executing that which
the soul decreed, both of them should likewise come unto judgment, both of
them be either delivered up to perpetual punishment, 2. These. 1.6. Cyprian in
expos. Symb.
or reserved to eternal glory. For the justice of God requires that the flesh
of the Saints, which have fought in the field, should also be crowned: and the
flesh of the wicked, which have blasphemed against God, should be tormented.
Wherefore to every soul shall be rendered not any other body what soever but
the body wherewith it was once knit and coupled; that forthwith the flesh with
her own soul may (according to the actions of this present life) either be
gloriously crowned as chaste, or as unchaste be extremely afflicted. Lastly, as
Christ rose again in the same flesh wherein he died: so shall we rise with
that very flesh we now are clothed withal. 1 Cor. 15.50.
Object. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. These our bodies
are flesh and blood. Therefore they cannot possess the kingdom of God, and by
consequent not these, but other bodies shall rise in the last day. Answ. 1.
Flesh and blood in this saying of the Apostle, which makes the Major
proposition, signify some evil adherent quality of the substance, or the
substance in respect of that quality. But in the Minor they signify the very
substance of our bodies, How flesh and blood (...) denied the heavenly
inheritance.
whereof the Anabaptists falsely understand their conclusion. 2. Here is a
fallacy of Accident. For the reason proceeds from corrupted substance to
mere substance, thus: Flesh and blood being mortal and corruptible (as now it
is shall not possess the kingdom of God; they fore simply no flesh or blood
shall enjoy the kingdom of God. Which kind of reasoning is altogether
inconsequent. So then flesh that is sinful and corruptible shall not possess
the kingdom of God: but our flesh shall enter in, being glorious and
immortal, and being then no more able to sin, neither shall it be
corruptible. The Apostle of purpose lays this down in the same chapter. It
is sowed a natural body, and is raised a spiritual body Repl. 1 Cor. 15.44.
Our bodies shall rise spiritual bodies; Therefore then our bodies shall not
have the properties of our flesh. Answ. The Apostle calls that a spiritual
body, not which is changed into a spirit in all properties; In what sense our
bo^^es shall be spiritual.
but which is guided by the spirit of God, which is immortal, and free from
all miseries, adorned with heavenly lightness, glory, might, and holiness. As
likewise on the other side he terms that a natural body, not which is turned
into the soul, or is like unto the soul in all properties; but which in this
mortality is swayed, quickened, and governed by the soul. That this is the
meaning of the Apostles words, is apparent by these reasons: Verse 53.
1. Because he says, It shall rise a spiritual body: but a spirit is no body.
2. Himself adds, This corruptible (body) must put on incorruption. 3. If any
body after the resurrection should be so spiritual, as not retaining at all any
bodily properties, then surely Christ's body should have been so: but now he
says to the Apostles, Handle me and see, Luke 24.39.
for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. Therefore much more
shall our spiritual bodies have flesh and bones. Thus Augustine interprets
Apostles meaning. Cons. Adimanw. cap. 12.
Whereas the Apostle says, that in the resurrection the body shall be
spiritual, we may not therefore think, that it shall be a spirit and no body:
but he calls that a spiritual body, which without any corruption or death is
altogether subject to the spirit. For when he calls the body, which we now
have, a natural body, we may not imagine hereon, that it is a soul, and no
body. Therefore as the body is now called natural, because it is subject to
the soul; and cannot be called spiritual, because it is not yet fully subject
to the soul, as long as it may be corrupted: so then it shall be called
spiritual, when by no corruption it can resist the spirit and eternity.

6. How the Resurrection shall be.
The dead shall be raised.
THe dead shall be raised with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, At
the resurrection,
and with the trumpet of God. and shall be presented before the high and most
just Judge, Jesus Christ. The resurrection shall be in glorious manner, and
openly, not fearfully, not in secret; and shall be far other, then that which
was wrought in some men at the resurrection of Christ. For it shall be done,
all Angels, men, and devils beholding it, yea with the exceeding joy of all the
godly, and with the exceeding fear and trembling of the wicked. The living
shall be changed.
They who then shall remain alive, shall be in a moment of time changed and be
made of mortal, immortal. Read cap. 15. of the former to the Corinthians, and
cap. 4. of the former to the Thessalonians.

7. When the Resurrection shall be.
THe resurrection shall be in the end of the world, in the last day. John 6.40.
John 11.24. Mat. 24.35.
I will raise him up at the last day. This Martha confessed, I know that
Lazarus my brother shall rise again in the resurrection of the last day. But
of that day knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but God only. This
question is to be held and proposed of us; that our faith be not troubled,
while we are forced to expect and tarry: or that we may not imagine to our
selves any certain time, when we think those things will happen: and so begin
to doubt, and think our selves to be deluded, when those things fall not so
out, nor come to pass at the time appointed by us. This question makes for
the increase of hope and faith in us.

8. By whose power, and by whom the Resurrection shall be.
THe resurrection and raising of the dead shall be wrought by Christ: for by
the force and virtue of Christ our Savior, We shall rise: John 6.54.
I will raise him up in the last day; which speech of Christ is to be
understood of the body: For he does not raise up the souls, because they die
not. Now Christ-man shall raise us, by the voice of his manhood, and by the
virtue of his Godhead. John 5.28. Acts 17.31.
The hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves, shall hear the
voice of the Son of man. God has appointed a day in which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has
given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. The use
of this doctrine is, to believe this our raising which shall be hereafter, both
because the raiser is of sufficient power, seeing he is Almighty God; and of a
prone and ready will, because he is our head. And hence arises unto us great
consolation and comfort. Because he is true man who shall raise us, therefore
he will not neglect his own flesh and members, but will raise them, even us
will he raise to eternal life: for which cause he took our flesh and redeemed
us. Object. But the Father is said to raise us, yea to raise Christ himself.
He that raised up Christ from the dead, Romans 8.11.
shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in
you: Therefore we shall not be raised by Christ, nor by the power of Christ.
Ans. The external works of the Trinity performed on the creatures are
undivided, or common to them all, always observing an order of the persons in
working. As therefore the Father is not excluded, when raising is attributed to
the Son, so neither is the Son excluded, when it is attributed to the Father,
or the holy Ghost. The Father therefore shall raise us by his Son mediatly. But
the Son shall immediately raise us with his spirit, as being our only Redeemer,
Phil. 3.20, 21.
and Judge. We look for our Savior from heaven, even the Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working, John 5.21.
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. As the Father
raises up the dead, and quickneth them: so the Son quickneth whom he will. But
the Spirit shall immediately raise us up himself. Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of him which raised up Jesus, etc.

9. For what end, and to what estate we shall rise.
THe last end of the Resurrection is Gods glory. For to this end shall the
Resurrection be, The ends of the Resurrection: 1. Gods glory. 2. The salvation
and glory of the Elect, and the damnation of the Reprobate. Rev. 3.21. and 7.13
Dan. 12.3.
that God may manifest, and together fully and perfectly exercise both his
mercy toward the Faithful, and his justice toward the Reprobate: and so may
declare the unutterable certainty of his promises in both. The next and
subordinate end to the former, is the salvation and glory of the Elect: and of
the contrary, the damnation and punishment of the Reprobate. For, the Elect or
Saints of God shall rise to everlasting life. To him will I grant to sit with
me in my throne. They shall be arrayed in long white robes. They shall shine as
the Sun. But the wicked shall rise to be drawn to everlasting pains and
torments: Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. And a little after, And these shall go into everlasting
pain, and the righteous into life eternal. Object. Christ's resurrection is
the cause of our resurrection, and also the benefit of Christ's resurrection is
our resurrection: But this cause and this benefit belongs not to Unbeleevers
and Infidels: Therefore they shall not rise. For to whom the cause of the
resurrection appertains not, to them the resurrection it self no way
belongs. Answ. We thus make answer to the Major, that, To whom no cause of
the resurrection belongs, they shall not rise: But although this cause,
namely, the resurrection of Christ, concerns not the wicked; that is, though
the wicked shall not therefore rise, because Christ is risen: yet they shall
rise for some other cause, to wit, for the execution of Gods just judgment,
whereby he shall deliver and give them to eternal pains. For one and the same
effect may have many and diverse causes, if not in number yet at least in kind,
especially being in diverse subjects. The cause therefore of the resurrection of
the godly, is the resurrection of Christ, who is as their Head: the cause of
the resurrection of the wicked, is not Christ's resurrection, (for they are not
the members of Christ) but the justice of God, and the truth of Gods menaces
and judgments. In a word, there is no coherence in this reason; They shall not
rise because of Christ's resurrection: Therefore they shall not rise at all:
because they shall rise in respect of another cause, which is, that they may be
punished. There is but one end indeed of our resurrection in respect of God,
which is glory: but the manner of coming to this end is diverse.

Quest. 58. What comfort take thou of the Article of everlasting life?
Ans. That forasmuch as I feel already in my heart the beginning of
everlasting life 2 Cor. 5.23.
, it shall at length come to pass, that after this life I shall enjoy full and
perfect bliss, wherein I may magnify God for ever; which blessedness verily,
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has any man in thought
conceived it 1 Cor. 2.9.
.

The Explication.
THis Article is placed in the end: 1. Because it is perfectly fulfilled after
the rest. 2. Because it is an effect of all the other Articles: that is, we
believe all the other Articles because of this; and all things that we believe
in the rest, were done, that we might believe this Article, and so at length
enjoy everlasting life. This Article therefore is the end and proof of our
salvation.

The chief questions touching everlasting life, are these:
1. What everlasting life is. 2. Of whom it is given. 3. To whom it is given.
4. Wherefore it is given. 5. When it is given. 6. How it is given. 7. Whether
in this life we may be assured of everlasting life.


1. What everlasting life is.
THe question, What everlasting life is, may justly seem unexplicable: seeing
the holy Ghost has pronounced thereof; The things which neither eye has
seen, Isay 64.4. 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, God has prepared for them
that love him. Notwithstanding by analogy and proportion of that life, whereof
Philosophers dispute, and Scripture speaks, we may in some sort conceive what
life eternal is. Life is defined among the Philosophers diversely: What life is.
and it is indeed a word of diverse significations, and signifying diverse
things. Generally, both as touching God, and Angels, living souls, and plants,
it is the existence or being of a living thing. For even Spirits live, but they
have not that from any quickening soul, but from their very nature and essence.
But in wights or creatures possessed of living souls, life is properly the
being of living creatures: which is nothing else, but, To be endued with a
living soul, or, To have in him a living soul. For, What a soul is.
the soul is that whereby such a wight lives, or the essential form of
life; which who have, live. It is taken both for the first act, that is, for
the very living and being: and for the second act, that is, for the operation
of a living thing. Thus therefore it is more fully defined: Natural life is
the existence or abiding of the soul in a quickened body, and the operation of
a living thing: Or, it is the act and perfection of the soul, executing
operations proper to a living thing: Or, finally, it is an aptitude of a living
thing to work the operations proper unto it, and is also the operations
themselves, by reason of the union of the body with the soul. Now when we
mention everlasting life, we restrain the word life; for then we speak of the
everlasting life of men and Angels.

That is called everlasting, 1. Which has neither beginning nor ending; so God
is everlasting. 2. Which has no beginning, and yet has an ending; as the
decree of God, What everlasting means.
3. Which has a beginning, but shall have no end; as Angels, and the souls of
men, etc. And in this third sense our heavenly life is called everlasting life;
that is, a life having beginning, but without end. So then the everlasting life
of man is nothing else but the eternal being of a regenerate and glorified
man; which being, What everlasting life is.
is to have the image of God restored, according to which man was at the first
created, to wit, to be endued with perfect wisdom, righteousness, and
felicity, or with a true knowledge and love of God joined with eternal joy.
And here in these acts of acknowledging and loving God, we (for plainness
sake) include the faculties and powers of acknowledging and loving God: For, to
be able to acknowledge God aright, and love him, no less belong to the
spiritual life, then to acknowledge and love him: 1 Cor. 2.14.
seeing The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God,
neither can know them. Again, we thus describe it: Everlasting life is a
perfect restoration of Gods image in us, and eternal joy resting on God,
celestial glory, and abundant fruition of all good things which are required
to the state of perfect happiness. More briefly; it is a perfect conformity of
man with God, consisting in the true and perfect knowledge and love of God, and
in the glory of both soul and body. So that to the full understanding of the
essence of everlasting life, Two parts of this life.
we are to consider these two things: Uunion.
An union both of our body and soul with God. Conformity with God.
A conformity with God, which issues out of this union, as an effect proceeds
from his cause. Now this conformity is a perspicuous and evident knowledge of
God, and his will, and his works, perfect righteousness, joy fixed in God,
incomparable glory, wherewith our bodies and souls shall flourish and shine as
the Sun, and a sufficiency of all good things in God pertaining to true and
perfect bliss. All these things do somewhat express the manner and form of
everlasting life. Now, if we add hereunto the efficient and final causes
thereof, An ample definition of everlasting life.
an absolute full definition may be thus framed: Everlasting life is the
eternal habitation or dwelling of God in the Elect by the holy Ghost, and the
true knowledge of God, his will, and all his works, kindled by the same spirit
immediately in their hearts, and true and perfect righteousness and wisdom,
that is, a perfect conformity and correspondence of their will and powers, and
operations with the mind and will of God: as also a joy resting on God, and a
sufficiency of all good things in God, as touching both soul and body, freely
bestowed by God through Christ on the Elect, begun in this life, and to be
perfected in the life to come, to this end, to glorify and magnify God
through all eternity.

The particular proof of each part of this definition.
All the parts of this definition are taken out of the Scripture. Gods eternal
habitation in us. John 14.23. John 14.16.
It is the eternal habitation of God in us by the holy Ghost. I and my Father
will come unto him, and will dwell with him. He shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Knowledge of God and perfect
wisdom. John 17.36.
It is the knowledge of God, and perfect wisdom. This is life eternal, that
they know thee to be the only very true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ. Righteousness. Luke 20.36.
It is righteousness. They are equal unto the Angels, and are the sons of
God, since they are the children of the resurrection. Joy. John 16.22.
It is joy in God. Your joy shall no man take from you. Sufficiency in God.
Revel. 21.22, 23. 1 Cor. 15.28. 1 Cor. 13.33.
It is sufficiency in God. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb, are the Temple of
it: And the City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it: for the glory of God did light it: and the Lamb is the light of it. God
shall be all in all. All those good things which we possess here, shall then
be perfect. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
shall be abolished. Without interruption. Revel. 21.4. Luke 1.33. Dan. 7.27.
It shall not be interrupted. God shall wipe away all tears. Of his Kingdom
shall be no end. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the holy people of the most
High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; that is, which has neither
beginning nor ending.

Object. Everlasting life is to live everlastingly. But the wicked also shall
be raised, and be immortal, because they shall live eternally: Therefore the
wicked shall have everlasting life. Answ. No consequence is current or of
force, when it is deduced but from one part only of a definition. For by the
name of everlasting life, is not meant the presence of the soul in the body;
that is, the natural life: but this being presupposed, there is further meant
a spiritual life, which the holy Ghost works in the Elect by his proper
function and office. Now, though the wicked after the Resurrection shall be
immortal, yet their soul-life shall be no life, but everlasting death. For
with the eternal life in the wicked shall be joined, 1. An eternal rejection
from God. 2. A privation and want of the knowledge and grace of God. 3. A
perpetual and unutterable torment and vexation. Their worm shall never dye.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The everlasting death of the
wicked.
Hereby is understood what everlasting death is; and that it is so called, not
because the Reprobate by once dying shall fulfill it, but because they shall
dye perpetually, and shall feel perpetual torment without end.

2. Who gives everlasting life.
GOD alone gives eternal life. Romans 6.23. Everlasting life the work of all
three persons.
For, Eternal life is the gift of God: and the Father (as the author and
fountain of all life) gives it by the Son and the holy Ghost: the Son by
the holy Ghost; the holy Ghost by himself: which order of working is natural
in the persons of the Divinity. Of the Father it is said, As the Father raises
up the dead, John 5.21, 26.
and quickneth them; so the Son quickneth whom he will. In which place the
same is affirmed of the Son also; as in like manner in these following: John
1.4. Esaias 9.6. John 10.28. John 3.5. Romans 8.12.
In him was life. The Father of eternity. I give unto them eternal life, that
is, not by merit only, but also by power and working. Of the holy Ghost
likewise it is said, Except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. He that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit dwelling in you. And this
testimony is to be observed for the confirmation of the Godhead of both.
Object. But the Ministers also give life: according to that, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1 Timothy 4.16.
In Christ Jesus I have begot you through the Gospel. In doing this, thou shall
both save thy self, and them that hear thee: Therefore God only gives not
life. Answ. There may be many subordinate causes of one effect. Christ and the
holy Ghost give life by their own power: the Ministers are only instruments, by
whom Christ works through the virtue of his Spirit. Let a man so think of us,
1 Cor. 4.1. and 3.5, 6.
as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. Who is
Paul then? And who is Apollos but the Ministers by whom ye believed, and as the
Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the
increase. Repl. But Christ gives life by a communicated power: Therefore not
by his proper power. Ans. He gives it by a power communicated, but
communicated from everlasting, as he was begotten from everlasting. By
retortion therefore it follows thus; He gives life by a power communicated
to him of his Father from everlasting: John 5.26.
Therefore he gives it by his own power. As the Father has life in himself,
so likewise has he given to the Son to have life in himself.

3. To whom everlasting life is given.
EVerlasting life is given to all, and only such as are elect from everlasting;
or, All the Elect, and they alone are partakers of everlasting life. John 10
28. John 17.9, 12. Romans 11.7.
to them that are converted in this life. I give unto them eternal life, that
is, to my sheep, who are his elect and chosen. I pray for them: I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Those
that thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is lost, but the child of
perdition. Again, faith and repentance are proper to the Elect only. The Elect
have obtained it, and the rest have been hardened. We must observe in this
place, whereas the question is, To whom everlasting life is given, that it is
better to answer, That eternal life is given to the Elect, As they are
elected, so they are but chosen to eternal life: as they are converted, so
they are in part admitted unto it, and begin to be put in dossession of it.
then to say, It is given unto the converted. For Conversion and Faith are the
beginning of eternal life: And to say, eternal life is given to the converted,
were all one, as if you would say, life is given to the living. Also, when the
question is To whom the beginning of everlasting life is given; we answer
rightly. Unto the Elect. For if you say, It is given to the converted: you
answer no more, then that which is in question and doubt; seeing it is
demanded, who they are whom God converteth.

4. For what cause everlasting life is given.
EVerlasting life is given unto us, not for our works, either present or
foreseen, God of his free mercy gives us, for Christ's sake everlasting
^^sief, that we might praise and magnify the same his mercy for ever. Romans
6.23. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10.
but for the alone free mercy of God, and his love toward mankind, and his
will of showing his mercy in saving the Elect, for the alone satisfaction and
merit of Christ, imputed unto us by faith, to this end, that God may be
magnified of us for ever. The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord. By grace we are saved through faith and that not of our selves; it is
the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained
that we should walk in them. So God loved the world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life, etc. Wherefore the impellent or motive
cause of everlasting life given unto us, is not any work of us men, either
present, or fore seen in us. For before the beginning of eternal life, that
is, before conversion, all our works merit eternal death: after the beginning
thereof, that is, after conversion, they are effects thereof: and nothing is
cause of it self. We are indeed brought unto it by many means: but the
means, by which we are led of God unto eternal life, are one thing; and the
cause, for which we are led unto it, another. The final cause or end, for
which eternal life is given us, is, that the mercy of God might be
acknowledged and magnified of us; To the praise of the glory of his grace,
Ephesians. 1.6.
wherewith he has made us accepted in his beloved. For the same cause God
gives us eternal life, for which he chose us.

5. How everlasting life is given unto us.
God gives us everlasting life, by ths outward ministry of the Word, and the
inward ministry of the Spirit.
EVerlasting life is given us by faith: faith by the preaching of the Word, and
inward efficacy of the holy Ghost. For the holy Ghost by the Word works in us
the knowledge of God and his will: that knowledge has following it a study and
desire more and more to know God, and live according to the prescript of his
will. John 6.68. 1 Cor. 4.15. Romans 1.16. Romans 10.17.
Whither shall we go? (say the Disciples) Thou have the words of life. In
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. The Gospel is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes. Faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God. And this is the ordinary manner of giving us this
beginning of everlasting life, namely, by the Word mediately. But there is
another manner of giving the same unto infants, and by miracles; such as was
the conversion of the Thief on the Cross, of Paul, and of Cornelius. Here the
ordinary way only is respected, which is proper unto men of years.

6. When everlasting life is given.
Everlasting life is begun here by conversion.
IN this life is given the beginning of eternal life: but the consummation and
accomplishment thereof shall be given us after this life; howbeit to none but
such as have received the beginning thereof in this life. For unto whom life
everlasting is not begun to be given here, that is, who begins not here to
feel a part of eternal life, to wit, faith and conversion; unto him life
everlasting shall never be given after this life. 2 Cor. 5.2. Mat. 13.12.
Therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house, which is from
heaven, because that if we be clothed, we shall not be found naked. To him
that has, it shall be given: and from him that has not, shall be taken away
even that which he has. The consummation of everlasting life is after this
life: It is consummated in the world to come, by glorification.
for unto whom everlasting life is begun to be given here; to them it shall be
given, finished, complete, and consummated. And of this consummation there are
two degrees: one, when the soul loosed from the body is presently carried into
heaven; because, by the death of the body we are freed from all infirmity: the
other degree is greater, higher, and more glorious, when in the resurrection of
the bodies, the souls shall again be united to their bodies, because after
the resurrection we shall be made glorious, and shall see God, even as he is.
He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, John 5.24.
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. Now
are we the sons of God, 1 John 3.2.
but yet it does not appear what we shall be: and we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is.

7. Whether we can in this life be assured of everlasting life.
IN this life not only we may, but we ought also to be assured and certain of
everlasting life: otherwise we shall never have it. For it is given to all the
faithful, and to them only. Farther, to believe eternal life, is to be
assuredly persuaded, that not only some shall be partakers thereof, but that I
also am one of that number: which is to be observed against Papisticall
diffidence and uncertainty. For we must be certain of our final perseverance;
Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God. Romans 5.1. John 10.28.
I give unto them eternal life. Now he should not give eternal life, if he
gave a doubtful and uncertain life, which might be interrupted. The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11.19. John 10.28. Phil. 1.6. 2 Timothy 1.12.
No man shall take my sheep out of my hand. He which has begun a good work in
you, he shall perfect it. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that
he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. He that
believes, knows that he does believe. This assurance and certainty is
grounded on sure and strong reasons. The reasons whereon out assurance of
everlasting life is grounded.
1. The author of everlasting life is unchangeable, even God himself. 2. Gods
election is eternal, and also unchangeable. 3. Christ is heard in all things
which he desires of his Father, But he prayed that his Father would save all
those whom he had given him. 4. God will not have us to pray for good things
necessary to salvation with a condition, but simply, because he has promised
it. John 17.11, 24. 1 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of God remains sure, with his seal, The Lord knows who are
his. Wherefore to doubt of the perseverance and consummation of eternal life,
were to overthrow the faith and truth of God, and to make void Christ's
intercession.

But whence may we be assured hereof? Of the consummation of everlasting life,
we must be assured by the beginning thereof. To every one that has, it shall
be given. The gifts of God are without repentance. God is faithful: Therefore
as he has begun, so will he perfect his work. How we are assured of the
beginning and consummation of eternal life in us. Mar. 9.24.
Of the beginning of eternal life we are assured chiefly by a true faith,
which withstandeth doubts, that is, which has a purpose to resist the Devil,
and cries, I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Moreover, by a full persuasion
of the good will of God toward us, and our consent herein, which is two ways:
1. By the peace of conscience toward God, which we have, being justified by
faith. 2. By true repentance, and a full purpose and intent to live according
to Gods commandments. For faith cannot be without repentance: Whose house we
are, Romans 5.1. Heb. 3.6.
if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope unto the end.

That which now has been spoken of this Article, does sufficiently declare
what it is To believe everlasting life: namely, assuredly and certainly to be
persuaded, What it is to believe everlasting life.
1. That after this life there shall be also a life, wherein the Church shall
be glorified, and God magnified of her everlastingly. 2. That I also am a
member of this Church; and therefore partaker of everlasting life. 3. That I
also in this life have and enjoy the beginning of everlasting life.

Quest. 59. But when thou beleevest all these things, what profit redoundeth
thence unto thee?
Answ. That I am righteous in Christ before God, and an heir of eternal life
Heb. 2.4. Romans 2.17. John 3.36.
.

Quest. 60. How art thou righteous before God?
Ans. Only by faith in Christ Jesus Romans 3.21.22, 24. and 5.1. Gal. 2.16.
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Phil. 3.9.
: so that although my conscience accuse me, that I have grievously trespassed
against all the commandments of God, and have not kept one of them Romans 3.9.
etc.
: and further am as yet prone to all evil Romans 7.23.
; yet notwithstanding, if I embrace these benefits of Christ with a true
confidence and persuasion of mind Romans 3.22. John 3.18.
, the full and perfect satisfaction 1 John 2.2.
, righteousness, and holiness of Christ 1 John 2.1.
, without any merit of mine Tit. 3.5. Deuteronomy. 9.10. Ezekiel. 36.22.
, of the mere mercy of God Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 2.8.
, is imputed and given unto me Romans 44. 2 Cor. 5.19.
, and that so, as if I neither had committed any sin, neither any corruption
did stick unto me; yea, as if I my self had perfectly accomplished that
obedience, which Christ accomplished for me 2 Cor. 5.21.
.

The Explication.
THis Doctrine of Justification, is one of the chief points of our faith; not
only because it treats of the chief and principal matters, but also
because this Doctrine is most of others called by Heretics into controversy.
For there are two principal controversies between the Church and Heretics.
The first, Of the Doctrine concerning God; the other, of this Doctrine of
Justification before God: and either of these Doctrines being overthrown, the
other points of our faith easily go to wrack. Wherefore we ought chiefly to
fence and strengthen our selves against heresies, in Doctrine concerning God
and his Justification.

The special Questions:
1. What justice or righteousness is in general. 2. How manifold it is. 3. In
what justice differs from justification. 4. What is our justice or
righteousness before God. 5. How it is made ours, whereas it is without us. 6.
Why it is made ours.


1. What justice or righteousness in general is.
Righteousness is derived from Right, which is the law it self; and
conformity with the law is righteousness it self: (...).
as, of the contrary, unrighteousness or sin is a transgressing of the law.
(...).
In general, it may be thus defined: Justice is a conformity with God, or with
the law of God: although indeed a definition so general of justice can searce
be given, as may agree both to God and Creatures (even such as may agree to the
farthest and highest kinds of justice or righteousness, which are, Uncreate,
and Created righteousness) except we will make a definition full of ambiguity.
Uncreate justice is God himself, Our created justice, is our conformity with
Gods laws appertaining unto us. Romans 3.31.
For uncreated justice or righteousness is God himself, who is the very
squire and rule all of justice. Created justice is an effect of uncreate or
divine justice in reasonable creatures. Justice therefore or righteousness in
general (as it agrees to creatures) is a fulfilling of those laws, which
belong to reasonable creatures: or is the conformity or correspondence of
reasonable creatures with the laws appertaining and belonging unto them.
Finally, Justice is the fulfilling of the law: and conformity with the law is
justice or righteousness it self. This we must know, because we must be
justified by the fulfilling of the law: and we must understand, that the law is
not abolished, but established by the Gospel. For the righteousness and
justice of the Gospel, is the fulfilling of the law: but does not at all
disagree from the law.

2. How manifold justice is.
JUstice in general, is either uncreated Justice, as God himself; or created,
as all Justice in reasonable creatures. Legal justice.
Created justice is legal and evangelicall. Legal justice is the fulfilling
of the law, performed by him, who is thereby said to be just: or, it is such a
fulfilling of the law, which one performs by his own obedience: or, it is a
conformity with the law, which is in him who is called just. This legal
justice was in us men before the fall, and now is in Angels, and in Christ, as
he is man, as an accident inherent in his subject. Evangelicall justice, or the
justice of the Gospel.
Evangelicall justice is also a fulfilling of the law; but is not in him, who
is called thereby just or righteous, but in another, and is only imputed to
him, who is thereof called just. This is Christ's justice or righteousness
performed for us: or that ransom of the Son of God imputed unto us by faith.
It may be also defined briefly thus: Evangelicall justice is a conformity with
the law, performed by Christ, and imputed of God to us by faith. The legal
justice is performed either by the obedience of the law, or by punishment. For
the law necessarily requires one of these. That which is performed by the
obedience of the law, is either general or particular. General or Universal
justice.
The general is an observing of all laws which belong unto us; or it is an
obedience according to all the laws unto us appertaining. For it is no right
or justice, but curiosity, to pry into laws or matters concerning rather other
men then our selves; 1 These. 4.11.
and hereof it is said, Study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own
business. This general justice is of two sorts; perfect and unperfect. The
perfect is an external and internal obedience to all the laws belonging unto
us. Perfect justice.
Or, it is a perfect both inward and outward conformity with the law of God.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them. Deuteronomy.
27.26.
The imperfect or begun justice, is a conformity begun only and imperfect;
Imperfect justice.
even such a justice as does not do all things, or not after that manner,
which the law requires. This imperfect justice is also of two sorts;
Philosophical justice.
Philosophical, and Christian. The Philosophical is a knowledge in the mind,
of Gods law and virtues, imperfect, obscure, and weak, and whatsoever manner
of purpose in the will and heart to do those things which are right and honest
according to that imperfect knowledge: Christian justice.
and a directing and governing of their behavior and manners according to the
law. The Christian is regeneration, or a knowledge of God and his law;
imperfect indeed, yet more notable and perfect then the Philosophical, and to
be perfected after this life; rising from faith and the love of God kindled in
the hearts only of the regenerate, by the virtue and operation of the holy
Ghost through the Gospel, and joined with an earnest and serious inclination of
the will and heart to obey God according to all his commandments. This justice
is proper to the elect and regenerate in this life, and flows from a
justifying faith. The particular justice is that virtue, Particular justice
which gives to every one his own: and is of two sorts, Commutative or
exchanging, Commutative justice. Distributive justice.
and distributive. The commutative observes equality of things, and prices in
exchanges, and contracts or bargains. The distributive observes a proportion
in distributing offices, goods, rewards, punishments, giving rewards and
punishments agreeable and proportionable unto the persons. Let the Countryman
till the ground, let the Statesman manage the affairs of the Commonwealth,
let the Preacher instruct the Church; on the good heap rewards, on the evil
aggravate punishments. Let honor be given to whom honor belongs, Romans 13.7.
and tribute to whom tribute belongs.

There is also another division of Justice; namely, Of the person, and Of the
cause. Justice of the person, when a person is just and agreeable to the Law.
Justice of the person, and of the cause.
Of the cause, when he has a just and good cause in any controversy, whether
the person himself be good or bad. Herewith David does oftentimes comfort
himself in his Psalms. It is otherwise called, The justice of a good
conscience.

A brief Table, comprehending the partition of Justice, set down in the
second Chapter of this tract of Justification.
Justice in general is a conformity with God, or with the Law of God: Or, it
is a fulfilling of Gods Law. This Justice is divided into 1. Uncreated justice:
which is God himself, whose whole effence is mere Justice. 2. Created
justice: which is an effect of God in reasonable creatures, whereby they be
conformable unto Gods Law. It is divided into 1. Legal justice, or justice of
works: which is perfect obedience of the Law performed by Angels or Men. This
again is distinguished into 1 Universal justice: which is an observing of all
the laws which belong unto us. It is divided into 1. Perfect justice: which is
an external and internal conformity with the Law of God, and other laws of
men, which concern us. 2. Imperfect justice: which is a conformity indeed, but
begun only. This is again subdivided into 1. Philosophical, or humane
justice: which is a knowledge of Gods Law and virtues, imperfect, obscure and
weak, etc. 2. Christian justice: which is a knowledge of God, and his Law,
imperfect indeed, yet apparent, kindled in the heart by the holy Ghost, through
the Gospel, and joined with a serious inclination of the will and heart to obey
God according to all his commandments.

2. Particular justice: which is a virtue giving to every man his own: and is
divided into 1. Commutative justice: which observes an equality of things, and
prices in contracts and exchanges. 2. Distributive justice: which observes a
proportion in distributing offices, goods, rewards, punishments.

2. Evangelicall justice, or justice of faith: which is a fulfilling of the
law, performed not by us, but by another for us; that is, the ransom of the
Son of God imputed unto us.


3. In what Justice differs from Justification.
Justice is the very conformity it self with the law, and the fulfilling of
the law, and the thing whereby we are just before God; which is the very
satisfaction of Christ performed on the Cross. Justification is the
application of that justice: and by this application, the thing whereby we are
just, even that justice and satisfaction of Christ is made ours: and, except
that be made ours, or applied and imputed unto us, we cannot be just; as
neither the wall is made white, except whiteness be applied unto it: For even
in like manner Justice differs from Justification, or justifying, as
whiteness from whitening. So application and imputation are not all one: for
imputation is not extended so far as application. For God alone does impute,
but we also do apply unto us. Now Justification is divided in like sort as is
Justice: For there is one Justification legal, which is a working of
conformity with God, or with the Law of God in us. Legal Justification.
This is begun in us by the holy Ghost, when as we are regenerated. There is
another Justification evangelicall, which is an application of his evangelicall
justice unto us; Evangelicall Justification.
or, it is an imputation of another justice, which is without us in Christ:
or, it is an imputation and applying of Christ's righteousness, which he
performed by dying for us on the Cross, and rising again. It is not a
transfusing of the qualities into us, but an assoiling and absolving us in
judgment for another righteousness. Wherefore, Justification and Remission
of sins are all one: For, to justify, is, that God should not impute sin unto
us, What it is to justify.
but accept us for just, and absolve or pronounce us just and righteous for
Christ's justice imputed unto us. That this word is thus to be understood, is
proved: In thy sight shall no man living be justified; that is, shall not be
absolved, Psalm. 143.3, 22.
shall not be pronounced just, to wit, by inherent righteousness. Blessed are
they, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.7.
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Out of these words, Paul interprets
justification to be the remission of sins, where the word impute is seven times
used. Object. He that is just and righteous, is conformed and agreeable to the
law. To justify is to make just: Therefore to justify, is to make one
agreeable to the law. All this is granted: To justify, is to make one
agreeable unto the law, either in himself, which is called our own justice,
inherent, infused, legal justice: or in another, which we term imputed
righteousness, righteousness of faith, the righteousness of the Gospel, and
another righteousness, because it is not inherent in us, but in Christ: this
is also a conformity with the law. Romans 3.31.
For faith makes not the law to be of none effect, but establishes it. And
such now is our Justice and Justification. For the question is concerning that
righteousness, whereby we sinners are just in this life before God; not of
that whereby we shall be just in the other life, or had bin just before the
fall, if man had not sinned.

4. What is our justice or righteousness before God.
Our righteousness is Christ's satisfaction, which consists in his humiliation.
Our justice or righteousness, that is, the justice or righteousness of the
Gospel, whereby we are just in the sight of God, is not our conformity with
the law, nor our good works, nor our faith; but it is Christ's satisfaction
only performed unto the law for us, or the punishments which he sustained for
us, and so his whole humiliation from the beginning of his conception, until
his glorification: (that is, his taking of flesh, his undertaking of servitude,
penury, ignominy, and infirmity, his suffering of that bitter passion and
death; all which he did undergo for us, but willingly: finally, whatsoever he
did, or suffered, whereunto himself, as being just, and the Son of God, was
not bound) and that humiliation and satisfaction freely of God imputed unto us
his faithful and believers. For that satisfaction is equivalent either to the
fulfilling of the law by obedience, or to the abiding of eternal punishment
for sin; 1. Cor. 2.2. Col. 2.10. Romans 5.19. Esaias 53.5, 6. Luke 22.20. Romans
3.24, 25. and 4.7. and 5.9, 10.
to one of which we were bound by the law. I esteemed not to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Ye are complete in him. By the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. With his stripes we are healed.
The Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. This cup is the New
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. All are justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth
to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. Blessed are they, whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Being justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath. We were reconciled to God by the death of
his Son. 2 Cor. 8.9. Gal. 3.13. Ephesians. 1.7. 1 John 1.7.
He being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might
be made rich. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was
made a curse for us. By whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins. The blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God cleanses us
from all sin. Now that Christ might perform obedience, and satisfy for us,
it behooveth him to be our Mediator, being by himself just and holy. For such
an high Priest it became us to have, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher than the heavens. Heb. 7.26.
All these things are true perfectly and wholly in Christ: for he has
perfectly fulfilled the law for us, 1. By the holiness of his humane nature.
2. By his obedience: for he became obedient to the death, even to the death of
the Cross. Phil. 2.8.
And the former fulfilling of the law, namely, the holiness of Christ's humane
nature, was requisite for the other, even for his obedience. This obedience and
satisfaction of Christ is our satisfaction, and our proper justice, for which
we please God, for which we are received into favor with God the Father, and
which is imputed unto us. That former fulfilling of the law is indeed imputed
also unto us, namely, the humiliation and justice, or righteousness of Christ's
humane nature, that we may be reputed holy before God: but this holiness of
Christ is imputed unto us for his obedience or satisfaction sake: because he
satisfied for us Gods justice, in sustaining eternal punishment and pains,
which we should have sustained everlastingly. Hence is it that the effusion of
Christ's blood (as being the complement and consummation of Christ's
satisfaction) is only said to be our justice and righteousness. 1 John 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; that is, not only from
that which is of commission, but also from that which is of omission.

We are to distinguish between these questions: 1. How a reasonable creature
may be just before God. 2. How man, being a sinner, may be just before God. 3.
Whether a reasonable creature may merit or deserve ought at Gods hand. To the
first question we answer; That a reasonable creature may be just before God by
the conformity of the law inherent in him, as blessed Men and Angels are just.
To the second, That man, being a sinner, is just by the imputation only of
Christ's merit: and of this question is our speech, when we speak of
Justification. But a man, which is a sinner, cannot in himself be just before
God: 1. Because before his justification, his works are corrupt. 2. Also after
his justification, the works of a man, which is a sinner, are imperfect. 3.
When they are perfect, as in the life to come they shall be, yet can we not
satisfy for the sin past: for we owe those works when we do them. To the
third, That no reasonable creature can deserve ought at Gods hand. When ye
have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants: Luke 17.10.
For neither is Christ's obedience verily any merit, in this respect, as if any
good came to God by it; but in respect of the dignity of the person, because it
was Christ that suffered, it is called merit.

5. How Christ's satisfaction is made our justice and righteousness.
WHereas it may seem absurd, that we should be justified by that which is
another man's; we are further to express more plainly how Christ's satisfaction
and obedience becomes ours. For except it be made ours, or applied unto us, we
cannot be made just for it; as a wall is not white, except whiteness be
fastened on it. Chr^sts satisfaction made ours two ways:
The satisfaction therefore or justice of Christ is made ours or applied unto
us two ways: that is, by a double application: By himself, imputing or
applying it unto us.
God himself applies it unto us: that is, he imputes unto us Christ's
righteousness; and for it accepts us for righteous, no otherwise than if it
were ours. By applying it unto our selves.
We apply it unto our selves, when we apprehend by faith Christ's
righteousness, that is, when we are steadfastly persuaded, that God does
impute, apply, and give it unto us, and for it, reputeth us for just, absolving
us from all guilt. There is then a double application: one in respect of God,
another in respect of us. The application in respect of God, is, the imputation
of Christ's righteousness: when God accepts Christ's righteousness (which he
performed, that it might be effectual and forcible on our behalf) and in
regard thereof accounts us for righteous, no less than if we had never
sinned, or at least had paid a sufficient punishment for our sins. The
application in respect of us is the very act of believing, whereby we resolve
our selves, that it is imputed and given unto us, etc. Both applications must
necessarily concur. For God applies Christ's righteousness unto us on this
condition, that we our selves also should apply it unto our selves through
faith. For, though a man offer another a courtesy or benefit; yet if he, to
whom it is offered, receive it not, is not applied unto him, it is none of his.
Wherefore without this our application, Gods application is not at all; and yet
our application is also from God: For God first imputes unto us Christ's
satisfaction; then he ingendreth faith in us, whereby we may apply the same
imputed unto us. So then Gods application goes before, and is the cause of our
application (which is of faith) albeit his is not without ours, John 15.16.
When we may be assured of Christ's satisfaction imputed unto us.
as Christ says: Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Now we may
then be assured, that Christ's righteousness or satisfaction is imputed unto us
of God, when we earnestly desire Gods grace, and feel the holy Ghost to work in
us a true confidence in the Mediator.

That which is now spoken of both applications, both Gods and ours, does
manifestly show, 1. That it is no absurdity to say, We are justified by
another justice: For, the justice, Four conclusions issuing out of the former
doctrine.
for which, by faith applied unto us, we are reputed just, is not simply
another, but is in some sort made ours, even by application. The subject
indeed wherein this justice is inherent, is Christ: we are the object, to which
this justice is directed, since it is imputed unto us. 2. That the word
Imputation is more strict than Application. The former is spoken of God only;
the latter of God and us. 3. That God otherwise applies Christ's justice unto
us than we do. God applies it by imputation and we apply it by faith and
acceptance. 4. That this phrase of the Church, To justify, The signification
of the phrase, To justify, proved by the Grammatical derivation of it in
diverse languages. In hip^^^.
signifies not legally, that is, To make one just who is unjust, by infusing
the quality of justice, but evangelically; that is, To repute him which is
unjust for just and righteous, and to absolve him from all guilt, and not to
punish him; and this for another justice and satisfaction imputed unto him. So
the Scripture uses this word, and almost in all tongues it bears no other
signification: for the Hebrew word Hadzdik, Exodus 23.^. Prove. 17.15.
signifies, To absolve a guilty person, To pronounce him guiltless: I will
not justify a wicked person. He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. The Greek word
(...) signifies sometime, To pronounce a man just and righteous, and
sometimes, To punish an offender; and both, on good knowledge of his cause by
due examination and judicial process; as Suidas well observes. Mat. 12.37.
So says Christ, By thy words thou shall be justified. The former
signification is used two ways in Scripture. For either it signifies not to
condemn, but To absolve in judgment: Romans 8.33.
as, Who shall condemn the Elect of God? it is God that justifies. He
departed justified rather than the other: or it signifies, To pronounce and
proclaim just. Luke. 18.14.
As, Wisdom is justified of her children. That thou may be justified in
thy sayings. Howbeit both significations in this Question come to one end. But,
that to justify, should be used for, to make just, or, to infuse an habit of
justice, is no where found amongst the Latins: and were it read in Latin
Authors, yet in Scripture, and in the Church it is otherwise used: as the
alleged places apparently prove, which can be understood no other way, than of
the absolution, and free accepting a sinner to grace and favor. Who shall
accuse Gods Elect? it is God that justifies. The Publicane departed justified,
that is, absolved, and more accepted of God than the Pharisee. Acts 13.39.
For, from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, by him every one that believes is justified, Here, To be justified,
does evidently signify to be absolved, Romans 3.24, 26, 28. and 4.5. and 5.9, 10.
and to receive remission of sins: All are justified freely by his grace. A
justifier of him which is of the faith of Jesus. A man is justified by faith
without the works of the law. To him that works not, but believes in him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Being now
justified by his blood. Reconciled to God by the death of his Son.

6. Why Christ's satisfaction is made ours, or in what sort God imputes it unto
us for righteousness.
The cause of Christ's satisfaction applied and imputed, is in God only, not in
us.
THe perfect fulfilling of the law performed by Christ for us, is made ours, or
applied unto us, through the alone and free mercy of God, as who from
everlasting did predestinate us to this grace, and freely chose us in Christ,
to whom he might apply, of his mere grace of faith, that justice and
righteousness at his appointed time, according to the good pleasure of his
will, as the Apostle speaks: that is, according to his mere good pleasure,
not being moved with any holiness which he foresaw would be in us. The reason
is, because there can be no good thing in us, except God first work in us.
Wherefore all imagination and affirmation of merit is to be taken away, as
which fights with the grace of God, and is a denial of his divine grace: For
the grace and mercy of God is the only cause of both applications. He of his
goodness, infinite and passing measure, applies Christ's merit unto us, and
makes that we also may apply the same unto us. The cause therefore why this
application is wrought, is in God alone; but not at all in us, that is, it is
neither any thing foreseen in us, neither also our apprehension and receiving
of this justice; for all the gifts and graces which are in us, are effects of
the application of Christ's merit: and therefore that merit of Christ is no way
applied unto us for the works sake which we do; but this is done, as the
Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1.5.
According to the good pleasure of his will. Whereupon also it is said, What
have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves; it is the
gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8.


Christ is then in respect of our justification, 1. As the subject and matter
wherein our justice is. 2. As the impellent cause, because he obtains it. 3.
As the chief efficient, because he together with his Father does justify us,
and gives us faith, whereby we believe and apprehend it. The mercy of God is
as the impellent cause thereof in God: Christ's satisfaction is the formal
cause of our justification, giving the very life and being unto it: Our faith
is the isntrumental cause, apprehending and applying unto us the justice or
righteousness of Christ. We must note therefore, How we are justified by the
grace of God; how by Christ's merit, and how by faith.
that we are justified by the grace of God, by the merit of Christ, and by
faith, but by each of these in a several sense and meaning. The first position
is understood of the impulsive cause, which is in God: the second of the
formal cause, in Christ: the third of the isntrumental cause, in us. We are
justified by the mercy or grace of God, as a principal impellent cause,
wherewith God being urged and moved, justifies and saves us. We are justified
by the merit of Christ, partly as by the formal cause of our justification,
inasmuch as by Christ's obedience applied unto us, we are accepted of God, and
being clothed as it were with this raiment, are reputed just: partly as by an
impulsive and meritorious cause, inasmuch as God absolveth us for his sake. We
are justified by faith, as by an isntrumental cause, whereby we apprehend
Christ's righteousness imputed unto us.

The common received opinion says; We are justified by faith correlatively:
that is, we are justified by that whereunto faith has relation, to wit, the
merit of Christ, which faith apprehends: For faith, and the satisfaction of
Christ, are correlatives, that is, have a mutual respect each to other; the
one being that which receives, and the other that which is received. This kind
of speech is well and probably used; because hereby faith is understood of the
formal cause of justification, that so the sense may be; Christ's merit
justifies us, and not faith it self: that which is apprehended does justify
us, and not the instrument which does apprehend. Nevertheless, this
proposition, We are justified by faith, may be understood also without
relation, to wit, we are justified by faith, as a mean. But this proposition
of the Apostle, Faith was imputed to him for righteousness, and other the
like, Romans 4.3.
are necessarily to be understood with a relation to Christ's merit and justice.
Faith was imputed unto him for righteousness, as faith is the apprehending
instrument of righteousness apprehended; faith being as it were the hand,
wherewith the justice of Christ is received.

Quest. 61. Why affirmest thou, that thou art made righteous by faith only?
Answ. Not for that I please God through the worthiness of mere faith; but
because only the satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness of Christ is my
righteousness before God 1 Cor. 1.30. and 2.2.
: and I cannot take hold of it, or apply it unto my self and other way than by
faith 1 John 5.20.


The Explication.
Three causes why faith alone justifies.
WE say, we are justified by faith alone: Because we are justified by the object
of faith only, to wit, by the merit of Christ, alone, besides which, there is
no justice of ours, nor any part thereof. For we are justified freely for
Christ's sake, without works. There is nothing which can be our justice and
righteousness before God, either in whole, or in part, besides Christ's merit:
only by receiving and believing another justice we are justified; not by
working, nor by meriting, but by an apprehension and acceptance only we are
just and righteous. All works are excluded, yea faith it self as it is a
virtue or work. Because the proper act and operation of faith is, for a man to
apprehend and apply unto himself Christ's righteousness: yea, faith is nothing
else than the acceptance it self, or apprehension of another justice, or, of
the merit of Christ. Because faith only is the instrument, which apprehends
Christ's satisfaction. Hence it is evident, for what causes we are to retain the
exclusive particle Only, Four causes why we are to maintain against Papists
that faith only justifies. Romans 3 24, 28. Mark 5 36.
and to maintain it against the Papists: namely, 1. For declaration of that
which Paul speaks, We are justified freely by grace, without works: likewise
of that which Christ says, Only believe. 2. That whatsoever works and merits
of ours, or of others, may be excluded from being causes of justification; and
faith may be understood only with relation and respect to Christ's merit, which
is our justice. 3. That not only our merits, but even faith it self may be
wholly excluded from that which is received by faith: and the sense may be, we
are justified by faith alone, that is, not by meriting, but only by receiving:
as when we say; This poor man is enriched only by receiving the alms of
charitable disposed people: where all works and merits, yea, the very receiving
of alms (if it be considered as a merit) are excluded. Therefore Paul says
always, that we are justified (...).
by faith, and (...).
through faith, as by an instrument; but no where faith, (...).
for faith, as the Papists say, who will admit both these manners of speaking,
as if faith were not indeed the application, whereby we apply unto our selves
Christ's justice; but were also besides a certain work or merit, whereby we
deserve to be just: which is quite repugnant to the nature of faith: For, if
for faith we were just and righteous, then faith were now no longer an
acceptance of another righteousness, but were a merit and cause of our own
justice; neither should it receive another satisfaction, which now it should
have no need of. 4. That we may know what necessity there is of faith unto
justification, and may understand, that we are not justified by the merit of
faith, and yet are not justified without faith apprehending the justice of
Christ; because it is the proper act of faith, to lay hold on his
righteousness. 5. The Orthodoxall or right believing Fathers oft-times urge
the exclusive particle, Origin. in Romans libro tertio capite tertio. Ambr. in
Romans 3. In cap. 10.
by faith only. Origin: The Apostle says that the justification of faith only
is sufficient; so that if a man believe only, he may be justified; yea,
though he perform no work. Ambrose: They are justified freely, who working
nothing, and rendering no recompense, are justified by faith only through the
gift of God. Again Ambrose: How then may the Jews think themselves to be
justified by the works of the law, with the justification of Abraham, where
they see that Abraham was not justified by the works of the law, but by faith
only? The law therefore needs not, when a sinner is justified before God by
faith only. In cap. 10. In 1. ad Cor. 1.4.
And, in the same place, the exclusive particle Only is often reiterated. The
same Ambrose says: Because this is decreed by God, that he which believes in
Christ should be saved without any work* receiving freely by faith only
remission of sins. We are therefore justified by faith only, that is, by
Christ's merit only received by faith: This we must constantly maintain and
defend, 1. For Gods glory, that Christ's sacrifice be not extenuated. 2. For our
own comfort, that we may be assured, that our righteousness depends not on
our works (for so should we lose it many thousand times) but only on the
sacrifice and merit of Christ.

ON THE 24. SABBATH.
Quest. 62. Why cannot our good works be righteousness, or some part of
righteousness before God?
Ans. Because that righteousness, which must stand fast before the judgment
of God, must be in all points perfect and agreeable to the law of God Gal.
3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.36.
Now our works, even the best of them, are imperfect in this life, and defiled
with sin Esaias 64.6.
.

The Explication.
IN the former Questions the true doctrine of Justification has been made
manifest and confirmed. It follows that we proceed to the confutation of the
Popish doctrine, affirming that we are justified by works, or, partly by
faith, and partly by works. The argument is thus framed: The justice which may
stand in Gods judgment must be perfectly absolute, and agreeable on all parts
with Gods Law. But our very best works in this life are imperfect, and stained
with sin: Therefore our very best works cannot be our justice in the judgment
of God, neither in part nor wholly. The Major of this Syllogism is evidently
proved out of the law: He that does these things, shall live in them. Cursed
is every one, which abides not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to do them. The Minor is out of doubt: Levit. 18.5. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Why
our works are imperfect.
seeing we do many evil things, which we ought to leave undone; and we leave
many good works undone, which we should do: yea, we mingle much evil with
that good we do, that is, we do it amiss. The complaints and daily prayers
of Saints are witness hereof: Forgive us our sins. Enter not into judgment
with thy servant. Wherefore imperfect works can make no perfect righteousness.
Psalm. 143.2.
This is the first cause why we cannot be justified by our works; namely, Ten
causes why we cannot be justified by works, or partly by faith, and partly by
works.
Because our justice should by this means be imperfect, seeing our works are
imperfect. Many other causes there are: For, Though our works were perfect,
yet are they due debt, so that by them we cannot acquit our sins that are past.
When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. They are
none of ours but Gods* who works them in us. They are temporary, and have no
proportion with eternal rewards: Luke 17.10.
whereas between a merit and reward there must be some proportion. They are the
effects of justification; therefore not the cause. If by them we were
justified, we should have whereof to boast: but the Scripture says, Not of
works, lest any man should boast himself. The conscience should be destitute
of solid or sure comfort. Christ should have died without a cause. There should
not be the same way to salvation in both Testaments, if Abraham were justified
by faith only, and we by works, Ephesians. 2.9. Romans 4.16.
whether by works alone, or works joined with faith, it skilleth not. Christ
should be no perfect Savior: because some part of our righteousness and
salvation should be without him. Gal. 2.21.


Quest. 63. How is it that our good works merit nothing, seeing God promises,
that he will give a reward for them, both in this life, and in the life to come?
Answ. That reward is not given of merit, but of grace Luke 17.10.
.

The Explication.
IN this Question is contained a prevention of an argument of the Papists,
brought for justification before God for our works and merits. Obj. 1. Reward
presupposes merit; so that where reward is, there is also merit: for Reward
and Merit are correlatives; whereof if one be put, the other is put also. But
everlasting life is proposed as a reward for good works: Therefore also the
merit of good works is everlasting life. Answ. The Major is sometimes true as
concerning creatures, as when men may merit or deserve of men. But neither
always among men does it follow that there is merit where there is reward: for
men also oftentimes give rewards not of merit or desert. Now it is unproperly
said of God, that he proposes eternal life unto our works as a reward: for we
can merit nothing at Gods hand by our works. Or if they thus press and urge
their reason: Object. That is a merit whereunto a reward appertains: But a
reward appertains to good works: Therefore by order of justice good works
are merits. Answ. That is a merit whereunto a reward appertains by force of
covenant or bond. But the reward of good works is of grace. In reward two
things are to be considered: 1. Obligation, or binding. 2. Compensation, or
recompensing. Here is no obligation, but compensation follows works through
grace. There is therefore a reward of works, because compensation follows
them; and God for this cause especially promises to reward our works: 1. To
testify unto us, that good works please him. Three causes why God promises
to reward our works.
2. To teach us that eternal life is proposed only to them that strive and
labor painefully. 3. Because he will as surely give us a reward, as if we
had deserved it. Hither may be referred all such like arguments of the Papists,
whereby they labor to establish the merit of works.

Object. 2. We are justified by faith. Faith is a work: Therefore we are
justified by works. Ans. 1. The consequence of this reason is denied, because
more is in the conclusion than in the premises: of which premises this only
follows; Therefore we are justified by that work: which we grant, to wit,
as by an instrument or mean, not as any impellent cause, as themselves
understand it: for we are justified by faith, as by a mean of attaining our
justification: and we are not justified for faith, that is for the merit of
faith. 2. The kind of affirmation is diverse: For in the Major, faith is
understood with relation to Christ's merit, in the Minor it is taken absolutely
and properly.

Object. 3. Our justice is that whereby we are formally or essentially just:
Therefore we are by faith formally and essentially just. Answ. The consequence
of this reason is to be denied, because the kind of affirmation is diverse.
For the Major is meant properly, but the Minor correlatively, and figuratively,
Per Metalepsin.
else it were false: For properly, not faith, but the correlative object of
faith, namely, Christ's merit (which faith beholds, and applies to it self)
is our justice. 2. Either there are four terms in this Syllogism, because
the Major treats of Legal justice, the Minor of Evangelicall: or else the
Major is false: For Evangelicall justice is not formally in us, as whiteness is
in a wall; but is without us, even in Christ, and is made ours by imputation
and application through faith.

Object. 4. That which is imputed unto us for righteousness, for it we are
righteous. Faith is imputed to us for righteousness, as Paul says: Therefore,
For faith we are righteous, and not only By faith. Ans. Again, the kind of
affirmation is, of proper in the Major proposition, made figurative in the
Minor. The Major is true of that which is properly and by it self imputed for
righteousness: The Minor is true of that which is correlatively imputed for
righteousness, because, by faith is correlatively understood the object of
faith, unto which faith has relation; for Christ's merit, which is apprehended
by faith, is properly our justice, and the formal cause of our justice. The
efficient of our justice is God, applying that merit of Christ unto us. The
instrument all cause of our justice is faith: And therefore this proposition,
we are justified by faith, being Legally understood with the Papists, is not
true, but blasphemous: but being taken correlatively, that is, Evangelically,
with relation to Christ's merit, it is true: For the correlative of faith is the
merit of Christ, which faith also as a joint Relative or correlative
respects, and as an instrument apprehends.

Object. 5. Evil works condemn: Therefore good works justify. Ans. 1.
These contraries are not matches: For our evil works are perfectly evil; our
good works are imperfectly good. 2. Although our good works were perfectly
good, yet should they not deserve eternal life, because they are debts. Unto
evil works a reward is due by order of justice: unto good works not so,
because we are obliged and bound to do them: For the creature is obliged to
his Creator, neither may he of the contrary bind God unto him by any works
or means to benefit him. And evil works in their very intent despite God;
but good works yield him no profit or delight.

Object. 6. He that does righteousness, is righteous: Therefore not he that
believes. Answ. 1. He is righteous before men: that is, by doing
righteousness, 1 John 3.7.
he declares himself righteous to others: but before God we are righteous,
not by doing righteousness, but by believing: as it is written; Romans 3.20.
By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. 2. John
shows there, not how we are righteous, but what the righteous are: as if he
should say, that he that is regenerated, is also justified; because, by doing
righteousness, he testifies to the world that he is justified; So then in
this reason, the fallacy is a taking that which is no cause of justification,
instead of the true cause thereof.

Object. 7. Christ says, Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much:
Luke 7.47.
Therefore good works are the cause of justification. Ans. 1. Christ here
reasons from the latter to the former; from the effect which comes after, to
the cause which goes before. In that the woman loved Christ much, Christ
thence gathers that many sins were forgiven her: and because there was a
great feeling in that woman of the benefit, it must needs therefore be that the
benefit is great, and many sins are forgiven her. That this is the meaning of
Christ's words, appears by the parable which he there uses. 2. Not every
thing that is the cause of Consequence in reason, is also the cause of the
Consequent, or thing it self which follows in that consequence of reason.
Wherefore it is a fallacy of the Consequent, if it be concluded, Therefore for
her love many sins are forgiven her: For the particle (because) which Christ
uses, does no^ always signify the cause of the thing following. It follows
not, The Sun is risen because it is day: Therefore the day is the cause of the
rising of the Sun. The contrary rather is true.

Quest. 64. But does not this doctrine make men careless and profane?
Ans. No: For neither can it be, but they which are incorporated into Christ
through faith, should bring forth the fruits of thankfulness Mat. 7.18. John
15.5.


The Explication.
THis Question of the Catechism is a prevention of the Papists slander against
the doctrine of Justification by faith. Ob. 1. Doctrine which makes men secure
and profane is not true, and therefore not to be delivered. But this doctrine
of free justification by faith, makes men secure and profane: Therefore it is
not true, nor to be taught or delivered in the Church. Ans. Here is a fallacy
of accident. If the doctrine of free justification by faith make men secure,
this happens by accident. The natural effect of this doctrine, is an earnest
desire of showing our thankfulness toward God. But this accident, objected by
the adversaries of this truth falls out, not because men do apply, but
because men do not apply to themselves the doctrine of grace. Repl. 1. Even
those things which fall out to be evil by an accident, are to be eschewed. But
this doctrine makes men by an accident evil: Therefore it is to be eschewed.
Ans. Those things which fall out to be evils by an accident, are to be
eschewed, if there remain no greater and weightier cause for which they are
not to be omitted, which become evil to men through their own default. But
we have necessary and weighty cause why this doctrine ought to be delivered,
and by no means to be omitted: namely, the commandment and glory of God, and
the salvation of the Elect. Repl. 2. That which cannot heart, we need not to
eschew. But according to the doctrine of justification by faith, sins to come
cannot hurt us: (because Christ has satisfied for all, both which are past,
and which are to come.) Therefore we need not to beware of sins to come. Now
this is apparently absurd: Therefore the doctrine, whence this Consequent
arises, is likewise absurd. Ans. 1. We answer to the Major of this reason,
that we need not beware and take heed of that which cannot hurt, namely,
whether it be taken heed of, or no. But sins to come hurt not, that is, hurt
not them which are heedfull and penitent; yet they hurt them who are careless
and unrepentant. 2. Therefore we also deny the Minor: for God is always
offended with sins, and his displeasure is the greatest hurt that can befall
man. Further, sins bereave us of conformity with God, and purchase bodily pains
unto the faithful, howsoever eternal pains be remitted unto them. Hither
belong other arguments of the Papists, wherewith they oppugn this doctrine of
Justification by faith: such as are these following;

Object. 2. That which is not in the Scripture, is not to be taught or
retained. That we are justified by faith only is not in the Scripture:
Therefore it is not to be retained. Ans. To the Major we say, that which is not
in the Scripture, neither in words* nor in sense, is not to be retained: But,
that we are justified by faith only, is contained in Scripture, as touching the
sense thereof; for we are said to be justified freely by grace, without the
works of the law, Romans 3.2^, 28. Gal. 2.15. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Titus 3.5. 1 John
1.7.
without the law, not of works, not of our selves, not of any righteousness
which we have done; by faith without merit. Also the blood of Christ is said
to cleanse us from all sin: And these are all one, To be justified by faith
alone, and, To be justified by the blood and merit of Christ apprehended by
faith, only by receiving and believing, deserving nothing by faith, or other
works. Now the reasons why we are to retain against the Papists the exclusive
particle [only] have been heretofore declared and enlarged.

Object. 3. That which is not alone, does not justify alone. Faith is not
alone: Therefore faith does not justify alone. Ans. If the conclusion be so
understood, as it follows out of the premises, on this wise; Faith therefore
does not justify alone, that is, being alone; the argument is of force: For
justifying faith is never alone, without works as her effects. Faith justifies
alone, but is not alone when it justifies; having works accompanying it, as
effects of it, but not as joint causes with it of justification. But if it be
thus understood, Therefore faith alone does not justify, meaning, that it has
not alone the act of justifying, which is the apprehending of Christ's justice;
then either the conclusion contains more than the premises enforce, or the
Major is evidently false: For I alone may speak in a hot-house, and yet not be
alone there. A thing may be not alone, but joined with others, and yet may
alone have this, or that act. For example; The will is not alone, but joined
with the understanding: yet it wills alone. A man's soul is not alone, but
joined with the body; yet it understands alone. It is commonly, and that
rightly, called a fallacy of Composition, the reason being deceitfully
composed. For the word, alone, is composed and joined in the conclusion with
the Predicate, which is the word justify, but in the premises it is joined
with the Verb, is.

Object. 4. That which is required in those who are to be justified; without
the same, faith does not justify: Good works are required in those who are to
be justified: Therefore without good works faith does not justify: and so
faith alone does not justify. Ans. Here also is the same fallacy. With what
difference faith and works are req^ired in them that are to be justified.
For the particle without, is ambiguously and doubtfully taken. For in the
Major it is taken thus: Faith without it, that is, being without it, does not
justify. For though it be not, or exist not alone, but is always united and
coupled with charity, whereby it works: yet it justifies alone, that is, it
alone has the act of embracing and applying to it self Christ's merit. The
Minor also of this objection is more at large to be explained, that it may the
better be rightly conceived. In them who are to be justified faith and works
are required, but not after the same manner. Faith with her proper work
(without which it cannot be considered) is required as a necessary instrument,
whereby we apply Christ's merit unto us. But good works are not required, that
by them we may apprehend Christ's merit, and much less that for them we should
be justified; but that by them we may show our faith, which without good works
is dead, and is not known but by them: that is, good works are required as
effects of faith, and, as it were a testimony of our thankfulness toward God.
Whatsoever is necessarily co-herent with the cause, that is not therefore
necessarily required to the producing of the proper effect of that cause. So
good works, although they are necessarily co herent and joined with faith, yet
are they not necessary for the apprehension of Christ's merit, that we should
(over and besides faith) by them also apply the same unto us.

Object. 5. Where more things are required, there the exclusive particle (only)
may not be used: In them that are to be justified, besides faith, good works
are required: Therefore we cannot say that faith only justifies. Answ. This
argument is all one with the former, and therefore the answer unto it is the
same. In them that are to be justified more things are required, but in a
diverse manner: faith, as a mean or instrument apprehending another justice;
good works, as a testimony of our faith and thankfulness.

Object. 6. He that is justified by two things, is not justified by one only:
But we, besides that we are justified by faith, are justified by the merit and
obedience of Christ: Therefore, not by faith only. Ans. Again we must yield
the same answer. He that is justified by two things, is not justified by one
only: that is, after one and the same manner. But we are justified by two
things after a diverse manner: For we are justified by faith, as by an
instrument apprehending justice; but by the merit of Christ, as by the formal
cause of our justice.

Object. 7. Knowledge does not justify: Faith is a knowledge: therefore faith
does not justify Ans. Knowledge alone does not justify: But justifying faith
is not a knowledge only, but also a confidence and sure persuasion, whereby, as
a mean, we apply Christ's merit unto us. And furthermore, knowledge and this
sure persuasion are much different. Knowledge is in the Understanding, but this
is in the Will: Knowledge and confidence differ.
Therefore a sure persuasion or confidence is not only a knowledge of a thing;
but also a will and purpose of doing or applying that which we know, and of
resting in it; so that we are thereby secure, and take joy of heart therein.
So then, to believe in God, is not only to acknowledge God, but also to have
confidence in him. Else the Devil also has a knowledge of God, and of his
promises, but without confidence: Therefore his knowledge is no justifying
faith, but historical only, whereof S. James speaks, saying: The Devils
believe and tremble. James 2.19.
Of such a faith we easily grant the Papists argument, but not of a true and
justifying faith.

Object. 8. S. James says, Ye see then, how that of works a man is justified,
and not of faith only: Therefore faith only justifies not. James 2.24.
Ans. There is a double ambiguity in the words: and first in the word
justified. For S. Jam. speaks not of that justice whereby we are justified
before God; that is, whereby we are reputed of God just for unjust: but he
speaks of that justice, whereby through our works we are justifed before men;
that is, are approved just, or are found to be justified. This is proved, 1.
Out of the 18. verse; Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my
faith by my works. Show it me (says he) to wit, who am a man. Wherefore, he
speaks of manifesting our faith and righteousness before men. 2. Out of the
21. verse; Was not Abraham our Father justified through works, when he offered
his Son upon the altar? Genesis 15.60
This cannot be understood of justification before God. For the story
testifies that Abraham was reputed just by God, long before the offering of
his Son. And Paul says: Abraham was justified before God, not by works, but by
faith. S. James his meaning is, that Abraham was justified before God, because
it is written: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness: Rom 4.1, 2. Genesis 15, 6.
but by good works and obedience toward God, he witnessed his justice before
men. This is the first ambiguity in the word justified. The second ambiguity is
in the word faith: For S. James, when he takes away justification of faith,
speaks not of a true or lively faith, as Paul does; but of a dead faith,
which is a bare knowledge without confidence or works. This appears in those
words: Even so faith, if it have not works, is dead in it self: and such faith
he ascribes to devils, who, questionless, have not true justifying faith.
Lastly, in the 16. ver. he compares that faith which he denies to justify,
with a dead body: but such is not true and justifying faith. The sum of all
is: If the word justified in this text of James be understood properly of
justification before God, then the name of faith there signifies a dead faith:
If faith be taken for true justifying faith, then the ambiguity rests in the
word justified.

Object. 9. That which is not required unto justification, is not necessary to
be done: but it is necessary that good works be done: Therefore they are
required to justification. Ans. The Major is false, because there may be many
ends of one thing. Though good works are not required to justification: yet
they are required in token of thankfulness, and to the setting forth of Gods
glory: As it is said, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, Mat. 5.16.
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. For this cause good works are
necessary to be done. More causes of them shall hereafter, in the doctrine of
man's thankfulness, be alleged and declared.

Obj. 10. It is said that Phinees work and deed was imputed unto him for
righteousness: Therefore good works justify: Psalm. 106.31.
Ans. This is a mis-construing of the phrase used in the place alleged. For
the meaning of it is, that God approved of this work, but not that he was
justified by that work: Gal. 2.16. Psalm. 143.2.
For, by the works of the law flall no flesh be justified in his sight.

Object. 11. Ten crowns are part of an hundred crowns in payment of a debt:
Therefore good works may be some part of our justice before God. Ans. There is
a dissimilitude in these examples: For, 1. Ten crowns are a whole part of an
hundred crowns, and being ten times multiplied make up the whole sum of the
debt: but our works are not a whole and perfect part, but an imperfect part of
the obedience we owe; and being multiplied an hundred thousand times, yet never
make any perfect obedience. 2. Ten Crowns may be accepted by the Creditour for
a part of the debt due unto him, because there may be some hope of payment of
the rest: but good works are not accepted by God as a part of our justice,
because there is no hope of full payment to be made by us; and all imperfection
or defect is condemned by the law.

Object. 12. The justice or righteousness which Christ brought is eternal:
Dan. 9.24. Osianders arguments against imputed righteousness.
For the Messiah (as Daniel says) brings everlasting righteousness. But
imputed righteousness is not eternal. Therefore imputed righteousness is not
given by Christ. Ans. We deny the Minor; for imputed justice is eternal, 1. By
perpetual continuation of imputation in this life. 2. By perfection of that
justice which is begun in us. For both that righteousness which is imputed
unto us, and that which is begun in us, is the righteousness of Christ; and
both of them shall be eternal. For we shall be acceptable and pleasing unto
God for ever through his Son Christ: Therefore imputation also shall be
continued, or rather shall be changed into our own justice and righteousness.
Repl. Where sin is not, there is no place for remission or imputation. In the
life to come sin shall not be: Therefore there shall be no place there for
remission or imputation. Ans. We grant the whole reason, if it be conceived
aright. In the life to come shall not be remission of any sin then present: yet
there shall be a remission of sins past; inasmuch as the remission which was
once granted in this life, shall continue and endure for ever: that is, our
sins, which were long since forgiven us in this life, shall never be imputed to
us again. And moreover, that conformity which we shall have with God in the
life to come, shall be an effect of this imputation.

Object. 13. The Lord is our righteousness: Therefore we are not justified by
imputed righteousness, Jerem. 23.6.
but God himself essentially dwelling in us is our righteousness. Ans. In this
saying of Jeremie the effect is put for the cause: The Lord is our justice or
righteousness, that is, our Justifier: even as Christ is said to be made unto
us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption; that is, a
Teacher of wisdom, a Justifier a Sanctifier and Redeemer. 1 Cor. 1.30.
That justice, which is God himself, is not in us: because so God should be an
accident to his creature, and become justice in man: For justice and virtue are
things created in us, not the essence of God. Osiander, who objecteth this,
does not discern the cause from the effect; that is, uncreated justice from
created justice. As we live not, or are wise by the essence of God (for this is
all one, as to say, that we are as wise as God) so also we are not just by the
essence of God. Wherefore nothing is more impious, than to say, that the
essential justice of the Creator is the justice of the creatures: for thereof
would follow, that we have the justice of God, yea, the very essence of God.

OF THE SACRAMENTS.
Quest. 65. Seeing then that only faith makes us partakers of Christ and his
benefits, ON THE 25. SABBATH.
whence does it proceed?
Answ. From the holy Ghost Ephesians. 2.8. and 6.23. John 3.5. Phil. 1.29.
, who kindles it in our hearts by the preaching of the Gospel, and confirms
it by the use of the Sacraments Mat. 28.19, 20 1 Pet. 1.22, 23.
.

The Explication.
THis Question points out unto us the coherence and connection of the doctrine
of Faith and the Sacraments. For Faith (whereon the former immediate discourse
has insisted) is ordinarily wrought in us of the holy Ghost, by the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, whereof there are two parts: the Word and
Sacraments. The holy Ghost by the Word kindles faith in us; and fostereth,
strengthens, and seals it unto us, when it is once kindled by the
Sacraments. For the Word and Gospel is as a Charter or Letter Patent; the
Sacraments are as seals thereunto annexed. For whatsoever is promised us in
the Word of the obtaining of our salvation by Christ; the same the Sacraments,
as signs and seals annexed unto the Word, as it were unto a Charter or
Letters Patents, confirm unto us more and more, thereby to help and relieve
our infirmity. It remains therefore, that we now proceed to entreat of the
Sacraments, the signet of faith, adjoined to the Word and Gospel. Object. It is
said, that the Spirit and the Word work faith in us, and the Sacraments nourish
it being wrought. How then differ these three one from another? Answ. Very
much. Three differences between the Spirit, and the Word, and Sacraments, in
working faith in us.
1. The holy Ghost works and confirms faith in us, as the efficient cause
thereof: the Word and Sacraments, as isntrumental causes. 2. The holy Ghost
also can work faith in us without them; and the Word and Sacraments without the
holy Ghost can work nothing. 3. The holy Ghost, wheresoever he dwells, is
effectual in working: the Word and Sacraments are not so.

Quest. 66. What are the Sacraments?
Ans. They are sacred signs and seals set before our eyes, and ordained of
God for his cause, that he may declare and seal by them the promise of his
Gospel unto us: to wit, that he gives freely remission of sins and life
everlasting, not only to all in general, but to every one in particular that
believes, for that only sacrifice of Christ, which he accomplished upon the
Cross Genesis 17.11. Rom 4.11. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Levit. 6.25. Heb. 9.7, 8, 9, 24. Ezekiel.
20.22. 1 Samuel 17.36. Esaias 6.6, 7. Esaias 54.9.
.

The Explication.
THe right and direct method of interpreting this doctrine of the Sacraments
requires, that first we speak of the Sacraments in general. And this way may
we not unfitly entreat in special of the Supper and Baptism: to wit, if we
take in declaring each Sacrament in special, the same questions, and that
course and order of the same questions, which we must observe and follow
concerning the Sacraments in general; and lastly, if we apply those
testimonies which speak of the Sacraments in general, to the handling and
declaring of the Sacraments in special.

The chief Questions concerning the Sacraments.
1. What Sacraments are. 2. What are the ends of Sacraments. 3. In what
Sacraments differ from Sacrifices. 4. In what they agree with the word, and in
what they differ from it. 5. How the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament
agree. 6. What are signs, and what the things in the Sacraments: and in what
the things differ from their signs. 7. What sacramental union is. 8. What
forms of speaking of the Sacraments are usual to the Church and Scripture. 9.
What is the lawful use of the Sacraments. 10. What the wicked receive in the
use thereof. 11. How many Sacraments there are of the New Testament.
What Sacraments are.
The original of the word Sacrament.
THat we may know what Sacraments properly are, the name it self of Sacrament
is first to be considered. Among the ancient Romans, this word Sacrament
signifies a piece of money, which two parties, putting one the other in suite,
laid down in some sacred place, or left in custody of the High-Pontife or
Priest, with this condition, that he who gained the suite, should have his part
entire again; and he who was cast in the cause, should lose his part to the
common Treasury, in lieu of his wrongful molesting the other party. This
signification nothing pertains to this place. a solemn form of an oath
taken in war, which they called a military Sacrament, so called of Sacrando;
that is, of sacring or consecrating them: because by that oath every one was
consecrated, or destined to his Captain, and not to any other, to serve him.
Hereof it is, that some will have these ceremonies instituted by God, therefore
to be so called, for that as Souddiers did oblige and bind themselves by that
military Sacrament unto their Captain; so we bind our selves unto our
Captain Christ, by a solemn oath, in the presence of God, Angels, and Men.
This truly is no unapt or unmeet Metaphor: but yet I think rather, that the
original of this name came from the old Latin Translations; in which,
wheresoever the word Mystery is used in the New Testament, for the same they
commonly in Latin put the word Sacramentum. Now Mystery comes from the Greek
verb, (...), which signifies, to institute, instruct, or initiate one in the
holy matters, or matters of Religion. But that Greek verb, (...) is derived
from another, which is (...), which signifies to shut, because (as Eustathius
says) they who are initiated, or entered in holy rites, were to shut their
mouth, and not to utter those things which were secret. Now a mystery is said
to be, either a secret thing it self, or the sign of a secret thing, or that
which has a secret signification, which none understand but they who are
initiated in holy rites. By a sign we understand an external and corporeal
thing and action, or a ceremony instituted and ordained by God, which
betokens a certain internal thing and spiritual. Which the Grecians call a
Mystery, and is otherwise called of the Latin Divines, a Sacrament. And some
such signs God always would have to be extant in his Church, whereby both the
good will of God toward men might be recorded and made known; and that men of
the other side might declare and show their faith toward God, and other duties
of piety and godliness. Sacraments therefore are so called Mysteries, because
they have a secret signification, which none understand, but they who are
initiated and instructed concerning the substance of sacred matters, or the
points of Christian Religion. Nevertheless, the word Sacrament is used in
diverse significations in the writings of famous Divines: of which these are
chief: 1. For a rite or external ceremony; which sense is proper and natural
to the word. 2. For the signs themselves. 3. For the thing signified by the
signs. 4. For the signs and thing signified both together.

Having seen now what the name of Sacrament signifies, it rests, that we
consider the thing it self, and define what Sacraments are. The definition
whereof is this: Sacraments are rites or ceremonies instituted by God to this
use, The definition of Sacraments.
That they might be signs of the Covenant; to wit, of Gods good will toward
us, and of the bond of the Church, whereby it covenanteth faith and repentance:
and that they may be marks and cognizances, whereby to distinguish Gods Church
from Gentiles and Sectaries, The definition of Sacraments.
In the Catechism they are thus defined: Sacraments are sacred signs and
feales object to our eyes, ordained and instituted by God, that by them he
might the more declare and seal the promise of his Gospel unto us. The parts
of this definition are in number three: The first part appertains to the
kind of Sacraments; the latter two to their difference. To the kind, whereof
they are, it appertains, The Sacraments are sacred seals.
that they are sacred and ocular signs and seals; that is, divine, and
signifying, or betokening sacred things, such as belong to Gods worship, and
the salvation of men. A sign and a seal differ one from the other, as a
general thing from a thing more special. For every seal is a sign, but not
every sign a seal. A seal certifieth and confirms a thing: What a sign is.
A sign only shows it. A sign is a thing signifying somewhat else then
that which it shows to the senses, and inducing something else into the
cogitation; as Augustine defines it: or, a sign is that, whereby the
understanding understands some things else besides the sign it self
apprehended by the sense. So words are the signs of things. Moreover, signs
are of two sorts: some are only signifying; others are confirming also: Two
sorts of signs: 1. Signifying. 2. Confirming.
that is, such signs, as whereby we reason and conclude also of the thing
which they signify, neither only understand by them what they signify, but
also argue and reason from them, so that we are not left in doubt or
uncertain, whether that be true or false which they signify: that is, we are
confirmed of the certain exhibiting unto us, and of our receiving of the thing
signified. Both these kinds of signs are conjoined in this definition, because
both agree unto Sacraments: for the Sacraments do not only signify what is
promised, but also seal unto us that which is promised in the Gospel. They are
not only figurative and admonitory signs and mere resemblances, or lively
shadows, as the Ancient term them: Lib. a. cap. 1. de doct. Christ.
but also in their true use become assurances and evidences, both exhibiting
and sealing; because they both exhibit unto the faithful the things promised
them in the Gospel, and seal unto them the exhibiting of them. Of circumcision
under the law, God says, It shall be a sign of the Covenant between me and
you. Paul expounds it: He received the sign of Circumcision, the seal of
the righteousness of the faith which he had. Genes. 17.11, Romans 4.11.
Sacraments therefore serve in the same stead that pledges do: for both they
signify, that there is something promised unto thee, and withal, they assure
and confirm the same unto thee; in regard whereof, it is also added, that they
are seals. Now these signs and seals are called sacred and holy: 1. Because
they are given us of God. Why the signs are called holy.
2. Because they are given us to an holy use. For holy and sacred things are of
two sorts: 1. Those things which God performs unto us. 2. Those things which
we perform unto God. These signs are said to be object to our eyes, that is,
visible; because they ought to be such, seeing they are to signify things
invisible. Why they are said to be object to our eyes.
For if they must be stays and props of faith, they must be perceived by the
outward sense, that the inward sense may thereby be moved. For that which thou
see not, is no sign. And he that makes a sign to be invisible, does imply a
contradiction, and speaks contraries. For not the signs signifying but the
things signified, are invisible: Else signs could not signify things, much
less ratify and confirm them; because, if they were invisible, an uncertain
thing should be confirmed by a thing as uncertain as it self. Whence it is,
that the ancient Writers define a Sacrament thus; A Sacrament is a visible
sign of invisible grace.

How the Sacraments differ from other signs. By the Sacraments God seals
unto us his promise.
To the difference of the Sacraments (whereby they have their several being,
as it were, and are different from other sacred things) appertain these two
properties: 1. That they are ordained and instituted by God. 2. That they are
instituted to this end, that God may by them seal and assure unto us the
promise of the Gospel. The former of these differences is general; common to
other signs given by God, as well as to Sacraments: whether those signs be
universal, as is the Rainbow: or particular, as was Gedeons fleece, first wet
with dew, the ground whereon it lay being dry; afterward dry, the ground being
wet: and the touching of Isaiahs tongue with a burning coal. The latter
difference is special, taken from the principal end, whereby Sacraments are
properly distinguished from all other holy signs. And, that these signs were
instituted of God alone, it is certain. For, as God alone pronounces
concerning his will, and teaches us the same, and gives us his promise of
grace; so he alone assures and confirms this promise unto us by his
Sacraments: Wherefore, God alone has authority to institute and ordain a
Sacrament. Why God only may ordain a Sacrament.
For the institution of Sacraments contains two things: 1. The appointing and
commanding of certain rites and ceremonies. 2. The promise of grace annexed to
this rite whereby God promises that he will give the thing signified unto such
as lawfully and rightly use the sign. And these things are proper to God
alone: For as the receiving into grace and favor, and remission of sins,
belongs to God alone; so also does the promise thereof. And as God alone
instituteth and appoints unto himself his public worship; so he alone is
able to confirm unto us, by his public worship, that is, by the ministry of
the Word, and by his Sacraments, the promise of grace, that is, the promise of
receiving all blessings and benefits necessary to salvation, which are
signified and confirmed by the ceremonies and rites of Sacraments. The promise
of the Gospel is called the promise of grace, because God does especially and
chiefly in the Gospel promise it unto us. Wherefore mention is made also of
this promise in the definition of Sacraments, that so that special difference
of Sacraments may be the better perceived and discerned: because God has given
to men promises also of other things, and has confirmed those promises with
signs. For Sacraments are signs not of every promise whatsoever, but of the
promise of grace, pertaining not to one private person only (as the touching
of Isaiahs lips) but to the whole Church. How God declares the promise of the
Gospel by Sacraments.
And further, he declares the same, being promised in the Gospel, and shows
it more clearly by Sacraments: and this by reason of the analogy, proportion,
and similitude, which the signs have with those things which are signified by
those Sacramental signs. For, as a similitude declares and explaineth that
whereof it is a similitude; so the Sacraments declare that, whereof they are
Sacraments. And as a true similitude is not understood, except the analogy of
the similitude be understood; so neither are the Sacraments, except we
understand the analogy and proportion which they have with the thing signified.
Neither does God by his Sacraments only declare the promise of the Gospel, but
also seals the same unto us: How he seals that promise unto us by
Sacraments.
1. Because God, when he speaks with us, whether it be by his word, or by a
sign, is always alike true: And therefore he assures and makes us certain
of his will, both by his Word and by his Sacraments, but most of all by his
Sacraments. 2. Because Sacraments are seals and pledges annexed to the
promise, which, whosoever uses rightly, that is, with true faith and repentance,
unto him those pledges and seals, seal and confirm most assuredly, that he
shall be partaker of the things themselves signified, which are spiritual.

2. What are the ends of Sacraments.
1. Sacraments are ordained to be seals of Gods Covenant.
THe chief and principal end of Sacraments is contained in their definition;
namely, to be signs of the Covenant: that is, that God may testify, that he
does in a lawful and right use of them bestow the thing promised, and so may
confirm our faith; or, that he may instruct us of his will by his Sacraments,
and by them exhort us to receive and embrace the blessings purchased by Christ,
and further, seal by those Sacraments these benefits and blessings of Christ
unto us. Now the Sacraments seal these benefits and blessings unto us: 1.
Because Sacraments are signs. 2. Because they are pledges, having a promise:
Therefore by these signs and pledges of Gods favor toward us, the holy Ghost
effectually moves our hearts no less then by the Word. The second end is the
distinguishing of the Church from Painims, 2. To distinguish the Church from
others.
and all other Sects whatsoever. For God will have his Church to be beheld in
the world, and to be known by these sacred signs, as soldiers are known by
their military tokens, and sheep by those marks which their shepherd seareth
seareth in them. He wills the Jews to be circumcised, and Christians to be
baptized: he interdicteth aliens and strangers, and excludes them from eating
of the Paschall Lamb. God will have his Kingdom discerned from the Synagogue
of Satan, for these two causes: 1. For his own glories sake. 2. For our
comfort and salvation. For, as he will not have himself shuffled and mingled
with Idols; so neither will he have his people shuffled and mighled with the
Kingdom of the Devil. The third end is the profession and testification of
our thank fullness and duty toward God: 3. To prosesse and testify our
thankfulness.
which is the bond, whereby we are obliged unto Christ to be his people, as he
is our God, to show true repentance, to believe in him, and to receive of him
his benefits offered unto us. The fourth is, the propagation and maintenance of
the doctrine: 4. To propagate and maintain the doctrine.
because God will not have the use of his Sacraments to be without the Word,
and application thereof. The fifth is, an occasion thereby given to the younger
sort, to inquire what these things mean, 5. To give an occasion to the younger
to inquire and learn the things by them signified. Exodus 13.14.
and so an occasion also of explicating and preaching the benefits of Christ
unto them. As also the Lord says unto his people, When thy son shall ask thee
to morrow, saying, What is this? Thou shall then say unto him; With a mighty
hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. The sixth
and last end is, that they may be bonds of mutual dilection and love; because
they, 6. To unite us in mutual love and affection.
who are entered into an association or confederacy with Christ the head of the
Church, ought not to be at difference among themselves. By one spirit are we
all baptized into one body. In like manner the Sacraments are the bonds of
public meetings and congregations in the Church. When ye come together to
eat, tarry one for another. For we that are many, are one bread, 1 Cor. 12.13.
and 11.33. and 10.17. Ephesians. 4.5.
and one body: because we are all partakers of one bread. One God, one Faith,
etc. But we cannot settle among us this communion, neither maintain and
continue it, being once settled, neither profitably annunciate and show sorth
the death of the Lord, as long as we dissent and jarre among our selves
contentiously about the institution of the Sacraments. For the Sacraments are
pledges of that communion, which Christians have first with Christ, and then
between themselves.

In what Sacraments differ from Sacrifices.
WE must hold and observe a difference between Sacrifices and Sacraments, that
we may know what to do when we come unto the Sacraments, and not make
Sacrifices of Sacraments; that is, present our own works, imagining that they
please God for the very work done, and deserve remission of sins; as Papists
do. Now the difference between these consists especially in two things: In
their kind and nature.
In their kind and nature. For Sacraments are only ceremonies, witnessing
unto us Gods will: Sacrifices may be ceremonial and moral works also: as, our
Sacrifices of thanksgiving, of praise, and thankfulness, the calves of our
lips, our alms, etc. are moral works, whereby we yield unto God due obedience
and honor, without any ceremony In their principal end.
In their principal and chief end. In the Sacraments God offers unto us his
benefits; but Sacrifices are testimonies of our obedience toward God. This
appears out the definition of both. A Sacrament it a work, wherein God gives
us something; to wit, the signs and the things signified: A Sacrament. A
Sacrifice.
and wherein he testifies of his offering and bestowing his benefits upon us.
A Sacrifice is a work, wherein we yield unto God obedience, or the worship
which he has commanded us: Or, it is our work done in faith, and to this end
principally, That God may have his due honor and obedience. They differ then
as these two; To give, and, To take, differ: For God gives Sacraments unto us;
and he receives Sacrifices of us. Howbeit, the same rite or ceremony may be in
diverse respects both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice. A Sacrament, as it is given
of God: A Sacrifice, as it is used by the godly, performing to God their
obedience. and yielding him tanks: Therefore a Sacrament and Sacrifice are
often one and the selfsame thing; The same thing or work may be a Sacrifice
and a Sacrament in a diverse respect.
but still they differ in respect. All Sacraments then in respect of us are
Sacrifices also, but those only Eucharisticall, and of thanksgiving, not
propitiatory. For there is but one only Sacrifice propitiatory; to wit, the
ransom of Christ offered for us on the Cross. Hence we easily may answer unto
that objection, Object. The Passover, and other ceremonies of the Old
Testament, were both Sacrifices and Sacraments: Therefore the Sacraments do
nothing differ from Sacrifices. Ans. More is in the conclusion, then in the
premises: because this only follows; That the same thing may be a Sacrament
and a Sacrifice. So Baptism and the Lords supper are Sacraments and
Sacrifices, in a diverse manner and respect. They are Sacraments: and that
principally, because they are the work of God, who gives us something in them,
and does therein testify his gift unto us. For in them he reaches unto us
certain symbols and tokens by his Ministers, as also by his Ministers he
speaks, as by his mouth, unto us: according as it is said; Luke 10.16
He that hears you, hears me. So therefore every Minister reaches with his
hand the Sacraments unto us, and we receive them at their hands, as at the
hands of God, if so we take them with reverence: but much more God gives, and
as it were, reaches with his hand unto us, in the lawful and right use of the
Sacraments, the things themselves which are signified by the Sacraments.
Furthermore, Baptism and the Lords Supper are Sacrifices, not indeed
principally, but as they are our work, which we perform to God; that is, as we
receive these signs, as it were from the hand of God, and so declare our
obedience toward God.

4. In what Sacraments agree with the Word, and in what they differ.
THis agreement and difference shall be handled in the 67. Question of the
Catechism.

5. How the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament agree, and how they differ.
THey agree: They agree:
In the author.
In the author; for both were instituted by God. In substance.
In the things signified, or in substance: for by the Sacraments of both
Testaments the same things are offered, signified, and promised unto us; even
remission of sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost, and that by Christ alone.
This is proved in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Hebr. 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday and today, the same also for ever. But these are not in
respect of rites and ceremonies the same: Therefore they are the same in
respect of the thing by them signified. 1 Cor. 10.2. Colos. 2.11.
The Fathers under the law were baptized in the cloud and in the sea, and did
all eat the same spiritual meat. By Christ ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands: that is, in Baptism we receive the same
benefits, August. Tract. 26. in John.
which they did in circumcision. Augustine says, The Sacraments of the Old and
New Testament differ in their signs, but agree in the thing signified by the
signs. All the Fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, I say, they verily
did eat the same spiritual meat. For indeed the corporal meat they ate,
was diverse from our corporal meat; seeing their meat was Manna, but ours is
of another kind. But they did eat the same spiritual meat which we eat.
Without Christ therefore, who is the thing signified of all the Sacraments,
both of the Old and New Testament, no man was ever saved, or now is, or ever
shall be saved. Whence it follows, that the Fathers in the Old Testament had
the same communion with Christ, which also we have, and that it was no less
signified and confirmed then unto them by the Word and Sacraments, then it is
now unto us in the new Covenant. Wherefore, it is not only idolatry to seek
another communion of Christ, then is in the Word, but also to seek another
communion of Christ in the Sacraments of the New Testament, then which was in
the Sacraments of the Old Testament.

The Sacraments of the old and new Testament differ: 1. In rites.
They differ first in rites, whereof change and alteration was made at Christ's
coming, that thereby might be signified the ceasing of the Old Testament, and
the beginning or succeeding of the New Testament. In number.
They differ in multitude and number. There were more, and more laborious; here
fewer, and more easy rites. In signification.
In signification. Those signified Christ to come, these Christ that was come.
The signification is diverse, as the circumstance of time is diverse, which the
Sacraments of the Old and New Testament signify. For the Sacraments of the old
Church signified the time to come of Christ which should come: our Sacraments
signify the time past of Christ already manifested in the flesh. In the
persons whom they bound
In binding and obliging men. The old bound only Abraham's posterity (for the
converted Gentiles were not bound to observe circumcision, Cap. 2.5.
such as were those religious men spoken of in the Acts) ours bind the whole
Church of all Nations and Countries. Baptize all nations. Mat. 28.19. Mat.
26.27.
Drink ye all of this. In continuance.
In continuance. The old were to endure but until the coming of the Messiah:
the new until the end of the world. In cleernesse.
IN cleernesse. Those are more obscure and dark, because they signify things
to be manifested; but these more clear and plain, because they signify
things already manifested.

6. What the signs are, what the things, and in what they differ.
IN every Sacrament are two things; the sign, and the thing signified. The
sign in the element, and the whole external action. The thing signified is
Christ himself and his benefits, or the communion and participation of Christ
and his benefits. Differences of the signs from the things signified.
The signs therefore differ from the things signified: In substance; for the
signs are corporal, visible, earthly: the things, heavenly, invisible,
spiritual. Obj. But the body and blood of Christ are things corporeal. Ans.
The things are here called spiritual, not as touching their substance, but
acrording to the manner of receiving them; because through the working of the
holy Ghost they are received by faith only, and not by any part of our body.
For that which is called spiritual in Scripture, sometimes signifies an
incorporeall nature or spirit, What is mean by that which the scripture calls
spiritual. 1 Cor. 10.2.
sometimes an effect or gift of the holy Ghost, sometimes an object of the
spirit, and of spiritual motions, which object is received by the spirit; that
is, by the motion of the holy spirit: or, which is given to them in whom the
holy Spirit dwells; as, All did eat the same spiritual meat. And in this
sense, the body and blood of Christ in the Sacraments are called things
spiritual. in manner of receiving. The signs are received visibly by the hand
mouth, and parts of the body; and therefore also of unbeleevers. The things are
received by faith only and the spirit; and therefore of the faithful only. In
the end or use. The things are given for the possessing of eternal life, they
are eternal life it self, or some part thereof, or purchase it unto us. The
signs are received for the sealing and confirming of our faith concerning the
things themselves promised. The things signified are necessary unto the
salvation of all the members of the true Church. The signs are not simply
necessary for all, but for them only, who are able to receive them, because it
is not the want, but the contempt of the Sacrament, which condemns the
despisers thereof. The signs are diverse in diverse Sacraments, the rites and
ceremonies are variable; but the things are perpetual and the same in all
Sacraments.

7. What the Union of the signs and the things is, which is called
Sacramental.
UNion in general is the conjunction of two or more things, whereby in some
sort they are made one. Hypostaticall or personal union is the coupling of two
natures in one person. The combining of the sign, and the thing signified in
Sacraments, is called Sacramental union. The question is, what kind of union
this is. The Papists opinion confuted.
The Papists imagine, that in the Lords Supper there is a conversion, and
change of the signs into the things signified. But a change is no union: and
Sacramental union must be such as agrees to all Sacraments, else shall it be
no Sacramental union in general; but in special, The union in the Supper,
and, The union in Baptism. Others are of opinion, that there is a corporal
copulation of the sign and the thing signified; The Sacramentaries opinion
confuted.
making one mass, and co-existence of both in one place. But this kind of
co-existence and containing of one the other, is no Sacramental union, because
it agrees not unto all Sacraments: Therefore Sacramental union is not
corporal, neither consists it in a presence of the thing and sign both in
one and the same place, and much less in any transmutation or
transubstantiation: but it is relative or respective, and consists in these
two things: In what Sacramental union consists.
In a similitude and proportion of the signs with the thing signified: whereof
Augustine thus speaks; If (says he) Sacraments had not a certain similitude
of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments. In
the joynt-exhibiting or receiving of the things, and in the lawful and right
use: Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
which cannot be without faith, as hereafter shall be declared. The faithful
only in the lawful and right use, receive the signs, of the Ministers; and
the things signified, of Christ; and when we so receive both, that is, the
sign and the thing signified, the same is called Sacramental union.

Proofs of Sacramental union.
The proof hereof is twofold: from the nature of a Sacrament. A Sacrament is a
respective or relative word. The foundation or matter in the Sacraments are the
rites and ceremonies, or external visible actions instituted by God, which are
performed by men after a certain and solemn manner, and are called by a
relative or respective name, Signs or Sacraments. The term respected or
correlative, is Christ, and the communion of Christ, and all his benefits, or
the internal spiritual working of God in us, according to the promise of the
Gospel: this is called the thing signed or signified by the Sacrament, because
it is signified and confirmed by the outward rite. The Relation it self is the
ordination of the foundation to the term; that is, of the rites to signify
the thing. The correlatives are the things signified and the signs. Hereby now
appears that a Sacramental union is nothing else but a relation of a sign to
a thing signified. Whence this infallible rule arises: while the relation
remains, the thing and signs are coupled; and when it cease, they are
dis-joyned: the meaning whereof is; that as long as Gods order is retained in
the sign, and the things signified, so long are the things exhibited and
sealed with the signs: but when Gods prescript cease, there can no longer be
any exhibiting or sealing of the things by the signs. out of the natural
proportion of Sacraments. Sacramental union is such as agrees to all
Sacraments: therefore look what was the union of Christ with the old
Sacraments, such is it now with our Sacraments; else either those Sacraments
were no Sacraments, or that union was no Sacramental union; namely, such as
agrees to all Sacraments. But that union could be no other but respective
union. Therefore Sacramental union is now also respective.

8. What phrases and forms of speaking of Sacraments are usual unto the
Church and Scripture.
Proper forms of speaking.
THe forms of speaking of Sacraments, are partly proper, and partly figurative.
The proper are, tokens, signs, seals, pledges; and those sealing and
confirming unto us, that God will give those things which he has promised.
Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.11.
So Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of faith. And it shall be a
sign in thy flesh. So bread is a sign of the body of Christ. sign are
expressly signified adjoined promises: namely, that receiving the signs we
shall receive the things by them: Mat. 16.16. Pigurative forms of speaking.
as when it is said, He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved. A
figurative or Sacramental kind of speaking is, The rock was Christ. 1 Cor.
5.7. 1 Cor. 20.16.
The bread is the body of Christ. Christ is our Passover. The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? So Baptism is said to
wash away sins, to save, to regenerate. Acts 22.16. Ephesians. 5.26. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Titus 3.5. 1 John 1.7. John 1.33. John 16.
as, The rock was Christ. We are washed by the blood of Christ. All these
phrases of speech signify the same thing: which is the promise of God adjoined
to the ceremony: and this therefore, 1. Because the signs represent and seal
the things. Baptism is the washing of regeneration. 2. Because the things and
the signs are together received by the faithful, in the right use thereof.

Briefly, A Sacramental form of speech is, wherein the name or properties of
the sign are given to the thing signified; or, of the contrary, the name of
the thing signified to the sign: and the meaning is, not that the one is
changed into the other, but that the sign represents and seals the thing
signified. The cause of Sacramental phrases and terms is, the proportion
between the sign and the thing signified: Ad Bonifacium Epist. 23.
whereof Augustine thus discourses: If Sacraments had not a certain
similitude of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they should be no
Sacraments. Now, out of this similitude they bear for the most part the names
of the things themselves. As therefore the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is
after a certain manner the body of Christ, and the Sacrament of Christ's blood,
is Christ's blood; so the Sacrament of faith, is faith. And in another place:
The things which signify, In Lev. quaest. 57.
are usually called by the name of the thing they signify. Hence it is said,
The Rock was Christ: for he said not, The Rock signifies Christ; but as if it
had been that, which verily in substance it was not, but only by mere
signification.

9. What is the right and lawful use of Sacraments.
In the right use of Sacraments is respected,
THe right use of Sacraments is, when the rites appointed by God are used by the
faithful and penitent, as signs of grace, and pledges of Gods good will
toward them. It consists therefore in these three things: The institution of
Christ, which must be pure.
When the rites ordained of God are observed, and not corrupted. The
institution of Christ is to be retained pure and incorrupt; the additions of
Antichrist are to be taken away, and those things which he took away, are
again to be added. The presons receiving, who must be be^eevers. Acts 8.37.
Mat. 3.6.
When those persons use those rites, for whom God has ordained them. Wherefore
the household of Christ only, that is. Christians, who by profession of faith
and repentance are the Citizens of the Church must use these rites. If thou
beleevest withal thine heart, thou may be baptized. So also, they are
baptized of John, Who confess their sins. The end for which they were
instituted.
When the rites and Sacraments are used to that end, for which they were
instituted: which we have heretofore handled. It any of these conditions be
broken, to wit, if either the rite or end be changed without authority from
God, or the sign be received without faith; it is clear, that the thing and
the sign do no longer continue united after Gods ordinance. Of the person
receiving the Sacrament, it is said; Circumcision profits thee, if thou keep
the law. Of the breach of the rites, Paul pronounces; when ye come together
therefore into one place, this is not to eat of the Lords Supper. Of mistaking
the end, Romans 2.25. 1 Cor. 11.20. Hos. 5.6.
Hosea the Prophet says; they shall go with their sheep and with their
bullocks to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him. For sacrifices were
not instituted by God to this end, to merit justification and salvation. Why we
may not change the rites in the Sacraments.
Wherefore it is not lawful to transform the rites to any other end or use,
besides that whereunto they were ordained: in faith and repentance. They who
have not this, unto them the Sacraments are no Sacraments. Wherefore they are
besides themselves, who say, that unbeleevers and infidels receive together
with the signs, the things signified by the signs.

10. What the wicked receive in the use and administration of the Sacraments.
The wicked receive the bare signs, without the things thereby signified.
IN the Sacraments we are specially to consider, what, to whom, and how God
offers and communicates. The wicked, although God in his Sacraments offer to
them also his benefits; yet seeing they are without faith, they receive the
bare signs only, and those to their judgment and condemnation. This is
proved, Because the benefits of Christ are received only in the right use of
the Sacraments, but they neglect the right use of them, who receive them
unworthily, without faith and repentance. Wherefore Paul also says; Whosoever
shall eat this bread, 1 Cor. 11.27.
and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. But the wicked eat it and drink it unworthily, because they
profane the Sacraments, and transform God into the Devil, and the sons of
God into the sons of the Devil. Unto whom nothing is promised in the word, to
him the Sacraments seal nothing: To the wicked nothing is promised in the
word; (for all promises in the word have a condition of faith and repentance
annexed unto them.) The Sacraments therefore seal and bestow nothing on the
wicked. For after what manner, and unto whom a Charter promises any thing;
after the same manner, and unto the same men, does the sign and seal annexed
unto the Charter promise the same also. Semblably, God performs his benefits
after the same manner, and unto the same persons, after which manners, and unto
which persons he promises them. But unto the wicked he has promised nothing,
so long as they remain in their unbelief. We receive spiritual things by
faith. The wicked have no faith. Therefore neither do the wicked receive
spiritual things. To be wicked, and to receive the Sacraments entirely,
implies a contradiction.

11. How many Sacraments there are of the new Testament.
THis point shall be answered in the sixty and eighth Question of the
Catechism.

Quest. 67. Do not then both the Word and Sacraments tend to that end, as to
lead our faith unto the sacrifice of Christ finished on the Cross, as to the
only ground of our salvation?
Answ. It is even so: For the holy Ghost teaches us by the Gospel, and
assures us by the Sacraments, that the salvation of all of us stands in the
only sacrifice of Christ, offered for us on the Cross Romans 6.2. Gal. 3.27.
.

The Explication.
4. In what Sacraments agree with the Word, and in what they differ from it.
THe Sacraments have some things in them agreeable with the Word, and some
conditions also different from the same. The Sacraments and the word agree,
The Sacraments agree with the Word in these things: In exhibiting the same
thing unto us.
Both exhibit the same things unto us. For by both God does testify unto us
his will, and by both he purposes the same benefits, the same grace, and the
same Christ unto us; neither does God confirm or represent by his Sacraments
any other thing, then he has promised in his Word: and they, who seek for any
other thing in the Sacraments then is prescribed in the Word of God, frame and
make Idols. In proceeding from the H. Ghost
Both are instruments of the holy Ghost, to kindle and strengthen faith in us:
and so both also confirm and establish faith. In being instituted and offered
by God.
God instituteth both, God offers both. In being accomplished by God.
God accomplisheth both by the Ministers of his Church. For he speaks with us
in his Word by the Ministers; and by the Ministers he offers and gives us
these signs in the Sacraments. But the things themselves which are signified
by these signs, the Son of God immediately offers unto us. He says, Receive
the holy Ghost. The bread which I will give you, John 20.22. John 6.51. Matthew.
3.11.
is my flesh. And John says of him, Indeed I baptize you with water to
amendment of life; but he that comes after me, will baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire.

The Sacraments differ from the Word in these things: They disagree,
In substance and nature.
In substance and nature. For, words signify according to the appointment of
men, whom it pleased that things should be so expressed and signified: Signs
signify according to a similitude, which they have with the things by them
signified. Words we hear and read: signs we perceive also by feeling, seeing,
and tasting. Words signify only: Symboles and signs confirm also. In the
persons, to whom they are offered.
In the objects. For the word of the promise and commandment is promised
without any difference to all. To the unregenerate, that they may either begin
to believe and be regenerated, or may be left without excuse: to the
regenerate, that they may the more believe and be confirmed. The Sacraments are
given only to the members of the Church, professing faith and repentance; whose
faith is by them confirmed and preserved. The word is preached to all at once:
the Sacraments are given to every member of the Church severally: one is
baptized after another, and the Supper is ministered to one after another.
Intheir use.
The Word is the instrument of the holy Ghost, by which he begins and
confirms our faith: and therefore the Word must go before the Sacraments. The
Sacraments are the instruments of the holy Ghost, by which he begins not,
but only confirms our faith: and therefore the Sacraments must follow the
Word. The reason of this difference is, because the Sacraments, without they be
understood, never move nor confirm faith. There is no desire after a thing
which is not known. Therefore some declaration and expounding of the signs out
of the Word must first be used. But yet in infants of the Church, the case is
diverse: for in them faith neither is begun, nor confirmed of the holy Ghost by
the Word, but by an inward working and efficacy: and because they are borne in
the Church, to them in their infancy appertains the covenant and the promise.
In their necessity.
For the Word is necessary and sufficing unto salvation, in them who are of an
under standing age. For faith comes by hearing. But the Sacraments are not
precisely and absolutely necessary unto all; neither of themselves without the
Word suffice they to salvation. For the seals without the Letters Patents have
no force: and that saying of S. Augustine is most true; Not the want, but the
contempt of them condemns. In their manner of working.
The Sacraments by gesture, the Word by speech, declares unto us the will of
God. The Word may be effectual without the Sacraments. but not the Sacraments
without the Word. Acts 10.44.
The Word may be without the Sacraments, as both in private and public
expounding of the Scripture, and that effectually also; as was apparent in
Cornelius: but the Sacraments cannot be, nor be effectual without the Word.
The Word is confirmed by the Sacraments.
The Word is that which is confirmed by signs annexed unto it: the Sacraments
are those signs whereby it is confirmed. The Word may not be preached unto
infants: some Sacraments may be given them.
The Word is to be preached to those only who are of understanding: The
Sacraments are to be given unto Infants: as, Circumcision and Baptism.
Augustine said, that a Sacrament is a visible Word: most briefly and most aptly
expressed he both the agreeing and differing of the Word and Sacraments. For
when he says, That a Sacrament is a Word, he shows in what the Word and
Sacraments agree: which is, in that they teach the same. When he adds
Visible, he shows the difference: that is, that they differ in rite and
ceremony. The brief sum of all that has been spoken, is: The signs by
gestures declare Gods will unto us; the Word by speech. By the Word, faith is
begun and confirmed in us; by the Sacraments it is only confirmed after it is
once begun. The Word profits without Sacraments; but Sacraments profit not
without the Word. Men of years are not saved without knowledge: they may be
saved and regenerated without Sacraments, if they neglect them not. The Word
pertains to all; the Sacraments to the faithful alone.

Quest. 68. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in the New Testament?
Answ. Two: Baptism, and the holy Supper.

The Explication.
But two Sacraments in the New Testament.
IN the new Testament are only two Sacraments, the use whereof in the Church
is perpetual and universal by the consents of Ambrose and Augustine:
Baptism, which succeeded in the place of Circumcision, and other purifyings of
the Law: and the Lords Supper, which the Paschal Lamb, and other sacrifices
shadowed and prefigured. These two, and no more, are Sacraments of the New
Testament: because these two Christ did institute. For those only are
sacraments of the New Testament, which are, 1. Ceremonies. 2. Instituted of
Christ for the whole Church. 3. Having the promise of grace adjoined unto them.
But there are only two such Sacraments, as appears by their definition:
Wherefore we have two Sacraments only. The Papists other five Sacraments, are
no Sacraments.
The Papists besides those two reckon five other; Confirmation, Penance or
private absolution, Order, Unction, and Matrimony. But properly these are no
Sacraments. For it is certain, that penance and private absolution, are only
the declaration and preaching of the Gospel. But the preaching and publishing
of grace must not be confounded with the annexed seals of the promise of
grace. Unction, and laying on of hands, and indeed ceremonies; but neither were
they instituted of Christ for the whole Church, neither have they the promise
of grace adjoined. Confirmation, or laying on of hands in the Primitive Church,
was a sign either of a miraculous bestowing of the holy Ghost, which soon
ceased; or of calling to the office of teaching. The thing signified by extreme
Unction, has ceased in the Church, with other gifts of miracles. Order or the
ordaining of the Ministers, testifies indeed Gods presence in the ministry:
but God may be forcible by the ministry of the man; yea though the man's person
please him not. Matrimony is no ceremony, but a moral work. The Papists reckon
it among Sacraments: because the old translation translateth the Greek work,
(...), (that is, a mystery) by the word Sacrament, Ephesians. 5.32. where the
Apostle speaks of marriage. But Paul himself is to be heard rather then the
Latin Interpreter. No man is ignorant, that Mystery is of as large and ample
an extent in signification with the Grecians, as arcanum (which signifies any
secret or hidden thing) is with the Latins: Wherefore they must confess and
grant all arcane and secret things to be Sacraments. And also, if Matrimony be
the seventh Sacrament, the will of God shall be the eighth Sacrament, Ephesians.
1.9. Ephesians. 3.3, ^. 1 Timothy 3.16. Chap. 5.32.
and the calling of the Gentiles the ninth and godliness the tenth. For so
does the same Interpreter in the Epistle interpret the same Greek word. But S.
Paul in that place of the Ephesians, uses that word, mystery, to design and
signify the conjunction of Christ and his Church, and not the conjunction of
man and wife.

Certain conclusions of the Sacraments in general.
1. GOD has always adjoined unto his promise of grace and eternal life some
signs and rites, These conclusions were publikly disputed at Heidelberg. Aug.
23. An. Dom. 1567.
which the Church calls Sacraments. Circumcision was commanded and enjoined
Abraham. By Moses the sacrifices and rites were increased, which endured unto
Christ, who instituted Baptism and the Supper.

2. Sacraments therefore are the signs of the eternal Covenant between God and
the faithful, that is, they are rites, commanded and prescribed to the Church,
and added unto the promise of grace, whereby, as by visible and certain
testimonies, God might signify and testify that he communicates and
imparteth Christ, and his benefits to all those that use and receive those
tokens and Symbols with a true faith, according to the promise of the Gospel,
and hereby also he might confirm in them a full persuasion and trust of his
promise: and that the Church also of the other side might, by the participation
of these Symbols and tokens, profess publicly their faith and thankfulness
toward God, and bind them selves unto it, preserve and propagate the memory of
Christ's benefits, be discerned from all other Sects, and obliged and stirred up
to a mutual dilection and love under one head Christ Jesus.

3. Rites and ceremonies which are not commanded of God, or are not instituted
to this end, as to be signs and tokens of the promise of grace, are not signs
and tokens of the Church: for a sign can confirm nothing but by his consent
and promise, from whom the thing promised and signified is expected and looked
for. No creature therefore can institute any signs or pledges of Gods will.

4. Two things are to be considered in all Sacraments: the visible, terrene,
and corporal signs, which are the rites and ceremonies; and the visible and
corporal signs, which God exhibiteth unto us by his Ministers, and we receive
corporally, that is, by the parts and senses of our body: and the things
signified, invisible, celestial, and spiritual; that is, Christ himself and
all his benefits, which are communicated unto us of God by faith spiritually,
that is, through the virtue and working of the holy Ghost.

5. The mutation and change of the signs is not natural, but respective, and
in relation: neither is wrought as touching their nature or substance which
remains still the same; but as touching their use, whereby they are
resemblances of other things.

6. The conjunction also or union of the signs and the things signified is not
natural or local, but respective, by the ordinance and appointment of God,
whereby things invisible and spiritual are represented by visible and
corporal things, as it were by visible words, and exhibited and received
together with the signs in their right use and administration.

7. The names and properties of the things signified are attributed to the
signs; and contrary, the names and properties of the signs unto the things,
in respect of the similitude, or of the signification of the things by the
signs, and in respect of the joynt-exhibiting and receiving of the things with
the signs, in the right use.

8. The right use of the Sacraments is then, when as the faithful keep those
rites which God has commanded, to those ends, for which the Sacraments were
instituted by God. The institution consists in rites, persons, and ends, the
violating whereof breeds an abuse.

9. In this use the things signified are always received together with the
signs: Therefore the signs are not empty or void, and without the things,
although the things are received after one manner, and the signs after another.

10. Without the use instituted by God, neither are the ceremonies any
Sacrament: neither are the benefits of God, which are signified by them,
received together with the signs.

11. The signs are received of the godly to salvation; of the wicked to
condemnation: But the things signified, only the godly can receive for their
salvation.

12. In the Elect notwithstanding, after they are converted, the fruit also of
the Sacrament unworthily received does at length follow. And in them also that
unworthiness, which by reason of these defects concurreth in their receiving,
albeit they are sometimes chastised for the same; yet nevertheless it is
pardoned them so that that unworthiness does not hurt or impair their
salvation.

13. Some Sacraments are to be received but once in our life. others more
often. Some are to be given to those of understanding only; others to infants
also: Even as they were instituted by God, either in once making his Covenant
with all the Elect, and those which were to be received into his Church, as
Circumcision and Baptism: or after sundry falls and combats of temptations,
for the renewing of his Covenant, and for the fostering and preserving of the
unity and assemblies of his Church: as the Arc, the Passover, and other
Sacrifices, and so likewise the Lords Supper.

14. Those things agree in common to Sacraments of both the old and new
Covenant, which have been spoken of in the definition. But their differences
are these: that the old show Christ, who was after to be exhibited, with his
benefits. The rites of the old were diverse from ours, and more in number: as,
Circumcision, Sacrifices, Oblations, the Passover, the Sabbath, worshipping at
the Arc. Christians have others, and those only two; Baptism, and the Supper.
The old were darker; the new are cleerer, and more manifest. The old were
proper and peculiar to Abraham's posterity and their servants: the new are
commanded to the whole Church, which is to be gathered both of Jews and
Gentiles.

15. The Sacraments and the preaching of the Gospel agree in this, that they
are the work of God, which he exercises toward his Church by his Ministers,
who teach, promise, and offer unto us the same Communion of Christ and all his
benefits: and also they agree in this, that they are the external instruments
of the holy Ghost, by which he moves our hearts to believe, and so, by the
coming and means of faith, makes us partakers of Christ and his benefis.
Neither yet is the working and operation of the holy Ghost to be tied here:
neither do these profir, but rather hurt them, who apply not unto themselves
by faith that which the word and rites signify.

16. The Sacraments differ from the word; because the word does by speech, and
they by gestures and motions, signify the will of God toward us. By the word
faith is both begun and confirmed. By these it is confirmed only in the Lords
Supper. The word also teaches and confirms without the Sacraments; but the
Sacraments do not without the word. Without the knowledge of the word, they
who are grown to understanding are not saved: but men may both be regenerated
and saved without the use of the Sacraments, if they be not omitted through
contempt. The word is preached also to the unbeleevers and wicked men: unto the
Sacraments the Church must only admit them whom God wills us to account for
members of the Church.

17. Sacraments and Sacrifices agree in this, that they are works commanded of
God, to be done in faith. A Sacrament differs from a Sacrifice, in that God
by Sacraments signifies and testifies unto us his benefits, which he
performs for us. By Sacrifices we yield and offer our obedience unto God.

18. Wherefore also one and the same ceremony may be considered both as a
Sacrament, and as a Sacrifice, as whereby God, in giving us visible signs,
testifies his benefits toward us, and we in receiving them, testify again
our duty toward him. And this testification of our faith and thankfulness
depends of that testification of Gods benefits toward us, as of the chief
and proper end and use of the Sacraments, and is thereby raised in the minds of
the faithful.

The confirmation of such of the former conclusions as most require it.
THe confirmation of the second conclusion. The definition therein delivered of
Sacraments, is expressed, Genes. 17.11. Exodus 20.20. Exodus 31.14. Thou shall
keep my Sabbaths. Now, that Sacraments are rites commanded and prescribed to
the Church by God, is apparent by the institution of them: as also that they
are rites adjoined unto the promise, as visible signs and tokens thereof;
Deuteronomy. 30.6. Heb. 8.9, 10.
because all Sacraments are necessary duties toward God. But chiefly and
principally they are Gods benefits toward us; as, Circumcision did portend and
show remission of sins, and mortification. Neither only do we signify them
in confessing and celebrating them: but chiefly God himself does signify them
unto us, testifying and confirming them unto us by the ceremonies of
Sacraments. For the Ministers, as well in the administration of the Sacraments,
as in the preaching of the Word, bear the person, and possess the place of
God in the Church. Teach and baptize all Nations. Mat. 28.19. John 4.1, 2.
Jesus did baptize, when yet not he himself, but his Disciples did baptize. So
of the sign and ceremony of inauguration or anointing one to be King, it is
said, The Lord has anointed thee; (...) Sam. 10.1.
when yet Samuel was sent to anoint Saul. They further are therefore said to
confirm our faith, because the Scripture witnesses them to be the signs and
tokens of the mu^uall and everlasting Covenant between God and the faithful,
which God signifies unto us in the bestowing of his benefits promised us in
the Gospel. But God is alike to be believed, whether by signs, or by words,
which signify his will: because not only our sacrifices and obedience, but
also the signs of grace delivered to us by God, have in their right use the
promise of grace adjoined unto them: As, He that shall believe, and shall be
baptized, shall be saved. And lastly, because the Scripture, to signify the
receiving or want of the thing signified, alleges the receiving or want of
the signs: Psalm. 51.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 3.6. 2 Cor. 10.16.
As, Purge me with hysope, and I shall be clean. The Lord will circumcise thy
heart. All we which have been baptized. The bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? And hereof also follow the other ends
specified in the definition, in the second conclusion: As, That the Sacraments
discern and sever the Church from other Sects. This is manifest both by
effects, and by restimonies. A stranger shall not cate thereof. Exodus 12.45.
What is the profit of Circumcision? Much every manner of way: Romans 3.1. Ephesians.
2.11.
because unto them are committed the Oracles of God. Ye being in times past
Gentiles, and called Uncircumcision of them, who were at that time without
Christ, and were aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers
from the Covenant of promise, Genes. 17.11.
and had no hope, and were without God in the world. It shall be a sign of the
Covenant between me and you; and it shall be my Covenant in your flesh.
Another end is that, that they preserve the memory of Gods benefits. As often
as ye shall eat this bread, ye show the Lords death until he come. 1 Cor.
11.26. Exodus 12.14. Deuteronomy. 6 8. Luke 22.11.
This day shall be unto you a remembrance. Thou shall bind them for a sign
unto thy hand, and they shall be as signs of remembrance between thine eyes.
Do this in remembrance of me. Lastly, They are also bonds of love: because
they who are confederated with God, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Cor. 10.17.
are united also among themselves. One Lord, one faith, etc. We being many, are
one body.

The confirmation of the fourth conclusion. The distinction there delivered is
manifest in it self. The receiving of the signs is corporal and external. But
the things especially signified are not received without faith, because they
are promised to believers only. And the signs are no otherwise true, then the
promises, unto which they are annexed. Again, The signs declare the same to
the eyes, which the promise declares unto the ears. As therefore the promise
is but an empty sound without faith: so also are the ceremonies vain
spectacles. Again, the things signified are the communion of Christ and all
his benefits: but this can no man have otherwise then by faith, either in the
use, or without the use of the Sacrament.

The confirmation of the sixth conclusion. Such is the conjunction of all
signs with their things signified, as that they represent the things
signified, and confirm the acceptance of them: For the pledges or tokens, and
symboles testifying other things, are, though not in the same place, yet
together with the things testified and signified. The reason is: Because, To
make one thing a sign of another thing, is not to include or tie the thing
with the sign, as that they should be in one place; but to ordain the sign
to signify the thing, the sign being in the same place with it, or in some
other place. Again, the nature of the things signified by the Sacraments, does
not admit the local union. For, some are subsisting forms, some accidents,
not inherent in the sacramental signs, but in the minds of men; as, the gifts
of the holy Ghost. Some are corporeal, and in one place only, and not locally
existent wheresoever the Sacraments are used: as, the flesh and blood of Christ.

The confirmation of the seventh conclusion. The Scripture speaks thus of the
Sacraments: Circumcision is the Covenant; the Lamb is the Passover; the blood
of the Sacrifices, the blood of the Covenant; the expiation of the Sacrifices:
the Sabbath, the everlasting Covenant; the mercy-seat of the Arc: Baptism, a
cleansing or washing. Bread and Wine, the body and blood of Christ. And so the
Scripture expounds it self, when Circumcision is called the sign of the
Covenant; the Paschall Lamb, the sign of the Passover: the Sabbath, a
perpetual sign of grace and sanctification: the ceremonies, types and
shadows of true things: the believer and baptized shall be saved; and of the
signs and symbols of the Lords Supper it is said, that they are to be received
of our reconciliation.

The confirmation of the tenth conclusion. The signs of the Covenant confirm
nothing unto them, who keep not the Covenant, or who refer them to another
end. But the Sacraments are signs of the Covenant, whereby God binds
himself to give unto us remission of sins, and eternal life freely for
Christ's sake: and we bind our selves to the yielding and performance of faith
and new obedience. Therefore they confirm not, neither assure them of Gods
grace, who are without faith and repentance, or use other rites, or to some
other end, then God has appointed. Moreover, It is superstitious and
idolatrous, to attribute the testification of Gods grace, either to the
external work and rite without the promise, or to any other works invented by
men. Wherefore, the abusing, or not right using of the Sacraments, has not the
grace of God accompanying it, or assures any man of it: As it is said,
Circumcision is profitable, Romans 2.15.
if thou do the law, etc.

The confirmation of the eleventh conclusion. The figure of Baptism being
correspondent to the Arc of Noah, does also save us, not the outward washing
away of the filth of the flesh, but the inward testifying of a good conscience
toward God. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? And seeing the Sacraments are an external instrument, whereby the holy
Ghost fostereth and preserves faith, it follows, that they serve for the
salvation of Believers, as does the Word. But contrary, the wicked, through the
abuse of the Sacraments, and the contempt of Christ and his benefits, which are
offered unto them in his Word and Sacraments, and through the confession of his
doctrine, which they embrace not with a true faith, purchase unto themselves
the anger of God, and everlasting pains, according to the saying of the
Prophet: Esaias 66.3.
He that kills a Bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a
sheep, 1 Cor. 11.20.
is as if he cut off a dogs neck. And S. Paul, Whosoever shall eat this bread,
and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord. But the things signified, because they are received by faith only,
and are either proper unto salvation, or salvation it self, as Christ and his
benefits, they cannot be received of the wicked, neither can they at all be
received but unto salvation.

The confirmation of the twelfth conclusion. A promise, and the sign of a
promise, having a condition of faith and fidelity adjoined unto it, are
ratified, whenever the condition is performed. But such is that promise,
which is signified and confirmed by the Sacraments: therefore if in the use of
them faith does accompany, which believes the promise, the things promised and
signified are received together with the signs. I might deal with thee as
thou have done, when thou did despise the oath in breaking the covenant:
Ezekiel. 16.59.
Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant made with thee in the days of thy
youth, and I will confirm unto thee an everlasting covenant.

The confirmation of the thirteenth conclusion. The iterating of circumcision
or baptism has been no where received or admitted. Neither is the reason
hereof obscure or unknown: because those Sacraments were instituted, to be an
initiating or solemn receiving of men into the Church, which is always
ratified to him that is penitent and persisteth therein. But the use of other
Sacraments is commanded to be iterated: as of the Sacrifices, the Passover,
worshipping at the Arc, Cleansings; as also of the Lords Supper. The cause is,
because they are a testimony, that the covenant, which was made in circumcision
and baptism, is ratified and firm to him that repents. And this exercising
of our faith is always necessary.

The confirmation of the fourteenth conclusion. That there is one common
definition agreeing to the Sacraments both of the Old and New Testament, has
bin showed before. That the difference of them consists in the number and
form of the rites, is apparent by a particular enumeration of them. For in the
New Testament it is manifest, that there are but two, because there are no
other ceremonies commanded of God, and having annexed unto them the promise of
grace. And that the old Sacraments signify Christ, which hereafter should be
exhibited; the new, Christ who already was exhibited, is apparent by the
interpretation delivered of them in holy Writ, whereof we spoke in the
definition. Now they differ in clearness, because in the New Testament the
ceremonies are purer, and signifying things complete and perfect. In the Old
were more rites shadowing things to come, all the circumstances whereof were not
as yet declared.

The confirmation of the fifteenth conclusion. What the Ministers do in Gods
name in the administration of the Sacraments, and also that God by the
Sacraments signifies, that is, teaches, offers, promises us the communion
of Christ, was declared in the second confirmation. Hereof follows the next,
which is: that the holy Ghost does move our hearts by them to believe. For
seeing the Sacraments are a visible promise, they have the same authority of
confirming faith in us, which the promise it self made unto us has. Of this
follows the third: For, that which serves for the kindling or raising of
faith in us, the same also serves for the receiving of the communion of Christ
and his benefits. And because we attain to this by faith, therefore it is
said: The bread is the communion of the body of Christ: Baptism does save us.
Neither yet does the holy Ghost always confirm and establish faith by them;
as the examples of Simon Magus, and of infinite others do show. That the use
of them hurts without faith, has been proved in the second conclusion.

The confirmation of the sixteenth conclusion. The Sacraments, without the word
going before, do neither teach nor confirm our faith: because the meaning and
signification of them is not understood, except in be declared by the word;
neither can the sign confirm any thing, except the thing be first promised.
An example hereof are the Jews, who observed, and now do observe the
ceremonies, but adjoyn thereto the not-understood promise of the grace and
benefits of Christ. Without the word, those who are of understanding are not
saved, either by doctrine, as by the ordinary means; or by an internal and
extraordinary knowledge. He that believes not in the Son, John 3.18. Romans 1.17.
is already condemned. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
But they may be saved without the Sacrament: because although by some necessity
they be deprived of these, yet they may believe, as the thief did on the
Cross. Or, if they be infants, according to the condition of their age they
are sanctified, as John in the womb, and many infants also in the womb, who
died before the day of circumcision. The word also is to be preached unto the
wicked, because it is appointed to convert them. But the Sacraments are to be
administered unto them, who are acknowledged for members of the Church; because
they are instituted for the use of the Church only. Thou ma^st be baptized, if
thou beleevest. Acts 8.37.


The confirmation of the seventeenth conclusion. The confirmation thereof is
manifest by the Passover, and other Sacrifices; as also by the Sabbath: which
all were commanded by God, that the godly might celebrate and worship God, and
show themselves grateful unto him, and might withal take the signs and
tokens of those benefits of God, which they received by the Messiah. So
Baptism is a confession of Christianity; and a sign, whereby Christ
testifies, that we are washed by his blood. The Supper of the Lord is a
thanksgiving for the death of Christ; and an advertisement that we are quickened
and revived by his death, and are made his members, and shall remain and
continue with him for ever.

OF BAPTISM.
ON THE 26. SABBATH.
Quest. 69. How art thou admonished, and assured in Baptism, that thou art
partaker of the only sacrifice of Christ?
Ans. Because Christ commanded the outward washing of water Mat. 21.19.
, adjoining this promise thereunto Ibid. Mar. 16.16. Acts 2 38. John 1.33. Mat.
3.11. Romans 6.3, 4.
, that I am no less assuredly washed by his blood and spirit from the
uncleanness of my soul, that is, from all my sins, that I am washed outwardly
with water 1 Pe 3.21. Mar 1.4. Luke 3.3.
, whereby all the filthiness of the body uses to be purged.

The Explication.
The principal Questions touching Baptism are:
1. What Baptism is. 2. What are the ends of Baptism: or for what it was
instituted. 3. What is the sense and meaning of the words of the institution
thereof. 4. The lawful and right use of Baptism. 5. What are the forms and
kinds of speaking of Baptism. 6. Who are to be baptized. 7. In place whereof
Baptism succeeded. 8. How Baptism agrees with Circumcision.
THe two former of these questions touching Baptism, are handled under the 69.
and 70. questions of the Catechism: the third and fourth under the 71. the
fifth under the 72. the sixth under the 73. the seventh and eighth under the
Common place of Circumcision, which follows immediately after those questions
of Catechism aforenamed.

1. What Baptism is.
THe word Baptism* signfieth a dipping in water, or sprinkling with water.
Those of the East Church were dipped their whole body in the water. Those of
the North in co^der countries are only sprinkled with water. This circumstance
is of no moment or weight. For washing may be either by dipping or sprinkling;
and Baptism is a washing. The Catechism definition is: Baptism is an outward
washing with water, commanded by Christ, adjoining this promise thereunto, that
we being baptized, are no less assuredly washed by his blood and spirit from
the uncleanness of our souls, that is, from all our sins, then we are
washed outwardly with water. It may be also fitly defined on this wise:
Baptism is a ceremony instituted by Christ in the New Testament, whereby we
are washed with water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
to signify that we are received into favor for the blood of Christ shed for
us, and are regenerated by his spirit; and also to bind us, that hereafter we
endeavor in our actions and death truly to testify newness of life. Or, It
is a Sacrament of the New testament ordained and authorized by Christ, whereby
is sealed unto the faithful, being baptized with water in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, remission of all their sins, the gift
of the holy Ghost, and a planting of them into Christ's body, which is his
Church; whereby they also profess, that they receive these blessings from God,
and will ever hereafter live unto him. Or yet more briefly: Baptism is an
external washing, instituted by the Son of God, with the pronouncing of these
words; I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost, to be a testimony, that he who is so washed or dipped, is reconciled
through Christ by faith, and is sanctified by the spirit unto eternal life. We
are said to be received into favor for the blood of Christ shed for us, to
wit, on the Cross; that is, for Christ's whole humiliation applied unto us by
faith. The Scriptures confirm this definition: Mat. 28.19.
Go and teach all Nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost; that is, testifying by the sign of Baptism, that they are
received into favor of God the Father through the Son, and are sanctified by
his Spirit. Mark 1.4. Mark 16.16.
John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of amendment of
life for remission of sins. He which believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved. Wherefore Baptism comprehends, Three things comprehended in baptism.
The sign, which is water; and the whole ceremony, as the sprinkling of water,
or the dipping into, and again returning out of the water. The things
themselves signified by the ceremonies, which are the sprinkling of the blood
of Christ: the mortification of the old man: the quickening of the new man into
a certain hope of the resurrection to come by Christ. The commandment and
promise of Christ, whence the sign has authority and power of confirming.

Baptism not a bare sign only.
Object. 1. Baptism is said to be an external washing of water: Therefore
Baptism is a bare sign only. Ans. 1. This is a fallacy of division, dividing
things which are to be joined; because, when we say, that Baptism is an
external sign, we join with the sign the thing that is signified. Ans. 2.
There is no particle added in our definition which excludes the thing. And
Baptism is in its own nature, without the promise adjoined, a bare sign; and
to the unbeleeving, who receive not the promise by faith, it is indeed an
external washing only with water: but the promise comes thereto, The
differences between Baptism and the washings of the Old Testament.
and is joined with this sign, when it is used aright. Object. 2. There were
washings also in the Old Testament: Baptism therefore is no Sacrament proper
to the New Testament. Ans. There is a great dissimilitude and difference
between the washings under the Law and our Baptism. entrance and receiving
into the Church, as our Baptism is. ceremonial uncleanness; as when a man
had defiled himself by touching a dead carcass, or any such unclean thing,
his ceremonial uncleanness was to be purged with a ceremonial washing: our
Baptism is ordained to wash away a moral uncleanness; that is, sin: And
hence it is, that Baptism is called in Scripture alaver, or washing; to wit,
in respect of that washing of the moral uncleanness, that is, in respect of
that inward or spiritual washing, whereby we are washed or cleansed from our
sins. Baptize all Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20.
and lo, I am with you always until the end of the world. This argument
therefore deceives by the ambiguity of the word washing. For those washings
have nothing but a bare name, wherein they agree with our Baptism.

2. What are the ends of Baptism.
1. To confirm our faith.
THe chief and proper end of Baptism is, to be a confirmation of our faith;
that is, a solemn testification, when Christ testifies, that he washes us
with his blood and spirit: that is, that he bestows on us remission of
sins, justification, and regeneration. Or, the chief end of Baptism is, To
be the sealing of God, and also the sealing or obsignation of the promise of
grace, that is, of our justification, and regeneration, and a testimony of Gods
will, that he gives the baptized these gifts at this present, and will give
them ever henceforward For he baptizeth us by the hands of his Minister, and by
him signifies unto us this his will. That baptism is a testimony and
confirmation of this will of God concerning his bestowing salvation on us,
appears, 1. By the form of Baptism; namely, because we are baptized in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: that is, we are assigned and
deputed to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and are claimed to be
his own. 2. By the promise annexed to the rite: Because God has promised
salvation unto him, Mark 16 16.
who shall believe, and shall be baptized. 3. Testimonies of Scripture also
confirm the same. Why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, Acts 22.15. Mark 16.16. Romans 6 3. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21.
in calling on the name of the Lord. He that shall believe, and be baptized,
shall be saved. Know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by
Baptism. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth,
and the renewing of the holy Ghost. To the which also the figure that now
saves us, even Baptism, agrees. By this end of Baptism appears, why
Baptism is not re-iterated or used again: namely, Why Baptism may not be
re-iterated.
Because Baptism is a sign of our receiving into favor, and the Covenant,
which is ever sure and ratified to them who repent: Therefore when we have
fallen we need no Baptism, but Repentance only. Regeneration is wrought but
once only: we are borne but once, and we are regenerate but once. For he who
is once truly ingraffed into Christ, is never cast out: Him that comes to me,
I cast not away; John 6.37.
and therefore it is sufficient, that Baptism, which is the washing and sign
of regeneration, be received but once only: chiefly, seeing regeneration, or
salvation has not a necessary dependence on Baptism. Otherwise, as often as
we sin, we should be rebaptized.

By this end also of Baptism it appears, How John's Baptism agrees with our
Baptism, and differs from the same. Acts 19.4. Mark 1.4.
that the Baptism of John is the same in substance with our Baptism. For John
preached the baptism of repentance for remission of sins, saying unto the
people, that they should believe in him which should come after him, that is,
in Christ Jesus. Such is our Baptism also; only herein it differs, that we
are not baptized in the name of Christ to come, but of Christ already come in
the flesh. Wherefore John's Baptism and ours are one and the same in nature and
substance, howsoever they differ in the circumstance of signifying; whereas
John baptized in the name of Christ, which should suffer, and be raised again:
the Apostles baptized, and we at this day are baptized in the name of Christ
which has suffered, and has risen again. For if it be not so, we cannot but
say our Baptism is not the same with Christ's Baptism. For Christ was baptized
of John. Object. John says, I baptize you with water: Therefore his baptism
was only a washing with water. Ans. John in that his speech distinguishes
that his ministry from Christ's efficacy in Baptism: for, if he meant
otherwise, it would follow, that Christ was only baptized with water, and that
we also are only baptized with water, or have not that Baptism which Christ
had.

To bind us to be thankful unto God, and to be a testimony of this our duty.
Baptism is instituted to be a testification of our duty toward God, and a
binding of us and the Church to thankfulness; that is, to faith and
repentance. To faith; that we might acknowledge for very God this God alone,
who is the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son and the holy
Ghost, into whose name we are baptized; that we worship him only, and receive
the promised benefits with faith. To repentance; that our whole life time we
being admonished by this rite how we are washed with the blood of the Son of
God, and regenerated by his Spirit, should, in witness of our gratefulness,
walk in newness of life; according to those sayings of Scripture: Mar. 1.4. 1
Cor. 6.11. Romans 6.2, 3, 4.
John preached the baptism of amendment of life. And such were some of you,
but ye are washed. How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein? know
ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by baptism into his
death, that, like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, so also we should walk in newness of life. To be baptized into the
death of Christ is, What it is to be baptized into Christ's death.
1. To be partakers of Christ's death, no otherwise then if our selves were
dead. 2. To die also our selves; which is to mortify the lusts of the flesh,
by the virtue and power of Christ's death, and to rise again with Christ unto
newness of life. This mortification God promises us in baptism, and binds
us unto it.

To be a token of our entrance into the Church. Act. 8.38. and 10.48. and
16.15, 33.
Baptism is instituted to be a token and Symbol of our receiving and entrance
into the Church. For these are opposed and contradictory, To be, and, Not to be
in the Church: To enter, and, Not to enter into the Church. For God will have
all the Citizens of his Church thus enfranchised; and those who are not
baptized when they may, he will not have reckoned in the number of his Church.
Hither appertain all those places, in which those who were become Christians,
as the Ethiopian Eunuch, Cornelius, the Jaylour of Philippi, Lydia the seller
of Purple, Paul, etc. are said to have been presently baptized. Wherefore the
Supper also is given only to them who are baptized: for they only are received
into the Church. Of this end bear witness those words of Christ: Mat. 28.19.
Go and teach all Nations, baptising them, etc. where the word (...), which
Christ uses, properly signifies, Make Disciples. Thus it is expounded by
John: John 4.1.
The Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John. This
end is also confirmed by the substitution of Baptism in place of circumcision,
which was in ancient times a Sacrament of receiving Disciples into the Jewish
Church.

To be a discerning badge of Christians.
That it should be a mark whereby the Church may be discerned from all other
Nations and Sects. This end follows on the former. For they who by a public
Sacrament are received into the Church, are by the selfsame discerned, and as
by a badge distinguished from the remnant, Mat. 28.19.
the filth of the world. Go and teach all Nations, baptising them: as if he
should say Gather me a Church by the word, and whom ye shall make my Disciples,
believing with their whole heart, all them, and them alone baptize, and
separate unto me.

To advertise us of the Cross of our preservation and deliverance.
That it should be a signification, or an advertisement unto us of the cross,
and of the preservation of the Church therein, and of the deliverance of the
Church from it. For it signifies that they who are baptized, are plunged as it
were in affliction, but with assurance of escaping thence. Hence afflictions
are term^d by the name of Baptis^. Are ye able to be baptized with the baptism
that I shall be baptized with? Mat. 20.22.
Deliverance from the cross the very ceremony it self of Baptism does show:
For we are dipped indeed, but we are not drowned or choak^d in the water.
Moreover, in respect of this end, Baptism is compared to the flood. For as in
the flood and deluge, Noah and his family were shut into the Arc, and were
after much trouble and danger saved, the rest of mankind perishing; so in the
Church, they who cleave unto Christ, although they be pressed with calamities,
yet at length in their appointed time they are delivered, whilst the rest
without the Church are overwhelmed with a deluge and gulf of sin. Hither
also belongs the place of Paul, where he compares the passing over the red
sea to Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.2.
All were baptized to Moses, in the cloud, and in the sea.

To signify the unity of the Church 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.5.
To signify the unity of the Church: and therefore it is a confirmation of
this article, I believe the Catholic Church. By one spirit are we all
baptized. One Lord, one faith, one Baptism. This end nevertheless may be
contained under the fourth, because when Baptism severeth the members of the
Church from others, it does also join and unite them among themselves.

To be a means of preservi^g and publishing more largely the doctrine of Gods
free promise.
To be a means of preserving and propagating the doctrine of the promise of
free salvation through the death of Christ; that the baptized may have occasion
to teach and learn who is the author, and what is the meaning or signification
and use of Baptism.

Quest. 70. What is it to be washed with the blood, and spirit of Christ?
Ans. It is to receive of God forgiveness of sins, freely, for the blood of
Christ, which he shed for us in his sacrifice on the Cross Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet.
1.2. Revel. 1.5. Rev. 22.14. Zach. 13.1. Ezekiel. 36.25.
: And also to be renewed by the holy Ghost; and through his sanctifying of us,
to become members of Christ, that we may more and more die to sin, and live
holy, and without blame John 1.33. and 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. and 12.13. Romans 6.4.
Col. 2.12.
.

The Explication.
A twofold washing in Baptism, 1. External. 2. Internal.
THere is a double washing in Baptism: external, which is by water: and
internal, which is by the blood and spirit of Christ. The internal washing is
signified and sealed by the external, and in the lawful use of Baptism is
joined therewith. Now this internal washing is of two sorts: Of blood.
The washing of blood, which is our remission of sins, and justification for
the bloodshed of Christ. Of the Spirit.
The washing of the Spirit, which is our renewing by the holy Ghost. Both these
are at once together performed. Wherefore, To be washed by the blood of Christ,
is to be justified, and to receive remission of sins for the blood of Christ
shed on the Cross for us: To be washed by the holy Ghost, is to be regenerated
by the holy Ghost; which regeneration is an alteration and change of evil
inclinations into good, which is wrought by the holy Ghost in our will and
heart, that we may have an hatred of sin, and contrariwise, a purpose to live
according to the will of God.

That this twofold washing from sins, is signified by the Sacrament of
Baptism, is apparent by these places of Scripture: Mark. 1.4. 1 Cor. 6.11.
John preached the Baptism of amendment of life, for remission of sins. But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Likewise, in that we are said by
baptism to die, and to be buried with Christ, and to put off the body of
sinful flesh, and put on Christ. Wherefore Baptism is a Symbol and sign of
both washings, or of both benefits (namely, both of remission of sins, and
amendment of life) not only because this Sacrament has some similitude and
correspondence with both: but also because these two benefits are ever joined
together, and neither can be without the other. For except Christ wash us, we
have no part in him; and, He which has not the spirit of Christ is none of
his. Now, our justification, John 13.8. Romans 8.9.
which is a washing by the blood of Christ, and our regeneration, which is a
washing by the holy Ghost, differ in this; that justification is finished
perfectly in this life by imputation; as it is said, There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus: Rom, 8.1.
but regeneration, or the mutation of our evil nature into good, is not
perfectly accomplished in this life, but begun only; yet so, that the beginning
thereof is truly in all the godly, and is felt of all that are turned unto God,
even whilst they are in this life: because all the godly have a true desire in
their will and heart to obey God; so that they are greatly grieved for their
other defects.

Quest. 71. Where does Christ promise us that he will as certainly wash us with
his blood and Spirit, as we are washed with the water of Baptism?
Ans. In the institution of Baptism; the words whereof are these: Mat. 2^.29.
Go and teach all Nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be
saved: but he that will not believe, shall be damned Mat. 16.16.
. This promise is repeated again, whereas the Scripture calls Baptism, the
washing of the new birth Titus 3.5.
, and forgiveness of sins Acts 22.16.
.

The Explication.
THe confirmation of the definition and chief ends of Baptism, is contained in
the words of the institution, Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.16.
which are read in S. Matthew, and S. Mark. Go and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. He
that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not
believe, shall be damned. These are briefly to be expounded and declared.

Teach all.) Teach all, and not some Nations, neither Abraham's posterity only.
Here is the difference of the Sacraments of the old and new Testament. For
Christ did not institute this new Sacrament for the Jews only, to whom
properly did belong the old Sacraments: but to all others also succeeding.

Baptising them.) That is, all, who by your doctrine come unto me, and are made
my disciples. And among them are numbered the Infants also of such as come unto
Christ, or are Christ's disciples. For their Infants also are disciples, as
being borne in the school of Christ. For, to be borne in the Church, serves
to the Infants in stead of their profession. The word is to go before the
Sacrament.
The order here is to be noted and observed. He wills first, that they be
taught; and after, that they be baptized. For he speaks of men of years,
which should be converted unto the faith and Gospel of Christ. Wherefore he
will not have the Sacraments to be dumb, but signifies that the Word ought to
go before, and then the Sacraments to follow.

Four things signified in these words, In the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, used in Baptism.
In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. These words, in
the name, signify, That Baptism was instituted by the common commandment and
authority of these three: and that these three persons do command, that they,
who will be members of the Church, be baptized. Wher^fore, it is of like force,
when the Minister baptiseth, as if God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost
did baptize. And hereof also it is manifest, that these three persons are the
three subsistents, or persons of the Godhead, and are one true God, into whom
we are baptized. that these three persons confirm unto us by their own
testification, that they receive us into favor, and perform that unto us
which is signified by baptism; which is, salvation, if we believe, and be
baptized: where is noted the principal end of Baptism. To be baptized in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, is, That he which is baptized
be bound to the knowledge, faith, worship, trust, honor, and invocation of
this true God, 1 Cor. 1.13.
who is the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. This is the second end of
Baptism, which Paul also in these words declares: were ye baptized into the
name of Paul? As if he should say: Ye ought to be his, to whom ye have given
your name, and bound your selves in Baptism. Baptising them in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, that is, baptising them by invocation of
the three persons, invocating the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost upon them. Which three persons, receive us into favor: And the Father
verily receives us into favor, for the Son, by the holy Ghost, whom the
Son gives us from the Father.

He that shall believe.) This condition is added unto the promise. For they who
are baptized, cannot receive that which is promised and sealed in Baptism, but
by faith: so that without faith neither is the promise ratified, nor the
Baptism availeable. And in these words is noted briefly the right use of
Baptism, in which right use the Sacraments are ratified to them which receive
them with a true faith. What is the right and lawful use of Baptism.
But in whatsoever corrupt and unlawful use and administration, the Sacraments
are no Sacraments, but are Sacraments to them only, who receive them with a
true faith. The right and lawful use then of Baptism is, when the converted
are baptized with observation of that rite and end which Christ appointed: that
is, When the ceremonies or rites instituted by Christ in Baptism are not
changed. Whence it is manifest that the dross and filth of Papists; as, oil,
spettle, and exorcisme or conjuration, tapers, salt, The dross, which the
Papists blood with the simplicity of Christ's institution in baptism, is to be
rejected.
and such like, wherewith the defile Baptism, is to be thrown away. Object.
But these appertain and belong to order and comeliness. Ans. The holy Ghost
knew well enough, what did appertain to order and comeliness in Baptism.
Rep. But they appertain to the signifying of some thing. Ans. It belongs not
to men to institute any sign of Gods will. This also we are to judge and think
of other ceremonies of the same hatching. When Baptism is given to them, for
whom it was instituted, which are all the converted or members of the Church:
and, When of these it is received with a true faith; according to that, Acts
8.37.
If thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou may be baptized. When Baptism
is used to that end, whereunto it was instituted: not to the healing of
cattle; and such like abuses. When Baptism is administered by them, to whom
Christ has given it in charge; that is, the Ministers of the Church, whom
Christ has sent to teach, and to baptize: not by women, or any other which are
not sent of God.

And shall be baptized.) He would confirm us also by the outward signs: and
therefore this is added, and shall be baptized, that we may know that not only
by faith, but by the outward sign also we are assured, that we are of the
number of them who shall be saved.

Shall be saved.) That is, let the baptized know that he has those benefits
which are signified by the ceremony or outward sign: that is, that he is
justified, and regenerated, if he believe: For without faith the promise is not
ratified, neither does Baptism profit at all. Unto both, both unto faith, and
unto Baptism, the promise is adjoined, but in a diverse manner; unto faith, as
a necessary mean to apprehend salvation: unto baptism, as a sign sealing the
salvation we apprehend.

He that will not believe, shall be condemned.) That is, though he be baptized.
The use of the Sacrament without faith does not save: therefore with faith it
does save. The want of the Sacrament does not condemn: yet so, as that want of
the Sacrament be without contempt. For not the want, but the contempt of the
Sacraments condemn, as which cannot possibly be where faith is. And hence it
comes, that if we convert this proposition, He that shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved, we cannot retain both necessarily. Now we convert it
thus: He that shall be saved, shall believe, and be baptized, this proposition
is not necessary, because some may be saved, which are not baptized: but none
can be saved, which do not believe. Wherefore there is not the same necessity
of faith and the Sacraments: The Sacraments are then necessary, when they may
be had according to the ordinance and institution of God. For the contempt of
the Sacrament, when it may so be had, is repugnant unto faith. Object. Christ
attributed salvation both to faith, and to baptism: Therefore in converting
the proposition, we must affirm both of it; and so affirm of him that is to
be saved, that he is also to believe and be baptized. Answ. Christ attributes
salvation to both, but not to both alike: to Faith, as the mean; to Baptism,
as the sign whereby salvation is sealed to us.

ON THE 27. SABBATH.
Quest. 72. Is then the outward Baptism of water the washing away of sins?
Answ. It is not Mat. 3.11. 1 Pet. 3.21. Ephesians. 5.2.
: For the blood of Christ alone cleanses us from all sin 1 John 1.7. 1 Cor.
6.11.


The Explication.
Proper and unproper forms of speaking of baptism.
AS it is true of the Sacraments in general, that some forms of speech
concerning them are proper some unproper, which are termed Sacramental
phrases: So also the forms of speaking of Baptism in special, are either
proper, or unproper. Proper forms of speaking are these; 1. When they who take
the sign, are said to take the thing signified: as He which shall believe, and
be baptized, shall be saved. 2. When the sign is said to signify the thing:
as, Baptism is a sign of the washing away of sin. He gave unto them
circumcision to be a sign of the covenant. Improper or figurative kinds of
speaking are, 1. When the sign is said to be the thing it self thereby
signified: as, Baptism is the laver or washing of regeneration. 2. When the
Sacrament is said to give the thing signified, or other things by consequence
belonging to the thing signified: as Baptism saves us. The three latter rules
and forms of speech proportioned by them are equivalent with Christ's promise:
He which shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved: And all of them
signify this one speech: Baptism is a certain sign or token of remission of
sins and everlasting salvation unto believers. For these and the like
figurative speeches of the Sacraments are to be interpreted like as the
figurative speeches of the Sacrifices. The Sacrifices are called oftentimes an
expiation or doing away of sins: and yet the Apostle affirms, that it is
unpossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins. So when it
is said: Heb. 9.13.
Baptism saves us; or, it is the washing of the new birth, or, it is the
washing away of sins: it is all one, as if it were said, Baptism is the
sign or token of all those.

Quest. 73. Why then does the holy Ghost call Baptism the washing of the new
birth, and forgiveness of sins?
Ans. God speaks so not without great cause: to wit, not only to teach us,
that as the filth of our body is purged by water; so our sins also are purged
by the blood and spirit of Christ Revel. 1.5. Revel. 7.14. 1 Cor. 6.11.
: but much more to assure us by this divine token and pledge, that we are as
verily washed from our sins with the inward washing, as we are washed by the
outward and visible water Mar. 16.16. Gal. 3.17.
.

The Explication.
THree causes there are why the Scripture speaks after this sort, mutually
changing the names of the signs and things. 1. In respect of an analogy or
proportion between the sign and the thing signified. For such a manner of
thing is the thing signified in his kind, as the sign is in his kind. For as
water, that is, the sign, washes away all filth: so also the blood of Christ,
that is, the thing signified, washes and cleanses us from sin. And as the
sign is applied outwardly by the Minister: so God will bestow and apply
inwardly the thing signified by the virtue of his spirit unto them, who receive
the sign with a true faith. For as the Ministers work without, so God does
work within. 2. For confirmation of faith in us. For the signs testify Gods
will toward us: which they testify by reason of the promise adjoined, as is
this; He that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved. But why
speaks the Scripture thus for our confirmation? Because in the lawful and
right use of the Sacraments there is a joynt-exhibiting and receiving both of
the signs, and of the things. Wherefore to teach us what the Sacrament gives,
being received aright; and to confirm unto us, that it gives it: for this
cause the Scripture changes the names, attributing that to the sign, which
pertains to the thing, and that to the thing, which pertains to the sign.
This is the third cause depending on the second; namely, this joynt-exhibiting
of the things with the signs.

Quest. 74. Are infants to be baptized also?
Ans. What else? For seeing they belong as well unto the Covenant and Church of
God, as they who are of a full age Genesis 17.7.
; and seeing also unto them is promised remission of sins by the blood of
Christ Mat. 19.14.
, and the holy Ghost the worker of faith, as well as unto those of full growth
Luke 1.14, 15. Psalm. 22.11. Isa. 44 1, 2, 3. Acts 2.39.
, they are by Baptism to be ingraffed into the Church of God, and to be
discerned from the children of infidels, Acts 10.47.
in like sort as in the old Testament was done by Circumcision Genesis 17.14.
, in the place whereof is Baptism succeeded in the new Testament Col. 2.11,
12, 13.
.

The Explication.
They are not to be baptized, who be eeve not the doctrine.
FOr the more easy understanding of this Question, let us first positively
define in general, Who are to require baptism: and, Who are to be admitted
unto it. 1. They who are not as yet the disciples of Christ, (that is, of the
number of them which are called, neither agreeing unto the doctrine, nor
obedient unto the ministry) are not to be admitted unto baptism. 2. Neither
ought they to desire baptism, who feel themselves not to be as yet the
disciples and scholars of Christ. The reason of both these is, because Christ
says, first, Teach all nations; that is, make all nations my disciples: and
then he wills them to be baptized. Wherefore all they, and they alone are to
be baptized, according to the commandment of Christ, unto whom the covenant
does belong: namely, such as are, and so ought to be accounted, members of the
visible Church; whether they be of understanding, professing faith and
amendment of life, or infants born in the womb of the Church: for all the
children of the faithful are in the covenant and Church of God, except they
exclude themselves. Or, All that are the scholars o^ Ch^^^^ are to be baptized.
All they are to be baptized, who are to be accounted for the disciples and
scholars of Christ: but for the disciples of Christ are to be accounted all
those of understanding, who profess faith and repentance; neither they only,
but their infants also which are born in the Church, that is, in the school of
Christ; which also teaches and instructs them by his holy Spirit, according
to their capacity, or as the condition of their age will bear. Out of this
general position thus concluded, we may easily determine of this special;
Whether infants are to be baptized. For, if they be disciples of Christ, and
part of the Church, they are to be baptized: But such they are: Therefore they
ought to be baptized. The Major is the flat prescript of Christ: The Minor is
most evident out of the form of the covenant, and other places. Baptism of
infants confirmed by four arguments.
The reasons alleged in the Catechism for the baptism of infants are four.

whole Church is to be baptized, according to Christ's commandment, Go and
teach all nations, baptising them: Mat. 28.19.
and according to that of S. Paul; By one Spirit are all baptized into one
baptism. 1 Cor. 12.13.
The Minor is clear out of the form of the covenant; I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed: Genesis 17.7.
and out of Christ's commandment; Suffer little children to come unto me,
Matthew. 19.14.
for of such is the kingdom of God.

Peter; Amend your lives, Acts 2.38, 39.
and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ: For the
promise is made unto you, and to your children. Again, Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptized, and 10.47.
who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? This is also proved by
manifest reason: For, unto whom the things signified belong, unto them also
does the sign belong, except some condition in the manner of using it hinder,
or except there be some express circumstance of the institution hindering and
letting the use of the rite and ceremony: as in ancient times, the women were
excluded and debarred circumcision in regard of their sex: and at this day the
showing forth of the Lords death, and the proving of themselves, which infants
cannot perform, excludes them from the Sacrament of the Supper. The Minor is
apparent out of the form of the covenant, I will be thy God, Genesis 17.7. Matthew.
19.14.
and the God of thy seed: and out of the promise, Suffer little children to
come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God: and out of these sayings, To
you, Act. 2.39. and. 3.25. 1 Cor. 17.14. Romans 11.16.
and to your children is the promise made. Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the covenant which God has made unto our fathers. Your
children are holy. If the root be holy, the branches also are holy. So also
John Baptist was sanctified in the womb. If a man diligently weigh these
testimonies of Scripture, he shall perceive doubtless, not only that it is
lawful, but also that this Sacrament of baptism must and ought to be given to
infants, because the infants are holy: The promise is made unto them, theirs is
the kingdom of God: And God says also, that he is their God; who certainly is
not the God of the wicked. Moreover, there is no condition or circumstance in
the infants hindering the use of Baptism. Can any man then forbid water, that
those should be baptized, who are partakers of the same benefits with the whole
Church?



Col. 2.11.
Ye are circumcised in Christ with circumcision made without hands, by putting
off the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ, in that
ye are buried with him through Baptism, in whom ye are also raised up together:
Therefore baptism is our circumcision, that is, a Sacrament whereby the same
things are confirmed and conferred, and that unto as many now in the new
Testament, which were confirmed and conferred, and to as many as they were
confirmed and conferred in the old Testament by circumcision. Wherefore the
Anabaptists, denying baptism to infants born in the Church, not only spoil them
of their right; obscure the grace of God, who will that the seed of the
faithful should from their birthday, they derogate manifestly from the grace
offered in the new covenant, and scantle it less then the grace of the old
covenant, seeing they deny that baptism is now extended unto those infants, to
whom circumcision was extended: they weaken the comfort of the Church and
faithful parents: and discerned and severed from the rest of this world: they
impair and make faint, in parents and children, the study of thankfulness,
and keeping their bond: affirming, that they cannot be forbidden water, they
saucily restrain and keep back the infants from Christ, lastly, they profanely
detract from Christ's general precept of baptising all. All which absurdities
manifestly prove, that the impugnation of infants baptism (whereon they are
consequent) is no light error, but an impious profane heresy, contrary to
Gods word, and the comfort of the Church. Wherefore this, and the like follies
of the Anabaptists sect, is with the more circumspection and wariness to be
avoided, which doubtless have been inspired by the devil, and is an execrable
monster, composed and made of diverse heresies and blasphemies.

Objections of Anabaptists against the baptising infants.
Object. 1. No opinion is to be received, whereof we have neither express
commandment, nor apparent example in the Scripture: But there is no
commandment or example extant in Scripture of baptising infants: Wherefore the
baptism of infants is not to be permitted in the Church. Answ. The Minor is an
open falsehood: For we read a general commandment to this purpose, Baptize
all nations. To these all the infants of the Church appertain. There are famous
examples of whole families baptized by the Apostles, without excluding the
infants belonging to those families. Lydia a seller of purple, and her whole
household, was baptized. Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16.
The jaylour of Philippi was baptized, with all that belonged unto him,
straightway. I baptized all the house of Stephanas. Rep. 1. Christ does not
expressly command that infants should be baptized. Ans. Neither does he expressly
command that any of ripe years, men, women, citizens, contrymen, fullers,
threshers, and other base artisans, such as (for the most part) Anabaptists
are: he commands that all be baptized, of what age, sex, condition, on state
soever, which pertain to the covenant and the Church; and in general
prescripts and laws, the rehearsal of each particular is not required,
because laws pass on the whole kind, and will that the like censure take
place in particulars of any general, which is of force in the general it
self. The Anabaptists themselves forbid not women to come to the Supper; yet
have they no express commandment or example in Scripture for this fact.
Touching baptism we have a general precept; Teach all nations (says Christ)
and baptize them. His commandment is, that all be baptized who are disciples:
but infants are disciples, because they are born in Christ's school, and are
taught in their kind. Peter also enjoineth the same, saying, The promise is
made to you, and to your children: Acts 2.38, 39. Acts 10.47.
therefore be baptized every one of you. Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And
Paul prescribes the same baptism, teaching us, that we are circumcised in
Christ, and buried with him through baptism. Col. 2.11, 12.
Our baptism therefore was appointed in place of circumcision; which
deputation or appointment stands for a precept. Repl. 2. They who are to be
baptized must first be taught; Teach all nations, baptising them, etc. Infants
cannot be taught: Therefore they cannot be baptized. Ans. The Major is true of
men of ripe years and full growth, capable of instruction, of which the first
gathering of the Church was: these Christ commands first to be taught, then
to be baptized, so to be distinguished from others. It is false of infants
either born in the Church, or entering into the Church with their faithful
parents in their conversion; because Christ speaks not of infants, but of men
of competent age to be taught, that they ought not to be received into the
Church, except they be first taught the principles of faith and christianity.
But infants are comprehended under the form of the covenant, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed, even before they are capable of instruction: therefore
they ought to be baptized ere they can be taught. Repl. 3. In the examples of
baptising whole households, a figure Synecdoche is implied, taking the whole
households for part of the households; and it is meant, that they only were
baptized who believed, and confessed their faith: Wherefore baptising of
infants is not clearly proved out of those examples. Ans. The Antecedent is
false, seeing the Apostles history makes no such exclusion; and we need not
run to a figure, when there is no reason why the proper sense should not be
retained. Rep. 4. Yes, there is a two fold reason of this Synecdoche: One, that
the Apostles did not infringe Christ's commandment and appointment: Another,
that the circumstances of those examples exclude infants: For it is there said,
Acts 16.31.
They preached the word of the Lord to all that were in his house; when yet (by
your grant) they preached not to infants. Again, the whole house rejoiced. The
whole house of Stephanas ministered unto the Saints. 1 Cor. 16.15.
Wherefore infants are excluded. Ans. To the first exception we answer, denying
that infants baptism is repugnant to Christ's institution, who will that all who
pertain to him, and to his Church, have the cognizance of baptism, as has
bee^ sufficiently proved. It is untrue therefore that they say the Apostles
abstained from the baptism of infants by Christ's institution. To the second
exception we answer, denying, that out of the circumstances alleged there
follows a Synecdoche in the phrases of baptism. For the infants might be
baptized with their parents, though themselves heard not the word, nor
ministered to the Apostles, but their parents only, and other aged in the
house; seeing infancy might exclude them from hearing the word and ministering,
but not sequester them from baptism, no more then from salvation it self.
Therefore it is said to Cornelius; Acts 11.14.
He shall speak words unto thee, whereby both thou, and all thine house shall
be saved. Wherefore, setting aside such frivolous cavils, we must hold fast
this doctrine, That baptism of infants was commanded by Christ, and always
practiced by the Apostles and the whole Church. Augustine says, Lib. 4 cap.
23. co^t. Dona^.
The whole Church holds by tradition the baptism of infants. Where he also
concludes; What the whole Church holds, being no decree of any Council, but
perpetually observed, that we justly believe to have been delivered and
confirmed by Apostolic authority.

Object. 2. Mark 16.16.
They who believe not are not to be baptized; for it is said, He that shall
believe, and shall be baptized: But infants do not believe: Therefore they are
not to be baptized. For unto the use of baptism faith is necessarily required:
for whosoever shall not believe shall be condemned: But unto those that are
condemned, the sign of grace must not be given. Answ. 1. The Major holds not
generally. We might, for instance, oppose unto them the example of
circumcision, which was given to infants who could not yet believe. It is true
therefore of those who are of understanding, that of them none are to be
baptized, but such as believe. Neither yet are they able to pronounce of those
who are of understanding, that they do believe. Wherefore, if infants are not
to be baptized because they have no faith: neither are they then, who are of
age and understanding to be baptized, of whom it cannot be known whether they
do believe or no: as Simon Magus was baptized, and yet was an hypocrite. But
(say they) profession of faith is sufficient for the Church. We confess that
this is true; and we add further, that to be born in the Church, is to infants
in stead, and in place of profession. 2. Where they say, that unto the use of
baptism faith is required; we grant it: but yet distinguishing of faith; so
that we say, Actual faith is required in those of understanding; but in
infants is required an inclination only to this actual faith. So unto the use
of circumcision was required actual faith in those of understanding; but in
infants an inclination thereto only. There are then four terms in their
Syllogism, or there is in it a fallacy of taking that to be spoken but in part,
which is more generally spoken. They which believe not, to wit, simply, neither
in profession nor in inclination, Infants believe by an inclination to faith,
and therefore are to be baptized.
are not to be baptized: But the infants of the faithful believe in
inclination. 3. We deny the Minor proposition, which denies that infants do
believe: for infants do believe after their manner, that is, according to the
condition of their age, whereby they have an inclination to believe, or do
believe by inclination; for faith is in infants potentially, and by
inclination, albeit faith be not in them actually, as in those who are of age
and understanding. And as wicked infants, which are without the Church, have no
actual impiety and wickedness, but an inclination only to wickedness: so
godly infants, which are in the Church, have not actual piety and godliness,
but an inclination only to godliness; not by nature indeed, but by the grace
of the covenant. Furthermore, infants also have the holy Ghost, and are
regenerated by him, as John was filled with the holy Ghost, Jerem. 1.5.
when as yet he was in the womb: and it is said unto Jeremy, Before thou
came out of the womb I sanctified thee. If infants have the holy Ghost, then
doubtless he works in them regeneration, good inclinations, new motions, and
all those other things which are necessary unto salvation, or at least he
himself supplieth all these things, Acts 10.47.
and suffices for their baptism; as Peter says, Who can forbid water from
them who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Wherefore Christ numbered
little children amongst the faithful; Matt. 18.16.
He that offends one of these little ones which believe in me. Wherefore,
infants do not profane baptism, as the Anabaptists shamefully slander us.

Object. 3. If the sign of the covenant pertain unto all to whom the promise
of the covenant pertains, then the sacrament of the Lords Supper must be
administered to infants, because the Supper also is a sign of the covenant: But
the Supper (as you grant) is not to be administered to infants: Therefore
neither baptism. Answ. This objection proceeds against the Major of our
first and second reasons before expressed, where we conclude not thus,
Therefore every sign: but thus, Therefore some sign is to be tendered and
given to infants; to wit, that sign, 1. Which has no conditions excluding
infants. 2. Which is an initiating or entering of them into the Church. And in
the new covenant, baptism alone is such a sign. Which we prove thus: Baptism
only requires the holy Ghost, and faith, whether actual or potentiall, that
is, in inclination: as appears by Peter's words: Can any man forbid water,
that they should not be baptized, who have received the holy Ghost? Again,
Baptism only is a receiving into the Church: Therefore it alone is such a
sign as is before specified. If they thus urge their argument: If infants are
to be baptized, they are also to be admitted unto the Supper; for the Supper is
to be given to the whole Church as well as baptism: But they are not to be
admitted to the Supper, as your selves confess: Therefore neither to baptism.
Infants are not to be admitted to the Supper, although they are to be baptized.
Two reasons hereof.
Ans. This reason does not follow, because there is a great difference between
baptism and the Supper: For, 1. Baptism is a Sacrament of entrance and
receiving into the Church: whence it comes, that the Supper is to be granted
to none, except he be first baptized. But the Supper is a sign of our abode in
the Church, or a confirmation of our receiving into the Church. For the Supper
is instituted for our confirmation, to be a sign, whereby God might confirm
and seal unto us, that he, having once received us into the Church, will also
evermore preserve us in it, that we never fall from it or forsake it; and also
that he will continue his benefits once bestowed upon us, and will cherish and
nourish us by the body and blood of Christ. This confirmation, they who are of
age and understanding, stand in need of, as who are diversely tempted. 2. Unto
baptism, regeneration by the holy Ghost and faith, or an inclination to faith
and repentance suffices: but in the Supper conditions are added and required,
which hinder the use thereof to be granted unto infants: for in the Supper it
is required. 1. That they who use the sign show forth the death of the Lord.
2. That they try themselves whether they have faith and repentance or no. And
seeing the age of infants cannot do these things, it is manifest, that infants
are for good cause excluded from the Supper, and yet not from baptism. And
therefore, although they are to be baptized, yet they ought not to be admitted
unto the Supper: for unto those Sacraments only are infants to be admitted,
which are signs of receiving into the Church and covenant, and which have no
such condition adjoined whereby their age is excluded: Such a Sacrament is
Baptism in the new Testament; not the Lords Supper.

Obj. 4. If baptism succeeded circumcision, then now also only the male
children should be baptized, and in the eighth day: But this is not so:
Therefore baptism succeeded not circumcision. Ans. The Major is denied: for
baptism succeeded circumcision, not in every circumstance, but in the thing
signified, in the end, and use: And in these the two Sacraments accord, though
the circumstances of sex and age be not common to both. For God expressly
restrained circumcision to the males, and spared the females: howbeit he
comprehended them in the males; in as much as, To be born of circumcised
parents, was to them in stead of circumcision. The women therefore were
circumcised in the men; that is, were reputed circumcised, because they sprung
of them: whence Christ calls a holy woman, a daughter of Abraham: Luke 13.16.
and the sons of Jacob oppose these two between themselves, our sister, and and
uncircumcised person, when they said, We cannot give our sister to an
uncircumcised man. Genesis 34.14.
Wherefore God excepted the woman in times past from circumcision, and
determinately set down the circumstance of the eighth day: but in baptism,
these circumstances of sex and age are not expressly mentioned; but there is a
general commandment, that all the children of the godly must by this symbol
be ingraffed into the Church, whether that be done on the eighth day, or
presently after their birth.

OF CIRCUMCISION.
THe two last Questions touching baptism, before proposed, have relation to
the doctrine of circumcision; and whatsoever can be said of circumcision, is
fitly annexed to the doctrine of baptism. It remains therefore that we
briefly discuss those Questions which are especially to be observed concerning
circumcision.

1. What circumcision was. 2. Why it was instituted. 3. Why abolished again. 4.
What succeeded in place thereof. 5. How baptism and circumcision agree, and
how they differ. 6. Why Christ was circumcised.
1. What circumcision was.
CIrcumcision was a rite and ceremony whereby all the males among the children
of Israel were by Gods commandment circumcised, that this rite might be a seal
of the covenant made with Abraham's posterity. Or, It was a cutting off of the
foreskin from all the men-children of the people of Israel, enjoined by God to
be a sign of the covenant entered with Abraham and his posterity, signifying
and sealing unto them the cutting off of the foreskin of their hearts by the
promised seed which should be born; distinguishing them from other nations, and
binding them to faith and obedience toward God: Genesis 17.10.
This is my covenant, which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed
after thee: Let every man-child among you be circumcised. Romans 14.1.
He received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness of
faith. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
and the heart of thy seed, etc. Circumcision therefore bound the Jews only:
other nations had free choice, if they perhaps embraced the Jewish religion,
and repaired to their Church, to be circumcised, or not circumcised. We must
here observe, that they of the old Testament were of three sorts: Three estates
of men in the old Testament.
Israelites.
There were Israelites, which were of Abraham's posterity, and were necessarily
bound by the law to observe circumcision and other ceremonies. Proselytes.
There were Proselytes, that is, out-comers, who came from out of the Gentiles
to enter the Jewish religion; and for confirmation of their faith, they yielded
themselves to circumcision, and to the whole ceremonial law. Of these mention
is made, Acts 2.10. Mat. 23.15. Religious men.
There were religious men, converted from Gentilisme to the Jewish religion, who
believed the doctrine and promises of God; but were not circumcised, nor
observed the ceremonial law; because it was lawful for the Gentiles to
submit, or not submit themselves to circumcision and the ceremonial law: Such
were Naaman the Syrian, the Ethiopian eunuch, and others specified in the Acts:
Acts 2.5. See the fourth Objection of the Anabapt. p. 743.
There were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, men that feared God. Object. The men
children only were circumcised: Therefore the women, it seems, were excluded
from grace. Ans. No: for the women were comprehended in the circumcision of the
men; and since God spared their weak sex, it sufficed that they should be
reckoned for the seed of Abraham, and have interest in the covenant, in that
they came of circumcised parents.

2. What were the ends of circumcision.
CIrcumcision was instituted, That it might be a sign of the grace of God
toward Abraham's posterity, and that doubly: First, That God would receive into
the covenant the believers, by the Messiah who was to come: Secondly, That he
would give them the land of Canaan, and grant his Church a certain place there,
until the coming of the Messiah. That it might be a bond, to bind Abraham and
his seed unto thankfulness, or to faith and repentance, and so to keep the
whole law. That it might be a mark to distinguish the Jews from other nations
and sects. That it might be a sacrament of initiating and receiving them into
the visible Church. That it might be an accusation, and a signification of
uncleanness by natural propagation in all men: Or, That it might be a
remembrance unto them of natural uncleanness, and of casting from them the
mass of sin, especially of uncleanness, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
rebelling against the law of chastity. Circumcise the foreskin of your
hearts, and be not any more stiff-necked. Jerem. 4.4.
Be circumcised unto the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your hearts. That
it might be a sign, which should show and signify, that the means of their
deliverance through Christ which was to come, should not come else whence then
from the blood of Abraham: Genesis 22.18.
In thy seed shall all nations be blessed.

3. Why circumcision is abolished.
CIrcumcision is abolished, Because the thing signified is exhibited: for,
among other things, it signified, that the Messiah promised unto the Fathers
should come at length in his appointed time, and should in our behalf take our
nature. Because circumcision was instituted for the severing of the Jews from
all other nations: but now the Church (that difference being abolished) is
collected and gathered out of all nations. Wherefore, the Messiah being
exhibited, and the difference of that people from other nations being revoked,
the type of circumcision was likewise to be cancelled: For it is a point of a
wise Lawgiver, when the causes are changed, to alter such laws and decrees
also as depend on them, and concern them. And now the Sacrament of baptism
performs the same unto us, which circumcision did unto them. Moreover, as
circumcision was a sign unto them of their receiving into the people of God;
so is baptism unto us the first mark which severeth the Church from the wicked.

4. What succeeded in place of circumcision.
Baptism succeeded circumcision. What the succeeding of one Sacrament in place
of another is.
BAptism in the new Testament succeeded in place of circumcision. One Sacrament
succeeds another, when one being abolished, another is substituted in the
room thereof; and that so, that under diverse rites and ceremonies the same
thing be signified; and so, as to have the same use and end which the former
Sacrament had. That baptism thus succeeded circumcision, is proved, 1. By the
authority of Paul the Apostle: Col. 2.11, 12, 13.
In whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by
putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ:
In that ye are buried with him through baptism, in whom ye are also raised up
together through the faith of the operation of God, which raised him from the
dead: And you which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh,
has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses. Here
the Apostle by two reasons proves, that there is no fruit or use of external
circumcision: or, that circumcision is now no longer to be retained in the new
Church: first, because we have circumcision not made with hands, that is,
spiritual in Christ; a sign whereof was the corporal circumcision: that is,
because that is now accomplished and fulfilled in Christ, which was by
circumcision prefigured and shadowed. Again, he proves it, because baptism
now has the same signification and use which heretofore circumcision had: this
only is the difference, that baptism is the sign of the thing exhibited,
which circumcision prefigured, when it was yet absent and not exhibited.
Wherefore we are taught by this place of Paul, that baptism is the same to
Christians, which circumcision was before to the Jews. 2. That baptism was
substituted in the same place of circumcision, the end common to both these
Sacraments convinces; because both these Sacraments are a sign of our
adoption into the people of God, and a Sacrament of our admission and receiving
into the Church. For as the infants of the Jews and Proselytes, as born
citizens of the Church, were forthwith circumcised on the eighth day; but those
who were of elder years, were then first admitted into circumcision, when they
professed Judaisme: so also the infants of Christians are presently baptized;
but the elder sort are not, until they have made profession of true Christian
doctrine; in stead of which profession, it serves the infants that they were
born in the Church.

5. How baptism agrees with circumcision, and how it differs from it.
CIrcumcision and baptism agree; They agree,
In end. Romans 4.11. Tit. 3.5.
In the chief and principal end: whereas in both is sealed the promise of
grace by Christ, which is always one and the same. In signification. Colos.
2.11. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jerem. 4.4. Mark 1.4.
By both of them is signified regeneration, and a promise is made on man's part
of faith and obedience toward God. In effect. Romans 6.3.
Both of them is a Sacrament of our entry, admission, and ingraffing into the
Church. Circumcision and baptism differ, They differ:
In tires.
In rite or ceremony: For the same are not the rites of circumcision and of
baptism. In circumstance of sex and age. Genesis 17.10. Mat. 28.19.
In circumstance of sex and age: For circumcision was injoined the males alone
on the eighth day; but baptism pertains to both sexes in the Church
presently after their nativity and birth. In the manner of signifying.
In the manner of signifying: Circumcision (on Gods behalf) promised grace for
the Messiah to come; Baptism for the Messiah exhibited. The circumcised were
received into favor for Christ which was to be exhibited; the baptized are
received for Christ exhibited. In a parcicular promise. Genesis 17.8.
In a particular promise: For circumcision had a promise also of a corporal
benefit; that is, it was a testimony also that God would give a certain place
for the Church in the land of Canaan, until the coming of the Messiah: Baptism
has no promise in particular of any temporal benefit. In manner of binding.
In manner of binding: Circumcision (on our behalf) did bind the Church to
observing of the whole law, ceremonial, judicial, and moral: Baptism binds
us only to the moral law; that is, to faith and amendment of life. In objects
and continuance.
In their objects and continuance: Circumcision was instituted only for
Abraham's posterity, and it was to continue but until the coming of Christ:
Baptism was instituted for all nations that are desirous and willing to come
unto the society of the Church, and it shall continue unto the end of the world.

6. Why Christ was circumcised.
THere was no cause of circumcision in Christ; for nothing could be sealed or
bestowed on him, neither did any uncleanness cleave unto him, the pruning
whereof should be sealed unto him: howbeit, he would be circumcised; Genesis 5.21.
He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be made
the righteousness of God in him. Isa 53.5, 6.
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are
healed. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

Certain conclusions of baptism.
BAptism is a Sacrament of the new Testament, whereby Christ testifies unto
the faithful, which are baptized in the name of the Father, and the Son, and
the holy Ghost, remission of all their sins, the giving of the holy Ghost, and
their ingraffing into the Church and his body: and they of the other side
profess, that they receive those benefits from God; and therefore will and
ought hereafter to live unto him, and to serve him. And further, the same
baptism was begun by John Baptist, and concinued by the Apostles, because he
baptized into Christ who should suffer and rise again; and they into Christ who
had suffered and was risen again.

2. The first end of baptism instituted by God, is, that God might thereby
signify and testify, that he cleanses, by his blood and the holy Ghost, them
which are baptized, from their sins, and so ingraffeth them into Christ's body,
and makes them partakers of his benefits. 2. That baptism might be a solemn
receiving, or matriculating and admitting of every one into the visible Church,
and a distinguishing mark of the Church from all sects. 3. That it might be a
public and solemn profession of our faith in Christ, and our bond whereby we
are obliged to faith and obedience toward him. 4. That it might advertise us
of our sinking into afflictions, and of cur rising out of them again, and
deliverance from them.

3. Baptism has this force and power, to testify and seal by the commandment
of God, through the promise of grace adjoined by Christ unto this rite rightly
used. For Christ baptiseth us by the hand of his Ministers, as he speaks unto
us by the mouth of his Ministers.

4. Wherefore there is in baptism a double water; an external, visible water,
which is elementary: and an internal, invisible, celestial, which is the
blood and spirit of Christ. So also there is a double washing; an external,
visible, and signifying washing, namely, the sprinkling or pouring of water,
which is corporal; that is, is perceived by the parts and senses of the body:
and an internal, invisible, and signified washing, namely, remission of sins
for the blood of Christ shed for us, and our regeneration by the holy Ghost,
and our ingraffing into his body, which is spiritual; that is, is perceived
and received by faith and the spirit. Lastly, there is also a double administer
of baptism; an external, of the external baptism, which is the Minister of
the Church, baptising us by his hand and water: an internal, of the internal
baptism, which is Christ himself, baptising us by his blood and spirit.

5. Neither is the water changed into the blood or spirit of Christ, neither is
the blood of Christ present in the water, or in the same place with the water:
Neither are their bodies, who are baptized, washed therewith visibly; neither
is the holy Ghost, by his substance or virtue, more in this water then
elsewhere: but in the right use of baptism, he works in the hearts of them
who are baptized, and spiritually sprinkleth and washes them with the blood of
Christ; and he uses this external symbol or sign as an instrument, and as
a visible word or promise, to stay and stir up the faith of them who are
baptized.

6. When as then baptism is said to be the washing of the new birth, to save
us, or to wash away our sins; it is meant, that the external baptism is a
sign of the internal, that is, of regeneration or our new birth, of salvation
and spiritual washing: and this internal baptism is said to be joined with
that external baptism in the right use and administration thereof.

7. But notwithstanding, so is sin in baptism abolished, that we are delivered
from being obnoxious to the wrath of God, and from the condemnation of eternal
punishment; and further, newness of life is begun in us by the holy Ghost: but
yet the remnants of sin remain in us until the end of this life.

8. Now all they, and they alone receive baptism to the right use, who are
renewed, or renewing; and are baptized to those ends whereto baptism was by
Christ instituted.

9. The Church does rightly administer baptism to all them, and to them alone,
whom she ought to repute in the number of the regenerate, or members of Christ.

10. Seeing also the infants of Christians are of the Church, into which Christ
will have all those received and enrolled by baptism who belong unto him; and
therefore baptism was substituted in the place of circumcision, whereby (as
well unto the infants, as unto the elder sort, which did belong unto the seed
of Abraham) justification, regeneration, and receiving into the Church was
sealed; and therefore no man can forbid water, that they should not be
baptized, who have received the holy Ghost purifying their hearts: those
infants then must necessarily also be baptized, who either are born in the
Church, or come together with their parents to it.

11. As the promise of the Gospel, so baptism being received unworthily, that
is, before conversion, is ratified and profitable unto salvation to them that
are penitent; and the use thereof, which was before amiss and unlawful, is
now become unto them right and lawful.

12. Neither does the wickedness of the Minister make baptism void, or of no
effect and force unto them, so that it be ministered into the promise and faith
of Christ: and therefore also the true Church does not baptize them who have
been baptized of heretics; but only must inform and instruct them with true
doctrine concerning Christ and baptism.

13. And as the convenant once made with God, is also afterward, after sins
committed, perpetually firm and of force to the repentant; so also baptism,
being once received, confirms and assures the repentant all their life time
of remission of sins: and therefore neither ought it to be re-iterated, neither
to be deferred until the end of our life; as if it so only cleansed men from
sins, if no sins be committed after it is once received.

14. Neither yet are all those who are baptized with water (whether they be of
understanding or infants) partakers of the grace of Christ: for the everlasting
election of God, and his calling unto the kingdom of Christ is free.

15. Neither are all who are not baptized excluded from the grace of Christ;
for not the want, but the contempt of the baptism shuts men out of the
convenant of God, made with the faithful and their children.

16. And seeing the administration of the Sacraments is a part of the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, they who are not called unto this, and especially
women, may not take upon them the power and authority to baptize.

17. Rites, which are patched by men to baptism; as hallowing of the water,
tapers, exorcisms, chrisme, salt, crosses, spettle, and such like, are worthily
reputed in the Church as a corruption of the Sacrament.

OF THE LORDS SUPPER.
ON THE 28. SABBATH.
Quest. 75. How art thou in the Lords Supper admonished and warranted, that thou
art partaker of that only sacrifice of Christ offered on the cross, and of
his benefits?
Ans. Because Christ has commanded me and all the faithful to eat of this
bread broken, and to drink of the cup distributed, in remembrance of him, with
this promise adjoined Mat. 16.27, 28. Mark 14.22, 23.24. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor.
10.16, 17. and 11.23, 24, 25. and 12.13.
: First, that his body was as certainly broken and offered for me on the
cross, and his blood shed for me, as I behold with mine eyes the bread of the
Lord broken unto me, and the cup communicated to me: and further, that my soul
is no less assuredly fed to everlasting life with his body, which was
crucified for us, and his blood which was shed for us, then I receive and taste
by the mouth of my body the bread and wine, the signs of the body and blood of
our Lord, received at the hand of the Minister.

The Explication.
The chief Questions concerning the Lords Supper, are:
1. What the Supper of the Lord is. 2. What are the ends thereof, or wherefore
it was instituted. 3. What it differs from Baptism. 4. What is the sense and
meaning of the words of the institution. 5. What is the difference between the
Lords Supper, and the Papists Mass, and why the Mass is to be abolished. 6.
What is the right use of the Supper. 7. What the wicked receive in the Supper.
8. Who are to come to the Supper. 9. Who are to be admitted to the Supper.


The three former of these belong to the 75. and 76. Questions of the
Catechism? the fourth to the 77, 78, 79. the fifth to the 80. the sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth to the 81. and under them they shall be placed and
handled.

1. What the Supper of the Lord is.
The names given to this Sacrament, and the reason of the names.
FIrst, we will see by what names the Supper of the Lord is called: then we will
in few words define what it is. This action, or ceremony, or rite instituted by
Christ, a little before his death, is called, The Lords Supper, It is called,
1. The Lords Supper.
from the first institution of it: that is in respect of the original or first
beginning of this rite, or in respect of the time wherein this ceremony was
instituted; which circumstance of time the Church (for her liberty in case of
this quality) has changed. For it was a matter of casualty that this ceremony
was instituted of Christ rather in the evening at supper time, then in the
morning, or at noon day: to wit, because of the eating of the Paschal Lamb,
which by the law was to be celebrated in the evening, and was afterward to be
abolished by this new Sacrament. It is called of S. Paul, 2. The Lords Table.
The Table of the Lord. It is likewise called Synaxis, that is, a covenant, 3.
A covenant of assembly.
in respect of the assembly and convent of the Church; because some, either few
or many, must assemble and meet together in celebrating of the Supper: for in
the first celebration the disciples were present; to them it was said, Take
this, and divide it among you: Wherefore it must needs be, that there was some
number there; which also appears by the Apostle repeating the first
institution, where in the end he adds, 1 Cor. 11.20, 35.
When ye come together to eat, tarry one for another. And further, that more
ought to come together to celebrate the Supper, this end of the Supper does
evidently enough show, in that it was instituted to be a token, and even a bond
of love; For we that are many, 1 Cor. 10.17.
are one bread, and one body. It is called also the Eucharist; 4. The Eucharist.
because it is a rite and ceremony of thanksgiving. Last of all, 5. A Sacrifice.
it is called also a Sacrifice, not propitiatory or meritorious, (as the
Papists dream) but gratulatory; because it is the commemoration of Christ's
propitiatory sacrifice. And at length it was also called Missa, from the
offering, or from the dismissing of the rest who might not communicate, after
the Sermon, which went before the celebration was finished. We retain the name
left in Scripture, and call it The Lords Supper. Now let us come to define the
Lords Supper: The definition of the Lords Supper.
The Lords Supper is a ceremony or Sacrament instituted and appointed of Christ
unto the faithful for a memorial of him; whereby Christ does certainly
promise and seal unto me, and all the faithful, first, That his body was
offered and broken on the cross for me, and his blood shed for me, as truly
as I see with mine eyes the bread of the Lord to be broken unto me, and his cup
distributed: And moreover, That he does as certainly, with his body crucified,
and his blood shed, feed and nourish my soul unto everlasting life, as my body
is fed with the bread and the cup the Lord, received from the hand of the
minister, which are offered to me as certain seals of the body and blood of
Christ. It may be also more briefly defined on this wise: The Lords Supper is a
distributing and receiving of bread and wine commanded of Christ unto the
faithful, that by these signs he might testify, that he has delivered and
yielded his body unto death, and has shed his blood for them, and does give
them those things to eat and drink, that they might be unto them the meat and
d^ink of eternal life, and that thereby also he might testify, that he
would dwell in them, nourish and quicken them for ever. And again, That of the
other side, he might by the same signs bind them to mutual dilection and
love, seeing Christ spares not to give his body and blood for us. This is
confirmed, not only by Christ in the Evangelists; but also by Paul, who
expressly says, The cup of the blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? Moreover, The sign and things signified in
the Lords Supper.
the signs in the Sacrament are bread and wine; bread broken and eaten, wine
distributed and taken. The things signified are, 1. The breaking of the bod^,
and the shedaing of the blood of Christ. 2. Our union and conjunction with
Christ by faith; so that we draw life everlasting from him, and are made
partakers, as of Christ himself, so also of all his benefits, as the branches
are made partakers of the life of the vine. We are advertised of this our
union and communion with Christ, 1. By the proportion which the signs have
with the things. 2. By the promise which is adjoined. And the proportion does
chiefly propose and show two things unto us: 1. The sacrifice of Christ. 2. Our
communion with Christ; because the bread is not only broken, but is also given
us to eat: Breaking of the bread a part of the ceremony.
Now the breaking of the bread is a part of the ceremony, because unto it a
part of the thing signified does answer; namely, the breaking of Christ's body:
of which signification of this sign Paul does testify, when he says, 1 Cor.
11.24.
This is my body which is broken for you. Here receiving and eating is part of
the ceremony, whereunto does answer the thing signified; to wit, the eating of
Christ's body. Now this divine and spiritual thing, namely, the breaking and
communicating of Christ's body, is signified and confirmed by this ceremony,
which is the breaking and receiving of bread, for two causes: 1. Because Christ
commands these rites, unto which we ought to give no less credit, then if
Christ himself did speak with us. 2. Because he annexeth a promise, that they
who observe these rites with a true faith, must be assured and certain, that
they have communion with Christ. Wine is added, that we should know the
perfection and accomplishment of our salvation to be in his sacrifice; and that
there was nothing which could be further desired. The wine is severed from the
bread, to signify the violence of his death, because the blood was sundered
from his body.

2. What are the ends of the Lords Supper.
THe ends for which the Lords Supper was instituted, are: Confirmation of our
faith.
That it might be a confirmation of our faith; that is, a most certain
testification of our communion and union with Christ: because Christ testifies
unto us by these signs, that he does as verily feed us with his body and
blood unto everlasting life, as we receive at the hand of the minister these
the Lords signs; and this testification is directed to every one who receives
the signs with a true faith: For we so receive the signs at the ministers
hand, as that rather the Lord himself gives them us by his ministers. John.
4.1.
Wherefore, Christ is said to have baptized more disciples then John, when yet
he did it by his Apostles, and other disciples. Distinction of Christians from
infidels.
That it might be a public distinction or mark, discerning the Church from
all other nations and sects: For the Lord instituted and appointed his Supper
for his disciples, and not for others. Testification of our faith.
That it might be our testification to Christ, and the whole Church; which is a
public confession of our faith, and a solemn thanksgiving and binding our
selves to perpetual thankfulness, and the celebration of this benefit: both
which are proved by these words of Christ; Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.26.
Do this in remembrance of me. This remembrance is taken, first for faith in
the heart; then for thanksgiving and our public confession. To be a bond of
the Churches assembly.
That it might be a bond of the Churches assemblies and meetings: because the
Supper was instituted, that it should be done and celebrated in a congregation,
and that either great or small. Therefore the Supper (as was said before) is
called a Synaxis. Mat. 20.27. 1 Cor. 11.33.
Convent: and Christ expressly commands, Drink ye all of this. Likewise Paul,
When ye come together to eat, stay one for another. To be a bond of love among
men. 1 Cor. 10.17.
That it might be a bond of mutual love and dilection: because the Supper
testifies, that all who receive it aright, are made the members of Christ
under one head: as also Paul says, For we that are many, are one bread and
one body, because we are all partakers of one bread. Now the members of one
body mutually love one another.

The Lords Supper may not be celebrated by one only.
Of this which has been spoken, we gather, that the Lords Supper ought not to
be celebrated by one only: 1. Because it is a communion, and the sign of our
communion; and a private supper is no communion. 2. Because it is a solemn
thanksgiving, and all ought to give thanks unto God: and by consequent, he
that thinks himself unworthy to communicate with others in the Lords Supper,
does withal confess himself not to be fit to give thanks unto God. 3.
Because Christ, together with his benefits, is not proper to any, but common to
all: wherefore a private Supper makes that good private, which should be
public. 4. Christ called all his household unto it, even Judas himself:
Therefore a private Supper is coutrary to Christ's institution. 5. That some
abstain from coming to the Supper, it comes of a certain evil and corrupt
motion, either because they will not communicate with others, or because they
think themselves not worthy enough to approach unto this Table. But all are
worthy, who believe themselves to be desivered by Christ from eternal
damnation, and desire to profit and go forward in godliness. In sum, if the
Supper be received by one only, that is done against the use, appellation,
institution, and nature of the Sacrament.

Object. An objection against that end which before ^as alleged to be
principal in the Lords Supper.
Christ, in the words of the institution of the Supper, puts, as the
principal end of his Supper, his remembrance: Therefore the confirmation of
faith must not be made the principal end of his Supper. Ans. The reason
follows not to the denial of a part, by putting the whole. For the
remembrance of Christ is the whole, wherein is comprised both our confession,
and our solemn bond to thankfulness, and also the consirmation of our faith.
Wherefore, rather by inverting the reason, I thus infer and conclude; because
the remembrance is the Supper, therefore it is the confirmation of our faith:
and because also Christ proposes unto us that ceremony or rite which must be
unto us a remembrance of him, he does verily propose also a confirmation of
our faith* which is nothing else but a remembrance of Christ and his benefits.
Ob. The holy Ghost confirms our faith: therefore the Supper does not Ans. The
reason follows not to the removing of an isntrumental cause, by the putting
of a principal cause: as if a man should say, God feeds and nourishes us;
therefore bread does not. For the holy Ghost confirms indeed our faith, but
by the word and sacraments; as God feeds and nourishes us, but by bread.

3. What the Supper differs from Baptism.
ALthough the same benefits are imparted and sealed unto us both in the Lords
Supper, and in Baptism, to wit, a spiritual ingraffing into Christ, and a
communion with him, and the whole benefit of salvation, whereof the Apostle
speaks, saying; By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.
and have been all made to drink into one spirit: Yet many and manifest are the
differences of these sacraments; for the Supper differs from Baptism, In
ceremonies.
In ceremonies or external rites. In signification of ce emonies. The same
thing is sealed in baptism and the Supper; but the means of sealing is diverse.
In the signification of the ceremonies. For albeit it is the same
participation of Christ; namely, both the washing away of sins by the blood of
Christ, which is represented in baptism; and eating and drinking of the body
and blood of Christ, which is confirmed unto us in the Supper: yet
notwithstanding that signification of our new birth is sealed by the dipping of
our body into the water of baptism; and this of our maintenance and
preservation is depainted and sealed by the eating and drinking of bread and
wine in the Supper. And therefore the thing signified of the sacraments is not
diverse; because it is the same, To be washed with the blood of Christ, and, To
drink the blood of Christ. But the manner of signifying one and the same thing
is diverse. In ends.
In their proper ends: Baptism is a covenant made between God and the
faithful; the Supper is a sign of the continuing of that covenant. Or,
Baptism is a sign of regeneration, and of our entrance into the Church and
covenant of God; the Supper is a sign of their fostering, abiding, and
preservation, who are once entered into the Church. The new man must first be
born by the spirit of Christ, and the sign of this renewing or regeneration is
baptism; afterward, when he is once renewed and born again, he must be
fostered and nourished by the body and blood of Christ, the sign of which
nourishing is the Supper. Briefly, in baptism God confirms us of our
receiving into the Church; in the Supper, of his continuing and increasing his
benefits unto us. In the mean time, it is one and the same Christ who both
regenerateth, and nourishes us to eternal life. In manner of using.
In the manner of using them. To the lawful use of baptism regeneration
suffices: therefore it agrees to all whom the Church reputeth regenerate; as,
all elder persons professing faith and repentance, and infants born in the
Church. But the Supper requires farther the trial of the faith of the
receivers, the remembrance of the Lords death, and thanksgiving. Luke 22.19. 1
Cor. 11.18.
Do this in remembrance of me. Show forth the Lords death till he come. Let a
man examine himself. Baptism therefore is due to the whole Church, that is, as
well to infants as elder persons; the Supper only to elder persons, who can
prove themselves, and show forth the Lords death. In order of receiving.
In the order of receiving them: For baptism must go before, and the Supper
follow: that is, the sacrament of the Supper must not be given, but to them who
are baptized; and not to them neither presently after baptism, but after they
have made confession of their faith and repentance. Whereupon, in the ancient
Church, after the sermon, were dismissed such as were excommunicated, likewise
those that were possessed or troubled with an evil spirit, and the
Catechumens, that is, such as did not yet understand the grounds and principles
of religion, or were not as yet baptized. So of old, they who were not yet
circumcised, were not admitted to the sacrifices or ceremonies. Now, if they
who were baptized, before they have made confession of their faith and
repentance, are not as yet to be admitted unto the Supper: much less are they,
who, being baptized, live after the manner of swine and dogs. In order of
receiving it self: which of baptism is but once, of the Supper often.
In the receiving it self: We must often celebrate the Supper, because we
must often show forth the Lords death; for it was therefore instituted, that in
it should be made public remembrance, recounting, and showing of Christ's
death: also the confirmation of our faith concerning the eternal continuance
of the covenant (which confirmation is by the Supper) is often necessary; and
therefore the Supper is often to be reiterated, as also the eating of the
Paschal lamb, prefiguring this Supper, was for this cause yearly reiterated.
But baptism is not to be reiterated, but once only to be received in our life
time; even as circumcision of old was but once received: and baptism is
therefore not to be reiterated, both because we have no commandment to this
purpose, and also because it is a sign of our receiving into the Church and
covenant of God; for the covenant once made, is not again undone or made void
to those that repent, but remains ratified and firm for ever: For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance: and we by repentance after our
falls enter not a new league with God, but renew and restore an old. Hereof it
is that Christ himself says of the Supper; Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.26.
Do this, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. And the
Apostle, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come. Romans 9.3.
But of baptism the same Apostle teaches, As many as have been baptized into
Christ Jesus* have been baptized into his death. And Christ pronounces, Mark
16.16.
He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved.

Quest. 76. What is it to eat the body of Christ crucified, and to drink his
blood that was shed?
Ans. It is not only to embrace by an assured confidence of mind the whole
passion and death of Christ, and thereby to obtain forgiveness or sins and
everlasting life Joh. 6.35, 40, 47, 48, 50, 51, 53, 54.
: but also by the holy Ghost, who dwells both in Christ and us, so more and
more to be united to his sacred body Joh. 6.55, 56.
, that though he be in heaven Col. 3.1. Acts 3.21. 1 Cor. 11.26.
, and we in earth, yet nevertheless are we flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones Ephesians. 5.30. and 3.16. 1 Cor. 6.15. 1 John 3.24. and 4.13.
: and as all the members of the body are by one soul, so are we also quickened
and guided by one and the same Spirit Joh. 6.57. and 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians.
4.15, 16.
.

The Explication.
THis question expounds and declares the thing signified in the Sacrament.
The eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood, is not corporal, What
it is to eat the flesh of Christ.
but spiritual; and compriseth, 1. Faith of Christ's passion and death. 2. An
apprehension of remission of sins and eternal life through faith. 3. Our
union with Christ by the holy Ghost dwelling in Christ and in us. 4. The
benefit of his quickening by the same spirit. Wherefore, to eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood, is, to be received into favor with God for
Christ's merit, to receive remission of sins, and be reconciled to God by the
same faith, to have the Son of God, who assumed man's nature, and united it
personally unto him, dwelling in us, and coupling us unto himself and his
assumed nature, by pouring into us his Spirit, through whom he regenerateth us,
and restores light in us, righteousness and life eternal, such as is eminent
in his assumed manhood. More briefly, to eat, is, 1. To believe. 2. To receive
remission of sins by faith. 3. To be united to Christ. 4. To be made partakers
of the life of Christ, or to be made like, and conformed unto Christ by the
holy Ghost, who works the same things in us and in Christ. This eating is our
communion with Christ, which the Scripture teaches, and which we profess in
the Creed: namely, a spiritual union with Christ, as members with the head,
and branches with the vine. Christ teaches us this eating of his flesh, John
6. and confirms it in the Supper by external signs. Thus did the ancient
Fathers, Augustine, Eusebius, Nazianzen, Hilary, and others expound the eating
of Christ's body, as hereafter shall appear. Wherefore the opinions of
Papisticall Transubstantiation, of a corporal presence, and of eating Christ's
body in the bread with the mouth (which many defend) are not grounded on the
words of the Supper, which promise the eating of Christ's body.

Quest. 77. Where has Christ promised, that he will as certainly give his
body and blood so to be eaten and drunken, as they eat this bread broken, and
drink this cup?
Ans. In the institution of his Supper, the words whereof are these 1 Cor.
11.23, 24, 25. Matthew. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark 14.22, 23, 24. Luke 22.19, 20
; Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the night that he was betrayed, took bread: and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body
which is broken for you: this do you in remembrance of me. Likewise also he
took the cup, when he had supped, and said, This cup is the new Testament in my
blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. For as
often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death
till be come. This promise is repeated by S. Paul, when he says 1 Cor. 10 16,
17.
This cup of thanksgiving wherewith we give thanks, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? For we that are many, are one bread, and one body, because
we all are partakers of one bread.

The Explication.
THe institution of the Lords Supper does confirm unto us by evident reasons,
what is the true and saving communion of Christ's body and blood: and therefore
the true sense and meaning of the words of the institution is diligently to be
considered. The holy Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, do most especially
of all others describe the institution of the Lords Supper: and besides them,
the Apostle so declares it no less plainly in his Epistle to the Corinthians.
The words of them all are these:

Matthew, Chap. 26.26. etc. As they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to the disciples* and said, Take,
eat, this is my body. Also he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he
gave it to them, saying; Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the new
Testament, that is shed for many for the remission of sins.

Mark, Chap. 14.22. etc. As they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take eat this is
my body. Also he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, gave it to them
and they all drank of it: and he said unto them, This is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many.

Luke, Chap. 22.19. etc. And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to them, saying This is my body which is given for you;
do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after supper he took the cup, saying,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23, etc. I have received of the Lord that which also I have
delivered unto you; to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread: And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance
of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood; this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me: For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye show the Lords death till he come.

The words of the Apostle we will briefly expound, and then we will
demonstrate our opinion in this point by true and firm arguments in the
Question of Catechism immediately following.

The Lord Jesus.] This is the Author from whom it is entitled the Lords
Supper: we must therefore observe what the Lord did, Lib 2. Epist. 3.
said, and prescribed, as Cyprian well warns us: If christ alone be to be
heard, we must not attend or regard what any man before us has thought meet
to be done, but what Christ (who is before all) first did perform.

In the night that he was betrayed.] This circumstance is specified by the
Apostle, to give us to understand, that Christ would at the last Supper of the
Passover institute this his Supper, to show, 1. That now an end was made of
all the old sacrifices, and he did substitute a new Sacrament which should
succeed, and should from henceforth be observed (that Paschal Sacrament being
finally abolished) and which should signify the same thing, difference only
of time excepted. For the Paschal lamb signified Christ which should come, and
should be sacrificed: The Supper, Christ already sacrificed. Object. But when
the Supper was instituted, Christ was yet to be sacrificed. Answ. But then was
at hand the offering up and sacrificing of Christ: For, a few hours after he
was sacrificed, and the Supper was from that time forward to signify Christ
sacrificed. 2. That he might stir up in his disciples and in us greater
attention and marking of the cause for which he did institute it, and that we
might understand how earnestly Christ would have this Supper to be commended
unto us: seeing he did nothing before his death, but that which was of most
weight and moment. Therefore did he in the very point or instant before his
death institute it, to be as it were the testament and last will of our
Testatour. Briefly, this clause Paul adds, that we may know, that Christ
instituted this Supper for a memorial of himself now ready to die.

He took bread.] That is, unleavened or not leavened bread, which then they did
eat of at the table in that feast of the passover, which admitted no leavened
bread. The institution of the Supper and unleavened bread did concur then
together, and fall our by an accident; and therefore this circumstance properly
pertains not to the Supper (as neither the evening does, at what time it was
instituted) neither can a necessity of unleavened bread for this use be hence
enforced, neither would Christ hereon prescribe any certain manner of baking
bread for the Lords Supper. Yet notwithstanding, the bread of the Lords Supper
differs in use from common bread, because this is taken for the nourishment
of the body; but that for the food and nourishment of the soul, that is, for
the confirmation of our faith and union with Christ. And here we are to note,
that he is said to have taken bread from the table; to wit, with his hand: he
took not his body therefore, neither took he his body in the bread, with the
bread, or under the bread, save only sacramentally: for his body lay not on the
table, but sat down thereat.

Blessing and thanksgiving are all one in the Supper.
When he had given thanks.] Matthew and Mark say of the bread, When he had
blessed; of the cup, When he had given thanks: Luke and Paul say of the bread,
When he had given thanks: Wherefore, To bless, and to give thanks, both
signify one thing: neither can the mystery of Popish magical consecration be
cloaked under these terms. Christ therefore blessed, that is, he gave thanks;
namely, to his Father (not to be bread) for spiritual blessings, I mean, for
the satisfying of souls: that his office being now performed and finished on
earth (his last act yet remaining to be done) the time of his dying for the
redemption of the elect was at hand: that thus it had pleased the Father to
redeem mankind; or that the typical Passover was abolished, and the signified
Pasteover was now exhibited, and a memorial of him was to be signed to the
Church: or lastly, he gave thanks for the admirable and wonderful gathering
and preserving of the Church.

He brake it.] That is, he brake the bread which he took from the table, and
distributed the same, being one among many: not any other invisible thing
hidden in the bread. He brake not his body, but the bread, as Saint Paul says,
The bread which he brake, etc. Now he distributed the bread, being one, among
many; because we that are many are one body. But the cause for which he brake
this bread, was to signify, 1. His passion, and the separation of his body
from his soul. Two things signified by the breaking of the bread. 1 Cor. 10.16.
2. The communion of many with his own body, and their bond of union and
mutual love. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of Christ? For
we that are many, are one bread, and one body. Wherefore, the breaking of
bread is a necessary ceremony, both in respect of the signification, Pour
causes why this ceremony is to be retained.
and in respect of the confirmation of our faith: and therefore is this
ceremony also to be retained, 1. Because Christ has commanded it; Do this. 2.
Because of the authority and example of the Church planted in the Apostles
time, which from the rite of breaking, termed the whole action, Breaking of
bread. 3. For our own comfort; that we may know the body of Christ to have been
as certainly crucified for us, as we see the bread to be broken unto us. 4.
That the opinions of Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation may be pulled out
of men's minds.

Take, eat.] This commandment belongs to the disciples, and to the whole
Church of the new Testament: Whence it is clear and manifest, 1. That the
Popish Mass, wherein the priest gives nothing to the Church to be taken and
eaten, is not the Supper of the Lord, but a private supper of him that
sacrifices, and a mere stage play. 2. That we must not be idle beholders of
the Supper, but religious receivers of it. 3. That the Lords Supper is not to
be celebrated but in an assembly or congregation where there are such as
receive and eat. 4. That the Supper is a sign of grace in respect of God,
reaching out unto us his benefits to be apprehended with a strong faith, even
as we receive the sign with our hand and mouth.

This is my body.] This, that is, this bread. Object. Then should it have been
said, These Greek pronouns cannot be expressed with the like English particles,
because the words, BREAD and BODY, being of diverse genders in Greek, the Greek
pronouns also are diverse, when as in English our particle THIS serves for
words of all genders.
(...), not (...). Ans. (...) is as much as if he had said, This thing which I
have in my hand: now that was bread. And that it is so to be understood, is
proved by these reasons: 1. Christ took nothing but bread: he brake bread, and
gave bread to his disciples to ear. 2. S. Paul says expressly, The bread which
he brake, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? 3. Of the wine it is
said, This cup is the new Testament in my blood. Wherefore, after the same
manner it is said, This, that is, this bread is my body, which is broken and
delivered unto death for you. The literal sense, if it be properly taken, can
be no otherwise understood then thus; The substance of this bread is the
substance of my body. But so to understand it is an undoubted absurdity: for
bread is a mass without life, baked of corn, and not united personally to the
Word: but the body of Christ is a living substance, born of the Virgin, and
united personally to the Word: Christ therefore calls the bread his body,
meaning, Cont. Adim. c. 12.
the sign of his body, by a sacramental Metonymie attributing the name of the
thing signified to the sign, because he appoints this bread to be sign and
sacrament of his body, as Augustine himself interprets: The Lord doubted not
to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. Wherefore, far be
it from us, that we should say, that Christ took bread visibly, and his body
invisibly in the bread. For it is to be observed, that he says not, In this is
my body: Or, This bread is my body invisible: But, This bread is my body, true,
and visible, which is given for you. Moreover, these are the words of the
promise added to this sacrament, to teach us what the bread is in this use, to
wit, the body of Christ; that is, what Christ exhibiteth and imparteth to the
receivers of this bread, and believers of this promise; even his body, or that
flesh which in the Gospel he promised to give for the salvation of the world.
For this is no diverse promise from that he delivered in the sixth of John,
John 6.51.
but every way the same concerning his flesh quickening us, and the eating
thereof profitable to salvation: Only here the sacramental rite is adjoined,
wherewith the promise is adorned and sealed; as if he should say, In the Gospel
I promised life eternal to all that eat my flesh and drink my blood; now I
confirm and ratify this my promise with an outward ceremony, that henceforth
they which believe this promise, and feed on this bread, may undoubtedly be
persuaded and assured, that they verily eat my flesh, which was given for the
salvation of the world, and have life eternal. By this promise therefore this
bread is made the sacrament and sign of Christ's body, and Christ's body is made
the thing signified by this sacrament: The union of the sign and the thing
signified in the Sacrament.
and these two (I mean, the sign, and the thing signified) are united in this
sacrament, not by any natural copulation, or corporal and local existence
one in the other; much less by transubstantiation, or changing one into the
other: but by signifying, sealing, and exhibiting the one by the other; that
is, by a sacramental union, whose bond is the promise added to the bread,
requiring the faith of the receivers. Whence it is clear, that these things in
their lawful use are always jointly exhibited and received, but not without
faith of the promise, viewing and apprehending the thing promised, now present
in the Sacrament: yet not present or included in the sign, as in a vessel
containing it; but present in the promise, which is the better part, life, and
soul of the sacrament. For they want judgment, who affirm, that Christ's body
cannot be present in the sacrament, except it be in, or under the bread: as if
(forsooth) the bread alone, without the promise, were either a sacrament, or
the principal part of a sacrament.

Which for you] my disciples; that is, for your salvation, and the salvation of
the whole Church.

Is broken.] Object. But Christ's body neither is, nor was broken. Answ. Paul
has a respect to the signification which the breaking of the bread did import:
now this breaking signifies the pains and renting of Christ's body, and the
violent sundering of his soul and his body one from the other: For, as the
bread is broken, and parted into diverse parts; so the soul and body of Christ
were separated and parted from each other. Wherefore the property of the sign
is here attributed to the thing signified.

Do this.] These words are a commandment to observe the ceremony which Christ
instituted. This, to wit, this which ye see me do, do you also henceforth in
the Church: that is, being gathered and assembled together, take bread, give
thanks, break it, distribute it, eat it, etc. He understands the whole action
which he commands, and that to us which believe, and not to the Jews, who
were ready to crucify him.

In remembrance of me.] That is, thinking and mediating of my benefits, which I
have done for you, and which are by these rites recalled into your memory; and
further verily feeling and finding in heart, that I give you these my benefits;
and therefore celebrating them by public confession before God and Angels yea
before men also, and so giving me thanks for them. Wherefore the end of
Christ's Supper is remembrance: The end of the Supper is the remembrance of
Christ's benefits.
which is not a mere meditation on the history, but a calling to mind the death
and benefits of Christ, and a faith whereby we apply Christ and his merit unto
us, and gratefulness or a public confession of his benefits. This remembrance
is the whole: whose parts are the memory of Christ's benefits; faith, whereby we
apply Christ and his merit unto us, thankfulness or public confession of his
benefits. Whence it is manifest, that the Supper was instituted to this end, to
be unto us a memorial of Christ, putting us in mind what and how great
blessings he has purchased for us, and with what and how exquisite torments
and bitter death he obtained them, confirming in us also our faith whereby we
apprehend them. Wherefore it follows not; Christ did institute his Supper for
a remembrance of him: Therefore he did not institute it for confirmation of
our faith. For this objection is no less frivolous, then if I should say, The
holy Ghost confirms our faith: Therefore the Supper does not. For (as it has
been said before) the reason follows not to the removing of the isntrumental
cause, by the putting of the principal cause; as neither does it follow to the
denial of a part, by the putting of the whole: for remembrance compriseth the
remembering of Christ's benefits, faith, and thanksgiving. For by his sacraments
Christ remembers us of himself and his benefits, and by his sacraments he
raises and establishes in us our trust and confidence in him; and further, of
that remembrance of Christ's benefits it must follow, that we also yield thanks
unto him therefore publicly. So then, the Supper is not only to admonish us of
our duty, as some think; but it must first represent unto us Christ's benefit,
and then afterward our duty: for where no benefit is, there we cannot be
thankful.

Drink ye all of this.] This commandment of Christ we oppose against the
sacrilege of the Pope, who bereaveth the Laity of the cup; Against Popish
administering the communion under one kind.
and against that sophistical figment of concomitancie of the blood with the
body under the form of the bread. Christ bids all eat, and all drink: The
Pope will not permit all to drink, but the Priest only; the Laymen he
suffers to eat only, because (says he) they drink it eating. This shameful
dealing is reproved and confuted by Christ's commandment, Drink ye all of this.
Here the Popes Sophisters cavil with us; telling us, that this commandment,
which we urge and press on them, pertains only to the disciples then
present, who were no Laymen, but Priests. But we answer, 1. That they fondly
imagine Christ's disciples to have been Masse-mumming Priests. 2. There is no
such difference in Scripture, as they put of Priests and Laymen, seeing the
Scripture intituleth all the faithful priests of God: He has made us kings
and priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.9, 5.
even his Father. Ye are a royal and holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 3. Under this pretext and color
the whole Supper might be taken away from the Laity; especially from women, if
it were true that such men only were to be admitted to the Supper as were at
the first Supper. Their tale of concomitancy is an impious and sacrilegious
pretext, which Christ confuteth and discovers to be false, when he calls
the bread by it self his body, and the cup by it self his blood, and reaches
both apart to his disciples to be eaten and drunk, and commands them
henceforth to be so ministered apart.

This cup is the new Testament.] Or, the Covenant, as both the (...).
Greek and Berith.
Hebrew word admits. Now, it is called the new covenant; that is, renewed,
or (to speak in a word) fulfilled. And this new covenant is our reconciliation
with God, the communion and participation of Christ and all his benefits by
faith in the sacrifice of Christ now fulfilled and finished, without any
observation of the ceremonies of the old Passover. The Supper is called the
new Covenant, How the Sacrament is called the new Covenant.
because it is a sign and a seal of this covenant, signifying and sealing
unto us our reconciliation with God, and our conjunction with Christ, which is
wrought by faith. Now Christ, in calling the Supper the new Covenant, 1.
Comprehends both the promise, and the condition which is expressed in the
promise; namely, our faith and repentance: whereof also it follows, that the
Supper was for this cause also instituted, that it might be a bond to bind us
to lead a Christian life. 2. He makes an opposition between the new Covenant,
and the old Covenant, which was the Passover; together with the rites thereof:
For the Supper signifies Christ offered; the Passover signifies Christ who
should be offered. There is notwithstanding no small similitude and agreeing of
both; for both signify our reconciliation with God, and conjunction with
Christ. Hence also we conclude, that the drinking of Christ's blood is not
corporal: for the new Testament is but one, and all the elect before Christ's
birth appertain thereunto.

In my blood, which is shed for you for remission of sins.] The blood of Christ
is his death. In the blood of Christ, is as much as to say, In the death, or
for the death of Christ. The shedding of Christ's blood is the merit for which,
being apprehended of us by faith, we receive remission of sins.

For as often as ye shall eat.] The Supper therefore is often to be iterated
and celebrated, 1. Because of the words of the institution. 2. In respect of
the end and purpose of the institution; because it must be done in remembrance
of Christ.

Show the Lords death.] That is, believe that Christ dyed, and that for you,
and then profess it also publicly before all.

Till he come.] Therefore it must be observed unto the worlds end: neither is
any other external form to be looked for until the day of judgment.

The words of the institution which have been hitherto expounded, 1 Cor. 10.16.
may be made more plain and clear by these words of the Apostle; The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

The cup of blessing.] That is, the cup of thanksgiving, which is received;
namely, to this end, that we may yield thanks to Christ for his death and
passion.

The communion of the body, likewise the communion of the blood, is, to be
made, through faith, partakers of Christ and all his benefits, the same spirit
being in us which is in Christ, John 15.2. ^phes. 5. 1 John 1.6.
and working the same in us which he works in Christ. Or, it is a spiritual
fellowship of the faithful with Christ, as of members with the head, and
branches with the vine. Bread and wine is the communion; that is, it is the
sign and testimony of our communion with Christ: But this our communion, as
the Apostle briefly declares, consists in this, that we who are many, are
but one body: Whence it is most easy to collect, That this communion of Christ
is not a corporalleating. For it is wrought only by faith and the holy Ghost.
Christ is the head, and we the members: and all we who are members have also a
communion of all Christ's benefits: Therefore the head is common, the benefits
common, and so the members also common among themselves; wherefore their love
and dilection is common and mutual.

Quest. 78. Are then the bread and wine made the very body and blood of Christ?
ON THE 19. SABBATH.

Ans. No verily Matt. 26.29. Mark 14.24.
: But as the water of baptism is not turned into the blood of Christ, but is
only a sign and pledge of those things that are sealed unto us in baptism
Ephesians. 5.26.
: so neither is the bread of the Lords Supper the very body of Christ 1 Cor.
10.16. and 11.26.
; although, according to the manner of Sacraments, and that form of speaking
of them, which is usual to the holy Ghost Genesis 17.10, 11. Exodus 12.11, 13. and
13.9. Titus 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 Corinthians. 10.4.
the bread is called the body of Christ.

The Explication.
THe Papists Transubstantiation (under which also Consubstantiation, maintained
by the Ubiquitaries and others, is comprehended) is in this Question of the
Catechism consuted and rejected; and the sacramental kind of speech which we
use, with the true sense of those words of Christ, This is my body, examined
and unfolded. We will first entreat of that form of speech which we use, and
of the true meaning of Christ's words: then will we handle the controversy of
Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation. That therefore which has been
heretofore spoken in general of sacramental phrases and terms, must be
restrained to this Sacrament: For thus Austine himself descends from the
general rule of sacramental terms, unto a particular instance of eating
Christ's flesh: E^ist. 23. ad Bonif^^.
This (says he) is the only way to find whether a phrase be proper or
figurative; That whatsoever in Gods word cannot properly be referred to some
point of moral duty, or to the truth of faith, you may be assured, that it is
figuratively spoken. And a little after he produces this example; Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. He seems, says Augustine, by these words to injoyne us some heinous
crime. It is therefore a figurative speech, instructing us, that we are to
partake of Christ's passion, and joyfully and fruitfully to recall to mind how
his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Wherefore, as of Baptism (as has
been already declared) so of the Lords Supper also the Scripture speaks
sometimes properly, and sometimes figuratively. The speech is figurative, when
Christ says of the bread, This is my body: and of the cup, This is my blood.
Likewise when Paul says, This cup is the new Testament in my blood. For in
these the name of the thing signified is attributed to the sign: Paul also
then speaks figuratively, when he says, This is my body which is broken for
you; because he attributes the property of the sign (which is, to be broken)
to the thing signified. Thus Cyprian must be understood: When we drink of the
cup, we cleave to the cross, Sermon. de Coena. Hom 24. in 1 Cor. 10. and Hom. 27.
we suck Christ's blood, and lay our tongues in our Redeemers wounds. Thus
Chrysostom is to be interpreted, when he says, Christ's blood is in the
chalice; Christ's body, which is in heaven, is presented on earth to our view;
and is not only seen, but touched of us; nor touched only, but eaten also: he
is held, bitten, and eaten of us, in token of love, as sometimes we bite at
him whom we love, and touch his flesh with our tongue. These sentences are not
truly spoken or understood of the body of Christ, but by a trope and figure
usual in sacraments. Now the speech is proper, when Christ says, Do this in
remembrance of me: and when the Fathers every where say, The breaking of bread
is a memorial, a lively shadow of Christ's sacrifice: The bread signifies the
body of Christ: It is a figure, a sign, a sacrament of the body of Christ.

Of the controversy concerning the words used in the Supper.
NOw, whereas our adversaries, the Papists and others, deny that Christ's words
are sacramentally spoken, and say we are to keep the letter; we must here add
something touching the controversy of the letter, and meaning of the letter.
The Papists bear us in hand, that by the virtue and force of consecration there
is made a transubstantiation, or changing of the bread into the body of Christ,
the accidents only remaining. Others tell us of a consubstantiation, or
co-existence of Christ's body in, or with the bread. The Transubstantiaries, The
Transubstantiaries and Consubstantiaries rely not on the simple meaning of
Christ's words.
together with the Consubstantiaries, do boast and glory, that they understand
the words of Christ simply and aright: But neither perform that which they brag
and boast of; for that is the true simplicity and property of the word,
whereunto, for the just understanding and interpretation thereof, nothing is to
be added, neither ought to be taken from it, neither any thing altered. But as
many as hold that the body of Christ is with, in, or under the bread, they add
unto the words of Christ, and depart from true simplicity: For if that which
Christ said is simply to be retained, and that not to be admitted which he said
not; then may we not say, The bread is both bread and the body of Christ: but
simply this only, The bread is the body of Christ. For he said not, My body is
with, or in, or under the bread; or, The bread is both bread, and my body
together: neither adds he, as these add of their own, really, substantially,
corporally; but he utters these bare words of the bread, This is my body.
Neither have the Transubstantiaries their opinion drawn from the words of
Christ simply understood, namely, that of the bread is made the body of Christ,
or, the bread is changed into the body of Christ: for this is their own forgery
and invention. For Christ said not, that the bread was now made, or was a
making, or should be made; but simply said, The bread is my body, where no
change could come between: so that the words of Christ be simply understood.
Therefore falsely do they persuade the people that they simply rest on the
propriety of Gods word, when as manifoldly and most far they swerve and
depart from it.

The true interpretation of Christ. words.
We Protestants retain the words of Christ without adding or altering; to wit,
that the bread is the body of Christ, and indeed, the true and visible body
which was given for us. But because these words literally taken, would admit a
sense repugnant to the truth of Christian faith (for if bread were properly
Christ's body, it would follow, that bread was crucified for us) therefore we
affirm, that in Christ's words a convenient meaning must be inquired after; that
is, Christ's words must be understood sacramentally: namely, that the bread is
called Christ's body, because it is a sign of Christ's body; the cup, or wine in
the cup is called Christ's blood, because it is a sign of Christ's blood; the cup
is also called the new Testament, because it is a sign of the new Testament;
even as baptism is termed a washing away of sins, and a laver of new birth,
because it is a sign of both these, which are wrought properly by the blood
and spirit of Christ. The true sense therefore and natural interpretation of
Christ's words is, This is my body which is given for you: that is, This bread
broken by me, and given to you, is a sign of my body delivered to death for
you, and an authentic seal of your conjunction with me; so that he which shall
believe, and eat this bread, he truly and really after a sort eats my body.
Here therefore to the sign is attributed the name of the thing signified, both
for the conjunction which the thing signified has, in the right use of the
Supper with the sign: and also for the proportion which the sign has with
the thing signified.

In this exposition we are not led and overruled by Philosophy and humane
reason (as our adversaries traduce us, and bear the world in hand we are) but
we observe those rules by which, in the joint consent of all sound wise men,
we are to censure the interpretation of any Scripture whatsoever: namely by
the analogy and rule of faith: by the nature of the thing or subject: by the
testimonies of Scripture which teach the same thing. Three rules w^ereby we may
judge of the interpretation of Scripture.
For by help of these three rules, the natural sense of Scripture is wont to
be examined, as often as necessity drives us from the letter to the sense and
meaning. 1. That no interpretation be received dissonant from the rule of
faith, or repugnant to any article thereof, or any commandment of the
Decalogue, or any express testimony of Scripture: for the spirit of truth is
not contrary to it self. 2. That the sense derived out of words signifying any
thing, have a congruity with the nature of the thing signified by the words, as
in this present subject of the Supper whereon we insist; when any question or
doubt is moved therein, we are to enquire, seeing it is a Sacrament, how the
Scripture elsewhere speaks of Sacraments, and of the Supper it self. 3.
That other like places be weighed and considered, by which it is either
manifest and granted, or may be demonstrated by some circumstance, that they
contain the same doctrine concerning the same thing, which is contained in the
place in controversy. For if we be fully resolved of the meaning of any
cleerer and uncontroversed place, we shall also be resolved of the sense of the
place in controversy, if the same thing be delivered in both. So then it is
out of doubt, that that meaning of the words of the Supper which is agreeable
with these rules, is true: and those untrue which disagree from them. But this
our construing and interpretation (which indeed is not ours, but the doctrine
of Christ himself, his Apostles, and all orthodox or right-beleeving antiquity)
does every way suit with these rules: wherefore undoubtedly it is most true,
and best beseeming the truth of the Gospel. Now let us come to the arguments by
which we prove our interpretation to be true: they are of four sorts; 1. Some
are taken out of the text it self, and circumstances of the institution of the
Lords Supper. 2. Some are taken from the nature of the thing or subject; that
is, by understanding the speech, as the thing it self does bear and suffer:
namely, according to the nature of all Sacraments. 3. Some are drawn from an
analogy of the articles of our faith, or from a conference of places or parts
of Christian doctrine. 4. Some are taken from other like places of Scripture,
where the same thing is delivered in such words as are manifest, and whereof
there is no controversy.

1. The first sort of arguments taken out of the text and circumstances of the
institution of the Lords Supper.
He sat down.
1. Christ's humane nature, at the first celebrating of the Supper, by a
corporal kind of placing, sat in his proper place at the table, and now is in
heaven: wherefore then it was not, neither is it now corporally in the bread,
or in the place of the bread.

He took bread.
2. Christ at the first Supper took not into his hands, nor brake his body, but
bread: wherefore bread is not properly and really the very body of Christ.

This is my body.
3. Christ's body was born of a virgin: But bread is made of meal: therefore it
is not really Christ's body.

4. Christ said of the visible bread being broken, This is my body; and of the
visible cup being distributed unto his disciples, This cup is the new Testament
in my blood: Therefore the Papists retain not the letter, when they say, My
body is contained under the forms of bread and wine: nor the Ubiquitaries, when
they thus speak, My body is in, with, under this bread: and much less when
both of them say, My invisible body, contained under this form, or under this
bread, is my body. For both of them do not only manifestly decline from the
letter to a gloss of their own; but shamefully pervert Christ's words in the
former gloss, as if it were written, My body is under this: and in the later
they father on Christ a childish tautologie, or repetition of the same thing;
as if he had said, My body is my body.

Which was given for you.
5. Christ's body which we eat in the Supper was delivered to death, and
crucified for us: But bread was not given and crucified for us: Therefore bread
is not properly and really the body of Christ.

This cup is the new Testament.
6. As the cup is the new Testament, so the bread is the body of Christ: The cup
is the new Testament sacramentally (as before has been showed, and now may be
farther proved by this reason; The new Testament properly is not drunk with the
mouth, but believed with the heart: but the cup is drunk with the mouth:
therefore the cup cannot properly be the new Testament.) Therefore the bread is
Christ's body in the same sense, to wit, sacramentally.

7. If the bread be properly Christ's body, and the cup his blood, it must needs
be, that in the first Supper the blood was separated from Christ's body, and
that now both of them be given us apart, as they are signs apart: But neither
in the first Supper was the blood then without the body, neither is the body
now given without blood (for then Christ was not yet dead, and now he dies no
more:) Therefore the bread is the body, and the cup the blood of Christ, not
properly, but sacramentally.

8. That which Christ himself did eat and drink, was not properly his body and
blood; else should he have eaten and drunken himself: But he did eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup; for he says, I will drink no more of the fruit
of the vine: Mark 14.25.
and Chrysostom commenting hereon, says, He also drank of the cup, Hom. 83.
in Mark.
lest hearing those words, they should say, What? Do we then drink blood, and
eat flesh? and so be troubled. For when he first made mention of this kind of
eating and drinking, many took offense for the words sake only: Therefore,
lest this should then also happen, he himself first did eat and drink, that
so he might lead them with a quiet reposed mind to the communion of the
mysteries. The bread therefore and the cup are not properly Christ's body and
blood, but sacramentally.

Do this in remembrance of me.
9. Remembrance is not of things corporally present, but of things absent:
Christ instituted this sacrament to be celebrated in remembrance of him:
Therefore Christ is not corporally present in the bread or sacrament.

Do this.
10. Either Christ with his body is not substantially in the bread or form of
bread, or the Supper is not to be any more celebrated: (For the Apostle bids
us eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, and show forth the Lords death
till he come:) But questionless, the celebration of the Supper is not yet to
be intermitted, but ought to be continued unto the end of the world: Christ
therefore is not yet come, neither is he corporally in the bread, or form of
bread.

11. As the bread was the body of Christ in the first Supper, and the disciples
did eat Christ's body; so and no otherwise the bread is now Christ's body, and
we eat Christ's body; for our Supper is no other then the Supper of the
disciples was: But in the first Supper the bread was not essentially Christ's
body, neither did the disciples eat Christ's body with their mouths in the
bread, or in the form of bread; for Christ corporally and visibly sat at the
table with his disciples, and suffered no change the whole action throughout:
Therefore now also the bread is not essentially Christ's body, neither do we eat
Christ's body with our mouths in the bread, or in the form of bread.

2. The second sort of arguments which are taken from the nature of the
Sacraments.
1. THe very manner and form of speaking yields us a firm and strong
argument. Bread is the body of Christ: But bread is not in his own proper
substance his body (for by reason hereof have they invented Transubstantiation
and Consubstantiation): Therefore it is a figurative speech, even such a one as
is usual unto sacraments, and is before declared in the institution of the
Supper.

2. In all sacraments, when the name or properties of the things signified are
attributed unto the signs, there is not signified the corporal presence of
the thing in the signs; but first, a similitude of the things with their
signs, and a sealing of them by their signs; then a conjunction and union of
the things with their signs in the right use: But in this Sacrament Christ
attributes the names of the things signified (his body and blood) to the
signs (the bread and wine) saying, This is my body: This is my blood:
Therefore there is not thereby signified a corporal presence of his body.

3. The nature of all sacraments is, that the signs be understood and taken
corporally, that the things signified must be understood and taken spiritually;
and that the visible things be not the things signified, but only signs and
pledges of them.

4. Sacramental phrases and terms are sacramentally to be understood: These
words of the Supper, This is my body, This is my blood, are sacramental
phrases; for they signify the Sacrament, and attribute the names of the things
signified to the signs: Therefore they are to be understood sacramentally.
Object. There is no figurative speech expressed in the words of the Supper:
Therefore we may not so interpret them. Answ. The Antecedent is false: for
Christ himself adjoined a sacramental declaration immediately on them,
saying, Do this; that is, eat this bread, and drink this cup: in remembrance
of me; that is, that thereby ye may be certified and assured, that my body was
given, and my blood was shed for you, and given to you to be meat and drink
unto life eternal. Again, This cup is the new Testament in my blood; that is,
the seal of the new Testament, and promise of grace now fulfilled in my blood.

5. Whatsoever is not promised in the Gospel, that cannot be sealed unto us by
the Supper; for sacraments confirm, exhibit, promise, seal no other thing then
the word does; whence they are termed visible promises, and visible words: In
the Gospel is promised no corporal eating; Joh. 6.62, 63.
nay, it is peremptorily reproved and condemned by Christ in the Gospel by two
arguments: 1. Because not long after he would exalt his body into heaven, and
remove it far from the Jews mouths. 2. Because the corporal eating of his
flesh profits nothing. Neither does he there distinguish the eating of him
into a gross and a finer manner; but simply rejects all eating of his flesh
with the bodily mouth: We may not therefore forge any corporal eating in the
Supper contrary to the Gospel.

6. The conceit of a corporal presence and feeding on Christ's flesh under the
bread, is wholly different and diverse from the formal consideration of a
Sacrament: Therefore it is to be rejected. The Antecedent is proved; because it
cannot be accounted either for the sign, or the thing signified, of which two
every Sacrament wholly consists. It is not the sign or sacrament, because it
is not object to the senses; and if it were, there is nothing which it might
signify. And further, it has no proportion or similitude with the thing; that
is, with the spiritual eating. Neither can it be said to be the thing
signified, seeing the Scripture no where speaks of an essential transfusion,
and real commixtion of Christ's flesh with our bodies, neither can there be
any, except we entertain the follies and dreams of Eutychians and
Swenckfeldians: For the sacraments testify of those blessings only, and them
only do they seal unto us, which are contained in the promise of the Gospel.
Again, it is not the thing signified; because this eating may be without
faith, and is common to the godly and ungodly: But the things signified in the
sacraments are received by faith alone, and of the faithful and godly alone.
Besides, if it were the thing signified, none had ever been said, or at any
time should have been saved without it. For, in all Sacraments the things
signified are the same, and are given to all that are to be saved; because they
are the benefits of the Messiah, comprehended in the promise of the Gospel:
which benefits are the same unto all, and without them no man is saved:
Therefore no place is left for a substantial presence, and mouthy eating of
Christ's body under the bread, or under the form of bread; and this
substantial presence, and mouthy eating, is indeed nothing but a vain name,
and Idol in the world. Object. The corporal eating is a sign of the
spiritual eating, and a singular confirmation of faith: Therefore Christ's body
is also a Sacrament or sign; and invisible grace is the thing signified. Answ.
The Antecedent is denied: 1. Because Christ's flesh under the bread is
invisible: Therefore it cannot signify another invisible thing, or strengthen
faith. For Sacraments or signs ought to be visible; so that it deserves not
(says Erasmus) to be called a Sacrament, which is not accomplished by an
external sign. For to this end and use are they given of God, that they may
(as it were) effectually show to our outward senses, that which is promised in
the Word, and performed by the holy Ghost in our hearts, that they may be
visible testimonies and pledges of the promise of grace exhibited and applied.
Whence is that saying of Austine: a Sacrament is a visible word: And, Lib. 19.
cap. 18. cont. Fault. and lib. 2. cap. 1. De Doct. Christ. and de Catech-rud.
ca. 26. Prosp. in sentent.
it is a visible form of invisible grace. And, A sign is a thing besides that
form which it presents to our senses, causing something else by it self to
come into the knowledge. And, the signs indeed of divine things are visible,
but the things themselves are invisible. And that of Prosper; The sacrifice of
the Church consists in two things: in the visible form of elements, and the
invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: in the Sacrament or sign,
and in the thing of the Sacrament; that is, the body of Christ. Therefore no
thing or action which is invisible, insensible, and not natural, can make the
nature or appellation of a Sacrament. And consequently they, who will have
Christ's flesh in, under, or with the bread to be a Sacrament, or will have the
bread to be transsubstantiated into his flesh, let them show us a visible or
sensible eating of it in the Supper, lest they seem to dissent from the
ancient Fathers. 2. There must be an analogy and proportion between the sign
or Sacrament, and the thing signified, or the thing of the Sacrament. For,
Except the Sacraments (says Austine) had some similitude of those things,
whereof they are Sacraments, they were not verily and Sacraments. Now, Epist.
23. ad Bonifacium.
if Christ flesh be also a Sacrament, and the thing of those Sacraments be
invisible grace; what proportion then and similitude shall there be between the
two Sacraments? but seeing there can be none, it follows, that Christ's flesh
may not be called a Sacrament; as being no less the thing it self of the
Sacrament, then eternal salvation signified, by way of proportion, by visible
bread, as by a sign. Wherefore the sacramental eating, which is done
naturally by the mouth, does not belong unto the body of Christ, considered by
it self, in any physical or natural respect: because unto this sacramental
eating the external signs only are object in their own nature. S. Austine
demanding how bread is the body of Christ, and wine his blood: These (says he)
brethren, are therefore called Sacraments: because in them one thing is seen,
and another thing understood. That which is seen, Serm-ad Infant.
has a corporal form; that which is understood, has a spiritual fruit. If
then thou will understand the body of Christ, here the Apostle speaks to the
faithful, Ye ar the body of Christ and his members. If then ye be the body
of Christ, and his members, your mystery is set on the table, etc.

7. The communion of Christ, which is promised in his Word, and sealed in his
Sacraments, is not corporal, but spiritual. But the communion of Christ,
which is given in the Supper, is the same with that which is promised in the
Word and sealed in all other Sacraments: Therefore the communion of Christ in
the Supper, is not corporal, but spiritual. The Major is manifest. For, in
the Gospel, no other communion is delivered or specified, but that which is
spiritual. The Minor also is evident, because the same benefits are proposed
in all the promises of the Gospel, which are presented and offered in the
Sacraments. For the Sacraments are the visible word; because they promise that
which the Word promises, by visible signs, and are seals of the promise of
the same grace.

8. There is one and the same signification of all the Sacraments of the Old
and New Testament; and in them, one and the same communion of Christ. But the
signification of all other Sacraments, and their communion is spiritual only:
Therefore there is no other in the Supper. The Minor is granted on all sides.
The Major is demonstrated by the Apostle in these words; 1 Cor. 12.13. and 10.2.
By one spirit we are all baptized into one body: And, All were baptized unto
Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all cate the same spiritual meat.
Object. There is not the same thing signified of all Sacraments. For, in
Baptism, the thing is, The washing by the blood of Christ; in the Supper, The
body and blood of Christ. Ans. The thing is not diverse: because it is the
same, To be washed by the blood of Christ, and, To drink the blood of Christ:
as we have heretofore proved. But the manner of the signifying one and the same
thing is diverse: that is, there is a diverse similitude of one and the same
thing signified by the signs, or one and the same thing has a diverse
similitude or proportion: Therefore, as in Baptism, so in Circumcision
likewise and the Passover, is promised a spiritual thing, not a corporal;
and so also here in the Lors Supper.

3. The third sort of Arguments, which are deduced from the analogy of faith.
1. Firm and strong reasons are drawn from the Article, which is concerning
the truth of Christ's humane nature. Christ took a humane nature, like unto us
in all things, sin only excepted, and retains the same through all
eternity, for our comfort and safety: but humane nature is neither infinite,
neither can it be in more places at once, nor visible and invisible both
together. For, it is proper unto the Deity only, which is unmeasurable, to be
essentially in many, or in all places at once, according to that saying of
Scripture: Jerem. 23.24.
Am not I he which fill heaven and earth? and by this very attribute or
property God is distinguished from all creatures. Now, the Godhead it self
cannot at the same time be both visible and invisible, finite, and infinite,
but in its own substance remains always invisible, incomprehensible and
infinite, else could it not be unchangeable. We may not therefore imagine, that
when Christ said, This is my body, his body then sat both visible to them at
the Table, and yet was invisible also in the bread: or that now it is both
visibly conversant in heaven, and invisibly contained in the bread.

2. From the Article of Ascension: Christ ascended truly; that is, was in his
body visibly and locally taken up into heaven, so that his body remained not,
nrr now remains on earth, but in heaven, whence he shall visibly return to
judgment. He is not therefore in the bread. Or thus we may urge the reason:
Christ's body is finite, as being a true body. But it is now in heaven:
Therefore Christ's body is not in While they beheld him, he was taken up. Acts
1.9. Colos. 3.1.
Seek the things which are above, where Christ is. The Major also is evident.
For if the true and very body of Christ be infinite, it is on earth, was no
true body of Christ, but apparent and fantastical: because it cannot agree,
no not to the Godhead it self, to be at one time finite and infinite,
sensible and insensible: and so all those things which are spoken of Christ in
the Articles of our Belief, should not have been done indeed, but only should
have seemed and appeared to be done; and so we should as yet remain in death.
Now here are two things to be noted: 1. That by the argument drawn from the
ascension, Christ's body is not clean taken out of the Supper, as some cavil,
but only out of the bread. For the distance of heaven and earth only hinders
the existence of Christ's body, both in heaven and in the bread together, but
not his presence in the Supper to be spiritual eaten by faith. For our faith
in the word of the promise, annexed to the bread and wine, beholds and
imbraceth the body and blood of Christ, and all his benefits there present. 2.
That the Argument of the Ascension (not done, but together with the former
Argument of the truth of his humane nature) overthrows the opinion of a
corporal presence of Christ in the bread. For if Christ's humane nature might
be everywhere, or present in many places; his Ascension could not hinder, but
that he might at once be both in heaven and in the bread. But whereas the
humane nature is finite, not present in many places, nor everywhere: hence it
is, that the Argument, borrowed from the Article of his Ascension, presses
most powerfully; and, as in the first Supper, the consequence derived from the
property of his humane nature thus; Christ's body sits at the Table, Therefore
it is not in the bread, or in the mouth of his Disciples, is sound and good: so
now we necessarily conclude out of the truth of his Ascension thus; Christ's
body is in heaven, Therefore it is not in the bread, or elsewhere on earth.
Object. It is humane reason alone that judges Christ's corporal presence in
the bread contrary to these Articles of faith: Therefore they are not indeed
contrary. Answ. We deny the Antecedent. For not reason only, but the Christian
faith, and Gods Word reaches us, that Christ's body is a true humane and finite
body, and not conversant at once in all, or many places; and that now, since it
ascended into heaven, it is not in the earth, but remains and abides in
heaven, until he return thence to judge the quick and the dead. That Christ's
body then should be present at once in heaven and in the bread, is repugnant
not to humane reason only, but also to Gods Word. This indeed is a principle
uncontroversed, How far forth we are not to listen to man's reason in divine
matters.
That man's reason in divine matters, oppugning Gods Word, is not to be
regarded, but ought to be subject thereunto. Notwithstanding, it is not simply
to be cashiered or discharged, no not in controversies of Divinity, as if we
were to bring a mere brutish and blockish sense to the sifting of the truth of
Gods Word: but we are to use reason aright, to discern thereby truth from
falsehood. For to this end was reason given to us men, that we should discern by
the light of understanding contradictory opinions; and fully conceiving what is
consonant with Gods Word, and what jarreth therewith, should applaud and
embrace the one, and reject the other. If this be not grounded and settled in
us, there will be no opinion so absurd and impious, there will be nothing in
the polluted sinks of all Heretics so filthy and monstrous, which may be
confuted by holy Scripture. For Heretics and Deceivers will always except
against us, that their opinions impugn not the truth of Gods Word, but that
they seem only in man's reason so to do. Repl. The Scripture attributes to
Christ's body many properties and prerogatives supernatural, or above and
beyond nature, which are not incident to our bodies: as, to walk on the
waters, to be transfigured, to be carried up into heaven, to pierce and pass
through a stone and closed doors, to be united to the Godhead personally, to
be made a sacrifice for our sins, etc. Therefore it is no absurdity to
attribute unto it presence in heaven and in the bread both at once, or even
ubiquity it self. Ans. In the Antecedent are many untruths mingled with some
truths. For the penetration of Christ's body through the stone, and through the
doors, is no where expressed in Scripture: and therefore we deny it. The rest
of the prerogatives are there expressed indeed, but they abrogate not the truth
of humane nature. For Peter also walked on the waters; and we shall be
transformed, and lifted up: but ubiquity and presence of Christ's flesh in all,
or many places, is no where extant in Scripture, and it suffers not Christ's
flesh to be any longer a creature, much less a true body. For, to be
everywhere, or in diverse places at once in its own substance, is the property
of the unmeasurable Deity alone: but every creature is finite, God only is
every where: because he is infinite.
and by his finitenesse is discerned from his Creator. Now that which is
finite, cannot be in more places then one. Hence it is, that the Scripture and
and Doctors of the ancient Church produce this property of presence in many
places, as a certain argument of true and sole Divinity: as Christ himself,
speaking of himself, says: The Son of man, John 3.13.
which is in heaven. And Dydimus says: The holy Ghost himself, if he were a
creature, Lib. 1. Cap. 1. de Spiritu sancto.
should at least have a circumscribed or limited substance, as all things else
which are made: For although the invisible creatures be not circumscribed in
place; yet they are finite in the property of their substance. But the holy
Ghost being in many, has no circumscribed or limited substance. Tertullian
also says: If Christ be man only, Lib. de. Trin.
how then is he present wheresoever he is called on? since this is not the
nature of man, but of God, To be present in every place. Our adversaries
therefore thus reasoning, that those prerogatives are the cause of his presence
everywhere, or in many places, which verily are no causes hereof, commit the
fallacy of alleging a false cause. For indeed the reason of those
prerogatives, and the ubiquity, are very diverse.

3. From the Article of the communion of Saints: 1. Such is the communion of
Saints with Christ now, as it was of old ever since the beginning, and shall be
ever hereafter; as well of those who use the Sacraments, as of them who are by
necessity excluded from them. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Ephesians. 4.4. Romans 8.9. 1 Cor.
6.17. 1 John 4.13. John 15.5. Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians 4.15. Ephesians 5.30.31. Ephesians. 4.
1 Cor. 10. Romans 8.
For there is but one only communion of Saints with Christ; because we are all
one body with Christ. But this communion of Saints with Christ was always
spiritual: as the Apostle does show; He that is joined to the Lord, is one
spirit. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us; because he has
given us of his spirit. He is the Vine, we are the branches: He is the Head, we
are the members: He is the Bridegroom, and we (with the whole Church) are his
Spouse. Or the argument may be thus formed: All the Saints have the same
communion with Christ, both in the Old and New Testament (as well they, who
have power to approach and partake of the Supper, as they who have not:) and we
cannot eat Christ any otherwise, then his Disciples did eat him in the first
Supper. But they did eat him spiritually: Therefore we eat him also
spiritually. Out of the self same Article we thus argue: 2. Such is our eating
of Christ, as is his abiding in us. But this is spiritual: Therefore our
eating of him is spiritual. The Major is out of question, because he is
therefore eaten, that he may remain in us, and we in him; not that being once
eaten, he should forthwith vanish away; John 6.56.
He which cateth my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him.
The Minor, namely, that Christ's abiding in us is spiritual, is sufficiently
proved and perceived by this, in that such is his abiding in us, as is his
Fathers: John 14.23.
If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and will dwell with him. But how does the Father dwell in
us or abide with us? Truly by his holy Spirit: Therefore Christ also so abides
with us, or dwells in us. 1 John 4.13.
Hereunto belong those sayings: By this we know that he dwells in us, and we
in him, because he has given us of his Spirit. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts through faith. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in
me, and I in him, Ephesians. 3.17.
the same brings forth much fruit. 3. Christ abides in us perpetually:
Therefore that abiding or presence is not corporal: because, as touching his
humane nature, John 15.5.
he says, Me ye shall not have always: Therefore he is not eaten of us
corporally; nay, he cannot be eaten of us corporally, except he be in us
corporally, and that also perpetually.

4. From the Article of remission of sins. If Christ be corporally in the
bread, and be reached out and delivered unto us by the hand of the Minister,
then we are to crave remission of sins at Gods hands, for his sake, who is in
the bread, and whom the Minister handles, whether the bread still remain
together with him, or no. For remission of sins is most especially to be
craved then, when we celebrate the Supper. So then every communicant must thus
pray: I beseech thee, O heavenly Father, to be gracious and merciful unto me
for this thy Sons sake, who is here present in this bread, and whom the
Minister handles, and whom I eat with my mouth: But this is that horrible
Idolatry, which is practiced in the Popish Mass, which without doubt is so
abominable in the sight of God, that it were better for us to suffer a thousand
deaths, then once commit the same. For the Gospel teaches us to beg of God
remission of sins, not for that Christ's sake, who is in the bread, and is
carried about in the Ministers hands, and eaten with men's mouths: but for that
Christ's sake, who suffered and died for us, who is now in heaven at the right
hand of his Father, and makes intercession for us. So then thus we reason,
That which establishes the horrible Idolatry of the Mass, is to be avoided of
the true professors of the Gospel: But the corporal presence of Christ, and
the eating of him with our mouths in the bread, establishes the horrible
Idolatry of the Mass: Therefore it is to be avoided by all true professors of
Christ's Gospel.

5. Unto the former may be adjoined also arguments taken from the sacrifice and
adoration of Christ. Wherefore Christ is present corporally, whether it be
after a visible or invisible manner, there he is so to be adored, to wit, by
our minds, and the motions of our bodies converted and turned thither. But he
is not thus to be adored in the Supper: Therefore he is not present in the
Supper corporally, either in the bread, or in the place of bread. The Minor,
That he is not to be adored in the Supper, is easily proved: because in the New
Testament since Christ's ascension it has not been, nor is lawful to tie and
bind invocation to any certain place or thing, without the express command
and permission of God, except we will commit open Idolatry. For all adoration,
bound and restrained to any certain place or thing on earth, is abrogated and
cancelled by Christ. The hour comes, John 4, 21, 22, 23, 24.
when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship the Father.
Ye worship that which ye know not; we worship that which we know: for salvation
is of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: For the Father requires even
such to worship him. God is a Spirit: and they that worship him, must worship
him in spirit and truth. Again, if Christ be so to be adored and worshipped in
the Supper, by our minds and motions of body converted unto the bread, that
whole oblation and sacrifice should consist in the hands of sacrificing
Mass Priests, because they offer the Son unto the Father, to obtain
remission of sins: and so were his crucifying to be re-iterated. Object.
Christ commanded not himself to be offered or adored, but to be eaten:
Therefore we establish not the Papists offering up of Christ to his Father, or
their worshipping of him in the bread, by that corporal presence which we
uphold. Ans. This their reasoning is two ways faulty: First, they beg that
which is in question, whilst they say, that Christ commanded us to eat him in
the bread: for this is no where found in Scripture. 2. They shift and seek to
slide from the question, in averring, that Christ commanded not himself to be
adored: for we have a general precept of adoring Christ in these words; Psalm.
45.13. Psalm. 97.7. Heb. 1.6.
He is the Lord thy God, and thou shall worship him. And let all the Angels of
God worship him. This general precept, without any special exception or
expectation of any particular injunction, should no less bind us all unto
obedience, and to the adoring of Christ in the bread, if we had any evident
proof of his invisible existence therein, than if we beheld him present with
our eyes. Thus Thomas expects not some special express warrant, but does
well in worshipping toward the place where he sees Christ standing, saying;
My Lord, and my God. Wherefore, John 20.28.
as long as the opinion of corporal presence stands, so long the Papists
idolatrous adoration and oblation, and their whole Mass must needs stand also.
For the Papists themselves will not have, that we understand their offering of
Christ in the Mass of any slaughtering or murdering him, but only of a
public showing him being there corporally present, and of a craving and
obtaining remission of sins for his sake, whom the Priests bear in their
hands, and present unto God the Father.

4. The fourth sort of Arguments drawn from like places of Scripture, where
namely the samething is delivered in words, whereof there is no controversy.
1. LIke phrases have a like sense and interpretation. But all these phrases
are accounted for like; namely, for sacramental forms of speech, wherein the
names or proper effects of the things signified, are attributed to the sign:
as, Circumcision is the Govenant of God. The Lamb is the Passover of the Lord.
Genesis 17.10, 11. Exodus 12.11. and 31.16. Levit. 1.4. Exodus 24.18. Exodus 26.34. 1
Cor. 10.3. Mark 2.26. Luke 22.20. Acts 22.16. Titus. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Genesis
17.11. Exodus 12.13, 14. and 13.9. and 31, 17.
The Sabbath is the Covenant of the Lord. The Leviticall sacrifices are an
expiation or doing away of sin. The blood of sacrifices is the blood of the
Covenant. The covering of the Arc is the mercy seat. The Rock was Christ. The
bread is the body of Christ. The cup is the New Testament. Baptism washes
away sin. Baptism is the washing of the new birth. Baptism saves us, etc.
Therefore their interpretation is alike. Now God himself interprets some of
them thus; Circumcision is a sign of the Covenant. The Lamb is a sign and
memorial of the Passover. The Sabbath is a sign of the Covenant: Therefore
we may justly interpret the rest on the same manner. The Leviticall sacrifices
signify the atonement for sins, made by the Messiah. The blood of
sacrifices is a Sacrament or sign confirming the Covenant; or a sign of
Christ's blood, whereby the Covenant was established. The covering of the Arc
signifies the Mercy-seate. The Rock signifies Christ. The bread is a
Sacrament of the body of Christ. The cup is a Sacrament sealing the new
Covenant. Baptism is a Sacrament of the washing away of sins, and of our
regeneration and salvation.

2. As the cup is the New Testament, so is the blood of Christ the New
Testament. The cup is the New Testament Sacramentally; that is, it is a sign
of the New Testament: Therefore Christ's blood is a sign of the New Testament.
The Major is apparent, because without doubt the words of Luke and Paul, This
cup is the New Testament in my blood; and the words of Matthew and Mark, This
is my blood of the New Testament, have all one meaning. The Minor is proved
before in the first argument, and cannot be taken otherwise. For the New
Testament is no external thing or ceremony, but a free reconciliation with
God, promised in the Gospel, through the blood and death of Christ. The cup
then is either the thing promised, or the seal of the promise; but it is not
the promise, nor the thing promised: Therefore it is the seal of the promise.

3. The bread which we break (says the Apostle) is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? As bread is the communion of the body of Christ, so also it
is the body of Christ. The reason is clear, because Paul's words and Christ's
have both one meaning; seeing Paul interprets Christ. But the bread is the
communion of the body of Christ sacramentally; that is, it is a Sacrament or
sign of our spiritual communion with Christ's body. For properly and
literally, bread cannot be termed a communion: Therefore, bread also is Christ's
body sacramentally; that is, it is a Sacrament or sign of Christ's body. Now
that the communion or communication of Christ's body is spiritual, is thus
proved: 1. Paul speaks of such a communion, as whereby we being many, are
made one bread, one body. But we being many, are one body spiritually:
Therefore the communion mentioned of Paul is spiritual. 2. The communion of
Christ, whereof he speaks, cannot stand with the communion of Devils: 1 Cor.
10.21.
Ye cannot (says he) drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the Devils: ye
cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of the Devils. The
argument is not deduced from an inconvenience or an undecency, as some fondly
tell us, Mat. 6.24.
but from an impossibility: as that of Christ, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
Where the words (...), ye are not able; or, ye have no possibility, are
likewise used, as well as in this place: 2 Cor. 6.15.
and as that of the same Apostle elsewhere; What concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has the Believer with the Infidel? 3. This communion of
the Saints with Christ, and Christ with the Saints, is spiritually expounded in
Scripture, 1 John 1.6, 7.
Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. If we say,
that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
truly. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.
Neither do we in the Creed believe any other communion of the Saints with
Christ, and Christ with the Saints, but that which is spiritual. Hom. 24. in 1
Cor. 10.
4. Lastly, Chrysostom interprets Paul's words of a spiritual communion. Why
said he not participation? That he might manifest unto thee somewhat more
excellent then it, to wit, the strongest and mightiest union that can be. And a
little after, Why call I it communion? Yea, we are the selfsame body of
Christ. What is the bread? even the body of Christ. What are they made, who
receive the body of Christ? not many bodies, but one body. For as the bread is
kneaded of many grains, so we also are joined with Christ.

4. Out of the words of Christ: John 6.62.
What then if ye should see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? It
is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I
speak unto you are spirit and life. In these words Christ expressly rejects
all eating of his flesh with our mouths, and overthrows by two arguments,
which we have heretofore declared: and on the other side he approves and
confirms our spiritual eating his flesh. Wherefore we may not forge any
corporal eating of Christ's body in the Supper, when such a kind of eating is
precisely reproved in the Gospel. Object. The sixth chapter of John treats
not of the Supper: Therefore this testimony makes naught against the eating of
Christ's body with our mouths instituted in the Supper. Answ. Here our
Adversaries deceitfully argue from the denial of a part, to the denial of the
whole. This Chapter, we grant, pertains not to the Ceremony of the Supper:
But hence it follows not, that simply it pertains not to the Supper. For it
concerns the promise; This is my body, which is given for you: because this
promise is desumed out of this Christ's Sermon registered in this sixth of John,
and is ratified and confirmed by the signs of bread and wine. Wherefore it
cannot be understood of any other eating of Christ's body in the Supper, then of
that which is delivered in the sixth of John, which is spiritual. For, bodily
eating is in that Sermon condemned. Repl. It is not simply the eating with the
mouth that is there condemned, but a Capernaiticall eating. Answ. All eating
with the mouth is Capernaiticall. For, a Capernaiticall eating is not a bloody
renting only and eating of Christ's flesh, and chewing it between the teeth,
but simply any eating with the mouth. For the Capernaites say not among
themselves: How can this man give us his flesh to devour, to gnaw on with our
teeth, to rend asunder? etc. But they say: How can this man give us his flesh
to eat? John 6.54.
Neither does Christ re-call them from a gross eating with the mouth, to a
subtle kind of eating with the mouth; but to his ascension into Heaven, which
should shortly come to pass, and thereby his body should be far removed from
their mouths, and trained them to a spiritual eating, which is with the heart
by faith.

5. Out of the same sixth Chapter of John, To eat Christ's flesh, and, To
drink his blood, signifies, To believe in Christ, To dwell in Christ, and,
Verse 54, 56.
To have Christ dwelling in us: as appears, because he attributes the same
effect of eternal life to both; namely, to the eating of his flesh, and to
faith in him: But in the Supper this eating is authorized: (For no other
purpose besides this can be showed in the whole Gospel, for sealing whereof the
Supper was instituted.) Therefore, To eat Christ's body, and, To drink his
blood, is, To believe in Christ, To dwell in Christ, and, To have him dwelling
in us.

6. By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, 1 Cor. 12, 13.
whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit.
Hence we draw two arguments: 1. Such as is the drinking of Christ, such is the
eating of him in the Supper. The drinking of him is spiritual: Therefore the
eating of him is spiritual. 2. The eating of Christ's body, and drinking his
blood, is common to all the faithful, even to the Fathers of the Old
Testament. For we have all bin made to drink into one spirit. But the eating
with the mouth is not common to all the faithful: (For the Fathers before
Christ's birth could not, and at this day Infants, and many of ripe years,
having not liberty to partake of the Supper, cannot eat his flesh with their
mouths.) Wherefore, this mouthy eating of Christ's flesh, urged by our
Adversaries, is not that true eating which the Gospel promises, and which the
Supper seals.

The testimonies of Fathers in this point.
UNto these arguments drawn out of the sacred Scripture, and the ground of our
faith, may be added testimonies of the Fathers, and the purer Church; who, if
we look into their writings, we shall find, that they plainly teach the same
doctrine touching the Lords holy Supper, which we do. Among many we will
produce only some few notable and clear in this point. Irenaeus says, Lib.
4. cap. 34.
The earthly bread, taking his name from the word of God, is no longer common
bread, but becomes the Eucharist or Sacrament, which consists of two things;
an earthly, and an heavenly thing. Tertullian, The bread which he took and
distributed among his Disciples, he made it his body, saying, This is my body;
that is, The figure of my body. Lib. 4. contra Marcion. Praedag. lib. 2. cap.
2. Lib. 2. Ephesians. 3. Sermon. de Coena.
Clemens of Alexandria, This is to drink Christ's blood, to be partaker of
Christ's immortality. Cyprian, Neither can his blood, wherewith we are redeemed
and justified, seem to be in the Chalice, when the wine fails in the
Chalice, wherein Christ's blood is showed, which is spoken of in every Sacrament
and testimony of Scripture. Again, the same Father says, As often as we do
this, we sharpen not our teeth to bite withal, but we break and part the
sanctified bread with a sincere faith, whilst we distinguish and separate that
which is divine, from that which is humane, and joining them again after their
separation, confess one God and man: yea, we our selves are made his body by
this Sacrament, and knit and united to our head by the thing signified by the
Sacrament. De divina mensa, Et quod.
The Canon of the Nicene Council: Again, here also is the Lords Table: Let us
not childishly cleave to the bread and wine set before us, but lifting up our
minds on high, by faith, let us consider, that on that Table is set the Lamb of
God taking away the sins of the world, which is offered of the Priests
without killing: and let us, truly receiving his precious body and blood,
believe that they are SIGNS of our resurrection. For therefore we receive not
much, but little; thereby to acknowledge that it is not received to satisfy,
In Litur. de Trin. l. 8. Orat. de pas.
but to sanctify us. Basil: We have set on the Table the figures of the sacred
body and blood. Hillarie: The bread and wine received, and drunk, effect and
work that both we are in Christ, In 1 Cor. 11.
and Christ in us. Gregory Nazianzene: The figures of the precious body and
blood of Christ. Ambrose: Because we are delivered by our LORDS death; being
mindful thereof, in eating, and drinking we Signify, (or Represent) the
flesh and blood that were offered up for us. De Sacr. l. 4. c. 5. Cont. Adim.
cap. 12. In Psa. 3 Epist. 23. ad Bonisac.
Again, This oblation is the FIGVRE OF THE BODY AND BLOOD of our LORD Jesus
CHRIST. Augustine: Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave a
TOKEN of his body. Again, The Lord admitted Judas to that banquet, wherein he
ministered and gave to his disciples the FIGVRE of his body and blood. The same
Father says: Unless Sacraments had a certain likeness of the things,
whereof they be Sacraments, without question they were no Sacraments. And in
consideration of this likeness, oftentimes they bear the names of the things
themselves. As therefore the Sacrament of the body of CHRIST is AFTER A
CERTAIN MANNER the body of Christ: and the Sacrament of Christ's blood is his
blood: so the Sacrament of faith is faith. In senten. Prosper. de ause. did.
2. c. Hoc est.
Again, As then the celestial bread, Christ's flesh, is IN SOME SORT called
Christ's body, whereas indeed it is a Sacrament of Christ's body; namely, that
visible, palpable, and mortal body which was nailed on the Cross, and the
sacrificing of his flesh, done by the hands of the Minister, is called Christ's
Passion, death, and crucifying, NOT IN THE TRVTH OF THE THING, but in a
mystery SIGNIFYING it: So the Sacrament of faith, by which is meant Baptism,
is faith. Sermon. ad infant.
Also: These, my brethren, are therefore called Sacraments, because in them one
thing is seen, another understood. That which is seen has a bodily form:
that which is understood, has a spiritual fruit or benefit. In Mat. Hom. 83.
Chrysostom: This is my blood, which is shed for the remission of sins;
which Christ said, to show that his Passion and Cross was a mystery, and to
comfort his disciples. Dialog. 1.
Theodoret: Our Savior verily changed the names of the signs and the things
signified, and gave the same name to the body, which is proper to the sign;
and that to the sign which is proper to the body. The cause of this change is
manifest to them that are entered into the first principles of divine mysteries.
For he would that they who use the Sacraments should not bend and set their
minds on the nature of the things which are seen, but, for the alteration of
the names, should believe that alteration which is made through grace. For he
who termed that by name of corn and bread, which is by nature a body, and
called himself a vine, he honored the signs, which are seen, with the title
and name of his body and blood, not by changing the nature, but by adding grace
to the nature. Macarius the Monk has a famous saying to this purpose: Hom. 27.
Bread and wine are a correspondent type of his flesh, and they who receive the
bread which is showed, eat the flesh of Christ spiritually. Other testimonies
for briefness sake we omit.

Of Transubstantiation.
NOw it is easy to see what we are to think of Transubstantiation, even that
it is an impious invention and device of the Papists: which also we will show
and prove briefly by diverse reasons. But first we must declare in a word what
the Papists properly mean by their Transubstantiation. They suppose that by
force of Consecration; that is, of uttering these words upon the creatures of
bread and wine, This is my body, This is the cup of the new Testament in my
blood, the bread and wine is substantially converted or turned into the body
and blood of Christ, the forms only or accidents of bread and wine remaining;
namely, the shape or figure, the heat, the taste, the weight, etc. They
therefore call these words of Consecration, operatorie, and effective, able to
work and effect the conversion and change: and they say, that the change is
fully accomplished in the very last instant of uttering the syllable The Latin
particle was UM, hoc est corpua me VM, which I chose rather to resemble by the
English form of Consecration.
DIE, This is my boDY: and then there is no longer bread and wine, but the body
and blood of Christ is present, and is contained under the forms of bread and
wine, and is eaten and drunk in the Eucharist or Supper by the mouth of the
Communicants. Concerning the manner of the change, it is not agreed on by all.
Some say, that the substance of bread and wine is by Transsubstantiation
changed into the substance of Christ's body and blood: so that the bread and
wine is essentially made the very body and blood of Christ, the external
forms only remaining; and this they term a substantial change, or change of
the substance. What the Papists call a substantial change.
Others are of opinion that the substance of bread and wine is not changed, but
vanishes by annihilation, or by being brought to nothing; and that then the
substance of Christ's body and blood succeeds in place thereof; so that the
substance of Christ's body and blood after the consecration, comes under these
forms and accidents, under which before was the substance of the bread and
wine: And this they call a formal change, or a change of forms. Lombard in his
Sentences expounds both these opinions, What they call a formal change. Li.
4. di. 11. Tho. Aqui. p. 3. q. 78. a. 5.
and seems to approve the former alone. Howbeit they call both these changes
by the name of Transsubstantiation. They affirm also that the particle This, in
the words of consecration, does note some indeterminate substance in general
(as they use to speak) without quantity or quality, contained under those
accidents, so that it demonstrateth unto us neither bread, nor Christ's body,
but only something contained under the forms and accidents, which before
Consecration was bread, but by vigor and force of the words of Consecration,
began to be the body of Christ: so that the meaning is on this wise; This is my
body, that is, Their vain questions where the Accidents in Transsubstantiation
may be grounded.
that which is contained under this, or these forms, is my body. Touching the
accidents, where they are grounded and seated, whether in the body of Christ,
or in the air, or in the surface of the bread and wine, or in nothing, they
curiously and diversely dispute; and the common received opinion is, that they
are existent without any subject. This is the doctrine of the Schoolmen and
all Papists, whereof (as we see) there are two maine heads: one of
Transsubstantiation, another of eating Christ's body with the mouth. But each of
them is a false profane forgery, utterly repugnant with the words of Christ. As
for the later of these, it is overthrown and refuted by the same arguments
whereby we have already proved the spiritual eating of Christ's body; and
Transsubstantiation is thus oppugned:

That which is Christ's body in the Supper, remains and is not therein
transformed, nor reduced to nothing: else Christ's body should not remain,
Arguments against Transsubstantiation.
nor be present in the Eucharist: But in the bread is Christ's body, namely,
sacramentally, as before we have made evident demonstrance:) Therefore bread
remains in the Supper, and is not transformed, or reduced to nothing. The
Minor is already proved, and is confirmed, Proofs that the bread in the
Sacrament is Christ's body.
1. By the authority of Luke and Paul, in these words: This cup is the new
testament: and, The bread is the communion of the body of Christ. 2. Farther
proofs are deduced also out of these words thus: What Christ brake, that he
called his body: But he brake bread, not some uncertain substance, nor the
mere accidents of the bread. Therefore the bread is the body of Christ.
Again, The Article THIS demonstrateth and points out either the bread, or
the mere accidents, or the body of Christ, or some determinate thing or
substance whatsoever. But it concerns not any indeterminate substance;
Because Christ brake not any undeterminate thing, that is, I know not what: but
determinately and precisely it is said, He brake bread, it concerns not
Christ's visible or invisible body; for his visible body sat and talked with
his Disciples: and an invisible body Christ never had: and moreover the Papists
themselves confess, that Christ's body is not yet present under the form of
bread, when the Priest begins to pronounce the particle THIS, but then, when
once the change is made; the change (say they) is made in the last instant of
consecration, at the pronouncing of this last syllable DIE, in these words, This
is my boDY. Lastly, it concerns not the accidents only of the bread; For
Christ brake not bare and mere accidents. Wherefore, the Article THIS
intimates nothing else but the bread; and Christ's words. This is my body, have
no other meaning then this, This bread is my body.

Christ brake bread: but he did not then break his body: therefore the bread is
not really his body.

Christ's body was given for us: The bread was not given for us: Therefore the
bread is not really Christ's body.

Christ says not, as the Transsubstantiaries say, Under these forms is my
body, or, My body is contained under these forms: Therefore the
Transsubstantiaries retain not, but pervert Christ's words.

Let this be made, but, This is my body. Therefore Christ's words turn not the
bread into the substance of his body; but they teach only that the bread in
this use is Christ's body, to wit sacramentally.

Paul expressly calls that which is taken, bread, both before and after the
eating: Therefore the bread is not reduced to nothing, nor changed into the
substance of Christ's body, but continues bread.

the sign, and the thing signed: or, as Irenaeus speaks, the earthly, and
the heavenly thing; and without these two, no Sacrament can consist or stand.
But Transsubstantiation takes away the sign or earthly thing, namely bread
and wine from the Eucharist. Therefore it takes away the whole fence or nature
of a Sacrament.



analogy or proportion of the sign and the thing signed; E^st ad Bonifac.
whereof Saint Augustine says, that The body so feeds the soul, as the
bread nourishes the body: and as corn bread, is one mass made of many grains;
so many are made one bread and one body, which partake of one bread. For, the
bare accidents of bread and wine cannot uphold and bear this Analogy, seeing
they nourish not; neither can you say, As the accidents of the bread and wine
nourish the body, to the maintenance of this life; so Christ's body nourishes
my soul to life eternal: for then the comparison will be between a true and
a false thing: wherefore the very Analogy of the sign, and the thing, do
sufficiently refute Transsubstantiation.

Of Consubstantiation.
THe Papists feigned that two great miracles were wrought in the Eucharist by
the virtue of Consecration, namely, the changing of the substances of bread and
the Lords body, and the subsisting of Accidents without any subject: of which
two, the former subverteth the Analogy of the whole Christian faith; the later
contradicts all sound Philosophy. And that force of Consecration they boast
of, is nothing else but a magical device of the Devil, What Consubstantiation
is.
and an invention of man's brain. This, when of ancient some Doctors espied, to
avoid these so absurd miracles, in stead of Transsubstantiation they coined
Consubstantiation: that is, The co-existence of two substances in one place;
or, the presence of Christ's body and blood, not under the forms of bread and
wine, but under the bread and wine it self. These therefore were of opinion
that the signs were not transsubstantiated, that is, changed not their
substance, but consubstantiated, that is, that the bread and wine remained, but
with, in, and under the bread and wine: Christ's body and blood were really and
substantially present, and eaten and drunken with the month of the Receivers.
Lib. 4. Dut. 11. c. Quidam. The age and parentage of Consubstantiation.
This opinion Lombard relates, and testifies that it was before his time
maintained by some; but he calls it a Paradox, a strange or wonderful
opinion. Guitmund fathereth it on Berengarius, after his recantation, and
terms it Impanation. Others impute it to one Walrame, against whom Anselme
has two books extant. Some fasten it on Rupert Abb. Tuit, who lived not long
after Guitmond, about the year of the Lord 1124. Petrus de Alliaco, Cardinal
of Cambray, says, In lib. 4. sentent. q. 6. art. 2.
that he had rather defend Consubstantiation the Transubstantiation, unless
the Church of Rome had defined the contrary. He lived about the year of our
Lord 1416. Lib. de Ca. Babyl.
At length Luther approving the judgment of this Cardinal of Cambray, as
himself witnesses, first thought it no article of faith to believe that the
substance of bread remains, or remains not; but either point might be held
without heresy. Afterward it seemed more probable unto him, that the bread
should remain, and the body of Christ should be under, in, and with the bread.
And this is now their opinion, who name themselves Lutherans. Wherefore they
interpret Christ's words, This is my body, thus: In this, with this, under this
bread is my body: and they glory and boast no less then the Papists, that they
retain the letter without any trope or figure. And so have they ranked
themselves, that, if they combat with Papists, then the particle This, notes
with them bread only, and the bread it self is the body of Christ: If they bend
their forces against us, whom they call Sacramentaries, then the particle This,
shall not signify bread only, but bread with the body of Christ lodged
invisibly therein; and the sense shall be, This is my body, that is, This
bread, and my body lying hid in this bread, is my body. They illustrate this
their gloss with vulgar similies, as they call them; that Christ, when he gave
his invisible body in the bread, in like manner said, This is my body; as the
Countryman says of the grain in his sack, This is corn, pointing at the
sack: or the Merchant, of the money in his purse, This is money, pointing at
his purse: or the Mother, of the Infant in his cradle, This is my child,
showing the cradle only: or the Vintner, of his wine, This is Rhenish wine,
when he reaches out the Goblet. These forms of speech are noted and observed
out of their books and disputations. But (good men) they have that luck which
the Poet alotteth unto fools: Fools when they seek to avoid an
inconvenience, Horat. Sermon. lib. 1. sat. 3.
fall into an evil. For in place of that absurd miracle, of the subsisting of
accidents without any subject, they have induced another more absurd, of the
penetration of two bodies: and, whether we respect the letter or the sense,
they have wandered and departed farther from Christ's words, then the Papists.
For the letter thus lies; This, that is, This bread is my body: The sense
stands thus: The visible bread broken and distributed is my true and
essential body, given for you. It is my true body, not by any change of
essence and nature, as the Papists would have it (for bread was not assumed by
the Word for us; neither was bread given and crucified for us): but it is my
true body in a mystical sense and Sacramental kind of speech, according to
the interpretation of the sounder antiquity, of Paul, yea, and of Christ
himself. The Transsubstantials gloss is farte wide of this the letter, and
meaning of Christ's words. As then the Papists retain not the letter, when in
stead of Christ's words, This is my body, they annex this seraphicall or
super-angelicall gloss: This thing or substance whatsoever, undeterminate,
contained under these forms, is my body: so much less do these reserve
entire the letter and sense of Christ's words, when, instead of them, they place
their own, saying: My body is in, with, under the bread: or, The bread, and the
body lying hid invisibly in the bread, is my body: For neither is the bread
alone, nor the bread with the body enclosed therein, properly Christ's body; as
an empty or full purse, is not properly, and without all figure of speech,
termed money. Now, the phrases they use, are too improper, and too much
unfitting that they would express. For as for the instances produced by them
we know as soon as the Countryman. Merchant, Mother, or Vintner speaks,
that grain is in the sack, money in the purse, an infant in the cradle, and
wine in the goblet. But when these men tell us, This is Christ's body, we know
not forthwith that Christ's body is in the bread; neither can it be proved;
because an Article of the Christian faith testfieth, that it is in heaven.

Of the Schism of the Consubstantials.
LUthers foundation and maine ground, at first, was those words only of
Christ, This is my body. Afterward in a disputation bad with the adversaries
of this opinion pinion the 27. and 28. year he retired and fled to the
Ubiquity, and for that one foundation or ground aforementioned he assumed four
other: 1. The personal union of the natures in Christ. The right hand of God,
which is every where. 3. The truth of God, which cannot lie. 4. The three fold
manner of the existence of Christ's body in any place. But being at length
repulsed from these holds, he betook himself again to Christ's words, and
desired that all disputation of Ubiquity should quite be revoked.
Notwithstanding, since his time, some, Lutherans by profession, finding no
sufficient warrant for their cause in Christ's words, have set Ubiquity on foot
again, and at this day account it the best stake in their hedge; Three sorts
of Lutherans.
though others utterly disclaim it. Hence arose a faction and division among
the Consubstantials: some are 1. Simplices.
simply Lutherans, who by Christ's words only defend the being of Christ's body
in the bread, and the eating it with the mouth: some are 2. Multipraesentiarii,
Omnipotentiarii.
multipresentiarie and omnipotentiarie Lutherans, that is, such as think
Christ's body to be present at once in many hosts, by reason of the omnipotency
really communicated therewith. Lastly, some are 3. Omnipraesentiarii,
Ubiquitarii.
omnipresentiarie Lutherans, who, to assoile the presence of Christ's body in
the bread, lay hold on the shield of Ubiquity, and teach that Christ's body is
every where present by virtue of the union with the Word, and therefore is
present in the bread, both before and after the use thereof in the Supper; and
that the right of consecration does effect only that it be eaten in the bread.
Of this our young Divines, for the understanding of this controversy, may not
be ignorant. For hereby they perceive, that at this day there are two maine
columns or pillars erected to under-prop Consubstantiation, namely, The two
principal grounds of Consubstantiation
1. The Vbiquity. 2. The words of Christ. The Ubiquity has been at large
discoursed of before in expounding the Articles of the personal union of the
two natures in Christ, of his ascension into heaven, and of his sitting at the
right hands of God the Father, and the difficulties therein discussed, fully
resolved, and Ubiquity it self confuted. Christ's words (witness the Papists
themselves) neither intimate Consubstantiation, neither can bear that
interpretation. Which the Ubiquitaries also in their writings dissemble not:
and have therefore devised and invented the Ubiquity because they saw that the
ground and foundation of their opinion, if it were laid on Christ's words only,
were too ruinous, and like to have a speedy downfall. Christ said, This is my
body, which is given for you; which words the Consubstantials retain not,
Consubstantiation over brown by Christ's very words.
neither literally, nor according to their sense and meaning. We need not
therefore any argument to refute Consubstantiation, but Christ's very words,
whereunto we recall them, and thus reason against them: Christ said not, In
this bread is my body; but, This is my body: neither is the sense of both these
propositions all one; seeing the former declares what is in the bread, and
where Christ's body is; the later, what the bread it self is in the Eucharist:
Therefore the Consubstantials who teach, that in the bread is Christ's body,
retain neither the letter, nor the meaning of Christ's words.

A refutation of objections framed to confirm Consubstantiation.
Schmidline his argument in the conference at Mulbr. La^. Page 159.
OBject. 1. It is an usual kind of speech when two things are jointly given,
the one apparent, the other in covert, that that only be named, which appeared
not: as we say of purses fraught with money, This is money: of a caske of wine,
This is wine. But Christ in his Supper delivering in the same manner two things
jointly at once, namely, the bread and his body, named that only, which
appeared not, under the bread, saying: Take, this is my body: Therefore Christ's
manner of speech is most usual and proper, neither needs it any explication
at all. Answ. To the Major we answer, that it is a form of speech most usual,
etc. but with this limitation, when it is certain that the thing which is
named, though it be not apparent, yet it is contained in that thing which is
apparent; as it is certain, that money is in the purse, and wine in the caske.
Otherwise it is no usual, plain, or true form of speech, to say of an empty
purse, This is money. But hitherto it is not clear, neither have the
Consubstantials as yet proved, that Christ's body lay hid in the bread, when
Christ said thereof, This is my body; as it ought to be evident, that money is
in the purse, and wine in the vessel, when it is said, This is money, This is
wine. Yea, and we avouch the contrary, to wit, that Christ's body in the first
Supper, lay not hid in the bread, but sat at table, and now is in heaven,
until it thence return in judgment: Therefore this form of reasoning, is a
begging of that which is in controversy betwixt us. Answ. 2. The Minor also is
false. For Christ, delivering unto his Disciples, not his body but bread, taken
from the table, and broken said, Take, cate, This (that is, this bread) is my
body. Which exposition is proved: 1. Because it is said of the cup, This cup is
the New Testament. 2. Paul expounds the particle This, of the bread, saying:
The bread which we break is the communion of Christ's body. 3. Because the bread
and body of Christ (both together) are neither properly, not figuratively
Christ's very body: and hereby a Tautologie, or a vain and childish iteration
of the same thing should be fathered on Christ, in saying; My body is my body.
4. We deny also the consequence, because their conclusion compriseth more then
their premises in force. For they conclude, that it is a most usual and
proper speech. But these two, usual and proper, are not in force and
signification alike. For the most usual form of speech may be figurative, as
those very trivial, and yet Synecdochicall speeches urged by them, This is
money, This is wine: who is so mad, as to think the purse alone, or the purse
with the money, is properly money? So was that Sacramental speech of the
Passover frequent, and well known unto the Disciples of Christ: Where will thou that we provide the Passover? Yet spoke they not properly, but
figuratively, attributing to the sign the name of the thing signified, by a
sacramental Metonymie or change of names. That which follows therefore out
of the premises, is only this, That Christ's words were trivial, plain and
known to the Disciples; but not that they were understood properly, literally,
and without all Trope or Figure.

Object. 2. Christ said, This is my body. But Christ is true: Therefore we must
believe him, setting apart all Philosophical subtilty and sharpness; and so
by consequent, bread is not a sign of his body, but his body, as the words
lie; which are simply and literally to be understood. Ans. Here they allege us
that for a cause, which is indeed no cause of the matter in hand. For Christ's
truth is a cause only that his words are true; yea, most true: to which we
ought to give credence, setting apart all Philosophical subtilty: but it is no
cause why his words should be proper, and literally taken. For he which
speaks figuratively, may also speak truly: as Christ him self was no less
true, yea truth it self, when he said, I am the light of the world, the door
of the sheepfold, the good Shepherd, the true Vine, my Father is an
Husbandman, ye are the branches; then when he said, This is my body. And they
deserve to be hissed out of Schools, who presume to term figurative speeches
by the name of lies. 2. We retort their Minor thus; Christ is true: Therefore
he said not, that his body lay hid in the bread, when all his Disciples saw
that it sat at Table. 3. We retort their conclusion on them thus; Christ's
words must be understood simply: Therefore ye may not cloak and color them
with your gloss, which perverteth the letter, when ye say, that In, With,
Under the bread is Christ's body; or that the bread is the closet of Christ's
body.

Object. 3. Christ is omnipotent: Therefore he can effect that his body should
be really in the bread. Ans. The reason is of no force, which will conclude a
thing to be done, because it may be done. The question is not, What Christ can
do, but what he will. He no where promised the presence of his body in the
bread, or in the presence of the bread: Therefore we derogate nothing at all
from his omnipotency, when we believe no such presence. Repl. Bread is present
in place of the Supper. Bread is Christ's body: Therefore Christ's body is
present in place of the Supper. Ans. The Minor of this Syllogism is
figurative, by the confession of the adversaries themselves. For Jacobus
Andreas in a disputation held at Mulbr. when he could no ways else escape,
expressly confessed, that this proposition is figurative; Bread is the body of
Christ. Protoc. lat. page 160.
The same Andreas afterward wrote, that this phrase, Bread is Christ's body, is
proper, Behold the spirit of contradiction.
and to be understood, without any trope or Figure. Is not this to blow hot
and cold out of the same mouth? to say one thing, and to unsay it again?

Object. 4. Christ's words are not to be changed. Christ used the word IS: This
IS my body: Therefore there may not be put in place thereof the word
SIGNIFIES. Ans. We grant the whole. For we place not the word signifies
instead of the word is; neither do we change Christ's words; but retain them
as they were pronounced by Christ. But we say, that this is the true and
natural sense of those words; namely, that the bread is the body of Christ
symbolically: that is, as a symbol or token of it, or that it signifies
Christ's body: For so Christ himself construeth them, saying; Do this in
remembrance of me: So Paul interprets them; This cup is the New Testament in
my blood. Tertublib. 4. Cont Marc.
And Tertullian says, The bread which he took and distributed among his
Disciples, he made it his body, saying: This is my body; that is, the figure of
my body. Lib. 4. cap. 4, 5. de sacr. Con. Adim. ca. 12.
And Austine; Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave a
token of his body. 2. We retort the argument on our adversaries, thus Christ's
words are not to be changed: Therefore the Transubstantials gloss is false,
averring thus; Under these forms is, or is contained my body: and likewise the
Corsubtantials gloss, in, with, under this bread is my body invisibly present.
3. The words are not to be chaged, to wit, into another sense then Christ will
have: but otherwise, they are often to be chaged; that is, interpreted aright:
as when it is said, Pluck out thine eye. To him that takes away thy coat,
give thy cloak also. For words are to be understood according to the nature of
things.

Object. 5. The words of Testaments are to be understood properly, lest
occasion of striving about the will of the Testator fall out: the Supper is the
New Testament: Therefore the words therein are properly to be understood. Ans.
To be Major we make answer, that the words of Testaments are properly to be
understood, if they be properly spoken; and figuratively, if they be
figuratively uttered. If they say, All words of Testaments are properly to be
understood, we deny the Major: For it is sufficient, that the words of
Testaments be clear and plain, though oftentimes they be not proper, but
figurative. For when we are sure of the Testators will, what it is, in vain
do we then dispute of the letter. So God in the old time spoke figuratively of
Circumcision, of the Paschall Lamb, of the Sacrifices. And Christ in the New
Testament spoke by a figure, Take, drink; This cup is the New Testament in my
blood. For here is a double figure: 1. A Synecdoche, when he bids them drink
of the cup; that is, of the wine in the cup. 2. A Metonymie, when he calls
the cup the New Testament; that is, the reconciliation of mankind with God,
sealed by his blood.

Object. 6. The eating of bread is done by the mouth: but the eating of the
body, is the eating of bread: Therefore the eating of the body is done by the
mouth. Answ. The Minor is either figurative, or false: It is figurative, if you
understand it thus, The eating of the body is the thing signified and sealed by
the eating of bread. And so, the manner of predication or affirmation being
changed, nothing is proved. If it be properly understood, it is false. For the
eating of the bread is external, corporal, and visible: but the eating of the
body is internal, spiritual and invisible. Wherefore they are not properly
one kind of eating; but as the thing signified is distinguished from the sign,
so the receipt of both of them is distinct, though both be at once in the
lawful use of the Sacraments.

Object. 7. That which quickneth and nourishes, must needs be received into
us. The body and blood of Christ do quicken us; Therefore they must needs be
received into us; that is, be eaten and drunken with the mouth. Ans. The Major
is but merely particular; and therefore false in general: for, not whatsoever
quickneth and nourishes us, must necessarily be received into us. That only
must be received into us necessarily, which quickneth and nourishes naturally;
that is, by a joynt-touching of our body. This meat, which so nourishes us
after a natural manner, does not nourish us, except thereby the substance of
our body be increased. But we speak far otherwise of the nourishing of the
soul, which is spiritual. Christ's body does not at all nourish us naturally:
for it does not, being received in us, quicken us, by working in us new
corporal qualities, like as a medicine does: but the body of Christ nourishes
and quickneth us after a manner diverse from that natural nourishing: and
accordingly as this manner of nourishing and quickening us requires, so receive
we Christ's body. The manner how Christ's body and blood nourish us.
The manner, whereby Christ's body and blood nourish us, is, 1. The respect of
his merit: For, for us Christ's body is given, and his blood shed for us, and
for the body and blood of Christ, we have eternal life given to us. After this
manner then the body and blood of Christ quickneth us, as it is a merit
deserving for us this blessing. 2. His body or blood quickneth or nourishes us
when we receive that merit of Christ's body and blood: that is, when we believe
with a true faith, that for it we shall have eternal life. This faith rests
and hangs on Christ, hanging on the Cross, not corporally dwelling in us. 3.
It nourishes us, when the same spirit uniteth us by faith unto Christ, and
works the like in us, which he does in Christ. For, except we be graffed into
Christ, we do not please God. For he will on that condition receive us into
favor, and pardon us our sins, so that by faith, through the working of the
holy Ghost, we be joined with Christ, and ingraffed into him. Seeing then this
is the manner, whereby the body and blood of Christ quicken and nourish us,
there is no need of any descending of the body and blood of Christ into our
bodies to quicken us.

Repl. Not only our souls, but our bodies also are fed with Christ's body and
blood unto eternal life: Therefore our bodies must eat as well as our souls.
But our bodies eat and drink by the mouth Answ. The Major here omitted,
proceeds thus: Whatsoever is fed with Christ's body, eats it; and is false,
being universally proposed. For does thy thigh or thine elbow therefore eat,
because it is nourished by the meat, which thou conveyest in by thy mouth? It
suffices, that eating is by the mouth, as an instrument framed by nature to
this end, to minister nourishment to the whole body. So it is not necessary,
that our bodies should eat Christ's body with their mouches, therewith to be
fed unto eternal life: but it suffices, that the mouth of faith takes the
spiritual meat, that spiritual nourishment and life may be transfused
throughout the whole man.

Quest. 79. Why then does Christ call bread his body, and the cup his blood, or
the New Testament in his blood: and Paul also calls bread and wine the
communion of the body and blood of Christ?
Ans. Christ not without great consideration speaks so: to wit, not only for
to teach us, that as the bread and wine sustain the life of the body, so also
his crucified body, and blood shed, are indeed the meat and drink of our soul,
whereby it is nourished to eternal life John 6.55.
: But much more, that by this visible sign and pledge he may assure us, that
we are as verily partakers of his body and blood, through the working of the
holy Ghost, as we do receive by the mouth of our body these holy signs in
remembrance of him 1 Cor. 10.16.
: And further also, that that his suffering and obedience is so certainly ours,
as though we our selves had suffered punishments for our sins, and had
satisfied God.

The Explication.
WHereas neither Transubstantiation nor Consubstantiation are signified by
Christ's words; the question is, Why the bread is called Christ's body, and the
cup Christ's blood: that is, why the things signified are attributed to the
signs, and the signs called by their name. There are two causes alleged
hereof: For the natural analogy or likeness, Two causes why the things
signified are attributed unto the signs.
which Christ's body and the bread have between themselves. 2. For the certainty
or confirmation of the joynt-exhibition of the sign, and the thing signified
in the true use. The similitude and proportion of the bread, and Christ's body,
especially consists in these points: 1. As the Bread and Wine nourish our
body unto this life; so the Body and Blood of Christ nourish us unto
everlasting life. received by the mouth; The Analogy or proportion between the
bread and Christ's body in the use of the Supper.
so Christ's body and blood are received by faith, which is the mouth of the
soul. 3. As the bread is not swallowed whole, but eaten, being broken; so
Christ's body is received being sacrificed and broken on the Cross. 4. As the
bread and wine profits not him that eats without appetite, but we must
bring hunger and thirst unto the Table; so Christ's body and blood profit none
but them, who hunger and thirst after righteousness. 5. As of many corns is
made one loaf, and of many grapes one wine: so we, by participation or
communion of these signs, though many, yet are made one body, and grow up into
one body with Christ, and between our selves. The certainty also or assurance
of faith is a cause, why we affirm that of the signs, which is proper to the
thing signified. For the signs testify, that Christ's sacrifice is
accomplished, and that indeed for our behoof and salvation, as verily as we
have the signs; yea, that we are fed with Christ's crucified body and blood,
shed and poured out, as truly as we receive these sacred symboles of his body
and blood.

ON THE 30. SABBATH.
Quest. 70. What difference is there between the Lords Supper and the Popish
Mass?
Ans. The Supper of the Lord testifies to us, that we have perfect forgivenes
of all our sins for that only sacrifice of Christ, which himself once fully
wrought on the Cross Heb. 10.10, 12. and 7.27. and 9.12, 25. John 19.30.
Matthew. 26.28. Luke 22.19.
: Then also, that we by the holy Ghost are graffed into Christ 1 Cor. 6.17. and
10.16. and 12.13.
, who now, according to his humane nature, is only in heaven, at the right hand
of his Father Colos. 3.1. Heb. 1.3. and 8.1.
, and there will be worshipped of us Mat. 6.20 21. John 4.21, 22. and 20 17.
Luke 24.52. Acts 7.55. Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.20. 1 These. 1.19.
. But in the Mass it is denied, that the quick and the dead have remission of
sins for the only passion of Christ; except also Christ be daily offered of
them by their sacrificers. Further also it is taught, that Christ is bodily
under the forms of bread and wine; and therefore is to be worshipped in them
In Canone Missae, and de consec. did. 2. Council. Trid. Sess. 13.5.
. And so the very foundation of the Mass is nothing else then an utter denial
of that only sacrifice and passion of Christ Jesus, and an accursed Idolatry
Heb. 9.26. and 10.12.
.

The Explication.
THis question is necessary, by reason of errors, which by the Mass have
crept into the Church. It is otherwise demanded, Why the Mass is to be
abolished? But here this question is also contained and comprehended: because
these differences and contrarieties of the Lords Supper and the Mass, are the
causes why the Mass is to be abolished. For whereas it has so many abuses in
it, flat repugnant to the Lords Supper, it may not be confounded therewith, nor
be thrust on the Church in place thereof, nor be permitted and tolerated in the
Church by godly and religious Magistrates; but it ought to be utterly abandoned
and put down. First then let us speak a few words of the name of Mass, or
Missa. The word Missa seems to have his name derived from the Hebrew Masah;
that is, a tribute, or voluntary offering, which was wont to be paid of every
one. The original of the word Missa, which we call the Mass.
The word is found, Deuteronomy. 16.10. Missach nidbath jadecha, a free gift of thine
hand. Now that offering was called so, being as it were an yearly tribute,
which was yet no exaction, but given freely. Others interpret it to be a
sufficiency, which is, that there should be given so much as was sufficient:
and perhaps this is the truer; because the Lord commanded the Israelites, that
they should open their hands unto the poor, Deuteronomy. 15.^.
and should lend him sufficient for his need. This the Chaldee Paraphrast
interprets to be Missah. Hereof these our men think, that it was called
Missa, as if it were a tribute, and free-offering, which should be everywhere
offered to God in the Church, for the living and the dead. But this is not of
any likelihood to be true. It is manifest indeed, that the Church has borrowed
some words from the Hebrews; as, Satan, Osanna, Sabaot, Halleluja, Pascha, and
such like, But those words came not to the Latin Church, but by the Greek
Church; and those words are found in the Greek Testament, when first it was
written in Greek. And therefore we have no Hebrew words derived unto our
Church, which the Greek Church had not before us. If also we seek the Greek
Fathers, the word Missa will never be found to have been used by them:
Therefore I think not that the word Missa was taken from the Hebrews; but
Missa, which doubtless is a Latin word by original, seems to have taken
from the Fathers, who used Remissa for Remissio, as Tertullian: Tertul. lib. 4.
cont. Marc. Cypr. debono patient. and Epist. 4. lib. 3.
We have spoken (says he) of De remissa peccatorum.
remissio; of sins. And Cyprian, He that was to give Daturus remissam
peccatorum.
remission of sins, did not disdain to be baptized. And again he uses the
same word: He that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, has not Remissam
peccatorum non habet.
remission of sins. Wherefore, as they say Remissa, for Remissio; so they seem
also to have said Missa, for Missio. But herein again they much vary. For some
will have the word Missa to be used as it were Missio, from an ancient custom
of Ecclesiastical rites and actions, which came from the Greek Churches to
the Latin, because Sermons and Lectures being ended, before the Communion a
Deacon did send forth, that is, did command the Catechumenes, the possested
with spirits, and the excommunicated persons to depart, crying with a loud
voice; If any Catechumene be yet abiding within the Church, let him depart: and
so the word Missa seems to be used as it were a Mission or sending away,
because it was the last part of divine Service. Others will have it to be so
called from a Dimission, or from the manner of dimissing the congregation;
because, Service being ended, a Deacon dimissed them with these words: Ite,
missa est; that is, Go, you may depart: Or, as others interpret it; Go, now
is the collection of alms: which they will have to be called Missa, of the
sending it in (as we may so speak) or throwing or casting it in for the poor.
Lombard has a new conceit hereof: Lib. 4. did. 15.
It is called the Mass (says he) because an heavenly Messenger comes to
consecrate Christ's quickening body, according to that prayer of the Priest;
Almighty God, command that this be carried by the hands of thine Angel into
thine high Altar, etc. Therefore unless an Angel come, it cannot rightly be
called a Mass. Lo the folly of the man! Again, The Mass is so called,
either because the host is sent; whereof mention is made in that Service:
whence it is said, Ite, missa est: that is, Follow the host, Lib. 4. did. 24.
which is sent up to heaven, trace ye after it: Or, because an Angel comes
from heaven to consecrate the Lords body, by whom the host is carried and
conveyed to the heavenly Altar. Whence it is also said, Ite, missa est: Go, it
is sent. We reject both the name and the thing. For this word, the Mass, does
not agree to the Lords Supper, because the Lords Supper has nothing common and
agreeing with the name of Missa, albeit it was used of the ancient Writers.
Moreover, we have no need of this name, for we have other words for this
purpose extant in Scripture, where it is called, The Lords Supper, The Lords
Table, Breaking of bread, etc.

Now let us see the differences of the Supper, and the Mass; and those most
contrary one to another, and such, as in respect whereof, the Mass ought to be
abolished. They are especially three, and are desciphered in the Catechism: 1.
The Lords Supper testifies unto us, That we have full remission of sins,
and justification freely by faith, for Christ's one and only sacrifice finished
on the Cross: according to these sayings of Scripture; The bread is the body
of Christ, given for us. Heb. 7.27. Heb. 9.12, 26.
The cup is the blood of Christ, shed for us for remission of sins. Do this
in remembrance of me. Show forth the Lords death till he come. That did he
once, when he offered up himself. By his own blood entered he in once into
the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. For then must he have
often suffered since the foundation of the world, but now in the end of the
world has he appeared once, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
Heb. 10.10, 12, 14.
By the which will we are sanctified, even by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once made. This man, after he had offered one sacrifice for
sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God. With one offering has he
consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. Contrariwise, the Mass denies,
that both quick and dead have remission of sins, by and for Christ's oblation,
except also he be daily offered by the Massing-Priests to God his Father. For
thus has that their Canon, which they call the less: Holy Father, Almighty
and Eternal God, receive this immaculate host or sacrifice, which I thy
unworthy servant offer to thee my living and true God, for my innumerable
sins, offenses, and negligences, and for all that stand about me here
present, yea, and for all faithful Christians, quick and dead, that it may be
profitable to me and them to everlasting salvation. And their greater Canon
has: Remember Lord thy servants and handmaids N. and all here present, whose
faith and devotion is well known unto thee; for whom we offer, or who offer
unto thee this sacrifice of praise for themselves, and all that are theirs, for
the redemption of their souls, for the hope of their safety and salvation.
What need was there that Christ should offer himself at all, if the oblation
of a petty Mass Priest may serve for the redemption of souls?

2. The Lords Supper witnesses unto us, That Christ (according to the Articles
of faith) as concerning his humanity, is in heaven at the right hand of his
Father, and is not shrouded under the bare accidents of the elements or signs
in the Supper, and that he exhibiteth unto us in the Supper his body and blood,
to be eaten and drunken by faith; and that he ingraffeth us into himself by
his holy Spirit, that we may abide in him, and have him abiding in us, as it is
said: He that is joined unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.17. and 10.16. Heb. 1.3. and
8.1, 4.
is one spirit. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? We have such an High Priest, that sits at the right hand of the
Throne of the Majesty in the heavens. For he were not a Priest, if he were on
earth. Contrariwise, the Mass teaches us, That bread and wine, by force of
consecration, is changed into Christ's body and blood; and that this his body
and blood in the act of consecration is conveyed by an Angel into heaven, lies
corporally under the forms of bread and wine, is really carried up and down
in the hands of the Minister, and received by the mouth of the Communicants.
These forgeries are repugnant to the Articles of Faith, the Incarnation, the
Ascension, and Intercession, and the return of Christ unto Judgment: and to
the nature of Sacraments, in which the signs must needs remain, and not lose
their nature.

3. The Lords Supper teaches us, That Christ is to be worshipped in heaven at
the right hand of his Father. For it overthrows not, but establishes and
ratifieth the Articles of Faith and doctrine of the whole Gospel, which
shows, that Christ is to be sought and worshipped Above. Colos. 3.2.
Seek the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God: Acts 7.55.
And Stephen, when he was stoned, saw Christ, and worshipped him Above,
standing at the right hand of God. The ancient Church also sang in their
Liturgy, or common Service and Prayer, Sursum corda, We lift up our hearts
unto the Lord. On the other side, the Mass tells us, That Christ is to be
worshipped in the bread; which adoration and worship, questionless is
idolatrous. For, To worship Christ in the bread, is, to direct our worship in
soul, mind, cogitation, and as much as may be, in the motion of our bodies,
to the place in which the bread is; and turning hereto, to yield reverence unto
Christ, as if he were present there, more than elsewhere. So of old they
worshipped God at the Arc, turning thereto with their minds, and as much as
might be, with their external grace and inclination of body. That this is
idolatry, we prove: 1. Because no creature has power to tie the worship of God
to any thing or place, Exodus 25.22. and 29.42. 1 King. 8.33. and 12.29, 10, 31.
Dan 9.11. 2 Kings 12.13. Amos 4.4.
wherein God has not commanded by express word himself to be worshipped, and
wherein God has not promised to hear us. And hereby is the cause of that
difference plainly seen, why the Jews, directing their prayer to the
Propitiatory or Mercy-seat, did notwithstanding withal in spirit worship the
true God, and were by promise from him assured to be heard; but worshipping in
Dan and in Bethel, and in the high places, and in the Temple of Samaria, were
Idolaters; not knowing what they worshipped: and the cause of this thing is
more at large declared, 1 Kings 17.9. 2. Because in the New Testament all
worship, which is tied to any certain place on earth, is utterly taken away,
and spiritual worship only required, stirred and kindled by the holy Ghost,
and done with a true faith and knowledge of God. Joh. 4.21, 22, 23.
So Christ teaches: Ye worship that which ye know not, we worship that
which we know. But the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain,
nor at Jerusalem, worship the Father. But the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in spirit and truth. Whereas Christ says in spirit, not in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem, he does plainly take away worship tied and
restrained to any certain place on earth. Wherefore we must also take away,
and have in detestation this impious invention of Christ's corporal presence in
the Mass, or in the bread and wine, which is the foundation of idolatrous
adoration or worship. For this being put, that Christ is in body present in the
bread (whether it be said to be done by Transubstantiation or
Consubstantiation) the Popish adoration stands fast. For as in ancient times,
before the Ascension, it was not only lawful, but behoovefull also to worship
Christ wheresoever he was; so now also, if he be in the bread, he must be
worshipped in the bread, whether he be there seen, or not seen. For much more
were we to believe the voice of God, then any sense of ours, if it expressed
and specified any such matter. Likewise of the contrary side, the presence of
Christ's body in the bread is taken away, if we take away by Gods commandment
this foul and shameful Popish adoration of Christ's body, lying covertly by
their judgments under the forms of Bread and Wine. Here the Ubiquiraries
except against us on their behalf, that Christ is present in the bread, not to
be worshipped but to be eaten, and that he commanded not himself to be adored,
but to be eaten. Answ. In both these asseraions they conclude no more, then
that which is in controversy: for Christ commanded neither of these. If he be
in the bread, he must there be worshipped, because of the general
commandment; Let all the holy Angels of God worship him. Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God. They therefore imagine Christ in the bread, and yet say it is
not lawful to worship him; which is an open deceit and mockery. Wherefore
Musculus, and others, to salve this sore, are content to fall down before the
Bread, and worship Christ therein. But Heshusius replyeth against us, thus; The
Divinity is not adored in all the creatures, though it be present in all:
Therefore neither is it necessary that the humanity should be adored in the
bread, though it be corporally present therein. Ans. The examples are not
alike. The adoration of the Divinity is not tied to all creatures, but it is
tied to the humanity assumed, as to a proper peculiar Temple. Wheresoever then
Christ's humanity is, there the Divinity will be worshipped in it, and with it.
And indeed, by this their own maine argument, The Ubiquity of Christ's manhood
confuted by the Ubiquitaries own argument.
the Ubiquity of Christ's manhood is quite overthrown: For, seeing the manhood
is not to be worshipped in all creatures, and everywhere; it follows, that
it is not present in all pears, apples, ropes, cheeses, etc. as the
Ubiquitaries write thereof.

These differences did D. Vrsine, in the year of our Lord 1569. thus enlarge
and deliver 1. The Supper testifies, that Christ's only sacrifice justifies:
The Mass Priests say, that the Mass justifies for the very work done, as
they use to speak: that is, through the external rite and action. 2. The
Supper teaches us, that Christ redeemed us by offering himself for us: The
Mass Priests say, that we are redeemed by Christ offered by them. 3. The
Supper tells us, that our salvation is perfected by Christ's own sacrifice:
The Masse-mongers report, that it is perfected by infinite numbers of Masses.
4. The Supper instructech us, how we are ingraffed into Christ by faith by
means of the holy Ghost: The Mass falsely feigneth, that Christ enters into us
corporally; or we are ingraffed into Christ by his corporal conveyance into
us. 5. The Supper teaches us, that Christ, having ended his sacrifice,
ascended into heaven: Our Massemongers tell us, that he in his body is on the
Aliar. 6. In the Supper bread and wine remain, and change not their substance;
because Sacraments retain, and change not the substance of the sign: The
Mass Priests declare unto us, that the substance of bread and wine is quite
abolished, and the accidents only remain. 7. The end of the Supper is, the
confirmation of faith in Christ, and his one only sacrifice: The end of the
Mass is, a confirmation of that opinion of works meritorious for their very
working and performance, and a denial of Christ's sacrifice. 8. The Supper
teaches us, that Christ is to be adored above in heaven: The Masse-mongers
adore him under the forms of bread and wine. These differences prove, that the
Popish Mass, in the foundation and ground thereof, is nothing else but a
denial of CHRIST'S only sacrifice, and an horrible Idolatry. They further
point out unto us many causes, for which the Popish Mass ought to be
suppressed, abolished, and abandoned far out of the Church: Nine causes why the
Mass is to be abolished.
of which are these here expressed.





Merit in the work done is grounded on the Mass. For the Mass Priests feign
that the Mass is a propitiatory sacrifice, which for its own worth does merit,
even by the work it self wrought, (that is, through the external right and
action) both for him that celebrateth, and for others, remission of sins.
Whereas even Moses sacrifices had not this property or power but the only
sacrifice of the Son of God once offered for us, whereunto the Lords Supper
leads and directs us, and from which the Mass with-draweth us. In what
sense the Fathers call the Supper a sacrifice.
The Fathers indeed sometimes call a supper a Sacrifice and so it is; but an
Eucharisticall or thanksgiving sacrifice, not a propitiatory sacrifice, as the
Papists dream. And the Supper verily, is even that same sacrifice which Christ
offered, in such sort, as the bread is that body which Christ gave for us: but
sacramentally. But our Mass Priests will have the Mass to be not the same
sacrifice which Christ offered, but diverse and different from it: For they
term it a sacrifice without blord, whereby is obtained remission of sins.
Therefore in very truth they deny Christ's bloody sacrifice, whilst they deny
that Christ has perfectly merited remission of sins, and invent another
sacrifice for the purging of sin; howsoever in words they profess that they
offer no other sacrifice then that which Christ offered. For it is one thing
for the same sacrifice to be often offered, which cannot be verified of Christ's
sacrifice: and another thing for one sacrifice to be once offered, and that
sufficient to take away all sins, which the Scripture affirms of Christ's
sacrifice. For these speeches are contradictory; This sacrifice alone is
sufficient for remission of sins: and, This sacrifice with others is offered
for sins.

remission of sins, and redemption of souls for such as are absent, dead, or
in Purgatory: though Gods word contrariwise reach that we shall be clothed in
heaven, if we be found clothed and not naked on earth; and that we shall be
judged as we are found in our departure out of this life. Cont. Demet.
For (says Cyprian) When we are once deceased and have departed this life,
there is no place for repentance, no effect of satisfaction: here life is
either lost or gained; here we procure eternal salvation by our worship of God
and fruit of faith.



The Mass is repugnant to Christ's Priesthood: because he is the only High
Priest, who has power to offer himself. The Pope, with his companions, most
impudently pulls this honor to himself. For these deceivers and lying men
feign, with great contumely and despite to Christ, that they offer again
Christ unto the Father, and that they alone are worthy men to offer Christ unto
his Father: when yet no man, no Angel, neither any creature is of that dignity
and worthiness, as that he may sacrifice the Son of God. For the Priest is
above the sacrifice: they therefore who will be the Priests to offer Christ,
mount and lift themselves above him. Object. The Priests slay not, but offer
only and present the Son unto the Father, that for his sake he may remit us our
sins, and so they only apply that one and only sacrifice of Christ. Ans. It
is enough that they say, that they offer Christ with their hands. For it
remains that they make themselves Priests, and so place themselves above
Christ the Son of God. Neither is it material, that they deny that they slay
Christ. Many things were offered of old by the Priests which were not slain,
neither were of that quality; but were only offered, as cakes, and liquid
offerings, and burnt offerings, and other such like. The Jews indeed slew
Christ: but it cannot thence be affirmed that they did sacrifice him; but
Christ himself was willingly slain, and therefore sacrificed himself. Christ
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God: Heb 9 1^.
Heb. 9.28.
and verily he offered himself once a sacrifice unto his Father for us. Christ
was once offered to take away the sins of many; and to them that look for him
shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Christ after he had
offered one sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10.12. A propitiatory sacrifice cannot be
without blood
sits for ever at the right hand of God. Now the Papists (contrary to these
manifest places of Scripture) will have Christ to be often offered in the
Mass. For they say, they sacrifice him indeed, but slay him not. But a
propitiatory sacrifice cannot be without slaughter: for, Without shedding of
blood is no remission. Heb. 9.22.




The Mass is contrary to the communion of Saints with Christ. For, it
imagines an execrable invention, which is, that Christ's body does descend into
our bodies, and remains as long within our bodies, as the forms remain of
bread and wine. But the Supper teaches that we are made members of Christ by
the holy Ghost, and ingraffed into him.

The Mass is repugnant to the true worship of God, because it makes Christ to
be there corporally present, and so by consequent there to be worshipped. Even
as of old before his ascension it was not only lawful, but in duty required,
that Christ should be worshipped in whatsoever place he was, and so also did
his Disciples always worship him, when he was present, as also when he
ascended from them: but after his ascension, they did not from that time adore
and worship him, turning unto any one particular place more then other.
Wherefore, seeing the Papists in their Mass tie the worship and adoration of
Christ to a thing, whereunto Christ himself by express word has not tied it;
They profess themselves to be idolaters, and do no less absurdly and
impiously in this, then if they should worship Christ at a wall, or if they
should worship a pillar, falling down before it.

Hence it is evident that the Mass is an Idol, made by Antichrist out of
diverse, and those horrible errors and blasphemies, and substituted in place of
the Lords Supper, and for this cause is justly and rightly suppressed. Object. 1.
The Mass is an application of Christ's sacrifice. Therefore it is not to be
taken away. Ans. I deny the Antecedent: because we apply Christ's merit by faith
only, as it is said: Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Object. 2. There must be a
perpetual sacrifice in the Church, Esaias 66.23. Mal. 1.11.
because Esaias foretold that it should be from Sabbath to Sabbath: and Mal. They
shall offer a pure offering. Ans. The sacrifices of the new Church of the
Gentiles is the Sacrifice of thanksgiving; and the Prophets insinuate unto us
such a Sacrifice perpetual and pure. Such a Sacrifice of thanksgiving the
Fathers termed the Eucharist: 1. Because it is a remembrance of Christ's
Sacrifice. 2. Because alms were given in the Primitive Church after the Supper
was ended, which were a Sacrifice. But that the Supper should be a propitiatory
Sacrifice, the Fathers never so much as once dreamed.

Quest. 81. Who are to come unto the Table of the Lord?
Ans. They only who are truly sorrowful, that they have offended God by their
sins; and yet trust that those sins are pardoned them for Christ's sake: and
what other infirmities they have, that those are covered by his passion and
death, who also desire more and more to go forward in faith and integrity of
life. But hypocrites, and they who do not truly repent, do eat and drink
damnation to themselves 1 Cor. 11.28. and 10.19, 20, 21, 22.
.

The Explication.
Here are three things to be handled and declared:
1. Who ought to approach unto the Lords Supper. 2. What the wicked receive if
they come. 3. What is the right and lawful use of the Supper.


1. Who ought to approach unto the Lords Supper.
THese are distinct questions, Who ought to approach unto the Supper: and, Who
ought to be admitted to the Supper. The former concerns the duty of the
Communicants; the latter, the duty of the Church and Ministers. The former is
stricter, the latter, larger and more general: for, touching the former, the
godly alone ought to come; touching the latter, not the godly only, but
Hypocrites also, who are not known to be such, are to be admitted by the Church
unto the Supper. Wherefore, all that ought to come, ought to be admitted, but
on the other side, not all that ought to be admitted, Who ought to come unto
the Lords Supper.
ought to come; but they only ought to approach unto the Supper, 1. Who
acknowledge their sins, and are truly sorry for them. 2. Who have a
confidence that they are pardoned and forgiven them by Christ, and for his
sake. 3. Who have an earnest purpose and desire of profiting and going forward
more and more in faith, and pureness of life: that is, they only ought to
approach and draw near unto the Lords Supper, and are worthy guests of Christ,
who live in true faith and repentance: Herein a man's true proof and examination
consists, whereof Saint Paul speaks: 1 Cor. 11.28. What it is to prove
himself.
Let a man examine himself, and so^let him eat of this bread. To prove thy
self, is, 2 Cor. 13.5. How we may be assured that we have true faith and
repentance. Romans 1.1.5.
To examine whether thou have faith and repentance, according as it is said:
Prove your selves whether ye are in the faith, whether Christ dwell in you.
But how shall a man know that he has these things? 1. By a confidence and
tranquillity of conscience: because, Being justified by faith, we have peace
toward God. Hope makes not ashamed: because the love of God is shed in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us. 2. By effects; that is, by
the beginnings of true outward and inward obedience, and by an earnest purpose
to obey God according to all his commandments. They who have and perceive this
in themselves, ought to draw near and partake of Christ's Supper; namely, whosoever
have faith and repentance, not in possibility only, but also actually.
Therefore infants are not capable of the Supper, because they save faith only
potentially and in possibility, not actually: they have an inclination to faith
or they have faith only by inclination, but they have not an actual faith. But
here is required an actual faith; which is both a knowledge, and confidence or
assurance on Christ's merit, a beginning of new obedience, and a purpose of
living godly: also an examination of himself, and commemoration or remembrance
of the Lords death.

Four causes why wicked men and hypocrites ought not to approach unto the
Supper.
It is not lawful for the wicked to approach unto the Supper: Luke 22.15.
as he said, I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you.
Wherefore, from the nature and subject of Sacraments is drawn this
demonstrative proof: What God has instituted for his household and children,
that hypocrites and aliens from the Church ought not to receive. Paul
interdicteth all the wicked without any exception, from coming unto this holy
Supper, by words authentic; in which namely he commands, that every man try
and examine himself, and so eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. he that
eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks his own damnation. Mat.
5.24. Esaias 66.3. Romans 2.25.
and the use of the Sacraments frequented by irrepentant and impenitent men,
condemned. Leave there thine offering before the altar: first be reconciled to
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. He that kills a bullock is as
if he slew a man. If thou be a trasgressour of the Law, thy circumcision is
made uncircumcision.

Object. 1. God commands that all use the Sacraments; and Christ says: Take,
drink ye all of this; therefore if wicked men approach unto the Lords Table,
they offend not. Answ. To the Antecedent we answer, that God indeed injoyneth
all men the Sacraments, namely, the lawful and right use, which is not without
faith and repentance. He commands that all be baptized and resort unto the
Supper; but he commands farther, that all believe and repent, Repent and be
baptized. Acts 2.38. 1 Cor. 11 28.
Let every man examine himself. Object. 2. We are all unworthy. Therefore all
must abstain. Ans. To the Antecedent: By nature, and in our selves we are all
unworthy, but we are made worthy by the grace of Christ, if we bring faith and
a good conscience. In Johan. tract.
Augustine says; Come with boldness; it is bread and not poison. No man's
unworthiness therefore ought to withdraw and withold him, because all that
bring faith and repentance are worthy. To him will I look that is poor, and of
a contrite spirit, Esaias. 66.2.
and trembles at my words. Object. 3. They who avoid the profaning of the
Lords Supper, do well: But they who refrain from the Lords Supper, in respect
of some hatred they bear to others, or for some other sins, avoid the
profaning of the Supper: Therefore they do well. Ans. The Major must be
distinguished: They who avoid the profaning of the Supper, do well, if they
avoid it in such sort as they ought; namely, by repenting themselves of those
sins which have been the causes of their refraining: but they do very ill,
who avoid it, persevering in their sins, hypocrisy and hatred: For these men
heap sin upon sin, and add contempt to their former profanation; and the rule
is sound, that, Evil is not to be done, that good may come thereof.

2. What the wicked receive in the Lords Supper.
Eight proofs that the wicked receive nothing but the bare signs in the Supper.
THe wicked and hypocrites coming to the Lords Supper, receive not the things
signified, to wit, Christ's body and blood; but the bare signs of bread and
wine, and those to their judgment and damnation. This is proved, John 6.56, 57.
From the definition of eating. To eat Christ, is through faith to be made
partakers of his merit, efficacy, and benefits: as it is said: He that eats
me, lives by me, dwells in me, and I in him. But the wicked and unfaithful
are not partakers of Christ: Therefore they ear not Christ. From the manner and
instrument of eating. Christ's body is eaten by faith alone: For, we apprehend
Christ with his benefits by faith only; and Christ's body is the meat and food
of the soul, not of the belly; of the heart, not of the mouth; as it is well
expressed in Luthers Catechism: These words: FOR YOU, require believing or
faithful hearts. But the wicked and hypocrites are destitute of faith:
Therefore they receive not Christ's body. Christ in the Supper offers his body
to be eaten of them only, for whom he offered himself on the Cross. But he
offered himself on the Cross for the faithful only, not for the wicked and
hypocrites: I pray not for the world, but for them which believe. This is my
body, John 17.9.
which is given for you. John 6.36.
Christ's body is the quickening bread, which whosoever receives, receives life
therewithal. For Christ's spirit is not separate from his body. He that eats
my flesh, dwells in me, and I in him. But the wicked receiving the signs,
receive not life. Therefore the wicked receive the signs without the things
signified. The unfaithful eat and drink their own damnation: Therefore the do
not eat Christ's body and blood. The argument is of force by the rule of
Contraries. For, To eat their own damnation, is, through incredulity and
abusing of the Sacraments, What is to eat his own damnation.
to be abalienated and repelled from Christ and all his blessings: or through
abusing of the Sacraments, being received without faith and repentance,
grievously to offend God: and so to draw upon themselves temporal and
everlasting punishment except they repent. What it is to eat Christ.
Contrariwise, To eat Christ, is through faith to be made partakers of his
merit, efficacy, and benefits. For no man can eat Christ, and not withal be
made by faith partaker of his merit, efficacy, and gifts. No man therefore can
both eat Christ, and withal eat his own damnation. 1 Cor. 10.11.
Paul says, Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of
Devils, then bereaves he the wicked of some thing in the Lords Table, whereof
they can have no part: But they at the Lords Table partake of the signs, bread
and wine: Therefore he depriveth them of the participation of Christ's body and
blood, the things signified. Object. Ye cannot; that is, with a good conscience
and to salvation. Ans. This is a false gloss. For the Apostle reasons not
from an inconvenience, but from an impossibility. Ye ought not to partake with
them that sacrifice to Idols: why? because this is to partake with Devils. But
it is impossible that ye should be partakers of the Table of the Devils, Mat.
6.24.
and of the Lords Table, because soothly, it is impossible to serve two
Masters, as Christ speaks; No man can serve two Masters: Ye cannot serve God
and Mammon: so the Apostle also speaks in the same sense, Ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of Devils. Mat. 15.25.
It is not meet to cast the childrens bread unto dogs. But Christ's body is the
childrens bread, that is, the bread of the faithful. Mat. 7.6.
Therefore Christ casts not his body to dogs, to wit, to the wicked, contrary
to his own doctrine, Give not holy things to dogs, nor cast pearls to swine.
August. lib. 21. c. 25. de Civit. Dei. and in lo. tract. 26. and 59. and in
senten. Prosp. c. 3.39. Ambros. Sermon. de coena.
Austine, and Prosper. Ambrose says, Although the Sacraments or signs suffer
themselves to be taken and touched by the unworthie, yet these men cannot be
partakers of the spirit, whose infidelity or unworthiness contradicts so
great holiness. And a little after, But as for those who in word only with dry
hearts and minds (that is, without affection and without understanding) are
present at these sacred mysteries, or further be partakers of the gifts
therein; they indeed lick the rock, but they neither suck honey thence, nor
oil: because they are not quickened with any sweetness of charity, or fatness
of sanctity of the holy Ghost: they neither judge themselves, nor discern the
Sacraments, but unreverently frequent and use these his holy gifts and
blessings, as common meats: and impudently intrude themselves into the Lords
Table in a filthy garment, for whom it had been better with a millstone about
their neck to have been drowned in the sea, then with an unclean conscience to
have taken one morsel at the Lords hands, who to this very day creates,
sanctifies, blesses, and divides to godly receivers his true and sacred body.

The causes for which the wicked are said to cate unto themselves damnation.
Now for these causes the wicked eat unto themselves, and draw on themselves
damnation: they discern not the Lords body, and tread under foot the blood of
Christ. His benefits indeed are offered unto them, but they receive them not
with faith, and so mock God, while they profess that they receive the benefits
of Christ, when as they do, or mind nothing less, and add this new offense
to their other sins. they condemn themselves by their own judgment. For
approaching unto the Lords Table, they profess that they accept of this
doctrine, and do believe no salvation to be without Christ: and yet in the
mean season are conscious unto themselves, that they are hypocrites, and so
condemn themselves. Therefore false is their objection, who say thus, The
wicked eat damnation unto themselves: Therefore they eat Christ's body. Ans.
Nay, rather the contrary follows; They eat damnation: Therefore not Christ's
body. For, To eat Christ, and To eat damnation, are contraries; which cannot
stand together. Repl. 1. They eat unworthily: Therefore they eat. Answ. I grant
they eat; but they eat not Christ: For the text says expressly, Whosoever shall
eat this bread unworthily. 1 Cor. 11.7.
Repl. Christ is not a Savior only, but a Judge also. Answ. He is a Judge not
of them by whom he is eaten, but of them of whom he is despised and rejected.
For of them which eat, he says, He which eats me* shall live by me. John
6.57.
But of them which despise him, he proclaims, Depart from me all ye that work
iniquity. Matt. 7.23.
As therefore the Gospel, being believed, is the savor of life unto life; and
being despised, is the savor of death unto death: So Christ, being eaten,
quickens; but being contemned, judges the eater. But he is then despised,
when in the word and sacraments he is offered to the unfaithful, but is
refused or rejected through infidelity. Repl. 3. They are guilty of Christ's
body: Therefore they eat it. Ans. The cause of their guilt is not the eating of
Christ, but the eating of the bread without Christ; because it is said, He
that eats of this bread unworthily. The abuse then of the sign is the
contempt of Christ; as the defacing of the Kings Charter or Seal is an injury
to the Prince himself, and a matter of treason. Repl. 4. But how eat the wicked
damnation unto themselves, seeing it is a good work to receive the Sacrament?
Ans. It is a good work by it self, but not unto the wicked. The receiving of
the Sacrament is a good work when the true and right use is adjoined: otherwise
it is made not a commanded, but a forbidden work, as also God says; He that
kills a bullock, Isa. 66.3.
is as if he slew a man. So likewise Paul: This is not to eat the Lords body.
And again: 1 Cor. 11.20. Romans 2.26.
If thou be a transgresser of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.
Else might we thus conclude; The receiving of Christ's body is a good work:
Therefore the wicked by that receipt cannot be made guilty of Christ's body.

3. What the right and lawful use of the Supper is.
THe right and lawful use of the Supper is, When the faithful receive in the
Church the Lords bread and his cup, and show forth his death, to this end, that
this receiving may be a pledge of their union with Christ, and an application
of the whole benefit of our redemption and salvation. It consists in three
things: 1. When the rites and ceremonies instituted of Christ are retained and
observed; yet so, that they be not observed of one or two privately, bu^ in a
convenient and lawful assembly of the Church, whether great or small: and the
rites instituted are, That the Lords bread be broken, distributed, and
received; and the Lords cup given to all that communicate, in remembrance of
Christ's death. 2. When the rights are observed of those persons for whom Christ
did institute them; that is, when the bread and wine is not distributed and
received of others then of whom the Lord would have it received: namely not of
his enemies, but of his ^isciples, which are the faithful. For, the observing
of the rite without faith and repentance, is not the use, but the abuse of it.
3. When the Supper is received, and the whole action directed to the right end
appointed by Christ: which is, in commemoration and remembrance of the Lords
death, and for confirmation of our faith, and to show our thankfulness.

Quest. 82. Are they also to be admitted to the Supper, who in confession and
life declare themselves to be unbeleevers and ungodly?
Ans. No. For by that means the Covenant of God is profaned, and the wrath of
God is stirred up against the whole assembly 1 Cor. 11.20, 34. Isa. 1.1. etc.
and 66.3. Jerem. 21. Psa. 50.16. etc.
: wherefore the Church, by the commandment of Christ and his Apostles, using
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, ought to drive them from the Supper, till
they shall repent and change their manners.

The Explication.
Who are to be admitted to the Supper.
THey are to be admitted of the Church to the Lords Supper, Who are of a fit age
to prove themselves, and to re-call to mind, and meditate on the Lords death,
according to that commandment: Do this in remembrance of me. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread. Show forth the Lords death till he
come: Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.2^, 28.
Therefore the infants of the Church, though they be reckoned among the
faithful, yet they are exempted from the use of the Sacrament. Who are
baptized, and by baptism made members of the Church: For in the Supper, the
covenant plighted with God in baptism is renewed: Therefore in old time none
might eat of the Passover, except he were first circumcised. So that Turks,
Jews, and other aliants from the Church are to be debarred of the Supper. Who
in words and deeds profess true repentance and faith, or they who express and
show a profession of faith and repentance in the actions of their life, whether
they do this truly and sincerely, or of secret and hidden hypocrisy: For of
things concealed the Church judges not. Therefore it admits all whom it may
judge to be Christ's members; that is, whom it hears and sees professing
faith and repentance in public confession and outward actions, whether they be
truly godly, or hypocrites not yet unmasked. But they are not to be admitted,
whosoever simply do avouch that they believe all things, and yet live wickedly:
for he that says he believes, and has not works, is a liar, and denies in
deed that which he affirms in words; according to that of the Apostle, T^^.
1.^6.
They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, and are
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. So S. James
shows, James 2.20. Why they only who profess faith and repentance are to be
admitted to the Supper.
That faith which is without works is dead. The reasons why they are to be
admitted only who both by their profession and life profess faith and
repentance, are these: Profaning of Gods covenant. What it is to profane Gods
covenant. Gods covenant two ways profaned.
Because the Church should profane Gods covenant, if it should admit
unbeleevers and men impenitent: For he that does a thing, and he that
consents unto it, are both obnoxious to the same law. To profane the Covenant
of God, is, to commend and acknowledge them for the confederates, or friends
and fellows of God, who are Gods enemies; and so to make God such a one as has
entered a covenant, and is in league with hypocrites and wicked men. Now the
covenant of God is two ways profaned: namely, as well by communicating and
imparting the sign of the covenant to them unto whom God promises nothing; as
by receiving and using the signs without faith and repentance. For, not only
they profane the covenant, who being as yet impenitent, take the signs of the
covenant unto them; but they also who wittingly and willingly give the signs
unto those whom God has shut from his covenant. They make therefore God a
fellow and friend of the wicked; and the sons of the devil they make the sons
of God, whosoever reach the signs to the wicked. Fear of Gods w^ath.
They are not to be admitted to the Supper, who profess not faith and
repentance both in life and confession: because, If such should be admitted,
the Church should stir up the anger of God against her self, as of whom
wittingly and willingly this should be committed. Now, that by this means the
wrath of God is stirred up against the Church, 1 Cor. 11.31.
the Apostle sufficiently witnesses, saying; For this cause many are weak and
sick among you, and many sleep. For if we would judge our selves, we should not
be judged. God therefore is angry with the consenters or winkers at the
profanation of the Sacrament, and so punishes them, because he punishes the
wicked, whom they, consenting thereto, admitted: for by both the Supper of the
Lord is alike profaned. Christ's commandment.
Christ has commanded that the wicked be not admitted. And if any deny that
any such commandment is extant, yet the substance and tenor of the
commandment shall be easily proved: For Christ instituted his Supper for his
disciples, and to them alone he said, Iuke 22.15, 17, 19, 20.
I have earnestly desired to eat this passover with you. Take this, and part
it among you: This is my body, which is given for you. This cup is the new
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Wherefore the Supper was
instituted for Christ's disciples only; all others, for whom Christ died not,
are excluded. To these three reasons we may here add a fourth. 4. This is an
evident demonstration: They who deny the faith are not to be accounted for
members, no not of the visible Church: But all that refuse to repent deny the
faith; according to that saying of the Apostle, They profess that they know
God, but by works they deny him, Tit. 1.16.
and are abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate:
Therefore they who refuse to repent are not to be reckoned members, no not of
the visible Church; and therefore are not to be admitted to the Sacraments of
the Church, but to be secluded, as aliants, from them, until they repent and
change their evil manners. But yet, for all this, those hypocrites are to be
admitted, together with the godly, unto the Supper, who are not as yet
manifested; because they profess in confession and outward actions faith and
repentance. But none ought to approach thither but true believers; for, these
only excepted, all others yea, even those hypocrites which are not as yet
manifested, eat and drink unto themselves damnation, and profane the Lords
sacred Supper. Object. The Church profaneth the covenant, if it admit the
impenitent, Answ. To the Antecedent we answer, that the Church sins not in
admitting hypocrites, to wit, as yet concealed, and not unmasked to the view of
the world, seeing the Church is forced to acknowledge them for sincere members,
who confess with their mouths, and counterfeit repentance. It should sin
indeed, if wittingly and willingly it admitted open and professed hypocrites,
which in word or deed deny faith and repentance. Rep. But many impenitent
persons intrude themselves, and profane the covenant, especially where
excommunication a part of Church discipline flourishes not; and these the
Church admits without sin: Therefore it offends not in admitting others
which deny repentance. Ans. The Church herein sins not, not because it is no
sin to admit the unrepentant; but because it admits them without knowledge
that they are such. But the impenitent persons themselves, who press unto this
table, profane the covenant; not to the impeachment of the Church, or them that
communicate with them, but of themselves: for they procure unto themselves
damnation. Nevertheless, it is the duty of the Church to observe diligently
what manner of men it admits; and the Minister of the Church is there
excused, where excommunication is not authorized: yet so, that he give not
willingly the Sacrament to the abusers thereof, but be instant in warning and
reproving them, and wish them to take heed of, and avoid their abuses. For,
Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. But the sin
shall lie on others, even on them who commit the abuse, and on them who wink
with both their eyes thereat.

OF THE PASSOVER.
SEeing it is aforesaid, that the Lords Supper succeeded the Passover, it
shall not be impertinent to declare here in brief the doctrine of the
Passover. The Questions concerning the Passover are these: 1. What it was. 2.
What were the ends and uses thereof. 3. What are the allegories or resemblances
of the rites of the Paschall lamb. 4. Whether it be now abrogated, and what
succeeded in place thereof.


1. What the Passover was.

THe Passover was a solemn eating of a Lamb, enjoined the Israelites by God
that this ceremony, being yearly performed throughout every house, might be a
memorial unto them of their deliverance out of Egypt, but should especially
signify unto the faithful their sparituall freedom from sin and death by
Christ, which was to be sacrificed or slain on the cross, and to be eaten by
faith. Or, It was a Sacrament of the ancient Church, which by Gods commandment
was to be celebrated with the yearly slaying and eating in every family of the
Jews a lamb of a year old, to be a remembrance unto hem of the benefits of
their delivery out of Egypt, and a seal of the promise of grace touching
remission of sins for the sacrifice of the Messiah. Pascha the Greek word,
comes from the Hebrew Pesach a Passover, derived of Pasach, which signifies,
To pass over. This Sacrament and whole solemnity had his name from the passing
over of the Angel, who seeing the blood of the Lamb on the Israelites upper
door-posts, passed over, and spared their firstborn, when he slew all the
firstborn of the Egyptians. The history of the institution of the Passover is
extant Exodus 12. God commanded that the killing of the Lamb should be executed
with certain and diverse ceremonies. The rites and ceremonies of the passover.
For, A lamb of a year old, a male without blemish, was to be separated from
the flock, the tenth day of the first month called Nisan, or Abib, according
to the number of the families, for every household a lamb; and was to be slain
four days after, that is, the fourteenth day at even, and the posts and
lintels, or upper cheeks of the doors of their houses were to be sprinkled with
his blood: then was he to be roasted, and eaten whole, and in haste, with
unleavened bread and sour herbs; and they that did eat it stood with their
loins girt, their shoes on their feet, and their staves in their hands. Exodus
12 11, 23.
Of this ceremony, says God, It is the Lords Passover. The blood shall be a
token for you upon the houses where ye are, that when I see the blood, I may
pass over you. This feast God would have to be yearly, that is, once every
year seven whole days celebrated with great solemnity: Exodus 12.14, 15.
And this day shall be unto you as a remembrance: and ye shall keep it an holy
feast unto the Lord, throughout your generations ye shall keep it an holy
ordinance for ever. Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread, etc. Look Exodus
23.15. Levit. 15.5. Deuteronomy. 16.1.

2. What the ends and uses of the Passover were.

FIve ends of the institution of the passover are specified, Exodus 12. To be a
confirmation of the promise of the Angels passover, and of the saving of the
Israelites firstborn.
That the blood of the lamb sprinkled on the posts might be a sign of the
Angel-which should pass over the Israelites, and save their firstborn; as it
is said, ver. 13. And the blood shall be a token for you upon the houses where
you are, that when I see the blood, I may pass over you. This end, after the
first performance of the rite, and execution of the passover, ceased
forthwith, although the analogy thereof remain for ever. For God both
heretofore spared, and now spares the faithful for Christ's blood shed; that
is, for it remitteth their sins, as in the second end is declared. To be a type
of Christ.
That it might be a figure of the Messiah his sacrifice to come or a sign of the
deliverance to be performed by Christ, and of Gods grace toward his Church:
this was the principal end of the yearly passover. Exodus 12.45. John 19.36.
This is thus proved: It is said, Ye shall not break a bone thereof: This
figure, John says, was then fulfilled when Christ's bones were not broken on
the cross; therefore the lamb was a type of Christ, and of his sacrifice.
Again, Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: 1 Cor. 5.7.
Therefore the paschall lamb signified Christ, and the sacrificing thereof
represented the sacrificing of Christ. Besides, the Church understood the
significations of other sacrifices, that they were types of the sacrifices of
the Messiah (for the Fathers of the old Church were not so brutish, as to hope
for remission of sins by the blood of bulls:) much more therefore did they by
faith behold the Messiah and his sacrifice in the Paschall lamb Finally, John
calls Christ The Lamb of God: Revel. 13.8.
and, the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world; to wit, because
he was prefigured by that lamb which was slain to be the passover. For a
remembrance of their delivery out of Egypt. Exodus 12.15. Deuteronomy 16.3.
To be a memorial of the first passover, and of the delivery out of Egypt. For
God would, that the memory of so great a benefit should be preserved among his
people, lest their posterity should wexe unthankful. Seven days shall thou
eat unleavened bread, even the bread of tribulation, (for thou came out of
the land of Egypt in haste) that thou may remember the day when thou came
out of the land of Egypt, all the days of thy life. To be an occasion of
public concourse to praise God for this benefit. Exodus 12.16.
That it might be a bond of public assemblies, and maintenance of
ecclesiastical Ministry: In the first day shall be an holy assembly. To
distinguish Israel from other people. Exodus 12.43, 48.
That it might be a Sacrament whereby to distinguish Gods people from other
nations: No stranger shall eat thereof. But if a stranger dwell with thee, and
will observe the passover of the Lord, let him circumcise all the males that
belong unto him, and then let him come and observe it; and he shall be as one
that is born in the land: For no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

3. The allegories or resemblances between Christ and the Paschal lamb.

FOr confirmation and illustration of the principal end of the passover, the
consideration of the resemblances of such rites as God prescribed to be
observed in the killing and eating the Paschall lamb, may much avail.

A Collation of the type, and the thing signified by the type.

THE TYPE WAS, THE THING SIGNIFIED IS, 1. A Lamb out of the flock, 1. Christ
very or true man, Isa. 53. John 1. 2. Without blemish, set apart, 2 Without
sin, Isa. 53. Heb. 7. 3. To be slain and roasted, 3. Who suffered and died, 1
Cor. 5. 4. Without breaking any bone, 4. Without having his bones broken, John
19. 5. About evening. 5. In the end of the world, Heb. 1. and 9. 6. The posts
were to be sprinkled wit^ his blood, 6. His satisfaction was imputed unto us,
Isa. 53. Romans 3. 7. That the Destroyer might pass over the Israelites hous^s.
7. That we might be delivered from everlasting death, Heb 2. 8. He was to be
eaten, and that in every family. 8. There must be in man an applying of this
death of Christ to himself by faith, Romans 1. John 6. 9. He was to be eaten
all. 9. This application must be according to all the Articles of faith, 2 Timothy
3. 10. Without leavened bread. 10. Without hypocrisy, 1 Cor. 5. 11. With sour
herbs. 11. With patience of the cross, Matt. 10. 12. Hastily, and in the habit
of travelers. 12. With a desire of profiting, and expectation of an heavenly
life, Matthew. 13. Heb. 13. 13. Of the Circumcised alone. 13. The regenerate
only eat him, and he is profitable to them alone, and they only take not the
Sacraments to their condemnation, Joh. 6. Heb. 13. 1 Cor. 11.

4. Whether the ancient passover be now abrogated.

THat the ancient passover is now by Christ's coming abrogated, with all other
types whatsoever, prefiguring the Messiah to come, is clear: 1. Out of the
whole disputation of the Apostle to the Hebrews, touching the abolishment of
the legal shadows, Heb. 7.12.
which abolishment is now performed in the New Testament. If the priesthood be
changed, then of necessity must there be a change of the law. In that he says,
a New Testament, he has abrogated the Old. 2. From the fulfilling and
performance of those legal shadows. These things were done, that the Scripture
should be fulfilled; Not a bone of him shall be broken. John 19.36.
Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. 1 Cor. 5.7.
3. From the substituting of the New Testament in place thereof: For Christ,
when he was ready to die, and to sacrifice himself as the true Passover,
ended the ceremony of the Paschall lamb with a solemn banquet; and thenceforth
instituted and ordained a Supper to be observed by his Church in place thereof.
I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Luke 22.15, 19.
Do this in remembrance of me. Where he commands, that we celebrate and
solemnize the supper in memory of him, not the ancient passover. As then
Baptism succeeded Circumcision; so the Lords Supper succeeded the Passover in
the new Testament.

Certain conclusions of the Supper.

1. THe Supper of the Lord is a sacrament of the new Testament, wherein,
according to the commandment of Christ, Bread and Wine is distributed and
received in the assembly of the faithful, in remembrance of Christ: which is,
that Christ might testify unto us, that he feeds us with his body and blood
delivered and shed for us to eternal life, and that we also might, for these
his benefits, give solemn thanks unto him.

2. The first and principal end and use of the Lords Supper is, That Christ
might therein testify unto us, that he died for us, and does feed us with his
blood and body unto everlasting life, that so by this restification he might
cherish and increase in us our faith, and so consequently this spiritual food
and nourishment. The second end is thanksgiving for these benefits of Christ,
and our public and solemn profession of them, and our duty toward Christ. The
third is, the distinguishing of the Church from other sects. The fourth, that
it might be a bond of mutual love and dilection. The fifth, that it might be a
bond of our assemblies and meetings.

3. That first end and use, which is the confirmation of our faith in Christ,
the Supper of the Lord has, because Christ himself gives this bread and drink
by the hands of his Ministers, to be a memorial of him; that is, to admonish
and put us in remembrance by this sign, as by his visible word, that he died
for us, and is the food of eternal life unto us, while he makes us his
members: both because he has annexed a promise to this rite, that he will feed
those who eat this bread in remembrance of him, with his own body and blood,
when he says, This is my body; and also because the holy Ghost does by this
visible testimony move our minds and hearts more firmly to believe the promise
of the Gospel.

4. There is then in the Lords Supper a double meat and drink,; one external,
visible, terrene; namely, bread and wine: and another internal. There is also
a double eating and receiving; an external and signifying, which is the
corporal receiving of the bread and wine; that is, which is performed by the
hands, mouth, and senses of the body: and an internal invisible, and
signified, which is the fruition of Christ's death, and a spiritual ingraffing
into Christ's body; that is, which is not performed by the hands and mouth of
the body, but by the spirit and faith. Lastly, there is a double administer and
dispenser of this meat and drink; an external, of the external, which is the
Minister of the Church, delivering by his hand bread and wine: and an
internal, of the internal meat, which is Christ himself, feeding us by his
body and blood.

5. Not the body and blood of Christ, but the bread and wine are the signs
which serve for confirmation of our faith: for the body and blood of Christ are
received, that we may live for ever. But the bread and wine are received, that
we may be confirmed and assured of that heavenly food, and daily more and more
enjoy it.

6. Neither is the bread changed into the body of Christ, nor the wine into the
blood of Christ; neither does the body and blood of Christ succeed in their
place, they being abolished: neither is Christ's body substantially present in
the bread, or under the bread, or where the bread is; but in the right use of
the Lords Supper, the holy Ghost uses this symbol, as an instrument to stir
up faith in us, by which he more and more dwells in us, ingraffeth us into
Christ, and makes us through him to be just and righteous, and to draw
eternal life from him.

8. Now, when Christ says, This; that is, This bread is my body, and, This cup
is my blood, the speech is sacramental, or metonymicall; because the name of
the thing signified is attributed to the sign it self; that is, it is meant,
that the bread it the sacrament or sign of his body, and does represent him,
and does testify, that Christ's body is offered for us on the cross, and is
given to us to be food of eternal life: and therefore is the instrument of the
holy Ghost to maintain and increase this food in us, 1 Cor. 10.
as S. Paul says, The bread is the communion of the body of Christ: that is,
it is that thing by which we are made partakers of Christ's body. And elsewhere
he says, We have been all made to drink into one Spirit. The same is the
meaning also, when it is said, that the bread is called Christ's body for a
similitude which the thing signified has with the sign; namely, that Christ's
body nourishes the spiritual life, as bread does the corporal life: and for
that assured and certain joint-receiving of the thing and the sign in the
right use of the sacrament And this is the sacramental union of the bread,
which is showed by a sacramental kind of speaking, but no such local
conjunction as is by some imagined.

9. As therefore the body of Christ signifies both his proper and natural
body, and his sacramental body, which is the bread of the Eucharist; so the
eating of Christ's body is of two sorts: one sacramental, of the sign to wit,
the external and corporal receiving of the bread and wine; the other real or
spiritual, which is the receiving of Christ's very body it self. And, to
believe in Christ dwelling in us by faith, is, by the virtue and operation of
the holy Ghost, to be ingraffed into his body, as members to the head, and
branches into the vine: and so to be made partakers of the fruit of the death
and life of Christ. Whence it is apparent, that they are falsely accused, who
thus teach, as if they made either the bare signs only to be in the Lords
Supper, or a participation of Christ's death only, or of his benef^^s, or of the
holy Ghost; excluding the true, real, and spiritual communion of the very
body of Christ it self.

10. Now the right use of the Supper is, when the faithful observe this rite
instituted by Christ in remembrance of Christ: that is, to the stirring and
raising up of their faith and thankfulness.

11. As in this right use the body of Christ is sacramentally taken: so also
without this use (as by unbeleevers and hypocrites) it is eaten sacramentally
indeed, but not really; that is, the sacramental symboles or signs, bread and
wine, are received, but not the things themselves of the sacrament, to wit, the
body and blood of Christ.

12. This doctrine of the Supper of the Lord is grounded upon very many, and
those most sound and firm reasons. All those places of Scripture confirm it,
which speak of the Lords Supper; and Christ, calling not any invisible thing in
the bread, but the very visible and broken bread it self, his body delivered
or broken for us: which, whereas it cannot be meant properly, himself adds
an exposition, that that bread is truly received in remembrance of him: which
is, as if he had said, That the bread is a sacrament of his body. So likewise
he says, The Supper is the new testament, which is spiritual, one, and
everlasting. And Paul says, It is the communion of the body and blood of
Christ; because all the faithful are one body in Christ, who cannot stand
together with the communion of the devils. Likewise he makes one and the same
ingraffing into Christ's body by one spirit, to be both in baptism and in the
Lords supper. Moreover, the whole doctrine and nature of Sacraments confirm the
same: all which represent to the eyes the same spiritual communion of Christ
to be received by faith, which the word or promise of the Gospel declares unto
the ears: Therefore they are called by the names of the things signified, and
in their right use have the receiving of the things adjoined unto them. The
articles also of our faith confirm it, which teach, that Christ's body is a true
humane body, not present at once in many places; as being now received into
heaven, and there to remain until the Lord return to Judgment: and further,
that the communion of saints with Christ is wrought by the holy Ghost, not by
any entrance of Christ's body into the bodies of men. Wherefore this sentence
and doctrine is of all the purer antiquity of the Church with most great and
manifest consent held and professed.

13. The Supper of the Lord differs from Baptism, 1. In the rite and manner
of signifying; because the dipping into the water or washing, signifies a
remission and purging out of sin by the blood and spirit of Christ, and our
society and fellowship with Christ in his afflictions and glorification. But
the distributing of the bread and wine signifies the death of Christ to be
imputed unto us unto remission of sins, and our selves ingraffed into Christ to
become his members. 2. They differ in their special use, because Baptism is
the testimony of our regeneration, and of the covenant made between us and God,
and of our receiving into the Church. But the Lords Supper testifies, that we
are ever to be nourished by Christ remaining in us, and that the covenant made
between God and us, shall ever be established and ratified unto us, and that we
for ever shall abide in the Church and body of Christ. 3. They differ in the
persons to whom they are to be given: Baptism is given to all those who are to
be accounted for members of the Church, whether they be of years and
understanding, or infants. The Lords Supper is to be given to them only who are
able to understand and celebrate the benefits of Christ, and to examine
themselves. 4. They differ in the often celebrating of them: Baptism is to be
received but once only; because the covenant of God being once made, is always
firm and of force to the penitent. But the Supper is often to be received;
because an often renewing and recalling of that covenant to our remembrance is
necessary for our faith. 5. They differ in the order which is to be observed in
the use of them: Because Baptism is to be given before the Supper, and the
Supper may not be given unto any, except he be first baptized.

14. They come worthily to the Lords Supper who examine themselves, that is,
are endued with true faith and repentance. They who find not this in
themselves, ought neither to come without it, lest they eat and drink their own
judgment; not to defer repentance wherewith they should come, lest they draw
upon themselves hardness of heart, and eternal pains.

15. The Church ought to admit all those unto it, who profess themselves to
embrace the ground and foundation of Christian doctrine, and to have a purpose
to obey it: but those must be repelled who will not desist, either from their
errors and blasphemies, or from manifest sins against their conscience, being
admonished by the Church, and convicted of error.

16. The Pope has corruptly taken away the breaking of the bread from the rite
of the Supper, and bereaved the people of the use of the cup. Corruptly also
has he transformed the Supper of the Lord, with adding so many ceremonies not
delivered by the Apostles into a theatricall or pageant-like Mass, that is,
into a Jewish superstition, and stage-like rounds and conveyances. But more
wicked and idolatrous inventions are these; That the Mass is a propitiatory
sacrifice, wherein Christ is offered by the Mass Priests for the quick and the
dead, and is by the force of consecration substantially present, and abides so
long as those forms of bread and wine remain uncorrupted: and further, does
bestow the grace of God, and other benefits upon them for whom he is offered:
of whom also he is eaten with the mouth of their body, yea, though they have no
good inward motion in them: and lastly, is, being treasured and laid up, and
carried about under those forms, to be worshipped. In respect of these foul
monsters, it is necessary that the Mass be quite and clean abolished out of
the Christian Church. In sum, they are these: 1. Transubstantiation. 2.
Bread-worship. 3. Sacrifice. 4. Maiming of Christ's Supper.

THE APPENDIX OR ADDITION ADJOINING unto the former Treatise of the Supper.
Certain principal arguments of the Consubstantiaries against the sincere
doctrine of the Lords Supper, and the Sacramentaries, as they call them:
together with a refutation of them.
1. THe errors of the Sacramentaries (say they) are, that there are but bare
signs and symboles only in the Supper. Ans. We teach that the things signified
are together with the signs in the right use exhibited and communicated,
albeit not corporally, but in such sort as is agreeable unto Sacraments. 2. The
Sacramentaries say, that Christ is present only according to his power and
efficacy. Ans. We teach that he is present and united with us by the holy
Ghost, albeit his body be far absent from us: like as whole Christ also is
present with his ministry, though diversely according to the one nature. 3. The
Sacramentaries (say they) affirm, that an imaginary, figurative, or spiritual
body of Christ is present, not his essential body. Ans. We never spoke of an
imaginary body, but of the true flesh of Christ, which is present with us,
although it remain in heaven. Moreover, we say, that we receive the bread and
body, but both after a manner proper to each. 4. The Sacramentaries (say they)
affirm, that the true body of Christ which hung on the cross, and his very
blood which was shed for us, is distributed, and is spiritually received of
those only who are worthy receivers: as for the unworthy, they receive nothing
besides the bare signs, unto their condemnation. Ans. All this we grant, as
being agreeing to the word of God, the nature of sacraments, the analogy of
faith, and the communion of the faithful.

Certain arguments of the Consubstantiaries, whereby they go about to
overthrow our doctrine of the Lords Supper; together with the refutation of
them.

1. THe words of the institution are open and plain, This is my body; This is
my blood. Ans. They allege these words against themselves: for they say, That
the body of Christ is received really in, under, with the bread: when Christ
says, that the very bread is the body. Wherefore they do a double injury unto
the Church: First, while they thrust upon the Church their own words for
Christ's. Secondly, while they imagine that the Church perceives not these
speeches to be diverse, In the bread is my body; and, The bread is my body. They
accuse Christ also for a liar: for they deny that the bread is his body, but
that his body is in the bread. Let them look therefore unto it, how they will
answer Christ at the last judgment for this blasphemy and reproach. The Papists
also do more retain the very words of Christ: But these retain not the words,
but follow the sense and meaning. We must see therefore which part follows
it. Ours shall be proved in the end. Repl. Christ adds an exposition of his
mind, Which is given for you; and, Which is shed for you. Ans. First, this is a
begging of that which is in question: for they take as granted, that the bread
is properly called the body, which yet lies upon them to prove; for it is a
sacramental manner of speaking. Secondly, we return their own reason upon
them, by inverting it thus; The body of Christ properly so called was given for
us: But the bread was not given for us: Therefore the bread is not the body
properly so called. Likewise, as the bread is the body broken, so the breaking
of the bread is the breaking of the body: But the breaking of the body is the
crucifying thereof: Therefore the bread broken is but sacramentally and by
representation the body broken.

2. They reason from the author who said it, and is true. Ans. This is also a
begging of that which is in question. They must prove that Christ said, his
body was in, under, with the bread. And further, a man may speak figuratively,
and yet speak perspicuously and plainly. Repl. He is also omnipotent: therefore
he is able to be everywhere, and so in the bread. Ans. Albeit he were able to
bring to pass, that two flat repugnant things should be true together: yet
will he not do it. Again, God is not able to work contradictories, or things
flat repugnant, because he is true. Now, to will those things which are
contradictory argues a liar: Wherefore we deny not the truth and omnipotency
of God, but these men's lies; nay rather, we defend Gods truth, affirming, that
God does that which he spoke. But they oppugn it, making contrary wills to be
in God. Repl. Christ's body has many prerogatives not agreeable to our bodies:
as, that he was born of a Virgin, walked on the sea, was at one time and
together in the grave, in hell, and in paradise; and passed through the gates
when they were fast shut. Ans. These examples are partly not matches, and
partly false. For this may agree unto a creature, to walk on the waters, as it
did to Peter: to pass through the gates shut, as it is agreeable to the nature
of a spirit. Again, these examples are not matches, nor of the same quality
with that which is in question; because these do not imply a contradiction. For
when he is said to be born of a Virgin, he is not said withal not to be born
of a Virgin. But, to be both finite and infinite, (as they will have Christ's
body who consubstantiate it with the bread) these imply a contradiction. Now it
is false that they say, that he passed through the gates shut, whereas the gates
might yield and open unto him: as also, that he passed through the door or stone
of the grave, when as it is said, that the Angel did open it: and lastly, when
they say that Christ's body was once and together in more places, which they seem
to have of Austin: but Austin said, That his body was in the grave, his soul in
hell, and his Godhead every where.

3. They reason from a circumstance of the time: the same night in which he
was betrayed. No man which speaks seriously, speaks figuratively: Christ
instituting his Supper, spoke seriously: Therefore without any figure. Ans. I
deny the Major: because by that position, no man that speaks seriously should
speak figuratively, which is most false. God speaks in all Sacraments, though
figuratively, yet seriously: I have earnestly desired (says Christ) to eat
this Passover with you. Wherefore I answer, that he uses not jesting or
obscure figures. This figure is perspicuous, because it is usual, and his
disciples speak so: Where will thou that we go and prepare that thou may eat
the Passover? It is usual also in all Sacraments; it is forcible and
emphaticall, because it expresses the similitude of the sign and the thing
signified, and the certainty of the conjunction of both in the right use and
administration. Again, we invert their reason, and say, Because Christ spoke
seriously, therefore he used a figure which does well express and declare the
thing. Repl. Christ said, This cup is the new testament. In wills and testaments
men speak properly: Christ here instituteth a Sacrament: Therefore he speaks
properly. Ans. I deny the Major, and invert the reason: for seeing he would
institute a Sacrament, therefore he spoke figuratively, calling the Supper the
new testament, which is figuratively to be understood for these two reasons: 1.
Because otherwise there should be two covenants, the one proper, and the other
the Supper. 2. Otherwise also they should be shut out from Gods covenant who
cannot come to the Supper, and all who come to the Supper should be in the
covenant. Object. Christ says, In my blood: Therefore the real blood of
Christ is in the Supper, and is drunk by the mouth. Ans. We conclude the
contrary rather by those words of Christ: because the new testament was made by
Christ's blood shed on the cross, and applied unto us by faith, not drunk by
the mouth; for otherwise they should be excluded from the testament and
covenant, who were not able to come to the Sacrament. Rep There is a great
force in the word New; That which was done in the Old Testament typically, is
done in the New really. Ans. If they add, Therefore done by the mouth of the
body, they bring in more in the conclusion then was in the antecedent; for
there was no type in the old Testament which did signify the eating of Christ
with the mouth. 2. We invert their reason: Christ's body was no otherwise eaten
in the new Testament then in the old: But in the old it was eaten spiritually
only: Co^. 2.17. Hebr. 9.
Therefore in the new also it is so eaten. Rep. The new Testament differs
from the old; because in that were types, in the new is the body it self. Ans.
This difference of the old and new Testament is no where set down in holy
Scripture; that Christ is eaten in the old not really, and in the new
corporally by the mouth. In the places which are alleged out of the Apostle
the body signifie^h that the shadow was only of the old Testament, and was
accomplished and fulfilled by Christ: because there the body is opposed to
those shadows: And further, because he calls it the body of Christ: which
kind of speech shows, that by Christ was wrought accomplishment and
fulfilling of the types and shadows of the old Testament. Moreover, albeit we
have Christ exhibited in the new Testament, and he is there born a man; yet
notwithstanding it does not therefore follow hereof, that his body is in the
bread, but only that it is in the new Testament.

4. They reason from the consent of the Evangelists, and S. Paul. Matthew, as
Theophylact calculateth, writ his Gospel eight years after Christ's ascension,
Mark ten years, Luke fifteen years, Paul twenty years, and all use the same
words. A speech that is often uttered with the same words is not figurative:
Such is the speech of the Lords Supper: Therefore it is not figurative. Ans. It
is false, that a speech often uttered in the same words is not figurative:
because, when a figure is conspicuous, known, and forcible, as this, it is
retained. Again, The Evangelists repeat the words of Christ, because he spoke
figuratively. Often, though it be figurative, is this repeated; He shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost, Mat^h. 3.1^. John 1.33.
and with fire. Moreover, we deny that this speech of Christ's Supper was
repeated by all in the same words: 1. Because Matthew and Mark say, This is my
blood of the new Testament. Luke says, This cup is the new Testament in my
blood. 2. Matthew and Mark say, This is my body. Luke adds, which is given
for you: Paul, which is broken for you. 3. Paul says, That the bread is the
communion of the body of Christ. And albeit in this place he speaks not
purposely of the Supper, yet he stirs up and exhorts unto it. Repl. It is
the same sense and meaning. Answ. The question now is not of the sense and
meaning of the words, but of the identity of the words; that is, whether they
be the same words. Repl. Where there is no mention at all of any figure, there
is no figure. Answ. This is false: For foolish were it, and men should seem to
make show and ostentation of their skill and art, if they should say that they
used a trim figure. And the Scripture also often speaks figuratively, and yet
does it not add withal, it speaks figuratively. Furthermore, they make
mention hereof, when they show, that it consists of the nature of the subject
and the attribute: The body was born of the Virgin, crucified, and so forth:
The bread is made of meal. Secondly, Christ wills this to be done in
remembrance of him: Therefore the bread is called the body, as a memorial of
his body. Thirdly, Matthew and Mark say, This is my blood of the new Testament:
Paul and Luke say, This is the new Testament in my blood. Now the new Testament
is the blood whereby God has bound himself to receive the faithful and
repentant into favor, and they bind themselves to yield faith and obedience
unto him. Fourthly, Paul says, That the bread is the communion of Christ's
body: which is not any corporal eating; 1. Because the faithful are thereby
one body in Christ. 2. Because he compares it with the communion of the altar
in the old Testament, which was not corporal. 3. Because it can agree but to
the faithful only, and not to the wicked. 4. John shows that communion: If
we walk in the light, 1 John 1.7.
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin.And further, this communion whereof Saint Paul
speaks, is our union with Christ, and fruition of all his benefits by faith.
Hither belongs the similitude of the body and the members, the vine and the
branches, which have nothing to do with any corporal eating. This communion
was and is common to all the faithful from the beginning unto the worlds end.
But they could not eat the body of Christ corporally by their mouth. That we
might grow up unto him, by whom all the body is coupled and knit together. Ephesians.
4.15, 16.
He that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit. 1 Cor. 9.17.
And by one spirit are we all baptized into one body. Hereby know we that we
dwell in him, and he in us: 1 John 4.13.
because he has given us of his Spirit. This union therefore is that
communion which is wrought by the holy Ghost; wherefore it is spiritual: For
bread cannot be this communion but by a figure, as it is a sign. Repl. He that
is guilty of the body of Christ, eats it: They who receive unworthily are
guilty of the body of Christ: Therefore they eat it corporally, for spiritually
they cannot; because if they could so eat it, they should not be guilty. Answ.
The Major is false. For he is guilty of Christ's body, who by his sins hangs
it on the cross again, and despises Christ's benefits. For any real eating is
not required to this guilt: but he that will not receive Christ offered by
faith, is thereby made guilty. So the injury done unto the Ark is said to be
done unto the Lord. Repl. They that discern not the Lords body, eat it: But the
guilty discern it not: Therefore they eat it. Ans. It the Major be taken
sacramentally, as of the bread, which is called, and is the body of Christ, it
is true: but if properly, it is false. For, not to discern his body, is, not to
give due honor to it, to contemn it; yea, not to receive the thing signified.
So, They are said to tread under foot the Son of God, Heb. 10.29.
and to count the blood of the testament as an unholy thing, who contemn him.

5. They reason from the testimony of the Fathers, and the godly of ancient
times in the purer state of the Church. Ans. The sayings of the Fathers are to
be understood sacramentally, or of our spiritual communion. Repl. 1. Augustine
says, Thou shall receive this in the bread, which hung on the cross: and this
is the cup, which was shed out of Christ's side. Answ. In the bread, as in the
sign, that is, together with the sign, thou shall receive the thing
signified. When we receive the bread, we are certain that we have Christ.
Repl. 2. Cyril upon John says, By natural participation, not only
spiritually, but also corporally: not only according to the spirit, but also
according to the flesh corporally and essentially. Answ. Cyril speaks not of
the manner of eating, but of the thing which was to be eaten. He shows that
we are made partakers not only of Christ's spirit, but also of his humane
nature. Now he understands a spiritual communion: 1. Because he cites
those places concerning it, John 6. and 1 Cor. 10. where no mention is made of
corporal eating. 2. He speaks of the presence of Christ, not in the bread,
but in us. 3. He proves the abiding of Christ in us, by the use of the Supper,
not by any corporal eating. 4. He so describes it, that he says, It shall
continue in the life to come. 5. He speaks of that communion which is proper
unto the saints. Now this is spiritual, for otherwise it should befall also to
the wicked.

The shifts of Consubstantiaries, whereby they go about to elude and shift off
certain of our objections, not all; for more are objected against them.
1. We make not, say they, any Capernaiticall eating. Ans. We demand of them
whether Christ be eaten by the bodily mouth; be it after a gross, or after a
finer manner. But how ever they answer; in that opinion which they hold there
is too too much idolatry: for Christ refuting the Capernaites, does not
distinguish the eating of him into a gross and a finer manner; but says
simply, That his body cannot be eaten with the bodily mouth: for he says, that
he must ascend: And, that the words which he speaks are spirit and life.

2. We maintain not Ubiquity, for there is not a word thereof to be found. Ans.
Here is to be observed the dissension of the adversaries about Ubiquity. But
neither is a word to be found hereof, That the body of Christ is together in
two places. And further, of this their opinion follows Ubiquity: For he that
is together and at one time in more places, must needs be infinite, and
therefore everywhere.

3. We overthrow not the article of Christ's ascension. Ans. Yea, but they do
overthrow it. For, while they hold that as often as the Supper is celebrated,
Christ is corporally eaten, they must needs say that he remains and is
invisible on earth. But he is said to have left the world, to have ascended
from a lower place into an higher, and to remain in heaven until he come to
judgment. Now, that some except, that Christ does descend from heaven as often
as the Supper is administered, it is already refuted.

4. We take not away the doctrine of the properties of Christ's humanity. Ans.
They altogether take it away. For, they will have his humane nature to be such
as is not seen, nor felt, nor limited in place. Rep. But Christ did put off
these infirmities and retained the essential properties. Ans. But these are
very essential properties, which being taken away, the verity also and truth
of his humane nature is taken away. Augustine says, Take away from bodies
their spaces, and they shall be no where.

5. We abolish not the doctrine concerning the communicating of properties of
both natures. Ans. Yea, but they endeavor it: For they apply those properties
of his divine nature, which are affirmed of the whole person in the concrete,
to both natures. I will be with you to the end of the world: This they
understand of both natures; which is all one, as if, when it is said, Christ,
God and man, was circumcised, one should thus conclude: Therefore the Godhead
of Christ was circumcised as well as his flesh. Repl. This only we add, That
those articles belong not unto them. Ans. After this sort all sects may shift
off all testimonies of Scriptures. But they belong hither, and that by a double
right: 1. Because they are written of the body of Christ: But the body of
Christ belongs to the Supper: Therefore these articles also belong hither,
for they show how Christ's body is to be eaten. 2. They belong hither, because
no article of faith is at variance with another. So belongs hither also the
doctrine of Justification, because in the Supper no other justice or
righteousness is to be sought for, but by the blood of Christ.

6. The manner how we eat it is not to be defined. Ans. They commit a double
fault in so saying: 1. When they deny that the manner is to be defined, and so
contradict and gainsay the Scripture, which defines it, and shows that it is
spiritual, and that there is wrought an union with Christ by faith, through
the holy Ghost. 2. They themselves define the manner, as it clearly appears
by their writing.

7. The saying of Durandus is true: We hear the words; we perceive the
motions; we know not the manner; we believe the presence. Ans. Durandus makes
naught either for you, or against us, or for himself, because he was a Papist.
And again, if his saying be rightly understood, we may admit it: We hear the
words, This is my body; not that we eat with our mouth the body of Christ in
the bread. We perceive the motions: that is, we perceive the bread to enter
into our mouth, not the body of Christ. We know not the manner: that is, not
perfectly, to wit, after what manner the holy Ghost is every where whole in
Christ, and in all the Saints, and how he uniteth us in Christ. We believe the
presence: namely, such as is the eating, and as is the union of the members and
in the head.

8. We teach this only, That the body and blood of Christ, is truly,
substantially, and naturally exhibited. We grant that we eat the true body
of Christ. So then is their disputation vain and frivolous: 1. Because they
confess that we are made partakers of the true body of Christ, and that we
must not question of the manner, for this we grant. 2. Because the reasons and
refutation which they bring, are of no weight or moment.

Certain reasons whereby is proved, That the body of Christ is not present,
either In, or Under, or At the bread of the Lords Supper, neither is corporally
eaten Under, With, In, or At the bread.
1. BEcause he took a true humane nature. Whereupon we add also, that we
cannot eat him otherwise than his disciples did in the first Supper. 2. He
truly ascended out of earth into heaven. 3. Such is our eating of him, as his
abiding is in us. 4. All the Saints of the Old and New Testament have the same
union with Christ. 5. Christ only is able to offer himself unto the Father.
Now it is necessary in the use of the Supper, to crave of God remission of
sins. Wherefore, if he be present at the bread, we must crave of him, and so we
offer the bread. But in the New Testament it is not lawful to direct our
prayer to any certain place. 6. The blessings which are promised unto the godly
only, are spiritual. Unto these and other fore-alledged reasons comes the
consent of the ancient Fathers, Ambrose, Athanasius, Austine, Basil, Bid,
Bertram, Chrysostom, Clement Alexandrinus, the Council of Nice, Cyprian,
Cyril, Denis, Gelasius, Gregory the Great, Gregory Nazianzene, Hesichius,
Hierom, Hilary, Irenaeus, Justine, Leo, Macarius, Origin, Procopius, Gaza,
Tertullian, and so forth.

THE SECOND APPENDIX OR ADDITION.
Arguments, whereby the opinion of the Vbiquitaries is refelled, and the truth
of sound doctrine confirmed.
THE FIRST ARGUMENT.
THE Marcionites and Manichees imagined that Christ had not a true and solid
body, but only made show of the shape of a body, so that he seemed only to
have flesh and bones, whereas indeed he had them not. And further, that the
very incarnation, and all the motions and operations of Christ, did but only
seem so in outward appearance, whereas in the truth of the thing there was no
such thing done. Now the opinion of the Vbiquity, and of the real
communicating of the properties of both natures, does raise again from hell
that fantastical dotary and frenzy of those heretics. Therefore it is no
less to be abandoned and banished out of the Church to hell, than that heresy
of the Manichees. That this opinion of Ubiquity does give life again to the
former, we prove. The Ubiquitaries are of opinion, and so teach, that all the
properties of the Godhead were presently, from the very point of Christ's
conception, really effused from the Godhead of the Word into the humane nature
which Christ took. Hence these absurdities will follow: 1. Christ shall not be
truly born of the Virgin, if as touching the nature of his humanity, he was
truly and essentially without the womb of his Mother before he was born; and
after he was born he remained no less truly and substantially, as touching
his humanity, in that self same womb, than before. 2. Christ was not truly
weak in his humane nature, and subject to passions, if he were then also as
touching the same nature partaker of the divine majesty and omnipotency. 3. He
was not truly dead, if also in the time of his death, as touching his soul and
body, he were essentially present every where together with his Godhead: For,
the soul being every where present, could not be really separated, in distance
of places from the body, which also should be everywhere present, and so
neither could the body die, but only in outward appearance and imagination. 4.
He ascended not truly into heaven: but it shall be said to have been only a
vain and imaginary, and fantastical spectacle, if he were in his body
substantially there, before he visibly ascended thither: and after he was
ascended thither, he remained yet in the substantial presence of the same
body, no less truly than before on the earth, yea, and in the very bodies also
of the faithful. If these things so fell out in the truth of the thing; it
will follow that the same body of Christ was indeed at once and together, both
weak and omnipotent, base and glorious, subject to sufferings, and not subject,
dead and alive, limited and unlimited; which is horrible to affirm. For
avoiding therefore of these prodigious and impious absurdities, they will
except, that he was not as touching his body, otherwise than limited, weak
subject to passions, and mortal in the time of his humiliation; because he
had debased himself, and would not show forth that Majesty, communicated unto
his body, before his resurrection. Ans. They interpret amiss that debasing of
himself, of all the glory and Majesty of his humanity hidden and kept close for
a time: whereas it is to be understood in respect of the Divinity of the Word,
in that he would take the form of a servant, that is, the mass of our nature,
and become man. Moreover, it will follow that Christ did show forth the
communicated power and Majesty of his flesh, even then, when he was indeed
weak and limited, or circumscribed in body: as when, shedding tears, he raised
Lazarus from the dead, and when being apprehended by the Jews, he healed
Malcus, whom Peter wounded. Now, what is it else to raise the Marcionites up
again from hell, or in the greatest matter of all others impiously to
blaspheme, if this be not?

The second Argument.
THe blasphemy of Samosatenus, Arrius, and the late Anti-trinitaries, is this:
That Christ-man, is not properly and by nature God, but only by an accidental
participation of Divine properties, majesty, honor, power, and virtue. The
Ubiquitaries also maintain the same consideration of the Godhead of
Christ-man, while they define the personal union by his communicating alone of
properties, whereby the flesh of Christ is made omnipotent and every where. So
that now that man is, and is called God; not that he is properly and by nature
God, but because in finite power, majesty, and glory is given him from God, and
all the gifts of the holy Ghost are bestowed on him without measure. Now this
accidental bestowing of the God head and all the properties, does not make
Christ to be properly and by nature God, but only by divine grace, or God
unproperly so called: because it is not the very essential Godhead of the
Word, but a certain participation thereof, in virtue and efficacy. And
therefore the sounder Fathers objected unto the Arrians, that they took away
the true and eternal Godhead of Christ, when they made him a God, not by
nature but by grace b participation only of dignity and majesty. Therefore,
seeing the Vbiquitaries also equalling our Immanuel with God, by participation
of properties only* take away his true and eternal Godhead, we do
disclaim and accurse this their doctrine as blasphemous and heretical. And,
that they do this, their own words and opinions witness; Brentius in recog.
p. 20 Anar. These. 10. ^^ p. Tubin. and These 25, 26. and Apol. ^agr 29.
as Brentius, and Jacobus Andraeas, and others of them in their writings.
Whence we conclude, that the Ubiquitaries hold the same opinion with the
Artians and the Anti-trinitaries, of the Godhead of Christ-man: that is, that
all esteem him for God, not by nature but only by grace of participation,
new, temporary, created, adopted. If these things be true, Christ shall not be
God and man, Lib. 1. de Trinita.
but a divine man, such as the Ubiquitaries repute him, who (as Servetus) hold
this opinion: That God can communicate the fullness of his Godhead give his
divinity, majesty, power, and glory unto man. But we execrate and detest the
same blasphemy of both.

The third Argument.
NEstorius taught, That the union of God the Word with man was wrought by the
participation only of equality, as touching majesty, honor, power, virtue, and
operation. Neither does he make the difference of the dwelling of the Word in
man's nature, which himself took, and in other Saints, to consist in any other
thing, than in those gifts and graces bestowed by God on man. The self same
also do the Vbiquitaries teach, because they cry that there is no difference
between the inhabiting and dwelling of the God head in Peter, and in Christ;
except it be taken from the communication of the gifts or properties of the
Godhead: and they contend, that by this means, this man, which was taken by
the Word, is God, because the Word does nothing without him, but all things by
him. This is nothing else, than to make Christ man, only God by an accident:
Wherefore, the doctrine of Vbiquity is altogether the same with Nestorius his
heresy. Tert. lib. de Trin page 6. 10.
Tertullian says: If Christ be man only, how then is he present everywhere,
being called upon and invocated, seeing this is not the nature of man, but of
God, to be able to be present in all places? By this testimony is refuted the
Ubiquity of the humane nature in Christ. Object. But the union of the divine
and humane nature in Christ is unseparable: Therefore wheresoever the divine
nature is, there is also the humane nature. Ans. It is true which is said, that
the union is unseparable. The Word never forsakes the nature once assumed and
taken. But the Word is not in the humane nature, as the soul is included in my
body. Wheresoever my body is, there must my soul needs be; neither is my soul
at the same time without my body. But the Word is not so in Christ-man: But he
is so unseparably and personally in the humane nature, as that he is together
also without the humane nature in all the parts of the world, as he fills
all; and in holy men and Angels by his special presence. The personal union
of both natures does not evert the general action and working of his presence
and majesty; neither does it let or hinder the special working of his
presence: because the Word is effectual, and works forcibly in the
regenerate.

The general points wherein the Churches, which profess the Gospel, agree or
disagree in the controversy concerning the Lords Supper.

THey agree in these points: and all his benefits obtained by these for us, by
a true and lively faith, and with earnest and ardent thankfulness, and
applies them unto those which eat and drink, as proper unto them.

They disagree in these points:

1 THat one part contendeth, that these words of Christ, This is my body, must
be understood, as the words sound, which yet that part it self does not
prove: but the other part, that those words must be understood sacramentally,
according to the declaration of Christ and Paul, according to the most certain
and infallible rule and level of the Articles of our Christian faith. 2. That
one part will have the body and blood of Christ to be essentially In, or With
the bread and the wine, and so be eaten, as that together with the bread and
the wine, out of the hand of the Minister, it enters by the mouth of the
receivers into their bodies: but the other part will have the body of Christ,
which in the first Supper sat at the table by the Disciples, now to be and
continue, not here on earth, but above in the heavens above and without this
visible world and heaven, until he descend thence again to judgment, and yet
that we notwithstanding here on earth, as often as we eat this bread with a true
faith, are so fed with his body, and made to drink of his blood, that not only
through his passion and blood shed, we are cleansed from our sins; but are also
in such sort coupled, knit, and incorporated into his true, essential, humane
body, by his Spirit dwelling both in him and us, that we are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones; and are more nearly and firmly knit and united
with him, than the members of our body are united with our head, and so we draw
and have in him and from him everlasting life. 3. That one part will have all,
whosoever come to the Lords Supper, and eat and drink that bread and wine,
whether they be believers, or unbeleevers, to eat and drink corporally, and
with their bodily mouth the flesh and blood of Christ: believers to life and
salvation; unbeleevers to damnation and death: the other holds, that
unbeleevers abuse indeed the outward signs, bread and wine, to their
damnation, but that the faithful only can eat and drink by a true faith, and
the fore-alledged working of the holy Ghost, the body and blood of Christ unto
eternal life.



Quest. 83. What are the keys of the Kingdom of heaven?
ON THE 31. SABBATH.
Ans. Preaching of the Gospel, and Ecclesiastical discipline: by which heaven
is opened to the believers, and is shut against the unbeleevers.

Quest. 84. How is the Kingdom of heaven opened and shut by the preaching of
the Gospel?
Answ. When by the commandment of Christ it is publicly declared to all and
every one of the faithful, that all their sins are pardoned them of God, for
the merit of Christ, so often as they embrace by a lively faith the promise of
the Gospel: but contrarily is denounced to all Infidels and Hypocrites, that so
long the wrath of God and everlasting damnation does lie on them, as they
persist in their wickedness John 20.21, 22 23. Mat. 16.19.
: according to which testimony of the Gospel, God will judge them, as well in
this life, as in the life to come.

Quest. 85. How is the Kingdom of heaven opened and shut by Ecclesiastical
discipline?
Ans. When, according to the commandment of Christ, they who in name are
Christians, but in their doctrine and life show themselves aliens from Christ
Romans 11.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 12.28.
, after they have been some time admonished, will not depart from their errors
or wickedness, are made known unto the Church, or to them that are appointed
for that matter and purpose, of the Church; and if neither then they obey their
admonition, are of the same men by interdiction from the Sacraments shut out
from the Congregation of the Church, and by God himself, out of the Kingdom
of heaven. And again, if they profess, and indeed declare amendment of life,
are received as members of Christ, and his Church Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. 1 Cor.
5.3, 4, 5. 2 These. 3.14, 15. 2 John 10.11. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 5.17.
.

The Explication.
SEeing it has bin showed in the Treatise next going before who are to be
admitted by the Church unto the Lords Supper; very commodiously and fitly shall
this doctrine follow, concerning the power of the keys: wherein, besides other
things, this chiefly is taught; How they who are not to be admitted, must be
restrained and excluded from the Sacraments lest, approaching unto them, they
profane them.

The chief questions are:
1. What the power of the keys given unto the Church is, and what are the
parts thereof. 2. Whether Ecclesiastical discipline and excommunication be
necessary. 3. To whom that power is committed: against whom, and in what order
to be used. 4. To what ends it is to be directed, and what abuses therein are
to be avoided. 5. What that power of the keys committed unto the Church
differs from the Civil power.


1. What the power of the keys given to the Church is, and what are the parts
thereof.
THe power of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, which Christ gave to his
Church, is the preaching of the Gospel, and Ecclesiastical discipline,
whereby heaven is opened to the believing, and shut up against the unbeleeving
and unfaithful. Or it is, the office or charge imposed on the Church by
Christ, of denouncing, by the preaching of the Gospel and Church discipline,
Gods will; and even of declaring the grace of God, and remission of sins unto
the penitent, that is, to them who live in true faith, and repentance: but of
denouncing unto the wicked the wrath of God, and exclusion or banishment from
the Kingdom of Christ, and of casting such out of the Church, as long as they
shall show themselves in doctrine and life estranged from Christ: and of
receiving them again into the Church, when afterward they shall repent. It is
called the power of the keys by a Metaphor or borrowed speech, taken from the
Stewards of men's houses, Why this power is called the keys.
to whom the keys are delivererd in charge: and the keys import a
Steward-ship by a Metonymy or change of names between the sign and the thing
signified thereby; as we use to say, The Scepter or Crown of any Country,
when we intimate and signify thereby the Kingdom of that Country: Wherefore
Paul says, 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 4.1.
The Church is the house of the living God. The Ministers of the Church are
Gods Stewards. For look what a faithful Steward is in his Masters house,
ordering all things at his Masters beck; the same a faithful Minister is in
Gods Church. Wherefore the denouncing of Gods will in his Church, is executed
by the Ministers, as the Stewards in his name. God himself is author of this
Ministry, who gave this power and privilege to his Church, and entitled it by
the name of the Keys, saying unto Peter; I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of heaven: that is, the office or power of shutting and opening the
Kingdom of God: and unto all his Disciples, Whatsoever ye bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven, Mat. 18.18.
and whatsoever ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. So then the Keys
are that power of opening and shutting, binding and loosing; and are called
Keys from the efficacy of this power. For the Church verily by the Word of God
in Christ's name (whose place the Ministers supply) does open and shut heaven,
bind and loose men; and the holy Ghost works powerfully by the Word, John
20.23.
as Christ promised: Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them;
and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

Now the chief and principal parts of this power of the Keys are two: The
preaching of the Gospel, Two parts of the power of the Keys.
or Ministry of the Word; and Church judgment, which is called also
spiritual Discipline or Jurisdiction, whereunto Excommunication belongs.
With either of these two parts the Church shuts and opens, binds and
loses. By the preaching of the Word it shuts and binds, when it
denounces to Hypocrites and Infidels Gods wrath and eternal damnation, until
they repent: and it opens and loses, when it preaches to the faithful and
penitent remission of sins and Gods favor through Christ. By Ecclesiastical
judgment it shuts and binds, when it excommunicateth outrageous and
refractary, or stubborn persons; that is, excludes them from the communion of
the Sacraments, the Church and Kingdom of God: Again, it opens and loses
thereby, when it receives the same persons, upon their repentance, as members
of Christ and his Church.

Here we are to observe a difference in the order of these two parts: For in
the preaching of the Gospel the Keys do first loose and afterward bind: but
in Ecclesiastical discipline they first bind, and afterward loose. Again,
in the former they bind and loose the same or diverse parties; in the latter
they bind and loose the same persons only Now, What Excommunication is.
Excommunication is the banishing of a grievous transgressour, or an open
ungodly and obstinate person from the fellowship of the faithful, by the
judgment of the Elders or Chief men, and by the consent of the whole Church,
exercised and executed in the name and authority of Christ, and of the holy
Ghost, to the end that the offender, being put to shame, may repent, and
scandals in the Church may be prevented. This exclusion or exile is not only
from the Sacraments, but even from the whole communion of the faithful,
whereunto the obstinate pertain not at all. Two sorts of Excommunication.
It is twofold; Internal, which concerns God only: and External, which
belongs to the Church. The internal excommunication is manifested to men on
earth by the external; and the external is ratified in heaven by the
internal, according to Christ's promise: Whatsoever ye bind on earth, Mat.
18.18.
shall be bound in heaven.

2. Whether Ecclesiastical Discipline and Excommunication be necessary in the
Church.
COncerning the Ministry of the Word, there is no doubt but all the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles have preached: and whereas Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction has a necessary co-herence with the Ministry of Gods Word, it is
not to be doubted thereof, inasmuch as God himself, and Christ, and the Apostle
Paul, have both by precepts and practice confirmed and established it. Mat. 18,
15. 2 These. 3.14. 1 Cor. 5.1. 1 Timothy 1.20.
And verily, if no Territory, no City can stand without discipline, laws, and
punishment; the Church also, which is the House of the living God, has need of
some spiritual policy and discipline, though it much differ from civil
Jurisdiction. Church Discipline therefore is necessary: In respect of Gods
general commandment, of preventing the profanation of his Sacraments, both in
the Old and New Testament. In the Old Testament God would not that the
rebellious should be reputed so much as members of his people, but would have
them cut off: much less would he endure, that they should be admitted to his
Sacraments. Number. 15.30, 31.
The person that dothought presumptuously, whether born in the land, or a
stranger, the same blasphemeth the Lord: Therefore that person shall be cut off
from among his people. Because he has despised the Word of the Lord, and has
broken his commandment, that person shall be utterly cut off. God would that
all should come unto the Passover, that is, all the members of his people: but
the rebellious and obstinate breakers of his Covenant he utterly disclaimed and
renounced from being members of his people: therefore he permitted them not to
come thereunto. That man that will do presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.11.
not harkening unto the Priest (that stands before the Lord thy God to
minister there) or unto the Judge, that man shall dye, and thou shall take away
evil from Israel. By these two places God will have those cut off, which are
rebellious against his law, and that even from the civil state and
Commonwealth: neither does he permit them to be any members of his people:
much less then will he have them to be accounted members of his visible
Church, and admitted to the Sacraments. The civil or judicial law indeed is
taken away, as also are the ceremonies: but that especial difference between
the Citizens of the Church and others, is not taken away. In the first of Esaias
is a whole Sermon against the wicked, which offered sacrifices unto God, and
there God will not that they should sacrifice unto him: therefore now also he
will not that such men be admitted to the Sacraments. Bring no more oblations
(says God) in vain. Object. God will that all should celebrate the Passover:
Therefore here-hence he excluded not the wicked. Ans. God will that all
celebrate his Passover; that is, all such as he will have accounted for
members of his Church and people: not the obstinate, whom he commanded to be
sequestered from his congregation. Again, Esaias 66. he detesteth such as persist
in their wickedness; and yet offer sacrifices unto him: He that kills a
bullocks, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, Esaias 66.3.
as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he
offered swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an Idol.
Jerem. 6.20.
In the sixth of Jeremy he sharply reproves those, who, being defiled with
their abominations, yet durst appear in his Temple. Ezekiel the 20. he
threatens that he will not answer, Ezck. 20.31.
when he is asked by them who go after other gods, and then present themselves
in Gods Temple, when they are polluted. In the same Chapter he says, verse 24.
that they profane his Sabbaths, and pollute his Sanctuary, who, when they have
gone a whoring after Idols, appear in his Temple. Amos the fifth, Amos 5.21.
he rejects the sacrifices and worship of transgressors: I hate and abhor
your feast-dayes, and will not smell in your solemn assemblies. Haggai the
second, he prohibiteth the unclean in soul once to touch holy things, where
he speaks of moral and ceremonial uncleanenesse. Prove. 15.8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord. In the New Testament
John admits them only to baptisem, who confessed their sins, and repented:
Bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life. Leave thine offering before the
Altar, and go thy way; Mat. 3.6.
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift:
Therefore whosoever reconcileth not first himself unto his brother, he is to
be debarred the Sacraments. For Christ will that all submit themselves first
unto God, according to all his commandments, before they approach to any
Sacrament: For by the name of Altar, here are understood any Sacraments
whatsoever. Amend your lives, Acts 2.38. and 8.37. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. and 11.27.
and be baptized every one of you. If thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou
may be baptized: Therefore, if thou beleevest not, thou may not. The
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not unto
God. Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils.
Whosoever eats unworthily, is guilty of the Lords body: But the wicked,
eating without faith and repentance, eat unworthily: Therefore they are
guilty. We ought not to partake in other men's sins: and we ought not to wink at
any man's destruction: therefore we may not admit the wicked to the Sacrament,
lest they eat unto themselves damnation.

If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between him
and thee alone: Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18.
if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. But if he hear thee not, take
yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may be confirmed. And if he will not vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto
the Church: and if he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee as
an Heathen man, and a Publican. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. But Christ will not that his Sacraments, which he instituted
for the faithful alone, be made common with Pagans and Publicans. And lest
this Mandate might be understood of some private and special judgment, it is
expressly added: Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. which words cannot be otherwise
understood, but of the public power of the Keys. I verily, as absent in body,
but present in spirit, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.
have determined already, as though I were present, that he that has done
this thing, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that such one, I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
be delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, Ibid. ver. 11, 13.
that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. And again: With
such a one eat not. Put away therefore from your selves that wicked man. For
what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 These. 3.6, 14.
or what part has the Believer with the Infidels? We command you, brethren, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye, withdraw your selves from every
brother that walks inordinately, and not after the instruction which ye
received of us. If any man obey not our sayings, note him by a letter, and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 2 John ver. 10.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to
house, neither bid him, God speed: for, he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds.

in respect of Gods glory. For God is reproached and despited, if without
difference wicked blasphemers go in the number of his Children, and his
Kingdom, and the devils be confounded.

Lest the Sacraments be profaned, and that given the wicked in the Supper,
which is denied them in the Word.

That the purity of Gods doctrine and worship be preserved.

For the safety of the Church, which shall be punished, if she wittingly and
willingly profane Christ's Sacraments, or suffer them to be profaned.

For the safety of the sinners, that they, being often admonished and put to
shame, may return to repentance.

For avoiding of offense in the Church, that others, weaklings, be not
corrupted by evil example. 4.1 Cor. 5.6.
Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

For avoiding of offense among those that are without, lest they, who are not
as yet members of the Church, come not to it.

That the name of God might not be blasphemed, and evil spoken of by others,
and his Covenant despited and reproached.

That from the sinners themselves punishment may be averted, because the
wicked, approaching unto the Lords Table, eat their own damnation. Wherefore,
that this may not come to pass, the Church is bound to provide, that such
approach not thither.

They who deny the faith and doctrine of Christ, are to be excluded from the
Church, and from the use of the Sacraments: For the Faithful, or Christians
are not to be confounded, or mingled with those, who are not members of the
Church, or with those, who are professed ungodly persons, blasphemers,
revolters to Arrianisme, Mahumetanisme, and the like. But they that deny, and
refuse to repent, deny the faith and doctrine; They profess that they know
God, but by works they deny him. And he that denies the faith, Tims 1.16.
is worse than Infidels: Therefore they who persist in their wickedness, and
deny to repent, are to be shut out of the Church; neither are they to be
admitted to the use of the Sacraments.

Give not that which is holy to dogs. Wherefore, neither to the Sacraments
are dogs to be admitted, namely, those which persist in their wickedness,
and make a mock of Gods Word. For if Christ speaks this of his audible Word,
to wit, the Word preached, which yet was instituted for the converted and
unconverted, or such as were yet to be converted; much more shall this likewise
be spoken of his visible Word, namely, of the Sacraments, which were ordained
and instituted for the converted only.

Open Infidels, wicked ones, and blasphemers, ought not to be baptized: For
they ought not to be baptized, who believe not with their whole heart.
Wherefore, Philip says to the Eunuch, If thou beleevest with all thine heart,
thou may be baptized. Acts 8.37. Mat. 3.^.
So John also baptized none but such as confessed their sins. Now if
blasphemers and unbeleevers are not to be baptized, it follows that they are
to be shut out of the Church, and not to be admitted to the receiving of the
Sacraments. They who ought not to be baptized, neither ought they to be
admitted unto the Supper: for there is one and the same reason in both.

They who are not as yet baptized are not to be admitted unto the Supper: but
to them who forsake their Baptism, Baptism is no Baptism; according to that
of the Apostle: If thou be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision; Romans 1.25.
that is, if thou persevere in thy transgression without repentance: Therefore
they who forsake their Baptism, are not to be admitted unto the Supper. Obj.
Then they who forsake their baptism, are also to be baptized after their
receiving into the Church. Ans. Their receiving into the Church by baptism is
firm, and in force to them that repent, without any iteration of the sign.
But seeing baptism is an entrance into the Church, they who forsake it, are
not in the Church; and therefore as long as they continue such, they are not to
be admitted either into the Church, or unto the Supper.

Unto whom the promise of grace does not belong, unto them the sign of grace
ought not to be extended: otherwise the Church should deal corruptly,
admitting them whom God excludes, and should be diverse and disagreeing from
her self: for she should absolve them by the visible word, whom she condemned
by the audible word. Wherefore the wicked and blasphemous, whom God has
rejected, and deprived of his grace, are not to be admitted unto the
Sacraments, which are the signs of Gods grace.

The institution of the Sacraments, or the condition, which must be observed in
coming to the Sacraments, requires faith and repentance: Therefore they who
show not repentance, ought not to be admitted. This argument follows by a
counterposition; They which have repentance and faith are to be admitted:
Therefore they, which have not repentance and faith are not to be admitted.

3. To whom the power of the Keys is committed, against whom, and in what
order to be used.

UNto whom the declaration and denouncing of Gods Word is committed, to them
also is committed the power of the Keys. The denouncing and publishing the
anger and favor of God, which is performed in the preaching of the Gospel, is
committed unto the Ministers: For the preaching of the Gospel is committed to
them alone. But that denouncing, which is exercised in Church discipline,
belongs to the whole Church: For unto the whole Church does discipline and
spiritual jurisdiction belong. Now the denouncing and declaration which is
used in the ministry of Gods word, is done after another manner than in the
Church discipline. In the ministry of the word, the anger of God the word
going before, is by every Pastor alone or Minister of the word privately
denounced against all ungodly, unbeleeving, and unrepenting persons: namely,
that they are exiled from the Kingdom of Christ, as long as they repent not,
neither live according to the prescript rule of the Gospel. And again, if they
repent, the grace and favor of God, and remission of sins, is by the same
Pastors and Ministers signified and declared out of the Word of God unto them.

How the Ministers of the word do absolve and condemn.
Object. Then have men power to condemn. Ans. They have ministerial power;
that is, the charge and function of denouncing unto men, according to Gods
Word, that God remitteth or not remitteth their sins. And this is done two
ways: when in the preaching of the Gospel they declare, That all believers are
saved, and that all unbeleevers are condemned. when as they exercise this
function of declaring Gods will privately unto particular men, and toward
every one in several: and when remission of sins is promised to some certain
person repenting, and when likewise the anger and displeasure of God is
denounced against any one person not repenting, as long as he continues in
that mind. So Peter said to Simon Magus, Acts 8.23.
Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business. The same is to be
said in particular to every one, as often as need requires: neither must we do
it at our own pleasure, but according to the word of God. And this is the power
of the Keys granted unto the Pastors, and annexed unto the Ministry of the
word. But to execute this sentence declared, belongs to God alone. In
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or Church-judgement, the denouncing of the favor
and wrath of God, is not done by any privately, but by the whole Church, or in
the name of the whole Church, by such as are deputed thereunto by the common
consent of all. And this denouncing is used for some certain causes, and
toward some certain persons, having also companying it a debarring and
excluding from the use of the Sacraments, when need requires.

The persons who are to be excommunicated.
Now, Who are to be excommunicated, is known sufficiently by that which has
been said before; namely, such as either deny some Article of faith, or show
that they will not repent, or submit not themselves to the will of God,
according to his commandments, neither make any doubt of persisting stubbornly
in manifest wickedness. All such are not to be admitted into the Church: or,
if they have been admitted into the Church in baptism* yet we must not go
forward in offering them the Lords Supper.

The order how they are to be excommunicated.
That Order is to be observed in executing the office of the Keys which Christ
himself, Matthew. 18. has set down. courteously admonished by one, according
to the commandment of Christ: Mat. 18.15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between him
and thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. Moreover, if
being admonished by one, he does not yet repent, he must be again privately
admonished by thee, taking one or two with thee. And such admonitions must be
done according to Gods word, and with signification of good will toward the
offender; and that not but for causes just, weighty, and necessary. And if
neither so admonished by one or two he repent, he is to be corrected by the
whole Church. Which also Christ has commanded. If he will not vouchsafe to
hear them, tell it unto the Church. Now, if a man transgress publicly by
offending of the whole Church, he must also publicly be corrected by the
Church, according as his trespass is. If he refuse to hear the Church also,
let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican. In these words Christ
expressly commands all, whosoever, being after this sort admonished by the
Church, will not repent, to be by the common consent of the Church
excommunicated, until they repent. This then is the lawful course of
reclaiming such as go aside, and refractary persons in Christ's Church, if the
degrees prescribed be observed in the execution. The degrees prescribed are
four: 1. A brotherly private admonition. 2. An admonition by many. 3. An
admonition by the Church, 4. The public deceee and sentence of the Church. The
first and second degree take place in private offenses; the third, in notorious
and grievous public crimes or scandals; the fourth, in a case of contumacy, in
which only the Church proceeds to excommunication, reputing the obstinate
party for an Heathen and Publican; that is, for an aliant and stranger from the
Church and Kingdom of God, until he repent. Wherefore necessarily before
excommunication first goes a knowledge of some slip or error, and a knowledge
of obstinacy or stubbornness. If then any man become a Papist, or an Arrian, or
a Davidian, or an Apostata in any other kind, he must not be reputed a member
of the Church, though himself profess that he is, and desire to continue
therein, unless he abjure and detest his error, and live according to the
doctrine of the Gospel. The reason is, because God will have his Church
separated from all other Sects and limbs of the Devil: but they, who reverse
their oath made in Baptism, are limbs of the Devil: Therefore they are to be
exiled the Church; yea, though they profess themselves Christians. For, in
deeds they deny what they profess in words: and therefore it is evident, that
they lie and dissemble; seeing faith and a Christian life cannot be dis-joyned;
and they who separate them, mock God and his Church. Now, an Apostata is not
such an one as sometimes, Who is an Apostata.
or oftentimes offends in life and doctrine, and repents again; but such
an one, as who being apparently convicted of open errors and outrages,
refuses to desist from them. Howbeit, if any profess repentance, and make
outward show thereof, though inwardly he be an hypocrite, the Church is bound
to admit such an one, until he bewray himself. For the Church may not judge of
things secret and hidden.

3. What are the ends of the Ecclesiastical discipline, and what abuses are
therein to be avoided.
CHrist has given to his Church the power of Excommunication, not for the
destruction of the sinner which is to be excommunicated, but for his
edification and salvation. Wherefore the end of this discipline is not to
establish the sovereignty and tyranny of the Ministers: The Kings of the
Gentiles reign over them; Luke 22.25.
but ye shall not be so. The Ministers themselves must most of all be subject
to this discipline, and with this bridle they are specially contained within
the bounds of their vocation; because the Keys belong not to Ministers alone,
but to the whole Church. Much less is this the end of Ecclesiastical
discipline, that wretched sinners should be vexed, oppressed, The ends and uses
of Excommunication.
and driven to desperation (these are the slanders of the enemies of this
discipline) but the true ends are those which the Apostle delivers and
shows: disgraced and terrified, may bethink themselves and repent, Let such
a man be delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus. Your rejoicing is not good: 1 Cor. 5.6.
know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Them that sin,
rebuke openly, that the rest may fear. 1 Timothy 1.20.
Purge out therefore the old leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7.
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened: For Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us. These then are the ends and uses of Ecclesiastical
discipline or excommunication.

The abuses that are to be avoided in Excommunication, are; 1. That the degrees
of admonition be not neglected, The abuses of it.
and that we begin not preposterously from the last, but from the first. Yet
count him not as an enemy, 2 These. 3.15.
but admonish him as a brother. it may not be managed by any several man's
private authority, or swayed by the Minister alone. For this power is not
appropriated by Christ to some few, or to the Ministers only (howsoever the
execution be devolved by the Church to a few, or to the Minister alone) but to
the whole Church, If he will not vouchsafe to hear them and others tell it
unto the Church. Mat. 18.17. Luke 22.25, 26.
The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them; but ye shall not be so. Wherefore
the consent and decree of the Church is to be expected; 1. Because of Gods
express commandment to this purpose. 2. That no man be injured. 3. That the
process may be better authorized. 4. That the Ministry of the Church grow not
unto an Oligarchy, or a Papisticall soveraignity of some few persons. That the
condemnation of the rebellious may be the more just. The last abuse to be
prevented by Excommunication is, 5. That we kindle no schisms, not give
occasion of scandal and offense in the Church, whilst good men see many at
variance between themselves, that grievous evils follow one another on the
head, and that the Church is divided: These evils, if the Ministers see, or
fear, they may not proceed, but warn and exhort both privately and publicly.
If they profit nothing hereby, they are held excused: Blessed are they which
hunger and thirst after righteousness; Mat. 5.6.
for they shall be filled: Others shall give an account of their obstinacy.

5. How the power of the Keys committed to the Church, differs from the
Civil power.
THe differences are many and manifest: Ecclesiastical and civil power is
apparent and manifest. There remain objections of the Adversaries of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, whereunto we will in few words make answer.

Object. 1. The charge and office of the Keys is no where commanded: Therefore
it is not to be ordained in the Church; and by consequent, no man ought to be
excluded from the Sacrament.

Ans. The Antecedenc is false; because frequently in Scripture manifest
testimonies of this charge and commission are extant: Matthew. 16.19.
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven. Here in plain words is
expressed the power of the keys committed to all ministers of the word.
Moreover, what this office or charge of the keys committed to the Church is,
and how the Church must discharge this charge and function, Christ likewise
plainly advertiseth and declares: If he will not vouchsafe to hear them, tell
it to the Church: Mat. 18.17, 1^.
and if he refuse to hear the Church also let him be unto thee as an heathen
man, and a publican. Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall
be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. These things given thus in precept by Christ, Paul also does in the
thing it self confirm: 1 Cor. 5.1, 5. and 11.20.
Let such a one be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. When ye come together
into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. 2 These. 3.14.
If any man obey not your savings, note him by a letter, and have no company
with him that he may be ashamed. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have
delivered unto Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20.
that they may learn not to blaspheme. In the Prophets also are manifest
testimonies, in which this is apparent to have been commanded by God: Isa. 1.11.
What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am
full of the burnt offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts: and I desire
not the blood of bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of goats. Isa. 66.3.
He that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a
sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he
offered swines blond: he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol. I
spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them, Jerem. 7.22.
when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings and
sacrifices. Psalm. 30.16.
Unto the wicked said God; What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances,
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? Wherefore Christ also says,
Matthew. 5.24.
Leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. There are other
places also of Scripture besides these, where it is commanded, that all
professed wicked persons be excluded from the Church, and the use of the
sacraments: as, wheresoever is reprehended the unlawful use of the sacraments:
Likewise, wheresoever the Ministers are commanded to receive only such for
members of the Church as profess faith and repentance. Rep. God indeed
forbids the ungodly to come unto the Sacraments, but he wills not that the
Church should forbid them. Ans. What God forbids to have done in the Church,
that will he have to be avoided by the discipline of the Church: and that God
has willed the Church to forbid and exclude professed ungodly persons, is
manifestly proved by the fore-alledged places.

Obj. 2. Men are not able to discern the worthy from the unworthy, they cannot
know who truly repent, and who persist in piety; neither can they cast a man
into hell: Therefore that judgment is not committed unto the Church, whereby
the godly may be distinguished from the ungodly. Ans. The Church does not judge
of such as are hidden or secret, but of those that are manifest; namely, of
those who show themselves in outward life and profession: and this she does,
when concerning such, she subscribeth to the judgment of God; that is, when
she judges of them according to the prescript of Gods word: as, when out of
the word of God she pronounces the obstinate to be condemned, as long as they
continue such; and when out of the word of God she absolveth them which show
repentance. But to discern from others such as are close and hidden, as the
Church is not able, so neither does she take it upon her.

Object. 3. Christ says in the parable of tares, Let both grow together until
the harvest: Matthew. 13.30.
Therefore none ought to be excluded. Ans. 1. Christ speaks there of
hypocrites, who cannot be discerned always from the true servers of God.
Therefore his meaning is, that hypocrites ought not to be cut off or separated
from the Church, as whom we know not to be such: but that the Angels shall do
this at the last day. 2. Christ distinguishes there the office of the
Magistrate, and of Ministers: Let them grow; that is, put not to death any
which are estranged from the Church. For, the Ministers may not use corporal
force against any man, as may the Magistrate. Now if this difference be put,
the difference which is between the Church and the kingdom of the devil shall
not be taken away.

Object. 4. Men are to be forced and compelled unto good works: The use of the
Sacraments is a good work: Therefore they are to be forced and compelled to the
use of the Sacraments. Ans. 1. The Minor is not true, except it be understood
of that use which is celebrated by the faithful: otherwise, when unbeleevers
use the Sacraments, their use is no good work. The use of the Sacraments is a
good work, when good moral works go before this use: and then is it truly
called the use of the Sacraments, otherwise it is rather an abuse and profaning
of the Sacraments. For, when the wicked take the Sacraments, they abuse them;
whence it is that Christ expressly dehorteth the wicked from this good work,
when as he says, Leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way.
2. The Major proposition is to be distinguished. Men are to be compelled unto
good works, but in their order, so that there go before an enforcing to moral
works, and then follow after an enforcing to ceremonial works: Luke 14.23.
and so is that to be understood which Christ says, Compel them to come in.
It they thus urge the argument: Good works are not to be forbidden: The use of
the Sacrament is a good work: Therefore not to be forbidden. If (I say) they
thus argue, we grant them their Conclusion: fo we forbid not the use, but the
abuse. Rep. 1. God would that all should celebrate the passover. numb. 15.30.
Ans. All? Not not orious wicked ones, but such as were members of his people,
and ought to be tolerated in a civil society: but concerning obstinate
persons, there was a commandment that they should be taken from amidst the
congregation. Rep. 2. Yet nevertheless many evils accompany this use, and are
therein committed. Ans. These evils are done by them that hinder, and will not
follow this good use, not by them that exhort thereunto: yet, Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; Mat. 5.6.
that is, which desire the performance of that which is good: which, if it be
not practiced, it is not their fault. And we may not do evil, or omit those
good things which God commands, that good may come thereof: only let us do
our duty, and leave the event unto God. If that which is good be not put in
practice by others, yet our conscience is clear, and we have discharged our
selves.

Object. 5. We have not examples of this exeluding: The Prophets, Apostles and
John excluded none; nay, John baptized a generation of vipers: Therefore our
Ministers may not exclude any from the sacraments. Ans. The Prophets, albeit
they could not exclude the wicked from the sacrifices and sacraments; yet they
condemned that wickedness of theirs in approaching thither, and made
oftentimes long sermons, bot against the wicked, who did approach; and against
the Church, which admitted them unto the sacrifices: But that the Apostles did
exclude, Paul alone does sufficiently show by his example, as we saw before, in
that he commanded the incestuous person to be delivered unto Satan, Mark 1.3.
Luke ^.3.
and to be cast out of the Church: and John baptized them only who promised
faith and repentance: he baptized a generation of vipers, when they did repent.
Wherefore, although they were a viperous brood whom John baptized; yet were
they not any longer vipers when they were baptized: for John baptized none but
such as confessed their sins; as also he preached the baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins: and required of them whom he baptized, that they
should bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life.

Object. 6. If they are to be admitted unto the sacraments which profess faith
and repentance, and the unbeleevers and wicked are to be excluded; the same
shall be done after the same manner as it was done by John: But John by himself
alone admitted them who professed faith and repentance unto baptism, and he
alone also rejected the impenitent: Therefore it shall be lawful for one
Minister alone, either to admit them who profess the doctrine and repentance,
or to reject the obstinate. Ans. The reason is not alike: For John was endued
with a prophetical and apostolic authority, which our Ministers have not.
Again* at that time the gathering of the new Church was respected, and not the
excluding of them who were in the Church, and had revolted from it.

Certain Arguments assoyled, whereby some, in a public disputation held in
Heidelberge, An. 1568. June to. (D. Peter Boquine being Moderator, and M.
George Withers Englishman, the Respondent) endeavored to abolish
Ecclesiastical Discipline: which Arguments, with their Solutions, were taken
word by word from the mouth of D. Ursine, at the repetition of this
disputation, the next day privately made in Colleg. Sapient.
The THESES proposed concerning Church Discipline were these two:
1. To the sincere preaching of the word and lawful administration of the
Sacraments is required an office or power of Government in the Church. 2. This
office I thus interpret; That the Ministers, with the Seniory, should have, and
should exercise a power of convicting, reproving, excommunicating, and
executing any other point of Ecclesiastical discipline on any offenders
whatsoever, even on Princes themselves.


1. WHere the Word and Sacraments are rightly to be administered, there must the
authority of discipline be established: But in the Primitive Church, and at
this day in well ordered Churches, the authority of discipline is not
established: Therefore the Word and Sacraments are not rightly there
administered. But absurd were it so to say: Therefore abjurd also to impose a
necessity of discipline on the Church. Ans. These words, To be rightly
administered, are doubtful, and have a diverse meaning. 1. To administer
rightly, signifies, so to administer, as that the administration wholly agree
with the prescript of the Lord. 2. It signifies, To administer (not according
to the right, perfect, and exact observing of it; but) so that the
administration be pleasing to God, and profitable for the salvation of the
Church. In this whole world the Sacraments are not rightly administered
according to the former signification: but according to the later signification
they are. For, albeit some blemishes, by reason of the Churches weakness and
imbecility, cannot be corrected and amended on a sudden; yet the
administration may please God, and profit the Church: albeit we are
nevertheless to acknowledge and bewail the defects: for, Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Except these
things be granted, there will be no pure Church in the world. We may seem now
to have sufficiently assoyled this objection: but yet further also we deny the
Minor: For the authority of discipline was, and continued in the Primitive
Church, and shall also continue in an ill ordered Church, but with great abuse,
as amongst the Papists. Repl. In our Churches, and in the Helvetian Churches,
excommunication is not in force: Therefore the Minor of the former objection is
true. Ans. Although in some Churches it be not exercised, yet is it not then
ill exercised: but the Minor is nevertheless infringed; because in those
Churches the Word and the Sacraments are rightly administered, according to the
other signification, whereof we spoke before. Here Ursine alleged a saying out
of Chrysostom; Chrysostom says, If any wicked person come unto the Lords
Table, give not unto him the Lords Sacrament, the body and blood of the Lord:
if he will not believe, signify it unto me: I will rather lose my life, then I
will admit him. Excommunication therefore was in force, and was exercised in
the Church many hundred years after Christ.

Object. 2. That doctrine which has neither Gods word nor approved examples,
Mat. 18.17.
is not to be thrust upon the Church: But this doctrine has neither of these:
1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1, 20.
Therefore it is not to be thrust upon the Church. Ans. It has the word for
it: If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man. It
has approved examples: Let such a one be delivered unto Satan. And, Whom I
have delivered unto Satan.

Objections against the Word or Scriptures alleged for proof of Seniory and
Excommunication.
REpl. No mention is made of the Seniory, or of Excommunication in the place,
Mat. 18. Therefore this Scripture proves nothing. Ans. I deny the Antecedent:
For, although there be not the formal words, yet the thing it self is
contained in them. For the Seniory is intimated in these words, Tell it to the
Church: and Excommunication in these, Let him be unto thee as an heathen or
publican. Rep. 2. The Church is not the Seniory: That by the name of the Church
is meant the Seniorie.
But Christ commands that signification be given to the Church; and that
admonition be given by the Church: therefore not by the Seniory. Ans. I deny
the Major: albeit the whole reason notwithstanding may be granted: namely, that
Christ understands not the Seniory, but takes properly the name of the
Church, both of the Jewish before Christ, and of the Christian after Christ.
But there must be notwithstanding some order of the jurisdiction of the Church:
some must be appointed and ordained by the Church to oversee and direct men's
actions, else will there be a confusion of all things. We cannot observe that
which Christ says, without defining of circumstances: Therefore by the Church
is comprehended the Seniory, and by consequent it is understood of a Council
or assembly of Governors.

Repl. 3. It is true indeed, that signification cannot be given to the whole
Church, but to the Council, or assembly of Governors: which yet is civil: so
that the meaning is; Tell the Church, that is, the Senate of the City. Ans. Now
then they confess, that it cannot be signified to the whole Church, but to
some Council, or assembly of Governors, which yet must be civil, not
ecclesiastical. The question then is, whether Christ's words are to be
understood of a civil Council and assembly. They prove therefore that this
Council is civil, thus; That Council which punishes with corporal
punishment, is civil: The Council which gave Paul power to put Christians to
death, punishes with corporal punishment: Therefore it was civil. Ans. That
Council which punishes so according to right, is civil; but they who gave
that power to Paul, did it wrongfully, because they had not that right and
authority, but usurped it: Which also is to be thought of their putting Stephen
to death, because it was done tumultuously: and further, the Priests themselves
were consenting to it, but unjustly. Rep. 4. S. Austin says, John 18.31.
Tract. 114. in Joh.
that the Jews did lie, when they said, It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death. Ans. The words of Austin are these: Did they not put him to
death, whom they yielded up to be put to death? But we must understand, that
they meant, they might not put any to death, because of the solemnity of the
day which they began now to celebrate. Ye false Israelites, are ye so hard
hearted? Have ye so lost all sense through your overmuch malice, that you
think your selves undefiled from the blood of the innocent, because ye
delivered him to another to be slain? Therefore Austin says not that they
lied; but only says, that they did that nevertheless, which they said was not
lawful for them to do. Rep. 5. S. Chrysostom also says, In Mat. Hom. 83.
It is not lawful for us; that is, because of the feast approaching. Ans. This
is not true, (with the good leave of S. Chrysostom be it spoken) because it is
witnessed by their stories, that their civil jurisdiction and laws were taken
from them by Herod the Great: Lib. 4. Antiq. c. 8.
and Josephus writes, that the whole Council was put to death by him and
Hyrcanus, one Sameas only excepted. Therefore the Jews in effect say this unto
Pilate, Thou have the power of the sword, it is not lawful for us to put any
man to death: which thing Pilate also himself confirms, saying, Joh. 19.10.
Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to loose
thee? Repl. 6. It is said in the Gospel, Take ye him, and judge him after your
own law. Ans. He means the law of Moses: as if he should say; If he be a
blasphemer, stone him to death, you have my good leave and warrant.

Repl. 7. Josephus says, That their laws were granted unto them by Claudius.
Ans. Then before-time they had them not. Moreover, Claudius is said in this
sense to have granted them their laws, because he permitted them to observe
their own laws and rites in religion. Joseph. lib. 19. Antiq. cap. 5.
I will (says Claudius the Emperor) that their laws be no longer infringed
through my predecessor Caius his folly, but by the publication of this my
Edict, that other of Caius be repealed, and they have free liberty to persist
in the ancient religion of their Fathers. Repl. 8. Their Council was taken
away by Herod the Great: Therefore before time they had civil jurisdiction,
and at that time, when Christ commanded to signify it unto the Council, they
had none but the civil. Wherefore, by consequent, it was to be signified to
the civil Senate: for that there was no council but the Civil. For, in all,
there were three councels or assemblies: 1. Of the whole kingdom, as the high
courts of Parliament in England. 2. A less council, which was the Senate of
the city of Jerusalem: and that was civil and ecclesiastical. 3. The
Triumviri. All these were civil. The Council then was civil. Christ sends
to the council. Therefore to the civil Senate. Ans. 1. By retortion. If the
Jews lost their civil Jurisdiction under Herod the Great, then they had it not
in Christ's time: for it is clear that Herod the Great died before Christ began
to teach. Ans. 2. The council was civil, but not only civil: for it had also
Ecclesiastical power, because it handled and decided matters of religion. It
consisted of Pharisees and Scribes, of Divines and Lawyers: For they had moral
and judicial laws. The less Council therefore, whereof Christ speaks, was
not merely Civil, but Ecclesiastical also. Now then the question is. Whether
Christ commanded to tell the Council, as it is Civil, or as it is
Ecclesiastical? That he will have it signified unto the Council, as it is
Ecclesiastical, we prove out of the text: 1. Because we are commanded to
account the excommunicated person for an heathen and publican, that is, for an
alien from Christ's Kingdom. Now to pronounce a man to be a Publican and an
alien from Christ's kingdom, belongs unto the Ecclesiastical Magistrate, not
unto the Civil: because a publican, and an heathen may be a member of the
City, but not of the Church of Christ. 2. Christ adds, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Here Christ
meets with an objection: For the excommunicated person may object; what does
this touch me? Although the Church account me for an Infidel, for a Heathen
man, and publican, I will notwithstanding in the mean season ear and drink.
Christ answers therefore, that this judgment shall not be frustrate or of no
effect: for I my self will be the executor of it. Before, he said, I will give
thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven: Chap. 16.
but there he speaks of the common and general authority of the Ministry:
here he speaks namely and particularly of the Ministers authority in this
case. To bind and loose therefore is not belonging unto the Civil Magistrate,
but unto the Church.

Thus far concerning the first member, That in the name of the Church mention
is made of the Seniory. Now as touching the other member, that there is mention
of Excommunication in those words, Let him be unto thee as an heathen or
publican.

The excommunication is contained in the place of Scripture before alleged.
Repl. 1. To be accounted for an Heathen man* and, To be excommunicated are not
all one. Therefore the word Excommunication is not contained here in words of
like force. Now the Antecedent is proved thus: Let him be unto thee as an
heathen man, and a publican: There he speaks not of the public judgment of
the Church, but of the private judgment of each man. Therefore he is not
presently excommunicated by the whole Church, who is accounted for an heathen
by private men. Ans. Whom each in several account for an heathen man, him the
whole Church so accounts of. Therefore he speaks of the judgment of the
Church. Rep. 2. But it is not said there in the text, whom the whole Church
accounts for an heathen man; but, He that hears not the Church, account him
for a heathen man. Therefore thou accountest him not so according to the
Churches judgment, but according to thine own judgment. Answ. Well; I
account him so, because he hears not the Church. But, Not to hear the
Church, and, To be a publican and estranged from the Church, are not these all
one? But I add another thing which admits less questioning. He says not
only to every private man, but the whole Church: For, To thee, and, To the
Church, are of like force. For, when Christ commands that I account a man for
a publican and a Heathen, does he in the mean time will that the Church
account him for a Christian? No: because then he would have contrary judgments
to be at once given of the same man. Wherefore, to be accounted of one for a
publican, is, so to be accounted of all, even of the whole Church: and if that
denunciation should not be done in special and particular, no man should be
accounted for a Publican. But, To be accounted of the Church for a publican and
an heathen, is to be excommunicated, and to be out of the communion of the
Church: wherefore this later member stands still, that in the Scripture
alleged mention is made of Excommunication, and that it is committed to the
Church.

Repl. 3. The wicked may be accounted for heathens and publicans without any
Excommunication: Therefore a publican and an excommunicate are not all one.
Ans. I deny the Antecedent: because, To account one out of the communion of the
Church, and, To excommunicate, are all one. Rep. 4. But we may account one,
that is, think one in mind to be such a person. Ans. If he hear not the Church,
thou art to know, not what the Church thinks of him in mind, but what they
publikly determine of him, whether thou may account him for an heathen and
publican. And furthermore, Paul elsewhere forbids us to eat and drink with a
wicked person: 1 Cor. 5.11.
but conversing with a wicked man cannot be avoided on the secret cogitation,
but on the public determination of the Church: therefore it is not a knowledge
only in the mind. Thirdly, in the same place he says, Put away from among your
selves that wicked man; that is, proclaim and declare him to be no member of
the Church: Therefore, To account one for a publican, is not only to think in
mind, but also to pronounce him an aliant from the Church, and to excommunicate
him.

Objections against the example of the Apostles excommunicating, alleged, 1
Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 8.5. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1 Timothy 1. etc.
THey who at this day disallow the Discipline of the Church, elude the example
of S. Paul two ways: Some simply deny, that the Apostle speaks of
Excommunication, when he says, He that has thus done, let him be delivered
unto Satan: For, say they, to deliver unto Satan, is not to excommunicate,
but by some miraculous punishment through Satan's means to cut off, or at
least, curse and banne him, and deliver him to Satan to be tortured; yet so,
that he continue a member of the Church notwithstanding. Others grant, that
Paul speaks of Excommunication; but they deny, that the example pertains to
us: because now there are Christian Magistrates, maintainers of discipline, of
which Magistrates the Church was destitute in the Apostles time. Ans. But
against the former of these make the Apostles words, To deliver up to Satan,
and, To put from the Church, is to excommunicate. 1 Cor. 5.2.
Put away from your selves that wicked man: and, With such a one eat not. These
cannot be understood of a miraculous punishment by death, such as Ananias and
Sapphira suffered; but they signify the ordinary authority and judgment of
the Church: 1. Because he says, Put ye away; and reprehendeth them, because
they have not yet abandoned him. And, Ye are puffed up, and have not rather
sorrowed, that he which has done this deed might be put from among you. Now
all these had not the gift which Peter had: Therefore he should wrongfully
reprove them for not showing some miracle. 2. Because he requires the consent
of the Church: When ye are gathered together, 1 Cor. 5.4.
and my spirit: But there was no need of such a concourse or an assembly for
manifestation of a miracle. 3. Because he will, that the incestuous person be
delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5.
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: that is, he will
have him so dealt withal, that notwithstanding he might live and repent, that
his flesh might be tamed with true contrition, that the old man might be
mortified, and the new man quickened. Wherefore the Apostle would not that he
should be slain. 4. He speaks of the separating and exiling him from the
Church, when he says, Purge out the old leaven. Company not together with
fornicators. With such a one eat not. All these speeches intimate a separation,
not any mortal punishment. 5. The conference of places of Scripture teaches,
that they who either in word or in life deny the Christian faith, are not to be
reputed Christians. Ambrose says, that this incestuous person, when his
offense was once known, was to be banished from the company of the brotherhood;
that is, from the Church. Now they who are cast out of the Church, are worthily
said to be delivered up to Satan; because they are conversant and resident in
his kingdom, as long as they repent not.

Three causes why Paul commanded the incestuous person to be excommunicated.
They who maintain the later opinion, allege a false cause, when they say,
that Paul therefore would have the incestuous person excommunicated, because
then there was no Christian Magistrate. For Paul renders far different
reasons hereof, which continue in force unto this day: When ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, by that
authority and warrant of Christ, Tell it unto the Church: Let him be unto thee
as an Heathen, or a Publican. Let him be delivered unto Satan, for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord
Jesus. Know ye not, that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? For, Christ
our Passover is sacrificed for us, that we should live with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth, and become a new sprinkling, and cast out the old
leaven of maliciousness and wickedness; or at least, if we cannot cast it all
out, yet that we profess not the toleration thereof. These are the causes why
Paul commanded, that the incestuous person should be excommunicated out of the
Church: but we no where read, that the Church did therefore excommunicate
wicked persons, because it wanted a Christian Magistrate. For the duties of the
Church and of the Magistrate always were, and yet remain distinct. It is
certain then, that the Apostle speaks of Excommunication, when he says:
Deliver him unto Satan. Put away the wicked man from among you: and that he
treats of the ordinary power of the Church against malefactors; whether any
miracle then betide or no.

Object. 1. Nathan excommunicated not David an adulterer: Therefore Paul
excommunicated not the incestuous person. Answ. David repented after the first
warning; therefore he ought not to be excommunicated. Paul also speaks with
condition of repentance: Put him away; to wit, if he repent not, or has not
already repented; on which repentance he commands that he be received again.
This condition we must necessarily understand; because that Christ would, that
certain degrees of admonition should first be practiced, and God at any time
receives the penitent into favor. The Thief on the Cross is not
excommunicated, but upon his repentance, received of Christ. Mat. 18.28.
If thy brother shall sin against thee until seventy times seven times, thou
shall forgive him. Wherefore not offenders, but obstinate persons, of which
sort David was none, are to be excommunicated.

Object. 2. Christ excommunicated none: Therefore Paul did it not, neither
ought the Church to excommunicate any. Ans. The consequence is not good, to
argue from the denial of the fact, to the denial of the right and lawfulness
of the fact. The argument is no better than this: Christ baptized none:
Therefore Paul might not, and the Church may not baptize any. For Christ indeed
baptized none, but he commanded his Apostles to baptize all Nations. So
likewise he excommunicated none, but he commanded the Church to excommunicate
the rebellious and obstinate. Mat. 18.17. and 5.24. Acts 8.36.
Let him be unto thee as an Heathen. Leave thy gift at the Altar, etc. Philip
said to the Eunuch, Thou may be baptized, if thou beleevest with all thine
heart: Therefore he had not baptized him, if he had not believed.

Object. 3, Paul says, Ye have not (...).
sorrowed, that he which has done this deed, 1 Cor. 5.25.
might be put from among you: Therefore they should have prayed, that God would
miraculously take him away by the Devil. Answ. Ye have not sorrowed,
signifies, ye have not been earnest in taking away that scandal, which should
be removed from you: from you, I say; because in the end Paul says, Put away
from your selves that wicked man. Therefore these words, That he might be put
from among you, signify, that he was to be cut off, not by Satan, but by the
Church.

Repl. Paul uses the same word of himself: 2 Cor. 12.21.
I shall (...).
bewail many of them which have sinned already, and have not repented, etc.
Here, to bewail, signifies not to be careful of removing a scandal from the
Church: Therefore neither in the former place. Answ. We answer out of the text:
In that place he says, If I come again, I will not spare: 2 Cor. 13.1.
Where he notes the cause of this his grief, in that he is constrained to
punish severely the obstinate; that is, in the end to excommunicate them out of
the Church.

Object. 4. The Apostle expounds himself, that he did not enjoyne the
Corinthians to excommunicate the incestuous person, when he says: 2 Cor. 2.6.
It is sufficient unto the same man, that he was rebuked of many: Therefore
those words; Account him for a Heathen and a Publican: and, Put him away from
among you* signify only a rebuking. Answ. This reason deceives by a fallacy
of consequent; because a general rule is not builded upon an example. For
because here was need of rebuking only, seeing the party repented; it does not
therefore follow, that always the same only is required. Repl. What they did,
that Paul commanded: But they did only reprehend and rebuke: Therefore Paul
commanded them only to reprehend him, when he commanded them to put him away
from among them, and to deliver him up to Satan. Ans. Paul commanded, that
they should reprehend him, but not that only; because he commanded also that
they should reject him, if he repented not. But if he repented, it should be
sufficient to reprehend and rebuke him. Wherefore it does not follow, They only
reprehended him: Therefore Paul commanded them only to reprehend him. This is a
true answer unto the former reply: but there is another also clear and
manifest. For the Greek word (which the Apostle here uses) signifies not only
reprehension and rebuking, (...)
but also that excommunication, which is by words only. So that now
contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him. Therefore he was now
excommunicated, and not as yet received, but to be received. Matthew. 18.
And when also he says, Of many, hereby is confirmed, that by the name of the
Church, whereof Christ speaks, is not understood the common multitude, but
the chief Governors of the Church. Again, For this cause did I write (says
the Apostle) that I might know the proof of you, whether you would be obedient
in all things. That they company not together with the excommunicated person. I
pray you, that you would confirm your love toward him. The Greek word, (...),
(which we interpret to confirm) signifies, by public sentence to speak a
thing. So it is taken, Galat. 5.15. A man's covenant, when it is confirmed; that
is, ratified by public authority. The Apostles meaning therefore here is, that
they should declare their love toward that man by public testimony.
Therefore, to forgive, is to receive the excommunicated person into favor, and
that does he often repeat. Now there was also some space between the writing
of the former and the later Epistle to the Corinthians: Therefore he stood in
the mean time excommunicated. In the former Epistle Paul says, That he
hears, that some wicked persons were among the flock. Them he wills to be
excommunicated. And it is likely, that the Corinthians obeyed this his
commandment in excommunicating them, and so wrote to Paul, that they had obeyed
him therein, because in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. he commends them, and
wills them to receive again the incestuous person, upon repentance.

Object. 5. Excommunication needs no excuse; but Paul excuses himself, for
that he had commanded him to be delivered up to Satan: Therefore he commanded
not that he should be excommunicated, but enjoined some more grievous penance.
Answ. The Major is false: because excommunication from the Church and Kingdom
of Christ, whereas it is a most grievous punishment, it requires a far
greater excuse, than any bodily punishment.

Object. 6. The Ministers cannot shut men out of the Kingdom of God: Therefore
Paul commands them no such matter. Ans. To the Antecedent we answer, that
they indeed cannot by their own authority; but they can in Christ's name,
according to the Apostles direction: When ye are gathered together, and my
spirit, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, they cannot cast men out
of Gods Kingdom: but they both can and ought to denounce rejection unto such
as God professes in his word that he does reject. For, to excommunicate, is
nothing else, but by denouncing to obstinate offenders their rejection from
God, to subscribe unto Gods divine censure. Now this the Church not only can,
but ought also to do. Therefore Paul reprehended the Corinthians, because they
excommunicated not the incestuous adulterer, but expected until they were
admonished hereof. Therefore he reprehendeth them, because they had swerved
from the common rule, that is, performed not the known and ordinary office of
the Church, that, according to the commandment, they should account of him as
of an heathen or publican.

Obj. 7. Paul commands, that he should be delivered to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh: But the word (...), importing destruction, signifies
everywhere in Scripture violent death: Therefore here in this place also is
insinuated a miraculous slaying of the body by Satan, that the soul might be
saved. Ans. It appears out of the circumstances, that destruction here
signifies the mortifying of the old man: for the opposition of the flesh and
the spirit, and the very phrase is most usual with Paul in this sense. The
whole scope also of the matter ratifieth the same; for he will, that he should
be delivered unto Satan, that the flesh may be mortified, and the spirit
saved: that is, that he may be converted in this life, and saved in the life to
come. Therefore his meaning is not, that he should be miraculously destroyed,
and deprived of life. Rep. But no man can be delivered unto Satan for his
conversion, or the mortification of the old man in him. Ans. It is true, that
this delivery and giving over to Satan, of it self, works no such effect,
but by accident; that is, it is of Gods mercy that the elect are reformed by
chastisements. And in the same sense wherewith they press this reply, may we
overthrow their own interpretation: because Satan also slays no man, that
his soul might be saved.

Obj. 8. If he would have had him excommunicated, he would have expressed his
intent more plainly. Ans. We are not to respect only the plainness of any
speech, but the purpose, force, and vigor thereof. Here greater perspicuity
needs not, because the Corinthians understood what he meant, else had he unjust
reproved them.

Object. 9. Whom Paul had willed to be noted by a letter, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
him he wills the Thessalonians to account of as of a brother; and therefore
will not have him to be excommunicated. This consequence or sequel is proved
thus; Contraries cannot stand together: But to excommunicate one and account
him for a brother, are contraries: Therefore if he be to be accounted for a
brother, he is not to be excommunicated. That these are contraries is also thus
proved: To excommunicate is, Not to account one for a brother: But, Not to
account one for a brother, and, To account one for a brother, are contraries:
Therefore also to excommunicate one, and account him for a brother, are
contraries, and so cannot stand together; except, Not to account, and, To
account for a brother should be all one. Ans. There is an ambiguity and diverse
understanding of these words, To account for a brother: seeing there are
degrees of brotherhood. Wherefore the contrariety is not here of force; for
all men are brethren, both Christians and Turks: But Christians nevertheless,
though they account Turks for their brethren and neighbors, and desire their
salvation, yet do they not account them for Christian brethren. If then they
are to account Turks for their brethren, then much more must they account them,
and seek their salvation, who were before-time brethren, that is, Christians.
2. It is a fallacy of taking that simply and wholly to be true, which is true
but in part: Account him for a brother; that is, in love, desire, and hope of
saving him, but not in reckoning him amongst the sons of God, and members of
the Church, until he repent. 3. He says not, Habete.
Account him for a brother; but, Monete.
Admonish him as a brother: that is, as him who sometimes was a brother; and
who, if he repent, must again be reputed a brother. For they are not altogether
deprived of all hope of salvation, who are excommunicated, but that they may
return again by repentance, and be included under the same hope. Now Paul uses
this phrase, because he would that love and hope of amendment should be the
rule of reproof. For a brother admonishes a brother friendly, and to a good
end.

Object. 10. What Paul did, that are not we to follow: 1 Timothy 1.20.
Paul did excommunicate Hymenaeus and Alexander without the Churches consent:
Therefore we must excommunicate no man. Ans. The Major proposition is false,
if it be generally understood. Repl. The Major is thus proved: What Paul did by
his Apostolic authority, that are not we to follow: But he did this by his
Apostolic authority. Now the Minor is proved by Paul's words: I have delivered,
says he, Hymenaeus and Alexander unto Satan: But our Ministers and Pastors
of Churches cannot do this: Therefore it must needs be, that Paul did it of
special authority. Ans. This whole reason I grant. We must not follow his
example, if he did it alone. But hereof it follows not, Therefore we may not
excommunicate: for so, more is in the conclusion then in the premises. And
again, the Minor may be denied; because in the text alleged, it is reported
only that Paul did it, not in what sort and what manner he did it, whether
alone, or with others.



THE THIRD PART. Of Man's Thankfulness.
AFter the Treatise of man's Misery, and of his Delivery thence by Christ, the
doctrine of Thankfulness has his necessary place: 1. Because it concerns
Gods glory; seeing the principal end of our Redemption is our thankfulness;
that is, our acknowledging and magnifying of Christ's benefits. 2. For our
comfort, which consists in our delivery: and deliverance pertains not but
to those who desire to approve themselves thankful. 3. That hence we may yield
unto God his due and lawful worship: for God condemns all man's will worship.
We must therefore declare out of Gods word the nature of true thankfulness,
which is the due worship of God. 4. That we may know that all our good works
are thankfulness, and not merits. Now, What thankfulness is in general.
in general, Thankfulness is a virtue acknowledging and professing the person
of whom we have been interessed, and the greatness of the benefits we have
received, with a desire of returning and performing again to our benefactors
all honest and possible duties. It comprehends in it truth and justice:
Truth, because it acknowledges and testifies the benefits that are received:
Justice, because it endeavors to render condign thanks for good deserts.
What Christian thankfulness is.
So then, Christian gratitude, which is here handled, is an acknowledgement and
profession of our free redemption from sin and death by Christ, and an earnest
desire to decline and avoid sin, and all displeasure of God, and to order our
life after his will; to crave expect, and receive all good things by true faith
from him alone, A connection of the Common places of this third part, by
resolving gratitude into his parts.
and to render all possible thanks for benefits received at his hands. Two
parts there are also of this gratefulness; Truth and Justice: Truth
acknowledges and testifies the benefit of free redemption and yields thanks
unto God for it. Justice offers up unto God such recompense as he requires,
which is naught else but a true worship of him, obedience and good works. Unto
truth belongs the doctrine of prayer; and the doctrine of good works is
referred to justice. Now the fountain of all these is, Man's conversion unto
God: for the works of the regenerate only are good and acceptable to God; and
Gods law is the rule of good works. Wherefore in this third part of Catechism,
Man's conversion to God, and The law of God is largely handled. So that these
four Common places principally appertain to this part, Of Man's Thankulfulnesse;
The Common place of Man's conversion, of Good works, of Gods law, and of Prayer.
The order and coherence of these Common places may be gathered also on this
wise:

Out of the diverse and manifold doctrine of the two former parts we have
learned, Another connection by compounding gratitude of all his parts.
that we are not through any merit of ours, but of Gods mere grace, by and for
Christ, redeemed from sin and death, and even from all evil both of crime and
pain: whereof it follows, that we should be thankful for this exceeding
benefit bestowed by Christ upon us. But we cannot show and approve our selves
thankful to God, except we be truly converted: for whatsoever is done by them
which are not converted, is done without faith, and is therefore sin and
abomination before God. First therefore, those things which are spoken of
Conversion, are in few words to be expounded. Then ensues the common place of
good works: for by them we declare our thankfulness toward God; and true
conversion cannot stand without good works. Afterward is adjoined the doctrine
which entreats of the law, whereby we learn to know good works: For those are
truly said to be good works, by which we worship God aright, and show our
selves to be thankful; which are done by faith, according to the rule and
prescript only of Gods law. Because God will chiefly be worshipped of us, and
magnified by invocation; and for this cause we show our thankfulness most of
all by prayer and thanksgiving: at length the common place of prayer shall be
lastly annexed. These things we purpose to declare briefly, and in order here
following.

ON THE 32. SABBATH.
Quest. 86. When as we are delivered from all our sins and miseries, without
any merit of ours, by the mercy of God only for Christ's sake, for what cause
are we to do good works?
Answ. Because, after that Christ has redeemed us with his blood, he renews
us also by his Spirit to the image of himself: that we, receiving so great
benefits, should show our selves all our life time thankful to God Romans 6.13.
and 12.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. 1 Cor. 6.20.
, and honor him Matt. 5.16. 1 Pet. 1.12.
. Secondly, that every of us may be assured of his faith by his fruit 2 Pet.
1.10. Matthew. 7.17, 18. Galat. 5.6, 22.
. And lastly, by our honest and good conversation, may win others unto Christ 1
Pet. 2.12. Romans 14.19. Matthew 5.16.
.

The Explication.
THis Question concerning the impulsive causes of good works, is moved in the
first place, and before we come to handle the Question of man's conversion; not
that good works go before conversion, but for the orderly connection of this
latter part of Catechism with the former. For out of the doctrine of free
satisfaction, humane reason thus argues: He is not bound to satisfy, for whom
another has already satisfied: Christ has satisfied for us: Therefore there
is no need that we should do good works. Ans. The Conclusion contains more
then the premises enforce; that which follows out of the two former
propositions is this: Therefore we our selves are not bound to satisfy; and
thus much we grant: 1. In respect of Gods justice, which exacteth not a double
payment. 2. In respect of our salvation, for which, if we were bound to
satisfy, it should be no salvation at all. Farther also we are obliged unto
obedience and good works, in regard of those causes which are in this Question
enlarged. For whom he called, them also he justified, and glorified. Romans 8.30.
Such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Therefore they who perform no good works, declare themselves to be neither
regenerated by the Spirit of God, nor redeemed by Christ's blood. Rom 6.13. and
12.1.
Give your members weapons of righteousness unto God. Give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving
of God. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16.
That by your good works which they shall see, 1 Pet. 2.12.
they may glorify God in the day of visitation. Give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: 1 Pet. 1.10.
after which words of Peter, certain copies insert these words, by good works.
Matthew. 7.17.
Every good tree brings forth good fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth
evil frruit. Galat. 5.6, 22.
Faith works by love. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. When thou
art converted, Luke 22.32. 1 Pet. 3.1.
strengthen thy brethren. Let the wives be subject to their husbands, that even
they which obey not the word, may without the word be won by the conversation
of the wives. Let us follow those things which concern peace, Romans 14.9.
and wherewith one may edify another.These causes are with diligence to be
urged and unfolded unto the people in our sermons of exhortation: and hereunto
tends the whole sixth Chapter, and part of the eighth Chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans, as far as the sixteenth Verse.

Three causes why justification and regeneration have a necessary coherence.
For farther declaration of the first cause, we may observe, that the benefit of
justification is not given without the benefit of regeneration: 1. Because
Christ has merited both; to wit, remission of sins, and the dwelling of God in
us by his holy Spirit. Now the holy Ghost is never idle, but always working,
and so makes those men in whom he dwells conformable unto God. 2. Because by
faith the hearts are purified: Acts 15.9.
For in them to whom Christ's merit is by faith applied, is kindled a love of
God, and earnest desire of performing things acceptable unto him. 3. Because
God imparteth the benefit of justification to none, but to them which prove
thankful: But no man can prove thankful, but he which receives the benefit
of regeneration: Therefore neither of these can be separated from the other.

We are farther to note the difference of the first and second cause. The first
shows us What Christ works in us by the virtue and power of his death. The
second teaches us What things we are bound unto in regard of the benefits we
have received.

Quest. 87. Cannot they then be saved, which be unthankful, and remain still
carelessly in their sins, and are not converted from wickedness unto God?
Ans. By no means. For as the Scripture bears witness, neither unchaste
persons, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor thieves, nor covetous men, nor
drunkards, nor slanderers, nor robbers, shall inherit the kingdom of God 1
Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5 5, 6. 1 John 1.14.
.

The Explication.
THis Question is a collection or consequent issuing out of the former
Question, and depending thereon: For whereas good works are the fruits of our
regeneration, and are the thanks we owe unto God, and evident arguments of true
faith, which whosoever have, they only are saved: on the contrary it
follows, that evil works are the fruits of the flesh, unthankfulness to
God, and clear arguments of infidelity, wherein whosoever persevere, they
cannot be saved. Therefore they who are not converted from their evil works
unto God, but continue in their sins, they are condemned for ever; 1 Cor. 6.9.
for so says the Scripture, Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, Galat. 5.21.
nor wantons, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. Whereof I tell you before,
as I also have told you before, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. Ephesians. 5 5.
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous
person, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and
of God. For for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. 1 John 3.14.
He which loves not his brother, remains in death. We may farther observe,
that here is contained another cause of good works, arising from the effect of
the contrary, namely, of evil works: because they which have not good works,
but persevere in sin, cannot be saved, seeing they are destitute of true faith
and conversion.

ON THE 33. SABBATH.
Quest. 88. Of what parts consists the conversion of men unto God?
Answ. It consists of the mortifying of the old man Romans 6 1, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24. Col. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 5.7. 2. Cor. 7.11.
, and the quickening of the new man.

Quest. 89. What is the mortifying of the old man?
Ans. To be truly and heartily sorry, that thou have offended God by thy sins,
and daily more and more to hate and eschew them Romans 8.13. Joel 2.13. Hosea 6.1.
.

Quest. 90. What is the quickening of the new man?
Ans. True joy in God through Christ Romans 5.1. and 14.17. Esaias 57.15.
, and an earnest and ready desire to order thy life according to Gods will, and
to do all good works Romans 6.10, 11. Gal. 2.20.
.

The Explication.
Here follows the Doctrine of man's conversion unto God, the chief questions
whereof are: 1. Whether man's conversion be necessary. 2. What conversion is. 3.
What are the parts of man's conversion. 4. What are the causes of conversion. 5.
What are the effects of conversion. 6. Whether man's conversion be perfect in
this life. 7. In what the conversion of the godly differs from the repentance
of the wicked.


1. Whether man's conversion unto God be necessary.
Man's Conversion unto God in this life is so necessary, that without it no man
can attain unto everlasting salvation in the life to come: according to the
Scripture, which says; Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, John
3.5. Luke 13.3 1 Cor. 6 9. Gal. 5.21. 2 Cor. 5.3. Mat. 25.10.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. They which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. If we be clothed, we shall not be found naked. Hereunto belongs the
example of the foolish Virgins, which are shut out from the Marriage, because
they had not burning Lamps filled with oil. And to this purpose is it, that
Christ gave commandment, Let your loins be girded about, Luke 12.35, 40, 46.
and your lights burning. Be ye also prepared therefore; for the Son of man
will come at an hour when ye think not. And again, The Master of that servant
will come in a day when he thinks not, and at an hour when he is not ware
of, and will cut him off, and give him his portion with the unbeleevers. And
here may we take up that notable sentence of S. Cyprian against Demetrianus:
When we are once departed hence, there remains no longer any place for
repentance; there is no work of satisfaction. Here life is either lost or
gained. Here we procure eternal salvation by our worship of God, and fruit of
faith. Neither let any man be bindered by sin, or force, from coming to obtain
salvation: For no repentance is too late for him that is yet abiding, in this
world, etc. Hence it appears how necessary conversion is unto the godly, or
those who are to be justified and saved: and therefore that in our exhortations
to amendment of life or conversion, the foundation or ground is to be laid
concerning the absolute and simple necessity of conversion it self in all
those which are to be justified

2. What man's conversion unto God is.
THe Hebrew word signifying man's conversion, is Thescubah, the Greek word
(...) and (...). Some distinguish these two words, Mat. 27.3. Heb. 12.17. Romans
11.29. (...). 1 Samuel 15.11, 29.
so that (...) in their judgment is spoken only of the repentance of the
godly; and (...) signifies also the repentance of the wicked; for, of Judas it
is said, that he repented himself; where the word (...) is used: and, of Esau
it is said, that he found no place to repentance, where the word (...) is
expressed. Howbeit of God Saint Paul says, The gifts of God are We have no one
English word to answer unto Resipiscentia: for our English Repentance,
expresses rather the Latin Poenitentia, which agrees as well to the wicked,
as to the godly.
without repentance: and the Septuagint, when they speak of God, use either
word indifferently: It * repents me that I have made Saul King. The holy One
of Israel will not * repent. The difference therefore is very little or none at
all, save that (...) imports properly a change of the mind or understanding,
and (...) insinuates an alteration of the will and purpose. Now, in man's
conversion there is a change of both these parts, the understanding and the
will. The Latins have many appellations and names, whereby they express the
same: For they call it Regeneratio, Renovatio, Resipiscentia, Conversio,
Poenitentia. Among all these, the Greek (...) is very well interpreted in
Latin by Resipiscentia; there being the same reason of both names. For, as the
Latin Resipiscentia is derived from Resipisco, which signifies to wex wise
after we have done a thing; so the Greek (...) comes from (...), which is
also to wex wise after an error or fault committed; to re-call or retract our
judgment and opinion, and to alter an evil purpose. Some render (...) by the
Latin Poenitentia, that is, repentance, or penitency: and this Poenitentia is
said to be derived either from Poenitet, which signifies to be grieved, and to
repent; or from Poema, which signifies pain and punishment: because the
grief which is in repentance, is as it were a punishment: or (as Erasmus is of
opinion) from pone tenendo; as if to repent, were to apprehend and lay hold on
a latter advisement, or to know and understand a thing after it is done.
However it be, yet the name of Poenitentia, or repentance, is more obscure than
the name of Conversio, or conversion. For repentance does not comprehend both
that from which we reclaim our selves, and that whereunto we are changed. But
conversion comprehends the whole, because it adds that mutation and change,
on which ensues a beginning of new life in a true faith. Now, repentance
signifies only the grief which is conceived after the fact or sin.

Moreover, the name of repentance is of a larger compass than the name of
conversion: For conversion is spoken only of the godly, who alone are converted
unto God: and in like manner is the Greek (...), and the Latin Resipiscentia,
spoken of the godly only; because by these three names is signified the new
life of the godly. But repentance is spoken of the wicked also, as of Judas,
who indeed repented of his wickedness, but was not converted: because the
wicked, when they sorrow, or are grieved, are not afterward converted or
corrected. Thus far have we discoursed of the names and appellations of
conversion: now let us examine what the thing it self is.

A definition hereof, proposed by his parts, may be deduced out of the 88.
question of Catechism; to wit, that it is a mortification of the old man, and
a quickening of the new man. It is more fully defined on this wise: Man's
conversion to God is, a mutation or change of a corrupt mind and will into a
good, stirred up by the Holy Ghost in the chosen, through the preaching of the
Law and the Gospel; on which ensue good works, or a life directed according to
all the commandments of God. This definition is confirmed by these places of
Scripture: Jerem. 4.1. Esaias 1.16. 1 Cor. 6.11. Psalm. 34.14. Acts 26.17, 18, 20.
If t^^ou return, return unto me. Wash you, make you clean. But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of our Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Eschew evil, and do good. The whole
definition is set down in the Acts of the Apostles; I send thee to open their
eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, that they receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them,
which are sanctified by faith in me. I showed that they should, repent, and
turn to God, and do works worthy amendment of life.

3. What are the parts of Conversion.
The two parts of Conversion: 1. Mortification. 2. Quickening.
THe parts of Conversion are in number two, as the Apostle shows; The
mortifying of the old man, and the quickening of the new man. So speak we better
with the Apostle, than if we should follow them, who make Contrition and Faith
the parts of Conversion. Now by Contrition they understand also Mortification:
by Faith they understand the joy which follows the study of righteousness
and new obedience, which are indeed effects of faith, but not faith it self:
and Contrition goes before Conversion; neither is it Conversion it self, nor
any part thereof, but only a preparing of men unto conversion; and that in the
Elect only, not in others. And this is the reason why they begin the preaching
of repentance from the law, and then come unto the Gospel, and so come back
again unto the Law.

The old man, which is mortified, is a mere sinner only, namely, our corrupt
nature. The new man, which is quickened, as he who begins to cease from
fins, namely, as our nature is regenerated. The mortification of the old man,
Mortification.
or of the flesh, is an annihilation and abolishment of the corruption of
nature in us, and contains, 1. A knowledge of sin, and of Gods wrath for
sin. 2. A grief for sin, and for the offending of God. 3. The flying and
shunning of sin. Of this Mortification the Scripture testifies thus: If ye
mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. Rent your hearts,
etc. Come, let us return to the Lord, etc. Romans 8 13. Joel 2.13. Hosea 6.1.
By this appears, that Conversion or Mortification is very unproperly
attributed unto the wicked; because in them is not any hatred or shunning of
sin, neither any grief for sin; all which, Mortification does comprehend.
Furthermore, the knowledge of sin goes before grief, because the affections of
the heart follow knowledge. Grief follows the knowledge of sin in the
wicked, on a sense of some present, and a fear of some future evil; to wit,
of temporal and eternal punishments: and this grief in the wicked properly
is neither a part of Conversion, nor a preparation thereunto; but rather a
flight and backsliding from God, and an entrance to desperation, as appears
in Cain, Saul, Judas, etc. It is called a grief not unto salvation, and, a
grief of the world, Contrition not unto salvation.
causing death, or, a grief not according unto God. But in the godly grief
springs from a sense of Gods displeasure, which they seriously acknowledge
and bewail; and it is joined with an hatred and detestation of the sin past and
committed already, and with an eschewing and avoiding all present and future
sin. This grief is a part of Conversion, or at least a preparation to the same;
Contrition unto salvation. 2 Cor. 7.10.
and it is called Contrition unto salvation, and, a sorrow according unto God,
working repentance to salvation. Now these three, knowledge of sin, grief for
sin, and flying from sin, differ in their subjects or places in man, wherein
they are seated. The knowledge of sin is in the mind or understanding: The
grief is in the heart: The flying is in the will; in that he will not
hereafter commit sin. The averting is in the heart and will, and it is an
averting unto somewhat, to wit, an averting from evil unto good, according to
that of the Psalmist: Psalm. 34.14.
Eschew evil, and do good.

This former part of Conversion is called Mortification: 1. Because, as dead
men cannot show forth the actions of one that is living; so our nature, the
corruption thereof being abolished, does no more show forth, nor exercise her
actions; that is, does no longer bring forth actual sin, original sin being
repressed: For the dead bite not. 2. Because Mortification is not wrought
without grief and lamenting. The flesh rebelleth against the spirit: and for
this cause Mortification is also called a crucifying of the flesh: Romans 6.7.
Gal. ^.17. Gal. 5.24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and the
lusts thereof. 3. Because it is a flight, or ceasing from sin. Neither is it
simply called mortification, but the mortification of the old man; because, by
it, not man's substance, but sin in man is destroyed. The words (Old man) are
also added for distinctions sake between the repentance of the godly and
ungodly: For in them not the man, but the old man; and in these, not the old
man, but the man is destroyed. The quickening of the new man is a true joy in
God, through Christ, and an earnest and ready desire of orderning our life
after Gods will, and exercising all good works. It comprehends three things*
which are contrary unto mortification: Three parts of this quickening.
1. The knowledge of Gods mercy and the applying thereof in Christ. 2. A
joyfulnesse thence arising, which is, for that God is pleased through Christ,
and for that new obedience is begun, and shall be perfected. 3. An ardent or
earnest endeavor and purpose to sin no more, arising from thankfulness: and
(because we rejoice that we have God appeased and pacified toward us) a
desire also of righteousness, and of retaining Gods love and favor. The ardent
desire of not sinning, and also of righteousness, and of retaining Gods love
and favor, is new obedience it self; according to those sayings: Being
justified by faith, Romans 5.1. and 14.15.
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Kingdom of God is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Esaias 57.15.
I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit
of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart. Romans
6.11. Gal. 2.20.
Likewise, think ye also, that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: and
in that that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God,
who has loved me, and given himself for me. Why this latter part of
Conversion is called quickening.
The latter part of Conversion is called Quickening: through Christ, is added,
because we cannot rejoice in God, except he be appeased and pacified with us:
but he is not at peace with us, but through Christ; therefore we cannot joy in
God but through Christ.

Either part of Conversion springs from faith. The reason is, because no man
can hate sin, and draw nigh unto God, except he love God; and no man loves
God, except he be endowed with faith. Whereas then in neither part there is
express mention made of faith, the cause hereof is not, in that faith is
excluded from Conversion; but because it is presupposed in the whole doctrine
of Conversion and Thankfulness, as a cause is presupposed where his effect is
defined. Object. Faith brings forth joy: Therefore not grief and
mortification. Ans. It were no absurdity to aver, that the same cause
produces diverse effects in a diverse kind of causing, and in diverse
respects. So then faith causes grief, not of it self, but by some occasion
of accident, which is sin, whereby we offend God, so bountiful a Father. It
effects joy by its own intent, because it assures us of Gods fatherly will
toward us through Christ. Repl. The preaching of the law goes before faith,
seeing that the preaching of repentance has his beginning from the law. But
the preaching of the law works grief and wrath: Therefore there is some
grief before says. Answ. I grant there is some grief before faith; but no
such, as may be part of Conversion: For the grief of the wicked, which is
before and without faith, is rather an averting from God, than a converting
unto him: See Call. Institu^. lib. 3. cap. 3. Paragraph. 2.
which being quite contrary, neither partly, nor wholly agree. But contrition
and grief in the Elect, is a certain preparation to repentance and conversion,
as has been already said.

4. What are the causes of Conversion.
principal efficient cause of our conversion is God himself, even the holy
Ghost. The holy Ghost the principal efficient. Jerem. 31.18. Lament. 5.21.
Acts 5.31.
Hence is it, that the Saints beg of God to convert them; and repentance is in
diverse places of Scripture called the gift of God. Convert thou me, and I shall
be converted: for thou art the Lord my God. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord,
and we shall be turned. Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.
Whence is collected a notable argument for proof of Christ's Divinity; seeing it
is the property of God only to give repentance and remission of sins. Acts
11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25.
Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. If God at any
time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may
come to amendment, out of the snare of the Devil.

isntrumental causes or means are; The isntrumental causes:
The Law.
The Law. The Gospel. Romans 3.20.
The Gospel. Faith.
After the doctrine of the Gospel has been preached, again the doctrine of
the Law: For the preaching of the Law goes before, preparing us to the
preaching of the Gospel: because, Without the law there is no knowledge of
sin: and therefore no grief or sorrow for sin. Afterward follows the
preaching of the Gospel, raising up contrite hearts, with a confidence of Gods
mercy through Christ. For without this preaching there is no faith, and without
faith there is no love of God; and consequently, no conversion unto God. After
the preaching of the Gospel, again follows in the Church the preaching of
the Law, that it may be the squire of our thankfulness, and course of life.
The Law then goes before conversion, and follows after the same. It goes
before it, to stir up a knowledge of sin, and grief for the same: It
follows, that unto the converted it may be a rule of their life. Hereof it
is, that the Prophets do first accuse sin, threaten punishments, and exhort to
repentance; and then afterward comfort and promise: and lastly, exhort again,
and lay down unto them the duties of piety and godliness: Such was John
Baptists preaching. So then the preaching of repentance comprehends the law
and the Gospel, though in effecting conversion the offices of both be distinct.
The next isntrumental and internal cause of conversion is faith: because
without faith there is no love of God; and except we know what the will of God
toward us is, as namely, that he will remit unto us our sins by and for
Christ, conversion will never be begun in us, neither in respect of the first
part thereof, Acts 15.^.
which is Mortification; neither in respect of the second part, which is
Quickening: for by faith are the hearts of men purified. Without faith there is
no true joy in God; neither can we without faith love God: and, Whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin. Romans 14.23.
All good works flow from faith, as from their fountain. We being justified
by faith, have peace with God.

furthering causes of conversion are; The cross and chastisements: whether our
own or others; also the punishments, benefits, and examples of others. The
helping causes. Jerem. 31.8. Psalm. 119.71. Mat. 5.16.
Thou have corrected me, etc. The subject or matter, wherein conversion is
placed, is the will, mind, heart, and all man's affections, wherein there is an
alteration by means of conversion. form of conversion is conversion it self,
with all the properties and circumstances thereof, which are: 1. In the mind
and understanding, The material cause. The form of conversion.
a right judgment concerning God, his will, and works. 2. In the will, an
earnest and ready desire and purpose of avoiding our former falls, and a
declining of Gods displeasure; with a resolution to obey God according to all
his commandments. 3. In the heart new motions, with good and reformed
affections conformable with Gods law. 4. Uprightness in our outward actions
and whole course of life, with obedience begun after Gods law.

The Object of conversion is; 1. Sin, or disobedience, The object.
which is the thing from which we are converted. 2. Righteousness, or new
obedience, which is the thing whereunto we are converted. The chief final
cause of conversion is Gods glory: The final causes. Luke 22.51. Mat. 5.16.
the next and subordinate end is our good, even our blessedness and fruition
of everlasting life. There is another end also of conversion, less principal,
to wit, the conversion of others. To this place of conversion belong those
questions of Pelagianism: Whether a man be able to convert himself without the
grace of Gods Spirit: and, Whether by free will a man be able to prepare
himself unto the receipt of grace.

The former was maintained by Pelagius, contrary to these express testimonies
of Scripture: Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. God works in as both the
will and the deed. An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. The later, the
Schoolmen, and the Papists at this day defend, contrary to the same words of
Scripture, and contrary to that direct proof against their opinion. No man
comes unto me except my Father draw him. Thomas Aquinas attributes
preparation unto free will, Vid. Su^^. Theolog. Partis primae part secunda
quaest. 109 Art. 6.
but not conversion. Now this preparation he thus colors, that it is indeeda
furtherance to the habitual grace of conversion, but yet through the free
assistance of God, moving us inwardly.

5. What are the effects of man's conversion.
THe effects of conversion are; 1. A true and ardent love of God and our
neighbor. 2. An earnest desire to obey God, according to all his
commandments, without exception. 3. All good works, even our whole new
obedience. Vid. Call. Institur. lib. 3. cap. 3. Paragraph. 16.
4. A desire of converting others, and re-calling them into the way of
salvation. In a word, the fruits of true repentance are all the duties of piety
toward God, and charity toward our neighbor.

6. Whether man's conversion be perfect in this life.
OUr conversion unto God is never perfected and accomplished in this life, but
is here in perpetual motion, until it attain unto perfection in the life to
come. We know in part. Hereunto bear witness all the complaints and prayers
of the Saints: 1. Cor 13*9. P^al. 19.12. Romans ^.2. Mat. ^.10* Romans ^. G^^. ^.
leanse thou me from my secret faults. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me? etc. Forgive us our trespasses. The wrestling also and conflicts
between the flesh and the spirit in the converted, testify hereof: The flesh
lusts against the spirit. The exhortations also of the Prophets and Apostles,
that the converted should yet be more converted, confirm this position: He
that is righteous, etc. We may thus make evident demonstrance hereof. Revel.
^2.11.
Neither the mortification of the flesh, Both parts of co^ve^sion are imperfect
in this life.
nor the quickening of the spirit is absolute and perfect in the Saints in this
life: Therefore man's whole conversion cannot be absolute and pe^fect.
Concerning the imperfection of man in the mortification of the flesh, there can
be no question or doubt thereof, it is so apparent; because the Saints of God
do not only continually wrestle with the concupiscence of the flesh, but
oftentimes also yield and give over in the conflict: oftentimes they sin and
slip, and displease God; though they defend not their sins but detest, bewail,
and study and endeavor more and more to shun and avoid them. Touching man's
imperfection in the quickening of the spirit, the same combat gives testimony:
and verity, since our knowledge is but in part only, the renewing of our will and
heart is even such; for our will follows our knowledge.

Two causes of this imperfection in man.
Now, there are two evident causes why the will of the converted tends
imperfectly to good in this life: Paul's only complaint makes sufficient
proof: I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. Romans
7.18, 19.
but sometimes forsaken by God for a season, either to examine or try them, or
to chastise and humble them: notwithstanding at length they are re-called to
repentance, so that they perish not. Muke ^.24. The (...) why God (...) r^th
(...) m^^rfe^tio^ to be ^^man. P^^^ ^^3. Ma. ^.12.
I believe Lord, Lord help mine unbelief. But the causes why God finisheth
not, as he might man's conversion in this life, are these: 1. That his Saints
may be humbled, exercised in says, patience, prayers, and skirmishing with the
flesh, and not wex proud with an opinion of perfection, but daily pray; Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord. Forgive us our trespasses. 2. That
they may more and more go forward unto perfection, and covet it more
earnestly. 3. That contemning this world, they may the more aspire and hasten
to the heavenly life; as knowing that their perfection is reserved until then.
Set your affections on things which are above. Col 3*2, 3, 4. 1 Joh^ 3.2.
Your life is hid with Christ in God Mortify therefore your members, which are
on the earth. It does not appear what we shall be: and we know, that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him. Of this imperfection Calvin has a notable
saying: In tit. 5. 3. parag. ^.
This reparation or restoring (faith he) is not finished in one moment, day, or
year; but God, b^ continual, and sometimes slow proceedings, abolisheth the
corruption of the flesh in his Elect. he cleanses them from their filth, and
consecrateth them temples unto himself, b^renuing, according unto true purity,
all their senses, that they may exercise themselves in repentance their whole
life time: and they know, that of this warfare there is no end, but in death.
You may to this purpose read the Sections immediately following as farte as to
the fifteenth, in which the whole disputation, touching the remn^nts of sin in
the Saints, is learnedly maintained against the Cathari and Anabaptists.

7. In what the conversion of the godly differs from the repentance of the
wicked.
THe name of Repentance is attributed as well to the wicked, as to the godly,
because they both agree in some things; to wit, in the knowledge of sin, and
the grief for sin: but in the rest there is great difference: Their grief
is diverse.
In the impulsive cause of repentance, which is Grief. The wicked are grieved
only for the punishment and torment ensuing, not for that they offend and
displease God. So was Cain grieved only in respect of his punishment: Genesis
4.13.
My iniquity (that is, the punishment of mine iniquity) is greater than I can
bear. Behold, thou have cast me out this day from the earth. Now the godly
hate indeed the punishment, but they are grieved especially for that God is
offended, and for their sin. So David; Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinnned: my sin is ever before me.
The good hate to sin, for the love they bear to virtue, the wicked for the
fear they stand in of punishment. So in Peter was a sorrow and grief, for
that he had offended God: in Judas for his torment ensuing, not for the Sin it
self. This difference has the Heathen Poet, Horace, described in this his
Poem: Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 16.
The good avoid offense for virtues sake:
The wicked to abstain base fear does make.


The cause of their grief is diverse.
In the cause, which breeds repentance in both. The wicked repent, by reason
of a despair, distrust, and diffidency; so that they run more and more into
desperation, murmuring, and hatred against God. But the Godly repent, by reason
of faith, and a confidence which they have of the grace of God, and
reconciliation through Christ.

The manner of their repentance is diverse.
In the form and manner of their repentance: For the repentance of the godly
is a returning unto God from the Devil, from their sins, and from their old
nature; because they do not only grieve, but also comfort and erect themselves
again by confidence in the Mediator; they trust in God, and rejoice in him,
and rely on him with David: Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean. The
repentance of the wicked is a backsliding from God unto the Devil, a hatred
of God, a flight from him, and a murmuring or repining against him, and a
beginning of desperation.

The effect of their grief is diverse.
In the effect, which their repentance works in them. In the wicked new
obedience does not follow repentance; but they go forward in their sins, and
return to their vomit, though they counterfeit repentance for a time, as Achab
did. They are mortified in feed themselves, and quite destroyed: but the old
corruption of their nature, that is, sin, is not crucified in them: and how
much the more they give them selves to repentance, so much the more is in them
a hatred of God, murmuring, flying, and turning away from God, and an
approaching unto the Devil: But in the godly new obedience follows and
accompanies repentance; and how much the more they repent, so much the more
dies the old man in them, and the study and desire of righteousness and
living well, is in them so much the more increased.

Quest 91. What are good works?
Answ. Those only which are done by a true faith Romans 14*23.
, according to Gods law Levit. 18.4. 1 Samuel 5.22. Ephesians. 2.10.
, and are referred only to his glory 1 Cor. 10.31
: and not those which are imagined by us, as seeming to us to be right and
good, or which are delivered and commanded by men Ezekiel. 20.18, 19. Esaias 29.13.
M^tthew 15.7, 8
.

The Explication.
UNder this Question is contained the Doctrine of good works; the chief
questions whereof are: 1. What good works are. 2. How they may be done. 3.
Whether the works of Saints be pure and perfectly good. 4. How our works,
though not perfectly good, please God. 5. Why we are to do good works. 6.
Whether good works merit any thing in the sight of God.


1. What good works are.
GOod works are such as are done according to the prescript rule of Gods law,
with a true faith to the glory of God only. Three things are here to be
considered: 1. The conditions and circumstances required for the making a good
work. 2. The difference between the works of the regenerate and the
unregenerate. 3. In what sort the moral works of the wicked are sins.

1. That a work which we do, Three things required to a good work:
may be good and acceptable to God, these conditions are required necessarily
unto it: Gods commandment. Mat. 15.9. How moral and natural good differ.
That it be commanded of God. In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrine
men's precepts. No creature has the right, or wisdom and understanding to
institute and ordain the worship of God. But good works (we speak of moral
good) and the worship of God are all one. Now moral good is far different from
natural good, inasmuch as all actions, as they are actions, even those of the
wicked, are good naturally, that is they are something framed by God in
nature: but all actions are not good morally, that is agreeing with the justice
of God. And thus is excluded by this condition all will worship, and that
coined device of good intentions, when as namely men do evil things, that
good things may come thereof. Likewise, when they devise and imagine works,
which they thrust upon God instead of worship. Neither does it suffice, if a
work be not evil, or not forbidden, 1 Samuel 15.22. Fizek. 20.19. Mat. 15.9.
Esaias 29.12.
but it must also be commanded, if it shall serve for Gods worship: according
to the Scripture, Obedience is better than sacrifice. Ye shall walk in my
statutes.

Object. But you will say, Things of indifferency (that is, things in
themselves neither good nor evil, and such as may be done or left undone by
men at their pleasure) are not commanded of God, and yet many of them please
God. Answ. They please him, not of their own nature, but by accident, inasmuch
as they are contained under the general of love; that is, they are done in
respect and regard of charity, and to avoid offense, and to further the
salvation of the weaker brethren. For in this regard they are in general,
though not in special. commanded by God. True faith.
That the work have his original from a true faith, which faith must be
grounded and depending on the merit and intercession of the Mediator, and by
which thou may know both thy person, and thy work to be accepted of God for
the Mediators sake. For, to do any thing with a true faith, is; 1. That the
person who is the Agent, believe that he is acceptable to God for Christ's
satisfaction. What it is to do any thing with true faith.
2. That the obedience it self pleases God, both because it is commanded by
him, and also because the imperfection thereof is accepted of God through
Christ's satisfaction, for which the person is accepted. Without faith it is
impossible for any man to please God. Neither is such a faith here sufficient,
which assures thee that God wills this, or that this work is commanded of
God: For then the wicked also should do that which God wills, with a true
faith. A true and justifying faith therefore stretches further, as both
comprehending historical faith, and also (which is the chiefest thing)
applying the promise of the Gospel unto us. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
Of this true faith are these things spoken: Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. And the reasons of both these
sayings, are not obscure: because without faith there is no love of God; and so
consequently no love of our neighbor. And whatsoever work arises not from
the love of God, is hypocrisy; yea, a reproach and contempt of God. For he
which dares to do any thing, whether it be acceptable to God or no, despises
God and dishonors him. Neither can there be a good conscience without faith:
and that which is not done with a good conscience, cannot please God. A
referring of them principally to Gods glory.
It is required, that this work be referred principally to the glory of God
only, and to his honor. Now, honor comprehends love, reverence, obedience,
and thankfulness. Therefore to do any thing to Gods glory, is so to do it,
that we may testify thereby our love, reverence, and obedience toward God,
and that by way of thankfulness for benefits received. Hereunto must our works
principally be referred, if we will that they be good and acceptable to God,
namely, to Gods glory, not to our glory and profit. Otherwise they shall
proceed from the love of our selves, not from the love of God. When as thou
do any thing, thou must not heed or ear what men speak, whether they praise
thee or no; so that thou know that it pleases God: according to the saying of
the Apostle; 1 Cor. 10.31.
Do all things to Gods glory. But yet true glory we may lawfully desire and
seek for: according to that, Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works. Briefly, Mat. 15.16.
in good works faith is required; because, except we be certainly persuaded
that they are acceptable unto God, they are done with a contempt of God. The
commandment is required, because faith has an eye unto the Word: Wherefore,
seeing there is no faith besides the Word, there can be no good works also
besides the Word. Lastly, Three sorts of works failing in the former conditions.
it is required that they be done to the glory of God, because if they be
attempted with a desire of our own glory or profit, they cannot please God. By
these former conditions all these works are excluded: Which are sins in
themselves, and repugnant unto Gods law, and his will revealed in the Word.
Which indeed are not repugnant unto the law, neither in themselves good or
evil; but which may yet by an accident be made good or evil. Works not
repugnant unto the law are made evil or sins by accident, when as they, being
not commanded of God, but imposed by men, are done, with an opinion of
worshipping God therein, or with the offense of our neighbor. These kind of
works fail in these two former conditions of good works. Which are good in
themselves, and commanded by God, but yet are made sins by accident, in that
they are unlawfully done, as not arising from those lawful causes, by which
the doers of them should be moved to them, and which in doing, they should
respect; that is, they are not done by faith, neither to this end chiefly, that
God might therein be honored. These kind of works fail in the two latter
conditions of good works.

2. The works of the regenerate and unregenerate differ, in that the good works
of the regenerate are done after all the conditions before specified: but the
good works of the unregenerate, though they be commanded by God, yet, 1. They
proceed not of faith. 2. Are not joined with an inward obedience, and therefore
are done dissemblingly, and are mere hypocrisy. 3. As they proceed not of the
right cause, that is, of faith; so are they not referred to the chief end,
which is Gods glory. Therefore they deserve not the name of good works.

3. This difference which appears in the works of the godly and the wicked,
confirms also that the moral works of the wicked are sins, though yet not
such sins, as those are, which in their own nature are repugnant unto Gods law.
For these are sins by themselves, and in their own kind: but those other are
sins only by an accident, namely, by reason of defect, because they neither
come of faith, neither are done for Gods glory. Wherefore this consequence is
not of force: All the works of the wicked and Paynims are sins. Therefore they
are all to be eschewed. For the defects only are to be eschewed, not the works.

A Table of the kinds of good works.
Of good works some are 1. Truly good, which, according unto the definition of
good works, are done, 1. By Gods commandment. 2. Of faith. and these are 3. To
Gods glory. and these are
and these are 1. Perfect: as are the works of Angels, and man's works were
before the fall, and shall be in the life to come. 2. Unperfect: as are the
works of the regenerate in this life.
2. Apparently good, such as are indeed commanded by 1. God; and are in their
kind good, but evil by accident, because they are not performed on that
manner, and to that end which they should. 2. Men for religions sake; as
traditions, advertisements, and precepts of Pharisees and Papists; Mat. 15. In
vain they worship me, etc.


2. How good works may be done.

Against the Pelagians and Papists.
THis question must be unfolded and plainly expressed, because of the Pelagians,
who attributed good works even to the unregenerate: and because of the
semi-Pelagian Papists, who have coined preparative works of free will. Good
works may be done, through the grace or assistance of the holy Ghost only, and
that by the regenerate only, whose heart is truly regenerated of the holy
Ghost by the faith of the Gospel; and that not only in their first conversion
and regeneration, but also by the perpetual and continual government of the
holy Ghost, who both works in them an acknowledgement of sin, faith, a desire
of new obedience; and also does daily more and more increase and confirm the
same gifts in them. Unto this doctrine S. Jerome also consents: Let him be
accursed (says he) Who affirms the law to be possible without the grace of
the holy Ghost. Wherefore out of this doctrine we learn, that men not as yet
regenerated, are able to do no good, and that even the holiest men sin also,
except the benefits and blessings of regeneration be continued. This we may see
in Peter, and David. Without regeneration no one part of a good work can be so
much as begun, because we are by nature evil, and dead in our sins: Mat. 7.11.
Ephesians. 2 1. Esaias 6.6.
All our righteousness is as the cloth of a menstruous woman. In which saying
also the Prophet comprehends himself, and even the holiest among men. If in
the Saints themselves naught else but sin is found before God, what then in the
unregenerate? What these are able to perform, we see in the Epistle to the
Romans, in the two first chapters.

Now, as by our selves we are not able to begin good works; so neither are we
our selves able to accomplish any good works: Matthew. 7.18. Jerem. 13.23. John
15.5. Phil. 2.13.
An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Can the Black moore change his
skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also be good, that are accustomed
to do evil. Without me can ye do nothing. It is God which works in you
both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Without imputed
righteousness, we are all in the sight of God, abomination, filth, and dung.
But the righteousness of Christ is not imputed unto us before our conversion:
Therefore it is impossible, before our conversion, that either our selves or
our works should please God. Faith is the cause of good works. Faith comes
from God: Therefore the effect also shall come from God, neither shall it go
before the cause: and therefore good works cannot be before our conversion.

An answer to the Papists question touching preparative works.
Here notwithstanding some demand of us, whether there be no preparative works?
Ans. If they mean by preparative works, such works as are unto us an occasion
of repentance, or which God uses to work in us repentance; such as are
external civil demeanor and a life led according unto the law; hearing,
reading, and meditation of the Word; yea, oftentimes the cross, and
afflictions: we may grant that there are some preparative works of this kind.
But if by preparative works they understand works before conversion, due
according to the law, whereby, as by man's good endeavor, God is allured and
encited to impart on the workers true conversion, and other his benefits and
graces; we utterly deny that there are any such: because, according to S. Paul's
rule, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. The Papists term these works merits
of congruity: Romans 14 23. The Papists merit of congruity.
that is, such as in themselves indeed are imperfect, and deserve nothing; yet
such they are, that for them it may seem meet to the mercy of God to bestow on
men, conversion and life eternal. But true it is that Paul says, God has
mercy on whom he will, not on them who deserve mercy: For no man deserves
ought of God but plagues and punishments When ye have done all those things
which are commanded you, Romans 9.18. Luke 17.10.
say, We are unprofitabe servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.

3. Whether the works of Saints be perfectly good.
THe works of the Saints are not perfectly good or pure in this life: 1.
Because the Saints, which do good works, do many things which are sins in
themselves. for which they are guilty before God, and deserve to be cast out
into everlasting pains. Cursed be he that abides not in all. Yea, the holiest
men do many evil works, commit many sins and acts which are evil in
themselves. Such was the sin of Peter, thrice denying Christ: and of David,
murdering Vriah, committing adultery, willing to cover it, and numbering the
people. 2. Because they omit many good things which they should do according
to the law. 3. Because there is not that degree of goodness in those works
that proceed from the Saints, which ought to be, and the exactness of the law
requires; for their good works are not so pure and good as God requires: Yea,
when the Saints perform most holy works, yet are they not perfect, but have
always in this life defects, and are stained with sins. For faith, and the
love of God and our neighbor, whence good works flow, are imperfect in us in
this life. The effect then shall not be perfect, because the cause is not
perfect: For we do not perfectly know and love God and our neighbor: and
therefore neither do we so cheerfully and perfectly as we ought, perform these
works unto God and our neighbor. I see another law in my members rebelling
against the law of my mind. And this is the cause why the works of the godly
cannot stand in the judgment of God. Seeing then all our works are imperfect,
let us acknowledge and bewail our defects and infirmities, and so much the more
hasten unto perfection.

Hence it is apparent, that that device of the Monks, touching works of
supererogation, A refutation of works of supererogation. Luke 10.35.
is a wicked doctrine, which they feign to be works undue to God and the law,
when men perform more then they ought. O blasphemous opinion against that of
Christ, When ye have done all, etc. Object. 1. If thou Supererogaveris.
spendest any more, etc. Therefore there are works of supererogation. Ans. In
Parables and similitudes opinions may not be grounded on every circumstance and
particle, seeing that which is like, is not altogether the same. The Samaritane
says: If thou spendest any more: not on God, 1 Cor. 7.25.
but on the sick man. Object. 2. I give mine advice (says S. Paul) speaking
of Virgins, concerning whom he had no commandment from the Lord: Wherefore,
advice may be given of doing more works than are commanded. Ans. I give my
advice, to wit, that I think it profitable and commodious for this life, Mat.
19.22.
but not meritorious of life eternal. Object. If thou will be perfect, go and
sell all that thou have: Therefore there be some exhortations, which being put
in practice, give perfection. Ans. This is but a special commandment, whereby
the proud young man is called unto humility, and to the love of his neighbor,
and to the office of an Apostleship in Jurie; and Christ requires not
supererogation at his hands, but perfection: and that also he requires, only
to cause him to understand how far off he is from it.

4. How our works, though not perfectly good, please God.
IF our works were not acceptable unto God, they should in vain be performed.
We must therefore know how they please him. Whereas then they are in themselves
imperfect, and many ways defiled, they cannot of themselves please God, by
reason of the exactness of justice which is in God. How beit they are
acceptable unto him in Christ the Mediator through faith, that is, for the
merit and satisfaction of Christ, imputed unto us by faith, and for his
intercession with the Father for us. For as we our selves please God, not in
our selves, but in his Son: so also our works, being imperfect and defiled in
themselves, yet are accepted of God for the righteousness of his Son;
wherewith, whatsoever is imperfect and unclean in them is covered, so that it
comes not into Gods sight. The person who is the Agent of good works, must
first be acceptable to God, and then the works please him. Otherwise, the very
best works of man, without faith, are not grateful unto God, but are an
abomination unto him, because they are nothing but hypocrisy. And the works of
the person which pleases God, so please God, as the person himself does. Now,
the person pleases God for the Mediators sake; that is, by the imputation of
the righteousness, and sanctification or satisfaction of Christ, being clad
therewith as with a garment before God: and therefore the works also of the
person are for the Mediators sake pleasing and acceptable unto God. God does
not examine our imperfect justice and our works, as they are in themselves,
according to the strict rigor of the law, according to which he should rather
condemn them; but regards and considers them in his Son. Hence is it that
God is said to have had respect unto Abel, Genesis 4.4.
and to his offering; to wit, in his Son, in whom Abel believed. Whence Christ
also is called our High Priest, by whom our works are offered unto God. Heb.
11.4.
He is called also the Altar, whereon our prayers and works being put, are
pleasing to God; whereas otherwise, they should stink in the fight of God.
Wherefore it follows, that we do as it were supply and repair our want and
defect with the perfection of Christ's satisfaction in Gods judgment. Therefore
says Paul: Phil. 3.9.
That I might be found in him, that is, not having mine own righteousness,
which is in the Law, but that which is of the faith of Christ, etc.

5. Why we are to do good works: and whether they be necessary.
BEfore, in the 86. Question, certain impulsive causes unto good works were
specified and expressed, which pertain unto this place: namely, Our
regeneration, having a necessary coherence with our Justification: Our
gratefulness for our Redemption: Our glorifying and magnifying of God. The
confirmation of our faith and election; and our good example unto others,
whereby to win them unto Christ. These weighty causes may most amply be
enlarged, if we reduce them to these three Classes or principal heads: to wit
if we say that good works are to be done by us in respect, 1. Of God. 2. Of our
selves. 3. Of our neighbor.

Inrespect of God they are to be done: In respect of God: and that* Because of
the commandment. Mat. 5.16.
1. Because of the commandment of God: Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
God requires the beginning of obedience in this life, and the perfection
thereof in the life to come. Wherefore we are necessarily to give our selves to
good works, John 15.12. Romans 6.13. 1 Theff. 4.3.
that we may perform due obedience unto God, who requires it of us. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another. Being made free from sin, ye are made
the servants of righteousness. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification. For Gods glory.
For the glory of God. For the setting forth of Gods glory is the chief end why
God commands and will have good works to be done of us, that both by them we
may worship and magnify God, and others, seeing the same, may glorify out
heavenly Father, like as that saying of Christ before alleged out of S. Matthew.
does teach us. To testify our thankfulness.
Because of that thankfulness which the regenerate owe. It is right and just
that by whom we are redeemed, and from whom we receive exceeding great
benefits, and those of all sorts, we should also love, magnify, worship,
reverence him, and declare our love and thankfulness toward him by our good
works and obedience. But God deserves all our duties by his benefits, and we
merit not his benefits by any or all our duties: therefore we owe unto him
thankfulness in lieu of them, which is to be declared in our obedience and
good works. Romans 2.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercy of God, that you give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving
of God. Ye are made an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

In respect of our selves: and that,
For confirmation to our selves of our faith. Mat. 7.18. James 1.20. Phil. 1.11.
That by our good works we may make testimony of our faith, and may be assured
thereof. Every good tree brings forth good fruit. That faith which is without
works, is dead. Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Now by our works we must needs know,
that we have faith, because the effect is not without his cause; and we must
know the cause by his proper effect. When as therefore we find not in our
selves good works, or new obedience, we are hypocrites, neither have we faith,
but an evil conscience. For true faith only (which never wants all her
fruits) brings forth, as a fruitful tree, good works, obedience, and
amendment of life: and these fruits likewise discern and distinguish true faith
from historical, and temporary faith, and so also from hypocrifie. For our
assurance of remission of sins.
That we may be assured that we have obtained remission of sins through
Christ; and are for Christ's sake justified before God: for justification and
sanctification are benefits linked together, which so cleave together, and that
necessarily, as they never can be severed or pulled asunder. For Christ
obtained both for us at once; namely, both remission of sins, and the holy
Ghost, who stirs up in us by faith the study and desire of good works and
new obedience. For our assurance of our Election. 2. Pet. 1.10.
That we may be assured of our Election and Salvation: Give diligence to make
your calling and election sure. These proceed from the cause next going before.
For God has chosen from everlasting of his free mercy those only which are
justified for the merit of his Son. Whom he predestined, Romans 8.30.
them also he called, and them also he justified. Therefore we are assured of
our Election through Justification; and that we have received from Christ our
Justification (which is never given unto the Elect without Sanctification) we
know by faith: And, that we have faith, we perceive by the works of faith, true
obedience, and true conversion. For exercise of our faith.
That by good works our faith may be exercised, cherished, strengthened, and
advanced. For they who give themselves over to corrupt lusts against their
conscience, in them faith cannot be; and therefore neither a good conscience,
neither a confidence and trust in God, as being appeased and favorable unto
them. For we have through faith only a feeling of Gods favor toward us, and
a good conscience. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. I put thee in
remembrance, Romans 3.13. 2 Timothy 1.6.
that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my
hands. To grace our calling. Ephesians. 4.1.
That by good works we may show forth and grace our life, profession, and
calling: I pray you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called. For avoiding of punishments. Mat. 7.19. Romans 8.13. Psalm. 39.12.
That we may escape temporal and eternal punishments: Every tree that brings
not forth good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire. If ye live
according to the flesh, ye shall die. Thou with rebukes do chasten man for
sin. To obtain rewards. 1 Timothy 4.8.
That we may obtain at Gods hands corporal and spiritual rewards: which,
according to the promise, accompany good works. Godliness is profitable unto
all things, etc. For except God would have the hope of rewards, and the fear
of punishments, to be motive causes unto good works, he would not use them in
admonitions, promises, and comminations.

To edify him by our example. 2 Cor. 4.15. Phil. 1.24.
That we may be profitable to our neighbors by our good example, and so edify
them. In respect of our neighbor: and that,
All things are for your sakes, that most plenteous grace by the thankesgiving
of many may redound to the praise of God. That I abide in the flesh, is more
needful for you. To avoid offense. Mat. 18.^. Romans 2.24.
That offenses may be avoided: Woe be unto that man, by whom offenses come. The
Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. To win the
faithless unto Christ. Luke 22.32.
That we may win unbeleevers, and by our words and deeds, and example convert
them unto Christ: When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

Here the question is moved, Whether good works be necessary to salvation.
Some have defended simply and peremptorily, that they are necessary thereunto;
others on the contrary have maintained stiffly, that good works are pernicious
to salvation. Both forms of speech are ambiguous and scandalous, especially
the latter; which seems to condemn, not only the confidence on good works,
but also the study and desire of performing them. Wherefore the latter is
utterly to be rejected. The former must thus be declared or expounded: That
Good works are necessary to salvation, not as a cause of our salvation, nor as
a merit deserving such a reward, but as part of salvation, it self, or an
Antecedent of salvation which is to come after, or as a means without which we
cannot attain the end. And after the same sort also may be said, That good
works are also necessary unto justice and righteousness, or, unto
justification, or, in them that are to be justified; namely, as a consequent
following Justification, wherewith Regeneration is unseparably joined. But yet
I would not use these kinds of speaking: 1. Because they are ambiguous and
doubtful. 2. Because they breed contentions, and administer occasion of
cavalling unto the Adversaries. 3. Because the Scripture does not use them;
which must be followed of us in speaking. more safely say, that good works are
necessary in them that are justified, and them that are to be saved. To say,
that they are necessary in them who are to be justified, is an ambiguous kind
of speech, seeing it may be so understood, that they are required before
Justification, and so become a cause of Justification. But Augustine has
rightly refuted this opinion, saying: Good works go not before them that are
to be justified, but follow them that are justified. Hence arises a direct
answer to this objection. Obj. That is necessary to salvation, which whosoever
have not, they cannot be saved. But they which have no good works cannot be
saved, as it is said in the 87. Question of this Catechism: Therefore good
works are necessary to salvation. Ans. We answer by distinguishing the Major
proposition. That, without which no man can be saved, is necessary to
salvation: that is, either as a part of salvation, or, as some necessary
precedent of salvation; and so we grant the conclusion: but not as a cause or
merit of salvation. If the Major be thus understood, we condescend unto it.
For good works are very necessary to salvation, or rather in them that are to
be saved (for it were better so to speak and avoid ambiguity) as a part of
their salvation, and as a precedent thereof, but not as a cause or merit.

6. Whether good works merit any thing before God.
THis sixth Question arises out of the fifth, as the fourth did out of the
third. For when men hear that we receive rewards of God by our works, they
presently conclude, that we merit somewhat by them. Wherefore we are to know,
that good works indeed are necessary, and therefore are to be done also for the
rewards ensuing them; Out works merit not at Gods hands,
but yet that they merit nothing, no not the least of Gods gifts, either
corporal or spiritual. The reasons hereof are most true and evident: Because
they are imperfect, and that, 1. In parts. 2. In degrees. Gal. 5.17.
Our works are imperfect, as well in parts, as in degrees of accomplishment. In
parts; because we omit many things which the Law prescribes: and do many evil
things which it prohibiteth, and always mingle evil with good, as both
Scripture and experience testifies. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to the other, so that
ye do not the same things that ye would. Now, imperfect works not only merit
nothing, but are also condemned in the judgment of God: Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things, etc. They are imperfect in degrees; Deuteronomy.
27.26.
because the best works of the Saints are unclean, and defiled in Gods sight,
seeing they are not done by such as are perfectly regenerate, nor with so great
love of God and our neighbor, as the Law requires. The Prophet says, even of
good works, Esaias 64.6.
We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as
filthy clouts. Phil. 3.8.
Paul Pronounces as much of his: I think all things but loss, for the
excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all
things loss, and do judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ. Thus
do the Saints judge and account of their own righteousness and merit.
Because they are none of ours, but are wrought by God in us. Phil. 2.13. 1 Cor.
4.7.
If we do any good works, they are not ours, but are belonging to God only,
who works them in us by his Spirit; It is God which works in you both the
will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. What have thou which thou have
not received? We are evil trees: if then we do any good, that must needs come
from God only. It is God which freely makes us good trees, and which works
good fruits in us: as it is said; We are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he has prepared, that we
should walk in them. If then we perform any good, it is the gift of God, and
not our merit. Mat. 20.16.
Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine own? He must needs be
very impudent, who having received of gift an hundred florens of a rich man,
thinks that he deserves a thousand more, by receiving of those hundred;
whereas rather he is by this gift received, bound to the rich man, and not the
rich man to him. Because God is not bound to reward any.
No creature, which does even the most perfect works, can thereby merit ought at
Gods hand, or bind God unto him, to give any thing of debt, and according to
order of justice. The reason hereof does the Apostle yield: Who has given him
first? We deserve no more our preservation, than we deserved our creation. He
did owe nothing unto us when he created us, so neither now does he owe us our
preservation, neither is he bound to give us any thing: but he did and does
both, of his own free will and mere loving kindness. He receives no
benefits at our hands. We can bestow no benefits upon our Creator. Now, where
there is no benefit, there is no merit. For a merit presupposes a benefit
received. Because there is no proportion between our works and Gods rewards.
There is no proportion between our works, which are utterly imperfect, and the
excellency of those great blessings and benefits, which the Father gives us
freely in his Son. Lest we should glory in our selves.
He that rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord. But if we merit by our works
remission of our sins, man should have in himself whereof to rejoice, neither
should the glory be given to God. If Abraham were justified by his works, 1
Cor. 1.13. Romans 4 2.
he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God. Because we are justified ere we
do them. Romans 9.11, 2, 13.
We are just, before we do good works. For ere Esau and Jacob were borne, and
when they had neither done good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain
according to election (not by works, but by him that calls) it was said unto
her, The Elder shall serve the younger: As it is written, I have loved Jacob,
and have hated Esau. Wherefore we are not then justified before God, when we
do good works; but we then do good works, when we are justified. Because all
our good works are due.
Our good works are all due: for all creatures owe unto their Creator worship
and thanksgiving; so that although we should never sin, yet can we not
sufficiently declare and show forth our thankfulness, whereof we are indebted.
Luke 17.10.
When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to do.

The opinion of merit weakneth consolation. Ga^. 3 40. Romans ^.16.
8. The opinion of merit, and justification by works, impaireth Christian
consolation disquieteth the conscience, and causes men to doubt and despair
of their salvation. For when they hear the voice of the Law sounding in their
ears, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things; and withal
consider their own imperfection, they are forthwith convicted in conscience,
that they never performed all things therein exacted. Wherefore they are
constrained to waver always uncertain, and to dread the curse. But faith
gives sure consolation and comfort; because it relieth on the promise, which
is certain. The inheritance is by faith, that it might come by grace, and the
promise might be sure to all the seed. Because then Christ had died in vain.
Gal. 2.21.
If we should obtain righteousness by our own works, the promises should be
made void: For in Abraham shall all the Nations be blessed. And Christ also
should have died in vain. Because then we should be otherwise justified th^n
the Fathers of the old Church John 14.6. 1 Timothy 2.5. Ephesians 4.5. Heb. 13.8. Acts
4.12.
There should not be one and the same reason and cause of our salvation, if this
doctrine of the merit of works should be admitted: Abraham and the Thief on
the Cross should have been otherwise justified, then we are justified. But
there is but one way leading to salvation: I am the way, the truth, and the
life. There is one Mediator between God and men. There is one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism. Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, the same is also for ever.
There is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Therefore
we shall not be saved by good works, or for our good works. Because then Christ
were not a perfect Savior.
Christ should not give us full and perfect salvation, and so neither should he
be a perfect Savior, if some thing were as yet required of us, whereby we
should be made just. For look how much of our merit were added unto his, so
much should be detracted and subducted from his merit: But Christ is our
perfect Savior. For (as Paul witnesses) God with his glorious grace has made
us accepted in his beloved. Ephel. 1.6, 7. and 2.8. 1 John 1.7. Acts 2.12.
By whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
according to his rich grace. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not
of your selves: it is the gift of God. The blood of Jesus Christ purges us
from all sin. There is no salvation in any other. Object. God calls those
blessings, which he promises to them that do good works, rewards and meed.
Now meed presupposes merit: Therefore good works do merit before God. Ans.
Amongst creatures sometimes it does, but never with God: because no creature
can merit at Gods hands, seeing God owes naught unto any creature. But they
are called the rewards or meed of our works in respect of God, forasmuch as he
recompenceth most fully those things which we do: neither yet is that
recompense due. For there can come no commodity unto God by us; and therefore
God is not bound, no not to make the least recompense. For he stands no ways
in need of our works; and unto whom they can add or bring nothing at all, of
him doubtless we are not able to merit or deserve any thing. But there comes
good rather unto our selves by good works: For the good works which we do, are
a conformity with God; and therefore are Gods gift, by which gift and benefit
we are bound unto God, but not God unto us. Wherefore it is no less absurd to
say, that we merit salvation at Gods hands by good works, than if one should
say; Thou have given me an hundred florens, therefore thou ought also to
give me a thousand florens. Howbeit, God enjoyneth us good works, and
promises free recompense to them that do them, as a father promises rewards
unto his sons.

ON THE 34. SABBATH.
Quest. 92. Which is the law of God?
Ans. God spoke all these words Exodus 20.1. Deuteronomy. 5.6.
.
1. I am the Lord thy God, which has brought thee out of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, thou shall have no other gods in my sight.

2. Thou shall make to thee no graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the
earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day: six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of works, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and thy stranger
that is within thy gate. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall do no murder.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his servant,
nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.

The Explication.
Now follows the doctrine of the Law, which is the Canon and Rule of good
works. The chief questions concerning the Law are: 1. What the law is in
general. 2. What are the parts of Gods law. 3. How far the law is, and is not
abrogated by Christ. 4. In what the moral law differs from the Gospel. 5.
How the Decalogue is divided. 6. What is the true meaning of the Decalogue, and
of every commandment thereof. 7. How far forth the law may be kept of the
regenerate. 8. What is the use of the law.


THe first four of these questions pertain to this 92. Question of
Catechism: the fifth to the 93. Question: the sixth to the 94. and to the rest
which follow, until the 114. Question: the seventh to the 114. Question: the
eighth to the 115. Question of the Catechism.

1. What the law is in general.
THe Latin word Lex (which signifies the law) is derived from Lego, which
signifies to read and publish; or from Lego, which signifies to choose. With
the former derivation agrees the Hebrew word, with the latter the Greek word:
For in the Greek, the Law is called (...), which comes from a word that
signifies to divide and distribute; and therefore the Law is so called,
because it distributeth unto every one proper charges and functions. In Hebrew
the Law is called Thorah, that is, doctrine: because Laws are published unto
all, that every one may learn them. And hereof is it, that the ignorance, or
not knowing the Law does not excuse: nay, rather they who are ignorant of those
Laws which belong unto them, do even in that very respect sin, because they
are ignorant.

The Law in general is a sentence or decree, commanding things that are
honest, binding creatures endued with reason unto obedience, with a promise of
reward, and commination or threatening of punishment. It is a sentence
commanding things that are honest, otherwise it is no Law. It binds creatures
endued with reason: for the Law* was not made for them, who are not bound to
obedience. With a promise of reward: The Law freely promises blessings unto
those who perform obedience; because no obedience can be meritorious before
God. Object. But the Gospel also promises freely good things and blessings:
Therefore the Law differs not from the Gospel. Ans. The Law promises freely
after one manner; and the Gospel after another. The Law promises freely, with
a condition of our obedience. But the Gospel promises freely, without the
works of the Law, with a condition of faith, not with a condition of our
obedience. Wherefore the Gospel does not promise blessings freely, without all
condition, but without such a condition, as wherewith the Law promises
blessings unto us. And with a commination or threatening of punishment:
otherwise, the Law were a vain and empty sound, and should effect nothing.
Plato says, A Law is a right form of government, directed to the best end by
fit means, proposing punishments to transgressors, and rewards to the
obedient. Oftentimes by the word Law, the course and order of Nature, appointed
by God, is improperly signified. So we say, The Law, that is, the order of
Nature requires, that fruit spring of a tree. But more improperly does S. Paul
call original sin the law of sin; because as a law it constrains us to sin.

2. What are the parts of the Law.
Laws are some divine, and some humane. Humane laws are they, which being
established by men, do bind certain men unto certain external actions,
whereof there is no divine commandment or prohibition expressly, with a promise
of reward, and commination or threatening of punishments corporal and
temporal. These humane laws are either Civil, or Ecclesiastical. Civil
laws are such as are made by Magistrates, or some whole body and corporation,
concerning a certain order of actions to be observed in civil government, in
bargains and contracts, in judgments and punishments, etc. Ecclesiastical or
Ceremonial laws are those, which are made by the consent of the Church,
concerning some certain order of actions to be observed in the Ministry of the
Church, which are the limitations of circumstances, serving for the Law of God.

Divine laws, that is, the laws of God, partly belong unto Angels, and partly
unto men, and partly unto certain special men. And these do not only bind
unto external actions, but require further, internal or inward qualities,
actions, and motions; neither propose they corporal and temporal rewards and
punishments only, but eternal also and spiritual; and they are the ends, for
which humane laws are made. Divine laws are some eternal and unchangeable,
some changeable; yet so, that they can be changed of none but of God himself,
who made them.

Three parts of Gods Law:
The parts of the Law of God are in number three; the Moral, Ceremonial, and
Civil or Judicial Law.

1. The Moral Law.
The Moral Law is a doctrine, agreeing with the eternal and immortal
wisdom and justice which is in God, discerning things honest and dishonest,
known by nature, and ingendered in reasonable creatures at the creation, and
afterward often repeated again and declared by the voice of God by the
Ministry of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, teaching that there is a God,
and what he is, and what we ought to do, and what not to do, binding all the
reasonable creatures to perfect obedience, both internal and external,
promising the favor of God and everlasting life to those which perform perfect
obedience, and denouncing the wrath of God and everlasting pains and
punishments unto them, who are not perfectly correspondent thereunto, except
there be granted remission of sins, and reconciliation for the Son of God the
Mediators sake.

An explication of some clauses in the definition.
Agreeing with the eternal and immortal wisdom.] That this Law is eternal,
is hereof apparent and manifest; because it remains from the beginning unto
the end of the world one and the same: and we therefore were created, and are
redeemed by Christ, and are regenerated by the holy Ghost, to observe and keep
this law in this life, and in the life to come, to wit, that with all our heart
we love God and our neighbor. I write no new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment, which ye have had from the beginning. 1 John 2.7.


Afterward often repeated again.] God repeated the law of nature, which was
engraven in our minds: 1. Because it was obscured and darkened by the fall; yea,
and many points thereof were wholly blotted out, and altogether lost. 2. Lest
the remnant of it, which was yet in men's minds, should be reputed for a mere
opinion without any truth or ground, and so at length be quite extinguished.

2. The Ceremonial law.
The Ceremonial, or laws derived of God by Moses concerning ceremonies, that
is, external solemn actions and gestures, which in the public worship of God
are to be performed, with the due observation of the same circumstances which
are prescribed, binding the Jews until the coming of the Messiah: that they
should distinguish this people and the Church from others; and should be
signs, symbols, types or shadows of spiritual things to be fulfilled in the
New Testament by Christ. What Ceremonies are.
That this definition may be understood, we must know what Ceremonies are: to
wit, solemn external actions, that is, often to be after the same manner, and
with the same circumstances reiterated, ordained of God, or of men also, to be
used in the external service or worship of God, for order, or signification
sake. But the ceremonies, which are ordained of God, are simply and absolutely
divine worship. The ceremonies which are ordained and instituted of men, if
they be good, are a worship only serving for divine worship.

3. The Judicial law.
The Judicial, are laws concerning the civil order or civil government, or
maintenance of external discipline among the Jews, according to the tenor of
both Tables of the Decalogue; that is, of the order and offices of Magistrates,
judgment, punishments, contracts, and of the distinguishing and bounding of
dominions, delivered of God by Moses, for the settling and preserving of the
Jews Commonwealth, binding all Abraham's posterity, and distinguishing them
from the rest of mankind, until the coming of the Messiah; and further, that
they should be the bond of the preservation and government of the Mosaicall
Commonwealth, until the Messiah was manifested; and certain marks whereby
this people, which was bound unto them, should be discerned from all others,
and should withal be kept in honest discipline and good order: lastly, that
they might be types of that order which should be in Christ's Kingdom, that is,
of the spiritual Regiment of the Messiah. The Moral Law is the fountain of
all other good laws, even as many as deserve the name of laws, and it wholly
agrees with the Decalogue, and is thence also deduced by necessary consequent,
so that whosoever violateth the one, transgresses the other also. Ceremonial
and Civil laws, whether they be divine or humane (so that they be good) are
verily agreeable unto the Decalogue; but yet they are not deduced thence by a
necessary consequence, as the Moral laws are, but serve thereto, as certain
prescriptions of circumstances. Hereby plainly appears the difference of
these laws. For it is one thing to follow necessarily out of the Decalogue,
and another thing, to agree with, and serve to the performance and execution of
the Decalogue. How the Moral differs from the Ceremonial and Judicial law.
This difference yet is diverse, because there is not one and the same
government of the Commonwealth and of the Church: neither is there the same
end of these laws: neither are all these laws after the same manner abrogated.
But the chief and especial difference of these laws is drawn from the
binding, time, and knowledge, or manifestation. The Moral ordinances are
known by nature: The Ceremonial and civil are not known by nature, but are
instituted according to the diversity of causes and circumstances. The Moral
bind all men, and even the Angels also: The Ceremonial and Civil were only
prescribed unto the people of Israel. And therefore Job, Jethro, Naaman the
Syrian, and others, who are re-counted for religious men, that is, such as were
born of Paynims, and lived amongst them, but yet worshipped the God, which was
manifested among the people of Israel, they did not observe the Leviticall
Ceremonies, and yet did nevertheless please God. And the very ordinances
themselves, concerning the Ceremonies and the form of civil government, show
that they bind Abraham's posterity only, whom God would by this form of
government and worship distinguish from other Nations.

The laws of the Decalogue are perpetual in this life, and after this life:
The ceremonial and civil were delivered of God at a certain time and again
abolished. The Moral laws speak both of internal and external obedience: The
ceremonial and civil speak of external obedience only; albeit neither does
this please God without the internal and moral obedience. The Moral laws
are not limited by certain circumstances, but are general: as, that there is a
time to be granted for the ministry and service of God, and that the ministry
is to be observed: that adulterers and thieves are to be punished. But the
ceremonial and civil laws are special, or a limitation of circumstances,
which are to be observed in external rites or actions both Ecclesiastical and
Civil: as that the seventh day is to be allotted for the ministry and service
of God: that the tenths and first fruits are to be given to the Priests: that
adulterers are to be stoned: that thieves are to be amerced with a fourfold
restitution. The ceremonial and the civil laws also are types or figures of
other things* for whose cause they are ordained: The Moral signify or
prefigure nothing, but are signified by the rites and ceremonies. The Moral
are the end, for which other laws are to be made; or, they are the principal
service and worship of God: The ceremonial and civil serve for the moral
ordinances, that to them obedience might be rightly and duly performed: that a
certain time, and certain rites may be observed in the public ministry of
the Church; that the ministry it self may be maintained and preserved.

The Moral Law, the Natural, and Decalogue differ. The Decalogue is the sum
of the Moral laws, What difference is between the Moral Law, the law of
Nature, and the Decalogue.
which are scattered through the whole Scripture of the Old and New Testament.
The Natural law does not differ from the Moral in nature not corrupted: but
in nature corrupted, a good part of the natural law is darkened by sins, and
but a little part only concerning the obedience due to God, was left remaining
in man's mind after the fall: for which cause also God has in his Church
repeated again, and declared the whole sentence and doctrine of his law in the
Decalogue. Therefore the Decalogue is a restoring and re-entring or
re-inforcing the law of Nature; and the law of Nature is a part only of the
Decalogue. The distinctions of these laws are to be known, both in respect of
the differences of the same (without the knowledge whereof, their force and
meaning cannot be understood) and also in respect of their abrogating; and
lastly, for the knowledge and understanding of their use.

4. How far the Law is, and is not abrogated by Christ.
THe common and true answer to this demand is, That Moses Ceremonial and
Civil Law is abrogated as touching obedience: and the Moral Law also as
concerning the curse thereof, but not as concerning obedience thereunto. The
Ceremonial and Civil are abroga^ed, as touching their obedience, and the
reasons hereof:


That the Ceremonial and Civil, or Judicial laws are so abrogated by
Christ's coming, that they now bind none unto obedience, and in our times carry
no show of laws, is proved: Dan. 9.27. Psalm. 110.
Because the Prophets in the Old Testament foretold of this their abrogation
and cancelling: Christ shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week, and
in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. 2. Christ and his
Apostles in the new Testament have expressly desciphered this abrogation of the
Ceremonial and Judicial Law. Acts 7.8. Heb. 7.11, 12, 13, 18. and 8.8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13. Acts 15.28, 29.
And, in stead of many testimonies, it shall suffice to allege that one Canon
of the Apostles Council. It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay
no more burden on you than these necessary things. 3. The causes being altered,
the Laws also depending thereon are altered. But the causes of the Ceremonial
and Civil Laws were; one, that the people of the Jews, of whom Christ was
come, might by this form of worship and regiment, be distinguished from other
Nations, until his coming: another; that they might be types of the Messiah,
and his benefits: both which causes have now ceased since the exhibiting of the
Messiah. 1. The distinction of Jews and Gentiles is now taken away: He is our
peace, which has made of both one, Ephesians. 2.14.
and has broken the stop of the partition wall, in abrogating through his
flesh the hatred; that is, the Law of commandments, which stands in
ordinances. In Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, Gal. ^.15.
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. 2. That the signification of the
ceremonies is fulfilled by Christ, is every where taught: Heb. 9.8. Luke. 6.16.
Col. 2 16.
Whereby the holy Ghost this signified, that the way unto the Holiest of all
was not yet opened. The Law and the Prophets endured until John. Let no man
condemn you in meat and drink. Against the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law,
the Jews thus object: Object. 1. Moses religious orders or worship were, by
virtue of the commandment annexed to them, A^c^^tation of Jewish objections
against this doctrine. Genesis 1^.13. Exodus 12.24. Psal^^ 132.15. Exodus 31.16.
to continue for ever; and the Jewish kingdom, by Gods promise. Circumcision
is an everlasting covenant. The Passover was to be kept holy by an ordinance
for ever. This is my rest for ever. The Sabbath is an everlasting covenant. Thy
throne, O God, endures for ever. Therefore Moses form of religion and polity
was not to be repealed by Christ. Ans. In this argument the fallacy of taking
that to be simply averred, which is spoken but in part, is twice used. For the
Major proposition treats of an absolute perpetuity, the Minor of a restrained
and limited perpetuity; since that in the testimonies alleged, an infinite or
unlimited perpetuity of the Jewish ceremonies and kingdom is not promised, but
a continuance until Christ, who was to be heard after Moses. For the particle
(Holam) signifies every where in Scripture not eternity, but the continuance
of a long and yet definite time. So is it used in that text of Scripture; And
he shall serve him for ever: that is, until the year of Jubilee; as
appears by the conference of that Law, Exodus 21.6.
with the Law touching the year of Jubilee, enrolled and registered, Levit.
25.40. Again, to grant that which they urge in their Minor, that an absolute
perpetuity is promised in the fore-rehearsed quotations, yet this perpetuity is
not of the types and shadows themselves, but of the spiritual things
signified and figured by them; to wit, that their truth shall endure for ever
in the Church, yea though the signs and shadows be by Christ abolished. For
thus does Circumcision continue unto this day; and thus is there a perpetual
Sabbath in Christ's Kingdom, and shall be perpetual in life everlasting.
Lastly, thus the kingdom of David is established for everlasting in the throne
of Christ.

Object. 2. The worship which lizekiel in his fortieth Chapter, and so forth to
the end of his Prophecy, describes, pertains to the Kingdom of the
Messiah, and is therein to be retained. But that worship is merely typical
and ceremonial: Therefore a typical and ceremonial kind of worship is to be
retained in the Kingdom of the Messiah; whence this inference is good, that
the Jewish religion, and polity, or form of government was not to be
abolished, but reformed rather, and re-established by the Messiah.

Ans. The Major of this Syllogism is not simply and universally true, because
there the Prophet indeed prophesies of the kingdom of the Messiah, but not
only thereof. For withal he describes the restitution of the ceremonial
worship in Judea, which should be after the return of the people out of the
captivity of Babylon, and should stand in force until the coming of the
Messiah. We deny also the Minor. For in the alleged Prophecy, not only the
restoring of the Jewish types is promised, but under the description of the
types the spiritual state and stateliness of the Church, which should be under
the kingdom of the Messiah, is shadowed and insinuated; which state and
stateliness was to be begun in this life, and to be perfected in the life to
come. Whereof good proof may be made by these evident arguments: Arguments to
prove that under the typical description before alleged, the spiritual
condition and estate of the Church is figured.
1. The story of Esdras testifies unto us that this restoring was not
accomplished until the coming of Christ: and withal other Oracles also of the
Prophets, concerning the base and contemptible coming and kingdom of the
Messiah in this world, suffer us not to believe that there shall be any such
magnificent and pompous estate of the Church on earth (as the Jews dream of)
no not after the coming of the Messiah. Wherefore that forementioned restoring
of Jerusalem, that is, the Church, is either to be understood spiritually; or
of force we must grant this absurdity, namely, that this Prophecy never was,
nor shall be performed. (The house of Israel shall no more defile mine holy
Name, neither they nor their Kings) does necessarily enforce a spiritual sense
and meaning touching the perfection of the life to come. Ezekiel. 43.7.
For usual and customable it is with the Prophets, to unite the entry of
Christ's kingdom, with the full and perfect establishment thereof. Ezekiel. 47.1.
waters issuing out of the Temple, spoken of in the same Prophecy, may not be
interpreted to be elementary waters, but shadow and represent unto us the
plentiful effusion from heaven, of the gifts of the holy Ghost in Christ's
kingdom. John in his Revelation, Chap. 21, 22.
where the spiritual and heavenly Jerusalem, that is, the glorified Church of
the New Testament is desciphered in words and terms literally borrowed from
this description of Ezekiel. Wherefore this Prophecy makes naught to prove
the continual observation of ceremonies, in the kingdom of the Messiah.
Object. 3. The best and most just form of government is always to be
followed. But there can be none better or juster than that, which God himself
settled among his people the Jews: therefore that is to be followed and
retained. Answ. Either the Major of this reason may be distinguished, or the
Minor denied with an exposition. For that which in positive laws (that is,
such as define the circumstances of the duty of Magistrates and subjects, and
Citizens one toward another) is in every place, and at all times most just,
the same are Law makers to follow: But in that form of the Mosaicall
government, many things are applied to the state and condition of that Nation,
Region, Time, and Ceremonial worship, the observation whereof, would now be
neither just nor profitable, because the causes, for which those laws should
be given to the Jews, are taken away or changed: as, of giving a bill of
divorce, of marrying the widows of their kinsmen. Wherefore God will not that
all Nations and ages be tied unto those laws. An argument whereof is, that
even at that very time* when he commanded these laws to be observed, he bound
not all Nations, but only Abraham's posterity unto them; and yet some that lived
according to such civil laws of other Nations, as were not wicked and ungodly,
did please him; as Naaman the Syrian, and whosoever of the Gentiles were
converted; who yet notwithstanding did not observe the ceremonies and civil
laws of the Jews. And Paul says, we must obey not only those which govern
according to Moses laws, but also other Magistrates, as the ordinance of God;
as long as they command nothing contrary to the commandments of God. And
himself also submitted himself to the Roman laws, when he appealed unto
Caesar, Rom.13.2.
and when he said, it was unlawful to bind one uncondemned which was a
Roman. Furthermore, if any man will hence conclude, That seeing it is lawful
to use the Laws of other Commonweals, as the Athenian, Roman, and such
like: it is therefore much more lawful and beseeming to imitate and follow the
form of that Commonwealth, which was immediately ordered and constituted by
God himself. We easily grant, that wise and discreet Magistrates and
Lawgivers may take as well thence as out of other governments (if there be any
thing convenient and agreeing with their subjects with whom, and the time
wherein they live) so that all opinion of necessity be taken away; that is, so
that it be not therefore commanded or retained, because it was prescribed by
Moses to the Jews; but because there are good reasons, wherefore now also it
should be done so: and if the causes be changed, then that the liberty also of
changing these laws by public authority be retained. Neither yet is Moses law
any whit impeached by this liberty of cleaving to it, or leaving it, and
appointing other ordinances in place thereof; since in so doing, we do no more
than cease to observe that which was never imposed on us.

How far forth the moral Law is abrogated.
Hitherto have we entreated of the abrogation of the Ceremonial and Civil
laws. Touching the moral law, it is in some part abrogated by Christ, and in
some part not abrogated. It is abrogated in respect of the faithful, two
ways: 1. As touching the curse of it; 1. As touching the course of it. Psalm.
143.2.
so that it cannot condemn such as are justified by faith in Christ, by reason
of the merit of Christ imputed unto them: or, as touching justification;
because judgment is not given of us according to the Law, but according to the
Gospel. John 3.36.
For the judgment of the Law would condemn and cast us away, whose dreadful
voice is: Romans 8.1.
In thy sight shall no man living be justified. But the judgment of the Gospel
is; He that believes in the Son of God has everlasting life. This abrogation
of the Law is the first and principal part of Christian liberty, whereof it is
said; There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 6.14.
Ye are not under the law but under grace. 2. As touching constraint.
2. As touching constraint. For now the Law does not any more express and
wrest obedience from us as a Tyrant, or as a Master enforcing and constraining
a lewd servant unto obedience. The reason is, because Christ begins a
voluntary and free obedience in us by his Spirit, so that we yield voluntary
obedience unto the Law. Romans 6.14.
Of this part of Christian liberty the Apostle speaks: Sin shall not have
dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace. Which liberty
and exemption from the Law, that it is, he afterward unfoldeth at large in the
whole seventh Chapter of that Epistle: and elsewhere says; The law is not
given unto a righteous man. 1 Timothy 1.9. Gal 5.23.
And again, speaking of them which are under the Spirit, Against such there is
no law. Object. The Law and the Prophets continued until John the Baptist
came: if therefore then first the moral law was abrogated as touching
Condemnation, when Christ was manifested in the flesh; it follows that the
faithful were under condemnation, who lived before the coming of Christ. How
the Law was abrogated to the Fathers of the old Testament, and how to us the
children of the new.
Ans. The Law was abrogated as touching condemnation, as well unto the
believers in the Old Testament, as to them who are believers in the New. To
them who lived in the Old, as touching the power and efficacy of Christ: to
these in the new, as touching his fulfilling and exhibiting.

How the moral Law is not abrogated, namely, touching obedience.
Now the Moral Law or Decalogue is not abrogated as touching obedience: but God
always, even at this day no less than in ancient times, exacteth as well at
the hands of the regenerate as unregenerate, that they perform obedience unto
his Law. The reasons hereof are strong and clear. The first is drawn from the
end for which Christ delivered us from the curse of the Law. For the Son of God
was not therefore made Mediator, Three proofs hereof: 1. From the end of our
redemption.
took the form of a servant, became obedient unto his Father, even unto the
death of the Cross, and redeemed us from the curse of the Law, that we should
continue and persist in sins, and enmity with God; but that he might deliver us
from sin, reconcile us unto God, and make us again like unto God, and the
Temple of God. If then he had this end, for which he did deliver us from the
curse of the Law, he did not withal take away the bond of our obedience. For
this is the Mediators office, to expiate and do away sins, and to bring to
pass, that hereafter the party offended be no more offended by that party
which had offended. From our duty, who receive a greater portion of Gods
blessings than other men.
How much the more and greater Gods benefits are toward us, so much the more
are we bound to yield thankfulness unto him, that is, to live according to
his will and Law. But they who are justified and regenerated by faith in
Christ, have received more and greater benefits than others. For these are
evermore added unto their creation, and preservation, and other benefits common
to the wicked with the godly. Therefore we are more bound after, than before
regeneration and justification, to yield and perform obedience unto Gods Law.
Testimony of Scriptu^e. Mat. 5.17.
Many testimonies confirm the same; as, Think not that I am come to destroy
the Law, or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them.
This is meant of all the parts of the Law, but most especially of the moral
Law, which Christ has fulfilled four ways: Heb. 7.26.
except himself were free from all spot, or stain of sin. Such an High Priest
it became us to have, which is holy, blameless, undefiled, separate from
sinners. Romans 8.3.
For (that which was impossible to the Law, inasmuch as it was weak because of
the flesh) God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, for
sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. 2
Cor. 5.2.
He made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him.

And this fulfilling of the types of the Law, and the paying of that punishment
which we did owe, is that very abrogating of the Law, whereof we have spoken.

Now, both these, to wit, punishment paid for us by Christ, and righteousness
begun in us, are comprehended and understood by Saint Paul, when he says:
Romans 6.6. and 8.4.
That the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, which walk after the
Spirit. And of the giving or the holy Ghost, and of regeneration, which is
wrought for and by Christ, Saint Paul purposely entreats, Romans 6. and 7.4.
Christ fulfilled the Law by teaching it, that is, by re purging and purifying
it from errors and corruptions, and by restoring the true doctrine and
understanding thereof; which he does, Matthew. 5.6. and 7. If then Christ both
teaches and restores the obedience of the Law in us; he does not abolish the
Law, as concerning obedience. The same does Paul teach, Do we then make the
law of none effect through faith? God forbid: yea, Romans 3.31.
we establish the law.

Now, by faith, or by righteousness and justice of faith, By faith the Law is
three ways established:
the Law is established three ways: In confessing or approving the judgment
and accusation of the Law against us; as, that we do not yield due obedience
to the Law, and therefore are guilty of damnation: for indeed, we seek for
righteousness without our selves in Christ. In satisfying, because, through
faith is applied to us Christ's satisfaction equivalent to eternal punishment,
which the Law required of us not performing perfect obedience: by means of
which satisfaction it comes to pass, that indeed not through the Law, but yet
neither against the Law, but with the Law, which Christ by his perfect
obedience satisfied on our behalf, we are justified before God. Through the
beginning of new obedience in this life, and the accomplishing of the same in
the life to come. Act. 15.9.
Purifying their hearts by faith. We through the spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness, Gal. 5.5.
through faith. More briefly to comprehend this large discourse; The Law is
established by faith, both in regard that the doctrine of the righteousness of
faith instructs us how we are not righteous of our selves; neither are made
righteous, but by some perfect satisfaction which the Law requires; as also,
because by faith a restoration or renewing of obedience unto the Law is
accomplished in us. The brief sum then of the whole doctrine touching the
abrogation of the Law, is this: The Ceremonial and Civil Law of Moses are
quite cancelled by Christ's coming, as touching both their bond and obedience;
but the Moral Law, as touching obedience to be performed thereunto, is not
abrogated, but only as concerning the curse, justifying, and constraint
thereof. The Objections of Antinomists, Libertines, and such like, who aver
that the Moral Law appertains nothing at all unto Christians, and is not to
be taught in the Church of Christ, you may find them resolved at the 115.
Question of this Catechism, where the use of the Law is handled.

4. In what the Moral Law differs from the Gospel.
THe declaration of this Question is many ways necessary, as by the difference
of the Law and Gospel may appear. The doubt arises especially from the
definition of the Law, where it is said, that the Law promises rewards to such
as perform perfect obedience; and it promises them freely, because no
obedience can be meritorious in the sight of God. In like manner also the Gospel
promises everlasting life freely: so that the Law and Gospel seem not to
differ. How beit there is a great diversity in them. The Law differs from the
Gospel: In the manifestation.
In the manner of their manifestation. The Law is known by nature: the Gospel
was after man's fall manifested from above. In doctrine.
In their matter or doctrine. The Law propounds Gods mere justice; the
Gospel propounds it jointly with mercy. Again, the Law teaches what we ought
to be that we may be saved, and what to perform; the Gospel teaches how we
may be such as the Law requires, namely, in Christ. In promises.
In their promises. The Law promises eternal life and all good things, with a
condition of our own proper and perfect righteousness and obedience, remaining
in us; the Gospel promises the same with a condition of faith and belief in
Christ, whereby we embrace another obedience, performed for us, to wit, the
obedience of Christ. Now with this condition of faith, is joined by an
indissoluble knot and bond, the condition of new obedience. In effects. Romans
4.15. 2 Cor. 3.7.
In effects. The Law causes wrath, and is the ministration of death: The
Gospel is the ministration of life, and of the spirit.

Quest. 93. How are the Commandments divided?
Answ. Into two Tables Deuteronomy. 4.13. Exodus 34.28. Deuteronomy. 10.3, 14.
: whereof the former delivers in four commandments, how we ought to behave
our selves toward God: the latter delivers in six commandments, what duties
we owe unto our neighbor Ma^th. 22.37, 38, 39.
.

The Explication.
Three causes why the division of the Decalogue is to be observed.
THe question concerning the division of the Decalogue is necessary and
profitable, and therefore to be observed: Decalogue. Decalogue makes to the
understanding of the commandments themselves. For it advertiseth us of the
degrees of obedience, and shows that the worship of the first Table is the
chief and principal. Now, the Decalogue is divided after a threefold manner.

The first division of the Decalogue into two Tables.
1. The Decalogue is divided by Moses and Christ into two Tables: the former
whereof compriseth our duties toward God immediately; the latter our duties
toward God mediately: Or, the former teaches us how we are to demean and
behave our selves toward God; the latter, what duties we owe to our
neighbor. This division is grounded on the express Word of God: Deuteronomy. 10.1, ^.
Hew thee two Tables of stone. It is also grounded on this, that Christ and
Paul refer the whole Law to the love of God and our neighbor, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, Exodus 32.15.
Deuteronomy. 4.13. Mat. 22.37, 38, 39. Two canses of this division.
and with all thy mind: this is the first and great commandment; and the
second is like to this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. This
division has these uses: Two canses of this division.
1. That we may better conceive the sense and scope of the whole Law, and
understand what is the perfection of obedience. 2. That we observe the common
rule, namely, that the commandments of the second Table yield to the
commandments of the first in the same kind of worship: That is, that the love
and glory of God, is to be preferred before the love and safety of all
creatures: Acts 5.29.
according to that saying; We ought rather to obey God than men.

The second division of the Decalogue into ten commandments.
2. The Decalogue is divided into ten Commandments, whereof four are
ascribed unto the first, and the six other unto the second Table. Now, God
numbered out these ten commandments or laws, not that he was delighted with
this number more than any other, but because the titles, and arguments of the
things themselves, to wit, the duties, were so many in number. For in these ten
laws all that we owe unto God and our neighbor, is so comprehended, that
nothing is omitted, and nothing is superfluous. So that the four commandments
of the first Table contain all duties which we owe unto God immediately: and
the six commandments of the second Table have in them whatsoever pertains to
the leading of this life in felicity and happiness. Howbeit there is much
dissension about the number of the Commandments. For some reckon three, some
five, and some four Commandments in the first Table and that that division,
which so ascribes four Commandments to the first Table, that the first
proceeds of not admitting other gods; the second, of not making any graven
Images; the third, of not taking the name of God in vain; the fourth, of
hallowing the Sabbath; and refers the other six unto the second Table: that
this division, I say, is the truest, these reasons declare: 1. Those are
distinct Commandments, The proof of this second division by four arguments.
which are distinguished in the matter which they deliver, or whose matter and
meaning is distinct and diverse (for doubtless God, when he divided the
Decalogue into ten Commandments, would that each Commandment should differ
from the rest in matter or meaning: so that those Commandments which differ in
sense are diverse; and they, which differ not in sense or meaning, are not
diverse Commandments, but one Commandment.) But the Commandment of not
having strange gods, and the Commandment of not making graven Images differ,
or are distinguished in matter or meaning: (for the first teaches who is to be
worshipped, namely, the alone true God; the second shows, how God is to be
worshipped, namely, not by the inventions of men: the first forbids any
other god, besides the true God alone, to be worshipped: the second prohibiteth
any other worship of that only true God, then himself has commanded:)
Therefore they are diverse and distinct Commandments. So of the contrary, the
Commandments touching concupiscence, which some divide into the ninth and
tenth; that it is in sense and meaning but one Commandment, both themselves
are witnesses, as often as in their Expositions and Paraphrases hereon, they
join this their ninth and tenth together: and Paul also teaches the same
doctrine, when he speaks of all concupiscence, as of one Commandment: Romans
7.7.
I had not known lust (to be sin) except the Law had said, Thou shall not
lust. Wherefore the two first Commandments before specified, are two diverse
Commandments; and this last, imagined by some to be two, is but one
Commandment. But if therefore yet the tenth Commandment must be cut in two
diverse Commandments, because it distinctly makes mention of diverse things,
not to be coveted or lusted after, namely, our neighbors house, and our
neighbors wife; it shall thereof follow, that so many Commandments must be
numbered, as there are recited kinds of things in every Commandment. 2.
Doubtless those Commandments are diverse, and not the same, which are
distinguished of Moses by diverse periods or sentences, and verses; and those
no whit different in themselves, but one Commandment, which are comprised of
Moses in one period or verse. But Moses has distinguished the first
Commandment (which proceeds, Of not having strange gods) from the second
(which is, Of not making Idols) in diverse verses and periods. Therefore they
are distinct Commandments. Contrariwise, Moses has not distinguished the
Commandment touching the coveting of our neighbors house and wife by several
periods, but has comprehended it in one period or sentence: therefore there is
but one Commandment concerning concupiscence. 3. Questionless, Moses retained
one and the same order of the Commandments, both in Exodus and Deuteronomy:
But he transposeth in those places the words of the tenth Commandment,
touching the coveting of our neighbors wife, (for in Exodus is placed first,
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, and then follows, Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors wife: but in Deuteronomy these words are foremost, Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, and these follow, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house.) Therefore these two members are parts of one Commandment;
else there can no ninth Commandment be assigned; and the Adversary must needs
say, that Moses in one of these places confounds the ninth Commandment with
the tenth, and substituteth a part of the tenth in place of the ninth; which
absurdity Moses may by no means be accused of. By this transposing therefore
and displacing of the words, the holy Ghoft does sufficiently declare, that he
would have all to be but one Commandment, whatsoever is read in the tenth
Commandment, jointly comprehended and contained in one period or sentence. 4.
There is very great and weighty authority, whereby this distinction of the
Commandments is confirmed. For thus do the ancient Writers of the Jews,
Josephus and Philo Joseph. l. 3. Antiq. Iud. Philo in ex^osit Decalog.
, distinguish the first and second Commandment, and knit up in one the tenth
Commandment, which our Adversaries divide into two. In like sort do the Greek
Ecclesiastical Writers divide the Decalogue: as Athanasius, Origin, Gregory
Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Zonaras, and Nicephorus Athanas. in Sy^ops script. l.
2. Orig. l. 3. sup* ^xod. ^om 8. Greg. Naz. i^ Carm. Chrysostom. sive Aut. opti.
pers. in Mat. 49. Zo^. Tom 1. histor. Ni ceph. hist. Eccles.
: And unto this opinion and sentence subscribe also the Latin Ecclesiastical
Writers; as Jerome, Ambrose, Sulpitius, Severus, and Austin Hier. in cap. 6. ad
c phe. A^^bros. in ^und loc. ad Ephesians Sulp S^ver. lib. 1. hist. sacrat. Aug. l.
quaest. vet. and ^o^. To^t. quae^^. 7. and l. 2. quaest. sup. Exodus c^p. 7.1.
. Therefore this distinction of the Decalogue was of ancient reputed best, and
so received in the Greek and Latin Church* We have therefore restored, not
changed or altered the Decalogue. Now whereas Josephus, Philo, and some Greek
Writers, attribute to each Table five Commandments, this makes nothing
against us: For, howsoever they so do, yet herein they all agree, that the
words and clauses touching the worshipping of one God, and not having any
graven Image, are two distinct Commandments: and the clause touching
Concupiscence makes not two, but one Commandment. Likewise, we find another
division in Augustine August Epist. 119. ad ^a^. car cap. 11. and quaest. sup.
Exodus cap. 7.
, which reckons only three Commandments in the first Table, and seven in
the second. But the Allegory of the Trinity, whereon Augustine groundeth this
reason, is too weak a proof for confirmation thereof. Howbeit this we must
observe, that if the doctrine and purpose of the Decalogue, touching the true
God, and his true worship be no way impeached, but reserved whole and entire,
we ought not to maintain any bitter contention about the reckoning or account
of the Commandments in their Tables.

The third division of the Decalogue In'o the immediate and mediate worship of
God.
3. The Decalogue is divided according to the things themselves which are
commanded or forbidden in the Decalogue, into the immediate and mediate worship
of God. Generally, in the Decalogue is commanded the worship of God; that which
is contrary to Gods worship is forbidden. The worship of God is either
immediate, when Moral works are immediately performed unto God: or mediate,
when Moral works are performed unto our neighbor in respect of God. The
immediate worship is contained in the first* Table, and is either internal or
external. internal consists in this, partly that we worship the true God,
and that that be performed unto the true God, which is commanded in the first
Commandment; partly that the manner or form of worship be right and lawful,
whether it be internal worship, or external. This form which is to be
observed in Gods worship, is taught in the second commandment. external
worship is either private or public. The private contains the private
Moral works of every one, which are always to be of every man in particular
performed, as touching the confession of God in our words and works; and this
private worship is delivered in the third Commandment. public worship
consists in sanctifying of the Sabbath, and is delivered in the fourth
Commandment. mediate worship of God, which contains our duties toward men,
or our neighbors, is delivered in the second Table: and this likewise either
external or internal.

mediate external worship consists partly in the duties of superiors
toward their inferiors, and so of the contrary: of which duties (as also of
civil order comprised under them) is spoken in the fifth Commandment; one
neighbor toward another, which are ratified in the rest of the Commandments:
and those are either the preserving of men's life and safety, which is in the
sixth Commandment; the preserving of chastity and wedlock, which is in the
seventh Commandment; the preserving of goods and possessions, which is in the
eighth; of the preserving of the truth, which is contained in the ninth
Commandment. The mediate internal worship, or the internal and inward duties
of mediate worship, consist in the internal affection of the heart: for they,
are the very uprightness of men's affections toward their neighbor, which is
to he included and understood in all the former Commandments;

Hence we easily answer this objection: Object. The duties to be performed
toward our neighbor are not the worship of God. But the second Table
prescrib^th what duties we are to perform toward our neighbor: Therefore the
obedience of the second Table is not the worship of God. Answ. The Major
holds true only in the mediate worship of God; in respect whereof we grant
the Conclusion. For the obedience of the second Table is not the immediate
worship of God, as the obedience of the first is: yet is it the mediate worship
of God, that is, such as is performed to God in our neighbor mediating, or
coming between God and us. For the duties of love toward our neighbor,
ought to flow or proceed out of the love of God; and being so performed, they
are acceptable to God, and are no less done to God himself, How the obedience
of the second Table is called Gods worship, and how duties toward our
neighbor. A difference of the two tables in objects.
then the obedience of the first Table. Wherefore in respect of God, for whose
sake they are put in practice, they are called, and verily are Gods worship:
but in respect of our neighbor, to whom they are immediately performed, they
are termed duties. Now the worship required in both Tables differs in
objects. For the first Table has an immediate object only, which is God. The
second has both an immediate object, to wit, our neighbor; and farther also a
mediate object, namely, God.

A Table comprising the sum of the third division of the Decalogue.
In the Decalogue generally is commanded Gods worship: which is, 1. Immediate,
or toward God alone: and that 1. Internal, or inward, touching the
worshipping Of one true God. as in the Commandemet. 1 Of one true God aright.
as in the Commandemet. 2
2. External, or outward: which is Private. as in the Commandemet. 3 Public.
as in the Commandemet. 4

2. Mediate, or toward our neighbor for Gods sake: and that 1. External or
outward, consisting in the Duties of superiors toward their inferiors; and
of the contrary, of inferiors toward their superiors. as in the Commandemet.
5 Preservation of Our own and others life and safety. as in the Commandemet. 6
Chastity. as in the Commandemet. 7 Goods and possessions. as in the
Commandemet. 8 Truth. as in the Commandemet. 9
2. Internal, or inward, which is a moderation or uprightness of the
appetite, that no man desire, or imagine any thing that is against all or any
the former Commandments. as in the Commandemet. 10



Quest. 94. What does God require in the first Commandment?
Ans. That, as deerly as I tender the salvation of my own soul, so earnestly
should I shun and fly all Idolatry 1 John 5.2. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and 10.14.
Sorcery, Enchantments, Superstitions Levit. 19.31. Deuteronomy. 18.9, 10, 11.
, prayer to Saints, or any other creatures Mat. 4.10. Revel. 19.10. and 22.8, 9.
, and should rightly acknowledge the only and true God John 17.3.
, trust in him alone Jer. 17.5, 7.
, submit and subject my self unto him with all humility 1 Pet. 5.5.
, and patience Heb. 10.36. Colos. 1.11. Romans 5.3, 4. 1 Cor. 10.10. Phil. 2.14.
, look for all good things from him alone Ps. 104.27, 28, 29. Esaias 47.7. James
1.17.
: and lastly, with the entire affection of my heart, love Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.
, reverence Deuteronomy. 6.2. Ps. 101.10. Pro. 1.7. and 9.10. Mat. 10.28.
, and worship him Mat. 4.10. Deuteronomy. 10.20.
; so that I am ready to renounce and forsake all creatures, rather then to
commit the least thing that may be against his will Mat. 5.29, 30. and 10.37.
Acts 5.29.
.

Quest. 95. What is Idolatry?
Ans. It is in place of that one God, or besides that one and true God, who
has manifested himself in his word, to make, or imagine, and account any
other thing, wherein thou reposest thy hope and confidence Ephesians. 5.5. 1 Chro.
16.29. Phil. 3.19. Galat. 4.8. Ephesians. 2.12. 1 John 2.23. 2 John 9. John 5.23.
.

The Explication.
General rules for better understanding of the Decalogue.
BEfore we enter any particular discourse of the meaning of every several
Commandment, we must observe certain general rules, necessary for the
understanding of the whole Decalogue, and each particular Commandment.

1. The Moral Law, or Decalogue, is to be understood according to the inter
pretation of Scripture: that is, according to the exposition and declaration of
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; and not according to the sense and
judgment of man only, or Philosophy. We must join together the explication,
scattered everywhere throughout the Scriptures, and not stick only upon those
short Commandments. Neither does Moral Philosophy suffice for interpretation
thereof, because it contains but a little part of the Law: and this is one
difference between Philosophy and the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is
delivered in the Church.

2. The Decalogue requires in all the Commandments obedience both external
and internal, in the understanding, will, heart, and all actions, perfect, not
in parts only, but also in degrees; that is, that we most perfectly obey God,
not only in all the duties prescribed, Galat. 3.10. Romans 7.14. Mat. 5.22.
but in the degrees also of those duties. Cursed be he that abides not in all.
The Law is spiritual. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall
be culpable, etc.

3. The first Commandment must be included and understood in all the rest,
that is, the obedience of the first Commandment must be the motive and final
cause of obedience toward the rest of the Commandments: otherwise, it is not
the worship of God, but hypocrisy, whatsoever we do. For we must do all things
which are delivered and prescribed in the other Commandments, even for the
love we bear to God, and for the desire we have to worship him. For except we
so do them, we do them not according to the sentence and prescript of the
Law, neither do we please God therein.

Wherefore the first Commandment of the Decalogue must shine before, and give
light as it were unto all the other Commandments both of the second and the
first Table, and be included in them. This rule is delivered by the Apostle;
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, 1 Cor. 10.31.
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. By these two former rules
many things are made more clear and manifest: namely, That no man in this life
performs entire and perfect obedience unto the Law; That the virtues of the
unregenerate are sins in the sight of God: because they are neither joined
with inward obedience, nor come from the obedience of the first Commandment,
neither are referred unto it, seeing they do not know the true God: and
therefore they are but a shadow of obedience, and are hypocrisy, which God
most severely condemns. Esaias 29.13.
Because this people come near unto me with their mouth, Romans 14.23.
and honor me with their lips, but have removed their hearts far from me. I
will again do a mavelous work in this people. Whatsoever is not of faith
is sin. Moreover, by these rules it is manifest, that true obedience cannot
be begun but by faith, through the knowledge of the Mediator, and the gift of
the holy Ghost. Purifying their hearts by faith. Acts 15.9. Galat. 2.20. John
5.23.
In that that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God. For
God is not truly known or loved without faith in Christ. He that honors
not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent him. Again, by these
rules it is declared, that our obedience in this life, seeing it is but begun
only, cannot please God, but through and for the satisfaction of Christ
imputed unto us. He has freely made us accepted in his beloved. Ephesians. 1.6.
Lastly, by them it is manifest, that in true conversion, obedience is begun
according to all the Commandments: For who truly loves God, he submits
himself without exception to all his Commandments. 1 John 3.6.
He that is borne of God sins not.

4. That we may judge aright of the meaning of every Commandment, or Law, we
must above all things consider the drift or end thereof. For the end of the Law
shows the meaning thereof: and by the end which God in every Commandment
intends, we shall judge aright and easily of the means. This rule also is of
force in humane Laws. But we are to understand it of the next and nearest end
of the Law. For not those things which are necessary to the attaining of such
ends as are remote or a far off, but those which are necessary to the attaining
of the nearest and subordinate ends, are to be comprised in the sentence and
prescript of one law; which, except it be observed, the sentence and substance
of all, or many laws, will be brought all into one. The furthest end, and
therefore the end of the whole Law, is the worship of God. It requires
therefore the whole obedience of the Law.

The end of the second Table, is the preservation of the society of mankind:
this requires all the duties of the second Table. The end of the fifth
commandment is, the preservation of civil order: it compriseth therefore the
duties of superiors toward inferiors, and inferiors toward superiors;
because without these, civil order cannot be preserved.

5. The same virtue or the same work is often, in a diverse respect, commanded
in diverse Commandments: that is, the same virtue is required for the
performing of obedience to many Commandments; because the ends of actions put
a difference between them, and the same virtue may serve for diverse ends: As,
fortitude is a virtue both of the fifth and sixth Commandment; because it is
required in a Magistrate, who is to take upon him the defense of others. This
we are to know, lest we in vain trouble and vex our selves in distinguishing
and placing the virtues.

6. The Law giver does in an affirmative Commandment comprehend the negative;
and contrariwise, in a negative he comprehends the affirmative: that is, in
the commanding of virtues, the forbidding of the contrary vices is contained:
and so contrariwise, in the forbidding of vice, the commanding of the contrary
virtue is included. For, wheresoever any good thing is enjoined, there the
special evil opposed unto this good is inhibited; because the good cannot be
put in execution, unless the contrary evil be abandoned. Now by evil is
meant, not only the doing of that which is evil, but also the omitting of
that which is good.

7. We must take heed that we restrain not the Commandments too much, and
take them too straightly. For they are so to be taken and understood, as that in
the general all the specials be contained: and in the chief special the next
allied specials: and in the effect the causes: and in one of the correlatives
the other also. So when manslaughter and adultery is forbidden, all wrongful
violence, and all wandering lusts are likewise condemned: when chastity is
commanded, temperancy is also commanded, without which this effect is not. When
subjection, which is the one relative, is commanded, magistracy also, which is
his correlative, is commanded.

8. The obedience or commandments of the second Table, yield unto the
obedience or commandments of the first Table; and the commandments concerning
Ceremonial worship, to commandments concerning Moral worship. Object. Mat.
22.39. What similitude or likelihood is between the first and second Table.
But the second commandment is like unto the first: Therefore the second Table
yields not unto the first. Ans. This is a fallacy, in taking that to be
simply and generally spoken, which is meant but of some part or points of the
second Table. The second Commandment, we grant, is like unto the first; but
not simply, and in every point, but (as heretofore has been showed) it is
like, As concerning the kind of Moral worship, which is always to be
preferred before the Ceremonial. For the ceremonies must give place to the
duties of charity expressed in the second Table. As concerning the kind of
punishment, to wit, everlasting punishment; whereunto they are subject, who
break the second, as well as they who break the first. As concerning the
necessary coherence and connection of the love of God and our neighbor; the one
being a cause, and the other an effect, so that neither can be kept without
other. For God is not loved, except our neighbor be loved: neither is our
neighbor truly loved, except God be loved. If any man say, I love God, and yet
hate his brother, he is a liar: 1 John 4.20.
for how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom
he has not seen? And this is the purpose of Christ in the fore-alledged
Scripture. For there the Pharisees equalled divine Ceremonies and their own
superstitions with the obedience of the second Table: for the detection of
which error, Christ faith, that the second Table is like unto the first: that
is as the obedience of the first Table is moral, spiritual, and principal;
so also is the obedience of the second: and as the ceremonies stoop to the
duties of the first Table, so also they ought unto the duties of the second.
What dissimilitude and difference.
Notwithstanding, there is a great difference between the Commandments of the
first and second Table: In their objects. For the object of the first Table is
God; of the second, our Neighbor. So that look how much God is greater then
our neighbor, so much the obedience of the first Table surpasses the
obedience of the second: and how much inferior our neighbor is unto God, so
much inferior is the obedience of the second Table to the obedience of the
first. In respect of their process and order. For the obedience of the first
Table is most principal: the obedience of the second less principal, and
depending and attending on the more principal. For therefore must we love our
neighbor, because we love God, and our love of God is the cause of the love of
our neighbor; the love of our neighbor arises from the love of God, and not
contrariwise, the love of God from the love of our neighbor. So says Christ;
If any man hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and
brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple.
And in regard of this twofold maine dissimilitude of the two Tables, the
Commandments of the second give place to them of the first Table.

Repl. The duties of our love toward our neighbor commanded in the second
Table, Hos. 6.6. Mat. 9.13. and 2.7.
yield not to the ceremonies commanded in the first: according to that saying
of Scripture: I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. But the duties of love
toward our neighbor are the obedience of the second Table: Therefore
obedience unto the second Table is no whit inferior to the obedience of the
first. Ans. There is more inferred in the conclusion then the premises
enforce. This is that only which follows; Therefore the duties of the second
Table yield not to the ceremonies of the first: which conclusion is true, and
overthrowes not this general rule. For this rule is to be understood of Moral
matters, and not of Ceremonial duties. If therefore the necessity, and the
safety of our neighbor require the omitting of a ceremony; the ceremony is
rather to be omitted, then the safety of our neighbor to be neglected. And so
is that text of Scripture to be construed, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

Certain Conclusions of the Decalogue.
1. THe first Table commands the duties toward God. The second commands
the duties toward man. But yet so notwithstanding, as that the first
immediately, this is mediatly referred to God.

2. The first Commandment, when as it commands us to hold and repute the
only true God, and God that is manifested in the Church, for our God,
comprehends chiefly the inward worship of God, which consists in the mind,
will, and heart.

3. The chief parts or points of this worship are, the true knowledge of God,
faith, hope, love of God, fear of God, humility, and lowliness in the sight
of God, and patience.

4. God may be known of reasonable creatures, so far forth as he will
manifest himself unto every one.

5. The knowledge of God is either simply and absolutely perfect, whereby God
only knows himself; that is, the eternal Father, Son, and holy Ghost, know
themselves in several, and each other mutually, and understand wholly and most
perfectly their own infinite essence, and the manner of each persons existing,
and being. For unto the perfect knowledge of an infinite thing, none but an
infinite understanding can attain. Or, there is a knowledge of God belonging
unto reasonable creatures, whereby Angels and Men know indeed the whole and
entire nature and majesty of God, as being most simple: but they know it not
wholly, that is, they so far only understand it, as he reveals it unto them.

6. The knowledge of God, which is in creatures, if it be compared with that,
whereby God understands and knows himself, is to be accounted imperfect.
But if the degrees thereof in it self be considered, it is also either perfect
or imperfect; yet not simply, but in comparison, that is, in respect of the
inferior and superior degree. The perfect knowledge of God in creatures is
that, whereby Angels and Men in the celestial life know God by a most clear
and bright beholding of the mind, so much as suffices for the conformity of
the reasonable creatures with God. The imperfect is that, whereby men in this
life know God, not so much as they could at first by the benefit of their
creation: and therefore were notwithstanding bound unto it still by Gods
commandment.

7. The imperfect knowledge of God which men have in this life, is of two
sorts; one Christian, or Theological: the other Philosophical. That is
received from the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: This from the
principles and general rules naturally known unto men, and from the beholding
of the works of God in the nature of things.

8. The Christian knowledge of God is also of two sorts: the one spiritual or
true, lively, effectual, saving; theother literal. The spiritual is that
knowledge of God and his will, which is kindled by the holy Ghost in our minds,
according to the word, and by the word, working in the will and heart an
inclination and desire more and more to know and do those things, which God
commands so to be done. The literal is that knowledge of God, which either
has been in men from the creation, or is wrought in their minds, of the holy
Ghost, by the word, which has not accompanying it an endeavor and desire of
framing, and conforming themselves unto the Commandments.

9. Both spiritual and literal knowledge are also immediate, or mediate.
Immediate, which is wrought by the instinct of the holy Ghost, without ordinary
means. Mediate, which is wrought of the holy Ghost by the voice of the
heavenly doctrine heard, read, and meditated.

10. The ordinary means to know God, and which is prescribed unto us by God
himself is by the study and meditation of heavenly doctrine. Wherefore we must
strive this way unto the knowledge of God, neither require or look for from
God any extraordinary and immediate illumination, except he of himself offer
it, and confirm it also unto us by certain and evident testimonies.

11. Now albeit so much as God would have known of himself unto us in this
life, he has sufficiently declared in his word: yet notwithstanding, those
natural testimonies of God are not superfluous, because they convince and
reprove the impiety of the Reprobate, and confirm the godliness of the Elect
and Chosen; and therefore are by God himself often commanded in Scripture, and
are of us to be considered.

12. But concerning them this we must hold; that they are true indeed, agreeing
with Gods word, but not sufficing for the true knowledge of God.

13. Moreover, although natural testimonies teach nothing that is false of
God: yet men, except the light of Gods word come thereto, gather and conceive
out of them naught else but false and erroneous opinions concerning God: both
because these testimonies show not so much as is delivered in the word; and
also because even those things, which may be perceived and understood by
natural judgment, men notwithstanding, by reason of that blindness and
corruption which is engendered in them, take and interpret amiss, and diversely
deprave and corrupt.

14. Wherefore in the first Commandment of the Decalogue, the ignorance of
those things is forbidden and condemned, which God has proposed unto the
Church, to be known of us, concerning him in his word and in his works, both
of our creation and redemption. Likewise all errors are condemned of such as
imagine, either that there is no God, as the Epicures; or more gods, as the
Ethnicks, Manichees, and those that pray to Angels, dead men, and other
creatures: and the vanity of superstitious men, which put their trust in other
creatures, or things diverse from him, who has manifested himself in the
Church: as Jews, Mahumetists, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Arius, Pneumatomachists,
and such like, who acknowledge not God to be the eternal Father, with the Son
and the holy Ghost co eternal.

Hitherto have we delivered certain general rules for the better
understanding of the true meaning of the Decalogue. Now we are to speak of the
sense and meaning of the Decalogue in special; that is, of the meaning of
every particular Commandment.

An exposition of the first Commandment.
THe first commandment has two parts: a preface, and a commandment. The
preface goes before, being comprehended in these words, I am Jehovah, the Lord
thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. This preface belongs to the whole Decalogue; because it describes
and discerns God the Lawgiver, from all creatures, Lawgivers, and false
gods: and further, it contains three several reasons, why the obedience both
of this first Commandment, Three reasons why obedience is to be performed unto
God in this, and in all the other Commandments.
and of the rest which follow, is to be performed unto God. he is Jehovah,
whereby he distinguishes himself the true God from all creatures, that he may
show himself to have the chief right of ruling: I am Jehovah. That is, I,
whom thou hear speaking, and giving the Law unto thee, am the true God, who
is and existeth from himself and by himself, and gives unto all other things
their being, and therefore has chief authority and sovereignty over all;
Creator of all things, eternal, omnipotent, author and preserver of all that
are good: therefore obey me. that he is the God of his people, that through the
promise of his bountifulness he might allure us to obey him. God verily is the
God of all creatures, as touching both the creating, and preserving, and
governing of them all; but he is the God of his Church, by the singular
participation and manifestation of himself. How God is said to be out God.
God then is our God, when we acknowledge him to be such as he has manifested
himself in his word: namely, who imployeth his omnipotency, justice, wisdom,
and mercy unto our salvation: or, who tendereth us with an especial and
peculiar favor in his Son. For God is properly said to be their God, whom he
loves and favors above all others. Whereupon also the Prophet David
affirms that Nation to be blessed, whose God is the Lord: Psalm. 33.12.
even the people that he has chosen for his inheritance. Which have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt: As if he should say; I am he, I am he, who have
manifested my self unto thee, and bestowed all those blessings upon thee. This
he adds, that by the mentioning of his late and notable benefit, he might
declare unto them, and admonish, them that they were bound therefore to show
thankfulness and obedience unto him. This also belongs unto us, because it
does figuratively comprehend and imply all the deliverances of the Church, by
the mentioning of so famous and notable a benefit. And further also, this was a
type of our wonderful deliverance achieved by Christ. Now when he says, that
he Jehovah is this God, and deliverer of the Church, he opposes himself both
to all creatures, and to Idols, challenging all divine honor and obedience
unto himself alone, according to the exposition hereof delivered. Deuteronomy. 6.
Esa. 43. and in other places. Wherefore it follows, not only that this
Jehovah is to be worshipped, but that he alone is to be worshipped, and to be
accounted for our God.

Some of the ancient made this preface to be the first Commandment, and for the
second Commandment they took the words following: Hesychius.
Thou shall have no other gods before me. But it is manifest that these words,
I am the Lord thy God, etc. are not the words of commanding ought, but of one
recording or rehearsing something of himself. Howbeit, the words which follow,
Thou shall have no other gods, etc. have the form and nature of a Commandment.

The end of the first Commandment.
The Commandment then is, Thou shall have no other gods before me. The end of
this Commandment is the immediate, internal, or inward worship of God; that
is, that we acknowledge the true God alone revealed in the Church, and give due
honor unto him with our whole mind, will, and heart. Moreover, this
Commandment is in such wise a negative, and denies other gods, as that it
contains also an affirmation, thus; Thou shall have none other gods:
therefore thou shall have me, that Jehovah, which have manifested my self in
my Church, thy God alone. Now to have God, What it is to have God.
is, 1. To know and acknowledge God, namely, that there is a God: that he is
one God: that he is such a God, as he has manifested himself in his Church,
and that he is such a God also toward us. 2. To trust in God only. 3. With
great humility and patience, to subject and submit our selves unto God. 4. To
expect and look for all good things from God only. 5. To love God. 6. To
reverence and worship God. Herein consists the obedience of this
Commandment, whose parts are the virtues which follow immediately after the
explication of the words of the Commandment. What is meant by the words other
God. What it is to have other gods.
An other God is every thing to which the properties and works of God are
attributed, though the thing it self have them not, and they be not agreeable
to the nature of the thing whereunto they are attributed. To have other gods,
is, not to have the true God; that is, either to have no God, or to have more
gods, or an other then the known God, or not to acknowledge God to be such
unto us as he is manifested, or not to trust in God, not to subject and submit
our selves unto God in true humility and patience, not to hope for all good
things from him alone, not to love and fear him. The parts of this impiety are
those vices contrary to these virtues whereof we purpose presently to entreat.
Before me, or in my sight: as if he should say, Thou shall have no other gods,
not only in thy gesture, and words in the eyes of men; but neither shall thou
have strange gods in the closet of thy heart, because nothing is close and
hidden from my sight, but lies wholly open, and is altogether manifest unto me
the searcher of the hearts and reins.

The most ready and easy way of expounding each Commandment, is to distribute
the obedience of every Commandment into his virtues, as parts; adjoining
afterward thoses vices, which are opposite unto the same virtues. The parts of
the obedience of this first Commandment are seven virtues; The Knowledge of
God, Faith, Hope, the Love of God, the Fear of God, Humility, and Patience.
These virtues are commanded, and their contrary vices are forbidden.

Virtue, The knowledge of God. Romans 10.14. John 17.3.
The knowledge of God is, so to judge of God as he has manifested himself in
his word and works, and to be moved and stirred up by that knowledge to a
confidence, love, fear, and worship of the true God. How shall they believe in
him of whom they have not heard? This is life eternal, that they know thee to
be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The extremes
repugnant to this virtue are many.

Ignorance of God and his will.
The ignorance or not knowing of the true God and his will, which is, not to
know those things of God, or to doubt of them, which we ought to know by the
benefit of our creation, and by his manifestations. This ignorance is either
natural, Twofold ignorance.
or ingendered in men, which is of those things which we are ignorant of, or
cannot understand through the corruption of our nature: or else it is a
purposed or endeavored ignorance, which is of those things that our conscience
tells us must be enquired after, neither yet do we enquire after them with
an earnest desire, namely, with a desire of learning them, and of obeying God.
Of both these ignorances it is said, There is none that does understand, and
seek God. Psalm. 14.2. 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not, etc.

Errors touching God.
2. Errors conceived, or false imaginations and opinions of him: as when Some
imagine there is no God. Some feign that there are more gods: as in ancient
times the Heathen, the Manichees, etc. If they profess it not in words, yet in
deed they make gods, while they ascribe those things to creatures, which are
proper to God only: as the Papists, who make their prayers unto Angels, and
men departed. For prayer and invocation attributes unto him who is invocated,
infinite wisdom and power. Wherefore Paul says, that they who pray to
creatures, Romans 1.23, 24.
Turn the glory of the uncorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, and of foure-footed beasts, and of creeping
things; And, Turn the truth of God into a lie, and worship and serve the
creature, forsaking the Creator. So neither will the Angel suffer John to
worship him, and adds this reason; I am thy fellow servants, Apoc. 19 10.
and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus: worship God. In
like manner also they imagine false opinions of God, who know God to be but
one, but know not the true God, which has revealed himself in the Gospel: as
the sounder Philosophers, and Mahumets Sectaries. 5. And so they also, who
profess that they know that one and true God, but yet slide and fall from him,
and in place of him worship an Idol which they make unto themselves, because
they imagine this God to be some other kind of god then he has revealed
himself to be in his word; as Jews, Samosatenians, Arrians, Pneumatomachi,
etc. John 5.23. 1 John 2.24.
He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father. He that denies the
Son, has not the Father.

Magic. What Magic is.
Magic, Sorcery, and Witcheraft, which is most repugnant, and contrary to the
knowledge of God. For it is a league or covenant with the Devil, the enemy of
God, with certain words or ceremonies adjoined, that they doing or saying this
or that, shall receive things promised of the Devil; and such things as are to
be asked and received of God alone: as, that by his aid and assistance they
shall know, or work things not necessary, tending either to the fulfilling of
their evil lusts, or to ostentation, or to the commodities of this life. Magus
(as also Magia, that is, Magic) is a Persian word, signifying a Philosopher,
or a Teacher. But men perceiving their own ignorance, sought for the Devils
help, Enchantments.
and so the names grew infamous. Unto Magic belong enchantments, which are the
using of certain words or ceremonies according to a covenant before entered
with the Devil, which being done and spoken, the Devil should perform that,
which the enchanters request. Now in these ceremonies and words* which they
use, there is no efficacy or force: but the Devil himself accomplisheth those
things, which he has promised, to this end, that they may revolt from God to
the Devil, Levi^. 20.6. Deuteronomy. ^1.10, 11, 12, ^3, 14.
and worship him in place of God. Now, as the Magician, so they also are
condemned by this Commandment, whosoever use the help of Magicians.

Superstition.
Superstition, which is to attribute such effects to certain things, or
observations of gestures or words, as depend not either on natural or moral
reason, or on the word of God; and either do not at all follow and fall out, or
are wrought by the Devils, and other causes then those, whereby they are
thought to have been done. For though it be no covenant with the Devil, yet
it is Idolatry. Under this vice of superstition are comprehended south saying,
Levit. 19.26. Esaias 14 25. and ^7.13.
observations of dreams, divinations signs, and predictions, or foretelling
of Wizzards, all which are by express words condemned in Scripture.

Confidence in creatures.
All trust and confidence, which is reposed in creatures. For this is
manifestly repugnant to the true knowledge of one God; and to faith, and hope.
For trust and confidence is an honor due unto God alone, which whosoever
translateth unto creatures, does in very deed imagine more gods. Wherefore God
in his word does utterly condemn those, Psalm. ^6 2. Je^. 17 ^. Mat. ^ 24.
Ep^es. 5.5.
who repose trust and confidence in things created, as in men. And also he
condemns those which put their trust in their own works, and in riches:
which also covetous men do; and so under the name of this vice is
covetousness also comprehended.

Idolatry. Two kinds of Idolatry.
Idolatry, which is most of all repugnant unto the true knowledge of God, and
to faith. Now there are two kinds of Idolatry. 1. when in profession another is
worshipped, then that one true God: or, when that is worshipped for God, which
is no God. This kind of Idolatry is more gross and palpable, and does properly
belong unto the first Commandment. 2. When in profession or professedly we
worship not another god, but we err in the manner of worship: that is, when
albeit the true God is worshipped; yet nevertheless he is worshipped after
another manner, then God himself has in the second Commandment, and also
commonly in his word prescribed, either by internal worship, or by external
worship, or external rites or ceremonies. This other kind of Idolatry is more
fly and wily, and is condemned and forbidden in the second Commandment. For
they who worship God in Images, though they deny that they worship any other
besides the true God, yet notwithstanding are Idolaters. For they imagine God
to be such a god as will be worshipped in Images, and so change the will of
God, and by changing Gods will, change even God himself.

Contempt of God.
The contempt of God, which is to know those things of God which are true, but
not to be moved thereby to love him: or to acknowledge indeed one true God
revealed in the Church; but not to be moved thereby to worship him, to trust in
him, to fear him, and to love him. For the knowledge of the true God does not
suffice alone, but there must also accompany it an inward motion of the mind to
embrace and follow the same; else should the Devils also and the Gentiles have
the true knowledge of God, which the Apostle denies, saying: They are
inexcusable, Romans 1.20, 21.
because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, etc.

Virtue, Faith.
Faith is a sure and certain persuasion, whereby we assent unto every word of
God delivered unto us, and whereby we are resolved that the promise of the free
mercy of God for Christ's sake does belong unto us: and further also it is a
confidence receiving this benefit of God, and resting thereon, being kindled of
the holy Ghost by the word in our minds, will, and hearts, and working in them
a rejoicing in God, invocation, and praying unto God, and obedience according
to all his commandments. Put your trust in the Lord your God, 2 Chronicles. 20.10.
and you shall be assured.

Four vices contrary in the defect to faith.
Unto faith are repugnant of one side which offends in the defect of faith,
Unbelief.
Un belief, which assenteth not to such doctrine as is heard and known
concerning God. Doubtfulnesse.
Doubtfulnesse, which neither assenteth steadfastly to the doctrine of God,
neither does altogether gainsay it, but, being floating and wavering, has a
weak inclination now to one part, and now to another. Distrust.
Distrust, which applies not unto it self the knowledge which it has of God
and his promises, and does through fear of Gods forsaking us, surcease the
doing of that it should do, and seek protection and safeguard without God, or
of some other besides God. He that believes not God, 1 John 5.10.
has made him a liar, because he believes not the testimony or record that
God witnessed of his Son. Temporary faith.
A dissembling or hypocritical faith, temporary faith, or a revolting from
faith: which is to yield an assent to the knowledge thereof, and to embrace it
for a season, but without any applying, or full persuasion of the promise of
Gods grace, and without regeneration; and therefore to be overcome through
temptations, or other causes, and so to cast away again that assent and
profession of godliness. Mat. 13.20.
He that received seed in the stony ground, is he which hears the word, and
incontinently with joy receives it; yet has he no root in himself, and
dureth but a season: for as soon as tribulation or persecution comes because
of the word, by and by he is offended. Acts 8.13. Heb. ^.4.
Simon also believed, and was baptized. It is impossible, that they which were
once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, etc.

Two vices contrary in the excess to faith.
Now amongst those which are repugnant unto faith, of the other side, which
offends in the excess, are, Tempting of God. Deuteronomy. ^.19. Man. 4.7. Exodus
17.2. 1 Cor. 10.9.
Tempting of God: which is through an unbelief, or distrust, or contempt of
God, and a trust or love of our own wisdom, justice, or power, and glory, to
depart from Gods word or order, and so to make trial of Gods truth or power,
and stubbornely, and proudly to provoke God unto anger. Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God. Moses said unto them, why contend ye with me? Wherefore do
ye then tempt the Lord? Do we provoke the Lord unto anger? Carnal security.
Carnal security, which is to live without thinking of God and his will, or of
our own infirmity, and dangers; and without acknowledging or bewailing of our
sins, and without the fear of God; and yet to promise to our selves an
indemnity from the anger of God, and from punishment, without faith and
repentance: This is often, and most grievously accused in the Scripture. Christ
speaks of that security and carelessness which shall be at his second
coming. As the days of Noe were, Mat 24.38, 39.
so likewise shall the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days before
the flood, they did eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage, etc.

Virtue, Hope.
Hope is a sure and certain expectation of everlasting life freely to be given
for Christ's sake; and of mitigation or asswagement of present evils* and of a
deliverance from the same evils of this life: and lastly, an expecting and
looking for all blessings necessary unto salvation, according to the counsel
and will of God. Hereof is said: Trust perfectly on the grace that is brought
unto you, 1 Pet. 1.13. Romans 5.5.
by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Hope makes not ashamed. Now hope springs
from faith: because he that is certain of the present will of God toward him,
has also certain and assured promises of the time to come. For God is not
changed: Romans 11.21.
and the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Moreover, faith and
hope differ in these considerations: Faith imbraceth the present benefits of
God, and his will toward us. Hope imbraceth the effects and fruits which are
to come of this present and perpetual will of God; according as it is said,
Heb. 11.11. Rom 8.24.
Faith makes those things to be which are hoped for, and shows those things,
etc. Hope that is seen, is not hope; for how can etc.

Two vices contrary in the defect to Hone,
Unto hope, in the defect, is opposed, Despair.
Despair, which is to esteem his sins to be greater then the merit of the
Son of God, and to refuse the mercy of God offered in his Son the Mediator:
and therefore not to look for those blessings which are promised to the godly,
but to be tormented with an horrible sense and feeling of Gods wrath, and with
a fear of being hereafter cast away into everlasting pains, and to stand in
horror of God, and to hate him as being cruel and a tyrant; Genesis 4.3. 1 These.
4.13. Romans 5.20.
as Cain cried out, My sin is greater then can be pardoned. From this despair
S. Paul dehorteth us, Sorrow not as others which have no hope. Where sin
abounded, there grace abounded much more. Doubting of future blessings.
A doubting of the blessings to come, which are expressed in the word: as of
everlasting life, of defense and delivery in temptations, and of final
perseverance. Carnal security contrary in the excess to Hope. Spiritual.
security.
Unto hope, in the excess carnal security is opposed, whereof we spoke a
little before. But as that is every where in Gods word condemned; so spiritual
security is commended, and required at the hands of all the godly, as which
does assure us of Gods grace amidst and against all the affrightings of
Conscience; and is nothing else but a faith, and hope, which, being joined with
true repentance, does not fear Gods forsaking, because it is assured of Gods
unchangeable favor toward it. Romans 8.31, 32.
Whereof it is spoken: If God be on our side, who can be against us? Who spared
not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall be not with him
give us all things also?

Virtue, The love of God.
The love of God is, to acknowledge God to be exceeding good and exceeding
bountiful and merciful; not only in himself, but also in us and toward us;
and that therefore he does employ his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, goodness
to our salvation: and so, through the acknowledging of his infinite goodness
toward us, to love God above all things, as that we more covet and desire our
conjoyning and conformity with him, and the execution of his will, then all
other things whatsoever; and further, had rather leave and relinquish all
things (love we them never so dearly) then be bereaved of his communion and
fellowship, or offend him in any thing: and are ready to part with all other
things (which we love) for his sake, and nothing is more cared for of us, then
how we may do things grateful and acceptable unto him. Two parts of true love.
For true love comprehends two things: 1. A desire of the safety and
preservation of the thing which is loved. 2. A will to be joined with the thing
we love, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke 14.26.
or to have it joined with us. Hereof-it is said, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, etc. If any man come to me, and hate not Father and
Mother, wife and children, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple.

The contrary v^ces.
Unto the love of God in the defect, are repugnant, Contempt or hatred of God.
The casting away of Gods love, or, the contempt and hatred of God, which is
through the alienation of our nature from God and Gods justice, and by reason
of an inclination thereof to sin, therefore to flee and shun God accusing and
punishing sin, and to fret against him. Of this sin it is said; Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be. Inordinate love of our selves and other
creatures.
Inordinate love of himself and other creatures, which is, to prefer his
lusts, or pleasures, or life, or glory, or any other thing before God, and his
will, and glory, and to be willing rather to neglect and offend him, Mat. 10.37.
then to part from those things which we love: He that loves Father or Mother
more then me, is not worthy of me. Feigned love of God.
A feigned love of God, whereby also we may here offend. But here we cannot
offend in the excess, because we never love God so much as we should.

Virtue, The fear of God
The fear of God is, to acknowledge the infinite anger of God toward sin,
his great power to punish sin, his wisdom and justice, and that right and
dominion which he has over all creatures; and of the contrary, to acknowledge
our own corruption and infirmity: and therefore to submit our selves to God
according to all his Commandments; and to account for the greatest evil, our
offending of God, and estranging from him, and in respect thereof highly to
hate and detest all sin, and to be ready rather to suffer all other evils
whatsoever, then that we will offend God in any thing. Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, because I am the Lord. Levit. 19.14. Jerem. 10.7.
Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? For to thee appertains the
dominion: for among all the wise men of the Gentiles, and in all their
kingdoms, there is none like unto thee. Object. The highest good cannot be
feared: for fear is a shunning of evil. God is the chiefest good. Therefore
he cannot be feared. Ans. To the Major we answer, that the highest good cannot
be feared, as it is the highest good, but in respect that it is somewhat else.
So God is feared, not as he is our principal good (for so he is loved) but as
he is just, and mighty to punish: or he is feared in regard of the evil and
punishment of utter destruction which he is able to inflict.

The differences between the fear and love of God.
The fear and love of God differ: For, 1. The love of God arises from a
knowledge of Gods goodness: The fear of God arises from a knowledge of Gods
justice, and of his power to punish sins, and of that right which he has
over all creatures. 2. Love pursues good, to wit, God and our conjunction with
him: wherefore the love of God is, not to abide to be bereaved of God, who is
the chief good. But fear flies evil, to wit, the displeasure and wrath of
God, and our separation from him. Wherefore also the fear of God is, to beware
that we offend not God. Moreover, the fear of God, A difference of the fear
of God in the nature of man being yet incorrupt, and the fear of God in the
regenerate. Esaias 25.8. Rev. 7.18. and 21.4.
which was in the nature of man incorrupt, differs from that which is now in
the regenerate in this life, and which is in the blessed Angels and Saints in
the celestial life. The fear of God, which is in the blessed in everlasting
life, is a high detestation of sin and punishments, without grief, because
neither any sin is in them, nor any punishment of sin; and they are assured
that they shall never sin or be punished. He will destroy death for ever, and
the Lord God will wipe away the tears from all faces. The fear of God, which
is in the regenerate in this life, is an acknowledging of sin and the wrath
of God, and an earnest grief for the sins committed, for the offending of
God, and for those calamities which by reason of sins both we and others
sustain, and a fear of future sins and punishments, and an earnest desire of
flying and shunning these evils, by reason of the knowledge of that mercy which
is showed unto us through Christ. Fear ye not them which kill the body, Mar.
10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, which is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell. Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in
the same condemnation? Luke 23.40.
This fear is commonly called Son-like fear, Son-like fear.
because it is such as Sons bear toward their Parents, who are sorry for the
anger and displeasure of their Father, and fear lest they farther offend him,
and be punished; and yet notwithstanding are always persuaded of the love and
mind of their Father toward them: and therefore they love him, and for this
love of him whom they have offended they are the more grievously sorry. So is
it said of Peter. So he went out, Mat. 26.75. Servile fear.
and wept bitterly. Servile fear, such as is of slaves or servants toward
their Masters, is to shun punishment without faith, and without a desire of
changing and amending this life, with a despair and shunning of God, and with
a separation from him. Three diffences between Son-like and slavish fear.
The Son-like fear differs from a servile or slavish fear: 1. Because this
Son-like fear arises from a confidence and love of God. And therefore, 2. It
principally shunneth not God himself, but the d^spleasing and offending of
God: and, 3. It is certain of everlasting life. Servile fear, 1. Arises from
a knowledge, and an accusing of sin, and from a feeling of Gods judgment and
anger against sin: and, 2. Is a shunning and hatred of God, and punishment,
and the judgments of God on sin, but not of sin it self. 3. And is so
much the greater, how much the more certain expectation there is of everlasting
damnation, and how much the greater despair there is of grace and the mercy of
God. This fear of God is in the Devils, and in the wicked, and is that
beginning of everlasting death, which the wicked feel in this life. I heard
thy voice in the garden and was afraid. Genesis 3.10. James 2.19. Esaias 57.21.
The devils believe and tremble. There is no peace unto the wicked. Wherefore
it is an hatred and shunning, not of sin, but of God, and is repugnant to the
faith and love of God. It is no^ commanded, but forbidden in this Commandment.
1 John 4.8.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear; for fear has
painfulness: and he that fears, is not perfect in love. Now, because in the
Saints in this life, neither faith nor love are perfect, but are often shaken
with many tentations and doubts; therefore, albeit this son-like fear is begun
in them, yet it is never in that purity, but that some servile fear is mingled
with it. Examples hereof are rife and frequent in the Psalms, and in the book
of Job. Psalm. 32.3. and 38.4. Job 13.24.
When I held my tongue my bones consumed, when I roared all the day. Mine
iniquities are gone over mine head, and, as a weighty burden, they are too
heavy for me: Mine heart pants, my strength fails me. Wherefore hidest thou
thy face, and take me for thine enemy?

We are further here to observe, The fear of God used in Scripture for the
whole worship of God. Prove. 1.7. 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 John 5.2.
that oftentimes in Scripture the love of God, and the fear of God, is taken
for the whole worship of God, or for the general obedience, according to all
Gods Commandments: As, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. The
end of the Commandment, is love out of a pure heart, etc. In this we know that
we love the children of God, when we love God, etc. The reason hereof is,
because the fear and love of God, seeing they spring of faith, and hope, are
causes of our whole obedience. For they who truly love and fear God, will not
offend him in any thing, but endeavor to do all things pleasing and
acceptable unto him.

The contrary vices.
Unto the fear of God are repugnant, 1. In the defect, Profaneness, carnal
security, and contempt of God: 2. In the excess, Servile fear, and despair;
of which we have already spoken sufficiently.

Virtue. Humility.
Humility is, to acknowledge all those good things, which are in us, and are
done by us, not to come from any worthiness or ability of our own, but from
the free goodness of God: and so by the acknowledging of Gods divine Majesty,
and our infirmity and unworthiness, to subject and submit our selves unto God,
to give the glory of all things which are in us to him alone, truly to fear
God, and to acknowledge and bewail our own defects and vices, not to covet to
any higher place or condition, neither trusting in our own gifts, but, in the
help and assistance of God, to hold our selves contented with our vocation and
calling, not to despise others in comparison of our selves, neither to let or
hinder them in the discharging of their duty, but to acknowledge that others
also are, and may be made profitable instruments of God, and therefore to give
place and honor unto them: not to attribute unto our selves things above our
force and power, not to affect any excellency above others: but to be well
contented with those things which God has given us, and to employ all our
gifts and studies to the glory of God, and the safety of our neighbors, even
those which are of the baser and unworthier sort: neither at any time to
murmr against God, if we fail of our hope, or if we be despised, but in all
things to ascribe the praise of wisdom and justice unto God. 1 Cor. 4.6, 7.
These things I have figuratively applied unto mine own self, and Apollos for
your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that no man presume above that which is
written, that one swell not against another for any man's cause: for who
separateth thee? And what have thou that thou have not received? 1 Pet. 5.5.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.
Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, Mat. 18.4.
the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Do nothing through
contention, Phil. 2.3.
or vain glory, but in meekness of mind let every man esteem another better
then himself.

Pride a vice contrary in the defect to Humility.
Unto Humility in the extremity of defect is opposed Pride, or arrogance: which
is to ascribe his gifts not to God, but to his own worthiness or ability, and
therefore to stand in admiration of himself and his gifts, not truly to fear
God, neither to acknowledge and bewail his defects; and so further to be
aspiring to higher places and callings; and standing not upon God, but upon his
own gifts, to attribute also to himself those things which he has not, to
attempt things above his power, and not belonging to his calling; to contemn
and debase others in respect of himself, to yield to none, but to covet to
excel, and be eminent above other, to refer his gifts and counsels
principally to his own glory, to be angry with God and men, to fret and fume
against God, when his desires and counsels are hindered, and also to accuse God
of error and injustice, if Gods counsels agree not with the judgments and
affections of men. More briefly thus: Pride and arrogance is for a man to
admire himself and his own gifts, to attribute them to himself as chief
causes of them, to intermeddle with other men's affairs, and fret and fume
against God, if his will and desire be hindered. Hereof it is said, 1 Pet. 5.5.
Prove. 16.5.
God resists the proud. All that are proud in heart are an abomination to the
Lord. Unto humility, is opposed, in the extremity of excess, a feigned modesty
or humility, which is a double pride: and it is to hunt after the praise and
commendation of humility, by denying of those things outwardly, which yet a man
does in his mind attribute unto himself, either truly or falsely, and by
refusing of those things which he most of all desires, and covertly labors
to compass. When ye fast, look not sour as the Hypocrites: for they
disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men to fast. Verily I say
unto you, that they have their reward. Aristotle terms it, feigned niceness,
and those that are possessed therewith, counterfeit nice men. Some render the
word there used by Aristotle, thus; Vainglorious dissemblers. The words of
Aristotle are these, They who dissemble in small and open matters, are called
coy deceivers, and grow contemptible every where with men: and sometimes it is
pride in men, as the wearing of Lacedemonian attire, or cladding themselves in
any course and vile apparel. Therefore counterfeit humility is double pride.

Virtue, Patience.
Patience is the knowledge and agnizing of Gods Majesty, wisdom, justice, and
goodness, resolving through a confidence in Gods promise, and so in hope of
Gods assistance and deliverence, to obey God, in suffering those evils and
adversities, which he sends on us, and wills us to suffer; neither in
respect of the grief which they bring, to murmur against God, or to do any
thing against his Commandments, but in our dolor and grief, to retain still
the confidence and hope of Gods assistance, to ask deliverance of him, and by
this knowledge and full persuasion of Gods will, to mitigate and assuage our
grief and pains: Psalm. 37.7, 35*
Hold thee still in the Lord, and abide patiently upon him. Hope thou in the
Lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote thee. Humility and Patience belong
unto the first Commandment, not only because they are parts of that internal
obedience, which God requires immediately to be performed unto him, but also
because they follow and accompany the true knowledge, or confidence, love and
fear of God, as necessary effects of the same.

Impatience contrary in the defect to patience.
Unto Patience, in the extremity of defect, Impatience is contrary: which is,
through the not knowing and distrust of Gods wisdom, providence, justice, and
goodness, not to be willing to obey God, in suffering such adversity, as he
wills us to suffer, and through grief to fret against God, or to do somewhat
against his Commandments, neither to desire or expect from God any help and
deliverance, neither by the knowledge and trust, or persuasion of Gods will, to
moderate the grief, but to yield unto it; and being broken therewith, to be
driven and solicited unto despair. Examples hereof are Saul and Judas: also
many raging affections in Jobs complaints, wherewith the godly are often shaken
and distressed.

Unto Patience in the excess, Temerity or rashness is opposed; Rashness
contrary in the excess to patience. Sirac. 3.27.
which is through foolishness, not knowing or not considering the dangers, or
his own calling, or the will of God, or else through a confidence in himself,
to adventure dangers without any need or necessity. He that loves danger,
shall perish therein.

Here is to be noted and observed, that oftentimes in this and other
Commandments the same vices are opposed to sundry and diverse virtues. So unto
faith, hope, and fear of God, is opposed carnal security: to faith, hope, the
love of God, humility and patience, is opposed the tempting of God: and to the
true knowledge of God and faith, Idolatry is most repugnant. The same may be
seen also, and must be observed in the virtues and vices of other
Commandments.

ON THE 35. SABBATH.
Quest. 96. What does the second Commandment require?
Ans. That we should not express or represent God by any image or shape, and
figure; Esaias 40.18, 19, 25. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Romans 1.23, 24. Acts 17.29. 1 Samuel
15.23. Deuteronomy. 12.30. Matthew. 15.9.
or worship him any otherwise then he has commanded in his word himself to be
worshipped.

The Explication.
The end of this second Commandment.
TWo things are contained in this second Commandment: the Commandment it self,
and an exhortation to obedience. The end or scope of the Commandment, is: That
the true God alone, who commands himself to be worshipped in the first
Commandment, be rightly worshipped of us: namely, with such worship, wherewith
it is right and meet he should be worshipped of intelligent and understanding
creatures, and such as pleases him, and be in no sort dishonored by
superstitious kinds of worship. Wherefore the true worship of the true God is
here enjoined, and withal a rule is given, that we holily and religiously
contain and hold our selves within the lists and tarriers prescribed by God,
neither add ought to that worship which God himself has instituted, nor
maime the same so much as in the least point: which also we are in other places
expressly enjoined by the Lord. What is the true worship of God, and what it is
to worship him truly.
Now the true and incorrupt worship of God is every internal or external
work, commanded of God, done in faith, which is persuaded that both the person
and the work please God for the Mediators sake; the chief end whereof is,
that due honor may be given unto God, whereby we may show that we acknowledge
him alone for the true God, who has willed the worship to be thus done unto
him. Will Worship is false worship.
And, To worship God truly, is so to worship him, as himself has manifested
in his word that he will be worshipped. Contrariwise, in this second
Commandment is forbidden all will worship, that is, all false worship; namely,
not only that creatures or Images be not reputed or worshipped for God, but
also that we resemble not him the very true God by any Image or shape, neither
worship him by Images, and at Images, or with any other kind of worship, which
himself has not commanded. For when he condemns the chief or grossest, and
most evident kind of false worships, namely, the worshipping of God at, or by
Images, it is manifest that he forbids also the other kinds of false
worships, seeing this is the head and fountain of all the rest. For he
forbids the most gross kind of Idolatry, not thereby to exclude others, and
acquit them from this inhibition, but because this is the fountain of all the
rest. Wherefore all worships (whatsoever are instituted by men, not by God, and
in which the same cause of prohibiting or forbidding appears) are forbidden
by the forbidding of this, the grossest kind of the rest. Therefore whatsoever
things hinder Gods true worship, they are all contrary to this Commandment.

Twofold Idolatry.
1. Idolatry; which is a false or superstitious worship of God. Idolatry (as we
have heretofore showed) is of two sorts: 1. When a false god is worshipped:
that is, when in place of the true God, or besides him, honor or worship is
given to some either imaginary or existent thing, which is agreeing unto the
true God only. This kind of Idolatry is especially forbidden in the first
Commandment: and further also in some part in the third Commandment. 2. When
men err in the kind of worship: that is, when worship or honor is imagined
to be done to the true God by some such work, which himself has not
commanded. This kind is properly condemned in this second Commandment, and is
called will worship, Who are superstitious. Esaias 29.13. Mat. 15.9. Col.
2.8.16.22, 23.
or superstition, adding men's inventions to Gods Commandments. They are said
to be superstitious, whosoever add humane inventions to the Commandments of
God. This superstition or will worship is condemned every where in Scripture: In
vain they worship me, teaching for doctrine men's precepts. Beware lest there
be any man that spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the
traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, etc. Which all perish with
the using, and are after the commandments and doctrines of men. Which things
have indeed a show of wisdom in voluntary religion, and humbleness of mind,
and in not sparing the body: neither have they it in any estimation to satisfy
the flesh. Hence we answer this objection. Object. Idolatry is forbidden in the
first Commandment, and in this second also: therefore they both make but one.
Answ. One kind of Idolatry is forbidden in the first Commandment, to wit, when
another god is worshipped: another in the second, namely, when the true God is
worshipped otherwise then he ought. Repl. Yea, but still in both there is
Idolatry committed, and a strange god worshipped. Ans. There is indeed an Idol
in both always: but not always in the intent and profession of men. Therefore
whosoever offend against the second Commandment, offend against the first;
because they who worship God otherwise then he will be worshipped, imagine God
to be another, or otherwise affected and qualified then he is. Therefore they
worship not God, but the invention of their own brain, which they persuade
themselves to be so affected.

Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy, which is, a pretending or feigning true godliness and worship of
God: doing the external works commanded by God, whether Moral or Ceremonial,
without true faith and conversion. This vice is depainted and described in
these words by the Prophet Esaias: This people come near unto me with their
mouth, Esaias 29.13, 14.
and honor me with their lips, but have removed their hearts far from me,
and their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men. Therefore behold
I will again do a mavelous work in this people.

Profaneness.
Profaneness, which is, a voluntary letting go, or contempt of all religion,
and of the whole worship of God both internal and external, or else of some
part of divine worship. This profaneness is repugnant not only to this
Commandment, but also to the whole worship of God in the first and second
Table.

For defense of superstition some allege: Object.
1. That such places and sayings as are brought against will worship, speak
only of Mosaicall and Jewish ceremonies, and of the wicked and ungodly
commandments of men: but not of such precepts of men, as are authorized by the
Church, Bishops, and such as command nothing contrary to Gods word. Answ. That
this is false which is replied, some demonstrances, which are added unto
certain places, declare, which also reject those humane Laws and ordinances,
that command any thing in regard of divine worship, which is not commanded by
God, although the same be a thing in his own kind not wicked, nor forbidden
of God. So Christ rejects the Jews tradition of washing of hands, Mat. 15.11.
because they had an opinion of worshipping God thereby; whereof he says, That
which goes into the mouth defiles not the man, but that which comes out of
the mouth, that defiles the man. Hither also may that be referred, which
Christ speaks, Mat. 23.25.
Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye make clean the outer
side of the Cup and of the Platter; but within they are full of bribery and
excess. Now that these and the like things are lawful, setting aside an
opinion of superstition in them, the Apostle in sundry places does show: He
that observes the day, observes it to the Lord: Romans 14.16.
and he that observes not the day, observes it not to the Lord. He that
eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not,
eats not to the Lord, and gives God thanks. Again, Whatsoever is sold in
the shambles, eat ye, and ask no question for conscience sake. 1 Cor. 10.25.
For the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. Wherefore they are not
simply so condemned, but only so far as they are prescribed for divine
worship, that is, if they be so prescribed, as that by the performance of them
God is honored, and dishonored by the omission of them. In the same respect
is single life also condemned; especially seeing the same is not a thing
indifferent; but to those only, who have the gift of continency: according as
it is said of Christ, He that is able to receive this, Mat. 19.12.
let him receive it: For all men (as in the same place Christ says) cannot
receive this thing, save they to whom it is given. Things indifferent are
diligently to be discerned from Gods worship.


And this is the difference between things indifferent, or of middle quality,
and those things which are properly the worship of God. Which difference we
must diligently observe: serve: 1. Because when men feign other worships of
God, in them they feign another will of God, which is to feign another God.
When they therefore so do, (as erst Aaron and Jeroboam did) they are no less
accused of Idolatry, then they who purposely worship another God, besides that
Jehovah revealed in the Church. 2. Because, by confounding of the true worship
with false worships, the true God is confounded with Idols, which are
worshipped with those worships invented by men. 3. Because, whatsoever is not
of faith is sin. And when any man does a thing, as thereby to worship God, his
conscience not knowing whether God will be worshipped after this manner or no,
he does it not of faith, but is ignorant, and doubts whether God be pleased
or displeased with his work: and therefore he presumes to do that, albeit it
may displease God: Wherefore he does not thereby worship, but contemn God. But
because the defenders of worships invented by men, allege certain places in
which the Scripture wills us to obey the commandments of men, and do thence
conclude, that they have the force and nature of divine ordinances, and so of
divine worship: it is therefore necessary, that here we should say something
touching humane traditions and their differences.

Of men's commandments, and the authority of Ecclesiastical Traditions.
THere are four sorts of those things which men command: Gods ordinances
proposed by men.
The ordinances of God, which God will that men propose unto others to be
observed, but not in their own name, but in the name of God himself, as being
themselves the ministers and messengers, not the authors thereof. So the
Ministers of the Church propound the heavenly doctrine of God to the Church,
Parents to their Children, and Masters to their Scholars; so Magistrates
propound the Commandments of the Decalogue unto their Subjects. The obedience
of those Commandments is, and is called Gods worship: because they are not
humane ordinances, but divine, which are necessarily to be obeyed, although no
authority or commandment of any creature came thereto; yea, although all
creatures should command the contrary. Hitherto appertain many places of
Scripture: Prove. 6.20. Deuteronomy. 17.2. Exodus 16.8. Mat. 23.2, 3. Luke 10.17. 1 Cor.
4.21. 2 Cor. 13.10. 1 These. 4.2, 8. 2 These 3.14. Heb. 13.14.
as, My son, keep thy fathers commandment, and forsake not thy Mothers
instruction. Ye know the commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. He
therefore that despises these, despises not man, but God. The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore, whatsoever they bid you, observe
and do. These and the like sayings, will us to obey men as the ministers of
God, in those things which belong unto the ministry, that is, which God by
express commandment has testified, that he will have published and commanded
by them; they grant not authority unto any to institute new worships of God at
their own pleasure: according as it is said; Prove. 30.^. 1 Timothy 1.3. and 4.11.
and 6.2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Put nothing unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
Command some that they teach none other doctrine. The civil ordinances of men,
which are determinations and prescriptions of circumstances necessary and
profitable to the keeping of the Moral Commandments of the second Table. 2.
Civil ordinances of men.
Such are the positive laws of Magistrates, Parents, Masters, and of all, who
bear rule over others in the Civil State. The obedience of these Laws, as
touching the general, is the worship of God, because the general thereof is
moral, and commanded by God himself, namely, obedience toward magistrates,
and others which bear rule in the Commonwealth. But as concerning the
special of the action, or as touching the circumstances, it is no divine
worship: because those works are divine worship, which must necessarily be done
in respect of Gods Commandment, although no Commandment or respect of any
creature were adjoined: but these, except they were commanded by the
Magistrates, might be done, or omitted, without any offense against God: but
yet notwithstanding, such Civil ordinances of Magistrates, and other
Governors bind the consciences of men: that is, we must necessarily perform
them; neither are they neglected without the displeasing of God: and therefore
by reason of these commandments of Magistrates, we are bound also to perform
the works enjoined us by these commandments, even although we could omit them
without giving any offense; if we mean to retain our bedience pure and sound.
So, To carry weapons, or, Not to carry weapons; To pay a lesser, or greater
tribu e or Subsidy, is not in it self the worship of God, but the obedience
which is in these and the like matters due to be rendered unto the Magistrate,
is Gods worship. Therefore if the Magistrare neither command nor forbid either,
it is free to do either: but if he command any one thing, he sins whosoever
does the contrary, although he could keep it never so close, neither offend any
man thereby. The reason is, because the general, namely, obedience toward the
Magistrate, which is Gods worship, is violated. Wherefore these specials and
particulars are by an accident made the worship of God, to wit, by the
commandment of the Magistrate. Hither belong these Scriptures: Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13.1, 2, 5. Titus 3.1. Ephesians. 8.1. Co^.
3.22, 23.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Ecclesiastical
ordinances.
The Ecclesiastical or Ceremonial ordinances of men, which are determinations
or prescriptions of circumstances, necessary, or profitable for the keeping of
the Moral Commandments of the first Table: for they belong either to the
keeping and maintaining of order and comeliness in the Church assemblies, and
the Ecclesiastical administration of the Ministry; or to external exercise
of godliness, both public and private, or to avoid the giving of offense
unto the weaker, and to bring them unto the Church and knowledge of the truth:
of which kind are, the time, place, form, and course of Sermons, and Prayers,
and Readings in the Church; likewise Fasts, the manner of proceeding in
election of Ministers, in gathering and distributing of alms, and such like,
whereof God has commnded nothing in special. The general also of these Laws,
as of the Civil, is moral, if they be rightly and profitably made; and
therefore it is the worship of God: as it is Gods worship to hear the word of
God, to pray unto God, as well publicly with the company of the faithful, as
privately, to bestow alms upon our poor brethren, to receive the Sacraments.
But the Ceremonies themselves are not only no worship of God, but neither do
they bind men's consciences, neither is the observation of them necessary,
except the omitting of them breed offense. So it is no worship of God, but a
thing indifferent, and not binding men's consciences, to use this or that form
of prayer, to pray standing or kneeling, to pray at this or that time, at this
or that hour, in this or that place, to read or interpret this or that Text
of Scripture, to eat or not to eat flesh, etc. Neither has the Church only
this right and power to constitute, or abrogate, or alter by her own authority
these ordinances, as she judges it to be most expedient for her common
edification: but the consciences also of particular men retain this liberty; so
that they may either omit these, or do otherwise, without any offense against
God, if there arise no scandal or offense thereby amongst men: that is, if
they do it neither of contempt or neglect of the Ministry, nor of wantonness,
or ambition, or of a desire of contention and novelty, nor with the offending
of weak ones. The reason is, because then laws are rightly observed, when they
are observed according to the mind and purpose of the Lawgiver. But the Church
ought to will that such ordinances and statutes as are made concerning things
indifferent, be observed, not in respect of our own authority or commandment,
but only for the maintenance of order and comeliness, and for the avoiding of
scandals and offenses.

Wherefore, as long as comeliness or order is not violated, neither offense
given, it leaves every man's conscience free to himself: For not in respect of
the Churches or Ministers commandment, but in respect of the just causes of
commanding, things indifferent are necessary sometimes to be done, or ^o be
omitted; and the conscience is hurt, not by the neglect of any humane
commandment, as in Civil matters, but by the neglect of the causes for which
they are commanded. Hither belongs the precept of S. Paul: If any of them
which believe not, call you unto a feast, 1 Cor. 10.27.
and if^e will go, whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. But if any man say unto you, This is sacrificed unto Idols,
eat it not, because of him that showed it, and for the conscience (for the
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is) and the conscience, I say, not
thine, but of that other: for why should my liberty be condemned of another
man's conscience? For if I, through Gods benefit, be partaker, why am I evil
spoken of, Acts 15.
for that, wherefore I give thanks? Likewise, the decree of the Council of the
Apostles, 1 Cor. 11.
of things sacrificed to Idols, of blood, and that which was strangled.
Likewise, the precept given concerning women to be covered. Likewise, the Lords
day substituted by the Church in place of the Sabbath, for the exercise of the
Ministry, etc.

Object. If the Edicts of Magistrates bind men's consciences, why then do not
the traditions of the Church bind them also? A difference between Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws.
Answ. There is a difference in these examples. God gave this power and
authority of making Civil Laws unto the Magistrate, and has strengthened it
with this band, in that he threatens and denounces his anger against them
which break these Laws: but unto the Church and to his Ministers he has not
given any such authority; but yet notwithstanding he would have these Laws and
constitutions to be observed, which the Ministers and the Church of their own
authority command, not for any necessity that there is of obeying these Laws
commanded by the Church, but according to the rule of charity, that is, for a
desire of avoiding offense. Mat. 20.25.
This answer is delivered in these places of Scripture: Ye know that the Lords
of the Gentiles have dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority over them: But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your servant. Not as if ye were lords over Gods
heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the slock. 1 Pet. 5.3. Co^os. 2.16.
Gal. 5.1. Two causes of this difference.
Let no man condemn you in meat you in meat and drink, or in respect of an
Holyday, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Neither are the causes obscure or
hard to come by, for which God made this difference: namely, Rep^.
or some occasion is given of injuring it. Neither is this reply of force: That
unto the greater and worthier office, greater obedience is due: and therefore
the constitutions of the Ministers of the Church are no less necessary to be
kept, then the Laws of the Civil Magistrates. Answ.
For unto the worthier greater obedience is due in those things which are
properly belonging unto his office. Now, the proper office of the Civil
Magistrate is, to make Laws, which are for the commandment it self to be
observed: but the proper office of the Ministry of the Church is, to sound
forth Gods Commandments: and, the proper office of the Church is, to ordain
ceremonial decrees, which must be kept, not for the commandment of man, but
for avoiding of offenses.

4. Humane ordinances, 4. Wicked ordinances of men. Acts 5.29. Mat. 15.3.
which are repugnant unto the ordinances of God. These God forbids us to
obey, whether the Civil Magistrate command them, or the Church, or the
Ministers of the Church. We ought rather to obey God then men. Why transgress
you the Commandment of God by your tradition? Object. Answ.
Having now considered these four kinds of ordinances delivered by men, it is
easy to make answer unto that first objection: God commands us to obey the
commandments of men. He does so: 1. Such as be good, that is, not repugnant
unto the word. 2. Such as he himself has commanded by men, that worship may
be given him. 3. Civil ordinances, which depend on the authority of men, not
obeying them for divine worship, but for conscience sake. 4. Ecclesiastical or
ceremonial ordinances, obeying them, but not respecting therein any divine
worship or conscience (neither of which they import) but only the avoiding of
offense.

Object. 2. What things the Church commands by the instinct of the holy
Ghost, those are divine ordinances, belonging to the worship of God. But the
Church decrees good and profitable constitutions, being guided by the guiding
of the holy Ghost: Therefore good constitutions decreed by the Church,
appertain to the worship of God. Ans. The general indeed of those
commandments, which the Church prescribes by the instinct of the holy Ghost,
appertains to the worship of God. This general compriseth the divine Laws of
God, of not breaking charity, and of avoiding offense, of keeping order and
comeliness in the Church. And in respect of this general, the constitutions,
which the Church decrees by the instinct and motion of the holy Ghost, are
also divine, or the constitutions of God, as namely, they are a part of those
divine Laws, the care and keeping whereof is commended unto us by God himself
in his word. But those good constitutions of the Church are humane, or the
constitutions of men, as they do in special design that which was in general
by these divine Laws signified rather then expounded. Wherefore those
ordinances are no worship of God, which the Church advises, decrees,
receives, or commands for the maintenance of mutual charity among us, and
for the preservation of order and comeliness, or for the avoiding of offenses,
albeit in the choosing and constituting of these she be directed by the instinct
of the holy Ghost. For the holy Ghost declares to the Church, both what is
profitable for the avoiding of offenses, and also that those things which are
commanded for the avoiding of offenses, are neither the worship of God, nor
necessary to be observed, but in case of avoiding offense; and therefore that
the Church retains her liberty of deliberating of them, or of changing of
them, or of omitting them, if there be no fear of offense. This does Saint
Paul manifestly declare, when as, counselling them to single life which have
the gift of continency, yet he adds further, But I speak this by permission,
1 Cor. 7.6, 36.
not by commandment. Again, This I speak for your own commodity, not to
tangle you in a snare, but that you follow that which is honest, and that ye
cleave fast unto the Lord without separation. Here he affirms both: both that
he wishes them that are continent, to lead a single life, that so they may
the more fitly serve God; and that also he leaves it free unto them to marry,
and he speaks both by the instinct of the holy Ghost. So does the same
Apostle forbid to eat of things sacrificed to Idols, with scandal or offense
of any weaker brother: but without this offense, 1 Cor. 10.
and setting it apart, he leaves it free to each man to do as himself lists.

Object. 3. God is worshipped by those things which are done to Gods glory. The
things that the Church does decree, are done to Gods glory: Therefore these
also are the worship of God. Ans. Those things that are done to the glory of
God, by themselves, that is, which are commanded by God, to this end, as that
by these works we should declare our obedience toward him, they are the
worship of God: but not those things which serve for the glory of God but by an
accident, that is, which serve sometime for the performing of those things,
which are commanded by God, upon some accidental respects and causes; which if
they do not concur, God yet may be honored, both of those that do them, and
of those that do them not, so that they be done, or left undone, of faith,
which is assured, and resolves that the person is reconciled unto God, and
that the action, or omitting of the action, does agree with the word of God.

Object. 4. The examples of those, who have worshipped God without his direct
Commandment, confirm that it is permitted to men to worship God with that
worship which themselves ordain. Answ. The example of Samuel sacrificing in
Ramoth, 1 Samuel 5.17. 1 Reg. 18.32. Judges 13.19.
Elias in Mount Carmel, Manoah in Zorah, cannot at all establish will worship.
For, sacrifices, they were the worship of God, because they were commanded by
God. places appointed for sacrifices, they were free, when as yet there was no
appointed place for the Ark of the Covenant. Wherefore Samuel did appoint that
Town for sacrifices, where he dwelt, as being most fit and commodious. Very
well knew the holy Prophet, that the worship of God did not consist in this
circumstance of place, which was left free unto the godly, before the Temple
was built of Solomon. persons, although the Prophets were not of Aarons family,
yet had they, by reason of their extraordinary function, authority to
sacrifice. This also may be said as touching Elias sacrificing in the Mount
Carmel.

Now as for Manoah, who is said to sacrifice in Zorah, either he did not
himself sacrifice, but delivered the sacrifice to be offered of the Angel,
whom he took to be a Prophet: or himself offered it, being commanded by the
Angel; and so did nothing besides the divine Law of God. In like manner is the
answer easy to other examples, which they heap together, Genes. 4. Hebr. 11.
Romans 10. Jerem. 35.
and bring in. Abel and Noah offer sacrifice: but not without the commandment
of God, because they did it with faith. But no faith can be without the word of
God. The Rechabites refrain from wine and husbandry, according to their father
Jonadabs commandment, and are therefore by God commended; but Jonadab meant
not to institute any new worship of God, but by this Civil ordinace, to banish
from his posterity riot, and such sins and punishments as accompany riot. Dan.
10. Jonab 3.
So also Daniels fasting, and the Ninivites fasting was no worship of God, but
an exercise, serving for the stirring up of prayer and repentance, which were
that worship of God, which is in those places commended. Now in John Baptist,
Mat. 3.
not his kind of living, food and apparel, but his sobriety and temperance
is commended, and is the worship of God. And not the raiment made of Sheeps and
Goats skins; neither the wandering in mountains, caves, and dens; but faith and
patience in calamities, is set forth and commended as the worship of God.

Object. 5. Whatsoever is done of faith, and pleases God, is Gods worship:
These works, albeit they are undertaken by men voluntarily, yet are done of
faith, and please God: Therefore these works undertaken by men voluntarily, are
the worship of God. Answ. This does not suffice for the defining of Gods
worship, to say that a thing pleases God: seeing actions of indifferency may
also be done of faith, and so please God, though in another sort then his
worship properly so called pleases him. For after a diverse sort is the
worship of God, and indifferent actions, pleasing unto God. The worship of God
does so please God, that the contrary thereto displeases God; and therefore
cannot be done of faith. But those things which are in themselves indifferent,
are so liked of God, that their contraries also are not of him disliked or
disallowed, insomuch that both of them may be done of faith, which faith makes
both the work and the person acceptable to God.

Thus far have we proceeded in speaking of the commandment it self: it
remains, that we prosecute the exhortation. But first the doctrine touching
Images, since it pertains to the Commandment, is to be weighed and
considered, which is wholly contained in the two questions next ensuing of the
Catechism.

Quest. 97. May there then at all any Images or resemblances of things be made?
Ans. God neither ought, nor can be represented by any means Esaias 40.25.
: and for the creatures, although it be lawful to express them, yet God
forbids notwithstanding their Images to be made or had, as thereby to
worship or honor either them, or God by them Exo. 34.17. and 23, 24. and
34.13. Numb. 33.52. Deuteronomy. 7.5. and 12.3. and 16.22.
.

The Explication.
AS concerning the words of the Commandment, we are to observe, that there are
two parts of this second Commandment. The former part forbids Images to be
made or had; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the
likeness of any thing, etc. The second and latter part forbids to worship
them with divine honor, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. In
the former part question is made, Whether all Images; and if not all, What
Images are lawful, or not lawful; and, How far forth they are so: In the
latter, Whether all bowing to Images be forbidden, and can by no means be
defended.

Of Images and Pictures in Christian Churches.
The chief questions concerning Images, are these:

1. Whether, and how far forth Images in Churches are forbidden by this
Commandment. 2. Whether the worshipping of Images may be defended. 3. Why they
are to be abolished in Christian Churches. 4. How, and by whom they are to be
abolished.
The two former of these fall under this 97. question of the Catechism: the
latter belong to the 98. question immediately following.

The Hebrew names of an Image.
THe usual Hebrew words are Zelem and Themunah, which signifies an Image: and
Lpesel, that is to say, a graven Image: and Hhezebh, that is to say, an Idol
or Statue, derived from Hhazabh, which signifies to trouble, to vex or
grieve; fitly so called from the effect of Idolatry, because and Idol vexes
and grieveth the conscience. The Greek names of an Image.
The Greeks call an Image and Idol (...), and (...), to wit, any resemblance
or likeness, especially that which men frame unto themselves, thereby to
represent and worship God; whether it be a solid-bodied Statue, or a bare and
naked Image or Picture. The Latin names. Imago. Statua. Simulachrum. Idolum. A
fond distinction of the Papists between the words Idolum and Simulachrum
confuted by three reasons.
The word Imago with the Latins, is any similitude represented and shadowed or
painted: the word Statua is any solid Image, carved, or cast: and so is
Simulacrum. The self-same also does the word Idolum signify, which of a Greek
word is made a Latin. Notwithstanding our late Popish Sophisters have invented
a distinction between the words Idolum and Simulacrum, thereby the more
colourably to defend their worshipping of Images. For they will have the word
Simulachrum to signify the Image of a thing truly existing in the world: and
the word Idolum to import an Image of some imaginary and counterfeit thing: and
therefore that Idols indeed, and their worship are forbidden, but not Images.
But the fondness and vanity of this distinction is apparent: Out of the
derivation of both these words. For the words Simulachrum and Idolum, differ no
more than these words, panis and (...), which both signify the same thing,
even bread: but herein only is the difference, that the former is a Latin
word, the latter a Greek word. For as the word (...), signifies a form or
shape, from formando, which is to form and fashion; so the word Simulachrum is
a counterfeit or shadow, from the word Simulando, which is to resemble,
counterfeit, or shadow, says Lactantius.

The Interpreters of Scripture use both these words indifferently. For the
Septuagint everywhere translate the Hebrew word Hhezebh, by the word (...):
and the Latin Interpreters translate it Simulacrum. Thus the vulgar La^in
Interpreter renders this caveat; Cavete vobis, (...), in these words, Fugite
Simulacra, Fly Idols. 1 John 5.21.


The use of both these words is indifferent in good and probable Authors.
Cicero in his first book De Finibus, speaking of the Atom^, calls them
Imagines and Idola, both Images and Idols. Euripides likewise terms the
ghosts of Polydore and Achilles, Eurip. in Hecub.
(...), and Idol. Therefore an Idol is not only an Image of a feigned thing,
but of a true thing also. Again, on the other side, the word Simulachrum is
used for the Image of a feigned thing. For Pliny calls the Idol of Ceres, a
false goddess, Plin. lib. 13. c. 4.
by the name Simulachrum: and Vitruvius likewise terms the Image or Idol of
Diana, Simulachrum. Wherefore false and feigned is this distinction of these
Sophisters between the words Idolum and Simulachrum. Thus much of the names
used in diverse languages, to express that we call an Image. Images and
Pictures not simply forbidden.


Now to the question we answer, that Images or Pictures are not here simply
forbidden to be made or had at all, because the Science of casting, carving,
painting, and embroidering is reckoned among those Arts and Crafts, which are
renowned and commendable, and are profitable for man's life, and are the gifts
of God: and God himself took care, Exodus 31.30. and 3^.30. Syrac. 38.2^. 1
Kings ^.30. and 10.20. Two ^orts of unlawful Images. 1. Images of God.
that Images should be made in his Tabernacle: and Solomon provided, that in
his Throne Lions, and in the Temple, by Gods appointment and commandment,
Palme-trees and Cherubins should be carved and set up. Neither is the reason
hereof hard and obscure: because writing and painting are profitable for the
memorial of things done; for ornament, and for a liberal and ingenuous
delight of man's life. Wherefore the Law forbids not the use of Images, but
the abuse; namely, it forbids that Images should be made, as by them to
represent or worship God, or any creatures. That Images of God are unlawful and
forbidden in this Commandemen^, proved by fo^^e season,:
So that simply all Images or Pictures are not forbidden; but only some which
are unlawful, are forbidden: as first, All Images and Pictures of God; that
is, made to represent or worship God, are simply here condemned, as it is
manifest, By the end of the Commandment.
By the end of the Commandment, which is the preservation of the incorrupt and
sincere worship of God. By the nature of God. Esaias 40.12, 18, 25.
By the nature of God. For God is incorporeall and in^ini^e; and therefore it is
impossible that he should be expressed and represented under a bodily and
finite Image, without impeachment and diminishing of his divine Majesty:
according to these sayings, Who has measured the waters in his fist? and
counted heaven with the spanne? etc. To whom will ye then liken God? or what
similitude will ye set up unto him? To whom will ye liken me, that I should be
like him, says the Holy One? Romans 1.23.
They turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image
of a corruptible man, and of birds; and four footed beasts, and of creeping
things. By Gods inhibition of them. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17, 18.
By Gods inhibition of them: Take therefore good heed unto your selves; for ye
saw no Image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst
of the fire: That ye corrupt not your selves, and make you agraven Image or
representation of any figure, whether it be the likeness of male or female,
the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, etc. By the cause of the
inhibition.
By the cause of this inhibition:because, forsooth, these Images not only
profit not men at all, but farther hurt them very much. For they are unto them
an occasion and cause of Idolatry, and so of punishment: In a word, God may not
be represented, because he neither will have it done, neither can we do it,
neither profueth it us any thing to do it. It is a very memorable president,
which Plutarch records of Numa in his life, Plutarch.
in these words: Numa forbade the Romans the use of any Image of any god,
which Image had the form or likeness of beast or man: So that in those former
times, there was in Rome no image of God either painted or graven: and it was
from the beginning 170. years, that they had built Temples and Chapels unto
the gods of Rome, and yet there was neither picture nor Image of God within
them. For they took it at the first for a sacrilege, to represent heavenly
things by earthly forms, seeing we cannot possibly any way attain to the
knowledge of God, Lib 4. cap. 3. Ortho. bid.
but in mind and understanding. Damascene writes, that To endeavor to
represent God, is a fond and wicked thing: although the very same Author
elsewhere does not obscurely defend the worship of Images in the seventh
Council held by Constantine and his son Leo; which Council, amongst other
worthy Decrees, ratified, that Christ should not be painted, nor carved, no not
according to his humane nature; because nothing but his humane nature could be
expressed by Art: and they who make such Images, seem to re-establish the
error of Nestorius and Eutyches. 2. The Images of creatures.
Secondly, the Images and figures of creatures, which are set up in Churches,
in Streets, and elsewhere, either for the worship of God, or to some perilous
and inconvenient ornament, are unlawful. Thou shall not bow down to them. 1
John 5.21.
Babes. fly Idols. But such Images of creatures may be lawful as are made and
set up without Churches, without any peril or show of Idolatry, superstition
or scandal only for a politic or Civil use, to wit, historical, or for
record of history; and symbolicall, or for evidence of some mystical matter;
and for honest or comely ornament: of which kind of Images were those Lions in
Salomons Throne, and Caesar's image in coin or money, etc.

Object. 1. Thou shall make no graven Image: Therefore God forbids the Art
of graving. Ans God indeed forbids the abuse; and that is: 1. If we would
grave an Image of God. 2. If we bind and tie the worship of God unto Images.

Object. 2. The holy Scripture attributing the parts of man's body unto God,
does signify thereby his nature and property. Therefore it is lawful also to
signify the nature and property of God by Images. Answ. There is a
dissimilitude between these Metaphors or translations of words, and between
Images: because unto them is annexed an opposition of them in the word of God,
which hinders and stops all errors: and Gods worship is not tied to those
words. But Images have no where any declaration of their necessary or
convenient use, and men easily fasten worship and adoration on them: Wherefore
God himself used those Metaphors of himself, by an anthropopathy, that is,
applying himself to speak unto men after the manner of men, thereby to help
our infirmity; and farther also permitted that we, speaking of him, should use
the same Metaphors: but he never either himself represented himself in
pictures and images; or willed us to use them for representation of him, but
strictly and precisely forbad them.

Object. 3. God of old presented himself to be seen in man's shape: Therefore
we may also follow in like signs and semblances. Ans. God indeed, moved by
certain reasons thereunto, did so; but he has forbidden us to follow it. The
reason of the prohibition is manifest. For it is lawful for God to manifest
himself what way soever he will; but it is not lawful for any creature to
represent God by any sign which himself has not commanded: there is
therefore a dissimilitude or difference in the instances. And those visible
shapes had God present with them to command, promise, and hear them, unto whom
he manifested himself: which cannot be said of such images as imitate those
shapes, without flat Idolatry: and therefore the Saints did well in adoring God
at them, or in them, as being after a special manner there present: which to
do in these, is impious and idolatrous, because it is done through the
boldness and vanity of man, without any commandment or promise from God.
Lastly, those visible shapes continued so long as it pleased the Lord to use
them for to manifest and show himself: and therefore could they not be drawn
to Idolatry. But images and pictures, which men make to represent the
manifestations of God, were neither ordained to manifest God, not to represent,
or resemble those ancient manifestations of God: and therefore are they an
object and an occasian of Idolatry.

A Table for the distinction of Images.
Of Images some are Natural; as any kind of Meteors, and other such natural
resemblances. Artificial; of which some are Engraven. Cast. Painted.
These are distinguished by their several matter, object, and end; and are
Images of God; which are simply condemned in this commandment, and every where
else in Scripture, and that because they impair the Majesty of God, and make
of God an Idol. Creatures; and are Lawful; such as stand without Churches, and
occasion no fear of Idolatry, but are only for civil use, or comely
ornament. Unlawful; such as are set up in Churches to worship God withal, or
for some dangerous kind of ornament.



2. Whether all worshipping at Images be forbidden, and may not in any sort be
defended.
TO this question we make answer, out of the second part of the commandment,
which simply forbids us to impart divine honor and worship to Images and
pictures, not only that which is given thereby or referred to creatures, but
also which is referred to the true God. Thou shall not bow down to them nor
worship them.

Object. 1. We worship not the Images (say the Papists) but God, of whom those
are signs and tokens, according to those versicles of the second Nicene
Council: That which the Image shows, is God; the Image it self is not God.
Look on the Image, but worship in thine heart that which thou beholdest
therein: and according to those of Thomas, Whenever thou passest by the Image
of Christ, see thou do obeisance: yet worship not the Image, but worship that
which the Image represents. Answ. 1. We deny that Images are signs of God,
because God cannot be truly signified by them, seeing he is immense; and
though he could, yet he ought not, because he has expressly forbidden them;
and because it is not in the power of any creature to ordain or establish any
signs whereby to signify God, but only in the will and pleasure of God.
Answ. 2. In this argument our adversaries tender and allege unto us a false
and needless cause. For not only the worshipping of Images is the cause and
form of Idolatry, but even the very worship of God also, which is given to
Images or other creatures besides or contrary to his word; 1 Kings 12.28. Exodus
32.5.
as the story of Aarons and Jeroboams calves does sufficiently declare. For,
though these men said: Behold, O Israel, thy gods which brought thee up, etc.
To morrow shall be the holy day of the Lord: yet God both detested, and
severely punished those worships as horrible and abominable Idolatry.
Wherefore, howsoever Idolaters pretend the name and honor of God; yet in
Idols, not God, but the Devil is worshipped, according as Paul testifies of
the Gentiles: 1 Cor. 10.12.
These things which the Gentiles sacrifice (to Idols) they sacrifice, etc.
though even they also in their worshippings pretended the name and honor of
God.

Object. 2. The honor which is given unto the sign, is the honor of the
thing signified. Images are a sign of God. Therefore the honor which is given
unto Images, is also given unto God. Answ. We again deny the Minor, or
distinguish of the Major thus; The honor of the sign is also the honor of
the thing signified, namely, when the sign is a true sign, that is, ordained
by him who has authority to ordain it, and when also that honor is given to
the sign which the right and lawful author of it will have done to the sign.
For not the will of him that honors, but of him that is honored, is the
rule which must prescribe the due honor. Now whereas God has forbidden both
these, namely, that Images should be erected to him; and, that himself should
be honored at Images erected to him, or to any creatures; he is not honored,
but contumeliously wronged, and reproached, when any honor done to images is
fastened on him. Repl. Whatsoever contumely is done to the sign, that
redoundeth on God, although the sign be not instituted by his commandment.
Therefore the honor also that is given to the sign, redoundeth on God,
although that honor be not commanded to be given to the sign. Answ. This
reason does not follow, because then are contrary things rightly attributed to
contraries, when the contrariety of the attributes depends of that, according
to which the subject is opposed, and not of some other thing. So we grant that
contumely against God follows indeed the contumely against the sign, albeit
the sign were not instituted by God; but not simply in respect of the sign it
self, unto which that contumely was done, but in respect of his corrupt and
bad will, who by showing contumely against the sin, which is thought to
represent God, purposes himself, and is minded to despite with contumely and
reproach God himself. For to the showing of despite and contumely against God,
it suffices, if there be any intent or purpose of departing from his
commandment. But if through a desire that we have to avoid Idolatry, we
detest Images, and other false reputed signs of God, by this contumely done to
the signs, we rather promote, further, and advance Gods glory. But the honor
of God does not follow the honor of the sign, except both the honor and the
sign be ordained by God: because it is not the intent and purpose of honoring
God, that suffices to the doing of honor unto God, but the manner also which
himself has prescribed, whereby to be honored is required, and must be
observed.

Object. 3. It is lawful to honor the Images of noble, renowned, and
well-deserving men. Therefore much more is it lawful to honor the Images of
blessed Angels and Saints. Ans. 1. To the Antecedent we answer; That honor of
monuments is lawful, which is a grateful and honorable memory of those,
whose monuments they are: and also that, which is applied to the use which
themselves would justly have it, and not to the worship of them, or to the
worship of God by their monuments: yea, and the defacing and utter razing of
those monuments (if necessity require such a change) so it be done without any
will or desire of despighting or dishonouring them, whose monuments they are,
is also lawful. But by no means may we attribute divine honor unto them,
such as that is, which these Papists yield unto their Idols, whether they cloak
it with the name of adoration and worship, or veneration and service. (...).
2. The images or monuments of notable men must be such, as have not been
drawn into Idolatry: for if so, we are not to honor them, but to suppress
them altogether, after the example of the brazen Serpent which Ezekias brake in
pieces, 2 Kings 18.4. Number. 11.8, 9.
when it was abused to Iolatry, though in former times it were kept as a
monument of Gods goodness showed in the wilderness, in healing, by the aspect
or beholding of it, them that were bitten with the fiery Serpents.

Quest. 98. But may not Images be tolerated in Churches, which may serve for
the use of the common people?
Answ. No. For it is not seemly that we should be wiser then God, who will have
his Church to be taught with the lively preaching of his word Romans 1.17. 2 Pet.
1.19. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
, and not with dumb images Jer. 10.8. etc. Hab. 2.18, 19.
.

The Explication.
THis is their demand, who grant that indeed the picture and images of God and
Saints are not to be adored: but maintain that they are to be retained in
Christian Churches as the books of laymen, and for other causes also; so that
the worshipping of them be avoided. But we are to uphold the contrary, namely,
that the images and pictures of God, or the Saints, are not to be tolerated in
Christian Churches, but utterly to be abolished, and removed from the sight of
men, whether they be worshipped or no.

Eight causes of suppressing images in Christian Churches.
3. Why images and pictures are to be abolished in Christian Churches.
THe chief causes for which images and pictures are to be abandoned our
Churches, are; The express commandment of God is, that they should not be
made at all.
Because, that images should be made and set up in Christian Churches, it is
quite contrary to the express commandment of God, Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing, etc. And whereas God
will have no images made, whereby to represent him, or at which to worship him;
in like manner will he not have them retained or kept which are made by others.
They are instruments of Idolatry.
Because in time of Popery they were the occasion and instruments of horrible
Idolatry. They are commanded to be abolished if they be made. Exodus 23.24. and
34.13. Number. 33.52. Deuteronomy. 7.5.
Because God precisely commanded all Idols to be abolished, and all the
corruptions of the true worship of God, and of the true doctrine, to testify
his wrath and anger against Idolatry. The profession of sincere religion so
requires. Deuteronomy. 7.5, 6. 1 John 5.21.
In respect of our confession of the sincere worship of God, and of our hatred
against Idolatry. This confession, whereby we profess our selves not to be
Idolaters, consists not only in words, but also in actions, and in outward
shows and signs. Ye shall overthrow their Altars, and break down their
pillars, and ye shall cu^ down their groves, and burn their graven images
with fire. For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. Fly Idols;
namely, in heart, profession, and signs. The example of zealous and godly
Princes herein. 1 King. 15.13. a King 10.30. and 18.4. and 13.
Because for the taking away and abolishing of Idols certain zealous and godly
Kings are praised in the Scripture; as Asa, Jehu, Ezekias, Josias. To avoid
offense, superstition and Idolatry among our selves.
For avoiding of offense, and peril of superstition and Idolatry, lest by
retaining of ancient images, or by substituting and adding new, the same danger
come to the Church, and to the ignorant people thereby, which in times past we
see to have issued hence on our Progenitors and Ancestors. To avoid the offense
of the Jews and other enemies of Christianity.
That the enemies of the Church by this spectacle, having so great a show of
Idolatry, be not the more alienated from the Church, so that they despite and
reproach therefore the truth of God. Of this danger God himself fore-warneth
us in that dreadful judgment on the Israelites for sparing the Canaanites:
Judges 2.3.
Wherefore I say also, I will not cast them out before you, but they shall be
as thorns unto your sides, and their gods shall be your destruction. So verily
the Jews at this day, because they see Images and Pictures in the Churches of
those that profess Christianity, are greatly offended, in so much that they
prove the more averse from Christianity. Their evil success who of ancient
maintained Images.
We see that Images never brought any good to them which had them: but even Gods
own people was for the most part seduced thereby, as we may see often in the
sacred Story, especially in the book of Judges, and in the Kings, and in the
Prophets. So prone and ready is our nature unto this evil, which has after
ensuing it most grievous punishments: as those which the Lord recites by
Moses, Levit. 26.30.
besides many others: I will destroy, says he, your high places, and cut away
your Images, and cast your carcasses upon the bodies of of your Idols, and my
soul shall abhor you. In like manner also the Angel of the Lord, upbraiding
the Israelites, that they had made a league with the Idolatrous Cananites,
Judges 2.3.
says: Wherefore, I will not cast them out before you, but they shall be as
thorns unto your sides, and their gods shall be your destruction. For these
causes, pictures and Images may not be tolerated in Christian Churches, but
must be taken down and abolished, yea, though they be not worshipped.

4. How and by whom Images are to be abolished.
Two things to be observed in abolishing Images.
IN abolishing and banishing Images, two things are diligently to be observed:
The preaching of Gods true worship before their abolishment.
That the doctrine concerning the true worship of God be preached before the
abolishing of Idols. So we read that Josias did, who first commanded Gods Law
to be read before all the people, and afterward proceeded to the execution of
it; I mean, the suppression and deposition of all Idolatrous abominations. For
a change in external matters, without declaration and understanding of the
causes, for which the change must go on, 2 King. 23.2.
either makes them Hypocrites, or alienateth and changes their minds and
affections from them, who are authors of the change. Let the word therefore go
before, and the Idols will fall to the ground. The abolishment must be
executed, not by private men, but by public authority.
The Images, and the seats of Images, their Altars, and the like instruments of
Idolatry, must be taken away, not by private men, but by public Authority,
whether of Magistrates, or of the people, it the right of Empire and
Sovereignty belong unto them, and in those places, where the Church has chief
rule and dominion. For so has God commanded the Israelites; and so we read
that the Israelites, and their godly Kings put in practice, and so also Paul,
Acts 17.8.
being but a private man, seeing and disliking the Idols of the Athenians,
Ephesians, and others, did not yet himself pull them down and abolish them,
nor exhort Christians to pull them down, but only to avoid them: because
indeed, neither himself was a Magistrate, neither had the Church there the
sway and sovereign authority: 1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
and in this case he gives this rule; What have I to do, to judge them also
which are without? Do ye not judge them that are within? But God judges them
that are without.

Object. 1. The books of laymen, or the unlearned, are profitable, and
therefore to be retained in Churches. Images are the books of the unlearned.
Therefore they are profitable, and may be retained in Churches. Answ. 1. Such
books of laymen are profitable, as are delivered unto them by God. But Images
are forbidden them by God. 2. The Minor is false. Habac. 2.18. Zach. 10.2.
For the Prophets teach far otherwise: as, An Image is a teacher of lies. The
Idols have spoken vanity. Whence we may thus reason. We ought not to speak
vain things, or to lie of God, either in words, or in gestures: But wood, or
graven Images are lies of God, because they cannot represent God, yea, because
they swerve so far, and carry us with them from God, as their figure and
shape is unlike God: and so consequently they cause us also to lie of God. If
then we will not lie of God, we must needs neither make, nor have any images,
or graven semblances: For, as Jeremie says, The stock is a doctrine of
vanity. Cap. 10.8.
Now in this sense we grant Images to be the books of the unlearned: to wit,
because partly they teach and signfie false things of God: and partly because
through the reverence of the thing signified, and the place, when as they stand
to the open view in the Churches and elsewhere, they easily draw away others
unto superstition, and teach the people Idolatry, as experience sufficiently
bears witness. 3. It follows not, if it were so that Images did teach the
unlearned, that therefore they should be retained in the Church, as profitable
books. For God will not have his Church to be taught by dumb Images, but by
lively preaching of his word; because faith is not by the sight of Images, but
by the hearing of Gods word.

Object. 2. The commandment concerning the abolishing of Images is
ceremonial: Therefore it pertains not to Christians, but to the Jews. Answ.
We deny the Antecedent: For it is no ceremony to abolish Images; seeing they
are the instruments, signs, causes, and occasions of Idolatry. Neither are the
causes, for which this commandment was of ancient given, any way changed or
diminished; as namely, that the glory of God be maintained against Idolaters,
and the enemies of the Church, and that God be not tempted through offering an
occasion of superstition, and of conceiving false and corrupt opinions of Gods
worship, unto weak and ignorant men, which are of their own accord inclining
and prone unto Idolatry. Wherefore this commandment of taking away and
abolishing Images made for the representing of God, or for divine worship, is
moral, and dureth perpetually.

Three differences between the images in Salomons temple and in ours:
Object. 3. Solomon by the commandment of God set up Images of Cherubins,
Lions, Oxen, Palme-trees, etc. Therefore Images may be tolerated also in our
Temples. Ans. The examples are unlike. They had Gods special warrant, ours
have not.
The figures and resemblances of diverse things and living creatures, as Oxen,
Lions, Palme-trees, Cherubins, and such like, painted in the Temple of Solomon,
were warranted by the word of God, and by his special commandment. But the
word of God is flat against those Images which the Papists have in their
Churches. They could not easily be abused, ours have bin and may be.
The Images which were painted in Salomons Temple, were such as could not
easily be drawn by any man into a superstitious abuse. But the Images of God,
and of the Saints, not only may easily be used to superstition, but (alas)
have been a long time hitherto the cause of too too filthy and shameful
Idolatry in Popery. They were types of spiritual things, ours can have no such
use.
God had this cause for which he would have those Images to be painted in the
Temple, that namely, they should be types of spiritual things. But this cause
is now taken away by Christ. Therefore our Images cannot be patronised by this
example: rather we are to obey the general commandment, whereby we are
forbidden to set up such Images, which, or in such a place where they may be a
scandal to the members, or enemies of the Church.

Object. 4. Images and Pictures are not worshipped in the reformed Churches.
Therefore there they may be tolerated. Answ. 1. God not only forbids Images
to be worshipped, but to be made also, or to be had being made. Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, etc. 2. They are always an occasion of
superstition and Idolatry to ignorant people; witness the experience of
former, and of present times. 3. They give occasion of scandal, and matter of
blaspheming the Gospel, to Jews, Turks, Pagans, and other enemies.

Object. 5. Images are the ornament of Churches. Therefore they may be
tolerated. Answ. 1. The true ornament of the Churches is the sincere preaching
of the Gospel, the lawful use of the Sacraments, true prayer, and worship
according to the prescription and direction of Gods word. 2. Churches were
built, that in them lively images of God might be seen, not that they should
become stalls of Idols, and dumb blockish images. 3. The ornament of the Church
must not be contrary to Gods commandment. 4. It must not be dangerous to the
members of the Church, nor scandalous to the enemies thereof. Repl. The thing
it self, and the use thereof is not to be inhibited and taken away for the
casual abuse of it: But Images by accident only or casually become perilous
and scandalous: Therefore they are not hereupon upon to be abandoned our
Churches. Answ. The Major is true, if the thing of it self, and in its own
nature be good, and the use thereof lawful, and if the accident inseparably
concurring therewith be not precisely condemned by God. For otherwise both the
thing and the use of the thing is unlawful, and to be eschewed. Now the Images
of God and the Saints, erected in Churches for Religions sake, neither are
good, nor their use lawful, but forbidden by the express Commandment of God.
Besides, and evil accident, namely, Superstition or Idolatry (whatsoever the
learned vaunt and boast of their knowledge) always attend these Images, and
accompany them amongst the unlearned sort: and this accident, Superstition and
Idolatry, is in like manner condemned in Gods Commandment. Repl. It suffices
that these Images by preaching of the word are rooted out of men's hearts:
Therefore it is not necessary they should be thrown and cast out of our
Churches. Answ. 1. The Antecedent is false. For God forbids not only that
they be set up in our hearts, but also that they be advanced in the sight of
men: seeing it is his will that not only we should not be Idolaters, but also
that we should not so much as seem to be such. Abstain from all appearance of
evil. 2. Such is the perverseness of man's heart, and his pronenesse to
superstition, that Idols, especially garnished, trimmed, and decked, and so
presented to the view of the eyes, of themselves sink into and seat themselves
in the hearts of simple and ignorant men, what soever others teach to the
contrary. 3. We thus retort this argument, They are to be rooted out of our
hearts by preaching: Therefore also to be cast out of our Churches. For Gods
word revealed from heaven commands us, not only not to adore and worship
them, but neither to make, not have them. And thus far have we insisted on the
declaration of the Commandment.

The Exhortation added unto the second Commandment.
THe Exhortation which is annexed to the Commandment, I am the Lord thy God, a
mighty and jealous God, which visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, etc. consists of five properties of God, which ought to stir us
up to obey God.

1. He calls himself Our God; that is, our Maker and Savior, and the author
of all good things. Hereby then he advertiseth us what execrable
unthankfulness it is not to yield due obedience to so bountiful a Benefactor,
but to revolt from the true worship of him to Idolatry.

2. He calls himself a Mighty God; that is, who is mighty in power, as well
to punish the obstinate, as to reward the obedient: Therefore he is to be
feared and loved above all things.

3. He terms himself a Jealous God; that is, a most sharp defender of his
own honor: wonderfully displeased with such as revolt from him, or violate or
impair his honor and worship. Now seeing jealousy or indignation conceived
from any injury or dishonesty, arises from his love which is hurt, God does
hereby withal signify, that he does ardently and entirely love those who are
his.

4. He calls himself a God, which visits the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him. Whereby
he exaggerateth or increases the grievousnesse of his anger and their
punishments, when he threatens also and denounces unto the children, and to
the childrens children, and to the childrens childrens children of his enemies,
even to the fourth degree and descent, to take vengeance on the sins of their
ancestors in them; if, namely, they also partake with the sins of their
ancestors. But to this commination or denouncement the saying of Ezekiel
seems to be repugnant: Object. Ezech. 18.
The soul that sins, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of
the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. But in the
same place it adds a reconcilement of these two places of Scripture. If a
wicked man beget a son, that sees all his fathers sins which he has done, and
fears, Answ. Verse. 14.19.
neither does the like, he shall not die in the iniquity of his father, but
shall surely live. He threatens them, that he will punish the sins of their
antecessors in their posterity, that is, such as persist in the sins of their
antecessors, whom it is meet and just to be partakers also of their
punishments. If any man reply: Repl. 1. Answ.
That by this means the posterity rue only their own sins, and not the sins
also of their ancestors, this reply is false, and of no consequence: For there
may be, and are oftentimes, more impellent and motive causes of one effect; and
the cause of one punishment are more sins as well of diverse, as of the same
men. If further it be urged, Repl. 2.
That vengeance is not taken on the ancestors sins in the posterity, because
the sense and feeling of those pains, which the posterity suffer, reaches not
to the ancestors; we answer, Answ.
that the posterity are a part of their ancestors, of whom they came. And
therefore that is felt of them, as it were in some part of them, which their
posterity suffer.

5. He says, that he is a God, which shows mercy unto thousands in them that
love him, and keep his Commandments: by which promise he amplifieth his mercy,
the rather to invite us to obedience, by the greatness of his bounty, and by a
desire of our own good and safety, and the good and safety of our posterity.
And whereas he here threatens punishment only unto the fourth generation, he
extends his mercy unto thousands, thereby to signify, that he had rather
show mercy then anger: and so by this means to allure us the more to love him.
Object. 1.
But unto this promise are opposed many examples of the godly, whose children
and posterity have perished. Whereunto God himself answers, That he will
bless the posterity of the godly, Answ. Ezekiel. 18.
if they continue in the good conversation and godliness of their ancestors:
but will punish them if they depart from it. If here it be demanded, Why he
does not convert their posterity, Repl Answ.
seeing without his mercy they are not able to follow the godliness of their
Parents; we answer: 1. Because this promise is not universal, but indefinite:
and therefore God does not therein bind his mercy unto every particular one of
the godlies posterity, but reserveth his election free unto himself. So that
as of the posterity of the wicked he converteth and saves some; in like manner
also he leaves of the posterity of the godly some in their natural
corruption, and in destruction, which all by nature deserve: and this he does,
to show that his mercy is free, as well in choosing the posterity of the godly,
as of the wicked. 2. Because he binds not himself to perform the same
benefits, or all the benefits to all the posterity of the godly. Wherefore he
satisfies this promise, when he does even vouchsafe corporal benefits to the
wicked and reprobate posterity of the godly. 3. Because he promises this
felicity of the posterity unto them that love him, and keep his commandments;
that is, to those which are indeed godly, and of good conversation. But because
the love of God and obedience is even in the holiest Saints in this life
imperfect: therefore the reward also promised unto them is imperfect, and
joined with the cross and chastisements, among which the wickedness and
unhappiness of their posterity is not the least; as may appear in David,
Solomon, and Josias.

Object. 2. They who keep Gods Commandments, obtain mercy: Therefore we
merit somewhat of God by our obedience. Answ. The contrary rather follows.
For God says, I will show them mercy. Therefore it is not of merit or desert;
for, Whatsoever is done of mercy, is not done of merit: and contrariwise,
Whatsoever is done of merit, is not done of mercy. Therefore the objection is
a fallacy, putting that for a cause, which is no cause. For when God adds
this promise, That he will show mercy unto the thousandth generation of them
that love him and keep his Commandments, he shows that he had rather show
mercy, then anger, thereby to allure us to love him.

Object. 3. This promise and commination belongs to the whole Decalogue: why
then is it peculiarly annexed to this Commandment? Answ. This promise and
commination is belonging verily to the obedience of the whole Decalogue: but is
therefore especially annexed unto this Commandment, both that we might know
the first and second Commandment to be the foundation of all the rest; and
also that God might show that he is especially angry with the depravers and
corrupters of his worship, and punishes this kind of sin both in them and in
their posterity: and contrarily, does bless also the posterity of them which
diligently regard and keep pure religion, or the true service and worship of
God.

ON THE 36. SABBATH.
Quest. 99. What does God decree in the third Commandment?
Answ. That not only by cursing Levit. 24.15, 16.
, or forswearing Levit. 19.12.
, but also by rash swearing Mat. 5.37. James 5.12.
, we should not use his Name despightfully or unreverently: neither should by
silence or connivence be partakers of those horrible sins in others Levit.
5.1. Prove. 29.24.
: but that we use the sacred and holy Name of God ever with great devotion and
reverence Isa. 45.23.
: that he may be worshipped and honored by us with a true and constant
confession Mat. 10.32. Romans 10.9, 10.
, and invocation of his Name Psalm. 50.15. 1 Timothy 2.8.
and lastly, in all our words and actions whatsoever Colos. 3.17. Romans 2.24.
1 Timothy 6.1.
.

Quest. 100. Is it then so grievous a sin by swearing or banning, to take the
Name of God in vain, as that God is also angry with them, who, as much as in
them lies, do not forbid or hinder it?
Answ. Surely most grievous Prove. 29.24. Levit. 5.1.
: For neither is there any sin greater, or more offending God, then the
despighting of his sacred Name; wherefore also he would have this sin to be
punished with death. Levit. 14.16.
.

The Explication.
IN the first and second Commandment God framed our minds and hearts to his
true worship: now he frames also our outward parts and actions, and that in
this and the fourth Commandment.

Two parts of this third Commandment. 1. A prohibition. 2. A co^mination.
These are two parts of the third Commandment: A prohibition, and commination.
There is prohibited the vain usage of Gods Name; that is, all abuse thereof in
whatsoever false, vain, Four significations of the Name of God.
or light and trifling thing, which tends either to the disgrace, or at
leastwise, not to the glory of God. The Name of god signifies in Scripture:
It signifies:
Gods attributes or properties. Genel. 32.29. Exodus 3.15. Exodus 15.3.
The attributes or properties of God; that is, those things which are affirmed
of God: As, Wherefore do thou ask my Name? Thus shall thou say unto the
children of Israel; The Lord God of our Fathers, The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my Name for ever,
and this is my memorial unto all ages. The Lord is a man of war, his Name is
Jehovah. God himself. Psalm. 116.12. Psalm. 5.12, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 16.2. 1 Kings
5.5.
It signifies God himself: As, I will take the cup of salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord: that is, I will call upon the Lord. They that love
thy Name; that is, they that love thee. I will sing praise to the Name of the
Lord most high. Thou shall offer the Passover to the Lord thy God, of sheep
and bullocks, in the place where the Lord shall choose to cause his Name to
dwell. I purpose to build an house unto the Name of the Lord my God. Gods will
or commandment. Deuteronomy. 18.19. 1 Samuel 17.45.
It signifies the will or commandment of God, and that either revealed and
true, or imagined and feigned by men. Whosoever will not hearken unto my words,
which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him. I come unto thee in
the Name of the Lord of hosts. Gods worship. Micah 4.5. Matthew. 28.19. Acts
21.13.
It fignifieth the worship of God, trust, invocation, praise, profession. We
will walk in the Name of the Lord our God. Baptising them in the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. I am ready not to be bound only, but also
to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

To take the name of the Lord, or to name or use the Name of the Lord, God
verily does not forbid: but he forbids to use it rashly; that is, lightly,
falsely, or reproachfully. Lightly, as in our daily and common talk, contrary
to the rule of Christ, Matthew. 5.37.
Let your communication be Yea, yea, and Nay, nay. Falsely, as in unlawful
oaths and perjuries. Reproachfully, as in cursings, blasphemies, and
sorceries, wherein the works of the Devil are cloaked and colored with the
name of God. The prohibition then in this Commandment is, Thou shall not take
the Name of God in vain: that is, thou shall not only not forswear, but
neither shall thou make any unhonourable mention of God: as neither against nor
besides that honor which is due to him, neither yet lightly, neither without
just cause. Now, this negative commandment has an affirmative included in it:
For, as in this commandment is prohibited the abusing of Gods Name; so in the
same contrariwise is commanded the lawful and right using of his Name. The
commandment then of this ordinance is, Thou shall honorably use the Name of
the Lord: The affirmative commandment or the thing which the commandment
requires. The end of the third commandment.
by which commandment he wills that we make no mention of him, but such as
is honorable, and worthy his divine Majesty: and as in the first Commandment
he requires his internal worship, to be done and given in him alone; so here
he requires his external worship, which consists in the true confession and
magnifying of his Name, to be performed of every of us, both publicly,
whenever it is exacted for the illustrating and setting forth of his glory,
and privately.

Unto the prohibition is annexed a commination, The commination.
whereby God might show, that this part also of the doctrine is one of those,
the breach whereof he chiefly detesteth and punishes. For seeing the praise
and magnifying of God is the last and principal end for which man was created,
God justly claims and exacteth that at our hands most precisely, for which he
commands all other things: and seeing the chief good and felicity in man is
the praise and worship of God, it follows, that the evil and misery is to
despite and reproach God; and therefore that the chief and greatest
punishment is due for this evil: Whosoever curses his God, Romans 1.21, 28.
Levit. 24.15, 16.
shall bear his sin. And he that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall be
put to death

The virtues of this Commandment consist in the right and honorable usage and
taking of the Name of God; the parts whereof are these: Ve^tue. Propagation of
true doctrine.
The propagation and spreading abroad of the true doctrine of Gods essence,
will and works: not that propagation which is done publicly by the Ministry,
and which is belonging unto the public office and function of teaching in the
Church, and whereof mention also is made in the fourth Commandment: but this
propagation of true doctrine is that instituting and instructing which
appertains to every one, because every one privately in his place, is bound
to bring others to the knowledge and worship of God. Teach them thy sons, and
thy sons sons. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Deuteronomy. 4.9. and
6.20. and 11.19. Luke 22.32. Col. 3.16. 1 These. 5.11. The Vices contrary to the
former virtue.
Exhort one another, and edify one another.

Unto the propagation of the doctrine concerning God, is opposed, Omitting of
instructing others. Mat. 25.25.
An omission or neglect of occasions, and ability to instruct others, and to
bring them unto the knowledge of the truth, especially our children, or others,
who are committed unto our trust and charge. Hither belongs Christ's Parable
of the servants employing their Masters Talents in trafique; I was afraid, and
went and hid thy talent in the earth. Loathing of communications about divine
matters.
A loathing or shunning of such talk and speech as is had of God* and divine
matters: I will delight in thy Statutes, and will not forget thy words.
Salvation is far from the wicked, because they seek not after thy Laws. 3.
The corruption of Religion and heavenly Doctrine, whereby some false thing is
avouched or spread abroad concerning God, Psalm. 119. Jerem. 13. 14.
and his will, or works: The Prophets prophecy lies in my Name. By sword and
famine shall those Prophets be consumed.

Virtue. Lauding of God.
II. The celebration, lauding, or magnifying of God, which is a commemoration
and recounting of Gods works and properties, joined with a liking and
admiration of them before God and his creatures; to this end, that we may
signify and declare our liking or approbation, and reverence toward God, that
God may excel above all things, and that so our subjection to him may appear
and be manifested: Psalm. 22.22. and 18. 1. and 6^.35. The Vices contrary to
this virtue:
I will declare thy Name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee. O Lord, our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the
world! Let heaven and earth praise him, etc. Unto the celebration or magnifying
of God are repugnant. Contempt of God. Romans 1.21.
Contempt of God, and the omitting of his praise and divine services: They
glorified him not as God. Contumely against God.
Contumely against God, or blasphemy; which is to speak of God such things as
are contrary to his nature, properties, and will, either of ignorance, or
through an hatred of the truth, Levit. 24.15.
and of God himself. Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his sin.

Now the Scripture distinguishes the blasphemy of God (that is, A distinction
between blasphemy against God, and blasphemy against the holy Ghost. 1 Timothy
1.13. Matthew. 12.31.
whatsoever is spoken contumeliously or reproachfully against God, either of
ignorance, or against the conscience. As, When I before was a blasphemer, and a
persecuter, and an oppressor: but I was received to mercy; for I did it
ignorantly through unbelief) from the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, which
is, against their conscience to strive against the known truth of God, whereof
their minds are convicted by the testimony of the holy Ghost: which sin who
commit, are punished by God with a blindness, so that they neither repent, nor
obtain remission. Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but
the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. Whence it
appears, seeing Paul says he was a blasphemer, and yet obtained pardon; and
seeing Christ affirms, that some blasphemy is forgiven, and some not
forgiven, that the name of blasphemy is taken in diverse senses.

Cursing. What it is to curse.
3. All cursing and banning, whereby men speak impious things of God against
their neighbor, as if he forsooth were their executioner, to revenge their
quarrel. Now, to curse, is to whish any man evil from Gods hands. All cursing
and banning, proceeding of hatred and thirst of private revenge to the
destruction of our neighbor, is ungodly; because therein we desire, that God
should become an executioner of our lusts and desires. Certain imprecations of
the Saints in the Psalms.
In the Psalms, and elsewhere, there occur certain imprecations of the
Saints against Gods enemies: but these are not simply to be condemned, because
for the most part they are Prophetical denouncements of punishment against the
unrepentant enemies of God. By their example execrations may at some times be
lawful, When execrations or cursings are lawful.
but with these conditions: 1. If we wish evil to them, on whom God denounces
it, even to Gods enemies. 2. If we wish it in Gods cause, without any private
hatred or desire of revenge. 3. If we wish it on condition; namely, if they
prove incurable. 4. If we so wish it, that we delight not in their destruction,
but only desire the advancement of Gods glory, and the preservation of the
Church.

Virtue. Confession of the truth we know concerning God.
The confession of the truth which we know concerning God, which is the showing
of our judgment and opinion concerning God, and his will certainly known out
of Gods word, because, according as our duty binds us, we signify and
declare our mind and knowledge for the setting forth of Gods glory, and for the
furthering of the salvation of others. Romans 10.10. 1 Pet. 3.15.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses to salvation. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence.

The agreement and difference of these three virtues of this commandment.
These three parts of virtues of the right and lawful usage of the Name of God,
which have been now proposed, agree in this, that they are a commemoration of
the truth concerning God. Again, they differ in this, that the doctrine or
propagation of true doctrine, tends to the instruction of others: The
celebration of God respects our liking and subjection: The confession of the
known truth betokens the certainty of our opinion and judgment.

Unto the confession of the truth is repugnant, 1. The denial of the truth,
and of our opinion in Religion for fear of hatred, The Vices. 1. Denial of
the truth. 1. General.
or persecution, or ignominy. This denial is of two sorts: the first is, an
universal and general defection from true Religion, which is to cast away the
profession of the truth, either certainly or doubtfully known and received,
with a certain and purposed advice, and with the whole hearts desire of
resisting God, and without any grief or remorse of flying and shunning this
casting away of the truth, and without any purpose of obeying God, in applying
to himself the promise of grace, and in showing repentance. This denial is
proper to Reprobates and Hypocrites. 1 John 2.19.
Whereof is spoken; They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us. Which for a time believe,
but in time of temptation go away. Luke 8.13.
And this defection, if it be done against the truth certainly known, is sin
against the holy Ghost, whereof none repent; and therefore it is not forgiven,
neither in this life, nor in the life to come.

The other denial is special and particular, 2. Special.
which is the denial of weaklings, and is committed either through error not
voluntarily, neither purposed; or through fear of affliction, when as not
withstanding there remains still in the heart an inclination and grief,
detesting that weakness and denial, and some purpose also to struggle out of
it, and to obey God, by applying unto himself the promise of grace, and by
giving himself unto repentance. Into this denial may the Elect and Regenerate
fall, but they get out of it again, and return unto the confession of the
truth in this life; as it is showed and exemplified in Peter, Matthew. 26.
thrice denying his Master through infirmity, but at length repenting.

Dissembling of the truth.
Dissimulation, or dissembling and hiding of the truth, when as Gods glory, and
our neighbors safety requires a confession of the truth: which then requires
it, when false opinions concerning God, and his will or word, or concerning the
Church, seem to be confirmed and strengthened by our silence in the minds of
men: or, when those things remain secret and hidden, which God will have
known and manifest for the maintenance of his glory against the reproaches of
the wicked, for the convincing of the obstinate, and for the instructing of
those which are desirous to learn: or lastly, when our silence makes us
suspected to be approvers and abetters of the wicked. So did the parents of the
blind man dissemble, and those chief Rulers also, who would not confess
Christ for fear of the Jews, John 9.22. and 12.42, 43.
lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue.

Untimoly confession.
An unseasonable and untimely confession, that is, whereby, without any
advancing of Gods glory, and without the furtherance of any ones safety, and
without any necessity of discharging his calling or duty, there is stirred up
either a derision and evil entertainment of the truth, or the fierceness and
cruelty of the enemies against the godly. Such a confession, whereas it does
rather darken then set forth the glory of God; and rather hinders, then
furthereth the safety of the Church; swerveth plainly from the scope and end of
true and lawful confession: and therefore is not a right using, but an abusing
of Gods Name. Therefore Christ for bids it, Give not that which is holy to
dogs. And Paul, Matthew. 7.6. Titus 3.10. Object. 1 Pet. 3.15.
Reject him that is an heretic after once or twice admonition, etc. Neither
does that cross this, which is said, Be ready always to give an answer to
every man, that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you; with meekness
and reverence. For Peter wills us to be always in a readiness, or furnished
to make answer concerning the sum and grounds of Christian doctrine; and to
repulse all slanders, and cavils, whereby the doctrine of the Gospel is
traduced and defamed by the adversaries thereof; yet so, as that it is not
necessary to utter and expound to every one, but unto all those which require a
reason and an account of our faith, thereby either to learn it, or know it, or
to judge of it. But whom we see once to scoff at the true doctrine, which has
been expounded and confirmed unto them sufficiently, if they again require a
reason and account of our faith, we are not to make further answer. For so
Christ himself, after he had sufficiently confessed and confirmed his doctrine
by testimonies, answers nothing unto the High Priest and Pilate touching the
false witnesses. And himself rendereth a reason of his silence: If I shall
tell you, you will not believe me. Matthew. 26.63. and 27.14.
Another reason is given by Esaiah: He was oppressed, and was afflicted, and
did not open his mouth: that is, because Christ knew he was to suffer according
to his Fathers will, after his cause was sufficiently defended, he is not
careful of delivering his person from injuries, contumelies and punishments:
for he knew that this obedience did tend to his fathers glory. But
contrariwise, when the High Priest adjureth him, he confesses himself to be
Christ; because then his silence would have given suspicion of contempt of the
Name of God, whereby he was adjured.

Object. We do not perceive who are swine and dogs; wherefore we are to
render a reason of our faith to all, without putting any difference.

Answ. Christ does not call all wicked men swine or dogs, but those only, who
contemn and make a mock of the doctrine confirmed, which they have heard, and
which has been expounded unto them. 2. Christ wills us not to judge of dogs
and swine by the secrets of their hearts, but by their present words and deeds.
If again it be replied, In matters of difficulty, and such as are hard to be
judged, except there be delivered some certain and exact rule to judge and
deal, men's consciences are left wavering and in doubt. But if also we are to
judge of the outward show of swine and dogs, it is hard to pronounce who are to
accounted for swine and dogs: Therefore men's consciences are left in doubt,
unto whom and when confession must be made. The Minor is false; for Christ will
have none to be counted for dogs and swine, but such as show manifest
stubbornness and obstinacy in their words and deeds, of whom it is no hard
thing to judge out of the word of God. And further, the holy Ghost is promised
unto all that ask him, by whom their judgments and actions may be directed,
that they err not. And lastly, seeing in this life we attain not unto the
perfection of Gods law, neither in other things, neither in this point: they
who join the desire of Gods direction with an earnest care of Gods glory, and
love of their neighbor, may and ought to be certain and assured, either that
their counsels are so ruled by the holy Ghost, that they err not; or, if they
err, that yet their error is pardoned and forgiven them. And this certainly
suffices for the retaining of a good conscience. If lastly it be objected,
that Tyrants and many Magistrates, which persecute the Church, are swine and
dogs; and therefore we, according to Christ's commandment, are not to make
answer unto them, if they demand our Religion: We answer, that this reason is a
fallacy of the accident. For if the Magistrate demand our Religion, or any
other by their commission, and in their name, we are necessarily to make answer
of our confession unto them, both in respect of their office, whereunto we owe
obedience; and also in respect of Gods glory: according as it is said of
Christ; Mark 8.3^.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words among this adulterous and
sinful generation, Matthew. 10. and Luke 12.
of him shall the Son of man be ashamed also, when he comes in the glory of
his Father with the holy Angels. When they shall bring you to the Synagogues,
and unto the Rulers and Princes, take no thought how or what things ye shall
answer, or what ye shall speak: For the holy Ghost shall teach you in the
same hour what ye ought to say.

Abuse of Christian liberty.
The abusing of Christian liberty, or of giving of offense in things
indifferent, which is, by using of the things indifferent, to confirm errors
in the minds of the Adversaries, or in their minds that are weak, or to
alienate them from true Religion, or by our example to provoke them to an
imitation accompanied with an evil conscience. Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.9. Acts
18.18.
If thy brother be grieved for thy meat, now walk thou not charitably;
destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Take heed, lest by any
means this power of yours be an occasion of falling to them that are weak.
And hereof it is that Saint Paul makes a vow, that he might free himself from
the suspicion of revolting from Moses.

Scandals and offenses.
All scandals and offenses given in manners, when as namely they which profess
true Religion, lead a lewd and wicked life, denying in their works the faith
which in words they profess. For, thereby they give an occasion unto the
adversaries, and those that are weak, to judge and speak ill of that Religion,
whose followers they see to live ill: and therefore this is reputed and
numbered among the chief contumelies and abuses of Gods Name. Romans 2.24. Psalm.
50.16. Esav 52.5. 2 Timothy 3.5.
The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. Unto the wicked
said God: What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth? Having a show of godliness, but have denied the
power thereof.

Virtue. Thanksgiving.
Thanksgiving: which is to acknowledge and confess, what, and how great
benefits and blessings we have received of God, and unto what obedience toward
God we are in respect of them bound and ready or prepared: and that therefore
we will yield unfeined obedience unto him, to the utmost of our power.
Whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, Coals 3.17.
do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, I These. 5.18.
Psalm. 107.1.
even the Father by him. In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God
in Christ Jesus toward you. Praise the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy
indureth for ever.

Unto giving thanks is opposed, Ingratitude, or omitting of thanksgiving.
The omitting of thanksgiving or ingratitude, when a man does either never or
seldom times think of, and magnify Gods benefits; or if he think of them, he
does it coldly and counterfeitly: that is, in such wise that there is not
kindled and stirred up in him a love of God, and a desire of performing
obedience toward God: When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Romans
1.21.
neither were thankful. Extenuating of Gods benefits. 1 Cor. 4.7.
A dentall, or extenuating and lessening of Gods benefits, or to make himself
and others authors thereof: What have thou that thou have not received? If
thou have received it, why gloriest thou, as though thou had not received it?
Neglect and abuse of Gods benefits. Mat. 25.26, 27.
The neglect of Gods gifts, when as they are employed not to Gods glory; or the
abuse, when they are employed to the reproach of God: Thou evil servant and
slothful, thou ought to have put my money to the exchangers, etc.

Virtue.
The zeal of Gods glory: which is an ardent love of God, and a grief for any
reproach or contempt which is done to God, and an endeavor to put away that
reproach from the Name of God, and to avoid sins our selves, and to banish
them from others. This zeal is required of every one, that every one,
according to his place and calling, as he is in duty bound, do vindicate and
maintain the glory of God. Phinehas has turned mine anger away from the
children of Israel, Numb. 25.11. 1 Kings 19.10.
while he was zealous for my sake among them. I have been very jealous for the
Lord God of hosts, etc.

Unto zeal for the glory of God is opposed, Cowardlinesse in maintaining Gods
glory.
In the defect, Cowardlinesse, Vices.
or lithernesse in maintaining Gods glory: which is, either not to be stricken
with a grief, when God is reproachea, and so neglect Gods glory: or not to
have and show in words and deeds a desire to hinder, according to his place and
calling, the reproaching of Gods Name. They run into this vice, who forbid
not, when they may, rash oaths and blasphemies of Gods Name: because they are
not led with a zeal of the glory of God, whereby they should be moved to
reprove and forbid (yet so, as it be according to their degrees and callings)
that which God reproves and forbids. Ignorant zeal. Romans 10.3.
In the excess is opposed an erring and ignorant zeal, or a zeal of error,
which Paul calls a zeal not according to knowledge; which is, to be
displeased with words and deeds, whereby Gods glory is falsely thought to be
impaired. Now this is done, Three kinds of ignorant zeal.
when as either we take that to be the glory of God, and endeavor to defend
it, which is not the glory of God, neither ought to be defended: or, when we
take that to be an impairing or defacing of Gods glory, and labor to repel
it, which is no impairing of Gods glory, neither ought by any means to be
repelled; and again, when either Gods glory is otherwise defended, then it
ought to be defended, or the impairing of Gods glory is prevented and repelled
otherwise then it ought to be repelled.

Virtue, Invocation.
Invocation, which is a prayer, whereby we crave of the true God, none other
blessings then God has commanded us to ask of him only; which prayer and
petition proceeds from a true feeling of our own want and necessity, and from
a desire in us of Gods bountifulness and liberality; and is made in true
conversion, and in a full persuasion of Gods promises, for the Mediators sake:
Psalm. 105.1. Mat. 7.7.
Praise the Lord, and call upon his Name. Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. This is
the assurance that we have in him, 1 John 5.14. The opposite vices.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. Unto
invocation is opposed, Neglect of invocation.
A neglect or omitting of invocation: which is reprehended, as being the
fountain of all ungodliness. This is neither to crave of God, nor to wish for
benefits and blessings necessary for us: They call not upon the Lord. Unlawful
and idolatrous invocation of Heathens, Turks, Jews, Papists.
All unlawful invocation; Psalm. 14.4.
that is, wherein is wanting some necessary circumstance of those which are
required to the lawful and true invocation of God: as, Idolatrous invocation,
or prayer, which either is directed unto false gods, or to creatures; or tyeth
Gods hearing of us, and his presence to a certain place or thing without his
word; that is, without the commandment or promise of God. Such is the
invocation and prayer of Pagans, Turks, Jews, and of all who imagine and make
unto themselves another god, besides him which has manifested himself in his
word by the Prophets and Apostles, through the sending of his Son and his
Spirit: Ye know not what ye worship. John 4.22.
Likewise idolatrous is the Papists invocation, who invocate on Angels, or on
the Saints departed; because they attribute and give unto them the honor which
is due unto God alone: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. Mat. 1.10.
I fell before the Angels feet to worship him, but he said unto me, See thou
do it not; Revel. 19.10.
I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of
Jesus. Worship God. Praying for things contrary to Gods will. James 4.3.
A craving of such things at Gods hands, as are contrary to his will and Law.
Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it on
your lusts. Lip-labor or faithless and unrepentant prayer.
Lip-labor, or vain babbling; that is, prayers made without any true motion
of the heart, without a desire of Gods bountifulness, only in word or outward
motion of the body, or without true repentance, without faith believing to be
heard, without a submitting of our will unto Gods will, without the knowledge
or cogitation of Gods promise, without confidence and trust in Christ the
Mediator only, and without acknowledgement of our own weakness and
infirmity. Mat. 6.7. Esaias 1.15. James 1.7.
When ye pray, use no vain repetitions, as the Heathen: for they think to be
heard for their much babbling. When you shall stretch forth your hands, I will
hide mine eyes from you: And though you make many prayers, I will not hear.
Neither let that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

Objections of Papists for invocation and prayers to Saints departed.
OBject. 1. The Saints for their virtues and gifts are to be worshipped of us,
with the worship either of Adoration or of Veneration. (...).
But not with the worship of Adoration (for this is due unto God only, as
giving unto him, to whom it is yielded, an universal and general power,
providence and dominion.) Therefore Veneration is due unto them: that is, such
honor, wherewith we venerate and worship Saints for their holiness and
merits. Ans. Adoration and Veneration (as they distinguish) there is another
kind of worship and honor due to the Saints, What worship is due to Saints.
and beseeming them; namely, An agnising and celebrating of that faith,
holiness, and gifts which God has bestowed on them; and, an obeying of that
doctrine which they have delivered unto us from God; whereof Augustine
testifies; They are to be honored (says he) by imitation, Lib. de vera Relig.
not by adoration. This worship is due unto the Saints, neither do we detract
or take it away from Saints, either living or departed; but with all
willingness we yield it unto them, Heb. 13.7.
according to the Apostles commandment: Remember them which have the oversight
of you, which have declared unto you the word of God, whose faith follow,
considering what has bin the end of their conversation. 2. We deny the Major,
because the worship which they entitle (...) and (...), that is, adoration, and
veneration, are not diverse, but one and the same, not befitting Saints or
other creatures, but God only, because he hears and understands, in all
places and at all times, the thoughts, groans, and wishes of such as call upon
him, and relieveth their necessities. None but God can hear them which pray:
therefore this honor is to be rendered to God alone, that it is he who hears
them that pray: as also this honor agrees to Christ alone, that through his
merit and intercession, remission of sins, eternal life, and other blessings
are given us of God. This honor therefore cannot be translated unto Saints,
without manifest sacrilege and Idolatry, whether it be called by the name of
(...) or (...), The words (...) and (...) signify but one thing. Mat. 4.10.
Mat. 6.24. Luke 16.13. 1 These. 1.9. (...). Romans 16.18. (...). Levit. 7.21.
Levit. 25.28. Valla in cap. 4. Mat.
or any other name whatsoever. For this distinction is very frivolous, seeing
the words (...) and (...) and (...) and (...), signify indifferently the same
thing, both in Scripture and in profane Writers. Of God it is said, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Where the English word
Serve, is in the Greek Text (...). And, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon: where
the English word Serve, is in the Greek Text (...). The same word (...), is
used in this sense in these places: Ye turned from God to Idols, to Serve the
living and true God. They that are such, Serve not our Lord Jesus Christ. And
Paul everywhere calls himself the Servant of God. In the Greek Text of the
Bible servile and slavish business is commonly termed (...). Suidas writes,
that the word (...) imports as much as to serve for hire or reward. Valla
shows, that the word (...) signifies to serve men, as well as to serve God:
citing and alleging for proof a place out of Xenophon, where the husband
says, that he is ready to adventure his life, rather then his wife should
Serve; where Xenophon uses the word (...). And again, the wife says, that
she would adventure her life, rather then her husband should Serve: which word
Xenophon expresses by the verb (...). So that the word (...) and (...) differ
no more then meat and food; that is, they are two names of one thing.

Object. 2. Whom God honors, the same must we also honor. God honors the
Saints. Mat. 19.28.
Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, etc. Therefore we also must honor them.
Ans. We grant this concerning that honor which God gives unto the Saints, for
therein invocation is not comprehended, as being an honor due unto God alone,
who says, That he will not give his glory to another. Esaias 42.8.


3. The hearing of our secret and inward groans, which God has by his own
power and nature, is communicated to the Saints by grace: Therefore they are to
be prayed unto by us. Ans. The Antecedent is false. For God does not
communicate these properties unto others, whereby he will be discerned from
others; as his infinity, his omnipotency, his infinite wisdom, his beholding
of the hearts, and therewithal his hearing of such as call upon him: these
properties he communicates to no creature, neither by nature, nor by grace.
Thou only know the hearts of the children of men. 2 Chronicles. 6.30.


4. The Saints have by the grace of God wrought miracles, whereby also God is
discerned from creatures: Therefore God has communicated some of his
prerogatives and properties unto the Saints, and by consequent the knowledge of
the thoughts and affections of all that pray unto them. Answ. This reason is
doubly faulty: 1. The consequence is not of force from a general particularly
put, unto a certain special: wherefore it follows not, that God has
communicated with his Saints a knowledge of hearts universally, or of the
hearts of all that make invocation, albeit it were true (which yet we grant not
to be true) that he did communicate some of his prerogatives or essential
properties with the Saints: except it may be proved by certain testimony of
Scripture, that amongst those some communicated prerogatives, this is also
contained. But the contrary hereof has been already proved. 2. The proof of
the Antecedent, drawn from the example of miracles, is of no force. For there
is not any power of working miracles transfused by God into the Saints, neither
do the Saints work these by their own virtue, or by any virtue communicated
unto them by God, but are only Ministers of the external works; that is, of
fore-tellings, or tokens: which when the Saints do, God does manifest unto
them, that he will by his own virtue, not transfused into them, nor by the
like virtue created in them, but by his own proper virtue, being and remaining
in himself alone, work those wonderful works, and proper unto an omnipotent
nature; and if we speak truly and properly, he it is alone that works them.
The Saints are said to work them, by a figure of speech, as being the
Ministers of the outward work, (...)
which God adds unto the working of the miracle, as a sign of his presence,
power, and will. Wherefore it does not hereof follow, that either the infinite
wisdom and universal knowledge of hearts, or other essential properties and
prerogatives of God are communicated with the Saints.

5. Some Prophets saw the thoughts, and perceived the privy devises of other
men; 1 Kings 14.6. 2 Kings 6.12. Acts 5.2.
as, Ahijah knew the thoughts of Jeroboams wife. Elizeus knew the thoughts of
the King of Syria. Peter knew the cousenage and fraud of Ananias and Sapphyra:
Therefore God has communicated the knowledge of minds and hearts unto Saints.

Answ. 1. A few extraordinary examples make not a general rule.

2. They knew these things by the gift of prophecy, wherewith they were endued
by reason of their office and calling which they had, and bare for the edifying
of the Church: neither yet did they know always, neither the thoughts of all;
neither by any power within them to behold hearts and minds: but through a
divine relelation from God, they knew only at such a time, and such things, as
was requisite for the prosit and utility of the Church, to be revealed unto
them. But hereof it does not follow, that the Saints departed also are endued
with the gift of Prophecy; because there is no need thereof in the life to
come, and they bear no longer that office which they bear in this life;
neither does it follow, that they behold the minds and hearts of men, or
understand from God the thoughts, affections, and necessities of all men.

6. Christ says, Luke 15.10.
That the Angels of God rejoice for one sinner that converteth: Therefore the
Angels behold the hearts of men. The same is likewise proved of the Angels out
of Daniel: Cap 9. and 10.
Therefore the Angels being in heaven, behold repentance and other desires in
men's hearts which are on earth. Answ. A cause is ill gathered and concluded of
an effect, when that effect may come of other causes. For it is not necessary,
that Angels should know those things by the beholding of men's hearts, which
they may know either by effects, or by signs and tokens, or by divine
testimony and revelation. For it agrees not to the Angels only, but unto all
the godly also on earth, to rejoice for the conversion of one sinner; neither
yet do they behold the hearts of men.

7. The soul of the rich Glutton saw from hell Abraham and Lazarus being in
heaven, implored Abraham's help, Luke 15.^3,25.
and knew the state of his five brethren in this life: and Abraham's soul
likewise did hear, and see the soul of the rich man: Therefore the souls of
the Saints in heaven see, and hear the state and prayers of them that converse
here on earth, and therefore are to be invocated. Answ. First, they do amiss
to take that properly, which Christ spoke allegorically, and by the way of
parable, in translating his speech from corporal things unto spiritual
things, not thereby to show that these are like unto them, but applying his
speech as might best fit our capacity, to advertise us of the estate of the
godly and wicked after this life. For souls have not either bosoms, wherein
to receive one another, or eyes to lift up, or tongues to be dried with thirst,
or fingers to dip into water, neither do they use any mutual parley or
conference from hell and heaven.

Christ's purpose therefore is by these figures of words to express the
thoughts, affections, torments, and state of the wicked abiding in pains after
this life. Moreover, were it so, that these things had been in such wise done,
as they are reported (against which yet the very words themselves are) yet
could naught be hence proved for the beholding of minds, neither yet for the
knowledge of all external things. For neither Abraham, nor the Glutton is said
to have understood the secret thoughts and cogitations of each other, but to
have knowledge of them by speech. And Stephen also being on earth, saw Christ
being in heaven: and Paul heard Christ speaking from heaven: neither yet do all
the Saints see, or hear what is done in heaven, neither did Stephen and Paul
see or hear these things at all times.

8. Christ, according to his humanity, makes request unto the Father for us
all: and therefore, according to his humanity, he knows the desire and
necessity of them that call upon him, in all places, and at all times.
Wherefore the Saints also have communicated unto them from God the beholding of
hearts, and the hearing of prayers. Answ. The example is unlike. For the humane
understanding and mind of Christ understands and knows, and his bodily
ears and eyes also hear and see things, whatsoever according to his humane
nature he should or would behold, either with his mind, or with his outward
senses, by reason of his Godhead, which shows them unto his humanity united
thereunto, or also gives unto his senses a virtue and force of perceiving
things which are farthest distant. Neither yet is the force or wisdom of his
humane nature infinite, as is the power and wisdom of the Godhead: neither
does he know, by any transfused virtue into him, the thoughts of minds and
hearts. For of the measure of knowledge convenient for his manhood, Mark 13.32.
it is said, Of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels which are
in heaven, neither the Son himself, save the Father. Of the revealing of the
secrets of men unto him by his divinity, Mark 2.8.
it is said, When Jesus perceived in his spirit, that thus they thought with
themselves, etc. But now, that all things are revealed unto Angels and Saints,
which are revealed unto the understanding of Christ by his Godhead, they will
never be able to prove out of the Scripture. For Christ's humane nature does
excel and surpass in wisdom all Angels and Men, both in respect of the
personal union thereof, because it is united to his Godhead, and also by
reason of his Mediatourship, which office his humanity bears and executes,
together with his divinity: yet so, that there is still kept in the
administration thereof the difference of both natures. Wherefore this example
of Christ does not prove that the Saints know all things, either by beholding
the things themselves, or by divine revelation from God.

9. In the divine essence shine all the Images and forms of things. But the
Angels and Saints departed behold the essence of God. Mat. 18.10.
Their Angels always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven:
Therefore they behold in God all things which we do, suffer, and think. Answ.
1. The Major proposition which they put, is doubt full and uncertain. For it
is manifest, that God knows all things, and does in his wisdom comprehend
the most perfect and perpetual knowledge of all things: but whether that
understanding of things does so shine in God, that it may also be beheld of
creatures, this verily they have not as yet proved out of Scripture. 2. Neither
is the Minor true, namely, That the blessed behold the essence of God, whereof
it is said, John. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time. 3. Albeit there is no doubt, but the holy
Angels and Men in the heavenly life enjoy a clear knowledge, and an immediate
manifestation of God, whatsoever it is: yet we are not to imagine, that they
naturally know all things that are in God: For then should their wisdom be
infinite, that is, equal unto Gods wisdom, which is absurd, and flat against
the testimonies of Scripture, whereas Angels also are said not to know the day
of Judgment. Likewise, Into which the Angels desire to look. To the intent, 1
Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10.
that now unto principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known by
the Church the manifold wisdom of God. They profit therefore and increase in
the knowledge of wisdom, and of the counsels of God, by the very execution and
contemplation of Gods works. Now seeing that which they speak of, is no
natural, but a voluntary glass, or rather a divine manifestation or
inlightning (that is, the Angels and blessed Men have not this in their own
nature to view and see in God his whole wisdom; but God, according to his
good will and pleasure, does manifest and communicate unto every one such a
part thereof, as seems good unto him, as it is said; No man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him) we affirm
therefore the invocation of Saints, so long to want a ground and foundation,
and so to be superstitious and idolatrous, until they show out of the
Scripture, that God would reveal unto the Saints the knowledge of the thoughts
and affections of them which call upon them. For that invocation, which is not
grounded on the certain and express word of God, is Idolatry.

10. The friendship and fellowship of the Saints with God and Christ, is so
great, and so near, that he cannot deny them this manifestation. Henceforth
call I you not servants: for the servant knows not what his Master does; but
I have called you friends: for all things that I have heard of my Father, have
I made known to you. Much more does Christ this in the heavenly life. These
follow the Lamb wither soever he goes. Ans. Revel. 14.4.
This cause is insufficient. For this friendship and fellowship continues,
although God reveal not unto them all things, or whatsoever they will; but
only those things, which for them to know is behoovefull for their own
salvation and happiness, and for his glory.

11. Christ is the only Mediator of redemption, or the Mediator redeeming us
by satisfaction, as being God and Man: but the Saints are also Mediators of
intercession, praying for us. Hence we thus reason: More intercessors hinder not
the being of one only Mediator. But the Saints are only intercessors or
requesters: Therefore their intercession hinders not, but that Christ may be
the only Mediator. Answ. We deny the Major, or distinction of mediation and
intercession; because the Scripture teaches, that Christ our Mediator did not
only by once dying redeem us, and was in the time of his humiliation suppliant
unto the Father for us, but that also he continually appears and makes
intercession for us in the presence of his Father. Heb. 5.7, 9. John 17.9. Romans
8.34. Heb. 7.24, 25. Heb. 9.24. 1 John 2.1.
Who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. But this man,
because he indureth ever, has an everlasting Priesthood: wherefore, he is able
also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ, the just. Wherefore both the merit or satisfaction, and
intercession is Christ's alone, and by our confidence in him alone we are to
approach unto God, that is, we are to ask and expect his promised blessings.
For the satisfaction and intercession of Christ only is of that price and
worthiness with God, that for his merit only God is gracious and favorable
unto us.

12. Against the former answer they reply with another distinction. Christ is
only Mediator and Intercessour by the worthiness and virtue of his own merit
and intercession: but the Saints are Intercessours by the worthiness and
virtue of Christ's merit and intercession; that is, their intercession
prevails with God for us, through the merit and intercession of Christ:
Therefore that is not translated unto them, which is proper unto Christ. Answ.
They cannot escape or avoid by this means, but that they must needs be
injurious unto Christ. For the Antecedent proposition has no sufficient
enumeration of those ways, whereby Christ's honor is translated unto others.
For not only they, which by their own proper virtue and worthiness, but also
they, which by Christ's virtue are said to merit of God those blessings that are
proposed for the merit of Christ only, are put in the place and office of
Christ. For no man besides Christ is able to merit of God any thing, not so
much as for himself, much less for others, by his own obedience and
intercession: wherefore our Adversaries by this reply overturne their own
doctrine. For if the prayers of the Saints are acceptable to God, and are heard
of him, through the force and virtue of Christ's merit and intercession; they
cannot be accepted, nor obtain any thing for us, for their own holiness and
merits as the Papists have hitherto taught us. For he that stands in need of
a Mediator and Intercessour himself, cannot be the intercessour for other
men, albeit he may pray for others. For he is here called an Intercessour, who,
by the worthiness and glory of his own satisfaction and petition, obtains
grace and favor for others.

13. Here they reply; They which pray for us in heaven, are to be prayed unto.
The Saints pray for us in heaven; because in this life they pray one for
another, and in heaven their love is more fervent toward us then in this life:
and this may be done without any injury unto Christ our Mediator, and with
assured persuasion of being heard either for their merits, or for the merit of
Christ: Therefore we are to pray unto them. Answ. The consequence of this
reason holds not: Because the praying of one for another is no sufficient
cause, for which he should be called upon, or prayed to, who does pray. We
gladly yield and grant, that the Saints in heaven do most earnestly desire of
God the defense and deliverance of their brethren, namely, of the Church
militant on earth, and that their prayers are heard according to the will and
counsel of God, whereunto they submit themselves. And that this is the meaning
and opinion of the ancient Doctors, when they treat of the prayers of the
blessed for the Church, the considering and conference of the places themselves
does show. But that the Saints understand and pray against the evils and
dangers of every one, and hear out petitions and requests, we deny. Wherefore
neither living in that heavenly fellowship and society, neither conversing in
this life, are they to be called upon, or prayed unto, without manifest
Idolatry.

14. God says, though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection
could not be toward this people: Therefore the Saints departed pray for us.
Answ. 1. Though we should grant this whole argument, yet it follows not
hereon, that they are to be prayed unto; as has been already proved. 2. This
is a figure of speech, representative, bringing in the dead praying, as if they
were yet living; so that the meaning and sense is: Though Moses and Samuel were
now living, and should pray for this wicked and reprobate people, as whiles
they lived they prayed for their people, and were heard: yet they should not
obtain grace or pardon. The like place we read in Ezekiel: Though Noah,
Daniel, and Job were in the midst of it, As I live, says the Lord God, Ezekiel.
14.20.
they shall deliver but their own souls. Here Daniel, which was yet living,
and Noah and Job, which were long since departed, are placed by the Prophet in
the midst of the wicked, praying for them.

15. The Lord says by Esaiah, I will defend the City to save it for mine own
sake, and for David my servants sake: ^ Kings 19.34.
Therefore we are heard also for the merit and intercession of the Saints.
Ans. This protection and preserving of the City is not promised in respect of
David's merit, but in respect of Gods promise of the Messiah, which should be
born of David's posterity. Repl. The delivery of the City from the siege of the
Assyrians, is not promised and performed in respect of the promise of the
Messiah, because that promise might have been fulfilled without the benefit of
delivery, as also it was fulfilled after the taking and overthrow of the City.
Ans. They err that restrain Christ's benefit to those things or promises
only, without the performance whereof, the promise made unto David, concerning
the Messiah, could not have been kept. For all the benefits and blessings of
God, both corporal and spiritual; both before, and after the Messiah was
exhibited; as well those, without which the promise of the Messiah could, as
those, without which it could not be fulfilled, are all performed unto the
Church for the Messiah sake. For all the promises of God in him are, Yea, and
are in him, Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.
And so does the Scripture expound the like kinds of speaking, as 1 Kings 13.
Deuteronomy. 7. Lastly, the benefits which God also performs unto the wicked
posterity of the godly, are attributed to the godliness of their godly
parents, not of merit, but of mercy, and for the truth of Gods promises. As,
Exodus 20. and 32. and Deuteronomy. 4.16.

16. Jacob says of Joseph's sons, Let my name be named upon them, Genesis 48.16.
and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac. Here Jacob wills himself and
his fathers to be called upon after his death: Therefore it is lawful to call
upon the Saints departed. Ans. It is an Hebrew phrase, which signifies not
adoration, but an adopting of sons; so that the sense is; Let them be called
by my name, or let them take their name from me; that is, let them be called my
sons, having the dignity and title of Patriarchs, that two Tribes of Israel may
come therein. The like phrase is in Esaias, Esa. 4.1.
In that day shall seven women say to one man, According to the old Latins;
Let thy name be called upon us. Job 5.1.
Let us be called by thy name; that is, let us be called thy wives.

17. Call now, if any will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou
turn? Here Eliphas exhorts Job to crave the aid of some Saints. Answ. The
words which go before do show, that these words belong to a comparison of men
with Angels, whom he says so far to excel men in purity, that they do not so
much as make answer, or appear, being called by men. Wherefore this place does
more make against, then plead for the invocation of Angels.

This is translated according to the old Latin translation, the words whereof
the Papists urge.
18. If there be an Angel, one of a thousand to speak for him, to declare man's
righteousness, He will have mercy upon him, and will say, Deliver him, that he
go not down into the pit. I have found one, in whom I am reconciled unto him.
Ans. Here the old translation speaks improperly. For the words are thus; If
there be an Angel with him, or Interpreter one of a thousand, to declare unto
man his righteousness, Then will he have mercy upon him, and will say, Deliver
him, that he go not down into the pit, for I have found a reconciliation. Now
then, albeit this were the sense, that Angels pray for men distressed, and in
affliction; yet this made nothing for their invocation. But it is manifest,
that this is the sense; If a man diseased or afflicted, be in his calamity
instructed of the will, justice, and goodness of God, either by an Angel, or
by a Prophet, or by some Teacher, (for these also are called Angels) and
repents him of his sins, and assenteth unto the doctrine and comfort
ministered unto him: him will God deliver by their ministry, by whom he does
instruct him.

19. Inasmuch as (says Christ) ye have done it unto one of the least of these
my brethren, Mat. 25.40.
ye have done it unto me: Therefore what honor of invocation we give unto the
Saints, the same is also given unto Christ himself. Ans. That honor of the
creature may and ought to be referred unto God, which God wills to be done
unto him: but that honor of the creature, which God forbids to be given
unto the creature, is not honorable, but reproachful and contumelious unto
God. Now the reason is sottish, whereas they will seem to draw it from the
words of Christ: when Christ speaks of the duties of charity, which God
wills us to perform in this life toward those that stand in need of our aid
and help; and not of the invocation of Saints.

20. If the Angels, understanding our necessities, pray for us, and so are to
be prayed unto, it is lawful also to pray unto Saints. But that the Angels
pray for us in special, it is confirmed by Zachary: The Angel of the Lord
answered and said, Chap. 1.12.
O Lord of hosts, how long will thou be unmercifull to Jerusalem, and to the
cities of Judah? Ans. The Major is not wholly to be granted, namely, that all
the Angels understand all the wants and necessities of men. For the calamities
of Jewry were open not only to the sight of Angels, but also to the sight of
Men. 2. We deny the consequence which they frame from the Angels unto the
Saints departed. For unto the Angels God commits the care and protection of
his Church in this life. Therefore they being also here on earth, see and know
our miseries, which the Saints see not, unto whom this charge is not committed:
and they pray particularly for many, which we cannot affirm of the Saints by
any testimonies of Scripture. 3. There is another fault in the consequence, in
concluding that we must pray to them, because they pray for us: because not
every one who prays for us, is straight-waies to be invocated, as was before
declared.

Object. 21. Judas Maccabaeus saw in a dream Onias the High Priest, and
Jeremias the Prophet praying for the people, 2 Maccab. 15.14.
and holy city Jerusalem: Therefore the Saints deceased pray for us, and are to
be prayed unto by us. Ans. First, an Apocryphal book proves nothing. Again,
we deny the consequence, that because the Saints pray for us, therefore we
should pray to them; seeing every one that prays for us, is not forthwith to
be prayed unto by us.

Object. 22. Baruc says, Hear now the prayer of the dead Israelites.
Therefore the Saints pray for us, and are to be prayed unto by us. Ans. Baruc
is an Apocryphal Scripture also, and besides in this argument the words (dead
Israelites) are mis-construed. For the Israelites are there said to be dead,
not which were deceased and departed this life, but which were yet living and
invocating on God in this life; but, by reason of their calamities, like unto
those that are dead.

Object. 23. We cannot have access unto a Prince wit^^ut some ones
intercession and mediation. Therefore much less may we appear before God
without some Intercessour and Mediator. Ans. We grant the whole. For indeed
without Christ the Mediator there is no access to God for any man, according
as Christ himself says: No man comes to the Father but by me. John 14.6.
And Ambrose notably answers this their argument, in his Exposition or
Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, thus writing: Some men are wont to use
a miserable or cold excuse, saying, that we have access unto God by his
righteous Saints; as we have unto a King by his Nobles about him. Well: Is any
man so desperately mad, and careless of his life, as to transfer the
Majesty and title of the King to any of his attendants; especially seeing that
they, who are found to have but once consulted of this practice, are worthily
condemned as guilty of treason? Yet these men think them not guilty of treason
against God, who attribute Gods proper honor unto the creature, and, forsaking
the Lord and Master, adore and worship their fellow servants, as if this made
any whit the more for them, that herein they serve God. For therefore we
approach unto a King by means of his Nobles and followers, because the King
himself is a man in like manner as we are, and knows not to whom he may
commit the charge of the Commonwealth: But to put God in mind of us, who is
not ignorant of us (for he knows the merits of all) we need no solicitor save
only a devout mind. For wheresoever such a one speaks, he will answer
nothing, etc. And Chrysostom says, The Canaanitish woman prays not James,
nor beseeches John, nor goes to Peter, nor follows after the whole company
of the Apostles, nor seeks any Mediator: but in stead of all these she
takes repentance for her companion, which repentance bare the place or person
of her Advocate, and so she went on to the spring head, even Christ. Thus much
be spoken of the sixth virtue prescribed in this Commandment: namely,
invocation, and calling on God.

Virtue, Right and lawful swearing.
Right and lawful swearing, which is comprehended under invocation, as a
special under the general: wherein we desire that God would become a witness
of the mind of the swearer, that in the thing which he swears he will not
deceive: and that God would punish the swearer, if he deceive. This swearing is
authorized by God to be a bond of truth between men and men, and a testimony or
record that God is the author and defender of truth.

Unto right and lawful swearing is opposed, The vices opposite:
Refusing of a lawful oath.
The refusing of a lawful oath, when one avoydeth to take an oath which
tends to Gods glory, and to the safety of his neighbor. An oath for
confirmation is an end of all strife. Perjury. What it is to forswear.
Forswearing, Heb. 6.16.
when wittingly and willingly a man deceives by an oath, or keeps not a
lawful oath. For, To forswear, is either to swear that which is false; as,
that thou art not guilty of murder, when thou have slaughtered a man: or not to
perform a thing lawfully sworn. An idolatrous oath.
An idolatrous oath, which is taken by another besides the true God. An oath of
an unlawful thing.
An oath made of an unlawful thing: as was Herod's, to perform whatsoever
Herodias daughter should ask. A rash oath.
A rash oath, made of lightness; that is, without any necessity, or on great
cause. And hereof speak those places which forbid swearing, Mat. 5. and 23.
and James 5. But the doctrine concerning Oaths is more largely amplified in
the two questions next ensuing in the Catechism.

ON THE 43. SABBATH.
Quest. 101. May a man swear also religiously and lawfully by the name of God?
Answ. He may; when as either the Magistrate exacteth it, or otherwise
necessity requires by this means the faith and truth of any man or thing to
be ratified and established, whereby both the glory of God may be advanced, and
the safety of others procured. For this kind of swearing is ordered by Gods
word Deuteronomy. 16.13. and 10.20. Esaias 48.1. Heb. 6.16.
, and therefore was well used of the Fathers both in the Old and New Testament
Genesis 21.24. and 31.53. Josh. 9.15. 1. Sam. 24.22. 2. Sam. 3.35. 1. King. 1.29.
To. 1.9. and. 9.1. 2 Cor. 1.23.
.

Quest. 102. Is it lawful to swear by Saints or other creatures?
Answ. No. For a lawful oath is an invocation of God, whereby we desire that
he, as the only searcher of hearts, bear witness unto the truth, and punish
the swearer, if he wittingly swear falsely 1 Cor. 1.23. Romans 9.1.
. But this honor agrees to no creature Mat. 5.34, 35, 36. James 5.12.
.

The Explication.
In these two questions the doctrine touching swearing is expounded and set
down at large.

OF AN OATH, OR SWEARING. The chief questions concerning an oath or swearing,
are,
1. What an oath is. 2. By whom we are to swear. 3. Whether a Christian may
swear. 4. Of what things we must swear. 5. Whether all oaths are to be kept.
The three last appertain to the declaration of the 101. Question of the
Catechism: the two former belong to the declaration and unfolding of the 102.
Question.

1. What an oath is.
AN oath is oftentimes understood and taken in Scripture for the whole worship
of God: The word Oath signifies, 1. Gods whole worship. Deuteronomy. 10.10. Esa.
19.18. and 45.23. and 65.16. Jerem. 12.16.
as it is said of the worship of God in the Old Testament; Thou shall swear by
his name. In that day shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan, and shall swear by the Lord of Hoasts. Every knee shall
bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me. And of the worship of God in
the New Testament: He that shall bless in the earth, shall bless himself in
the true God, and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the true God.
If they will learn the ways of my people, to swear by my Name; then shall
they be built in the midst of my people. The reason is, because by whom we
swear, 2. An especial invocating of God to give witness to the truth, and
punish the wi^full fa^se. swearer. 2 Cor. 1.23.
the same we profess to account for God. But properly an oath is an Invocating
on God, whereby is desired that God, who is the viewer of the hearts, would
give testimony unto the truth, and punish him that swears, if wittingly he
deceive. So does the Catechism define it, and the definition is desumed or
borrowed from that form of swearing which the Apostle uses: I call God for a
record unto my soul, that to spare you, I came not as yet unto Corinthus. It
is said in the definition, that God would give testimony; namely, by saving and
doing good to him that swears, if he swear aright: but by punishing and
destroying him, if he wittingly deceive. For an Oath was ordained by God, that
it might be the bond of truth between men, and a testimony or record that God
is the Author and defender of the truth.

2. By whom we must swear.
We must swear by the name of the only true God: Five causes why we must
swear by God alone,
Gods Commandment. Deuteronomy. 10.20.
Because God has commanded us to swear by him only, as he alone is to be
feared and worshipped. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, thou shall serve him,
and thou shall cleave unto him, and shall swear by his name. Gods prohibition
of swearing by any other besides himself.
God expressly forbids, that we swear by any other name: Ye shall make no
mention of the name of other gods. Because an Oath is a kind of invocation,
which invocation is due to God only.
God will have invocation to be used to himself only, and he condemns such
as in their oaths join the creatures with God. Now an Oath is a kind of
invocation of God, as appears out of the definition thereof. Because God only
is the viewer of hearts.
An Oath does give and ascribe unto him by whom we swear, the inspection and
viewing of hearts, infinite wisdom, and knowledge of all things, presence in
all places, etc. (And indeed, infinite wisdom, and the searching of hearts is
required in him by whom we swear, because in oaths we treat not of manifest
matters, or whereof there is good evidence; but of hidden and uncertain
difficulties, and in which he only can judge whether men deceive who is the
beholder of hearts.) But God alone is the searcher of hearts, omniscient, and
every where present. Hence issues a proof that Christ is true God, and that
we are to swear by him; John 2.24, 25. 1 Cor. 2.10.
Because he knows all men, and has no need that any should testify of man:
for he knows what is in man. So also is it said of the holy Ghost, The spirit
searches all things. Because God alone is omnipotent, and executor of
punishment.
By whom we swear, unto him we give and ascribe the execution of punishment,
and unto him we attribute omnipotency, as whereby he must maintain the truth,
and punish him that lies. But God alone is omnipotent and executor of
punishment: Mat. 10.28.
Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. Men
cannot be revengers of perjury, because such as swear falsely escape the
judgment of men, seeing men are not the intelligencers of men's hearts, to see
whether they who swear, deceive or no; or because perjured persons are
sometimes mightier then that they may be drawn to punishment by men. Hence
follows it, that such oaths that are sworn by Saints or other creatures are
Idolatrous, and forbidden of God.

Object. Genesis 41.15.
But Joseph swear by the life of Pharaoh: Therefore it is lawful to swear
also by man or creatures. Ans. Some grant that he sinned in so doing, namely,
that he erred, following the custom of the Gentiles, who were wont to swear
by Kings, that thereby he might keep close from his brethren who he was: but we
may make answer othewise also; namely, that it was not properly an Oath, but
only an asseveration made for to show the evidence of the thing, comparing it
with a thing which was certain and evident: so that the tenure and meaning of
such asseveration is, that those things which are avouched, are as certain, as
that man certainly lives, whom he assevereth to live; namely, as being
known, and yet living: or so certain as he, who assevereth, certainly
wishes that man to live, whom he names. So also shall the meaning of Joseph's
asseveration be, As Pharaoh lives; that is, as truly as Pharaoh lives, or is
in safety, or as truly as I wish him to live, and to be in safety, so truly
say I these things. The same sense and meaning is to be rendered of the like
asseverations: as the asseveration of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.26. and 17.55. and
20.3.25.26.
As thy soul lives my Lord, namely Ely: and of Abner, As thy soul lives O
King, meaning Saul: and of David, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives,
speaking to Jonathan: And of Abigail, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul
lives, speaking to David.

3. Whether a Christian may swear, or take a right and lawful oath.
Four causes why we may take a lawful oath.
THat a Christian may without breach of piety swear by the name of God; namely,
if the Magistrate exact an oath at his hands, or otherwise if necessity so
require, is here proved by four arguments: Gods glory.
That Gods glory may thereby be advanced: For truth, and the manifestation
thereof, is a thing glorious unto God. Man's safety.
That the safety of others may thereby be procured: For our safety consists in
the truth, especially in that heavenly truth. Authority of Gods word.
Because a lawful oath is authorized by Gods word. Example of the ancient
Church. Exception of Anabaptists and the refutation thereof.
Because it has been heretofore rightly taken by the Saints of God. Here the
Anabaptists except against us; saying, that of ancient it was lawful for the
Fathers in the Old Testament under the Law to swear, but it is prohibited us
in the New Testament. Therefore to the former reasons we are to add these for
proof of the contrary unto their opinion. Christ's ratification of it in the
New Testament. Mat. 5.17.
Christ says, I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Now he
speaks this of the Moral Law, whereunto an oath belongs. Therefore the
taking of an oath was not repealed by Christ. It is a part of Gods Moral
worship.
The Moral worship of God is perpetual. But a lawful oath is a part of the
Moral worship of God, for it is an invocating of God. Therefore it is
perpetual. The Prophets call it so. Esaias 65.16.
The Prophets describing the worship of the new Church, term it a swearing by
the name of God. He that swears in the earth shall swear by the true God.
Therefore the new Church may swear by the name of the true God. It is a seal
of faith and truth, and a deciding of debates. Heb. 6.16.
The confirming of faith and truth, and the deciding of debates is profitable,
lawful and necessary for Church and Commonwealth, and glorious unto God. But
an oath is a confirmation of faith and truth, and a deciding of debates: An
oath for confirmation is an end of all strife. Therefore an oath is not only
lawful for Christians, but also necessary. Example of Christ and the Saints in
the New Testament. Mat. 5.18. Romans 1.9. Romans 9.1. 2 Cor. 1.23. Phil. 1.8. 1
These. 2.10.
We have herein the example of Christ and the Saints in the New Testament. For,
Christ himself not once, but often used a form of swearing for confirmation
of his doctrine; Verily, Verily, I say unto you: And Paul in the same case
often interposeth an oath: God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit, in
the Gospel of his Son, that etc. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost. I call God for a record upon
my soul, etc. God is my record, how I long after you all. Ye are witnesses,
and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves
among you. These, and the like arguments and examples do sufficiently show,
that doubtless, To swear lawfully, is granted unto Christians, even now also
in the new Covenant.

The Anabaptists object against us that saying of Christ: Object. But I say
unto you, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37.
Swear not at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God; nor yet by
the earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city
of the great King; neither shall thou swear by thine head, for thou can not
make one hair white or black. But let your communication be, Yea, Yea; Nay,
Nay. For whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. James 5.12.
And that of James: Before all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by
heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your Yea, be Yea; and your
Nay, Nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

Answ. That by those places alleged, not all oaths, but rash and unnecessary
oaths are forbidden, is manifest both by conference of other places and
examples of the Old and new Testement, and especially by the purpose and scope
of Christ; who, freeing the true meaning and sentence of the law from the
corruptions of the Pharisees, Two sorts of oaths. 1. Direct. 2. Indirect.
Both these oaths are here forbidden.
and taxing their hypocrisy, shows, that by the third Commandment is
condemned not only all perjury, but also all rash oaths, superfluous and
unnecessary: and in them not only those that are direct oaths, in which the
name it self of God is expressed; but also indirect or oblique oaths, in
which the name of God is understood, being dissembled and cloaked by uttering
in place thereof the names of creatures. For such kind of oaths were then
commonly used in ordinary and daily speech: and hypocrites, A twofold
profaneness issuing out of the Pharisees accustomed swearing by creatures.
who did exercise those indirect or oblique forms of swearing, By the Temple,
By the Altar, By Heaven, etc. excused them, 1. As if, swearing on this wise,
they profaned not the name of God, inasmuch as they expressed not the name of
God in their oath. 2. As if they were not perjured and forsworn, if when they
expressed not the name of God in their oath, they afterward brake their faith
and oath given in that indirect form of swearing: But Christ shows, that
even then also the name of God is sworn by, when heaven and earth is named;
because there is no part of the world, no creature, wherein God has not
engraven some work of his glory. And when men swear by heaven and earth, Why
we are said to swear by God, when we swear by creatures.
in the sight and hearing of the framer of them both, the religion of the oath
is not in the creatures by whom they swear, but God himself only is called
to record and for a witness, by the citing of these symboles and badges of his
glory. Neither does God stick in the words, but respects the mind of him that
swears: neither does the honor or dishonor of Gods name consist so much in
the naked and bare letters and syllables, as in the sentence and meaning of
those signs and symboles; like as Christ also teaches the same in express
words, Matthew 23. Mat 23.16, 17. etc.
which words are to be conferred with this place which now we have expounded.
The meaning of S. James in the place alleged out of his Epistle, is also all
one with the meaning of Christ already expressed. Repl. But Christ says:
Swear not at all. And James says: Nor by any other oath. Therefore all oaths
are forbidden amongst Christians. Answ. Here is a fallacy of Composition;
namely, a mis-joyning of words in this clause, or sentence, which are not to be
joined together. For that particle, at all, is referred to the diverse forms
of rash swearing, which the Pharisees averred to be lawful, not to the very
word of swearing it self: as if he should say, Swear not falsely, or rashly at
all; to wit, neither directly, nor indirectly. So says S. James, nor by any
other oath, to wit, rash, or false; by naming of certain kinds whereof, he
shows that all such like are forbidden. Else should Christ himself offend
against his own commandment, Mat. 5.37.
whereas he here says: Let your communication be Yea, Yea; and Nay, Nay: and
yet elsewhere oftentimes, in his most grave and reverend speech and doctrine,
uses this asseveration, Verily, Verily, I say unto you. Likewise else should
James condemn Paul, who by an oath took God to witness unto his soul: and
the holy Ghost should contradict himself in condemning all manner of oaths by
James, and commending an oath by another Apostle as a ready remedy, profitable,
and necessary for the preservation of humane society, to determine and end all
strifes and controversies, from which in this frailty man's life cannot be free.
Repl. 2. The permission of oaths in Scripture, and the examples of such as
have taken them, concern public oaths only, that is, such as are given and
taken in some public behalf: Therefore at least private oaths, such as
pass between private men, are wholly forbidden. Esaias 65.16. Jer. 4.2.
Ans. 1. We deny the Antecedent, because this restraint is not only not found
specified in these grants and examples in Scripture, but farther also can have
no places in either of them, as the view and scanning of the places does prove.
2. There are manifest examples of a private oath, as of Jacob and Laban, Boos,
Abdias, Abigail and David. 3. The same is proved also by the end of an oath:
for the end thereof, which is the confirming of faith and truth, and the
deciding of debates, belongs privately also to all Christians; and therefore
so does an oath it self also, whereby we confirm and establish faith and truth.

4. Of what things we are to swear: or, what oaths are lawful: and, what
oaths are unlawful.
Lawful oaths.
THose oaths only are lawful, which disagree not with Gods word, and which
are taken of things true, certainly known, lawful, possible, weighty,
necessary, profitable, and worthy of such and so great a confirmation; that is,
such as require a confirmation by oath, for the glory of God, and safety of our
neighbor. Of these only must we swear. Unlawful oaths.
Unlawful oaths, are such as are contrary to Gods word, and are taken of
things either false, or uncertain, or unlawful, or impossible, or light and
frivolous. Of such things we may not swear. For he that swears of things
that are false, makes God witness of a lie: He that swears of uncertain
things, swears with an evil conscience, and with a contempt of God, when as
he dares to make God a witness of that thing, which he knows not whether it
be a truth, or a lie: and he that so swears, it is all one to him whether he
make God witness of a lie, or of a truth: and withal he desires, that either
God will bear witness to a lie, or if he will not be accounted the witness
of a lie, that then he will punish him that swears. He that swears of
unlawful things, makes God both a favourer and an approver of that which he
has forbidden in his law, and so he makes God contrary to himself; because
he desires God to punish him, if he do that which God commands; or if he
do not that which God has forbidden: and furthermore, either he has a
purpose to do against Gods commandment, or if he swear in earnest, he
alleges God for a witness of a lie. He that swears of impossible things,
either is mad, or mocketh and derideth God and Men; seeing he cannot have an
earnest purpose of performing that which he swears; or swears
hypocritically, and so swears of a lie: namely, he swears that he will do
that, which neither he will do, neither shall at all be done. He that swears
lightly, shows no reverence that he has of God; and he that does easily
swear, does easily also forswear. But the principal and chief cause of an
oath ought to be, 1. The glory of God. Two principal causes to be respected in
swearing.
2. The safety and welfare, as well private as public, of our neighbors.
Object. Of uncertain things we may not swear. Things to come, such as those
are which men promise to perform, are uncertain: Therefore we must not swear
of things to come. Ans. We must not indeed swear of the event, as which is not
at all in our power; but of our own present will of doing, either now, or
hereafter, that which is just and lawful, and of the present and future
binding of our selves to it, whereof every man may and ought to be certain.
And so swear Abraham, Isaac, Abimelech, David, Jonathan, Booz, and others,
binding themselves to a future performance of certain duties.

5. Whether all oaths are to be kept.
Oaths conceived, or made rightly of things lawful, true, certain, weighty,
and possible, are necessarily to be kept. For if once thou have acknowledged
and testified thy self to be justly bound to keep thy promise, and have called
God to record hereof; when as afterward thou wittingly and willingly breakest
thine oath, thou do violate and break a just bond, and do either accuse
God, the witness and maintainer of this bond, of vanity and lightness, or
provoke him to punish thee in that thou art a perjured person: He that
swears to his own hinderance, and changes not, shall never be moved.
Whosoever voweth a vow unto the Lord, Psalm. 15.4, 5. Numb. 30.3.
or swears an oath to bind himself by bond, he shall not break his
promise, but shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. But
oaths that are made of unlawful things, either by an error, or by ignorance,
or through infirmity, or against the conscience, it is sin to keep them. And
therefore such oaths are to be retracted, and re-called by repenting and
surceasing a wicked purpose; not to be continued by persisting and practicing
it, lest we add thereby sins unto sins. In the Lords eyes a vile person is
contemned, Psalm. 15.6.
he that swears to his own hinderance, and changes not. For, he that
keeps an oath made of unlawful things, heapeth sin upon sin, both in that he
swear amiss, and so has a will to sin; and also in that he endeavors to
do that which he swear amiss, and so confirms that will of sinning by an
oath: according to the common rule, Ill sworn, and worse kept; for, what
things God forbids, those things he will not have men, either sworn or
unsworn, to perform: and what he forbids us to will, or promise, or swear;
so much the more does he forbid us to do the same, how much the more grievous
a thing it is to do them, than to will or promise them. They therefore who
keep that which they have ill sworn, heap sin upon sin; as did Herod, putting
John Baptist to death by pretense of keeping his oath: And likewise such as
keep Monastical vows, whereby they have sworn Idolatry, and impious single
living. Neither is this argument of any force; An oath is necessary to be kept.
But they have swor^ these things: therefore they must needs keep them: For the
Major is true of a lawful oath. But an oath, which is made of a thing
forbidden by God, is not to be kept: because it is not a lawful oath; which
also is amended and corrected by repenting thereof, and by desisting from an
evil purpose, not by persisting: therein, or by performing it: according as it
is said; Let him that stole steal no more: and according to the example and
doctrine of David, Ephesians. 4.22.
who swears that he will destroy. Nabal, together with his family, saying;
So, and more do God unto the enemies of David: for surely I will not leave of
all that he has, 1 Samuel 25.22.
by the dawning of the day, any that pisseth against the wall. But after he
had heard Abigail speak, he gives thanks to God, that the executing and
fulfilling of his oath was hindered by her, and confirms by a new oath, that
this is Gods blessing and benefit: saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
Verse. 32, 33, 34.
which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy counsels, and blessed
be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and that mine
hand has not saved me. For indeed, as the Lord God of Israel lives, who has
kept me back from hurting thee, etc. Object. 1. He that swears to do a
thing, which is in his power to do, and yet does it not, makes God witness
of a lie. But he that swears to make a slaughter, swears that which is in
his power to do: Therefore he which swears to slay, and does it not, makes
God witness of a lie; and God may not be made witness of a lie: Therefore
sworn slaughter must be executed* Answ. The Major is true, if it be understood
of a thing, which both is in our power; and is also lawful: but it is false,
if we understand it of any thing, which being in our power, is unlawful. He
that swears indeed ought that is lawful, and is in his power, and does it
not, makes God witness of a lie: but if it be an evil thing which he
swears, the recalling thereof is better than the keeping. For an unlawful
oath being broken, makes not God witness of a lie, because the revoking of it
is good, as appears in the revoking of that oath which David had made to
destroy Nabal with all his household. Object. 2. The oath of peace which was
made to the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.15.
was against the Commandment of God: It is lawful therefore to keep an oath
made of things unlawful. Answ. 1. We deny the Antecedent, namely, that that
oath of peace was unlawful, and against the Commandment of God: For they were
not excluded from peace, if any of those Nations, which God had commanded to be
destroyed, did ask peace of the Israelites, and did embrace their religion.
Now the Gibeonites desired peace, and are adjudged to serve the Tabernacle for
wood-cleavers, and drawers of water perpetually. Therefore the peace which was
promised them, albeit it was obtained by fraud and guile, yet was it not
repugnant to Gods Commandment. 2. In this Reason is a fallacy of alleging a
false cause. The Israelites do not therefore keep this oath, as that they were
bound thereby, because they swear it, being deceived, and thinking the
Gibeonites to have bin of another country: but, 1. For avoiding of offense,
whereby the Name of God might be disgraced among the Heathen, Two causes why
the Israe^ites kept their oath made to the Gibeonites.
if the Jews had not kept their oath. 2. Because it was lawful and just to
save them, which desired peace, and embraced their religion, although no oath
had been made at all.

Out of those things which have been spoken, concerning the keeping of lawful
oaths, answer is made unto this Question; Whether oaths extorted from men
against their wills are to be kept. Extorted oaths are to be kept, if they
contain nothing in them that is unlawful, or, if they have the fore alleged
conditions, although they be unprofitable and hurtful to us. But unto wicked
oaths no man ought to be forced: neither verily should wicked oaths be
extorted by any tortures from us, but we must choose to die rather. But if any
wicked and impious oaths be made, through fear or infirmity against our
conscience, those do not bind, and are to be re called; because, what is
impious to be done, that is impious to be sworn, neither is one sin to be
heaped on another. Now, extorted oaths, that are not impious, which are made
of things lawful and possible, though hurtful and hard are doubtless to be
kept; but if any impossibility afterward happen, they bind not at all. If
otherwise there happen no impossibility afterward, they are doubtless to be
kept, because thou art bound by Gods Law to choose the lesser evil. If it be
just to do, which thou through constraint have promised, it is just also for
thee to promise by oath to do it. For what we may lawfully do, the same also
we may lawfully promise by an oath to do: As, if a man, falling into the
hands of a thief, should be required of the thief to give a piece of money for
the redeeming of his life, verily he not only may, but also ought, if he be
able, to perform that which the thief requires. And if this be lawfully
performed unto a thief, it is lawfully also performed unto him by an oath.
Likewise, it is lawful also to promise by an oath silence unto the thief: and
such an oath made for the keeping of silence promised unto the thief, both may
and ought to be kept. Object. That which is hurtful to the Commonwealth is
not to be promised, or, if it have been promised, not to be kept. Such silence
promised unto the thief is hurtful to the Commonwealth: Therefore it is not
to be promised, or, if it have been promised, it is not to be kept. Ans. 1.
That which is hurtful to the Commonwealth, is not to be promised, that is, if
we may do it without hazard and danger of our life. And further, if at that
instant, when a man is in such danger of his life, he be not rather to provide
for his own safety, than to reveal such a thing. 2. It is rather profitable,
than hurtful to the Commonwealth, to promise silence unto the thief, and to
keep promise: For he which has promised silence by an oath to the thief, is
by this means saved. Moreover, if he should not promise by oath silence unto
the thief threatening him death, he should thereby neither profit the
Commonwealth, nor himself. Wherefore, to promise silence by an oath unto the
thief, and to keep it; seeing it is a lesser evil, then that a Citizen should
be slain, is, of the two, rather to be chosen.

ON THE 38. SABBATH.
Quest. 103. What does God command in the fourth Commandment?
Answ. First, that the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Schools of learning
should be maintained Titus 1 5. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14.15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.2. and 3.15. 1
Cor. 9.12, 13, 14
: and that I, both at other times, and especially on Holy Days, should
frequent studiously divine assemblies Psalm. 40.10, 11. and 68.26. Acts 2.42, 46.
, hear the Word of God diligently 1 Timothy 4 13. 1 Cor. 14.29.
, use the Sacraments 1 Corinthians. 11.33.
, join my prayers with the common prayers of the assembly 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 8.
1 Corinthians. 14.16.
, and bestow something, according to my ability, on the poor 1 Cor. 16.2.
. And further, that all my life time I be free from misdeeds and evil actions,
yielding unto the Lord, that he may be his holy Spirit work in me his work,
and so I may begin in this life that everlasting Sabbath Esaias 66.3.
.

The Explication.
The parts of the fourth Commandment.
THe parts of this fourth Commandment are in number two: A Commandment.
A Commandment. A reason thereof.
A reason of the Commandment. The Commandment is; Remember that thou keep holy
the Sabbath day: and, In it thou shall do no manner of work. The parts of the
Commandment are also two: The first is moral and perpetual; namely, That the
Sabbath be sanctified: that is, that some certain time be allotted to the
Ministry of the Church, The Commandment twofold.
or to the public service of God. The other part is ceremonial and temporary;
namely, 1. Moral and perpetual.
That that time be the seventh day. That the former part is moral and
perpetual, 2. Ceremonial and temporary.
is clearly proved by the end and perpetual causes of the Commandment. The
end of the Commandment is, The public service of God in the Church; Or, The
first part of the Commandment is moral and perpetual.
the perpetual preservation and use of the Ecclesiastical Ministry. For, God
wills that at all times there be some public Ministry of the Church, and
assembly of the faithful, 1. The end of it.
in which the true doctrine concerning himself may daily resound: 2. The causer
of it.
and that for these causes; 1. That himself may be publicly served in the
world. 2. That the religion and faith of the Elect may be stirred up and
cherished by public exercises. 3. That men may mutually edify one another in
the faith which they profess, and provoke one another to piety and godliness.
4. That consent in the doctrine of the Church and worship of God may be
continued. 5. That the Church may be apparent in the world, and may be
discerned from other companies of men. Now, whereas these causes pertain not
to any definite or certain time, but to all ages and estates of the Church and
the world; it follows hereon, that God will have the Ministry of the Church
perpetually maintained, and the use thereof often frequented: and therefore
that the moral part of this Commandment binds all men from the beginning of
the world unto the end to keep some Sabbath, that is, to allot some time to
Sermons, Prayers, and the Administration of the Sacraments. That the latter
part is ceremonial, That the latter part is ceremonial and temporary.
and not perpetual, it is evident; because the Sabbath of the seventh day was
in the promulgation and publishing of the law ordained by God for the
observation of the Leviticall Ceremonies, and given unto the Jews for a
Sacrament, that is, for a type of the sanctifying of the Church by the Messiah
to come: Fzek. 10 12.
according as it is said, Keep ye my Sabbath: for it is a sign between me
and you in your generations, that ye may know that I the Lord do sanctify
you. Moreover, I gave them also my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them,
that they might know, that I am the Lord that sanctify them. Wherefore the
Sabbath also of the seventh day was, together with the rest of the ceremonies
and types, fulfilled and abrogated by the coming of the Messiah. And thus much
briefly of the Commandment.

The reason of the Commandment is: For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, The reason of the commandment.
etc. It is drawn from the example of God, who rested on the seventh day from
his work of Creation, after six days labor ended. Wherefore, properly it
pertains to the circumstance of the seventh day, or to the ceremonial part
of the Commandment, concerning the seventh day. Howbeit, the imitating of that
rest whereunto God inviteth us, is not only ceremonial, and belonging to the
Jews; but moral also and spiritual, signified by the ceremonial, and
extending it self to all men. But that the Commandment, with the reason
thereunto adjoined, may more fully be understood, we will in brief expound
the words of both; and afterward summarily handle and unfold the Common-places
hitherto belonging: namely, the Common-places concerning the Sabbath, the
Ministry of the Church, and touching Ceremonies.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. A brief explication of the
words of the commandment. Numb. 15.35.
] What the Sabbath is, and how manifold, shall hereafter be showed. Here God
speaks emphatically, as of a thing most strictly charged and enjoined:
Remember that thou keep holy; that is, with great care and religion keep holy
the Sabbath day: and elsewhere he commanded him to be put to death which
breaks the Sabbath. The causes why God does so severely command the keeping
of the Sabbath, Three causes why the observing of the Sabbath was so severely
commanded.
, are: 1. Because the breach and violating of the Sabbath, is the breach and
violating of the whole worship of God. For the neglect of the Ministry does
easily corrupt the doctrine and worship of God. 2. Because by so severe
exacting of the ceremonial or typical Sabbath, God would signify the
greatness and necessity of the thing signified by this type; namely, the
spiritual Sabbath. 3. Because God will have the external Sabbath to serve for
the beginning and perfecting of the spiritual Sabbath.

Keep holy.] To sanctify and keep holy the Sabbath, is not to spend the day in
slothful idleness, What it is to keep holy the Sabbath.
but to eschew and avoid sin, and to do good works on the Sabbath. Now God is
otherwise said to sanctify the Sabbath, than are men. God is said to sanctify
the Sabbath because he appoints it for divine worship: How God, and how man
are said to sanctify the Sabbath.
Men are said to sanctify the Sabbath, when they refer it to that use, unto
which God has appointed it.

Six days shall thou labor.] Six days God allotted unto men to labor in,
the seventh he selected to his worship; not that he would that on other days
the worship of God, and the meditation of divine things should be omitted, but
he requires these two things: 1. That on the Sabbath day there be not only a
serving of God, Two things required by God of us on the Sabbath.
as on other days, but also a public serving of him in the Church. 2. That on
that day all other labors should give place to the private and public service
of God, which on other days every one does exercise according to his vocation.

What works are forbidden on the Sabbath.
Thou shall do no work.] God forbids that on the Sabbath day we should
work; not any work whatsoever, but only servile works, or such as hinder
the worship of God, and exercise of the Ministry: which declaration is
expressly elsewhere set down: Ye shall do no servile work. Levit. 23.25.
Therefore Christ defends his Disciples, pulling the ears of corn on the
Sabbath day to drive away hunger: and himself heals a man having a dry hand,
and says, that an Ox, or any Beast, Mat. 12.3. Luke 14.4, 5.
falling into a pit on the Sabbath, may be drawn out thence without any sin.
Macchabaeus fights on the Sabbath day, that there might be some preserved
which should keep the Sabbath. And of the like actions there are two reasons
given: 2 Maccab. 15. 1 Mac. 2.40, 41.
If we do all as our brethren have done, and fight not against the heathen for
our lives, and for our laws, then shall they incontinently destroy us out of
the earth: Therefore they concluded at the same time, saying: Whosoever shall
come to make battle with us on the Sabbath day, we will fight against him.
For the maintenance of their life and religion, they say, it is lawful to
fight even on the Sabbath day. By the same reasons does Christ defend his
Disciples and himself, citing a place of Hosea, cap. 6. If ye knew what this
is, Mat. 12.7. Mark 2.27.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the
innocent. And, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: that
is, ceremonial works must give place to the moral works, so that rather the
ceremonies must be omitted, than such works of charity, as our necessity, or
the necessity of our neighbor requires. And, Have ye not read in the law,
how that on the Sabbath days, Mat. 5.6.
the Priests in the Temple break the Sabbath and are blameless? but I say unto
you, Here is one greater than the Temple. Also, Ye on the Sabbath day
circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the
law of Moses should not be broken; be ye not angry with me, John 7.22, 23.
because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day. By which words
he shows, that such works as hinder not the use of the Sabbath, but rather
further and establish it (such as are the works which appertain to the service
of God, or sacred ceremony, or to charity and love toward our neighbor, or to
the saving of our own, or another life, as that present necessity will not
suffer them to be deferred until another time) do not break or violate the
Sabbath, but are most of all required to the right and lawful observation or
keeping of the Sabbath.

Thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter.] He will also have our children and
family to cease from their labors for two causes: Two causes why our children
and family must cease from labor on the Sabbath.
1. Principally, that these also may be brought up by their Parents and Masters
in the service of God, and may be admitted unto the Ministry of the Church:
For, God will have these also to be members of his Church. 2. Because he will
have, especially on the Sabbath day, love and bountifulness toward our
neighbor to be showed and seen in the Church.

Why Converts strangers must cease from labor on the Sabbath. Why Infidels
strangers must cease from labor on the Sabbath.
The stranger, etc.] He wills also strangers to intermit their labors; and
that, if they were converted to true religion, because they were of the
household of the Church; if they were Infidels, he commands it them, not in
respect of themselves, but in respect of the Israelites: 1. Lest by their
example they should give offense to the Church. 2. Lest their liberty might be
an occasion to the Jews, to accomplish by them those labors, which it was not
lawful for them to work by themselves, and so the law of God should be deluded.

Whether other Nations were also bond unto Mosaicall ceremonies, if any of them
lived among the Jews. Whether the Sacraments, among which was also the
Sabbath, ought to be common unto Infidels with the Church. Unto these questions
we thus answer: To the first and second, as concerning binding and constraint,
the strangers which conversed among the Jews, Three questions concerning the
Sabbath answered.
were not forced either to all ceremonies, or to religion, but to external
discipline, which was necessary for the avoiding of breeding offenses in the
Church wherein they lived: For a Magistrate ought to be a maintainer of
discipline and order, according to both Tables of the Decalogue, amongst his
subjects, and to forbid manifest idolatry and blasphemies: and to take care, as
far forth as he may, that strangers and sojourners minister or give no open
scandal to his subjects. Moreover, as concerning the binding, there was a
peculiar consideration and respect of the Sabbath, which was not then first by
Moses prescribed to the Israelites, but commanded by God from the beginning of
the world unto all men; and so did bind all men until the coming of the
Messiah. Although indeed this commandment and ordinance was so grown out of
use among other Nations, that they accounted it among the number of the chief
reproaches, wherewith they derided, and scoffed at the Jews, terming them
Sabbataries, because they so religiously observed the Sabbath. To the third
question fore-alledged we answer, that the Sabbath was no Sacrament unto
Infidels (though they also ceased from their labors as well as the faithful)
because neither did the promises belong unto them, that God would be their
sanctifier: neither were they therefore constrained to cease from their daily
labors, as for a testification or confession of this promise, but only for
avoiding of offense, and for preventing of such occasion of breaking the
Sabbath, as might be given by them unto Gods people.

Thy cattle.] By this it is the better understood, that the Sabbath was not a
Sacrament instituted for Infidels, in that their cattle also are commanded to
rest, whose rest had no respect or consideration either of Gods worship, Two
causes why the rest of our cattle on the Sabbath is commanded.
or of a Sacrament, but was commanded only in respect of men: 1. That all
occasion of laboring might be cut off, by forbidding the labor or use of
their beasts. 2. That they also sparing brute beasts, might learn how God will
have regard to be had of mercy and favourablenesse toward men.

For in six days.] The reason which is annexed unto the commandments, is
drawn from Gods rest, and appertains to the ceremonial commandment
concerning the seventh day, as before has been showed.

Two causes why the seventh day is appointed the Sabbath.
And rested on the seventh day.] That is, he ceased to create any new parts of
the world, as being now perfect, and such as God would have it to be. This
seventh day he consecrated to divine service: 1. That this rest of the seventh
day might be a monument of the Creation then finished and absolved by God, and
of the continuing of his perpetual preservation and governing of his work
ever since that day, unto his own glory, and the safety of his chosen: and
that so it might be a prick to stir us up to the consideration and
magnifying of these Gods works and benefits toward mankind, for whose sake
all things are made, and preserved by God. 2. That by the example of his own
rest, as a most forcible and effectual argument, he might exhort men to the
imitation thereof, in omitting on the seventh day their accustomed works of
the six days. A two-sold imitation of Gods rest. Two sorts of our works.
And so the imitation of Gods rest is double: Ceremonial, or signifying; and
Moral, or spiritual, or signified. So also our works, from which we are
commanded to cease, are of two sorts: Labors in our vocation.
Some of them are indeed commanded by God, but they are not to be done with the
hinderance of Gods worship; of which sort are the functions and labors of each
man's vocation. Sins. Labor and sin forbidden by the Sabbath in diverse
respects.
Some are forbidden of God; as sins. Both these are forbidden on the Sabbath,
but in a threefold difference: For, 1. Labors are forbidden, but in a respect
only; to wit, as they hinder the Ministry of the Church, or as they give
offense to their neighbor: but sins are simply forbidden. 2. Labors are
forbidden only to be used on the Sabbath day; sins are forbidden at all
times. 3. The ceasing from labor is a type of ceasing from sins, which is
the thing signified by that type.

OF THE SABBATH.
HAving expounded the words of the Commandment, that the doctrine concerning
the Sabbath, and the sanctifying thereof may be better understood, we are
further to consider of the Sabbath:

What and how manifold the Sabbath is. 2. How the Sabbath belongs unto us. 3.
The causes for which the Sabbath was instituted. 4. How the Sabbath is
sanctified, or kept holy; and how it is broken or profaned.
1. What and how manifold the Sabbath is.
THe Sabbath is called in Hebrew Schabbat, Schebbet, and Schabbaton, Three
causes why the day appointed to Gods public service is called the Sabbath day.
each of which signifies a quietness or rest, or ceasing from labors. And
God so called the day appointed in his public service and worship: 1. Because
God rested on that day; namely, from making any new or more kinds of creatures,
though not from the preserving of the same which he had made, or from
continuing the generations of the singulars of every kind. 2. Because the
Sabbath is an image of the spiritual rest from sin, which should be in the
life to come. 3. Because we also and our families, and our cattle are to rest
and cease from our works on that day: not from all works, but from household
and civil works, and from others of the like kind, that God may then show and
exercise in us his works. The Sabbath therefore is a time appointed for the
ceasing from external works, which are either morally or ceremonially
forbidden; that is, from sins, and labors, in our vocation pertaining to the
use of this life, and a time consecrated to the execution and performance of
such things, as belong to Gods worship or service. And this concerning the name
of the Sabbath.

Furthermore, the Sabbath is of two sorts: Internal, and External. The
internal, What the Sabbath is. What the internal or moral Sabbath is.
or moral, or spiritual, is the study of the knowledge of God and his works,
of avoiding sins, and of worshipping God by confession and obedience. To be
short: The spiritual Sabbath, or spiritual rest, is a ceasing from sins, and
an exercising of the works of God. This Sabbath, though it ought to be
continual and perpetual with the godly, yet it is begun only in them in this
life, and is called the Sabbath, both because this is that true rest from
labors and miseries, and the consecration of us to Gods worship, and also
because it was in time past signified by the ceremonial Sabbath. And this
spiritual Sabbath shall be perfectly and perpetually continued in the life to
come, wherein is a perpetual worshipping and magnifying of God, Two causes why
ceasing from sin, and study of the word is called a Sabbath. Isa. 6.13. What
the external or Ceremonial Sabbath is.
all those labors being left and surceased, wherein we are now busied and
occupied. And from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall all flesh
come to worship before me, says the Lord. The external or ceremonial
Sabbath is a certain time ordained and in stituted by God in the Church,
dedicated to a ceasing from works and labors, and given to the Ministry of
Gods Word, and to the administration of the Sacraments, or to the external
public worship of God. This ceremonial Sabbath was necessary in the Old
Testament, to be the seventh day, and that on that day (as also on other holy
days) the Leviticall ceremonies should be observed. This ceremonial Sabbath
is a thing indifferent in the N. Testament. This external Sabbath is also of
two sorts: Immediate, and Mediate. Immediate is that which was immediately
instituted by God himself, and prescribed to the Church of the Old Testament,
and this was diversely taken in the Old Testament: Diverse Sabbaths in the Old
Testament.
The Sabbath of days.
The Sabbath of days was every seventh day of the week: which was in a more
particular sense called the Sabbath, both in respect of Gods rest from the
Creation of the world, and in respect of that rest, which was commanded the
people of God to be kept on that day. Hence the whole seven days, or, the
whole week, was with the Hebrews called by the name of the chief day the
Sabbath, or Sabbaths. Now in the end of the Sabbath, Mat. 28.1.
when the first day of the Sabbath (that is, of the week) began to dawne.
Likewise, Levit. 23.15.
the Sabbaths of days were other festival days: as the feast of the
Passover, Whitsontide, Tabernacles, Trumpets, etc. because in these feasts the
people were to rest as on the seventh day. The Sabbath of months.
The Sabbath of months was the new Moons. The Sabbath of years.
The Sabbath of years was every seventh year, L^v. 25.4, 26, 35. Levit. 25.8.
wherein the Jews were commanded to intermit the tillage of their fields. And
hereof also the whole seven years were by a Synecdoche called Sabbaths. Thou
shall number seven Sabbaths of years unto thee, even seven times seven years.
The mediate external Sabbath, is that which God does mediately constitute by
his Church in the New Testament, such as is the first day of the week; to wit,
Sunday, or rather, the Lords day, which the Christian Church ever since the
Apostles time observes instead of the seventh, or Sabbath day, in respect of
Christ's resurrection: witness that of John; I was ravished in spirit on the
Lords day. Revel. 1.10.
More briefly thus: The ceremonial Sabbath is twofold; one of the old
Testament, another of the new. The old Sabbath was tied to the seventh day, and
the keeping of it was necessary, and was the precise worship of God. The new
Sabbath depends on the arbitrament or appointment of the Church, which for
certain causes makes choice of the first day: and that first day is to be
observed for orders sake, but without any opinion of necessity, as if that and
no other were to be observed by the Church: of which difference more shall be
spoken in the Question next ensuing.

A Table of the distinction of the Sabbath.
The Sabbath, that is to say, the ceasing or rest from working, is, 1.
Internal, moral and spiritual; as, the rest from sin. 2. External and
Ceremonial, instituted by God: 1. Immediately, in the old Testament: as the
Sabbath of 1. Days, which were the 1. Seventh day. 2. Feast-dayes of the
Passover, Whitsunday, etc.
2. Months, as the new Moons. 3. Ye^res, as every seventh year.
2. Mediately, by the Church in the new Testament, as the Lords day.


2. How the Sabbath belongs unto us Christians.
THe Sabbath of the seventh day was even from the beginning of the world
designed by God, to signify, that men should, after the example of God
himself, rest from their labors, and especially from sins: and afterward in
Moses law this Commandment was again repeated: and then with all was the
ceremony of ceasing from labor on the seventh day ordained to be a Sacrament,
that is, a sign and token of that sanctifying, whereby God signifies himself
to be the Sanctifier of his Church, that is to pardon her all her sins and
offenses, to receive her to favor, to endue and rule her with his holy Spirit,
for the beginning of new and everlasting life in her in this life, which
afterward should be accomplished and perfected for, and by the Messiah
promised to the Fathers. And this is the reason, why the Ceremonial Sabbath of
the seventh day is now abolished; namely, because it was typical, admonishing
the people of their own duty toward God, of Gods benefits toward them, which
was to be performed by Christ: for which self same cause also all the other
Sacraments and Sacrifices, and ceremonies made before and after the Law, were
abolished by the coming of Christ by whom that was fulfilled that they
signified. But although the Ceremonial Sabbath is abrogated and disannulled in
the new Testament: yet the Moral Sabbath continues still, and belongs unto
us, and does still remain; which is, that some time is to be allotted for the
Ministry of the Church: For as heretofore in the Jewish Church, so now in the
Christian Church we must ever have some day, wherein the Word of God may be
taught in the Church, and the Sacraments administered. But nevertheless we are
not restrained or tied to have either Saturday, or Wednesday, or any other
certain day. For the Apostolic Church, to distinguish it self from the
Jewish Synagogue, according to the liberty wherewith she is enfranchised by
Christ, instead of the seventh day, has, on good reason, made choice of the
first day; namely, because on that day was Christ's resurrection, whereby the
spiritual and internal Sabbath is begun in us. Briefly, the Sabbath does not
belong to us Ceremonially, in special and particular; albeit it does belong to
us, and so to all men, and ever continues both morally and ceremonially in
general: that is, we must have some day wherein the Church may be instructed,
and the Sacraments administered, but we are not tied to any certain day.

Object. against the abrogating of the Ceremonial Sabbath.
The Jews against the abrogation of the Ceremonial Sabbath thus urge: Ob. 1.
The Decalogue is a perpetual law: The commandment of the Sabbath is a part of
the Decalogue: therefore it is a perpetual law, and not to be abolished. Ans.
The Decalogue is a perpetual law, as it is a Moral law. But the Additions or
circumstances and limitations of the Moral precepts, annexed by way of
signification, were to be kept until the coming of the Messiah.

Object. 2. The commandments of the Decalogue belong unto all. This is a
commandment of the Decalogue: therefore it belongs unto all. Answ. The
commandments of the Decalogue which are moral belong unto all: But this
commandment is in part ceremonial, and so as it is ceremonial, it belongs
not to us, albeit the general belong unto us. The reasons why the ceremonial
law belongs not unto us, are especially these: 1. One part of this law of
sanctifying the Sabbath is ceremonial. Col. 2.16.
2. Paul says, Let no man condemn you in respect of an holy day. 3. The
Apostles themselves did change the Sabbath of the seventh day. 4. From the end
or purpose of the law. It was a type of things that were to be fulfilled by
Christ; namely, of sanctification: and every type must give place to the thing
thereby signified. Likewise, it was a severing, or distinguishing the Jews
from other Nations: but this severing and distinction was taken away by Christ.

Object. 3. The Lord says of the Sabbath day: Exodus 31.27.
It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, and an
everlasting covenant: Therefore the Sabbath of the seventh day is never to be
abolished. Ans. 1. The ceremonial Sabbath was perpetual until Christ's
coming, who is the end of ceremonies. 2. The Sabbath is eternal, as concerning
the thing signified, which is a ceasing from sins, and a rest in God: for in
this sense are all the types of the old Testament eternal: even the kingdom
of David also: which yet was overthrown before the coming of the Messiah.

Object. 4. We grant the Mosaicall ceremonies to be changeable, yet it
follows not thereof, Look the question concerning the abrogating of the Law.
Ob. 1. Page 2.
that the laws which were made before Moses time are changeable: in the number
whereof also is the keeping of the Sabbath day. Answ. The ceremonies which were
ordained of God before Moses, are also changeable; because they were types of
the benefits of the Messiah to come, and therefore are by his coming abolished,
as circumcision which was given unto Abraham, as also the sacrifices which were
prescribed unto our first Parents.

Object. 5. The laws which were given of God before the fall, are not types of
the benefits of the Messiah, and bind all mankind for ever: for then was not
given as yet the promise of the Messiah, and there was one and the same
condition of all mankind: But the Sabbath of the seventh day was ordained by
God, as soon as the creation of the world was finished, before the fall of
mankind: Therefore it is universal and perpetual. Ans. The Major proposition
is true concerning the moral law, the notions whereof were imprinted in man's
mind at the first creation: but it is not true as touching the ceremony or
observing of the seventh day, as which after the fall was made a type of the
benefits of the Messiah in the Mosaicall law; and therefore, in like manner as
other ceremonies which were either then, or before instituted, it became
subject to mutation and change by the coming of the Messiah. For, God would not
have the shadows of things to continue or remain, the things themselves being
once come and exhibited. Wherefore albeit we grant that the exercises of
divine worship were to have been kept on the seventh day, according to the
commandment and prescript of the Decalogue, as well if men had never sinned,
as now after they sinned: yet notwithstanding, seeing God has enrolled this
ceremony amongst the shadows of the Messiah to come, he has, by this new law
enacted by Moses, made it changeable together with other ceremonies.

Object. 6. The cause of the law being perpetual, does make the law it self
also perpetual. The memory and celebration of the creation, and the meditation
on the works of God is a perpetual cause of the Sabbath: Therefore the
Sabbath is perpetual, yea even after Christ's coming. Ans. A law is made
perpetual or unchangeable by reason of an unchangeable cause, that is, if that
cause it, and do necessarily or perpetually require this law as an effect or
mean: but not, if at other times, that end may be better come unto by other
means, or if the Lawgiver may as well obtain the same end by another law. In
like manner, seeing also this law of sanctifying the Sabbath of the seventh day
being repealed and abolished, we may nevertheless godlily and holily by other
means meditate on Gods works, it follows not that this law of the
ceremonial Sabbath is perpetual, although the memory and celebration of Gods
creation and works ought to be perpetual: and therefore has the Church by
common consent, according to Christian liberty, well changed this ceremony of
observing the seventh day, being taken away by Christ, and has substituted in
the place of the seventh day, the first day of the week: yet so, that there is
observed no difference of days; which is utterly forbidden in the Church,
seeing one day is not holier than another.

The Anabaptists also against the observation of the first day of the week,
Objecti. against the observing of Sunday or the Lords day. Col. 2.16. Galat.
4.10. Romans 14.6.
or the Lords day, oppose those sayings of Scripture, which forbid the putting
of difference between days and days in the new Testament. Let no man condemn
you in respect of an holy day. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and
years. He that observes the day, observes it to the Lord: and he that
observes not the day, observes it not to the Lord. Therefore (say they) the
observation of the first day of the week, or the Lords day, is no less in
these places reproved, than the solemnizing of the Sabbath. Ans. We answer to
the Antecedent, that a putting difference between days and days is indeed
forbidden amongst Christians, but not simply or wholly, but on this wise;
namely, if it be done with an opinion of ceremonious worship or necessity. Now
the first day of the week, or the Lords day, is not so observed by the Church,
For there is a double difference between the Christian observing of the Lords
day, and the Jewish observing of the Sabbath or seventh day. A double
difference between the Christian observing of the Lords day, and the Jewish
observing of the Sabbath.
For, 1. It was not lawful for the Jews to change the Sabbath, or to omit it,
as being a part of ceremonial worship: and this they might not do, by reason
of the express commandment of God to the contrary. But the Christian Church,
retaining still her liberty, allotteth the first day unto the Ministry,
without adjoining any opinion of necessity, or worship. 2. The old ceremonial
Sabbath, was in the old Testament a type of things to be fulfilled by Christ:
but in the new Testament that signification cease, and there is had regard
only of order and comeliness, without which there could be either no
Ministry, or, at least wise, no well ordered Ministry in the Church.

3. The causes for which the Sabbath day was instituted.
THe final causes or ends for which the Sabbath day was instituted, are these:
For public service and worship of God in the Church.
The public service and worship of God in the Church, exercise of prayers,
confession and obedience, in which consists the study of the knowledge of
God, of good works and thankfulness. God will, and therefore does he
especially ordain the Sabbath, that he be worshipped and invocated of us in
this life, not only privately, but also by the public voice of the Church. For
maintenance of the Ministry of the Church. What Church Ministry is.
The maintenance and preservation of the Ministry of the Church; which is an
office and function instituted by God to teach and instruct the Church
concerning God and his will, out of the Word of God delivered by the Prophets
and Apostles, and to administer the Sacraments according to Gods holy
institution. This is not the least end, for which the Sabbath was ordained:
For, this ordinance and public preaching of the doctrine, being joined with
prayer and thankesgiving, and with the use of holy rites, is a public exercise
stirring up and cherishing faith and repentance. To be a type of of the
everlasting spiritual Sabbath. Ezekiel. 20.12.
It was instituted, that it might be in the old Testament a type signifying the
spiritual and everlasting Sabbath. Moreover, I gave them also my Sabbaths, to
be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that
sanctify them. To be a memorial of Gods creation and preservation of all
things.
It was instituted for a circumstance of the seventh day, that, namely, the
seventh day might advertise men of the creation of the world, of the ordering
and managing of things to be done, and of that meditation which they are to
use, in considering Gods works, which he in six days created and
accomplished. For exercise of the works of charity.
That on that day the works of charity, bountifulness, and liberality should
be exercised. For rest of man and beast.
For the bodily rest both of men and beasts; but of beasts in respect of man.
For example of man unto man in honoring God. Psalm 22.22.
That men should provoke one another by their example to godliness, and to the
praising and honoring of God. I will declare thy Name unto my brethren; in the
midst of the congregation will I praise thee. To be a note of the Church.
That the Church may be seen and heard among men, and be discerned from the
other blasphemous and idolatrous multitude of men, and that they may join
themselves thereto, who are as yet separated from it. So was in the old
Testament also the Sabbath a mark, distinguishing the people of Israel from
all other Nations.

4. How the Sabbath is sanctified or kept holy, and how it is broken, or
profaned: or, what are the works commanded and forbidden on the Sabbath.
THe sanctifying or holy use of the Sabbath, or of the time ordained for the
Ministry of the Church, is when such holy works as God has commanded to be
then performed, are exercised thereon. Contrariwise, The profanation of it is,
when either holy works are omitted, or profane works done, such as hinder the
Ministry, or are contrary to those works which belong unto the sanctifying of
the Sabbath. Now the works whereby the Sabbath is sanctified, and the contrary
unto them whereby the Sabbath is profaned, are principally these:

1. Rightly and truly to teach and instruct the Church concerning God, and his
will. I. Virtue.
The teaching which is here commanded, is of another kind from that which was
mentioned in the third Commandment. For there it belongs to every private
person to teach: here the function of teaching is enjoined as proper unto
certain persons, and that unto such persons, as being furnished from above
with necessary gifts, are lawfully called by the Church unto this function: and
unto them it is enjoined in this Commandment, that they faithfully propound
and deliver sound doctrine to all men, both in public assemblies, and in
private instruction, according to each man's necessity and occasion; and this
they are to do for public edification of all, and the salvation of each man.
Hither appertain those sayings of Scripture, Levit. 10.11. Acts 13.15. and
17.2, 17. 2 Timothy 4.2. The contrary vices.
Unto the delivering and teaching of the doctrine is opposed: The omitting or
neglect of the duty of teaching, whether privately or publicly; whereof God by
the Prophet complains: Esaias 56.10. Ezekiel. 34.3.
All her watch men are dumb dogs. Woe to the Shepherds that feed themselves.
A corrupting or maiming of the doctrine, or a fitting of it to the opinions,
affections, lusts, or private commodities of the Ministers, Magistrates, and
others: We are not as many, 2 Cor. 2.17.
which make merchandise of the Word of God; but as of sincerity, but as of God,
in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.

2. Rightly to administer the Sacraments according to Gods divine institution.
II. Virtue.
This likewise must be performed by the Ministers of the Church lawfully called
to discharge this function. And as the doctrine, so also this administration of
the Sacraments is not tied to certain days, but it suffices if the
administration be public, and be done by the Ministers, who bear a public
person, and represent in the Ministry the person of God himself talking with
men. So Circumcision was administered on any day which fell out to be the eighth
from the infants nativity. So Baptism also may be administered at any time: But
the administration of the Sacraments ought chiefly to be exercised on the
Sabbath day. Acts 8.38. and 10.4, 8. 1 Cor. 11.20, 33 Acts 2.42. Numb. 28.9.
When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
body. Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. They continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking
of bread and prayers. Therefore, besides daily sacrifice, there are certain
sacrifices appointed, which were to be performed on the Sabbath, and on
festival days. Furthermore, this administration must be in public
assemblies: For so Christ also instituted his Supper (as which amongst other
ends, must be also a bond of Church assemblies) to be administered in the
assembly of the Church, be it great, or be it small: Drink ye all of this.
Mat. 26.27.
Unto the right administration also of the Sacraments belongs the excluding
and debarring of those, whom God has commanded to be excluded from them. Like
as it was not lawful for those that were aliens from the country and religion
of the Jews, neither for any of the uncircumcised, Exodus 12.45.
to eat of the Paschall Lamb: 1 Cor. 10. and 11.
So neither ought the Church to admit unto the Lords Supper those that are not
baptized; or those that are baptized, but yet are aliens in their doctrine and
manners from Christianity. Unto the right and due administration of the
Sacraments is opposed an omitting in the Church or neglect of exhortation to
the receiving of the Sacraments: The contrary vices.
as also a corrupt and unlawful administration of the Sacraments; when
somewhat is either taken from, or added to the Ceremonies instituted of God,

3. Diligently to learn the doctrine of the Church: that is, daily to frequent
the public assemblies of the Church, III. Virtue.
and there attentively to give ear unto the heavenly doctrine plainly opened
and delivered, and diligently to meditate after thereon, and examine it: but
especially to spend those days which are deputed unto the ministry and
service of God, in reading, meditation, and in discoursing of divine matters.
These things are made manifest by the nature and necessary dependency of
correlatives. For if God will have some to be diligent teachers on the Sabbath,
he will also have some to be diligent hearers and learners of this doctrine on
the Sabbath. And the study of learning is not without private meditation:
Therefore have the men of Beroea their commendation, Acts 17.11.
thus; They received the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so. But unto them especially is the study of
knowing the doctrine of God enjoined, who either serve, or hereafter are to
serve and minister unto the Church. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation,
and to doctrine. 1 Timothy 4.13. 1 Timothy 3.6. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. The contrary vices.
And Paul will have the Minister of the Church to be fit and able to instruct,
and to refute the adversaries. Unto the study of learning the doctrine, is
repugnant: A contempt and neglect of the doctrine; that is, either not to
afford our presence in sacred assemblies, when there is no just cause to hinder
us, and to busy our selves in such works on the Sabbath day, as might have
been deferred, or not to give ear and attendance to Sermons and the preaching
of Gods Word: or not to meditate, consider, and examine the doctrine of the
Church. A neglect of learning the doctrine in Ministers, or in them who of God
are called to the study of learning, and either are one day to serve for the
propagation of the doctrine, or have greater occasion and ability of learning
it than others have. To whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required, Luke 12.48.
etc. Curiosity, which is a desire and study of knowing or hearing those things
which God has not revealed, unnecessary, strange, and vain. Prove. 25.27.
Sirac. 3.22, 23.
To search their own glory, is not glory. Seek not out the things that are too
hard for thee, neither search the things rashly, which are too mighty for thee.
But what God has commanded thee, think upon that with reverence. Hereof S.
Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 4.7.2 Tim. 2.23. 2 Timothy 4.3. Tit. 3.9.

4. To use the Sacraments according to Gods institution. The first day of the
week, the Disciples being come together to break bread, IV. Virtue. Acts 20.7.
Paul preached unto them, etc. So God commanded the Passover to be celebrated
in a solemn assembly of the people, and unto other holy days and Sabbaths he
assigned certain sacrifices. And in like manner God will, that as his doctrine
should be heard, so also the right and lawful use of his Sacraments should be
seen and be held in the public meetings and assemblies of the Church: because
God will have both these to be marks, whereby his Church may be known and
discerned from other sects and peoples. Again, as the Word, so also the
Sacraments are an instrument or exercise to stir and maintain in us faith
and godliness. They are also a public profession of our faith and
thankfulness toward God, and a part of Gods public worship in the Church:
Therefore the use of them is most agreeable and fit for the Sabbath day. Unto
the right use of the Sacraments is contrary: The contrary vices.
The omitting and contempt thereof. The profaning of them, when they are not
received as God has commanded, neither by them for whom they were ordained. A
superstitious using of them, when as salvation and the grace of God is tied to
the observation of the rites and ceremonies; or when they are used to such
ends, as God has not appointed. The uncircumcised man-child shall be cut off
from his people. Genesis 17.14. Esaias. 66.3.
He that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: He that sacrifices a
sheep, as if he cut of a dogs neck, etc.

5. Public invocation on God, V. Virtue.
whereby we join our confession, thanksgiving, prayers, and desires with the
Church. For, God will be invocated not only privately by every one, but also
publicly by the whole Church for Gods glory, and our comfort, that so we may
the less doubt that God will hear us; seeing he has promised to hear not
only us, but also others, and the whole Church praying for us together with us.
For therefore God has annexed a special promise unto public prayers: If two
of you shall agree on earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, Mat.
18.19, 20.
it shall be given them of my Father which is in heaven. For where two or three
are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. And,
giving of thanks, and praise unto God, is promised to God as a special
worship: Psalm. 22.22.
In the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee: And the same is
commanded: 1 Cor. 14.16.
When thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of
the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what
thou say? I exhort, that first of all, supplications, prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1.
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. Now whereas Christ
elsewhere commands, that when a man prays, he enter into his chamber, Mat.
9.9.
and when he has shut his door, pray unto his Father which is in secret; he
by these words does not condemn and forbid public prayers, but hypocrisy
and ostentation, and feigned godliness: which the words testify which go
before; When thou prayest, be not as the Hypocrites. Now hypocrisy is a
feigning and ostentation, or show of godliness. We are here further to
observe, that in this Commandment is prescribed the public invocation of the
Church: but that which was in the former third Commandment prescribed, is the
private invocation, which concerns every particular man. Unto public
prayers is opposed, 1. A neglect of the prayers of the Church. The contrary
vices.
2. An hypocritical presence at them, without any attention and inward
devotion. 3. Such a reading or praying as serves not for any edifying of the
Church. Thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified.

7. Charity and bountifulness toward the poor; that is, to bestow alms, VI.
Virtue.
and perform the duties of love and charity toward the needy, thereby to
sanctify the Sabbath, in showing our obedience, which we yield unto the
doctrine. Hither appertains the Sermon of Christ concerning the Sabbath,
wherein he declares against the Jews, Whether it be lawful to do no good on
the Sabbath day. And whereas God will have his Sabbath to be kept all our life
time; yet will he have examples and testimonies thereof to be showed especially
on the external or ceremonial Sabbath day; that is, at those times which are
allotted to the teaching and learning of Gods word. For, if at that time any
man show not his desire of obeying God, when Gods doctrine sounds in his
ears, and when God wills us, surceasing and omitting all other cares, to
meditate on godliness and amendment of life; he gives a token that he will
far less do it at another time. Therefore has it been always the custom
of the Church, to bestow alms on the Sabbath day, and to perform the works of
charity toward those that are in want. nehem. 8.10.
Send part unto them, for whom none is prepared: for this day is holy unto our
Lord. The contrary vices.
To the bestowing of alms is repugnant, 1. A neglect or contempt of the poor,
and of the works of charity toward them: as when we do not, according to our
power, succor the poor that stand in need of our help. 2. Ostentation and
vainglory, in giving our alms, Mat. 6.2.
which Christ condemns.

7. The honor of the Ministry of the Church, VII. Virtue.
or our obedience toward the whole Ministry in life, and manners: and this is
the Moral Sabbath. Five parts of the honor of the Ministry.
Now that obedience toward the Ministry comprehends many things: Reverence.
Reverence; that is, an acknowledging of Gods order and will in the ordaining
and maintaining of the Ministry, and in the gathering of his Church by it:
that is, a declaration both in words and deeds of this our acknowledgement and
judgment of the Ministry. 1 Cor. 4.1.
Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and the disposers of
the secrets of God. 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you through us. Love.
Love, whereby we gladly frequent divine assemblies, and hear and learn the
doctrine of the Church, and wish well unto the faithful Ministers of the
Church, not only in respect of that duty of charity, which we owe; but also of
the Ministry, which they discharge. How amiable are thy Tabernacles? My soul
longs, Psalm. 84.1, 2.
yea and faints for the courts of the Lord. Psalm. 122.1.
I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord.
Obedience. Heb. 13.17.
Obedience in those things which are belonging unto the Ministry. Obey them
that have the oversight of you. Hither belong the works of love toward God
and our neighbor, even the whole life of a Christian, which is that spiritual
or moral Sabbath. For to hold and celebrate that spiritual Sabbath, is, in
the direction and ordering of our life to obey the voice of God, speaking by
the Ministry of the Church. For God will therefore have the true doctrine to
be learned of us, that we may obey it. James 1.22.
Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
Thankfulness.
Thankfulness, that is, such duties as tend to the preservation and
maintenance of the Ministry, Ministers, and Schools. For if God will have
Ministers to be in his Church, he will also, that every one, according to his
ability, help forward and further the maintenance of the Ministry, and
Schools of learning, and do his endeavor, that the Ministers, Teachers, and
Schoolmasters be honestly provided for. For, without the study and learning
of Arts and Sciences, neither can men be made fit to teach, nor the purity and
sincerity of doctrine be upheld and maintained against Heretics. Hither
appertain Moses Laws of the firstborn, of first fruits, of tithes, and such
like offerings, which were allotted to the Priests and Levites by way of
stipend, whereby they might sustain their own life and their household, that
so they might wholly be employed in the Ministry. And albeit the circumstances
of these Laws are abolished, yet the general remains for ever; because God
will have his Ministry to be maintained to the end of the world. Deuteronomy. 12.19.
1 Cor 9.7. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17. Mat. 10.14.
Beware that thou forsake not the Levite, as long as thou live upon the
earth. Who goes a warfare any time at his own cost? Who planteth a vineyard,
and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? Lenity.
Lenity and moderation in bearing with such infirmities of the Ministers, as do
not enormously or manifestly corrupt or hinder the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5.19.
and hurt the Church by offense. Against an Elder receive none accusation, but
under two or three witnesses. To the honor of the Ministry of the Church is
opposed the contempt of the Ministry: as when either the Ministry of the
Church is abolished, or committed to men unworthy or unable, or is denied to be
the means and instrument which God will use for the gathering of his Church;
likewise, when the Ministers are reproached, when their doctrine is heard, and
not obeyed in the ordering of our life, when the works of charity are
neglected, when necessary maintenance is not allowed the Ministers, when the
defense and protection of them, and other duties of thankfulness are not
performed toward them, when the maintenance of Schools, and Studies, and
learning is neglected, when the tolerable defects of the Ministers are not
borne with, and when for such the Ministry suffers reproach and contumely.
In like manner also it is against the use of the whole Ministry, not only
when some one privately neglects or omitteth the use of the Ministry; but
also when one by his commandment and persuasion or example, or by some other
hinderance, calls away his children, family, or any other from the use of the
Ministry.

OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL MINISTRY.
WHereas the public external worship of God, and consequently the Ministry
it self of the Church, and the use and honor thereof is in this Commandment
authorized, as appears by that which has been already handled; the doctrine
concerning the Ministry of the Church is here to be examined. The chief
questions thereof are:

1. What the Ministry of the Church is. 2. For what end and purpose it was
instituted. 3. What are the degrees of Ministers. 4. What are the duties and
functions of Ministers. 5. Unto whom the Ministry is to be committed.
1. What the Ministry of the Church is.
THe Ministry of the Church is a function by God ordained of teaching Gods
word, and administering his Sacraments, according to his divine ordinance. The
parts then of the Ministry of the Church are two: 1. To preach Gods word. 2.
Rightly to administer the Sacraments.

2. For what end and purpose the Ministry was instituted.
THe causes why God ordained the Church Ministry are: Gods glory. Psalm. 68.26.
Gods glory, because God will be magnified and invocated in this life by
mankind, not only privately by particular men, but also by the public voice
of the Church: Give thanks to God in the Congregation. Men's conversion. Ephesians.
4.11, 12.
That it may be an instrument, whereby to convert men unto God: He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, etc. for the gathering together of the Saints. Men's
instruction by men.
That God may apply himself to our infirmity, in teaching men by men. Men's
edification by good example. Psalm. 22.22.
That men may provoke one another by their example unto godliness, and to the
magnifying and praising of God: I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in
the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee. Man's advancement in so high a
calling.
That God may show his love toward man, in that he will have men to be
Ministers of that great work, the ministry of reconciliation, which also the
very Son of God did administer. The clear apparency of the Church.
That the Church may be seen and heard among men, and may be discerned from the
other blasphemous and idolatrous multitude of men, that so the Elect may be
gathered unto it, and that the Reprobate may be made more inexcusable, while
they contemn and endeavor to repress the voice and calling of God, which
they have heard. But have they not heard? No doubt their sound went out through
all the earth, and their words into the end of the world. Now thanks be unto
God, which always makes us to triumph in Christ, Romans 10.18. 2 Cor. 2.14, 15,
16.
and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place: for we
are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish: to the one we are the savor of death unto death, and to the other
the savor of life unto life.

3. What are the degrees of Ministers.
OF Ministers, some are immediately called of God, some mediately by the
Church. Immediately are called the Prophets and Apostles. 1. Immediately
called. 1. Prophets.
The Prophets were Ministers immediately called of God, to teach and open the
doctrine of Moses, and of the promise of the Messiah to come; as also to
correct their manners in the Church and Commonwealth of Moses, and to utter
Prophecies of events in and without the Church, having a testimony and warrant,
that they could not err in doctrine. 2. Apostles.
The Apostles were Ministers immediately called by Christ, to teach the doctrine
concerning the Messiah now exhibited, and to spread it throughout the whole
world, having likewise a testimony and warrant, that they could not err in
doctrine. 2. Mediately called.
Mediately were called, Evangelists.
The Evangelists, who were helpers of the Apostles in their labors, and were
sent of the Apostles to teach diverse Churches. Bishops or Pastors.
Bishops or Pastors, which are Ministers called by the Church, to teach the
word of God, and to administer the Sacraments in some one certain Church.
Doctors.
Doctors, who are Ministers called by the Church, to teach in some certain
Church. Governors.
Governors, who are Minsters, chosen by the judgment of the Church, to
administer discipline, and to ordain things necessary for the Church. Deacons.
Deacons, who are Ministers chosen by the Church, to take care for the poor,
and to distribute alms.

4. What are the duties and functions of Ministers.
THe duties and functions of Ministers of the Church, are in general: unto the
Church by their good example of Christian life and conversation: Titus 2.7.
Above all things show thy self an example of good works. Acts 20.28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made you over seers, to feed the Church of God.

5. Unto whom the Ministry is to be committed.
UNto whom, and what manner of persons the Ministry is to be committed, Saint
Paul plainly delivers in his Epistles to Timothy, and to Titus. And, briefly
to comprise them, the Ministry of the Church is to be committed, 1. Unto men,
2 Timothy 2.12.
not to women: I permit not a woman to teach. 2. To such as have a good
testimony in and without the Church: 1 Timothy 3.^, 7.
A Bishop must be unreproveable, well reported of, even of them which are
without, lest he fall into rebuke, and the snare of the Devil. 3. To such as
are able to teach, that is, to such as rightly understand the doctrine, and
have gifts in some measure rightly to expound the same: 2 Timothy 2.10.
A Bishop must be apt to teach: A workman that needs not to be ashamed,
Titus 1.9.
dividing the word of truth aright. Holding fast the faithful word, according
to doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and
reprove them that say against it.

OF CEREMONIES.
WHereas one part of the fourth Commandment is Ceremonial: it shall not be
unfit or impertinent to say and set down some thing in this place concerning
Ceremonies. The special questions are: 1. What Ceremonies are. 2. How
Ceremonies differ from Moral works. 3. How many sorts of Ceremonies there
are. 4. Whether the Church may ordain Ceremonies.


1. What Ceremonies are. ALl divine worship was called of the Romans by the
name of Ceremony, Dee. 1. lib. y. Ceremonia a carenio Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
from the town Caere, wherein the Images of the gods were kept from the
Gauls, as Livie writes. In the Church Ceremonies are called External and
solemn actions, ordained in the ministry of the Church, either for orders
sake, or signification.

2. How Ceremonies differ from Moral works. CEremonies differ from Moral
works, in that, 1. Ceremonies are temporary: Moral works are perpetual. 2.
The Ceremonies are done always alike: The Moral are not done always alike.
3. The Ceremonies signify: The Moral are signified. 4. The Moral are as the
general: The Ceremonial are restrained in special. 5. The Ceremonial serve
for the Moral: The Moral are the end or scope of the Ceremonial.

3. How many sorts of Ceremonies there are. CEremonies are of two sorts: some
commanded by God, some ordained by men. Commanded by God. 1. Sacrifices. 2.
Sacraments.

and those are either Sacrifices, or Sacraments. Sacrifices are ceremonies
appointed by God, wherein we offer and perform some certain obedience unto
God. Sacraments are Ceremonies instituted of God, whereby God testifies and
performs certain benefits to us. ordained by the Church, Ordained by men.
are not the worship of God, and may be changed by the advice of the Church, if
there be good causes for the changing and alteration of them.

4. Whether the Church may ordain Ceremonies. Caveats to be observed by the
Church in instituting of Ceremonies.
THe Church may and ought to ordain Ceremonies; because without defining and
determining of circumstances, the Moral worship cannot be kept. There are
notwithstanding certain conditions to be observed by the Church, in ordaining
Ceremonies; namely, 1. They must be such Ceremonies as are not impious, but
agreeable to the word of the Lord. 2. They must not be superstitious, such as
to which we annex worship or merit, or necessity, or which are done with
offense. 3. They must not be too many, nor too toylesome and burdensome. 4.
They must not be idle and unprofitable, but must all tend to edifying.

ON THE 39. SABBATH.
Quest. 104. what does God injoyne us in the fifth Commandment?
Answ. That we yield due honor, love, and faithfulness to our Parents, and so
to all, who bear rule over us; and submit our selves with such obedience, as
is meet, to their faithful commandments and chastisements Ephesians. 6.1, 2.5.
and 5.22. Col. 3.18, 20, 22, 23, 24. Pro. 1.8. and 4.1. and 15.20. and 20.20.
Exodus 21.12. Romans 13.1.
: And further also, that by our patience we bear and suffer their vices and
manners Pro. 23.22. Genesis 9.24. 1 Pet. 2.18.
, ever thinking with our selves that God will govern and guide us by their
hands Ephesians 6.9. Col. 3.19, 21. Romans 13.2, 3 Matthew. 22.21.
.

The Explication.
NOw follow the Laws of the second Table of the Decalogue, the obedience
whereof does as well verily respect God, as the commandments of the first
Table, but the works are immediately exercised toward men. For the immediate
object of the second Table is our neighbor, and the mediate is God. The sum
of the whole obedience of the second Table Christ has briefly comprised in
these words: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Matthew. 22.39.
And he has laid down this rule for better understanding of the Commandments
of this second Table; Mark 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets. Of the whole second Table Christ also
pronounces that, Mat. 22.39.
The second Commandment is like unto the first; that is, the second Table is
like unto the first Table; which is thus to be understood: 1. As touching the
kind of the chief worship of God, the second Table is like unto the first;
and so is the second said to be like unto the first, in respect of the
ceremonial, which are not the chief worship. 2. As touching the kinds of
eternal punishment, because the transgression of both Tables meriteth eternal
punishment. 3. As touching the inseparable coherence of the love of God and our
neighbor. For, our neighbor cannot be loved without the love of God: and the
love of God is declared and exercised by the love of our neighbor. Three
causes of the necessity of obedience unto the second Table.
Whence also we may gather the causes, for which obedience is necessarily to be
yielded unto the second Table, seeing God no less exacteth it at our hands,
then he also requires the obedience of the first Table: namely, 1. That in
this obedience God himself may be worshipped, and our love toward him showed
and declared by our love toward our neighbor for his sake. 2. That by the
love of our neighbor our conformity with God may appear. 3. That the society
of mankind may be preserved, which was ordained of God for the celebration and
magnifying of his Name. Moreover, this fifth Commandment of honor due to
Parents (which Hierome plainly calls the fifth in order) is placed first in
the second Table: 1. Because this is the cause, the bond, Comment. in Ephesians.
6.2. Two causes why this Commandment is placed first in the second Table.
and ground of the obedience of the rest of the Commandments following. For if
this obedience stand, which is of the inferiors toward the superiors, who
are those which ought in Gods name to command the obedience of the
Commandments that follow; then must the obedience toward the rest of the
Commandments necessarily follow. 2. Because the Lord annexed a special
promise, and a singular blessing unto this Commandment; that is, length of
life to be heaped on those, who yield obedience unto it. And these two; namely,
the Commandment and the Promise, does this fifth Commandment contain.

The end of the fifth Commandment.
Now the Commandment proceeds thus: Honor thy Father and thy Mother. The end
of the Commandment is, the preservation of civil order, which is the order
decreed and appointed by God in the mutual duties of superiors and
inferiors. The superiors are all such, whom God has set over others to rule
and defend them. The inferiors are those, whom he has submitted to the power
of others to be ruled and defended by them. The duties of superiors are
comprehended by the name of Father and Mother. And our superiors are, 1.
Parents themselves, who bred us. Five sorts of superiors understood by the
name of Father and Mother.
2. Tutors and overseers of pupils or young children. 3. Schoolmasters,
Teachers, and Ministers of the Church. 4. Magistrates, high or low. 5. Our
Elders. All these, or whosoever else rule over us, are understood in the name
of Parents, and are to be honored of us; because God gives them all to us
instead of Parents, and they discharge the duty of Parents, and are as it were
Gods Vicegerents in ruling and governing us, substituted by God for Parents to
us, when the malice of men began to increase. Now, Parents rather then other
governors are named, and commanded to be honored: Four reasons why Parents
rather then other Governors are here commanded to be honored.
1. Because the Father-like power and government was the first amongst men. 2.
Because this is as it were a rule, according to which others are to be composed
and framed, and God will have superiors bear a Fatherlike mind and affection
toward their inferiors. 3. Because it is most beloved of all men: so that to
it, and in regard of it, they easily submit themselves. 4. Because, seeing the
bond of duty toward Parents is the greatest, the contempt of them is the more
heinous and grievous, which therefore also is with greater severity condemned
by God.

In this Commandment then is prescribed the honor not only of Parents, but
also of all Superiors; and likewise the obedience not only of children, but
also of all inferiors. Herein also are the mutual duties of both parties
commanded. For when God commands the duty of inferiors toward superiors,
he does also of the contrary command the duties of superiors toward
inferiors: and when he commands Parents to be honored, he will withal,
that both they be as Parents to us, and also behave themselves as worthy of
honor; that is, to do the duty of Parents: and seeing he prescribes the duty
of Parents, it must needs be, that he also injoyneth the duties of others who
bear rule, whereas they are comprehended under the name of Parents. So also he
commands the duties of children, when he commands them to honor their
Parents; and therein also not only the duties of children, but of all
inferiors also, because he will that all superiors be honored of the
inferiors. Hence we easily answer that objection: Object. God in this
Commandment wills only our Parents to be worshipped, which is the duty of
inferiors: Therefore he commands nothing here to superiors. Ans. I deny the
consequence of this reason, and rather by retortion of the argument thus
conclude: Because he commands Parents to be honored: Therefore he
prescribes the duties of superiors. For when he gives the names to the
superiors, he gives them also the thing it self, or that from whence they
have the name: and if God will have them to be honored, he will also have them
to do those things that are worthy of honor. And albeit sometimes wicked men
bear rule; and therefore are unworthy of honor, yet the office is to be
distinguished from the persons: and whose vice we ought to detest, their office
we must honor, because it is Gods ordinance. Seeing then the superiors are to
be honored in respect of their office, it is manifest, that so far forth only
we must yield obedience to them, as they pass not the bounds of their office.

The promise is, That thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee: This promise God annexed to this Commandment, 1. That by so
singular a benefit proposed as a reward, he might the more invite us to the
observing and keeping hereof. 2. To signify how greatly he esteems that
obedience, and how grievously he will punish those which do against this
obedience. 3. To signify how necessary this obedience is. For this obedience
toward Parents, is a preparing, and a motive cause to the whole obedience of
the Laws which follow. Saint Paul alleging this promise, says, That this
fifth Commandment is the first Commandment with promise; that is, Ephesians. 6.2.
with special promise, or of a certain particular blessing, which God
promises to them that perform obedience. And the blessing or benefit which he
promises, is long life. Object. The first Table has also a promise adjoined:
Therefore this Commandment is not the first with promise. Ans. This
Commandment has a special promise, the first Table has only a general.
Object. But long life seems not to be any blessing or benefit by reason of
the misery of this life: Therefore it is a fruitless promise. Ans. This comes
but by an accident: For long life is a blessing by it self, though it be
joined with misery. Repl. 1. A good thing joined with great evils, is rather to
be wished away, then wished for. But long life is joined with many evils:
Therefore that blessing, by reason of the accidents, seems rather worthy to
be wished away from us, then to be wished to come unto us. Answ. A good thing
is to be wished away from us, if it have accompanying it greater evils. But God
promises unto the godly, together with long life, a mitigation of calamities,
and, a long fruition of Gods blessings even in this life. Moreover, the worship
and celebrating of God in this life is so great a good, that the calamities of
this life ought not to enter the balance, or stand in comparison with it. Repl.
2. The wicked also and disobedient are long lived: Therefore long life is not a
benefit proper to the godly. Answ. 1. A general rule is not overthrown by the
varying of a few examples. For the disobedient for the most part perish after
an evil manner and untimely. The eye that mocketh his Father, let the Ravens
of the valley pick it out. Prove. 30.17. Prove. 20.10.
He that curses his father or his mother, his light shall be put out in
obscure darkness. Ans. 2. Corporal benefits are bestowed on the godly for
their safety and salvation; and therefore are tokens and arguments to them of
Gods good will toward them: but on the wicked such are bestowed, partly that
they, being thereby called and invited to repentance, may become more
excuselesse in Gods judgment; partly, that the godly and elect, which are
mingled among the wicked, may enjoy these blessings. Repl. 3. All godly and
obedient children are not long lived: yea, many of them dye speedily. Answ. 1.
Again, a general rule is not overthrown by the varying of a few examples.
For the greatest part of the godly are long lived. 2. Promises of corporal
blessings are understood with an exception of chastisement and of the Cross.
3. That crosses not this promise, because unto them their translating into a
better life is a most ample and large recompense of long life.

Three parts of the obedience of this Commandment.
The parts of the obedience of this Commandment are three: 1. The proper
virtues of superiors. 2. The proper virtues of inferiors. 3. The virtues
common to both.

The proper virtues and defects of superiors distinguished according to their
duties and functions.
1. THe duties and functions of Parents are, Four duties of Parents. Mat. 7.9.
1 Timothy 5.10. Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Prove. 13.1. Prove. 19.18. The opposite sins
to those former duties of Parents.
1. To cherish and nourish their children. 2. To defend and protect them from
injuries. 3. To instruct, or commit them to be instructed of others. 4. To rule
and govern them by domestical discipline. The same duties belong unto Tutors,
who succeed in the room and place of Parents. The sins therefore repugnant
to the duties of Parents are: 1. Not to provide and minister necessary
sustenance unto the children, or to bring them up in riot. 2. Not to defend
their children against injuries, or not to accustom them to patience and
gentleness, or to offend in a foolish over-tender love; for some small or no
injuries done unto them. 3. Not to instruct, or take care that their children
be instructed, according to their own, and their childrens ability; or to
corrupt them by their evil instructions and examples. 4. To bring them up in
idleness and licentiousness of sinning: not to chastise their children as
necessity requires, or to be too fierce and cruel unto them, beyond their
duty, or the degree of the fault committed.

Two duties of School masters.
2. The duties of Schoolmasters or Teachers, 1. To teach and instruct their
Scholars faithfully; seeing they are in the place of Parents. 2. To rule and
govern them by scholasticall discipline. Unto the Schoolmasters and Teachers
instructions and discipline, the same vices are contrary, which are unto
Parents.

3. The duties of Magistrates may be brought and reduced to these heads: Four
duties of Magistrates. Deuteronomy. 1.16. and 17.9.
1. To command the observing and keeping of the Decalogue: to wit, that their
subjects live according to both Tables of the Decalogue, that is, according to
the whole Decalogue as concerning external discipline. 2. To execute the
Decalogue, or the commandments of the Decalogue; that is, to maintain the
obedience thereof by defending them who observe it, and by punishing them that
transgress against discipline, either in goods, or in name, or in body, or in
life. 3. To enact some positive Laws for maintenance of Civil order, What
positive Laws are.
which otherwise would not stand. Now Positive Laws are a determining and
defining of such circumstances as are necessary for maintenance of order and
decency in the Commonwealth, and serve for the keeping or obedience of the
Decalogue. 4. To put also these their own Laws in execution. Unto the
Magistrates duty two extremes are opposed: Two opposite extremes to those
former duties.
Slacknesse or remissness. What slackness is.
Slacknesse or slothfulness, which is, either not to require of his subjects
the discipline of the whole Decalogue: or, not to ordain those things which
are required to the preservation and order of civil society: or, not to defend
the innocent against injury: or, not to restrain: or, to punish lightly such
as offend against the discipline of the Decalogue, or against the positive
Laws. Tyranny. What tyranny is.
Tyranny: which is, either to command his subjects things that are unjust: or,
to punish that which is no sin, and them who sin not: or, to punish more
grievously, then the degree of the fault does deserve.

Duties of Lords and Masters. Ephesians. 6.9. Sirac. 33.23.
The duties of Masters and Lords are, 1. To command such things unto their
family as are just and possible, to prescribe just and lawful labors, not
unlawful, not unpossible, not too burdensome and unnecessary. 2. To afford
them nourishment, and to give them their wages for their labors. 3. To govern
them by domestical discipline. The fodder, the whip, and the burden belong
unto the Ass; and meat, correction, and work unto the servant.

Opposite vices to the three former duties.
The sins and faults of Lords and Masters are, 1. To permit in their family idle
slothfulness and licenciousnesse. 2. To command unjust things* and to lay on
too grievous burdens. 3. To defraud their servants of their meat and wages. 4.
To grieve and exasperate their family though too much rigor and severity.

The duty of Elders.
5. The duties of Elders and such as are superior in wisdom and authority is,
to govern and further others by the example of their life, by their counsels
and admonitions. These transgress against their duty and calling, Their
defects.
1. Through folly or corrupt counsels. 2. Through lightness of manners, and by
their evil example. 3. By neglect of the younger sort, or other inferiors,
whom they see to offend, and might by their counsel and authority correct and
amend, but do not.

The virtues proper to inferiors.
5. Parts of the duty of inferiors toward superiors.
THe proper duties of inferiors are expressed by the name of Honor. For,
Honor signifies and comprehends, Reverence.
1. The Reverence of the inferiors toward the superiors; which is, 1. An
acknowledgement of Gods will, who will have such an order to be in the calling
and degree of superiors, and does ordain the same, and adorn and furnish it
with gifts necessary. 2. An approbation of this order, and these gifts of God.
For if we do not know and acknowledge this order to be good; we will not
honor it. 3. A subjection and submission unto this order, even for the will
and pleasure of God. 4. An outward declaration of this their judgment and
mind in words and deeds, and in ceremonies and gestures, which differ
according to places. But reverence is also in the mind; and does not consist
only in outward gestures. And subjection here comprehends such obedience as
is not constrained, but ready and willing. 2. Love.
Secondly, Honor signifies a Love which we must bear unto them, in respect of
their calling and office; and this cannot be severed from reverence. For whom
we love not, them we cannot reverence. 3. Obedience.
Thirdly, Honor signifies obedience in all things lawful and possible, which
the superiors, according to their office and calling, command: and this
obedience must be voluntary, even as children rejoice to do those things which
are grateful and most acceptable unto their Parents. 4. Thankfulness.
Fourthly, It signifies thankfulness toward superiors; which requires that
every one, according to his calling and ability, and as occasion serves, aid
and further them. 5. Lenity and tolerance in their small defects.
Fifthly, It signifies lenity and equability toward superiors; which is, to
bear with those vices of Parents and superiors, which may be borne-with and
tolerated without any reproach unto Gods name, or which are not flat repugnant
unto his Law. Hereby is easily gathered what duties are enjoined to inferiors,
and what things agreeable to their duties and callings they owe to every sort
and order of superiors. The inferiors sin and transgress against that
honor which they owe unto their superiors, either not accounting of them, as
being in that place where God has placed them; or, yielding more unto them
then may agree unto men: or, hating them, especially for executing their office
and duties: or, loving them more then God: or, denying obedience to their just
and lawful commandments: or, obeying them in show, or when they command
things unjust and impious: or, harming them with injuries: or, not ayding them
in what things, and by what means they may: or, gratifying them flatteringly
and unrighteously: or, exagitating their infirmities: or, by flattery
commending their errors and vices: or, not advising them according to their
place, with due reverence, of enormous and pernicious faults committed by them.

The virtues common to both superiors and inferiors.
THe common duties unto all, or those virtues which are here prescribed unto
all degrees, both of superiors and inferiors, and the contrary vices whereof
are condemned, are: That general justice, which is, obedience, 1. General
justice.
according to all Laws that appertain unto all, in respect of every ones
vocation and calling. That this is here commanded, is manifest, because the
superiors must require this of their inferiors, and incite them by their
example to obey: and inferiors are commanded to obey all just ordinances and
commandments. Unto this general justice are opposed, The contrary vices.


Particular justice.
Particular distributive justice, which keeps a proportion in distributing of
offices, rewards, and punishments, or which is a virtue giving to every one his
own. Now every man's own is such an office, or honor, or reward, as is
convenient and fit for him, and belongs unto him: Give to all men their duty:
tribute, Romans 13.17. The contrary vices.
to whom ye owe tribute; custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear;
honor, to whom ye owe honor. To this is opposed, Error, which takes away an
office from him to whom it is due, and gives it another, who should not
administer it, or to whom it does not agree. Rashness, or accepting of
persons, or partiality in distributing offices, or in giving honors, or in
bestowing rewards.

Sedulity.
Sedulity, (or diligence, or fidelity) which is a virtue in a man well knowing
and understanding those parts which belong properly unto his own duty and
office, examining them, and doing, according to Gods commandment, those things
that belong to him, constantly, continually, studiously, willingly, and
cheerfully: likewise, containing himself, with this endeavor of well-doing,
within the bounds of his own duty and calling, letting pass things that
appertain not to his vocation, and such as are unnecessary: and all to this
end principally, as thereby to serve God, and his neighbor, and to do those
things which are pleasing to God, and profitable unto men. Study to be quiet,
and to meddle with your own business. He that rules, 1 These. 4.11. Romans
12.8. Ephesians. 6.6. Eccles. 9.10.
let him do it with diligence. Serve as the servants of Christ, doing the will
of God from the heart. All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all
thy power. But it is to be observed, that this virtue is not only to
understand what are the parts of a man's duty, but also to examine and search,
if yet there be ought remaining which he knows not to belong unto his duty.
For he that knows not, must seek and search, otherwise he shall nevertheless
render an account of neglecting his duty, because his ignorance was purposed
and voluntary, The contrary vices.
which excuses not. Unto sedulity is opposed, Negligence.
Negligence of slothfulness, which either does not look after matters, or
does willingly let them pass, and performs the parts of this duty either not
willingly, or not entirely, or not diligently. A show of diligence.
A show of diligence, which does his duty, chiefly for his own glory and
commodity sake. Curiosity.
Curiosity, which intrudeth and insinuates himself into other men's duties.
Arrogance.
Arrogance, which gives that unto himself, which he has not, or boasts of
that which he has.

Love of our kindred.
Love, or tender affection toward our kindred and near of blood, as toward
our Parents, Children, and other kinsfolks. For when God wills us to honor
our Parents, he will also that we love them, and that as our Parents: and when
he will have them Parents, he will also have their children to be loved of
them; and that not only as strangers, but as their children. For, seeing God
ordains the bonds of conjunction between men; he also allows the degrees
of love and duties. If there be any that provideth not for his own, 1 Timothy 58.
The contrary vices.
and namely, for them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then
an Infidel. Unto love are repugnant, Unnaturalness.
Unnaturalness, which either hates, or does not affect and love those which
are near of blood unto him; neither is careful of their safety. Indulgency.
Indulgency or cockering; which, for the love of any, either winketh at their
sins being pernicious either to themselves or others, or does gratify them
in things forbidden of God.

Thankfulness.
Thankfulness, which is a virtue consisting of truth and justice,
acknowledging from whom, what, and how great benefits we have received, and
have a desire or willingness to perform and return for them mutual labor,
or mutual duties, such as are honest, and possible. He that rewards evil for
good, evil shall not depart from his house. Prove. 17.13. The contrary vices.
Unto Thankfulness are repugnant, Unthankfulness.
Unthankfulness, which does not acknowledge, or does not confess the author
and greatness of the benefit receive, or does not endeavor to perform
mutual duties. Flattery.
Unlawful gratifying, or parasite-like flattering.

Gravity.
Gravity, which is a virtue, that, on knowledge of a man's calling, and degree,
observes that which becomes a man's person, and shows a constancy, and
squarenesse in words, deeds, and gestures, that thereby we may maintain our
good estimation or authority, that our calling be not reproached. For, because
God will have superiors to be honored, he will also that they themselves
maintain their own honor. Now glory, which is an approbation yielded us both
of our own conscience, and of the conscience of others, judging aright (seeing
it is a virtue necessary both for the glory of God, and for the safety and
welfare of men) is without question to be desired, so that these ends be
withal respected. Prove. 21.1. Eccles. 7.3. Sirac. 41.12. Gal. 6.4. Titus 2.7.
A good name is to be chosen above great riches. A good name is better then a
good ointment. Have regard to thy name, for that shall continue with thee above
a thousand treasures of gold. Let every man prove his own work, and then
shall he have rejoicing in himself only, and not in another. Above all
things, show thy self an example of good works, with incorrupt doctrine, with
gravity, integrity. Unto gravity are contrary, The contrary vices.
Levity.
Levity, not observing seemlinesse, or convenience, or constancy in a man's
words, deeds, and gesture, or not having a desire of retaining his good name
and estimation. Ambition.
Swelling or ambition, which is to lift up himself in respect of his own
calling or gifts, and to contemn and neglect others, and to be aspiring to
higher places, and to seek the applause and approbation of man, not for any
desire of Gods glory, or of his neighbors safety, but only for an ambitious
humor and desire of preeminence.

Modesty.
Modesty is a virtue which has near affinity with gravity, whereby a man
knows his own imbecility, and, considering his place and office wherein he
is placed by God, keeps a mean and convenience of person in opinion and in
speech of himself, and in actions, and in behavior, to this end, that we give
no more to our selves then becomes us, or defraud others of due reverence;
that we show no more glitter or gloriousness in our apparel, in our
behavior, in our talk, and life, then is needful; that we set not our selves
before others, or oppress others; but behave our selves, according to our
ability and capacity, with an acknowledgement of Gods gifts in others, and of
our own defects. Now, as it was said, Modesty has an affinity with gravity:
For if gravity be not joined with modesty, it degenerateth into ambition and
swelling. If any seem to himself that he is somewhat, Gal. 6.3.
when he is nothing, he deceives himself in his imagination. Humility and
modesty differ in their end: and modesty is toward men, acknowledging their
own vices, and the gifts that are in others: Humility is toward God. Unto
modesty are repugnant, The contrary vices.
Immodesty.
Immodesty* which reteineth not a seemly convenience (befitting both our own
person, and them with whom we converse) in words, deeds, behavior and
apparel. Arrogance.
Arrogance, which in opinion and speech challenges more unto himself then his
strength will bear, or does either admire his own gifts, or vaunt of them
without need, or extol them above measure. Counterfeit modesty.
Show of modesty, which is, in his admiration of himself, yet to extenuate and
debase himself, and to be backward in receiving of honors or offices, which a
man desires, to hunt after his own praise, or an opinion of modesty.

Equity.
Equity, which is a virtue mitigating, upon good cause, the rigor of strict
justice in punishing and taxing others offenses, patiently bearing with some
such errors and defects, as do not enormously harm the public safety, or
the private welfare of our neighbor, and covering and correcting such vices of
others, or endeavoring to heal and cure them. For this, by reason of men's
manifold infirmities, is so necessary both in superiors, and inferiors toward
superiors, that without it, civil society cannot consist. Be subject to your
Masters with all fear; 1 Pet. 2.18.
not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward. Hither
appertains the example of the Sons of Noah. Genesis 9.23.
Likewise the Commandment of the moderation and gentleness of Parents toward
their children in exercising correction and discipline. Ephesians. 6.4. Col. 3.21.
and 4.1.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction
and information of the Lord. Provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged. Ye Masters, The contrary vices.
do unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a Master in heaven. Unto equity are repugnant, Immoderate rigor.
Immoderate and unlawful rigor, in censuring of those that sin through
infirmity without any enormous harming either of their own safety, or others.
Slacknesse.
Slacknesse, not punishing or reprehending, according to his place, enormous
faults. Soothing.
Flattery, which for to curry favor, and for commodities sake, praises that
which is not to be praised, or attributes greater things to one, then are
beseeming for him.

ON THE 40. SABBATH.
Quest. 105. What does God exact in the sixth Commandment?
Ans. That neither in thought, nor in gesture, much less in deed, I reproach,
hate, or harm, or kill my neighbor, either by my self, or by another Mat.
5.21, 22, and 16.52. Genesis 9.6.
: but I cast away all desire of revenge Ephesians. 4.26. Romans 12.19. Mat. 5.25. and
18.35.
. Furthermore, that I hurt not my self, or cast my self wittingly into any
danger. Romans 13.14. Colos. 2.23. Sirac. 3.27. Mat. 4.7.
. Wherefore also that murders might not be committed, he has armed the
Magistrate with the sword Genesis 9.6. Exodus 21.14. Mat. 26.51. Romans 13.4.
.

Quest. 106. But this Commandment seems to forbid murder only.
Ans. But in forbidding murder, God does further teach, that he hates the
root and cause of murders, to wit, Prove. 14.30. Romans 1.29.
envy, 1 John 2.11.
hatred, James 1.20. Gal. 5.20.
and desire of revenge, and does account them all for murder 1 John 3 15.
.

Quest. 107. Is it enough that we kill no man in such sort as has been said?
Answ. It is not enough. For when God condemns anger, envy, hatred, he
requires that we love our neighbor as our selves Mat. 22.39. and 7.12. Romans
12.10.
: and that we use humanity Ephesians. 4.2. Gal. 6.1, 2. Mat. 5.5. Romans 12.18.
, lenity, courtesy, patience Luke 6.36. Mat. 5.7.
, and mercy toward him 1 Pet. 3.8. Col. 3.12.
, and turn away from him, as much as we may, whatsoever may be hurtful unto
him Exodus 23.5.
: In a word, that we may be so affected in mind, as that we stick not to do
good also unto our enemies Mat. 5.44, 45. Romans 12.20.
.

The Explication.
THe scope or end of this Commandment, is the preservation of the life and
safety of men's bodies, and of the welfare both of our selves and others. Here
therefore are commanded all things which make for the preservation of our own
life, and the life of others. Contrariwise, here are forbidden all those things
which tend to the destruction of our life, or the life of others: that is, all
wrongful harming, all desire of doing harm; yea, and all signs of this
desire.

Why murder only is here named.
Now in this prohibition is named murder, not that God forbids that alone,
but thereby to take away together with the effect the proper causes thereof:
and under the name of murder, are all sins which accompany it comprehended,
that by signifying thus the heinousness and grievousnesse thereof, we may be
the more effectually withdrawn and deterred from committing them: according to
that rule; When any special virtue is commanded, or any special vice
forbidden, the general virtues and vices, the causes thereof, or whatsoever
has any affinity therewith, is commanded and forbidden. Here is to be proved,
Why internal murder is forbidden in this Commandment.
That internal things are also commanded and forbidden by this Commandment.
2. That the hurting either of our selves or others is forbidden. 3. That the
defense of our neighbor is commanded. 1. Internal things are commanded and
forbidden, Because when the effect is commanded or forbidden, the cause is also
commanded or forbidden. From the scope and end of the Commandment: God will
not have us to hurt any: therefore he forbids the means also whereby we may
hurt. By the interpretation of Christ: Whosoever is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, Mat. 5.21.
shall be culpable of judgment: Therefore all unjust wronging of our
neighbor, together with the outward slaughter of him, is forbidden; yea, and
all the causes, occasions, and signs of this harming; as anger, envy, hatred,
and desire of revenge. Why hurting of our selves, or others is here also
forbidden.
The hurting, yea, and neglect as well of our selves as of others, is
forbidden, because the causes why God commands us to have regard of another
life, are the same in us: The image of God in man, which by us may not be
destroyed, neither in our selves, nor in others. The similitude and likeness
of nature, and our original from our first Parents. For as our neighbor is
not to be hurt and wronged by us, because he is our flesh; so neither may we
violence or hurt our selves, because, No man ever hated his own flesh. The
greatness of the price and ransom wherewith Christ purchased all the members
of the Church. The conjunction of Christ's members. And seeing these causes are
found in our selves also, it follows that by this Law every one is forbidden
to hurt or neglect his own life or body. Why the defense of our neighbor is
here commanded.
The defense of our neighbor is commanded. For, whereas the Law not only
commands us to avoid sins, but also to embrace and practice the contrary
unto them; it is manifest that God here does not only forbid us to endanger
any man's life and safety, but farther also commands us, as far forth as we
may, to defend and preserve it. Therefore this negative Commandment, Thou
shall do no murder, includes the affirmative, Thou shall preserve the life
of thy neighbor.

The substance and sum of the Commandment is, That we neither harm by any
external work, either our own life, or the life of an other, or any man's
safety and well are of body, either by force, or by deceit, or by neglecting:
neither wish in affection or will, an impairing thereof, or signify by any
tokens any such affection or will; but on the contrary, endeavor to defend and
preserve the same to the utmost of our power. Wherefore, Thou shall do no
murder, signifies, The meaning of the Commandment.
Thou shall not desire to murder, either thy self or others: For what God
will have not to be done of us, that does he not grant to be wished or desired.
Neither shall thou intimate or signify any desire of murdering either thy
self or others: For, the desire and wishing whereof God forbids, he
forbids also any inkling or signification thereof to be given either in
words, or behavior, or countenance. Neither shall thou put this desire in
execution: For, the desire and signification whereof God forbids, he verily
much more forbids the practice and execution thereof. The contrary then is,
Thou shall love and help thy self and others, 1. In heart and desire. 2. In
signification. 3. In practice and execution. Hence spring and arise all the
virtues of this Commandment, and likewise the contrary vices unto them. The
vices which are here forbidden, tend to the ruin and destruction of men: the
virtues that are here commanded, tend to the preservation of the life or safety
of men. And the safety of men is preserved, either by not hurting, or by
helping them. Two kinds of virtues prescribed in this Commandment. 1. Not
hurting virtues. 2. Helping virtues.
Whereby are made two diverse kinds of virtues of this Commandment; the former
whereof contains the virtues which tend to the not hurting of men's safety:
the other compriseth the virtues which tend to the helping and furthering of
men's safety. The virtues not hurting the safety of men are of three so^s. For
we are said, Not to hurt three ways: to wit, either, being not hurt or
provoked, or being provoked, or both ways. In the first manner of not hurting,
consists particular justice, hurting no man: In the second, Mildness and
Equability: In the third, Peaceablenesse. Again, the virtues helping and
furthering men's safety are twofold. For we are said To help, 1. By repelling
evils, dangers, and injuries. 2. By doing good, or bone fitting our selves or
others. In the first manner of helping, consists Commutative justice in
punishments, Fortitude, and Indignation: In the second, Humanity, Mercy, and
Amity.

The virtues not hurting the safety of men.
Particular justice.
PArticular Justice not hurting any man, is a virtue which neither by
endeavor, nor by neglect hurts the life or body of any of whom we are not
hurt, except God command it. Or, A virtue shunning all harmings which are done
either by violence, or by deceit, or by neglect of our own, and others safety.
This is expressed in the words, Thou shall do no murder. Unto particular
justice hurting no man, is opposed, 1. All unlawful harming of our own or any
others life and body, whether of purpose, or of negligence. 2. Remissness,
when they are not hurt, who are to be hurt, by them unto whom the execution
belongs.

Mildness.
Mildness, or placability, or easiness in forgiving, which is a virtue
moderatresse and governesse of anger, which neither is angry for no cause,
neither upon a light cause: neither, where is cause of just anger, wishes the
destruction of the person that hurts; but is displeased only at the reproach
of Gods name, or for unjustice, or for the hurt of our neighbor: and admits
not in mind the desire of revenging any injury, be it never so great; but
heartily wishes the safety and good estate of enemies, and il-willers, and
endeavors to maintain the same according to our ability, and their
necessity. Or, it is a virtue moderatresse and governesse of anger, which
shunneth all unjust anger, and does so moderate just anger, as that it is not
angry beyond measure, or passes the bounds and limits by God prescribed,
neither burns with a desire of revenge, but pardons offenses and also
grievous injuries, even to enemies: so that the anger conceived neither aims
at, nor lights on the persons, but on the vices of offenders; and that with
this regard, that it wishes the safety of them, who most heinously offend.
Blessed are the meek, Mat. 5.5. The contrary vices.
for they shall inherit the earth. Mildness is repugnant, Remissness, when a
man is not moved for grievous injuries, nor represseth and punishes them, or
is too slack in forbidding them. 2. Unjust or immoderate anger. 3. Desire of
revenge, grudging, hatred and spite:

Equity.
Equability or equity, which is a virtue of near affinity with mildness, which
is a moderatresse of strict justice (which equalleth punishments with faults)
upon good and reasonable cause: as when in respect of the crime it self, or
our own duty, or the public safety, or the private safety of them which
transgress, or for the avoiding of offense, or for any other good cause, we
yield somewhat of our right, in punishing offenses, Gal. 5.1. Phil 4.5.
or in punishing of injuries. Brethren, if a man be fallen, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted. Let your patient mind be known unto all
men. Unto equability, or equity is repugnant, The contrary vices.
Immoderate rigor, cruelty and unjust severity, when there is had no regard of
circumstances: whereof it is said; Extreme right is extreme wrong.
Remissness; that is, not to be moved at such things, whereat we ought to be
moved: as, when God commands, etc. Partiality, and accepting of persons.

Peaceablenes.
Peaceablenesse, or study of peace and concord, which is a diligence both in
avoiding unnecessary causes and occasions of offenses, discords, contentions,
and hatreds; and also in reconciling those which are offended either with us,
or with others: and lastly, in retaining and keeping of peace, for the
retaining where of not to refuse troubles, and the dissembling and forbearing
of injuries whereby we have been harmed, so as it be without the reproach of
Gods name, and any grievous impairing either of our own, The contrary vices.
or others safety. Unto Peaceablenesse is opposed, Turbulency, or
quarrelsomenesse, giving or taking occasion of stirs, whereunto belong all
desire and delight in contention, backbiting, slandering, whispering. Here
therefore all contentious persons, back-biters, slanderers, and whisperers are
condemned. Remissness, when as thou so covetest to keep peace, that thou do
not respect Gods glory, neither thine own and thy neighbors safety. This is
an unjust gratifying.

The virtues helping and furthering men's safety.
Commu^ative justice.
COmmutative justice in punishments, is a virtue observing equality of offenses
and punishments, inflicting either equal punishments unto the faults, or
lesser, being induced thereto upon good cause, according to the respect and
consideration to be had of circumstances in civil judgment, for the
maintenance of Gods glory, and for the preservation of men's society. For when
God forbids the society of men to be harmed or impaired, and will have the
Magistrate to be the maintainer of discipline according to the whole Decalogue,
he will also have them with just punishments restrained, that make any grievous
breach of this order. Wherefore a Magistrate may offend not only in cruelty,
or unjust severity, but also in lenity or remissness, and in licencing men to
hurt and injure others. Because thou have let go out of thy hands a man whom I
appointed to die, 1 Kings 20.42.
thy life shall go for his life, Levit. 24.17. Numb. 35.31.
and thy people for his people. He that kills any man, he shall be put to
death. Ye shall take no recompense for the life of the murderer, which is
worthy to die: Exodus 21.23. Deuteronomy. 24.10.
but he shall be put to death. Life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth. The
Fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children put to
death for the Fathers, but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.
Deuteronomy. 19.
Thou shall make cities of refuge, that innocent blood be not shed within thy
Land. Here therefore is commanded, for the defense and safeguard of men's safety,
severe justice, which remitteth not punishment without good cause, and
observes equality od the offense and punishment. Whereof it is manifest, that
this Commandment does not take away, but ordain and establish the office of
the Magistrate in punishing transgressors. Romans 13.4.
He is the Minister of God, and bears not the sword for naught. For when God
commands a man to be slain, not men now, but God himself puts him to
death by them, unto whom he gives this in charge. And that the licentiousness
of doing violence or outrage might not grow strong and increase, he would have
transgressors to be curbed and kept short by punishments. Wherefore the revenge
due to Magistrates is comprehended in that saying, Vengeance is mine; I will
repay, Romans 12.19.
says the Lord. And hereby is answer made unto this objection, It is said
here, thou shall do no murder: Therefore we must not at all put any man to
death: and by consequent, this justice does not appertain to this
Commandment; as which cannot be kept, except many be put to death. Unto which
we answer: 1. We must therefore put some to death, lest the society of men be
destroyed by thieves and robbers. 2. It is said, Thou shall do no murder;
that is, not thou that art but a private man, not according to thy own
pleasure and lust, without any warrant and special exception against this Law.
For God punishes when the Magistrate punishes. Unto Justice commutative in
punishments, The contrary vices.
Unjustice is contrary, which either does not at all punish, or does unjustly
punish: as, 1. Cruelty and overgreat severity, or false pretending of strict
justice. 2. Private revenge. 3. Remissness, when that is not punished which
ought to be punished. 4. Partiality, or accepting of persons.

Fortitude.
Fortitude is a virtue, which adventureth dangers according to the rule of
wel-informed reason; that is, such dangers as right and ruled reason wills to
adventure, and that for the glory of God, the safety of the Church and
Commonwealth, the defense and preservation either of our selves, or others,
against grievous injuries. Now this fortitude of Gods Saints arises from
faith, and hope, and the love of God and their neighbors. But that heroical
fortitude, Heroical fortitude.
which is a special gift of God, as in Joshua, Sampson, Gedeon, David, is to
be distinguished from that presentnesse of mind and courage, which through a
cogitation and thinking on Gods will ought to be raised and stirred up in all,
especially in Governors: Be strong, 1 King. 2.2. Numb. 13. and 14.
and show thy self a man. Hither appertains the example of the spies of the
Land of Canaan, and of the people being out of heart, and despairing for ever
compassing and possessing of it. Like unto this virtue, is warlike fortitude:
Warlike fortitude.
which is a defendresse of justice, and an undertaking of the just defense of
our selves or others, albeit it be not without peril and danger. War.
War is either a necessary defense against those that exercise robbery, and
outrages, or cruelty against the people; or a just punishment for grievous
injuries sustained, which is undertaken of the ordinary power by force of arms.

The contrary vices.
Unto Fortitude is opposed, 1. Timorousness, and the betraying of another
safety, when thou art able to undertake his defense: likewise a shunning of
necessary dangers, and such as God has commanded us to undergo. 2. Rashness,
or foole-hardinesse, which is to undertake things unnecessary and unprofitable.

Indignation
Indignation, or zeal, is a virtue justly offended and wroth of Gods name, the
unjust hurting of our neighbor, and for some grievous injury, which is done
either against God or our innocent neighbor; having moreover a desire, as
ability and strength affords, to repel and revenge the injury done against
God or our neighbors, according to Gods Commandment. Gedeon said to Zebah and
Zalmunna, The men that ye slew at Tabor, were my brethren, Judges 8.9. Judges
20.
even my Mothers children: as the Lord lives, if ye had saved their lives, I
would not slay you. And the Israelites wage war against the Benjamites, for
the wickedness committed against the Levites wife. As therefore unjust wars
are forbidden by this Commandment, so just war is allowed in the fifth
Commandment, as a part of the Magistrates duty toward his subjects, and in
this Commandment as a defense both of his own and others safety and life; and
consists partly in justice not hurting and punishing, partly in fortitude and
indignation. For either it is, as before was said, a necessary defense against
those that exercise robbery and violence, or cruelty against the people, or a
just punishment for grievous injuries; which is undertaken by ordinary
authority with force of arms. 1 Samuel 25.28.
My Lord fights the battles of the Lord. Hither also belongs the defense of
their own life and their neighbors, which private men use against unjust
force and violence, when necessity suffers not the Magistrates aid to be
required: for when the Laws and the Magistrate arm a private man against a
robber, or adulterer, he uses then the sword, not unadvisedly taken, but
justly delivered into his hand by the Magistrate, as being the Magistrates
deputy and minister. So Moses slew the Egyptian in defense of the Israelites.
Unto Indignation are repugnant,. 1. Unjust anger. 2. Remissness or slownesse,
when there is no sharpness or earnestness showed in being justly offended
with injuries, and in revenging them.

Humanity.
Humanity, or the love of man, is a true and sincere good will both in mind,
and will, and heart, toward others, and a declaration thereof in words,
behavior, and duties convenient, and possible. This selfsame virtue in the
Scriptures is called the love of our neighbor, which in Philosophy is termed
Humanity: for by this virtue all men perform that to others, which they would
have to be done unto themselves. Romans 12.10. Gal 6.10. The contrary vices.
Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love. Let us do good unto
all men, but especially unto them which are of the household of faith. Unto
Humanity are opposed, 1. Inhumanity, or waywardness: which either omitteth the
proper duties of humanity, or commits the contrary thereunto. 2.
Spightfulnesse, or envy which is a repining at another good, and a desire
either to win that good unto himself, or avert it at least from another. 3.
Self-love, with a neglect of others. 4. Unjust pleasurings or gratifyings.

Mercy.
Mercy is a virtue, which has a fellow-feeling, and takes compassion of the
calamities of good men, or of those who sin through ignorance or infirmity, and
indeavoureth to take them away, or to assuage them as much as equity and Gods
glory permits, neither rejoices at the calamities of the very enemies
themselves. Or it is sorrow for calamities of innocent men, or such as fall
through ignorance or infirmity, and a desire to assuage or take away their
calamities by honest means: Blessed are the merciful, Mat. 5.7. The contrary
vices.
for they shall obtain mercy. Unto mercy are contrary, 1. In the defect,
unmercifulness, cruelty, hard-heartednesse, not to have compassion of those of
whom we are to have compassion. Likewise, rejoicing at another man's harm, and
uncompassionatenesse void of all grief. 2. In the excess, Remissness, when
they are spared, whom God will not have spared, which is cruel pity, whereby
the whole society of men is hurt, yea, and he himself also who is spared.

Amity.
Amity is a virtue comprehended under Humanity as a special under his
general, and it is a mutual and sincere good will between good men, kindled
by the mutual knowledge of virtue each in other, by a communication, and other
honest duties in both parties, performing mutual duties, such as are just and
lawful, and possible. Prove. 18.24.
A man that has friends, ought to show himself friendly: for a friend is
nearer then a brother. It is different from love, in that love stretches both
to the known and unknown; but amity or friendship extends only to those
that are known one to another, The contrary vices.
and that for some virtues appearing in them. Unto amity or friendship are
opposed, 1. Enmity. 2. Neglect of friends. 3. Lightness in joining and
loosing friendship. 4. Counterfeiting and dissembling of friendship. 5.
Flattery. 6. Unjust gratifying.

A summary Table of the sixth Commandment.
In the sixth Commandment: Thou shall do no murder, is 1. Forbidden all
unjust harming of our own, or our neighbors life and safety: and our
neighbor is hurt by 1. Forsaking him, and not helping him to our power; which
is a neglect of the duties, which are required for the preservation of life. 2.
Wronging him: which is done by 1. External force or violence; as by 1. Murder.
2. Back-bitings. 3. Injuries whatsoever.
2. Internal affection; as 1. Anger. 2. Hatred. 3. Desire of revenge.


2. Commanded the preservation of our own, and other men's life or safety. And
this is preserved by 1. Not hurting them: for they ought not to hurt others who
are 1. Not provoked, which is the part of Justice. 2. Provoked, which is the
point of Gentleness and equity. 3. Either provoked or unprovoked, which is the
point of Peaceablenesse.
2. Helping them: and our neighbor is helped by 1. Repelling injuries from
him: which is done by 1. Commutative Justice in punishments. 2. Fortitude. 3.
Indignation.
2. Benefiting him: through 1. Humanity, or kindness and good will. 2. Mercy.
3. Amity, or friendship.




ON THE 41. SABBATH.
Quest. 108. What is the meaning of the seventh Commandment?
Ans. That God has in execration all turpitude and filthiness Levit. 10.28.
, and therefore we also must utterly hate and detest it Jude 22.
, and contrariwise live temperately, modestly, and chastely 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5.
, whether we live in holy wedlock, or in single life Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 7.7.
.

Quest. 109. Forbids God nothing else in this Commandment, but adultery,
and such kinds of uncleanness?
Ans. Seeing both our body and soul are the Temples of the holy Ghost, God will
have us to possess both in purity and holiness. And therefore deeds,
gestures, words Ephesians, 5.3, 4. 1 Cor. 16.18, 19, 20.
, thoughts, filthy lusts Mat. 5.27, 28
, and whatsoever enticeth a man unto these, all that he wholly forbids
Ephesians. 5.18. 1 Cor. 15.33.
.

The Explication.
GOD in this Commandment ratifieth or establishes the preservation of
chastity and marriage, and farther authoriseth marriage it self. For,
whatsoever he forbids, the contrary thereof he commands and wills to be
kept. Now he forbids Adultery, What is meant when adultery is named.
which is a breach of wedlock. Now, when God names adultery, he does not
forbid that only, as being the most gross vice of all those which are
repugnant to chastity, but also condemns all wanton and wandering lusts in
persons married or unmarried, all vices that are contrary to chastity, and such
as are of near affinity unto them; likewise their causes, occasion, effects,
antecedents, consequents: and of the contrary, he commands all things which
make for the preservation of chastity. The reasons are these: 1. By one
special, the rest that are of affinity with that are understood. Therefore
when adultery is forbidden, other special vices or lusts are condemned. 2.
Where the cause is condemned, there also the effect is condemned, and so of the
contrary. So here are condemned or forbidden, as well the antecedents as the
consequents of adultery. 3. The end and scope of this Commandment is, the
preserving of chastity, and protecting of wedlock among men. Whatsoever
therefore makes for the preserving of chastity, and for the protecting of
wedlock, is commanded in the Law: and the contrary is withal forbidden. The
virtues of this Commandment. 1. Chastity.
The virtues of the seventh Commandment are in number three; Chastity,
Shamefastness, Temperancy.

Chastity.
Chastity is a virtue preserving cleanness of mind and body, agreeing with
the will of God, and avoiding all lusts forbidden by God, all unlawful
companying, and inordinate copulation, and all the desires, occasions, effects,
and suspicions either in single life, or in wedlock. Chastity has his first
original from a Greek word, (...).
which signifies to adorn; because it is an ornament not only of the whole
man, but also of all the rest of the virtues. Wherefore that name was given by
special regard and pre-eminence to this virtue; because it is one of those
principal virtues that make the image of God: God is chaste, and will be
called on by such as are of a chaste mind, Twofold chastity.
and suffers chaste prayers to take effect with him. Now there is a double
chastity; 1. Of single life.
one of single life: another of marriage. Chastity of single life is a virtue
avoiding all lusts, 2. Of marriage.
remaining in a sole estate without marriage. Chastity of marriage is, to
observe in marriage the order instituted by the wonderful counsel of God. The
causes of chastity are: Four causes. 1 These. 4.3, 4.
1. The Commandment of God. This is the will of God, even your sanctification,
and that ye should abstain from fornication: that every one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor. Follow peace with all men,
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. 2. The preservation of
Gods image. 3. A study and desire to avoid the defacing of Gods image, and the
conjunction that is between God and the Church. Heb. 12.14. 1 Cor. 6.15, 18.
Flee fornication. Know ye not that your bodies are the numbers of Christ?
shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
Harlot? God forbid. The contrary vices.
4. Rewards and punishments. The extremities of chastity are; counterfeit
chastity, unclean single life, whore-hunting, keeping of concubines, incest,
adultery, and all wanton and unwieldy wicked lusts, their causes, occasions,
and effects: all unlawful conjunctions, all corrupted desires that violate,
and hurt the conscience also in marriage.

Three kinds of lusts.
Now all sorts of lusts may be referred unto three several kinds. Of the first
kind are those which are contrary to nature, and from the Devil; namely, such
as are even against this our corrupt nature, not only because they corrupt it,
and bereave it of that conformity with God, but also because this our corrupt
nature abhors them. Of this kind are those which are recited by the
Apostle, Romans 1.
as confounding of kinds and sexes, likewise the unnatural abusage of
woman-kinde. These heinous sins and horrible trespasses are to be punished by
the Magistrate with extraordinary punishments. Incest has for a great part a
repugnancy with this our nature, albeit there were examples of incest in our
first Parents; because those were done of necessity, and by dispensation from
God himself. Therefore this was an exception from the general rule.

Of the second kind are those, which proceed from this our corrupt nature; as
fornications amongst those that are free from marriage, adulteries between
persons that are both married, companying of married persons with others that
are unmarried. If a married person have company with another married person,
Double adultery.
it is a double adultery: for he violateth both his own wedlock, and the
others. If a married man have to do with an unmarried woman, Simple adultery.
Simple fornication.
it is simple adultery. Simple fornication is of those that are unmarried.
Magistrates are by duty bound severely to punish incests and adulteries. For
they are much more heinous then thefts and robberies. God appoints death for
adulteries. Now although God did not ordain that simple fornication also be
punished with death, yet when he says after: Let there not be a whore amongst
you; he signifies, that it is to be punished in his kind. There are other
things also, which are committed of this our corrupt nature with an evil
conscience, as lust and evil desires, unto which we yield, or wherewith we are
delighted, neither endeavor to avoid them. Such vicious and lewd desires, and
the like, although they be not punished in the Civil court, yet are they
joined with an evil conscience, and are punished of God.

Of the third kind are corrupt inclinations. unto which yet good men do not
yield, but withstand them, and take away from them all occasions: and their
conscience is not troubled, because God is invocated and called upon, and the
grace of resistance is desired, and there is remaining in their hearts a
testimony of the remission of their sins. And for a remedy for these sins,
after the fall, was marriage appointed. Therefore against those inclinations it
is to be said, It is better to marry, then to burn. 1 Cor. 7.9.
But yet S. Paul nevertheless by those words does not allow such marriages as
are untimely, hurtful to the Commonwealth, entered into before a lawful age,
or unhonest; that is, against good orders and manners.

Shamefastness.
Shamefastness is a virtue abhorring all filthiness, joined with a shame,
grief, and sadness, either for some former uncleanness, or for fear of
falling into any hereafter; and having a purpose and desire to fly not only
uncleanness it self, but also the occasion, and tokens and signs of
uncleanness. Shamefastness is required unto chastity, as a furtherance and
cause of chastity, and also an effect, consequent, and sign thereof. The
extremities or vices contrary to shamefastness are: The contrary vices.
1. Shamelessness or impudency, which makes light of uncleanness. 2. A rude
and uplandish bashfulnesse, or an uncivil and perverse bashfulnesse, when a
man is ashamed of that, whereof he ought not to be ashamed; as of a thing which
is good and honest, and requires not any bashfulnesse to be showed therein. 3.
Obscenity, and scurrility, or ribaldry.

Temperancy.
Temperancy is a virtue, observing the mean agreeable to nature, honesty,
mediocrity, and order of persons, places, and times, according to the law and
rule of nature, in things concerning the body; as meat, and drink, and in the
desire of them. Temperancy is required unto chastity, as a cause without which
we cannot be chaste: and is the mother and nurse of all other virtues. Take
heed to your selves, Luke 21.34.
lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting, and drunkenness,
and cares of this life. Ephesians. 5.18.
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess. Walk honestly, as in the day:
not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in
strife and envying. Romans 13.13, 14.
But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts of it. The extremities of temperancy are: 1. Intemperancy in
meat, The contrary vices.
and quaffing of the drink, gluttony, drunkenness, even to the overture of our
stomach and head-reeling. 2. Luxury, which is too much prodigality, and
needless superfluity in meat, apparel, household stuff, etc. 3. Hurtful
temperancy, or too great abstinency and hypocritical, not agreeable to nature;
such as is the abstinency of Eremites: Likewise superstitious fasts.

OF MARRIAGE.
WHereas Marriage is authorized in this Commandment, we are to consider of it,
1. What Marriage is. 2. What are the causes of the institution of Marriage. 3.
What Marriages are lawful. 4. Whether it be a thing indifferent. 5. What are
the duties of married persons. 6. What things are contrary to Marriage.


1. What Marriage is.
MArriage is a lawful and indissoluble conjunction of one man and one woman,
instituted by God, for the propagation and increase of mankind, that we might
know him to be chaste* and to detest all lust, and that he will gather unto
himself out of mankind thus lawfully multiplied an everlasting Church,
whereof he may be known and worshipped aright: Lastly, that it might be a
society and fellowship between man and wife of labors, cares, and prayer.

2. What are the causes of the institution of Marriage.
THe author of Marriage is God himself: For marriage is no invention of man,
but instituted by God in Paradise before the fall of man. Now the causes for
which marriage was instituted, are, (as we may learn out of the definition of
marriage) 1. The means of multiplying mankind. 2. The gathering of the
Church. 3. The image and resemblance of the conjunction between God and the
Church. 4. That loose and wandering lusts might be avoided. 5. That there might
be a society and fellowship of labors and prayer. That fellowship is more
near and strait; and therefore sends out more ardent and earnest prayers:
because we do more ardently and earnestly help them by our prayers, unto whom
we are joined in labor and affection. As, the Parents pray more earnestly for
the children, then the children for their Parents: because, as the Proverb
goes, Love does descend, not ascend.

3. What Marriages are lawful.
Eight conditions of lawful marriage.
THat Marriage may be a lawful conjunction, these things are thereto required:
1. That Matrimony be contracted between persons fit to be joined. 2. That is
be contracted by the consent of both parties. 3. That there be adjoined also
the consent of others, whose consent is required by Law; as namely Parents, or
those who are in the place of Parents. 4. That there be no error committed in
the persons. 5. That in the contract honest conditions, decency, and a lawful
course or process be observed. 6. That Matrimony be contracted between two
persons only: Genesis 2.24. Mat. 19.5.
They two shall be one flesh. The Fathers indeed of the Old Testament had many
wives: but we are to judge according to laws, and not according to examples.
7. That it be contracted in the Lord; that is, between the faithful, and with
the invocation or calling on of God. 8. That it be not contracted between
persons in such degrees of kindred as are forbidden of God and honest Laws.

Kindred is either consanguinity or affinity: though some take kindred and
consanguinity for one and the same thing. Consanguinity.
Consanguinity is between persons springing from one and the same stock,
Affinity.
and nearly allied in blood. Affinity is alliance rising by marriage between
the kinsfolks of man and wife. A stock.
The stock is the person, from whom the rest are derived. A line.
Now kinsfolks are distinguished by line and degree. A line is an order of
kinsfolks, A degree.
descending or coming of one stock. A degree is a distance between kinsfolks
on the fathers or mothers side, from the first stock. Concerning those degrees
this common rule is to be observed: How many persons there are from the stock,
so many degrees there are. By Gods Law the second degree, and by laudible
politic Laws of men the third degree is forbidden. The division of a line in
kindred. 1. Ascendents. 2. Descendents. 3. Collaterals. Collaterals are, 1.
Equal. 2. Unequal. That the degrees prohibited, Levit. 1. are prohibited
likewise by nature it self, proved by four reasons.
The line is either of Ascendents, or Descendents, or Collaterals. The
Ascendents are all the Ancestors and Progenitors. The Descendents are all the
Progeny. The Collaterals are they that are not borne one of another, but come
all from the same two parents. The line of Collaterals is either Equal or
Vnequ^ll. It is Equal, when there is equal distance from the common stock.
Unequal, when the distance is unequal. The prohibitions of degrees of
consanguinity from marriage are expressed and set down by God, Levit. 18. And
that they are Moral and Natural, it is proved: 1. Because the Gentiles are
said through breach of those degrees to have committed abomination, and to have
been cast out for them: But the Gentiles had not the Ceremonial or Civil Law
of Moses. 2. Because for breach of these Laws; that is, for loose lusts, and
incestuous marriages, God punished the world with a deluge. 3. From the end,
because the end; that is, the prohibition of incest in reverence of blood, was
made universal, perpetual, and moral. 1 Cor. 5.
4. Paul most sharply reprehendeth and commands the incestuous person to be
excommunicated, which had married his fathers wife: and John the Baptist says
to Herod, Mat. 6.18.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife.

4. Whether it be a thing indifferent.
Marriage granted to some: free untu otherstand for others necessary.
MArriage is licenced by God to all persons that are fit for it. It is a thing
Indifferent; that is, neither prescribed, nor forbidden of God, but left free
to them who have the gift of continency. But whosoever are not endued with this
gift of continency, unto all them marriage is not a thing indifferent, but
commanded unto them, as necessary, from God himself, that they marry in the
Lord. 1 Cony. 1, 2, 8, 9.
It were good for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless, to avoid
fornication, let every man have his wife. I say unto the unmarried and unto the
widows; it is good for them to abide even as I do. But if they cannot
abstain, let them marry: for, it is better to marry, then to burn. But a just
and convenient time is to be observed in first and second marriages; and we may
not give passage to the flames of loose lusts, but, as much as lies in us,
cool and allay, and quite quench them by prayer, and by all diligent
endeavor: and as we are not to run on herein until touch of conscience; so
neither are we to proceed so far as to the breach of civil honesty: which
how highly it was respected by the ancient Romans, and how heedfully regarded
in their Laws, witness Plutarch, who in the life of King Numa thus writes:
Women remained widows ten months after the decease of their husbands, or else
she that would marry within that time, was bound by Numa's order to sacrifice a
Cow great with calfe. For when a just and lawful time of marriage is not
observed, then is that thing a cause of many evils and troubles in Civil and
Ecclesiastical affairs. But, notwithstanding, whosoever has once lawfully
and in the Lord contracted matrimony, it is never permitted, or lawful for
them to dissolve or loose the bond of matrimony once contracted, except it be
for adultery.

5. What are the duties of married persons.
Duties common to both parties.
THE common and mutual duties of married persons are: 1. Mutual Love. 2.
Spousall faith and truth, as each to love the other only, continually, and
constantly. 3. Community of goods, and a sympathy and fellow-feeling in evils
and calamities. 4. The bringing forth, and bringing up of children. 5. Bearing
with infirmities, with a desire to cure them. The proper duty of the husband
is, 1. To nourish his wife and children. The husbands proper duties. The wives.
2. To govern them. 3. To defend them. The proper duty of the wife is, 1. To
be a helper unto her husband, in maintaining and preserving their household
substance. 2. To obey and reverence her husband. When these things are
neglected, they grievously trespass against the lawful use of marriage.

6. What things are contrary to Matrimony.
UNto Matrimony the same vices are contrary, which are repugnant to chastity:
1. Fornications and adulteries, whereby spousall loyalty and chastity is broken
of one or both parties. Likewise incests, unlawful copulation, and abuses of
marriage. 2. Rash divorces, which of ancient were common among the Romans and
Jews, and are usual at this day among barbarous Nations; divorces, I say,
which are made not in case of adultery, either parties forsaking the other. But
the person that is forsaken, or is solicited to admit a forsaking, does not
cause the divorce, but the other. 3. Forbidding and reproving of marriage.

ON THE 41. SABBATH.
Quest. 110. what does God forbid in the eighth Commandment?
Answ. Not only those thefts 1 Cor. 6.10.
, and robberies 1 Cor. 5.10. Esaias 33.1.
, which the Magistrate punishes; but by the name of theft he comprehends
whatsoever evil crafts, fetches, and devices, whereby we seek after other
men's goods, and endeavor by force, or with some show of right, to convey them
over unto our selves, Luke 3.14. 1 These 4.6.
: of which sort are, false weights, false elns, uneven measures Prove. 11.1. and
16.11. Ezekiel. 45.9, 10. Deuteronomy. 25.13.
deceitful merchandise, counterfeit coin, usury Psalm 15.6. Luke 6.35.
, or any other way or means of furthering our estate, which God has
forbidden. To these we may add all covetousness 1 Cor. 6.10.
, and the manifold waste and abusing of Gods gifts Proverbes 5.16. and 21.20.
.

Quest. 111. what are those things which God here commands?
Answ. That, to my power, I help and further the commodities and profit of my
neighbor: and that I so deal with him, as I would desire to be dealt with my
self Mat. 7.12.
: and that I do my wone work painfully and faithfully; that I may thereby
help others also who are distressed with any need or calamity. Ephesians. 4.28.


The Explication.
BY this Commandment is enacted and decreed a distinction of possessions. For
the end of this Commandment is, the preservation of goods or possessions,
which God gives to every one for the maintenance of their life. For if we may
not steal, then must every man possess his own. God therefore forbids all
deceit, evil crafts, fetches, and devices, whereby our neighbors wealth is
impaired, diminished, and his possessions confounded, or his title or right in
any thing wrongfully made litigious, and called into question. Contrariwise, he
commands all such virtues, as make for the maintenance and furtherance of our
neighbors estate. Thou shall not steal; that is, thou shall not covet, or
attempt by guile to conveigh thy neighbors goods unto thee. Therefore defend,
preserve, increase them, and give thy neighbor his own. Now Theft is only
named, Why theft is here named.
as being the grossest kind of defrauding, that by it the rest of the like
quality might be understood; and that for the same, as the scope or end, other
vices or sins of like nature, and their antecedents and consequents might be
prohibited and forbidden.

The virtues of this eighth Commandment, together with their extremes, or
contrary vices,
Commutative justice.
Commutative justice, which is a virtue in purchasing of goods, not coveting
after another man's goods, and keeping an equality by number in bargains, and
in the common trade of life, in the purchasing and exchanging of things
according to just Laws, between the ware and the price, the desert and the
reward, whether it be in purchase or buying, or in exchange of things. Of the
Dominion and Division of things, Justinian the Roman Emperor thus entreats:
Some things are by the law of Nature common to all; as the air, running
waters, the sea, and seashore: Some are public or common to all under the same
Empire and Regiment; as rivers, havens, and the use of the banks of rivers:
Some are common to a whole City; as theaters, race-downes, etc. Some are no
man's; as religious things, hallowed, and consecrated: but the most or greatest
part of things in this world belong to some private and singular man, and are
by him diverse wains purchased. So that all things, other ar^ no man's, or some
man's. Therefore those things are translated to another owner, which are either
no man's, or are belonging to other men Those things that are no man's, become
theirs who get them: and if thou seine upon that which is no man's, thou shall
inju^^e^o man. Those things tha^ belong to an^ her man, are passed from him
either by violence, the owner being unwilling thereto; or by grant, according
to the owners will and liking. Those things are passed from the owners against
his w^ll, which are either by right of war, or by captivities taken away from
an enemy. Those things are passed away with the owners liking, which are passed
to another either by inheritance. or by contract and bargain. By inheritance
things are passed over to another, either by testament, or without any
testament. A contract o^ bargain, is a consent and agreement between any of
passing over any things, or of the communicating or exchanging of them,
according to just and honest haws. All contracts are comprehended under
commutative justice. Ten sorts of contracts.
Now there are ten sorts of Contracts. 1. Buying and selling, when a thing is
passed from the buyer to the seller, so th^^ the buyer pay the seller a just
equivalent price for it. This is sometimes either with a condition of selling
it again, or with a condition of not selling it again, so that the buyer
cannot sell that which he bought unto others. Unto buying belongs the buying
of revenues: for that is no usury; as neither is the setting out of ground to
farm at a certain rate, yearly to be paid. 2. Loan, which is a contract,
wherein the use of a thing is passed to another, so that there be repaied as
much again. In loan a thing is given, not that the same thing should be
restored, but the like, or that which is of the same value.

3. There is another loan, which is called Commodation, when the use of a
thing is granted a man for a certain time, so that without any price or
valuation the selfsame thing be precisely restored whole and sound. 4.
Donation, or by deed of gift, when a thing is passed from the right owner, who
has the right of giving it, by free grant and will, to another, without any
recompense conditioned Object. Justice requires that we give like for like,
but this is not done in donation: Therefore this is repugnant unto justice.
Answ. Justice requires it, if they be given with that mind and purpose, as to
have recompense. 5. Exchange, when a thing is changed by the right owners
consent, or when one thing of like value is given for another. 6. A letting to
hire, which is a contract, whereby the use, not the right or possession of a
thing is passed by the right owners to another, upon a certain price, and for
a certain time, so that the same thing be restored safe and sound. 7. Pledging
or gaging, when a thing is passed to another, as being bound to be his for use,
only till such time as other things which are owed him, are repayed to him: or
when a thing is delivered a man for a certain time, that if in the mean
season it be not redeemed, the other may have the right using of it at his
pleasure. 8. Committing on trust, when a thing is delivered to another to keep,
so that neither the use nor the possession, but only the keeping and custody
of the thing is committed unto him. 9. Partnership; which is a certain
contract used by them who traffic together, wherein one imployeth his money,
the other his work or labor, with this condition, (...).
that part of the gain and loss may come to each of them; and either of them
either reap the whole gain, or bear the whole loss. 10. A certain
contract, wherein the use of a ground, or the possession of a ground to use, is
passed by the owner unto an husbandman, with a certain condition; as namely,
that he till and labor the ground delivered to him, and be bound to the Master
to perform certain duty, The contrary vices.
or some certain service These diverse kinds of contracts are to be observed,
for better understanding of commutative justice. The extremes or vices contrary
to commutative justice are these: 1. Unto commutative justice are repugnant all
unlawful conveiances of things, What theft is, and how many kinds there are of
it.
which are done either by violence, as robberies: or by guile and deceit, as
theft. Theft is the taking away of that which belongs unto another, besides
the owners knowledge and will, with mind and purpose to deprive him thereof.
The special sorts of theft are: 1. Robbery of a comman treasure. 2.
Sacrilege, which is taking away of some consecrated and hallowed thing. 3.
Counterfeiting of merchandise, when one uses sleights and guiles in contracts,
cousenages, and all corruptions of contracts, among which usury has not the
lowest place. 4. Usury, is that which is taken above the principal, in regard
of the loan only. From usury are exempted just contracts, partnership,
buying, contracts of paying rents, just recompense of any damage of loss?
There are many questions of Usury, concerning which we may judge according to
that saying: Do as thou will be done unto, and what thou will not have done
unto the^, that do not thou unto another.

Contentedness.
Auta^key, or contentedness, which is a virtue, whereby we are contented with
those things which we presently enjoy, and have justly gotten, and meekly
suffer poverty and other discommodities, neither are broken through want and
penury, not gape after other men's goods or substance, nor covet things
needless and unnecessary? The extremes of this virtue, The contrary vices.
in the defect, are Theft and Covetousness: In the excess, A feigned
refusal, when one makes show, as if he were unwilling to receive such things,
which yet he could and gladly would receive. Likewise, Inhumanity: which is, to
refuse all things.

Faithfulness.
Fidelity, or faithfulness, which is a virtue that heedeth another harms,
and endeavors to avert them, and gladly and diligently performs all the
parts of his calling; and doing his duty to this end, that God may be honored,
and we sustain our life, and that there may be sufficient of things necessary
for us and ours, and also that we may yield succor, and make supply of
necessaries unto others. He that undergoeth not those labors which he is able
and ought to undergo, commits theft. Object. There is mention made of
fidelity in the fifth Commandment: Therefore it has no place here. How this
virtue is comprised under the fifth Commandment, and h^w under this eighth
Commandment.
Answ. It is no absurd thing, that one and the same virtue should be placed in
diverse Commandments for diverse ends and respects. For the ends of actions make
the actions differ. Fidelity is placed in this Commandment, as it is a
diligence and endeavor employed in the withstanding of others discommodities,
and doing such works and labors, whereby we may get us food, raiment, and
things necessary. Fidelity is placed in the fifth Commandment, as it is an
obedience showed in doing our duty. The contrary vices.
The extremes hereof are: 1. Unfaithfulness, not respecting or heeding any
harms and damages, neither diligently performing the duties of his calling
and vocation. 2. Retchlesnesse and slothfulness, which only takes part and
fruition of public commodities, but it self conferreth nothing to the common
society of men.

L^berality.
Liberality, which is a virtue giving to them that want, according to the rule
of upright reason; that is, which imparteth unto others his own goods, not by
any due bond or obligation, but, according to the Law of God and nature, or for
godliness and charity sake, with a liberal heart, according to his own
ability, and the necessity of others: as well knowing, where, when, to whom,
and how much he may give, and observing a mediocrity and mean between base
niggardliness, and riotous prodigality. The contrary vices.
The extremes hereof in the defect are; Illiberality, Covetousness, Baseness.
Covetousness is a desire of increasing our substance by right and wrong, and a
restraint of just and lawful giving: or, which on distrust of God, and trust
in the goods of fortune, is not content with such things as God gives by
lawful means: but desires still more and more, and labors to pull and
hale unto it by right and wrong whatsoever it affects, and gives not where
God will that we should give. In the excess, Over-lashing Prodigality, which
gives beyond reason, and without need, with a rejoicing in such excessive
larges. Of this vice it is said: Sick art thou, Arist. Eth. lib. 4. cap. 1. V.
Hospitality.
who take delight in lavishing.

Hospitality.
Hospitality, which is one kind of liberality: namely, liberality and
bountifulness toward travelers and strangers, especially toward those that
are exiles for the profession of the Gospel, entertaining them with all duties
of hospitality, and Christian charity: or bountifulness toward strangers,
especially Christians, who either suffer exile for Religion, or are forced to
travel for the confession of the truth. The extremes are, Inhospitality and
Prodigality toward strangers, The contrary vices.
so soaking and drawing dry as it were the fountain of our bounty, that we
have not sufficient necessaries for those who are under our own charge.

Parsimony.
Parsimony, which is a virtue eschewing and shunning riot, and all unnecessary
expenses of gifts, keeping those things which are his own and well gotten, and
profitably employing them to his own use, and theirs that belong unto him,
neither spending more than he sees to be needful. The affinity between
Liberality and Parsimony.
Liberality has Parsimony accompanying it: and they both are two means between
the same extremes, that is, between Covetousness and Prodigality: because
Liberality without Parsimony degenerateth into Prodigality: and Parsimony
without Liberality degenerateth into Covetousnes and Baseness. And therefore
he is not liberal, who is not sparing: neither is he sparing, who is not
liberal. Liberality enlarges our giving according to ruled reason Parsimony
restrains the same according to ruled reason, and spares so much, as is
requisite for necessary uses. So then, these two virtues are exercised in the
same matter, and between the same extremes, and therefore the same vices which
are contrary to Liberality, are repugnant also to Parsimony.

Frugality.
Frugality, which is an oeconomicall or household virtue, disposing of things
well gotten, honestly, wisely, and profitably, for matters profitable and
necessary, or defraying charges upon such things ever as are necessary and
fruitful. The difference between Parsimony and Frugality.
This virtue is of near affinity with Parsimony. Parsimony consists in giving
moderately: Frugality or Thriftinesse consists and depends on a right
bestowing of that which is ours with discretion. Both are placed under this
Commandment, because Prodigality, or Over-lashing, the contrary unto both, is
here forbidden. The extremes are the same both of Frugality, and of Parsimony,
to wit, Prodigality, and Covetousness, or Niggardliness.

Certain Objections against the former distinction of Rights and Possessions.
OBject. 1. In the Apostles time all things were common: Therefore now also all
goods ought to be common. Answ. 1. There is a dissimilitude and a far
different reason in these examples. For the community of goods was then both
easy to be compassed, and necessary to be contrived. It was easy, because
they were few: It was necessary, because they were in danger, lest, if they
sold them not, they should be taken from them by force. Now there is neither
that easiness, nor necessity. Wherefore the Apostles were induced upon good
causes, why they should then bring in community of goods, which causes have
long since ceased, and now are not. 2. They did it not being enforced thereto
by any law, but freely: For their parting with their goods in common was
voluntary, none was compelled unto it. And therefore Peter says to Ananias,
Whiles it remained, appertained it not to thee? Acts 5.4.
And after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? 3. This custom was of
force only at that time; for afterward upon change of these causes, this
custom also ceased. 4. This community of goods was not in all Churches:
because in Macedony and in Achaia, collection was made of alms, which were
sent to Jerusalem. Object. 2. Natural things are unchangeable. Community of
goods is natural: Therefore Community of goods is unchangeable, and therefore
is now also to be observed. Answ. Natural things are unchangeable, in respect
of the Moral Law, but not in respect of natural profit and utility. Object.
3. Christ says unto the young man, If thou will be perfect, sell all, and give
it to the poor. Answ. 1. The examples have a diverse reason: Because this was
a special calling of a Disciple, belonging to an Apostle-ship. 2. Christ would
thereby signify, how far off he was from the perfection of the law, whereof
he gloried. 3. He says not: Give it in common, or put it in the common
treasury: but, Give it to the poor. Object. 4. All things are Christ's,
therefore all things are Christians. Answ. All things are Christians, or ours,
as concerning the right to the thing, but not as concerning the right in the
thing. All things are due unto us, but we may not lay hands of any thing before
the time. Object. 5. All things between friends are common. Answ. All things
between friends are common, as touching the use of them, and as touching the
duties and parts of honesty and commodity, or, as touching necessary use, being
levelled by the rule of Reason: For we are to ask things of our friends,
which we would have them ask of us. But all things among friends are not
common as concerning the possession and right: because unto every one belongs
a distinct possession and right of his own goods. This possession of goods, or
distinction of rights is enacted (as we have said) by this commandment,
because if we may not steal, we must then possess our own: and that for
these causes; 1. To maintain our selves and ours honestly. 2. To yield
something for the maintenance of the Ministry. 3. For the maintenance of the
commonwealth. 4. For the maintenance of our friends, and relief of the poor
according to our ability.

ON THE 43. SABBATH.
Quest. 112. What does the ninth Commandment exact?
Answ. That I bear no false witness against any man Prove. 19.5, 9. and 2^.28.
, neither falsify any man's words Psalm. 15.3. and 50.19, 20.
, neither back-bite or reproach any man Romans 1.29, 30.
, nor condemn any man rashly or unheard Mat. 7.1. Luke 6.37.
; but avoid and shun with all carfulness all kind of lies, and deceit, as the
proper works of the devil John 8.44.
, except I mean to stir up against me the most grievous wrath of God Prove.
12.22. and 13.5.
: And that in judgments and other affairs I follow the truth, and freely and
constantly profess the matter as it indeed is 1 Cor. 13.6. Ephesians. 4.25.
. And moreover, defend and increase, as much as in me lies, the good name and
estimation of others 1 Pet. 4.8.
.

The Explication.
THe drift or end of this Commandment is, the ordinance and maintenance of the
truth among men. Neither is in this Commandment only bearing false witness
forbidden, but all things which are of near affinity therewith, the general
whereof is lying. Thou shall not bear false witness of thy neighbor, or
against thy neighbor. In this negative Commandment is comprehended an
affirmative: which is, Bear therefore true witness of, or for thy neighbor;
that is, be true and desirous of learning and knowing the truth. Wherefore the
original and general head of those virtues, which are here commanded is
truth, or trueness in our speech, opinion, judgment, covenants, and in our
doctrine: For the name of Truth here, is taken for the agreement or
correspondence of our knowledge or speech with the thing, whereof our speech
is. True we term the speech it self agreeing with the thing. Contrariwise,
the general head of such vices as are here condemned, is false-hood in any of
the fore-alledged premises.

The virtues of this ninth Commandment together, with their vices.
THe chief and principal virtue, which is here commanded, is Truth. 1. Truth
or trueness is a virtue, 1. Virtue: Truth.
whereby we love true opinions or speeches, and seek after them, and receive
them, and gladly profess and defend them, according as both our duty, and
persons, places, times, and other circumstances require, unto the glory of
God, and the safety of our neighbor. This end makes that the devil cannot be
said to be true, although he sometimes speak that which is true: For he is
true, who speaks and loves the truth, and does affection it for the glory of
God, and the safety of his neighbor. Of this virtue Aristotle briefly, but
learnedly, disputes in his Moralls, and refers truth in bargains to
justice. He calls him properly a true man, who, when it steedeth him naught
at all, yet is true in his speech and whole life, and is habitually such an
one. Truth may also be defined on this wise: What truth is.
Truth is a firm election in the Will, whereby we constantly embrace true
sentences and opinions, speak that which is true, keep covenants and promises,
and avoid all deceitful dissemblings both in speech and outward gesture. True
conf^ssion is commanded both in this, and in the third Commandment: How
confession of truth here differs from that which is required in the third
Commandment.
as oftentimes the same virtue is required to the obedience of diverse
commandments. But in the third Commandment true confession is required, as it
is the honor and worship of God, immediately respecting God: and here it is
commanded, as there is a will in us not to deceive our neighbor, but to wish
his safety and welfare. Under the name of truth, we comprise liberty of
speech: which is a virtue, whereby, as much as the time, place, and necessity
requires, we profess the truth freely, and boldly, and are not with-drawne
through the fear of dangers. Unto Truth, The contrary vices:
in the defect, are repugnant, Lying.
Lying* unto which appertain all guiles, dissembling, lies of courtesy,
slanders, back-bitings, evil speakings: which kinds of lying are repugnant
also unto fairness of manners and conditions. Likewise, Negligence in
understanding the truth of things, and searching true opinions, and wilful
Ignorance, which is a l^ing in the mind. Vanity. A Vain man. A Liar. Lying.
To lie. Mentiri, est adversus mentem ire.
Vanity or Levity, which is a readiness to lying. He is vain who lies much
often, and easily, and that without any shame. A Liar is he, who has a desire
to lie. Lying is to speak otherwise, or to signify otherwise by outward
gestures, than thou think, and than the thing it self is. For, to lie, is
as much as to go against thine own knowledge. All lying, which does expressly
and plainly dissemble the truth is here condemned: neither are officious lies,
or lies of courtesy excused, Lies of courtesy.
because evil is not to be done that good may come of it. And well says
Lactantius: In Epit.
We must never lie, because a lie either always hurts or deceives some
man. But a truth which is uttered by a figure is no lie, Truth uttered in a
figure.
whether he understand it or no with whom we deal. This is to be observed,
that we be not rigorous in examining the actions of the Saints, and also that
we excuse not those things which have no need to be excused. Exodus 1.15, 20,
21.
Officious lies are commonly defended by the example of the Egyptian Mid-wives,
which lied unto the King, and were blessed of God. But God blessed them not
therefore because they lied; but because they feared God, and slew not the
Infants of the Israelites. Object. That which profits another, and hurts no
man, See August. lib. de mend. ad Consen.
is not sin, and therefore may be done. A dutiful lie is of such quality.
Therefore it is no sin, but may be made. Answ. The Minor is false: because that
which God forbids, always harmeth; and if it profit at all, this is but by
accident, through the goodness of God. Unto Truth, in the excess, is
repugnant, The contrary vices.
1. Untimely professing of the truth: which is, to cast pearls to swine, and
to give that which is holy unto dogs, as Christ says, who by these words does
wholly forbid unnecessary and untimely professing of the truth. For as the
verse has it in the Poet; He that warns out of time does harm. 2.
Curiosity, which is to search after things unnecessary or unpossible. These
things may suffice for this chief and principal virtue of the ninth
Commandment. The virtues which follow, wait upon truth, and they all are as it
were of truths retinue.

Virtue. Fairness of mind.
Fairness of mind is a virtue which takes well things well or doubtfully
spoken or done, and interprets them in the better part, to wit, as far as
there are any reasonable causes to induce thereto, and does not easily conceive
suspicions, neither sticks upon suspicions: though they be such as are just,
and have reasonable causes, he does not ground thereon, neither directs his
actions accordingly, neither decrees or determines ought by them. Or,
Fairness of mind is a neighbour-vertue unto truth, allowing of others wills
upon probable reason, and hating all evil-mindednesse, and drawing also some
things that are doubtful to the better part: and hoping indeed that which is
good; but yet, as touching mutable things, thinking that the wills of men may
change, and that a man may err concerning another will, seeing the infoldings
and secret places of man's mind are not beheld. The extremes of this virtue, in
the defect, are, Slandering and Suspiciousnesse. The contrary vices.
Slandering is not only falsely to criminate and attach the innocent, What
slandering is.
or also to enterlace and coin some false-hood. Suspiciousnesse, is to take
things well or ambiguously spoken, in the worser part, to suspect evil things,
of those that are good: What suspiciousnesse is.
It is lawful for us sometimes to suspect, Mat. 10.16, 17.
except we will be fools. Beware of men: be ye wise as serpents, and
innocent as doves. But it is one thing to conceive a suspicion, and another to
dwell on it, and continually nourish it. What suspicion is. Four sorts of
evil and good suspicion.
Now suspicion is an opinion of evil of some man for some probable cause,
whether true or apparent. Suspicion is twofold: Good and Evil. 1. Evil
suspicion is, when it proceeds from a cause either altogether false, or
unsufficient; as when a cause is feigned where no cause is, or when our
neighbor is innocent: Good suspicion is, when we suspect on good ground, or
cause sufficient. 2. Evil suspicion is, when on bare suspicion we determine
something: Good suspicion, when the matter is left in suspense, as long as
there are probable reasons on both parts. 3. Evil suspicion is, when on
suspicion we take counsel how to harm some man: Good suspicion does the
contrary. 4. Evil suspicion is, when on suspicion we conceive hatred: Good
suspicion does the contrary. In the excess foolish credulity, and foolish
Flattery. What Credulity is.
Credulity is hastily or unadvisedly to interpret any thing, or to assent to
one without just and probable cause; or, to believe a thing of another, when
there are manifest and probable reasons to the contrary. What Flattery is.
Flattery or assentation is to praise, or like things not to be praised,
thereby to get either the goods or favor of another man. Fairness of mind is
an assistant or special kind of truth: Therefore it is also here together with
truth commanded.

Virtue. Simplicity.
Simplicity, which is open truth without wrinckles, or fetches and compassings:
or, it is a virtue which does properly and plainly speak and do such things as
are true, right, and declared in arts and common life. Truth is tempered with
simplicity and fairness of mind or conditions. The contrary vices.
The extremes of simplicity are, Feigned simplicity, and doubleness in manners
and conversation.

Virtue. Constancy.
Constancy, which is a virtue not departing from the known truth, neither
altering his purpose without good and necessary causes, but constantly speaking
and doing such things as are true, just, and necessary. Or, it is a virtue
persisting in the truth once found, known and approved, and in the like manner
professing and defending the same. Constancy is necessary for the preservation
and maintenance of the truth: The contrary vices.
therefore it is here also commanded. The extremes hereof, in the defect, are
Inconstancy or Lightness, which is to alter true purposes and opinions without
reason. In the excess the extremes are Pertinacy or Stoicall Stiffenesse and
rigor, which is a vice arising from a confidence in his own wit, or from
pride and ostentation, refusing to yield or depart from his opinion, albeit it
be such as he sees by strong reasons to be false, but persisting in false
opinions, or unjust, or unprofitable actions.

Virtue. Docility.
Docility, or a readiness to learn, which is a virtue searching after the
reasons of true opinions, easily believing, and yielding to those that teach or
show better things, and that upon certain reason, and framing his will ready to
assent unto true or probable reasons, and to leave those things which before
he held and embraced. The same are the extremes of Docility which are of
Constancy, whereunto also this Docility is necessary; The contrary vices.
for, Constancy without Docility degenerateth into Pertinacie: and, Docility
without Constancy, degenerateth into Levity. Now all these virtues which have
been numbered, agree and are linked very well one with another: For Truth must
be tempered with Fairness of mind and Simplicity, perceived and known by
Docility, preserved and maintained by Constancy. And so these former virtues
are required to the being of Truth: the three virtues following are required to
the profitable being of Truth in the world.

Virtue. Taciturnity.
Taciturnity or silentnesse, which is a virtue withholding in silence things
secret, and unnecessary to be spoken, where, when, and as far as is needful,
and avoiding overmuch babbling and talkativenesse. Or, it is such a manner of
professing the truth, whereby secret things, whether true or false, are kept
close, and speeches unnecessary and unprofitable are avoided, especially
untimely and pernicious speeches, and such as give offense. The contrary vices:
1. Prattling. 2 Foolish-prating 3. Treachery.
The extremes hereof, in the defect, are, Prattling, Foolish prating, and
Treachery. Prattling, is not to be able to keep close any thing, but reveals
all things, even men's very secrets. Foolish prating, or futility and folly of
speech, is to speak unseasonably, immoderately, and foolishly. Treachery is to
betray honest attempts and enterprises to the hurt of them whose friend the
talecarrier seems, or ought to be: or, not to defend one, nor respect his
danger, when a man ought, and may so do: likewise, to relate and detect things
unworthy the mentioning, and whose mentioning is harmfull to him to whom it is
disclosed or discovered: or to inform one of things which must needs be
revealed, upon no good mind, and to no good end: Lastly to give information
with perjury or a lie. In the excess, Haughtiness, Peevishness, and
dissembling of the truth, where are necessary or probable causes. Peevishness
or morosity, is an overmuch silentnesse, In excess: 1. Peevishness, or
morosity. 2. Silentnesse.
and a burying of the truth, where Gods glory and the safety of our neighbor,
or our own, or others cause, or the love of our friend requires us to speak.

Virtue. Affability.
Affability or readiness of speaking: which is a virtue gladly, and with
signification of good will, hearing, answering, speaking where need is, upon a
necessary and probable cause; or it is a virtue easy entertaining the mutual
talks of others, and giving signification of good will in conferences, speech
and gestures. Or gentleness, facility, affability, consist in giving ear, and
making answer to others, Vide Arist. Eth. 4. cap. 4. The contrary vices.
with some signification of good will. The same are the extremes of affability
which are of taciturnity, or silentnesse: likewise levity, assentation, or
affected and labored affability. Silentnesse without affability becomes
morosity or peevishness, and affability without silentnesse becomes prattling
and foolish prating, babbling out things hurtful, unnecessary, vain, or
secret: Therefore, Taciturnity and affability are virtues of near affinity.

Virtue. Urbanity.
Vrbanity or pleasantness, which is a virtue of speaking the truth with a
certain grace and elegancy, to teach, comfort, exhilarate, and nip, or touch:
or it is a certain sauce of truth and speech, to wit, the truth figuratively
uttered, The contrary vices.
either to move, or delight others, without bitterness, and keeping the
circumstances of place, time, and persons. The extremes in the excess are: In
excess:
Scurrility.
Scurrility. Dicacity.
Dicacity. Back biting.
Backbiting. Scurrility is obscene and homely jesting, especially in serious
matters. Scurra (that is, a scurrilous person) is so called from the Greek word
(...), which signifies dung: because he speaks filthiness and dung.
Dicacity or scoffing is a vice of jesting bitterly; and of deriding, boording,
and exagitating others, but especially such as are miserable. Backbiting is a
vice which spreads false slanders of others, construeth doubtful speeches in
the worse part, with a desire of revenge, and an endeavor to hurt, or raise
envy. The extremes in the defect are, Stolidity.
Stolidity or foolishness. Sottishness.
Sottishness or unsavourinesse. Foolishness is an untimely affectation of
Urbanity. In defect:
Sottishnes is an absurd and unsavory affectation of Urbanity. Now, Vrbanity
is an especial gift of the wit, but yet may be gotten by experience in matters.

ON THE 44. SABBATH.
Quest. 113. What does the tenth Commandment forbid?
Ans. That our hearts be not at any time moved, by the least desire, or
cogitation, against any Commandment of God: but that continually, and from our
heart we detest all sin, and contrarily delight in all righteousness Rom
7.6.
.

The Explication.
THat the Commandment touching Concupiscence is one, and not two, That this
commandment. touching Concupiscence i^ but one commandment, proved against
the Papists by four reasons. Exodus 20.17. Deuteronomy. 5.21.
is manifest, 1. By Moses diverse rehearsal, or transposing and displacing some
clauses and members thereof in Exodus and Deuteronomy. 2. By Moses conjoyning
or comprehending of them both in one verse in both places aforementioned. 3. By
the interpretation of S. Paul, who compriseth that whole context, verse, or
sentence of Moses in one Commandment: I had not known lust, except the Law had
said; Thou shall not lust. 4. By that that the Papists themselves and others
are wont in their Commentaries to join the coveting of our neighbors house,
and wife; because indeed they see, that, for one and the same cause, the
coveting of our neighbors house, wife, and all other things that are his, are
forbidden. Whence it follows, that either there is but one commandment
touching concupiscence; or so many must be reckoned, as there are things of our
neighbors forbidden to be coveted. 5. By the authority of ancient both Jews
and Christian Interpreters, whose names are alleged above in the division of
the Decalogue.

The end of this Commandment.
The scope and end of this tenth Commandment is, a rightnesse and inward
obedience of all our affections toward God, and our neighbor, and his goods,
which must also be observed in the other Commandments. Here then some man may
say: This Commandment is superfluous, seeing it requires no new thing from
the rest. Answ. Nay, it is not superfluous; because it is added to the former
Commandments, to be a declaration of them, and that universal, because this
is spoken of the whole in general: and further, it is also added, to be a rule
and level, according to which we must take and measure the inward obedience
of all the other Commandments: For in this Commandment is commanded,
Original justice or righteousness toward God and our neighbor, What
Original justice toward God and our neighbor is. What Concupiscence is.
which is, the true knowledge of God in our mind, and a power, inclination, and
desire in our will, and heart, and in all our parts to obey God, and his known
will. Likewise, in this Commandment Concupiscence is forbidden: which is, an
inordinate appetite, or a corrupt inclination and pronenesse in the mind,
will, and heart, desiring those things that God forbids in his Law.
Nevertheless, properly original justice toward our neighbor is here
commanded, What Original justice toward our neighbor is.
which is, an inclination and desire to perform unto our neighbor, for Gods
sake, all duties required, and to regard and maintain his safety and welfare.
There are two extremes of this original justice toward our neighbor here
forbidden: What Original sin toward our neighbor is.
1. Original sin toward our neighbor, which is a desire and wishing of those
things which hurt our neighbor. 2. In the excess, Inordinate love of our
neighbor, when for his sake we neglect God. Some take Concupiscence and
original sin to be all one; but they differ, as an effect differs from a
cause, or at least, as a part of any thing from the whole: For, Concupiscence
is a propension to those things which are forbidden by the Law: How
Concupiscence and Original sin differ.
Original sin is the guilt of all mankind the want of the knowledge and will
of God. We are here to observe, that not only corrupt inclinations are sins,
but also the thinking of evil is sin, to wit, as the thinking of evil is
joined with a desire of pursuing, Concupiscence is sin.
or doing it. Now that Concupiscence is evil and sin, albeit it be born with
us, there is no doubt: For, we are not to judge according to Nature, but
according to the Law, whether a thing be sin, or no: For whatsoever is contrary
to this, is sin, be it, or be it not born with us.

The Pelagians denied Concupiscence to be sin: but the Law says the
contrary; Thou shall not covet. Romans 7 7.
And Paul says, I knew not sin, but by the Law: for I had not known
concupiscence (or lust) except the Law had said; Thou shall not lust. The
Pelegians were condemned in many Councels, summoned and gathered together for
confutation of Pelagius and Celestius their heresies, about the year of our
Lord. 420. and sometime after, as in the Milevitane Council, the fifth
Council of Carthage, and the Council of Palaestina in the East, The Pelagians
chief Objections to prove Concup^scence to be no sin. How Concupiscence is
natural unto us.
etc. Their chief Objections are these: Object. Natural things are not sin.
Concupiscence is a natural thing: Therefore it is no sin. Ans. 1. There is a
fallacy of the Accident in the Minor. For, inordinate concupiscence was not
before the fall, but happened unto our nature after the fall. So then it is
Natural, not of it self, but by accident; to wit, inasmuch as since the fall
it is born and bred with us: or it is Natural, that is, an evil accident
inseparably cleaving to a nature good in it self. 2. There are four terms in
the Syllogism, by reason of the ambiguity of the word Natural: For in the
Major it signifies a good thing created of God in nature: to wit, man's
appetite before the fall; which was not contrary to the Law and will of God: In
the Minor it signifies a thing, which we have not by creation, but which we
have purchased unto us after the fall. Repl. An affection or appetite, even in
nature now corrupted, to desire good things, and eschew hurtful things, is not
sin: because it is a thing made of God; and a motion good in self. But such is
Concupiscence: Therefore it is no sin, Answ. to the Major. The appetites and
motions of nature are good in themselves, as they are merely motions, not as
they are inordinate motions, and are carried unto such objects as God has
forbidden, as all motions and appetites of corrupt nature are; because either
they affect not such objects as they ought, or affect them not in such sort,
and to that end which they ought: and therefore are all vicious, and very sins.
An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Mat. 7.18.
To desire the fruit of a tree, was natural: but, To desire it contrary to
Gods express Commandment, as it was desired of Eve, was a motion in its own
kind and nature corrupt, and very sin. Object. 2. That which is not in our
power to cause either to be in us, or not to be in us, is no sin. Concupiscence
is so in us, that it is not in our power to shake and put it off: Therefore it
is no sin. Answ. The Major is false: For sin is not to be esteemed by the
liberty or necessity and bondage of our nature, but by the will and law of God.
Whatsoever disagreeth herewith is sin, whether men have power to avoid it, or
no: and God requiring of us impossible things, does not injure us, because he
commanded them when they were possible. Though we have now lost our ability of
performing, yet God has not lost his right of requiring that of us, which he
left with us. Object. 3. Sin makes men obnoxious to the wrath of God. But
Concupiscence does not make the regenerate obnoxious to Gods wrath: For there
is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus: Therefore Concupiscence,
at least in the regenerate, is no sin. Romans 8.1.
Answ. There is a fallacy of accident in the Minor: For it is but by accident,
that concupiscence does not make the regenerate obnoxious to the wrath of God,
that is, by reason of the grace of God, not imputing it to the faithful: But
this comes not thereof, as if concupiscence were not sin; for neither do
other sins condemn the regenerate, not because they are no sins, but because
they are remitted by Christ. Object. In Baptism, Original sin is taken away:
Therefore Concupiscence is not sin in those that are baptized. Answ. to the
Antecedent. Original sin is taken away in Baptism, not simply, but as
touching the guilt of it: but corruption, and an inclination to sin remains
in them that are baptized. And this is it that the Schoolmen say: The Formal
of sin is taken away, and the Material remains. Repl. Where the Formal is
taken away, there also the thing it self is taken away; because the form of
every thing is the cause of the being of it. But in Baptism, the Formal of
Original sin is atken away: Therefore Original sin in it self is taken away
in Baptism. Answ. Here is a fallacy, taking that to be generally meant of the
whole, which is spoken but in part. The Formal of sin is taken away, not
simply, but as touching the guilt of it. For there is a double Formal of sin:
1. A repugnancy with the law, A double formality of sin.
and an inclination to sin. 2. The guilt, which is the ordaining of it to
punishment. The guilt is taken away, but the inclination abides. I see another
law in my members, Romans 7.23.
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of
sin, which is in my members.

Quest. 114. But can they who are converted unto God, perfectly observe and
keep these Commandments?
Answ. No: but even the holiest men, as long as they live, have only small
beginnings of this obedience 1 John 1.8. Romans 7.14, 15. Eccles. 7.22. 1 Cor. 13
9.
: yet so, that they begin with an earnest and unfeigned desire and endeavor to
live, not according to some only, but according to all the commandments of God
Romans 7.22. Psalm. 1.2.
.

The Explication.
THe Question here is, How the law is possible: and, Whether regenerate men may
perfectly keep it: which was the seventh question proposed to be considered of
concerning the Law. That this Question may be the better understood we are to
distinguish the nature of man: 1. As it was first entire and incorrupt; and 2.
Afterward fallen; and 3. Again restored. The law was possible to be fulfil^ed
by man, his nature being incorrupt.
Unto nature entire and incorrupt, the whole law, as touching all parts and
degrees thereof, is possible, as unto Angels; for man was created unto the
image of God, in perfect holiness and righteousness. It is impossible to
corrupt nature. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Jerem. 13.23. Mat. 7.18. Romans 14.23. Ephesians.
2.1, 3. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Unto nature corrupted after the fall, the fulfilling of the law is so
impossible, that it cannot so much as begin obedience acceptable to God;
according to these Scriptures: All the thoughts of man are only evil,
continually, even from his youth. Can the Black moore change his skin? or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also be good, that are accustomed to do evil.
A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin. We are dead in our sins, by nature the sons of wrath. We are not able of
our selves to think anything, as of our selves. How far for^h it is possib^e
to restored nature.
Unto the regenerate, who have nature restored again, the law is possible, 1.
As concerning outward order and discipline. 2. As concerning the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, that is, by the benefit of justification and
regeneration; both which benefits we obtain by faith. 3. As touching the
beginning of inward and outward obedience in this life. 1 John 5.3.
This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, etc. He that
without the beginning of obedience, that is, without regeneration, glories
that he knows and worshippeth God, is a liar. But the law is impossible to
the regenerate, How it is impossible to restored nature. Psalm. 143.2.
in respect of God, that is, as touching the perfect inward and outward
obedience of the law. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord: for in
thy sight shall no man living be justified. For, 1. They fulfill not the Law
perfectly, because they do many things contrary to the law. 2. And those
things also which they do according to the law are imperfect. For in the
regenerate are many sins yet remaining, as original sin, many actual sins,
ignorances, infirmities; which their sins notwithstanding themselves
acknowledge and bewail: We have all been as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. A
three fold difference between the regenerate and unregenerate sinning.
and all our righteousness is as filthy clouts. Therefore regenerate sinners
differ much from ungenerate sinners; and this difference is threefold: 1.
There is a purpose of God himself of saving the regenerate. 2. The certain
final repentance of the regenerate. 3. Even in the very sins of the regenerate
there remains some beginning of true faith and conversion. But of the wicked
and unregenerate, in whom nature is fallen, but not restored; neither has God
any such purpose as to save them, neither is their final conversion certain,
neither have they any beginning of true obedience, but sin with their whole
heart and will, and rush against God, and at length perish, unless they be
converted.

Quest. 115. Why will God then have his law to be so exactly and severely
preached, seeing there is no man, in this life, who is able to keep it.
Answ. First, that all our life time we more and more acknowledge the great
pronenesse of our nature to sin Rom 3.20. 1 John 1.9. Psalm. 32.5.
, and so much the more greedily desire remission of sins and righteousness in
Christ Mat. 5.6. Romans 7.24.
: Secondly, that we (being doing of this always, and always thinking of that)
implore and crave of the Father the grace of his holy Spirit, whereby we may
daily more and more be renewed to the image and likeness of God, until at
length, after we are departed out of this life, we may joyfully attain unto
that perfection which is proposed unto us 1 Cor. 9.24. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.
.

The Explication.
WHen question is made concerning the use of Gods Law, we must re-call to
mind the difference of each part thereof. The use of the Ceremonial laws of
Moses was, Four uses of the ceremonial law: 1. A training of us unto Christ.
1. To serve as a School master to Christ and his Kingdom, that is, to be a
signification of spiritual and heavenly things in Christ's Kingdom; namely,
the benefits of Christ toward his Church, and the duty of the Church toward
God and Christ. Galat. 3.24.
The Law was our School master to bring us unto Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith. 2. A distinguishing of the Jewish Church from other Nations.
2. To be as visible marks and eminent differences, to discern and sort out
the Church of the Jews from other Nations. 3. For exercise of our piety, and
testification of our obedience toward the Moral Law: 3. A testification of our
obedience to the Moral law.
For he that willingly and diligently performs burdensome and unpleasant
things, if he know the same to be pleasing unto God; he then does show himself
to love God, and to obey him with a ready mind. Therefore, says God to
Abraham, being now ready to sacrifice his son, Now know I that thou fear
God, Genesis 22.12.
seeing for my sake thou have not spared thine only son. Acts. 15.10.
So the ceremonial and judicial ordinances of the Old Testament are called a
yoke and servitude. 4. A confirmation of faith. Genesis 17.11. Romans 4.11. Exodus
31.17. Ezekiel. 20.12. Two uses of Moses Judicial laws. 1. The continuance of
that regiment. 2. The representation of Christ's Kingdom.
4. For a confirmation of faith: For there were of them certain Sacraments or
signs of the Covenant, and seals of Grace; as Circumcision, and the Paschall
Lamb: which did signify and testify what benefits God would give by the
Messiah unto believers.

The use of the Judicial or Civil laws was, inasmuch as they were the very
form of the Mosaicall Commonweal, To be as sine^es for the sustenance and
preservation of that regiment and kingdom, until the coming of the Messiah. To
be types of the government of the Church in the Kingdom of Christ: seeing the
Princes or Kings of that people did, no less than the Priests, represent
Christ the High Priest and King of the Church. These uses, together with the
laws themselves, had their end, when the Ceremonies were fulfilled and
abrogated by Christ's coming, and Moses polity or form of government
overthrown by the Romans.

The uses of the Moral law are diverse, according to the four estates of men.

In nature, being not as yet depraved or corrupted through sin, as our nature
was incorrupt and undefiled before the fall, there were two especial uses of
Gods Law: Two uses of the Moral law in our incorrupt nature before the fall.
Full conformity of man with God.
The whole and entire conformity of man with God. For there did shine in the
mind of man, not yet fallen, the perfect knowledge of Gods Law; and the same
did work the correspondence and congruity of all our inclinations, motions,
and actions with his divine order and will; that is, perfect justice and
righteousness before God. A good consciscience.
A good conscience, or a certain persuasion of Gods favor, and a certain
hope of eternal life. For when as the law both commands perfect obedience,
and promises eternal life to those that perform it; therefore by order of
Gods justice it works in nature uncorrupted, as perfect obedience, so also
certain expectation of reward: according as it is said; He that does them,
shall live in them. Levit. 18.5. Mat. 19.17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.

In nature now corrupted, and as yet not regenerated by the holy Ghost, there
are also other two uses of the law: Two uses of the Moral law in corruptnatuie.
Maintenance of discipline within and without the Church.
The preserving and maintaining of discipline both in the Church and without
also. For the law, both being by God himself engraven in the minds of all
men, and speaking by the voice of Teachers and Magistrates, does by binding of
the conscience, and by denouncing and ordaining of punishments, and by shame,
bridle and restrain the unregenerate also, so that they shun open and manifest
wickedness, such as are contrary to the judgment of that right reason which
is even in the unregenerate, and which must be removed before regeneration.
When the Gentiles, which have not the law, Romans 2.14, 15.
do by nature the things contained in the law, they having not the law, are a
law unto themselves. Which show the effect of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one
another, or excusing. The law is given to the lawless and disobedient. 2 Timothy
1.9.
Acknowledgement of sin.
The acknowledgement of sin. For the law accuses, convinces, and condemns
all the unregenerate, because they are unrighteous before God, and guilty of
eternal damnation. Romans 3.19, 10.
We know, that whatsoever the law says, it says it to them which are under
the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be culpable before
God: Therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his
sight: For by the law comes the knowledge of sin. I knew not sin, but by
the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said; Romans 7.7. What
this knowledge of sin works by it self in the unregenerate and reprobate.
Thou shall not lust. This use of the law, to wit, the knowledge of sin, and of
the judgment of God against sin, of it self ingendereth in the unregenerate
an hatred of God, and an increase of sin. For so much the more does nature, not
yet regenerated, desire to commit and excuse sin, how much the more the law
urges and presses the prohibition and condemnation of sin. The law causes
wrath. Sin took an occasion by the commandment, Romans 4.15 and 7.8.
and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. Moreover, if those unregenerate
be also reprobate, then works it at length in them a despair and blasphemy.
Therefore it is called the ministry of death. But by accident the knowledge of
sin is in the Elect a preparing of them to conversion, 2 Cor. 3.7. What it
works by accident in the elect and regenerate.
to wit, God by this means constraining and compelling them to acknowledge
their own unrighteousness, despair of any help from themselves, and by faith
to seek for righteousness, Ga^at. 3.21, 22.
and life in Christ their Mediator. If there had been a law given, which could
have given life, surely righteousness should have been by the law. But the
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus
Christ, should be given to them which believe.

In nature restored by Christ, or in the regenerate, the uses of the Moral law
are many: Seven uses of the Moral law in nature restored.
Maintenance of discipline.
Maintenance of discipline: For, although this use of the law does chiefly
belong unto the regenerate who are not bridled by the Law of God and
righteousness (as has been already showed) but by the fear of punishment
only and shame not to make open profession of wickedness, abstain from sin,
according to that of the Poet: The wicked refuse to sin for fear of
punishment: yet has it place also in the godly; because, for the weakness and
corruption of the flesh prone to sin, it is profitable and necessary, that both
the threatenings of the law, and examples of punishment should be set before
them also, to keep them in good order. For God threatens even to the Saints,
if they run into grievous offenses, grievous punishments: If the righteous
turn away from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, he shall die for it.
Acknowledgement of sin.
Acknowledgement of sin. Ezekiel. 18.24.
For this use, though it principally belong to the unregenerate, yet it
concerns the regenerate also. For even to the regenerate the law is a glass,
wherein they may see the defects and imperfection of their nature; and it
instructs them continually with due contrition to humble themselves in the
sight of God, and makes them to profit and go forward daily in true
conversion unto God, and faith in God; and that as their renewing increases,
so their prayer should increase, wherein they beg and crave to be daily more
and more conformable to God and his Law: Romans 7.22, 23.24.
I delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man: but I see another law in
my members rebelling against the law of my mind, etc. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Concerning both these uses
of the law, namely, the maintenance of discipline, and acknowledgement of sin,
is that saying of Paul to be understood, Gal. 3.24.
The law is our Schoolmaster unto Christ: and that as well in the unregenerate
elect, as in the regenerate. For, to the former of these it is a preparation to
conversion; to the latter, an increase of conversion, seeing faith cannot be
kindled in the heart, nor consist therein at all, except open and manifest
transgressions be eschewed and sins against the conscience avoided. 1 John 3.7,
8.
Let no man deceive you: He that commits sin, is of the Devil. Direction
in Gods worship and Christian conversion. Psalm. 119. sect. 14. verse. 1. Jerem.
31.33. Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26, 27.
The third use of the Moral law is, to be a rale of Gods worship, and of
Christian conversion: Thy word, O Lord, is a lantern unto my feet, and alight
unto my paths. I will put my laws in their inward parts, and write them in
their hearts. This use is proper unto the regenerate. For although the law also
be unto the unregenerate a rule of their actions before conversion; yet to them
it is not a rule of worship and thankfulness toward God, as it is to the
regenerate. Testimony of God, who, and what he is.
The Moral law delivered and expounded in the Church, is a testimony of God,
that there is a God, and likewise, who, and what he is. Testimony of the true
Church and true Religion.
The voice of the law sounding in the Church is an evident testimony, showing
which is the true Church, and which is true Religion in the world. For seeing
in the Church alone the doctrine of the law has been, and now is, preserved
pure and incorrupt, which all other sects have, by assenting to manifest
errors and impieties, diversely corrupted: the voice then of the law, which
sounds in the Church, is an evident disciphering and declaring which is the
people of God, and which is true Religion in the world. Testimony of the
excellency of man's nature before the fail
It is a testimony of the excellency of man's nature, which was before the fall,
and original righteousness lost in Adam; that is, it remembers us of the
Image of God in man, which was created in him, and which is restored in him by
Christ. Testimony of eternal life.
It is a testimony of eternal life to come, wherein we shall again perfectly
fulfill the law. For the law was given to be observed by men. But in this life
it is not fulfilled of us: Therefore there must needs be yet another life
remaining, wherein we shall live according to the prescript of the law, that so
at length the law may be fulfilled of us.

In nature perfectly restored and glorified after this life, although the
preaching of the law and the whole Ministry shall cease and have an end, yet
there shall remain in the Elect a knowledge of the law, and there shall shine
in them perfect obedience thereunto, and full conformity with God. Therefore
then shall be the same uses of the law, which were in nature incorrupt before
the fall.

The Arguments of Antinomists, Libertines, and other such like profane
Heretics, who maintain, that the law is not to be taught in the Church of
Christ.
OBject. 1. That which cannot be kept, ought not to be taught; because it
profits nothing. The law cannot be kept: Therefore it ought not to be taught
in Christian Churches. Answ. 1. This is a fallacy, alleging a false cause: For
the impossibility of perfect obedience of the law in this infirmity of our
nature, is no sufficient cause, why the preaching of the law in the Church
should be deemed unprofitable: whereas there may be, and indeed are, other
causes, why it is not only profitable, but necessary also that the law should
be taught: For we have already showed, that there are many uses of the law,
even in the regenerate: and therefore it is not necessary, that on the removal
or taking away of one end and use, should follow the taking away of the rest.
If it cannot be perfectly kept, yet at least, it is therefore to be taught,
that we may acknowledge this imperfection and defect, to the end we may the
more earnestly sue for remission of sins, and righteousness in Christ, and may
so much the more cheerfully strive and endeavor to attain to the mark set
before us, even our perfection in Christ. Ans. 2. Here is also a fallacy,
taking that to be generally true, which is but in part true. For that the law
may in some sort be kept of the regenerate, we have even now proved. Wherefore
the Minor, simply and generally understood is false.

Object. 2. He that commands impossible things, commands unprofitable
things. God in the law commands things impossible: Therefore God commands
unprofitable things. Therefore the law is unprofitable. Ans. This argument is
almost all one with the former; and thus we answer the Major: He commands
unprofitable things, who commands impossible things; that is, 1. If they be
simply impossible. 2. If they be always impossible. 3. If there be no other
uses of this Commandment, but that those things be perfectly done which are
commanded. Now we have heard before which are the ends of the law, for which
ends of the law before declared, God will have both the law to be commanded,
and us to be taught the same.

Object. 3. What God will not give us in this life, and so what we are not able
to attain unto, that we may not desire. God will not give us perfect
fulfilling of the law in this life: Therefore we ought not to desire perfectly
to fulfill the law. Ans. We ought not to crave or desire that which God will
not give us; that is, except God wills us to desire it, and there be great
cause why we should desire it. Why we are to desire the perfect fulfilling of
the law by us in this life.
But God wills us to crave in this life, and to desire the perfect fulfilling
of the law, 1. Because he will at length effectuate it in those that desire
it: and therefore he will give it us after this life, if we desire the same
here truly and from our heart. 2. That we may now go forward in godliness,
and that the study of living according to the prescript of Gods law may be
daily more and more kindled and confirmed in us. 3. That by this desire of
fufilling the law, God may exercise us in repentance and obedience.

Object. 4. Christ is not the Lawgiver, as it is said, The law was given by
Moses; but grace and truth came by Christ: Therefore, neither he, nor the
Ministers of the Gospel, should teach the law. Answ. Christ is not the
Lawgiver, as concerning the chief and principal function and office of the
Mediator. For that is, to bring forth the Gospel out of the bosom of his
Father, to make request and intercession, to be made a sacrifice for us, and by
the gift of the holy Ghost to reconcile us unto God. But a part notwithstanding
of this office is, to show and take away those errors, wherewith the law is
corrupted, and to propound the pure doctrine thereof to this end, that the
minds of men may thereby be prepared to hear the preaching of the Gospel,
which is proper unto the Messiah, and that they being converted, may be
instructed what thankfulness God requires of them for the benefit of their
redemption. Christ then is the Law giver, as he is God, and the Author of the
law together with the Father: but as he is Mediator, he is not indeed the
Lawgiver, because he publishes not the law; as it is said, 1 John 2. But yet
notwithstanding he is the purger, repairer, and restorer of the law from
corruptions; and this not principally, but that he might perform the
principal function of the Mediatour-ship, to wit, our reconcilement and
salvation. The same answer we make also concerning the Ministers of the Gospel;
inasmuch as they are to propound no other doctrine unto the Church, than Christ
bath delivered.

Object. 5. He that has satisfied the law by punishment, is not bound to
obedience; because the law either binds to punishment or to obedience, but
not unto both together. But we have satisfied the law by Christ's punishment:
Therefore we stand not bound to perform obedience. Ans. We distinguish the
Major: 1. He that has suffered sufficient punishment, is not bound to
obedience, to wit, not to the same obedience, for the omitting whereof he has
suffered punishment: but after the satisfaction has been made by punishment
for sin committed, he is bound notwithstanding hence-forward to obey the law,
or to suffer new punishment, if through new disobedience he break the law. 2.
He that has satisfied not by his own punishment, but by another, and is
received into favor with God without his own satisfaction, ought to obey the
law; though not as thereby to satisfy for sins, yet to show his
thankfulness: that is, he ought to order and direct his life, according to
his will by whom he is redeemed, and of whom he is received into favor. For
no man is therefore punished for sin committed, or delivered from the crime
thereof, that he should persist in it, but that he should leave off
hence-forward to commit sin any more, and to offend him unto whom he is
reconciled. Wherefore in like manner we also, because Christ has satisfied for
our sins, stand bound to perform the obedience, not of the time past, but of
the time to come, and this also we are bound to perform, not for any expiation
or recompense of those sins, which either we have committed, or do commit, or
hereafter shall commit; but for the showing of our thankfulness for the
benefit of Christ, Romans 6.7, 11. 1 Cor. 5.14, 15.
whereby we are delivered from sin and death. This does S. Paul teach: He that
is dead, is free from sin. Again, Likewise think ye also that ye are dead
to sin, but are alive to God, in Jesus Christ our Lord. If one be dead for all,
then were all dead. And he died for all, that they which live should not hence
forth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

Object. 6. Christians are not ruled by the law, but by the Spirit of
regeneration, according as it is said, 1 Timothy 1.9.
Ye are not under the law, but under grace. The law is not given unto the
righteous man: Therefore it is not to be taught in the Church of Christ. Answ.
Christians are not ruled, that is, are not compelled and constrained by the law
and fear of punishment unto whatsoever discipline or order, like as are the
wicked: but yet they are taught and instructed by the Law of God, what worship
is pleasing unto God: and the holy Ghost uses the voice of the law, to teach
and incline them to an obedience not constrained, or hypocritical, but true
and voluntary; so that not only the law commands them what to do, but the
Spirit also of grace does give them ability to obey. For this is, not to be
under the law, and the law not to be given unto the righteous. So then the bond
and doctrine remains, albeit the condemnation and constraint is taken away.
For unto this are we bound, that our obedience be most free and voluntary. We
are deb^ers, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. Romans 8.12.
The law is not given to the righteous man; to wit, constraining and condemning
him.

Object. 7. We are not under the law, but under grace: Therefore the law
binds us not. Romans 6.14.
Ans. This is a fallacy, mis-interpreting the words alleged: For, Not to be
under the law, imports as much as, Not to be held or bound to the obedience
of the law, but to be freed from the curse or constraint of the law: as, To be
under grace, is, To be justified and regenerated by the grace of Christ. Repl.
They who are bound to perform the law, and perform it not, are subject to
condemnation: But we are not subject to condemnation; for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: Romans 8.1.
Therefore we are not bound to perform the law. Ans. The Major is true, but
with these conditions: 1. If he that is bound to perform the law, be bound to
perform it in his own person: but we are bound to perform, and do perform
the law, not in our selves, but in Christ. 2. If he be bound to perform it in
himself always, or at all times perfectly: but we in this life are not bound
to perform the law perfectly in our selves, but only to begin obedience,
according to all the Commandments thereof.

Object. 8. The law is the letter which kills, and, The ministry of
condemnation: But, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: 2
Cor. 3.6, 9.
Therefore the law pertains not to them that are in Christ Jesus, that is,
Christians. Ans. 1. Here is a fallacy of Accident. For the law is the letter
which kills, not of it self, but by the default of men, who, the more they
perceive and see a dissimilitude between themselves and the law, the more they
despair of salvation, and so are killed. 2. The law alone, without the Gospel,
is the letter, that is, a doctrine, teaching only, requiring obedience,
denouncing Gods wrath and death to the disobedient, and not working that
spiritual obedience which it requires: But being joined with the Gospel,
which is the spirit, it also begins to become the spirit, that is,
effectual unto obedience in the godly; because the regenerate begin of their
own accord to obey the law. How the law is the letter: and how the Gospel is
the spirit.
The law then, is the letter, to wit: 1. Alone by it self, and without the
Gospel. 2. In respect of unregenerate nature. Contrariwise, the Gospel is the
spirit, that is, the ministry, whereby the holy Ghost, working in us
spiritual obedience, is given: not that all who hear, forthwith receive the
holy Ghost, and are regenerated; but because by it faith is received, whereby
our hearts are quickened, so that they begin obedience to the law. Wherefore
hereof it follows not, that the law is no longer to be taught in the Church;
for Christ says of himself, I am not come to destroy the law, Matthew. 5.17.
Romans 3 31. Christ in himself fulfilled the law two ways: and in us two ways.
but to fulfill it. Through faith we establish the law. And Christ in himself
fulfilled the law two ways: 1. By doing. 2. By suffering. For he was just and
righteous in himself, and brake no tittle or jot of the law, and (for our
sakes) partly did those things which he was not bound to do, partly sustained
the punishment of the law. In us likewise he fulfilled it two ways: 1. By
teaching it us. 2. By giving us his holy Spirit for assistance in the
performance thereof in some measure, as we have heretofore, in the doctrine
touching the Abrogation of the law, more fully declared.

Object. 9. That which increases sin, is not to be taught in the Church. Rom
7.3.
The law increases sin: Therefore it is not to be taught in the Church. Answ.
There is a fallacy of Accident in the Minor. The law increases sin by an
accident, to wit, by reason of man's corruption, and that two ways: 1. Because
man's nature is so corrupt and wayward from God, that men do not what they know
to be pleasing unto God; Two ways by which the law is said to increase sin.
and contrariwise, earnestly desire, and most wilfully commit, yea, even with
greedines, that which they know he has forbidden. Because it shows wrath;
when men, the more they know by the law their sins, and the punishments they
have deserved, the more they fret against God, hate, and despite him, and run
into desperation. But of it self the law works righteousness, conformity
with God, the love of God, etc. The law also by it self increases sin, but
the word Increase is then taken in another sense: to wit, it shows unto us,
and forces us to acknowledge the greatness and multitude of our sins: but it
does not so increase sin, as to make that sin, which is little in it self, more
great and grievous. So then there are four terms in the argument, by reason
of the ambiguity of the middle term therein; namely, the word Increases.

Object. 10. Ye are dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be
unto another, even unto him that is raised up from the dead, Romans 7.4.
that ye should bring forth fruit unto God. And, Gal. 2.19.
I through the law, am dead to the law; and that I might live unto God, I am
crucified with Christ. Thus I live: yet not I now, but Christ lives in me;
and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God.
Hence they conclude: If we be dead to the law, and are Christ's, who now lives
in us, then is not our life now schooled and ruled by the direction of the law,
but by Christ only. Answ. But seeing the Apostle himself says, That the law
is not made void, Romans 3.31.
but established by faith; this phrase, To die unto the law, does not signify
to be exempted from the obedience of the law, but to be freed from
condemnation, and from the provokement of sin, which the law works in the
unregenerate; whereas we, being ingraffed into Christ, enjoy in him both a
full satisfaction for our sins, for which the law condemned us, and the Spirit
of regeneration, bending and inclining our hearts, not to an hatred of the law,
wherewith they first did burn; but to the study and desire of obedience and
righteousness. Therefore he adds, Romans 7.4.
That ^ee should be unto another, who is raised up from the dead, that ye
should bring forth fruit unto God. Again, We are delivered from the law,
being dead unto it, Romans 7.6.
wherein we were holden, that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not
in the oldnesse of the letter. In the other place, this is the Apostles
meaning: I through the law, to wit, which accuses us of sin, and terrifieth
the consciences of men, am dead to the law, that is, cease to seek for
righteousness in the law, and begin to seek for it in Christ. For this is it
which he adds, I am crucified with Christ: namely, by the participation of
Christ's merit, and the mortification of sin, that I might live to God:
according to the will of God expressed in the law. For he lives to God, who
obeys God, and honors him through his obedience. But this the doctrine of
the law does not work in nature now corrupted, except we pass from the law to
Christ by faith, that he may live in us, and we in him; that is, that he may be
effectual in us through the working of his holy Spirit: 1. By suggesting and
speaking comfort in our hearts, of the remission of our sins; then, by making
us like unto himself by regeneration, that the law may no longer condemn us,
and cause wrath: but, we may delight in the law of God, concerning the inner
man, Romans 7. So then we are delivered from the law, and die to the law; so
Christ lives in us, that we begin to delight in the law, and to order our life
according to the prescript thereof. For, Christ does not restore any other
righteousness, or any other image of God in us by his Spirit, than which was
created in our nature, darkened and eclipsed by sin, and described in the law;
neither is there another spirit, author of Gods law, and worker of our
conformity with God in our nature uncorrupted and restored.

Object. 11. I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, not according
to the covenant that I made with their Fathers. Jerem. 31.31.
Here they say, That God promises not to renew ehe old covenant, which is the
law, but to make a new, which is the Gospel. Wherefore not the law, but the
Gospel only is to be taught in the Church of Christ. But it is manifest, that
the new covenant, is not diverse from the old, as touching the substantial,
but only as touching the accidental parts, or conditions, and circumstances
thereof. For although the old shadows and dark types are taken away, and a
most clear doctrine, of the prophecies and figures fulfilled by Christ, has
succeeded; and the grace of the holy Ghost is shed more plentifully on men in
the New Testament, than in the Old: yet notwithstanding, there was one and the
same manner and way both of obtaining salvation, and of Gods spiritual
worship, in times past, that now is. Unto this bear witness the words
themselves of the Prophet Jeremy: Jerem. 31.33.
I will write in their hearts my law; he says not, another law, but the same
which in times past I gave them: Jerem. 31.34.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people; I will forgive their
iniquity, and will remember their sins no more. For these conditions of the
covenant, are found as well in the Old, as in the New; The difference only is,
that these are not the proper benefits of the law, but of the Gospel: which two
parts of the Old and New Testament, the Prophet here opposes one to the other,
calling the law the old covenant, and the Gospel the new covenant, as being the
principal part of the covenant: and therefore he ascribes these blessings to
the new covenant; because thereon depends whatsoever grace of Christ befell
unto the old Church, and therein are those blessings more fully manifested and
exhibited by Christ, which were also promised and granted in the old for
Christ. If then God will write the law, which was first written in tables of
stone, in the hearts of men in his new covenant: he does not abolish, but
establish the law by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the hearts of men are
regenerated, that they may begin to obey the law: and therefore he delivering
here a difference between the law and the Gospel, does so substitute the new
covenant to the old, as that he says, that that part of the covenant, which is
the Moral law, must be retained and written in our hearts. Now if they urge
these words, which the Prophet adds: They shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, for they shall all know me (That hereby they may conclude, Jerem.
31.34.
That men are not in the New testament to be willed to know God, for that they
shall of themselves know and obey him) they err too grossly, going about to
remove the isntrumental cause, by reason that the effect in the N. Testament
is greater and more plentiful; for, that men may know God, and of their own
accord obey him, the holy Ghost works by the doctrine of the law and the
Gospel. Neither does it follow, that they are not bound, neither are to be
urged by incitements of exhortation, because they do their duty of themselves:
For, binding and exhorting is a far other thing, than constraining. Wherefore,
in two respects has the law place in instructing the regenerate: namely, that
they may learn of the law the will of God, and may also by the law be more and
more incited willingly to obey God.

Object. 12. The law is not necessary unto salvation: Therefore it is not to be
taught in the Church. Ans. This reason is a fallacy, reasoning that not to be
simply so, which is not in some respect so. For, albeit the law is not
necessary to this, that we should, through our obedience to it, be saved; yet
it is necessary unto other things, as has been taught already in the doctrine
concerning the use of the law.

Object. 13. In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
Again, Col. 2.3.10. John 1.16.
Ye are complete in him. Of his fullness have all we received: Therefore we
must not go back from Christ to Moses, and there is no need of the law in the
Church of Christ. Answ. This reason deceives, by inferring a false consequent,
because it proceeds from the putting of the whole, to the denial of a part.
The whole wisdom and knowledge, that is, the doctrine of Christ delivered by
him unto us, is sufficient and necessary for the Church: but a part of that
doctrine is the Moral law also; because Christ commands not Faith only, but
Repentance also and amendment of life to be preached in his Name: and he
himself delivered and declared the law. The compleatnesse therefore and
perfection of our wisdom and salvation, which we have in Christ, does not
exclude, but include rather and comprehends the doctrine of the law.

OF PRAYER.
ON THE 45. SABBATH.
Quest. 116. Wherefore is Prayer necessary for Christians?
Ans. Because it is the chief part of that thankfulness which God requires
of us Psa. 50.14, 15. Matthew. 17.7, 8.
. And also because God gives them only his grace and holy Spirit, who with
unfeigned groanings beg them continually of him, and yield him thanks for them
Luke 11.9, 13. Matthew. 13.12.
.

The Explication.
MAny Questions may be moved concerning Prayer; but the chief Questions hereof
are four: 1. What Prayer is, and how many sorts there are of Prayer. 2. Why
Prayer is necessary. 3. What is required to true Prayer. 4. What is the form
of Prayer prescribed.


1. What Prayer is, and how many sorts of Prayer there are. PRayer is the
invocation of the true God, proceeding from an acknowledgement and sense of our
necessity and need, and from a desire of Gods bounty, in true conversion of the
heart, and in a confidence of the promise of grace for Christ's sake the
Mediator, begging at Gods hands necessary blessings, corporal and spiritual,
or giving thanks unto him for the receipt of these. Invocation the general of
prayer
The General of Prayer is Invocation, or, Adoration. But Adoration is
oftentimes taken for the whole worship of God; because, whom we worship, him
we account for the true God. Prayer is a part of invocation. For Invocation,
or, To invocate or call upon God, is, To crave of the true God any thing that
is necessary, both for the soul and body, and to give thanks for benefits
received of him. Hereof it is here used as the General of Prayer. Wherefore
Prayer compriseth these two specials or parts; Prayer has two parts: 1.
Petition. 2. Thanksgiving.
What Petition is. What Thanksgiving is. What Thankfulness is.
namely, Petition, or Prayer in special so called, and, Thankesgiving.
Petition is a prayer, craving of God blessings necessary both for the soul, and
for the body. Thanksgiving is a prayer acknowledging and magnifying benefits
received of God, and binding the thankful party to thankfulness, acceptable
to God. Thankfulness in general is an acknowledgement or profession of the
quality and quantity of a benefit received, and a voluntary binding to the
performance of duties mutual, possible, and lawful. Thankfulness therefore
contains two things: Four sorts of Prayer. 1. Tim. 2.1.
to wit, Truth and Justice. Saint Paul makes mention of four sorts of prayer:
1. Deprecations against evil things. 2. Petitions for good things. 3.
Intercessions and requests for others. 4. Thanksgiving for benefits received,
and evils repelled or removed from us. Prayer also is distinguished with
respect unto the circumstances of person and place, into private and public
prayer. Private pray is the conference of a faithful soul with God, Private
and public prayer. What private prayer is.
craving apart for himself or others, certain blessings or benefits; or
giving thanks for some received. This is not tied to words and places. For
oftentimes an anguished and pensive heart, instead of words, powers out sighs
and groans only: 1 Timothy 2.8. What public prayer is.
and the Apostle commands, that men pray everywhere, lifting up pure hands.
Public prayer is that which is uttered unto God, undera certain form of
words by the whole Church, in their assemblies, the Minister saying before
them, as in open congregations it is meet he should. To this is the use of our
tongue required, and therefore Christ said; When ye pray, say. For to this end
was the tongue especially made, that God might be magnified by it: and, Out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Luke 11.2.
Lastly, hereby others also are to be invited to the lauding and praising of
God.

2. Why Prayer is necessary for Christians. THe causes for which Prayer is
necessary, are these: 1. The Commandment of God. because God has commanded,
that we call upon him, and will this way chiefly and principally be worshipped
and magnified by us. Psalm. 50.15. Matthew. 7.7. Luke 11.2.
Call upon me in the day of trouble. Ask, and it shall be given you. When ye
pray, say, Our Father, etc. 2. Our necessity and want: For we receive not of
God those blessings which are necessary for our safety and salvation, except
we ask them of him. For God has promised them to such only as ask him. So
that prayer is as necessary for us, as craving of alms is necessary for a
beggar. Now what we speak of the necessity of prayer, the same is also to be
said of the necessity of thanksgiving: For, without giving thanks, we lose
those things that are given, and receive not such things as are to be given,
and are necessary. The necessity of both will easily appear, whether we
consider the effects of faith, or the cause of faith, and so also faith it
self. Faith is kindled or increased in no man, who does not ask it; no man
has faith, who gives not thanks for it: and they which are endued with true
faith, ask the grace of God, and they who have tasted of Gods grace, show
themselves thankful unto God for it, and do more and more crave and desire
it. The love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.
which is given unto us. And the holy Ghost himself also is obtained by
petition or prayers; for the holy Ghost is given to none, but to him that
desires him. Obj. 1. But we see the wicked also to receive many gifts of the
holy Ghost, who yet desire him not: Therefore not only they that desire him,
receive him. Answ. The wicked verily receive many gifts, but not those
principal gifts, neither those that are proper to the Elect, such as are
faith, repentance, and conversion, remission of sins, regeneration: and
further, what gifts the wicked receive, those are not availeable unto them,
neither do they receive them to salvation. Repl. Infants crave not the holy
Ghost: and yet they receive him. Ans. The holy Ghost is not given but to them
that ask him, that is, to those of years and understanding, who are able to
ask him. But even Infants also ask and crave the holy Ghost after this
manner, having, to wit, in possibility an inclination to faith, and therefore
potentially they ask the holy Ghost, or have an inclination to ask him: Out
of the mouth of very babes and sucklings have thou ordained thy praise. Object.
2. The effect is not before his cause. Psalm. 8.2.
But prayers are the effects of the holy Ghost, inasmuch as no man can ask the
holy Ghost, who has not the holy Ghost, and he alone works prayer in us:
Therefore the holy Ghost is not received by prayer, but is in us before prayer;
and so by consequent he is not given to them only that ask him, Answ. The
effect is not before his cause, that is, in order and nature; but in time they
are both together. So the holy Ghost, and the asking of him are both together
at one time in us, though not in the same order and nature. For the holy Ghost
is in us according to nature before prayer; because we then first begin to
desire him, and to ask him of God, when he is given unto us. But albeit the
holy Ghost is according to nature or order first in us, yet he is not first in
us according to time. For as soon as the holy Ghost is given, we begin to
desire his presence; and as soon as we desire and ask him, he is given us:
that is, in the same moment God works in us a desire of the holy Ghost, and
gives him unto us. And indeed he works a desire of him in us, by commanding
us to ask him; and working this desire in us, he withal gives him unto us,
when we ask him. For God does not so work in us, as a ray of the Sun
lights on a vessel, to wit, in time, but in an instant. For this gift is at
once given, taken, and desired. We might also put a distinction between the
beginning and the increase of the spirit, because we cannot crave the latter,
except we have the former. For no man desires him, but he who has in
himself the beginning of him: but the first Solution and Answer suffices to
satisfy this Objection. Whereas then it is said of Christ; Luke 11.13.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that
desire him? this must not be understood of the increase only, but also of the
beginning of his gifts and graces.

Quest. 117. What is required unto that prayer, which shall please God, and be
heard of him?
Ans. That we ask of the only true God, who has manifested himself in his
Word Revel. 2.9. John 4.22.
, all things which he has commanded to be asked of him Rom 8.26. 1 John 5.14.
James 1.5.
, with a true affection and desire of our heart Joh 4 23.24. Psalm. 145.18.
, and, through an inward feeling of our need and misery 2 Chronic. cap. 20.
ver. 12.
, cast our selves down prostrate in the presence of his divine Majesty Psalm.
2.11. and 34.17. Esaias 66.2.
, and build our selves on this sure foundation Romans 10.14. and 8.15, 16. James
1.6.
, that we, though unworthy, yet, for Christ's sake, are certainly heard of God
John 14.13. and 15. ver. 16. and 16.23. Dan. 9.17.
, even as he has promised us in his Word Matthew. 7.8. Psalm 27.8. and 143.1.
.

Quest. 118. What are those things which he commands us to ask of him?
Answ. All things necessary both for soul and body James 1.17. Matthew. 6.33.
; which our Lord Jesus Christ has comprised in that prayer which himself has
taught us.

The Explication.
THe condition and circumstances of true prayer are: Eight conditions of true
prayer:
A. direction of it to the true God.
A direction of it unto the true God, that we make our prayer unto the true God
manifested in the Church by his Prophetical and Apostolic Work, and by his
works of Creation, Preservation, and Redemption of the Church. And this true
God is the eternal Father, Son, and holy Ghost. As we have received (says
Basil) so are we baptized; and as we baptized, so we believe, and as we
believe, so we adore and worship the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The
knowledge of Gods Commandment.
The knowledge of Gods Commandment: For without Gods Commandment, we doubt of
being heard. But the soul that looks into Gods Commandment, confidently
resolves that his prayers are acceptable unto God; because the worship, which
God requires of us in his Word, cannot be unwelcome or loath some to him.
Wherefore, when we pray, we ought thus to resolve: I call upon thee, because
thou have commanded me. The knowledge of the things we are to ask.
The knowledge of those things which are to be asked. God will not have us
direct idle and wandering desires to him, uncertain what we would ask: For
even a Prince would think himself scorned, if thou should kneel before
him, and kno^est not what to ask. So God will have us consider and know such
things as we are to ask of him, otherwise, it is not praying, but mocking of
God. Now we of our selves know not what to ask; and therefore has Christ
prescribed a form of prayer, ou^ of which we may learn what things we are to
ask of God. We are to ask (that I may summarily comprise them) things both
certain and allowed, and permitted by God. Things to be asked in praver: 1.
Spiritual. 2. Corporal.
Why spiritual, and why corporal things are to be asked.
These are of two sorts: Spiritual and Corporal. God will have us ask both
of him: Spiritual things, because they are necessary to salvation; Corporal
things, 1. That the desire of them may be an exercise of our faith, and
confirm our trust and confidence of obtaining things spiritual and availeable
to salvation. The reason is, because no man can look for good and saving
things at Gods hands, except he have God reconciled unto him. 2. That we may
consider and profess his providence, knowing that nether these unnecessary and
corporal things befall us by chance or fortune. A true desire of the things we
ask.
A true desire of those things which are to be asked. God will not have our
petition to be hypocritical or feigned, nor bred in our mouth, but in our
heart: he will have us pray with a true affection and desire of the heart: For
it is not the words of the mouth, but the groans of the heart which make true
prayer; as the Lord says to Moses: Exodus 14.15.
Why do thou cry unto me? when yet Moses spoke nothing: Therefore an ardent
desire is to be made the General in the definition of all prayer.

A sense and feeling of our own want. Hom. Odyss. 2.
A sense and feeling of our own want. The acknowledgement and feeling of our
own want, is the fountain from whence our desire arises. For what thou
think not thy self greatly to want, that do thou not earnestly desire:
Pray; for all stand in need of God.

Humiliation.
Humiliation, that is, true repentance. We must needs have also true humility,
true ackowledgement of our own unworthiness, or true repentance and
conversion; and so prostrate our selves in suppliant manner before his divine
Majesty: 1. Because God owes us nothing. 2. Because we are his enemies before
our conversion. God does not hear sinners, that is, proud sinners, such as
that Pharisee. And, John 9.31.
how greatly true humiliation, repentance, or conversion is required to prayer,
even that does sufficiently show, in that the promises of God belong only to
such as are converted. Wherefore, Luke 18.11.
without conversion no man can pray according to faith: and without faith no
man can be assured that he shall be heard, neither receives he what he asks.
Considence in the Mediator.
A confidence in the Mediatiour, that we may resolve, that both our person, and
our prayers please God, not for our own worthiness, but for Christ's sake our
Mediator. So Daniel prays, that he may be heard for the Lords sake: Dan.
9.17. John 16.23. Heb. 13 10.
and Christ wills us to pray unto his Father in his Name. Our prayers are to
be put on our Altar Christ; so shall they be acceptable to God. Confidence of
being heard.
Confidence of being heard. In the former, Faith is required, whereby we with
full confidence resolve, that we are through Christ's merit just before God, and
that God is reconciled unto us by Christ. Here the faith of being heard is
required: which cannot stand without the former faith of being justified.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, which cries Abba, Father. He that comes to God, must believe that
God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. But here in this
full persuasion of being heard, A difference of things to be prayed for.
we are to observe the difference of such things as are to be desired. Some
gifts are necessary to salvation, as spiritual gifts: Some are corporal,
without which we may be saved. Spiritual blessings are simply to be desired,
with a trust and full persuasion of being heard, even that we shall receive
them as we desire, that is, in special. But gifts, which are not necessary to
salvation, whether they be corporal, or else such spiritual, as without which
we may be saved, these are to be desired verily, but with a condition of Gods
will and pleasure, that he will give them us, if they serve for his glory, and
be profitable for us; or that he will give us other of better quality, either
at this, or some other time. We must follow, in asking these benefits, the
Leper, which said: Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. For neither
do the Elect, when they ask such things, desire simply to be heard. For
oftentimes we ask things, Matthew. 8.2.
not knowing what, and what manner of things they be, and so neither know we
whether the obtaining of them in special (if we should be heard in them) will
profit us, or be pernicious and hurtful to us. Object He that asks
doubtfully, asks not according to faith, neither is heard. We ask corporal
blessings doubtfully, because we ask them with condition: Therefore not
according to faith. Answ. 1. The Major is either particular, or false. For the
nature of faith requires that we be certain, not of all corporal benefits,
but only of spiri^uall blessings, which are necessary to salvation: as, of
remission of sins, and of life everlasting. In corporal blessings it
suffices, if faith submit it self to Gods Word, and crave and look for such
things as are availeable to salvation. Answ. 2. The Minor also may be denied.
For albeit we ask corporal blessings with a condition, yet do we not simply
doubt of obtaining them: For we believe, that we shall receive those
corporal blessings which we ask of God, so that they be expedient for us
unto salvation; and otherwise, if they are like to prove hurtful unto us, we
desire not to be heard in that which we pray. Therefore, we nevertheless ask
in faith, while we submit our selves to the Word and Will of God. and desire to
be heard according to his good pleasure. For faith submits it self to every
word and will of God: and the will of God is this, That we ask spiritual
things simply, and corporal conditionally; and that we resolve with our
selves, that we shall receive the former in special; but the latter as far
forth as they serve for Gods glory and our salvation. And thus if we pray, we
doubt not to be heard.

A confidence in Gods promise.
A confidence and trust in Gods promise, that we know and think that God has
promised to hear as many as call upon him, with those conditions before
alleged: Call upon me in the time of trouble: Psalm. 59.15. Esaias 65.24.
so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise me. Before they call, I will
answer: and whiles they speak, I will hear. Without this promise of hearing^
there is no faith; without faith prayer is but vain. Except we give faith and
credit to Gods promises, and think of them while we are praying, they avail us
nothing, neither can we desire ought with good conscience: but rather, when
after this sort we know not what we ask, doubting of Gods hearing of our
petition, we do not pray, but mock God. Now the confidence which we have of
Gods promise in hea^ing us, breadeth in us a certainty of his hearing, and our
salvation: and this certainty kindles in us a study of invocation and of
making supplications unto God. By these conditions and circumstances of sincere
and true prayer it does easily appear, A difference between the prayer of the
godly and the wicked.
how much the praying of the godly and the wicked differ. The godly endeavor
to observe all these conditions in their praying: The wicked contrarily, either
omit and neglect them all, or keeping one or two conditions, err in the rest.
Some err in the knowledge of the nature and will of God, therein omitting the
first condition: some err in the things which are to be asked when they ask
either evil things, or uncertain, or nor approved by God. Some ask these
hypocritically: some without a feeling of their want: some not with a
confidence in the Mediator: some persisting in their wickedness, think yet
that God hears them: some desire things necessary to salvation, with a
distrust and diffidence: some lastly ask, not thinking of Gods promise, and
therefore not according to faith.

ON THE 46. SABBATH.
Quest. 119. What Prayer is that?
Ans. Our Father Mat. 6.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Luke 11.2, 3, 4.
, which art in heaven: Hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come: Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Explication.
THe form of prayer prescribed by Christ unto us is recited by the two
Evangelists, Mat^hew and Luke. This, questionless, is the best, most certain,
and most perfect form of prayer; for it was delivered by Christ, who is the
Wisdom of God, and his words his heavenly Father always acknowledges and
hears. Moreover, it contains most briefly all things that are to be
desired, necessary for the soul and body. Lastly, it is a rule whereby all our
prayers must be directed. Two causes why Christ del^vered unto us this form of
prayer.
Some demand, Whether we be so tied to this form of prayer, that in praying
we may use no other. Answ. Christ delivered this form unto us, not that we
should be tied to these words; but that we might know. 1. What things ask. 2.
How to ask them. For it is a general form of the manner whereby, and the
things which we are to ask. Now it falls out oftentimes that particular
benefits are necessary for us, which we must ask of God, according to those
sayings of Scripture: Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you. John 14.13. James 1.5. Matthew. 24.20.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, and it shall be given him.
Pray that your flight be not in the winter. But these, as touching the words,
are not in this prayer. There are also many examples of prayer in the old and
new Testament, which, as concerning the words, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. 2 King. 8.15.
Dan. 9.4. John 17.1. Acts 4.24.
differ from this: as the prayers of Josaphat, Solomon, Daniel, Christ
himself, the Apostles, and others, which nevertheless were heard of God.
Wherefore the form of prayer delivered unto us by Christ, is wholly a thing
indifferent. Object. We may not be wiser than Christ: Therefore seeing he
has appointed us a certain form of prayer; we must hold us contented
therewith: and therefore we do amiss, when we use other forms of prayer. Ans.
We may not depart from that form, if Christ will have us tied unto it: but he
will not have us tied to these words; because his purpose was, when he taught
his Disciples to pray, to deliver a brief sum of those things which we are
to ask of God. Repl. That is to be retained, than which no better can be
invented. We cannot invent a better form, and better words than are these of
Christ himself: Therefore we must retain also the form and words of Christ.
Answ. We cannot invent better words, neither a better form, to express this
sum of such things as are to be desired, which is as it were the general of
all things that are to be desired. These generals of Gods benefits which Christ
in this form has prescribed unto us to be desired, cannot be proposed in a
better form: but Christ will have us also to descend to specials, and ask
particular benefits according to our necessity. For that form prescribed by
Christ, is nothing else but a set or course of certain heads or generals,
whereunto all benefits, as well corporal as spiritual, may be referred. And
when Christ wills us to desire the generals, he wills us also to desire
the specials. And further also, those which are here put in general, we are in
like manner for this cause to declare in special, that we may be led into a
consideration of our necessity, and to a desire of making of our petition to
God to help our necessity. Now that we may do this, we have need also of
special forms of praying: For, to the explication of generals by their
specials, we have need of another form. But yet all other forms of prayer must
agree with this form prescribed by Christ. Hence Austine testifies, August.
ad Prob.
that All the prayers of saints extant in Scripture are contained in the Lords
Prayer. And he adds farther, that It is free for us to say the same things in
other words, when we pray: but it is not free for us to say or mention other
things than are comprised in this form of prayer.

Quest. 120. Why does Christ teach us to call God our Father?
Answ. That presently in the very entrance and beginning of the prayer, he
might stir up in us such a reverence and confidence in God, as is meet for
the sons of God; which must be the ground and foundation of our prayer: to
wit, that God through Christ is made our Father, and will much less deny unto
us those things which we ask of him with a true faith, than our earthly
Parents deny unto us earthly things Math. 7. v. 9, 10, 11, Luke 11. v. 11, 12,
13.


The Explication.
THis Prayer of Christ has three parts; a Proeme, Petitions, and a Conclusion.

The Proeme is, Our Father which art in heaven. The Proeme has two parts, 1. A
calling on the true God, in these words; Our Father. 2. A description of him in
these; which art in heaven. And the Lord used this kind of Proeme, because he
will be called upon with due honor. This honor consists, 1. In the true
knowledge. 2. In true confidence. 3. In obedience. Obedience compriseth, 1.
True Love. 2. True Fear. 3. Hope. 4. Humiliation. 5. Patience.

Our Father.] God is called Our Father, 1. In respect of our creation. The
son of Adam, the Son of God. 2. In respect of our redemption, God is our
Father in three respects. Luke 3.38.
and receiving into his favor by his Son our Mediator. Christ is the only
begotten and natural Son of God: we are not his sons by our own nature, but
are for Christ's sake adopted to be sons. 3. In respect of our sanctification,
or regeneration by the holy Ghost in Christ. Christ will have us to call God,
Father, and so to invocate him, Five causes why we here call God Father.
1. In regard of the true invocation of God, who is the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2. In regard of the true knowledge of him, that we may know him
to be our Father, who through and for his Son the Mediator has adopted us to
be his sons, when otherwise we were his enemies: John 20.17.
I go unto my Father, and unto your Father: and who farther also for his Sons
sake regenerateth us by the holy Ghost, and endoweth us with all gifts and
graces necessary. 3. In regard of reverence; namely, that in us may be stirred
up and raised true reverence toward him: that seeing he is our Father, we
therefore behave our selves as becomes sons, and be affected with such
reverence toward him, as it becomes children to be affected toward their
Father, especially being adopted children, and unworthy of Gods blessings and
benefits. 4. In regard of confidence, that the same be raised in us, whereby we
may be assured that we shall be heard, and that he will give us all things
which pertain to our salvation. For seeing God is our Father, Romans 8.32.
and even so loving a Father to us, That he has given his only begotten
Son for us to death: how then shall he not give us together with him all
things necessary to our salvation? 5. For a memorial of our creation. Now God
will hear those only that ^o pray: because in them he obtains the end of
his blessings and benefits. Object. 1. We invocate the Father according to the
prescript of his own Son: Therefore we must not invocate the Son and the
holy Ghost. Ans. The consequence of this reason is denied; because the
consequence holds not from the attributing of some propriety unto one person
of the Godhead, to the removing of the same from another person of the
Godhead. The words God and Father, sometimes taken essentially, sometimes
personally. Why Father is here taken essentially. Esaias 6.9.
Again, the name of Father (as also the name of God) when it is opposed to all
the creatures, is taken essentially, not personally: but when it is put with
another person of the Godhead, it is taken personally. Wherefore in this place
the name of Father is taken essentially: and the reasons hereof are manifest:
1. Because the name of Father is not here put with another person of the
Godhead, but with the creature of whom he is invocated. So also by the Prophet
Isaiah, Christ is called The everlasting Father. 2. The invocating of one
person, does not exclude the others when mention is made of their external and
outward works. 3. We cannot consider God the Father, but in the Son the
Mediator. And the Son has made us sons by the holy Ghost, who is therefore
called the Spirit of adoption. 4. Christ teaches us that we must invocate him
also, John 16.23.
saying* Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in my Name, he shall give you. 5. Christ gives the holy Ghost:
therefore it is he himself of whom we ask him. Object. 2. Christ is called,
and is our brother: Therefore he is not our Father. Ans. He is our brother, in
respect of his humane nature: but he is our Father, in respect of his divine
nature. Object. 3. If he be called the Father who has received us into favor
for Christ's sake, then is not Christ understood by the name of Father, because
he that receives us into favor for Christ's sake, is not Christ himself. But
the Father, whom we here so call, receives us into favor for Christ's sake:
Wherefore he is not Christ. Ans. He that receives us into favor for Christ's
sake, is not Christ himself, that is, in the same sense and respect. Christ,
as he is our Mediator, is he through whom we are received; but as he is
God, he is he that receives us.

Two causes why we say Our Father.
Our.] Christ wills us to call God our Father, not my Father, Confidence.
Thereby to raise in us a confidence and full persuasion that we shall be
heard. For because we pray not alone, but with us the whole Church does with
one consent pray to him, he does not reject her, but hears her prayers,
according to this promise of our Lord: Where two or three are gathered, etc.
Object. But oftentimes thou prayest at home, the Church not being privy
thereunto. Ans. The godly and the whole Church pray for themselves and all the
members, with an affection and desire. Love and desire is an habitual quality
of the soul, remaining also when thou sleep; it is not a passion quickly
fleeting or passing away. Therefore, when thou prayest alone at home in words,
the whole Church prays with thee in affection. And this also makes much for
the engendering of confidence in us; because, as has been said, God does not
reject the whole Church. Mutual love. Two causes why Christ admonishes us of
mutual love.
does he by this word, To admonish us of mutual love, wherewith Christians
being endued, must pray one for another. And therefore does he by this word,
in the very Proeme and entrance of the prayer, admonish us of mutual love
wherewith we must be affected toward our neighbor: 1. Because there is no
praying without the true love of our neighbor: 1 John 4.20.
neither can we be persuaded that God hears us. For if we approach unto
God, not accounting the sons of God for our brethren, neither will he then
account us for his sons. 2. Because without the love of our neighbor there is
no true faith, and without faith there is no true prayer: For whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin. Romans 14.23.
Object. It is the part of a Father to deny nothing to his children: but God
denies many things to us: therefore he is not our Father. Ans. It is the part
of a Father to deny nothing unto his children, that is, which is necessary and
wholesome for them: but it is the part of a Father to deny to his children
things unnecessary, unprofitable, and harmefull. Thus God deals with us,
giving us all spiritual and corporal blessings that are necessary,
profitable, and wholesome for us.

Quest. 121. Why is that added: Which art in heaven?
Ans. That we conceive not basely or terrenely of Gods heavenly Majesty Jere.
23.24. Acts 17.24, 25, 27.
: and also that we look for, and expect from his omnipotency, whatsoever things
are necessary for our soul and body Romans 10.12
.

The Explication.
THe second part of the Proeme is, Which art in heaven, that is, heavenly.
Heaven here signifies the habitation of God, and the holy Angels, and blessed
men: whereof God says, heaven is my throne: and Christ says, In my Fathers
house are many mansions. Esaias 66. v. 1. John 14.2.
God indeed by his immense essence is everywhere: but he is said To be in
heaven, and, To dwell there; because there God is more glorious than in this
world, and does also there immediately show and manifest himself. Now the Lord
wills us to call him, Eight causes why we are to call God, Our Father in
heaven:
our Father which is in heaven: To distinguish him from earthly Fathers.
1. Thereby to show the opposition and contrariety of earthly Fathers, and this
Father: that so we should think that God reigns in heavenly glory and
majesty, and is a Father, not earthly, but heavenly; even he, 1. Who sits
in heaven. 2. Who rules everywhere with heavenly glory and majesty, has
sovereignty over all things, and governs by his providence the whole world by
him created. 3. Who is void of all corruption and change. 4. Who also does
there especially manifest himself before the Angels: and does there show what a
Father he is, how good, and how mighty, and rich. To work in us confidence of
being heard.
2. To raise up in us a confidence that God hears us: For, if he be our
Father, and one that is endued with exceeding goodness, which he especially
manifests and declares in heaven; then will he also give us all things
necessary to salvation: and if this our Father be Lord in heaven, and so
omnipotent, whereby he is able to help us; then is he able most easily to
give us those things which we ask of him. To work in us reverence of him.
3. To raise a reverence of him in us.Seeing this our Father is so great a Lord,
that is, heavenly, who reigns everywhere, who is able to cast both body and
soul into hell fire: let us then reverence such a Lord, and approach unto him
with exceeding submission both of mind and body. That we call on him in
fervency of spirit. That the mind of him that worshippeth be lifted up to
heavenly things. That the error of Ethnickes might be met withal, who think
that they may adore and worship God in creatures. To admonish us, that we are
not to direct our prayers unto a certain place, as in the Old Testament.

ON THE 47. SABBATH.
Quest. 122. What is the first petition?
Answ. Hallowed be thy Name: that is, Grant us first to know thee aright John
17.3. Jer. 9.23, 24. and 31.33, 34. Mat. 16.17. James 1.5. Psalm. 119. sect. 14.
verse. 1.
, and to worship, praise, and magnify thy almightinesse, goodness, justice,
mercy, and truth shining in all thy works Psalm. 119. sect. 18. verse. 1. Luke 1.
ver. 46, 47, 68, 69. Psalm. 145.8, 9, 17. Exodus 34 6, 7. Romans 11.33.
. And further also, to direct our whole life, thoughts, words, and works to
this end, that thy most holy Name be not reproached for us, but rather be
renowned with honor and praises Psalm 71.8. and 115.1.
.

The Explication.
Why this Petition is first in order.
NOw follows the second part of the Prayer, containing six Petitions. Amongst
them this petition of hallowing Gods Name is set in the first place because it
is the end and scope of all the other Petitions. For the end of all our
affairs, actions and prayers must be Gods glory. Now, the end is the first
thing which is intended, and the last thing which is performed and executed. 1.
Therefore the end of the other Petitions is to be desired, if we will desire
the rest aright, according to that Commandment, Seek ye first the kingdom of
God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.
We are here to consider, 1. What is called the Name of God. 2. What is holy,
and what, To hallow or sanctify.

The Name of God signifies, What the Name of God signifies. Psalm. 5.11. and
7.17. and 116.1^. 1 Kings 5.5. Exodus 15.4. and chap. 34. verse. 14. 1 Samuel
17.45. Mat. 28.19. Acts 21. verse. 13. and 2. verse. 38.
1. God himself: They that lovethy Name, shall be joyful in thee. I will
praise the Name of the Lord. I will call upon the Name of the Lord. He shall
build an house unto my Name. 2. The properties and works of God: His Name is
Jehovah. The Lord whose Name is Jealous. 3. Gods Commandment and charge, his
divine will and authority: I come to thee in the Name of the Lord of hosts.
Baptize them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. 4. The
worship, trust, celebration, and confession of God: I am ready to die for the
Name of the Lord Jesus. Be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ: in which place, as also Mat. 28. the Name of God signifies both his
authority, and the confession of him. Here it is used in the first and second
signification, to wit, it is taken for God himself, and for the divine
properties and works, in which Gods Majesty shines.

What Holy signifies.
Holy signifies, 1. God himself most holy, and most pure; or, essential,
uncreate holiness, which is God himself: For all virtues and properties in
God are his essential holiness. Esaias 6.33.
So the Angels call God, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. 2. That holiness
which is in creatures; that is, their conformity with God, which is begun in
the godly, and is perfect in the Angels. 3. The ordaining and appointing of
things to holy uses. In this sense that is called holy, which is destined to
some holy use, as the Temple of Jerusalem, Hallowing signifies, 1. To
acknowledge that for holy which is holy. How we are said ^o sanctify God.
the Altar, the Vessels, and the Priests. The word Hallowing, is taken in these
three senses: First, to hallow or sanctify, is to acknowledge, reverence, and
magnify that as holy, which indeed in it self is holy. In this sense we are
said to hallow and sanctify God, who is holiness it self; 1. When we
acknowledge God to be holy: or, when we acknowledge God to be such as he has
declared himself in his Word and works; that is, when we know, and think the
same of Gods essence, of his will and works, of his omnipotency, goodness,
wisdom, and other his properties, which God in his Word has commanded and
revealed that we should know and think of them. 2. When we not only know God
to be holy, but also confess and magnify him, and that in words and
profession, and in deeds and integrity of life. 3. When we refer the true
doctrine, knowledge, and profession of Gods holiness, and likewise of our
prayers and actions, and even our whole life, unto that end whereunto we ought,
and whither God has commanded it to be referred; namely, to the glory and
worship of God himself. 2. To make that holy which in it self is not holy.
Secondly, to hallow or sanctify, is to separate that from pollution, and make
it holy, which in it self is not holy, but polluted. So the Word did sanctify
that mass or lump of flesh which he took, even that nature, which in us is
polluted, John 17.17, 19. Ephesians. 5.26. 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Timothy 2.21. 1 John 3.3. 1
Pet. 1.10.
preserving it in himself from all contagion of sin, and adorning it with
perfect sanctity. So God and Christ do sanctify the Church; namely, by
remitting us our sins, and sanctifying us by the holy Ghost, and by the
continuing of both unto us. So we are commanded to sanctify our selves; that
is, to keep our selves from all uncleanness of the flesh. Be ye holy, for I am
holy. 3. To appoint a thing in it self either holy or indifferent, to an holy
use.
Thirdly, To sanctify, is to ordain and appoint that to an holy use or end,
which it self is either holy, or indifferent. So the Father sanctified the
Son; that is, ordained him to the office of the Mediatourship, and sent him
into the world. Thus God sanctified the Sabbath day, the Temple, the
Sacrifices, the Priests; and thus Christ sanctified himself for the Elect;
that is, he offered up himself to his Father an holy sacrifice for us. Thus is
the meat we receive sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

How we pray that Gods name be hallowed.
Of these three significations of Hallowing, the first and second pertain to
our present purpose: For, our petition to God is, that his name be hallowed not
only of us, but in us also; that is, we desire, 1. That God would enlighten us
with the knowledge of his holiness, and most holy name; or, (as the Catechism
expounds it) that we may know him aright, and worship, praise, and magnify
his almightinesse, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy, and truth, shining in
all his works. 2. That he would also sanctify his name in us, and more and
more sanctify and regenerate us, so that in our whole life we may avert and
take away all reproach of his most holy name, and by all means advance it with
all praise and honor. In a word we desire; 1. That God would enlighten us with
the true knowledge of his holiness. 2. That he would give us true faith and
repentance, and regenerate us with his spirit, that we may be holy, as he is
holy. 3. That he would give us a mind to profess that holiness of his divine
name in words and deeds, to his own praise and glory; that he may be glorified
of us by our true knowledge and profession of him, and conformity of life with
him, and so he be severed from all Idols and profane things. Object. That which
of it self is holy, cannot be hallowed. Gods Name is of it self holy:
Therefore it cannot be hallowed. Ans. It cannot be hallowed in that second
sense of hallowing before delivered; that is, That which of it self is holy,
cannot be made holy: but it may be sanctified, as sanctifying is used in the
first and third signification; that is, That which of it self is holy, or
indifferent, may be acknowledged, praised, and magnified as holy. So we desire
that Gods Name may be hallowed; that that which in it self is holy, may also be
acknowledged and magnified as holy. God indeed sanctifies us, by making us
holy of not holy. But we sanctify God, not by making him holy, but by knowing
and speaking that of him, which he will have us know and speak of him. Object.
What belongs to us to do, that should we not desire another to do. But it
belongs to us to hallow and sanctify the Name of God: Therefore we need not
to pray, that God himself would hallow it; for herein we do as a scholar, who
being commanded of his Master to apply his study diligently, beseeches his
Master to do it for him. Ans. We distinguish the Major: What belongs to us to
do, that should we not desire another to do, if so we are able by our selves,
and by our own strength to perform it: but what we are not able of our selves
to effect, we justly crave of God, that he would minister strength unto us to
perform it. Now we are utterly unable to hallow and sanctify Gods Name.
Therefore we must desire of God, that he will give us strength, whereby his
divine Name may be of us hallowed and sanctified, yea rather that himself
would sanctify in us his holy Name.

ON THE 48. SABBATH.
Quest. 123. What is the second petition?
Answ. Let thy kingdom come: that is, Rule us by thy word and spirit, that we
may humble and submit our selves more and more unto thee Psalm. 119.5. and
143.10. Mat. 6.33.
. Preserve and increase the Church Psalm. 51.20. and 122.6, 7.
: destroy the works of the Devil, and all power that lifts up it self
against thy Majesty: make all those counsels frustrate and void, which are
taken against thy word 1 John. 3.8. Romans 16.20.
, until at length thou reign fully and perfectly Revel. 22.17, 20. Romans 8.22,
23.
, when thou shall be all in all 1 Cor. 15.28.
.

The Explication.
THy Kingdom come; that is, Let it by continual increases flourish, and be
augmented, and always by a new enlargement and accession, let thy kingdom be
extended and multiplied, which thou, O God, in thy Church do hold and
possess.

The special questions concerning the Kingdom of God.

1. What the Kingdom of God is. A Kingdom, in general, is a certain form
of Civil government, wherein the sovereignty of rule belongs to some one
person, who is furnished with gifts and virtues above the rest; and rules over
all, according to just, honest, and certain Laws, in requiring obedience,
making Laws, defending the good, and punishing the bad. The kingdom of God is
that, in which God only reigns, and exercises sovereignty over all
creatures, Gods universal kingdom. Gods special kingdom.
but especially governs and preserves his Church. This kingdom is
universal. The special kingdom of God, which he exercises in the Church, is
the sending of the Son from the Father, even from the beginning of the world,
who should ordain and maintain a Ministry, and should by the same be
effectual and forcible in working, should gather a Church, by the word and
holy Ghost, out of all mankind; rule, preserve, and defend the same against
the enemies thereof; raise it from death; and at length, the enemies thereof
being cast into everlasting pains, adorn it with heavenly glory, that so God
may be all in all, and may be magnified by the Church of Angels and men for
ever.

The parts of Gods kingdom.
Out of this definition we may gather, and make these parts of the kingdom of
God: 1. The sending of the Son our Mediator. 2. The ordaining and maintaining
of the Ministry by Christ. 3. The gathering of the Church out of mankind by
the voice of the Gospel, and the efficacy of the holy Ghost, beginning in us,
the Elect, true faith and repentance. 4. The perpetual government of the
Church. 5. The preservation thereof in this life, and protecting against her
enemies. 6. The casting away of her enemies into eternal pains. 7. The
raising of the Church unto eternal life. 8. The glorifying of the Church in
eternal life, when God shall be all in all. Of this kingdom it is said: Ps.
2.6. and 110.2.
I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. Be thou Ruler even amongst the
midst of thine enemies. Hence it appears, that this kingdom, which we desire
may come, is not worldly, but a spiritual kingdom: which also the Lord
himself shows by diverse parables in the Evangelist, and unto Pilate he
answers; My kingdom is not of this world. John 18.36.
This kingdom we here pray for that it may come, and be enlarged and defended.

2. How manifold the kingdom of God is. The kingdom of heaven is a kingdom.
THis kingdom of God is but one indeed, but it differs in the manner of
governing and administration. For it is diversely administered here and in
heaven. It is therefore commonly distinguished into the kingdom of grace, and
the kingdom of glory. 1. Of grace, and begun in this life.
This distinction is all one with theirs, who say, that the kingdom of heaven
is twofold: One, begun in this life; another consummated after this life. 2.
Of glory, and perfected in the next life.
We desire both in this petition; to wit, both the constitution of this
kingdom of God in this life, and the consummation thereof after this life.
Howbeit, it is one and the same kingdom, distinct only in degrees and form of
administration. This kingdom on earth, which is but begun, has need of
means. In the consummated and perfect kingdom of God, there shall be no need
of any means or instruments, because in that the Church shall be perfectly
glorified; so that it shall be without evil both of crime and pain, and God
shall be all in all.

Hereby is that question assoiled out of the place of Paul; 1 Cor. 15.24.
He shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father. Wherefore, as
concerning the form and manner of administration, he shall deliver the
kingdom after our glorification; that is, he shall cease to discharge the
office of the Mediator. There shall be no need of conversion, of purging out
of sin, of protecting of us against our enemies, he shall not gather the
Church, he shall not raise the dead, he shall not glorify nor perfect them;
because then they shall be perfect: He shall not teach them, because they shall
be all taught of God: Prophecies shall be abolished, tongues shall cease, and
knowledge shall vanish away; because, When that which is perfect is come, 1
Cor. 13.8, 10.
then that which is in part shall be abolished. There shall be therefore no
need of these instruments and means any longer, by which now the Church is
gathered and saved. There shall no longer be any enemy, the Church shall
gloriously reign with Christ, and God shall be all in all; that is, shall
manifest himself immediately unto the blessed Saints: In that City (which is
that consummate kingdom) I saw no Temple; Revel. 21.22, 23.
for the Lord Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. And the City has no
need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did
light it, and the Lamb is the light of it.

3. Who is King and Head in Gods Kingdom. The whole three persons. Christ in a
special and particular manner.
THe Head or King of this kingdom is but one; because the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, are but one God. Now the Father is King, and rules by the Son,
and the holy Ghost. Christ the Son is King and Head of this Kingdom after a
singular manner: 1. Because he sits God at the right hand of God, and rules
with equal power with the Father. 2. Because he is Mediator; that is, Because
he is the person, by which God works immediately, and gives the holy Ghost.
John 15.26. Ephesians. 1.22^
I will send him unto you from the Father. He has appointed him over all
things to be the head to be Church.

4. Who are the Citizens or Subjects of Gods Kingdom. THe Citizens of this
kingdom are, 1. The Angels in heaven confirmed and established in grace. 2.
The blessed Saints in heaven, who are called the Church triumphant. 3. The
godly, or converted in this life, who have as yet certain remains of sin, and
are called the Church militant. 4. Hypocrites, namely, the called of the
visible Church only, but not elected. These are counterfeit and apparent
Citizens to the outward show, who indeed are not the Citizens of Christ's
kingdom, but only in name, but are in truth the bondslaves of the Devil.
Hypocrites notwithstanding are called the Citizens of the kingdom, Mat. 8.12.
and 22.16.
as the Jews are termed by Christ the sons and children of the kingdom. Of
these it is said, The first shall be last: that is, they who will be accounted
first, and yet are not, shall be last; that is, shall be declared to be none of
the kingdom of God.

5. What are the Laws of this kingdom. THe Laws whereby this kingdom is
administered and governed, are, 1. The word of God, or the doctrine of the Law
and Gospel. 2. The efficacy of the holy Ghost, working and reigning by the word
in the hearts of the elect.

6. What benefits are bestowed on the subjects of this kingdom. THere is no
kingdom, which has not regard to the commodities of the subjects. And
Aristotle writes to Alexander, A kingdom is not injury, but bountifulness.
Wherefore this kingdom has also his proper goods and commodities. These are
the spiritual and eternal benefits of Christ, as true faith and conversion,
remission of sins, righteousness, preservation therein, and the continuance
of the holy Ghost, John 8.38.
glorification, and life everlasting. If the Son shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed. Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
John 14.27.
My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world gives,
give I unto you.

7. Who are the enemies and foes of this kingdom. THe enemies of this kingdom
are the Devils and wicked men. Now of wicked men, some are in the Church; as
hypocrites, who callenge to themselves the name and title of Citizens of the
kingdom, when as they are nothing less: others are without the Church, and
professed enemies; as Turks, Jews, Samosatenians, Arrians, and whosoever defend
errors against the grounds and foundations of Religion.

8. In what place this kingdom is administered. THis kingdom, as concerning
the beginning or gathering thereof, is administered here on earth: yet so, that
it is not in any one certain place, Island, Province, People, 1 Timothy 2.8.
but is spread through the whole world. I will that the men pray everywhere.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, Mat. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them. We never go out of this kingdom, if we abide
in true faith. This kingdom, as touching the consummation or perfection
thereof, is administered in heaven. And although I go to prepare a place for
you, John 14.3. and 12.26. and 17.24. 1 These. 4.17.
I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may
ye be also. Where I am, there shall also my servant be. Father, I will that
they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am. We shall be caught
up to meet the Lord.

9. What is the time of the durance and continuance of this kingdom. THe
beginning and gathering of this kingdom dureth from the worlds beginning to
the end thereof; because at all times there were, are, and shall be some
members of the true Church, whether few, or many, to be gathered out of this
world to the kingdom of God. The consummation, or perfection of this kingdom
shall endure from the glorifying of the godly to all eternity. 1 Cor. 15.24.
Then shall be the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father: which is to be understood (as was before observed) as touching this
form of administration of that kingdom.

10. How this kingdom comes. It comes four ways.
THis kingdom comes to us four ways: 1. By the preaching of the Gospel;
whereby is revealed the light of the true and heavenly doctrine. 2. By
conversion, when some are converted to God, and are endued of God with faith
and repentance. 3. By making progress or increase, when the godly receive
increase, or when the proper gifts and blessings of the faithful are augmented
with perpetual increase in the godly or converted. Revel. 22.11.
He that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him
be holy still. 4. By consummation and full accomplishment, when the godly shall
be glorified in the second coming of our Lord. Revel. 22.20.
Even so come Lord Jesus.

11. Why we are to desire that the kingdom of God come. WE ought to desire,
that the kingdom of God (both that which is here begun, and that which is
elsewhere to be perfected) come: 1. For the glory of God, or in respect of the
first petition: because that we may sanctify and hallow his Name, it is
required, that he rule us by his word and spirit. For except God erect in us
this his kingdom, and deliver us out of the kingdom of the Devil, we shall
never hallow and sanctify his Name, but rather shall defile and pollute it. 2.
Because God will give his kingdom only to those that ask it, like as he
gives the holy Ghost unto them only that ask him. Out of these premises we
plainly perceive what it is which we ask him in this petition. Here therefore
we desire, that God will by his Son, The sum of this petition.
our Mediator, sent from the very beginning into the world, 1. Preserve the
Ministry which he has ordained. 2. Gather his Church by the Ministry of his
word, and the working of the holy Ghost. 3. Rule his Church gathered, and us
the members thereof, with his holy Spirit, who may conform us unto him, soften
our hearts, regenerate our wills. 4. Defend us and his whole Church against our
enemies and tyrants. 5. Cast away his and our enemies into eternal pains,
wherewith he may punish them for ever. 6. And at length deliver his Church from
all evils, and glorify it in the world to come with life everlasting. Object.
That which comes neither sooner nor later for our prayers, is in vain desired
of us; and therefore we are not to desire it. But the kingdom of God, that is,
the delivery of the Church from all evils and miseries, shall come neither
sooner nor later for our prayers, then God has decreed it: Therefore we are
not to desire the delivery of the Church. Answ. The Major is false. For so then
might we conclude or reason of all Gods benefits, that they are not to be
desired, seeing they all remain in the counsel and purpose of God. Repl. 1.
But God has promised other benefits with this condition, that we must ask and
desire them. Answ. So also shall full delivery from all evils befall them only
in that day, who in their afflictions and cross wish for and desire, that
delivery, and pray that this delivery may come speedily, according to the
decree of God, Revel. 22.20.
and that no one elect may be excluded. Repl. 2. But we must not desire, that
God would hasten the delivery of his Church: because that would be with loss
of many of the elect, who are not as yet borne. Answ. When we desire, that God
would hasten the delivery of his Church, we desire also, that whosoever of the
elect are as yet remaining, may be all speedily gathered, not one of them being
excluded: and this we crave, Why we desire the speedy coming of Christ's
Kingdom.
1. That the Church may speedily be delivered, that all the godly may rest from
their labors. 2. That there may be a swift end of wickedness and impieties,
and the enemies may be cast into everlasting pains. 3. That the glory of God
may soon be manifested in this perfect delivery of the Church, and final
abjection of the enemies thereof. This delivery therefore of us and of the
whole Church, we must crave of the Lord with daily prayers, if so we will our
selves at the length be delivered with the Church. But they which desire not
the Lords coming, to them he also shall not come. Seeing then we must desire,
that his kingdom may come, and therefore must withal desire our full
delivery; hereby it is evident, how impious a thing it is to be afraid of the
judgment of God, and the last day of doom: because such as do this, show
themselves not to be godly, neither to desire the full deliverance and
glorifying. Object. But terrible will the day of judgment be: Therefore we are
not to desire it. Answ. It will be terrible, but to the wicked only. For unto
the godly it is said; Lift up your heads. Luke 21.28.
Therefore God will have them to rejoice, and to wish for the approaching of
that day. For what thou rejoycest in, that also thou wishest. Come Lord Jesus.
Revel. 22.17.


ON THE 49. SABBATH.
Quest. 124. What is the third petition?
Answ. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven* that is, Grant that we and
all men, renouncing and forsaking our own will Mit. 16.24. Tit. 2.11, 12.
, may readily, and without any grudging, obey thy will, which only is holy
Luke 22.24. Ephesians. 5.10. Romans 12.2.
: and that so every of us may faithfully and cheerfully perform that duty and
charge which thou have committed unto us 1 Cor. 7.24.
, even as the blessed Angels do in heaven Psalm 103 20, 21.
.

The Explication.
HEre we are to consider: 1. What the will of God is. 2. What we here desire,
and how this petition differs from the second. 3. Why this petition is
necessary. 4. Why that clause is inserted, As it is in Heaven.

1. What Gods will is. THe Will of God signifies in Scripture, Psalm 103.21. 1
These. 4.3.
1. The Commandment of God: Ye his servants that do his will. This is the will
of God, even your sanctification. 2. It signifies the events, or rather Gods
decree concerning future events, in which that his decree is daily revealed:
Mat. 25.30. Esaias 46.10. Romans 9.19.
Not as I will, but as thou will. My counsel shall stand, and I will do
whatsoever I will. Who has resisted his will?

2. What we here desire, and how this petition differs from the second. THy
will be done: that is, Cause and grant, that we men may do not our will, but
thy will, which only is just and holy; and that we may obey thee. We desire
then, A denial of our selves, which consists of two parts: The denial of
our selves, which is twofold.
1. That we may be ready to renounce all our own affections, which are
dis-agreeing from the law of God. A right and ready execution of our duty. Our
duty is twofold:
2. That we may be ready also to undergo our cross, and to ascribe, and submit
our selves willingly unto God in all things. We therefore desire, that God will
give us his grace, whereby we may be able to deny our own corrupt will, and
forgo all things, which are repugnant to the will of God. We desire a right and
ready execution of our duty, that every man in his vocation may cheerfully
serve God, and execute his will, as well in common as general duties, and in
his proper and special duty. Common.
Our common duty is, that which is required not of us only, but of all
Christians also, and compriseth virtues necessary for all the godly; as faith,
conversion, godliness, charity, temperance, and such like. Proper.
Our proper duty is, that which concerns every man's proper calling. We ask the
fulfilling of both duties in this petition, namely, that every one may abide in
their proper and common calling committed unto them, and do their duty. Unto
God be committed the care concerning the events: but let us care to do those
labors, which properly belong unto us. Events agreeable to Gods will.
We desire events, such as are not contrary to Gods will; that is, that such
things may come to pass which please God. A prospering of our Actions.
We desire a blessing and prospering of our actions and counsels. For God will
have us also to desire of him, that he for his infinite goodness will
vouchsafe to prosper well our actions, counsels, studies, labors, and
endeavors; that he will for his exceeding goodness so direct our labors,
that no other events may follow them, but such as himself knows may most
serve for his glory and our salvation. We in the mean season must do our duty
diligently, and leave the events to God. The sum of all is: we pray that God
would bury in us evil lusts and desires; and that himself alone will work
perfectly in us by his spirit, that so we being furnished and upheld with his
divine grace, may fulfill our duty, and be answerable to our calling. Object.
The former petition does desire also, that we may rightly perform our duty:
Therefore this petition is superfluous. Answ. We do not crave here altogether
the same thing, which in the former we pray for. For in the former we desire,
that God will begin his kingdom in us, by ruling us by his spirit, who
regenerateth our will; that so henceforward we, rightly performing our duty,
may yield all obedience to our King. But in this petition we desire, that in
performing rightly and faithfully our duty, we may execute the will of God. Or,
There we crave, that the Church may be, and be preserved and glorified: Here we
pray, that every man in the Church may perform his duty aright, as becomes
him.

The coherence of these three first petitions.
We are to observe here by the way, what is the coherence and difference between
these three former petitions. They are so linked together, that one consists
not without the other: but like as the third petition serves for the second, so
does the second for the first. For the name of the Lord is not hallowed or
sanctified, except those means be put, whereby it is advanced. And those
means are the duties of every particular man's calling and vocation. Now these
petitions differ on this wise: In the first, we desire sanctification, or the
true knowledge and magnifying of God, The difference between them.
and all his works and counsels. In the second, the gathering, preservation,
and government of the Church, that God would rule us by his spirit and word,
defend and protect us, and deliver us from all evils both of crime and pain.
In the third, that every one particularly in their vocation may obey God; that
is, that every man be with diligence occupied in his proper duty and function,
and direct all things to the glory of God, and take well in worth whatsoever
God sends on him.

3. Why this petition is necessary. THis petition is necessary, 1. That the
Kingdom of god may come, whereof we spoke in the second petition. For except
God himself bring to pass, that every one in his calling and duty do
diligently his will, this kingdom cannot be settled, flourish, and be
preserved. 2. That we may be in his kingdom. For except we do the will of God,
we cannot be Citizens of his kingdom. And we are not able of our selves, by
reason of the corruption of our nature, to do his will, if God minister not
strength unto us: and he gives us not ability, except we desire it. Therefore
we must desire of him, that we may do it. Object. That which is always done,
and shall certainly come to pass, though we desire it not; the same is not to
be desired. The will of God is done always, and shall certainly be done,
though we desire it not: Therefore it is not to be desired that it be done.
Answ. There is a fallacy in the Major proposition, putting that for a cause,
which is no cause: because we do not therefore desire, that Gods will be done,
as if it should not be done, if we should not desire it: but we desire it for
other causes; namely, that all events may be good and prosperous unto us. For
events shall not be good unto us, neither tending to our safety, except we
submit them to the will of God; so that we desire that only to be done which he
has decreed, and will have done. The Minor also of this reason we deny. For it
is false, 1. As concerning the calling and vocation of every man; because they
that desire not, that they be able in their vocation to do their duty rightly,
faithfully, and happily, the same shall never do it. 2. It is false also, as
concerning Gods decree: because God has decreed many events, but yet so, as
that he has also decreed the means of coming thereunto. Repl. The decree of
God is unchangeable: Therefore what God has decreed, shall be done, even
without our prayers. Answ. The decrees of God, not only as touching the events
or ends, but also as touching the means, is unchangeable. He has decreed to
give the end, but by the mean; which is of this condition, that we desire it,
and pray for it.

4. Why that clause is inserted, As it is in heaven. Two causes hereof.
CHrist adds here this clause, As it is in heaven, for two causes: 1. To
describe and draw us a pattern and example of perfection, whereunto we must
strive. 2. That by this desire of perfection we may be assured, that God will
give us here the beginning, Luke 8.18. Of whom Gods will is done in heaven.
Psalm. 40 10. John 6.38.
and the perfection in the life to come. To him that has it shall be given.
The reason of both is, because in heaven the will of God is most perfectly
done. Of whom say you? 1. Of the Son himself, who does all the will of his
Father. Lo, I come, O God, to fulfill thy will. Not to do mine own will, but
his will which has sent me. 2. Of the holy Angels and blessed men. Of the
Angels the will of God is so done in heaven, as that every Angel stands in
the presence of God, being ready to do whatsoever God commands. They do both
his general and his special will most readily: no one of them slacketh in his
function, none seiseth upon that which belongs to another, none is ashamed to
serve us; though we annoy them with the noisome savor of our sins, Heb. 1.14.
and offend God. For they are ministering spirits. So then we desire, that we
may also obey God, that we may execute his will, as the holy Angels fulfill it
in heaven.

Object. Impossible things are not to be desired: for he that desires things
unpossible, desires in vain. But to desire that Gods will be done in earth,
as it is in heaven, or that we may do our duty like as do the Angels in
heaven; is, to desire a thing unpossible: yea, it is to desire that which is
contrary to Gods decree. Therefore that is not to be desired, seeing God will
have this to be our state in the life to come, not in this life. Ans. 1. The
Major is to be distinguished. Unpossible things are not to be desired, except
God will at length grant them to those that desire them: but God will give the
performance of this will to those that desire it; and that in this life, as
concerning the beginning thereof; and in the life to come, as concerning the
consummation and full accomplishment. Wherefore this consummation is to be
desired: and the impossibility is patiently to be suffered in this life. And
the consummation is therefore to be desired in this life, that we may at length
obtain it: because he that does not now desire it, shall doubtless at no time
obtain it. It is one thing, Not to be able to attain unto this consummation,
and another thing, Not to desire it. 2. We deny the Minor, wherein is a
fallacy, putting that for a cause, which is no cause. For neither do we desire
that in this life the consummation or perfection of our obedience toward God
may be accomplished, but that here may be wrought the beginning, and
continuance, and increase thereof, and after this life our obedience being here
augmented with continual increases, may be at length perfected and
consummated, that so we then may no less do the will of God, then it is
always done of the Angels in heaven. When therefore we pray, That Gods will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven, this particle (as) does not betoken the
degree, but the kind of doing it, which is the beginning of performing Gods
will. And to crave and obtain this at Gods hands is not against Gods decree.
And as touching our consummation, it is our part to pray every moment that we
may be altogether freed from sin. For God will that we wish it, though he will
not perform it unto us in this life. For it belongs nothing at all unto us
to search what things God has decreed; seeing we have this prescribed us for a
rule, that we pray for things on condition of Gods will. We must therefore
submit our selves unto Gods will, and desire what God wills us to desire,
whether God has decreed it or no. God will have our Parents to die, and yet
will he not have us to wish their death: God will have his Church to be under
the cross, and yet he will not have us to desire her cross; but to pray for
her delivery, and patiently to bear it, if it afflict her. In like manner, God
will not in this life give us perfect deliverance from sin, and yet will he
have us to wish it, and every moment to desire that we may be wholly delivered
from sin. Wherefore, some things are to be desired, which God will not do: and
some things which he will do, are not to be desired, but patiently to be
suffered. And yet hereof it follows not that we ask contrary to the will of
God; because in our prayers we always submit our selves to Gods will.

ON THE 50. SABBATH.
Quest. 125. What is the fourth Petition?
Ans. Give us this day our daily bread: that is, give unto us all things, which
are needful for this life Psalm. 145.15, 16. and 104.27, 28 Mat. 6.26.
, that by them we may acknowledge and confess thee to be the only fountain,
from whence all good things flow James 1.17. Acts 17.28. and 14.17.
; and all our care and industry, and even thine own gifs to be unfortunate and
noisome unto us, except thou bless them 1 Cor. 15.58. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Psalm. 37.16.
and 127.1, 2.
. Wherefore grant, that, turning our trust away from all creatures, we place
and repose it in thee alone Ps. 55.23. and 62.11. and 146.3. Jer. 17.5, 7.
.

The Explication.
THis petition concerning our daily bread, should (it seems) have been placed
after the petition following touching remission of sins. For the greater and
more excellent benefits are first to be prayed for, and the less, and less
worth at last to be sought for. But Christ, respecting our infirmity, allotted
to this petition of our daily bread, the fourth, and as it were middle place,
The reason of the order and place of this petition.
that so we might both begin and shut up our prayer with petition of spiritual
blessings, as the most principal; and that the obtaining of corporal benefits
might more and more confirm in us a confidence of obtaining spiritual graces.
In this petition we desire corporal blessings, concerning which we are to
observe these questions; 1. Why corporal blessings are to be desired. 2. How
they are to be desired. 3. Why Christ compriseth corporal blessings under the
name of bread. 4. Why he calls it, Our bread. 5. Why he calls it, Daily
bread. 6. Why he adds, This day. 7. Whether it be lawful to desire riches.
8. Whether it be lawful to treasure up any thing for the time to come.


1. Why we are to desire corporal blessings. WE must desire corporal
blessings at Gods hands as well as spiritual: Gods Commandment. 1. General.
In respect of Gods commandment, which may suffice us, albeit there were no
other cause. And we have a Commandment hereof from God, both general and
special. For Christ says in general, Ask and ye shall receive. Mat. 7.7. 2.
Special.
And a special Commandment he sets down before this form of prayer which
himself prescribes unto us. After this manner therefore pray ye; Mat. 6.9.
by which Commandment Christ also wills us to desire bread, or corporal
blessings of God. Now, whereas Christ says: Mat. 6.32, 33.
Seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all things
shall be ministered unto you: And again, Take no thought what ye shall eat: he
does not therein forbid us to desire our daily bread, even corporal blessings,
but he forbids this distrustfulnesse. Gods promise.
In respect of Gods promise: because God has promised that he will give us
things necessary for our life: and he promised these to no other end, then that
we should desire them of him: and he promised them, that we should thereby have
a spiritual, not a fleshly security of obtaining them. Mat. 6.32.
Your Father knows what ye have need of. Gods glory.
In respect of Gods glory: that namely there may be a knowledge and profession
of Gods providence, especially toward his Church. God will have us to ascribe
this praise unto him, because he is the fountain of all blessings and
benefits, and that we may not deem these things to come by chance to us. Our
comfort. for the care God has over each of us.
For our comfort: that these corporal blessings may be tokens to us of Gods
fatherly good will toward us; seeing wholesome blessings and benefits are
promised and given to the children of God only. Wherefore when they are
bestowed on us, we must be persuaded that we are of the number of them, to whom
God has promised to give them. Exercise of our faith in the promise of grace.
Because the desiring and expecting of these blessings, is the exercise of our
confidence in the promise of grace: or it is the exercise of our invocation,
faith, and hope. For we cannot promise unto our selves corporal blessings, nor
desire them, except we resolve that we be in favor, and except we be assured
of spiritual blessings, and of Gods good will toward us. Our necessity. Psalm.
115.18.
For our necessity, that we may do the will of God here on earth: which without
daily bread we cannot here do. The dead praise not thee, O Lord. Expectation of
all goodness from God.
That the desire of these blessings may be a confirmation in our minds, and a
profession before the world, that God is he who gives even the least benefits.
our comfort of Gods continual care over the whole Church.
For this our comfort: that we may know that the Church on earth shall ever be
preserved, seeing God hears us, and will give us our daily bread, according
to his promise.

2. How corporal blessings are to be desired. Corporal blessings, as well as
other blessings promised in the Gospel, are to be desired, With confidence of
Gods favor.
With a confidence and full persuasion of Gods favor: because otherwise we are
not heard, neither are these blessings good and wholesome for us; and God may
answer, that we are not of them unto whom he has promised these things. With a
condition of Gods will
With a condition of Gods will and pleasure: that is, with a submitting of our
will to Gods will, that God would give us what we ask, if it please him; and as
he knows they may make for our good, and his glory: because God has promised
these blessings not with any determined or definite circumstances. For God has
not defined in his word, what corporal blessings he will give us: but as
touching spiritual, he has promised expressly, that he will give them to every
one that asks them. With faith of being heard.
With faith and belief of Gods hearing us, so that we certainly bel^eve that
God will give us so much as suffices. To serve God and our neighbor.
To this end, as thereby to serve God and our neighbor; not to satisfy our
luxurious desires, nor for ostentation. They who desire them not after this
sort, are not heard; that is, such things are not given them, as may tend to
their safety: and albeit they receive that which they desire, yet are they not
indeed heard of God, because those things which they receive, are not good and
profitable unto their salvation. We are here to observe, that the Lord
commands us in general to pray for corporal blessings, neither has defined
in his word, what corporal blessings he will give us, and has with this
condition promised to give them us, namely, as the safety and salvation of
every one, and the manifestation of his glory requires. The reasons hereof are
these: Two causes why corporal blessings are conditionally to be c^a^ed.
1. Because we oftentimes know not what we ask, and what is expedient for us.
And often we ask things neither profitable to us, nor serving for Gods glory,
or the salvation of others. But God knows best, what is convenient and meet
for us for the manifesting of his glory, and for the furthering of our own
salvation. Seeing then we often err in desiring corporal blessings, God
gives none other unto us, then such as he knows to be meet and profitable
for us. But spiritual blessings God has promised not in general only, but
both specially, and simply without any condition annexed. For they are simply
profitable unto us, and God himself has prescribed the manner and way which we
are to follow in them: so that in desiring them we cannot err. For, what
things God has simply promised us, the same we ought simply to desire: and
what things he has specially and absolutely promised us, the same must we in
like manner absolutely ask and desire. So must we simply desire the holy
Ghost, because God has simply and expressly promised that he will give the holy
Ghost to every one that desires him. 2. That we may learn to be content with
those things which we have received of the Lord, and submit always our will to
his pleasure and purpose. So God also for this cause has commanded us in
general to desire corporal blessings, that such a desiring of those blessings
may be an exercise of our faith, and of the subjection and submitting of our
will to the will of God.

3. Why Christ comprised corporal blessings under the name of bread. UNder the
name of bread, by a Synecdoche, Bread signifies, 1. All nourishment.
which is an usual figure of speech to the Hebrews, Christ comprised all
corporal blessings, and such as are necessary for this life; as are all food,
victuals, raiment, health, civil peace. This is apparent by the end and scope
of the petition. For we desire bread for our necessity. But many other things
are necessary for us. Therefore we desire them also under the name of Bread.
And this Hebrew Synecdoche is found often in the sacred Bible: as, In the sweat
of thy face shall thou eat bread. Genesis 3.19. Psalm. 41.9.
He which did eat of my bread has lifted up the heel against me.
Furthermore, 2. The blessing of them, even our wholesome use.
Christ did not only comprise things necessary themselves under the name of
Bread, but also the profitable use of them: For bread, without the blessing of
it, is no better then a stone. And therefore comprehended he all these things
under the name of Bread, 1. To bridle and reine our desires, The reasons of
this Synecdoche.
and to teach us that we should ask bread only; that is, only things necessary
for us to sustain our life, and to serve God and our neighbor both in our
common and proper vocation and calling. 2. To teach us to pray that this bread
might be profitable unto our salvation; that is, that those corporal blessings
might tend to our salvation, or that the use of those corporal blessings might
be good and saving unto us. For bread, without this good and saving use, is a
stone. Now bread is made good and saving unto us, 1. If we receive it with
faith, and with that mind, and after that manner, and to that end which God
requires; to wit, if we stick not in the creatures, but pierce with our mind
to God himself the Creator of all things, and the fountain of all benefits or
gifts. 2. If we desire that he will give to the bread obtained and received
from him, Levit. 26.26.
a force and virtue of nourishing and sustaining our bodies; that is, if we ask
not only the bread, but the blessing also of the bread at Gods hands. For,
unless he bless, all our cares and labors are b^t vain, and the very gifts
of God become unprofitable, yea hurtful unto us, according to that his
commination, I will break the staff of bread. Hereby now it is plainly
clear, what we desire, when we desire bread: namely, 1. Not great riches, but
only things necessary. 2. That they be bread to us: that is, that they may be
good and saving to us through Gods benediction and blessing, wherewith if they
be not accompanied, the bread shall not be bread, but it shall be as a stone or
poison to us. For he that gives bread, that it may be to him that receives it
no better then a stone; gives a stone, not bread. And such are the blessings
which the wicked receive of God, and snatch as it were unto themselves.

4. Wherefore Christ calls it our bread. CHrist wills us to desire our
Bread, not mine, thine, or any other man's Bread. 1. That we should desire those
things which God gives us. For the bread is made ours, which is given us of
God necessary for the sustenance of our life. Therefore give us our bread,
signifies, Give us bread, O God, assigned unto us by thee, which thou will
have to be ours. God as an house-holder does distribute to every one his
portion, which we desire for our selves of him. 2. That we should desire things
necessary, gotten of us by lawful labor, in a kind and trade of life
pleasing to God, and honest, and profitable to the common society; that is,
which we may receive through ordinary means, and by lawful ways, the hand of
God from heaven reaching them out unto us. He that will not work, let him not
eat. 2 These. 3.10.
3. That we may use them with a good conscience and thankesgiving. For God will
have us assured, that when he gives us these blessings, he gives us with them
the power of enjoying them: yet so that he will not have us use his gifts as
ravenous robbers, but freely and with thanksgiving.

5. Wherefore Christ calls it daily bread. CHrist calls the bread, which we
must desire of God, daily: 1. Because he will have us daily to desire as much
as may for every day suffice us. 2. Because he will bridle our raging and
endless lusts and desires. Mat. 6.31.
Your Father knows what ye have need of. A small thing unto the just man, Ps.
37.16. and 34.9.
is better then great riches to the wicked and mighty. Nothing wants to them
that fear the Lord; that is, no profitable and necessary thing. Therefore give
us daily bread; that is, give us bread sufficient, give us so much of things
necessary for our life, as shall be needful for every of us in his vocation
and calling to serve God and our neighbor.

6. Why Christ adds, This day. CHrist adds it, 1. To meet with our
distrustfulnesse and covetousness, and to reclaim us from these vices. 2.
That we should depend on him only, as yesterday, so this day, and to morrow:
that namely, we always look for the necessaries of this life at the hands of
God, that we know them to be given us of God, not to be gotten by our own
hands, or labors, or diligence: that also we know that they being received,
profit not our body, except Gods blessing do accompany them. 3. That the
exercise of faith and prayer may always be continued in us. For as long as it
is said, This day, so long will he have prayer to be continued, that so we may
yield due obedience to that commandment, 2 These. 5.17.
Pray always.

7. Whether it be lawful to desire riches. THis question, together with the
next ensuing, arises out of the former questions. For when we are willed to
desire only daily bread, and that this day, it seems at the first sight,
that it is not lawful either to desire riches, or to put up any thing for the
morrow. But it is verily lawful to desire riches, if, taking away all
ambiguity and doubtfulnesse of the word, we understand by the name of riches,
things necessary for the sustenance of life: What Epicurus took riches to be.
As the Epicure defined riches, to be a poverty agreeable to the law of Nature.
This definition is good. For they are to be accounted truly rich, who have
things necessary sufficient to maintain life, and who live content here-with.
And if we so take the name of riches, riches are doubtless to be desired of
God; in as much as we ought to desire such things as are necessary for nature,
and our place and function whereunto God has called us. The reason hereof is,
because these necessary things or riches, are the daily bread which we ought to
desire. They are also otherwise defined, To be an abundance and plenty over and
above things necessary. So Crassus (surnamed, the Rich) said, that no man was
rich, but he who was able to maintain an Army with his revenues.

If we take riches in this sense, riches are not at all to be desired of God.
For this we are not to ask our daily bread. And Solomon in the person of all
the godly says, Prove. 30.8.
Give me not poverty, nor riches: by which words the Spirit of God also by
Solomon teaches us to pray against riches; that is, abundance above things
necessary. 2 Timothy 6.9.
Hither belongs also that of Paul, They which will be rich, fall into
tentations, and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction: for which causes riches are called Thorns by
Christ, which cannot be handled without danger of pricking. 1 Timothy 6.6.
But contrariwise, godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he
has. But notwithstanding, if God has given us any thing, besides those things
which are necessary for us, let us do our diligence to use them well, or
reserve them to good uses. For Christ commanded his Disciples to gather up the
broken meat which remained, that nothing be lost. And famous and notable is
the example of Joseph, John 6.12.
who by the fore-warning of the Oracle, Genesis 41.
gathered and laid up food in the time of plenty, for the years of dearth to
come. But here we must take heed, 1. That we repose not our confidence in
them. 2. We must avoid luxury and all abuse of them. 3. We must consider that
we are Gods stewards, who. has committed these riches unto us, to employ and
bestow well, Three things to be weighed in our treasuring up of riches.
and that by this means he has laid a burden upon us; and therefore shall we
one day render an account to God of our stewardship and administration.

8. Whether it be lawful to put up any thing for hereafter. IT is doubtless
lawful to put up something for the time to come, according to this
commandment of Christ, Gather up the broken meat which remains, that
nothing be lost. This is also included in the word Our. For we are commanded to
succor and help the Commonwealth when need is, and bestow something on the
poor. Therefore we must lay up something whereby to do this, and we must lay
up of our own. Hither belong also such precepts and commandments as speak of
parsimony and frugality, which virtues are busied in keeping, and well and
profitably disposing of things well gotten, to a man's own use, and the use of
his friends, avoiding all sumptuousness, prodigality, and luxury, and
lavishing or mis-spending the gifts of God. The Apostle teaches, that it is
the duty of Parents to lay up something for their children, when he says: The
children ought not to lay up for their fathers. 1 Cor. 12.14.
Yet here we are to observe these three things: 1. That those things which are
stored up be lawfully gotten, purchased by lawful and honest labor and
industry. 2. That we repose no confidence in them. 3. That they may be employed
on lawful and necessary uses both of our own and others: as, to the honest
maintenance either of our life and family, or our friends. Likewise to the
preservation of the Church, to aid the Commonwealth when need shall require,
and bestow somewhat on the poor, and our needy brethren: Hereof says David:
Trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity. Psalm. 92.10.
If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. And Paul: Let him that
stole, steal no more: but let him rather labor, and work with his hands the
thing which is good, Ephesians. 4.28.
that he may have to give to him which needs.

Now shall answer easily be made to such objections as may be opposed against
this petition. Object. 1. That which is ours, we need not desire: Bread is
ours: Wherefore we need not to desire bread. Ans. There is a diverse
signification in the word Ours: For in the Major proposition it signifies a
thing which we have in our own power: in the Minor, a thing which is made ours
by Gods gift; or, which by prayer we obtain of God, as has been before
declared. Object. 2. That which is not gotten by labor, but by prayer, that we
need not labor for: Our daily bread is not gotten by labor, but by prayer:
Therefore we need not labor, but pray only. Answ. Here is a fallacy, taking
that for simply true, which is true but in part. Such things as simply are not,
or cannot be gotten by labor, neither as a cause, nor as a mean, for these
indeed in vain we labor. But though our labors be not necessary, as the
whole and principal efficient causes whereby corporal blessings are gotten,
yet they are necessary as means ordained by God: according to these
Scriptures; Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread. He that will not work, let
him not eat. God indeed gives all things freely, and yet not without our
labor and prayers: 2 These. 3.10.
as is well signified by that proverbiall Verse: Dat Deus omne bonum, se^ non
percornua tau^um. Virtutem posuere Dii non ante l^borem.
The path to virtue which does lead,
With toilesome labor men must tread.


Object. 3. Christ wills us to desire daily bread: Therefore it is not
lawful to put up any thing against the Morrow, but we are to care only for
the present day. Again, he wills us not to desire bread against the Morrow,
but to desire bread for this day: Why then says Saint Paul, that the Fathers
ought to lay up for their children? 1 Cor. 12.14.
Ans. This is a fallacy, putting that for a cause, which is no cause. Christ
wills us to desire daily bread, and this day; and therefore we must also
desire of him things necessary for our life for every day; this day, to morrow,
and so long as we live: but he means not hereby, as if he would not have us
labor for the morrow, or not to put up any thing for the morrow, or to cast
away those blessings which he has already given us, sufficing for the morrow;
but he endeavors to take from amongst us all distrust, covetousness,
wrongful gaining or purchasing, and disobedience. Christ indeed other-where
commands, Mat. 6.34.
That we care not for the morrow: but there he forbids us to think of the
morrow with mistrustfulnesse, as if God would give nothing to morrow; or with a
purpose of not praying to morrow: but he forbids not prayers and labors.
Wherefore the Lord will not that we put up any thing for hereafter, but first,
that we be content with things present, all distrust and covetousness,
unlawful getting and disobedience being set apart and banished. 2. That we
place not our trust in things necessary given us of God: but know and certainly
persuade ourselves, that those benefits which have been and are given, come
from the hand of God, and that they are not otherwise good and profitable unto
us, except his blessing come to them. 3. That we consider our selves always to
stand in need of Gods blessings. And we must withal beware, that we prescribe
not to God, what he is to give us.

ON THE 51. SABBATH.
Quest. 126. What is the fifth petition?
Answ. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
that is, Even for the blood of Christ, do not impute unto us most miserable and
wretched sinners all our offenses, neither that corruption, which still
cleaves unto us Psalm. 51.1. and 143.2. 1 John 2.1, 2. Romans 8.1.
: even as we also feel this testimony of thy grace in our hearts, that we
steadfastly purpose unfeignedly from our hearts to pardon and forgive all those,
who have offended us Mat. 6.14, 15.
.

The Explication.
OF the order and argument of this fifth Petition Saint Cyprian does learnedly
and religiously inform us in these words: After our supplication to God for
supply of food and sustenance, we pray for pardon of our sins and offenses,
that he which is fed of God, may live in God: and we regard not only this
present and temporal life, but we respect eternal life, to which he shall
come, or into which he shall be received, whose sins are forgiven. And this
petition is (as the same Father notes) a notable and ingenuous confession of
the Church, wherein she acknowledges and bewaileth her sins: and it is
withal a consolation, that the Church shall receive remission of sins,
according to Christ's promise. Also a binding of us to a mutual forgiving of
our neighbor. Now then, Christ in this petition will, 1. That we acknowledge
our sins. 2. That we thirst after remission of our sins, because it is
granted to them only that desire it, and who do not tread under foot the blood
of the Son of God. 3. That our faith be exercised: because this petition
confirms our faith; and again, this petition flows from faith. For, faith
is the cause of prayer, and prayer is the cause of faith, as concerning the
increasing of faith.

The special Questions.
1. What Christ here callethdebts. 2. What is remission of sins. 3. Why are
we to desire remission of sins. 4. How sins are remitted unto us: or what
that clause means, As we forgive them that trespass against us.
1. What Christ here calls debts. CHrist calls all our sins debts, both
original and actual, of ignorance, of fact, and omission: as himself in S.
Lukes Gospel interprets himself, saying; Forgive us our sins: for even we
forgive every man that is indebted to us. Luke 11.4. Why our sins are called
debts.
And they are called debts, because they make us debtors to God, both of the
neglect of obedience, and of punishment which we are to pay. For when we sin,
we do not give nor perform unto God what we owe unto him; and as long as we
give not this unto him, so long we remain debtors, and are bound to satisfy
by punishment: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all that are written in the book
of the Law, to do them. From this we could not at all be delivered, unless God
did forgive us our sins.

2. What is remission of sins. THe Creditor is said to Remit the Debtor, when
he never requires the debt of him; but, as if it were paid, crosses it out of
his books of accounts, and punishes him not: as we may read in the parable of
the King which forgave his servant, Mat. 18.28.
who besought him, the debt of ten thousand talents. So God forgiveth us our
sins, when he imputes them not unto us, nor punishes us for them, and that
therefore, because he has punished them in his Son our Mediator. Wherefore,
Remission of sins, is, that God will not impute any sin unto us, but does
receive us into favor, pronounces us just and righteous, and accounts us
for his sons, of his mere and free mercy for Christ's satisfaction performed by
him for us, imputed unto us, and apprehended of us by faith: and that therefore
he will not punish us for our sin, but endoweth us with justice, and
everlasting life; because the remission of sin takes away the punishment
thereof. For sin and punishment are correlatives: put sin, and you put
punishment; take away sin, and punishment is also taken away. Object. To remit
sin, is, Not to impute, nor to be willing to punish sin in us. But this is
contrary to Gods justice: Therefore when we desire that God will remit our
sins, we desire that God will invert the order of his justice. Answ. The
consequence of this reason is false: because to remit sin, is then contrary to
Gods justice, when remission is given without all satisfaction whatsoever. But
we desire remission of sins, for the satisfaction of Christ, for which they are
remitted unto us; and therefore our sins are not remitted us with any breach of
Gods justice: because they are remitted us with recompense made for them.

Repl. If they be remitted with recompense made for them, then God does not
remit us our sins freely. Answ. They are remitted with recompense; and
therefore not freely in respect of Christ: but they are remitted freely in
respect of us; because he receives not satisfaction of us, but of Christ, who
has fully satisfied him for us.

Repl. Then this is not freely, because we have merited it in Christ. Answ.
That merit is not our merit, but Christ's; because the Father gave us his Son
freely, who meriteth without any merit of ours coming between: and that merit
of Christ is imputed to us through grace; therefore freely for that merit are
our sins remitted us: whereupon also it is truly and well added, that for
Christ's satisfaction our sins are not imputed to us. For we desire not, that
God would do contrary to his justice, and would not account us in mind for
sinners; but that he would impute unto us another righteousness; that is, the
righteousness of Christ, wherewith we being clothed, our sins also may be
covered. The sum of all is; God forgiveth us our sins freely: 1. Because he
requires not any satisfaction at our hands. 2. Because he freely gives us his
Son, himself therein satisfying himself. 3. Because he freely gives and
imputes his Sons satisfaction to the faithful.

3. Why we are to desire remission of sins. WE are to desire remission of sins,
1. That we may be saved; because without remission of sins we cannot be
saved. And this benefit God gives not, but only to those that desire it. 2.
That we may be put in mind of the remnants of sinnet which are even in the
holiest men: and that to this end, that repentance may evermore increase.
Wherefore we are daily also to beg and desire remission of sins. 3. That we
may desire and receive the former blessings, because without remission of
sins those blessings either are at all not given, or are given to our
destruction. So the wicked do indeed often receive them, but not for their
salvation, as turning rather to their condemnation. Object. What we have, that
we need not desire: But the godly have remission of sins: Therefore the godly
have no need to desire it. Answ. The godly indeed have remission, but not
wholly, neither also as concerning continuance, but only as touching the
beginning thereof. This remission must verily be continued; because sin is
daily continued even in the regenerate: and God also does continue it to them,
unto whom he remitteth their sins in his Son: yet with this condition, that
they daily pray for, and desire that continuance. Although then God has
remitted unto us our sins, yet he will that we ask and desire pardon for
them: and therefore we desire, that, what sins we commit, or shall commit,
the same God would remit unto us.

4. How our sins are remitted unto us. The meaning of the clause, As we
forgive them that trespass against us.
Our sins are so remitted unto us, as we forgive and remit our debtors. And
this Christ added, 1. That we may rightly desire remission of sins, and so
that we may come to pray with true faith and repentance, a sign and token
whereof is the love of our neighbor. 2. That when we find in our selves true
faith and repentance, we may so have a certain argument and comfort in us,
that we are of the number of them, unto whom remission is promised, and that
therefore we shall doubtless obtain remission of sins: when as we may be
certainly assured by this, that we our selves remit unto others from our heart
their trespasses against us, that we please God, albeit many remnants of sin
are dwelling as yet within us. Object. 1. He that remitteth not, is not
remitted: We remit not: Therefore we are not remitted. Answ. He that
remitteth not fully and perfectly, is notwithstanding remitted, so that he
remit truly and sincerely. We therefore shall be forgiven, if we forgive truly
and sincerely. Object. 2. Christ willed us to desire, that God will so remit us
our sins, as we remit our debtors: But we do not perfectly remit our
debtors: Therefore he willed us to desire, that God will not perfectly remit us
our sin, and this is to pray for our own perdition and destruction, since God
condemns even the least sins. Answ. This is a fallacy of speech, deceiving
by mis-construing a word. For, the particle (As) in this petition does not
signify the degree of remission, or a comparison of our remission with that
remission wherewith God remitteth us our sins; but it signifies the kind of
remission; namely, the truth and sincerity of our remission: whereby we forgive
others from our heart, and with a ready will of forgiving them: or (to speak
shorter) here is not made a comparison according to degrees, but according to
the truth of the thing, or according to the truth and will of remission: so
that the meaning is, So perfectly God remitteth us our sins, as we truly and
certainly remit and forgive our neighbor: Luke 11.4.
or, forgive us our debts, because we forgive our debtors. Repl. Then is our
remission of others the cause why God remitteth us. Answ. This is a fallacy,
putting that for a cause which is no cause. For, our remission, wherewith we
forgive others, though not perfectly, yet sincerely, is only an argument and
testimony unto us that God will remit us our sins. For our remission and
forgiving of others cannot merit: 1. Because it is imperfect. 2. Albeit it were
perfect, yet should it not merit; because what we now perform, that we owe
unto God. For, were it so, that we did not perform perfect obedience to God,
yet were we bound of duty to perform it. Repl. But nevertheless, yet here is
betokened an equality of remission in us and God. Answ. Not an equality, but a
likeness and similitude of the kind of remission. Object. 3. He that
remembers injuries, and is desirous of revenge does not truly remit and
forgive. But we all remember injuries, and are desirous of revenge: Therefore
we do not truly remit and forgive. Answ. They that remember injuries; that is,
without a resistance and dislike of this remembrance, or with a yielding
thereto, do not truly remit. If then we withstand and resist the remnants of
sins, which as yet cleave fast to us, and do not yield to them, nothing
hinders why we may not be said to remit others truly, and from our heart, and
so also to attain to that, in regard whereof this particle (As) was added of
Christ; to wit, (which before also we mentioned) to desire and pray rightly.
Now we rightly pray, and desire in faith and repentance; both which this
petition confirms. Faith is confirmed and strengthened by this petition,
because when we truly remit our neighbor, we may and ought certainly to
resolve, that our sins are also remitted us, and so have we a good conscience,
and are assured, that we are heard; according to this promise of Christ: If ye
do forgive men their trespasses, Mat. 6.14.
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. True repentance also is confirmed
and increased in us by this petition. For by this clause, As we, etc. we are
provoked and incited to true repentance, the chief part whereof is the love of
our neighbor. For if we will be forgiven, we must forgive others. Both causes
are contained in the words of Christ before alleged out of Matthew; as also in
the rest which are presently added in the same place in Matthew, by way of
opposition. If ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you; that is, assure your selves also, that your heavenly Father
hears you: in which words is comprehended the confirmation of our faith. But
if ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your Father forgive
you your trespasses. In these words is added a spur to repentance. Object. 4.
Paul obtained remission, neither did he yet forgive all men their trespasses,
because he says, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Alexander the Copper-smith has done me much evil: the Lord reward him
according to his works: Therefore it is not necessary that we should forgive.
Answ. There is a threefold remission or forgiving: Remission is threefold:
Of revenge.
Of revenge. This belongs to all men, because all men ought to remit, and
forgive revenge. Hereof speaks this petition: and this, Paul did forgive
Alexander. Of punishment.
Of punishment. This, as all cannot inflict, so neither can all remit; but
neither the Magistrates also (unto whom yet the same otherwise is committed)
ought always to remit this, but only for certain causes: For, God will have
the execution of his justice and law. But Paul forgave Alexander the punishment
also, as much as concerned himself, yet he will notwithstanding have him
punished of God, but with a condition; that is, if he persist in sin. Of
judgment.
Of judgment. This is not always to be remitted: For God, who forbids
lying, will not have us judge of knaves, that they are honest men: but he will
have us discern the good from the bad. This also Christ commands, saying,
Mat. 7.6. and 10.16.
Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast pearls before swine. And
again: Be ye simple as doves, and wise as serpents, Therefore Paul sinned not
in retaining his judgment and opinion of Alexander, as of a wicked man, as
long as he repented not.

ON THE 52. SABBATH.
Quest. 127. What is the sixth petition?
Answ. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: that is,
Because we our selves are so feeble and weak by nature, that we cannot stand
so much as one moment or instant John 15.5. Psalm. 103.14.
, and our most deadly enemies, Satan 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.12.
, the world John 15.19.
, and our own flesh Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.
, do instantly oppugn and assault us; uphold thou us, and establish and
strengthen us by the might of thy spirit, that we may not in this spiritual
combat yield as vanquished, but may so long stoutly withstand them Mat. 26.41.
Mark 13.33.
, until at length we get full and perfect victory 1 Thessal. 3.13. and 5.23.
.

The Explication.
HEre some make one, some two petitions; but we are not to strive, so that
nothing of the doctrine be taken away, but that this be made full and plain.
Now they are rather two parts of one petition. Lead us not into temptation, is
a petition of delivery from future evil: Deliver us from evil, is a petition
of delivery from present evil.

The special Questions.
1. What Temptation is.
THere are two causes of temptation: Two kinds of tempting. 1. Gods tempting.
Genesis 22.1. Psalm. 139.1. Deuteronomy. 13.3. 1 Pet. 1.6. and 4.12.
The one is from God; the other from the Devil and the Flesh. The temptation,
whereby God tempts us, is a trial of our faith, godliness, repentance, and
obedience, by whatsoever encumbrances, which are by God opposed to every one:
as, by all evils, by the devil, the flesh, lusts, the world, afflictions,
calamities, the cross, etc. that our faith, patience, and constancy may be
manifested and made known both to our selves and others. So God is said to
have tempted Abraham, Joseph, Job, David. Lord, thou have proved me. So God is
said to tempt his people by false Prophets, and to try us by the cross. The
temptation whereby the Devil, and our flesh, and the wicked also tempt us, is
every soliciting to sin; which soliciting it self also is sin. 2. The Devils
temptation. Job 1. and 21.
So the Devil tempted Job, that he might seduce and withdraw him from God,
whom he had before loved and served; albeit the matter fell out otherwise then
the devil would have it. Object. But God tempts no man. Answ. James 1.13.
God tempts no man; that is, by soliciting him to sin, or evil: but he
tempts by procuring and trying us. The Devil, the World, our Flesh, tempt
us; that is, solicit us to evils, and withdraw us from God. But God so
tempts no man: and yet he is said to have tempted Abraham, Job, David; that
is, to have tried their faith and constancy by afflictions and the cross: so
by the same he tries our faith, hope, patience, love, invocation, constancy,
whether we will or no worship and serve him also in affliction.

Hereby we easily understand, seeing temptation is attributed unto the Devil,
and to the corrupt lusts and inclinations of men, in what sense God may be said
to tempt, or not to tempt men. For Satan tempts, both offering occasions of
sinning without, and instigating within to sin, thereby to draw men headlong
into destruction, and to reproach God. Corrupt inclinations tempt; because they
bend, and are prone to actions by God forbidden. But God tempts, not to
destroy us, nor to cause us to sin, but to try and exercise us, when either he
sends calamity upon us, or permits the Devil, or men, or our flesh to
provoke or invite us to sin; hiding for a while his grace and efficacy in
preserving and ruling us, that our faith and constancy may be more known and
apparent, not verily unto God himself (as who from everlasting knows what
and how much it is, and how much also hereafter it shall be by his favor and
blessing) but to our selves and others, that so also a trust and full
persuasion of Gods presence and protection may be confirmed in us by the
examples of deliverance, and in others a desire of following our example may be
kindled, through the beholding of our perseverance, and that in all of us may
be raised and stirred up true gratitude and thankfulness toward God, who
delivers his out of temptations. So God tempts Abraham, commanding him to
sacrifice his son Isaac. Genesis 22. Exodus 15.25. and 16.4.
He is said to have tempted the people with want of water. He commands Manna
to be gathered, as much as was sufficient for every day, that he might tempt or
prove the people, whether they would walk according to his Law or no. He is
said to tempt the people by false Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13.3.
that he might know, whether they loved him with all their heart, and with all
their soul. In the embassage of the Princes of Babel, God left Hezekiah to
tempt or try him, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
and to know all that was in his heart. Wherefore this prayer which Christ
taught us, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, speaks
not simply of trial and manifestation of our faith and godliness; unto which
also David offers himself of his own accord, saying: Prove me, O Lord, and
try me: examine my reins, and mine heart. Psalm. 139.23. James 1.13.
And Saint James speaks not of our trial, but of our incitement to sin. Let
no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is enticed. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, brings forth
death.

It is also hereby manifest, how God punishes the wicked, or chastises or
tempts the godly by evil spirits, neither yet is he the cause or partaker of
those sins, which the Devils commit. For, that by the wicked the wicked are
punished, or the good chastised or exercised, it is the righteous and holy
work of Gods divine will: but that the wicked execute the judgment of God by
sinning, that comes not so to pass by any fault of God himself; but through
the proper corruption of the wicked, and such as themselves have purchased, God
neither willing, nor allowing, nor working, nor furthering their sin; but in
his most just judgment only permitting it, when, executing and accomplishing
by them his own work and counsel, either he reveals not at all his will to
them, or moves not their will, to have his revealed will as the end and level
of their action. This difference of the works of God, and the Devil, and even
Gods working of his just work by the Devil, but permitting only the sin of
the Devil, is evidently confirmed by the story of Job: Job 1. and 2.
Where God purposes to try Job, but the Devil to destroy him. The same is
likewise confirmed by the story of Achab, 1 Kings 22. 2 These. 2.
and by that prophecy of the Apostle concerning Antichrist, where the Devil
seduceth men to destroy them, and God will have them to be seduced thereby to
punish them, and suffers the Devil by sinning to execute and fulfill his
will.

2. What is, to lead into temptation.
WHen God is said to lead us into temptation, it is meant, that God, according
to his most just will and judgment tries us. Now, to lead us into
temptation, wherewith the Devil tempts us, is, that God permits the
Devil to solicit us. Now we here in this petition pray against both (which
also we briefly touched before) namely, What here we pray against.
our trial, and allurement, or soliciting to sin. For we desire, 1. That God
will not tempt us to try us, but yet with a condition of his will and pleasure;
and if he do tempt us, yet that he will not tempt us above our strength: and
that also he will give us strength. 2. We desire that he will not suffer the
Devil, or the world, or our own flesh to solicit us to sin: or if he suffer
them, that yet himself will be present with us; that we fall not wholly into
sins. The meaning then is, Lead us not into temptation; that is, suffer us not
to be tempted above our power, neither suffer the Devil so to tempt us, that
either we sin, or wholly revolt from thee. Ob. Temptations which are good in
respect of God, are evil in respect of the Devil, and yet notwithstanding
into them does God lead us: Therefore God is the cause of sin. Ans. This
reason contains a fallacy of the accident. They are sins in respect of the
Devil, because he will thereby allure us to sins: in respect of God they are
not sins, because they are a trial, and a reclaiming of us from sins; as
also, because they are a confirmation and strengthening of our faith.
Wherefore, as temptations are trials, chastisements, martyrdomes, they are sent
of God: but as they are evil, and sins, God will them not (to wit, as, To
will them, is to approve and work them;) but only permits them.

3. What is, To deliver us from evil?
BY the name of Evil some understand here the Devil, some sin, some death:
but the best is to comprehend in it all evils both of crime and pain, whether
they be present, or to come; yea, and the Devil himself, the author, and
Grandcomplotter, (...). 1 John 2.14. Mat. 5.37.
or Arch-contriver of all mischiefs, who is called that wicked one, by a
significant propriety of speech. I write unto you young men, because ye have
overcome the wicked. Whatsoever is more then these, comes of Evil. Cyprian
understands this petition of evils; that is, of all adversities and
afflictions, which the enemy attempteth against us, from which we can have no
sure guard, except God protect and deliver us. When as then we desire that God
will deliver us from evil, we desire, 1. That he will send no evil on us,
What here we pray for.
but deliver us from all evils present and to come, both of crime and pain. 2.
That if he send on us any evils, that he would mitigate them in this life, and
turn them unto our salvation, that they may be good and profitable unto us. 3.
That he will at length in the life to come fulfill and perfectly deliver us,
and wipe away every tear from our eyes.

4 Why this petition is necessary.
THis petition is necessary, 1. In respect of the multitude and power of our
enemies, and the greatness of evils, and our own weakness and infirmity. 2.
In respect of the former petition, for the obtaining thereof: because our
sins are not remitted, except we persist in faith and repentance. If then we
will that God remit and pardon us our sins, we must stand steadfast in faith
and repentance: but steadfast we shall not stand, if we be tempted above our
strength, if we fall into sins, if lastly we revolt from God himself.
Object. We are not to pray against such things as are good, and profitable for
us: The temptations of God, as trials, diseases, poverty, sending false
Prophets, are good things and profitable unto us: We are not therefore to pray
against the temptations of God. Ans. The Minor contains a fallacy of the
accident. We are not to pray against such things as are good and profitable;
that is, which are by themselves profitable or good. But afflictions, trials,
crosses, and other temptations are by themselves evil and unprofitable, and
not good. But yet they are good, and profit us only by an accident: which
accident is the mercy of God accompanying them, without which they are not only
not profitable, but also a part of death, and a most present way to death, both
temporal and eternal. Wherefore as afflictions and crosses are evil by
themselves, and destroy nature, so far forth we pray against them: but as they
are good and profitable unto us that believe, so we pray not against them: or,
we pray not against that good which concurreth with afflictions, and the
cross: but against the cross it self, and afflictions, which are by
themselves evil, because they destroy nature. So also we pray against death,
as being evil by it self: and Christ himself also prayed against it. Mat.
26.39.
Let this cup pass from me: As then death was a destruction, a torment, and
evil, so Christ prayed against it, and would it not: yea, neither would the
Father himself it, as it is so considered. But as Christ's death on the Cross
was a ransom for the sins of the elect, so both Christ, and the Father would
the same. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

Object. 2. What things God will, those things ought we not to refuse. But God
will our temptations. Therefore we may not refuse them. Answ. What things God
will, those we ought not to refuse; that is, in such respect, as he will that
we suffer them, with a submitting of our will unto his divine will; or such
things as he simply will. But God wills not simply temptations neither, in
this respect, as they are a destruction, but as they are exercises of faith and
prayer, or martyrdomes, or a trial of our constancy: and in this respect, and
so far, we ought also to wish them, but not simply. And that we are not simply
to will or wish temptations or afflictions, it hereby easily appears, because
it is patience to suffer them: which it should not be, but rather our duty, if
we ought simply to wish them, neither might we pray against them. God will not
therefore that we wish for evils as evils: but as evils are good, so will he
have us to bear them patiently.

Object. 3. What thou shall not obtain, that thou desire in vain: But we
shall not obtain, never to fall into temptation: Wherefore in vain do we
desire it. 2 Timothy 3.12.
For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. Ans.
This is a fallacy, putting that for a cause which is no cause. For therefore
desire we that we be not led into temptation, not because we are wholly to be
delivered; but, 1. Because we are delivered from many things, in which we
should perish, if we should not request deliverance. This is a cause
sufficient. 2. That those evils also into which we fall, may be good and
profitable unto us. And to those which desire in general deliverance, will God
grant these two so great blessings. But yet notwithstanding, by reason of the
remains of sin in us, he will have this benefit to be imperfect: which
nevertheless we are to ask wholly, with submitting of our will unto the will
of God, and with full persuasion, that in the life to come we shall wholly
attain unto it.

The use of this petition is, The uses of this petition.
, Confession of our infirmity. Mat. 25.41.
A confession of our infirmity in sustaining or bearing the very least
temptations, that no man insolently and proudly lift up himself, as Peter did,
when he professed that he would die with Christ: nor account the glory of his
confession and sufferings for his own, seeing the Lord himself teaches us
humility, saying: Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. 1 Cor.
10.12.
He that thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he fall. A declaration of
the miseries of this life.
A declaration of the miseries of this life, lest we should wexe secure, and
love and cleave to the world. A confession of Gods providence.
A confession of Gods providence, whereby (as Cyprian testifies) is showed,
that the Devil can effect nothing against us, except God first permit him:
that so our whole fear and reverence might bend to God-wards, seeing in our
temptations that wicked one can do nothing, except power be given him of God.
Now the Devil has power over us, according as our sins reign in us: as it
is said; Who gave Jacob for a spoil, Esaias 42.24.
and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, because we have sinned against
him? For they would not walk in his ways, neither be obedient unto his Law.
And this power indeed is given him to a double end: either to our punishment
when we offend; or to our glory when we are tried, etc. Thus far Cyprian.

The order and coherence of the petitions.
Now we are to observe the order and coherence of these petitions. 1. The Lord
commands us to desire the true knowledge of God and his promise, which is the
cause of all other his blessings. 2. He wills us to desire, that God would
govern us by his Spirit, and so continually preserve and confirm us in this
knowledge. 3. That every of us may do and fulfill thereby his duty in his
vocation and calling. 4. That he would give us those things whereby every one
may do his duty, namely, corporal blessings. The fourth petition then agrees
with the former: because if we must at all be in our own vocation and calling,
we must live and have things necessary for the maintenance of our life. 5. He
adjoyneth next after the petition of spiritual and corporal blessings, a very
fit objection of our unworthiness: That thou may give us spiritual and
corporal blessings, forgive us our debts. Wherefore the fifth petition is the
ground and foundation of the rest, which being overthrown, the rest fall to
ground. For if thou resolve not, that thou have God gracious and favorable
unto thee, how shall thou have him to be merciful? How shall thou continue in
that knowledge which thou have not? How shall thou do thy duty, and the will
of God, seeing thou art his enemy, and endeavourest the contrary? How shall
thou ascribe all things to God? How shall they turn to thy salvation? 6. After
the petition of spiritual and corporal blessings, there follows lastly, the
petition of our deliverance from evils both present and to come. And from this
last petition, we return again to the first: Deliver us from all evils both
of crime and pain, both present and to come, that we may know thee to be our
perfect Savior, and so thy name may be hallowed and sanctified of us.

Quest. 128. How concludest thou this Prayer?
Answ. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever: that is,
we ask and crave all things of thee; because, seeing both thou art our King,
and almighty, thou art both willing and able to give them all unto us Romans
10.11, 12. 2 P^t. 2.9.
. And these things we therefore ask, that out of them, not to us, but unto thy
holy Name all glory may redound John 14.15. J^^^m. 33.8, 9. Psalm 115.1.
.

The Explication.
THis last part of prayer serves to confirm our faith and belief, or
confidence of being heard, and obtaining our desire; to wit, that God will, and
is able to give us those things which we desire.

Thine is the kingdom.
Thine is the kingdom.] This first reason is drawn from the duty of a King,
which is, to hear his subjects, to defend, and preserve them. Therefore thou,
O God, seeing thou art our King, mightier then all our enemies, having all
things in thy power, good and evil, (evil, so that thou art able to repress
them: good, so that there is no good so great, which thou can not give, as is
agreeing and standing with thy nature) and seeing we are thy subjects, be
present and assist us with thy power, and save us, as who art loving unto thy
subjects, and thy protection and safeguard is alone saving and preserving. He
is called a King, 1. Because he has power over all creatures. 2. Because he is
the peculiar King of the Church.

The power.
And the power.] The second reason is drawn from the power of God. Hear us, O
God, and give us what we desire: because thou art mightier then all our
enemies, thou art able to give us all things, and thou only art able, in thee
alone rests this power, joined with exceeding goodness.

The glory.
And the glory.] The third reason is taken from the end or final cause. We
desire these things for thy glory. From thee alone, the true God and sovereign
King, we desire and expect all good things, and profess thee to be the Author
and fountain of all good things. And verily because this glory is due unto
thee, therefore also do we desire them of thee. Hear us therefore for thy
glory. For this petition and expectation of all good things from thee, is
nothing else but the attributing and yielding unto thee thy due glory and
honor: and especially, because thou will also for thy glory sake give us those
things which we desire. For what things serve for thy glory, the same will thou
perform and do: but those things which we desire, serve for thy glory:
therefore thou will give them us. Give us therefore these things that we
desire, and the glory shall return and redound unto thee, if thou deliver us.
For so shall thy kingdom, and power, and glory be manifested.

Object. We seem to bring persuasive and moving arguments unto God, whereby we
may move him to do what we desire. But in vain are reasons used to him who is
unchangeable: God is unchangeable. Therefore in vain use we these reasons unto
him. Ans. This is a fallacy, putting that for a cause, which is no cause. For,
we grant this argument in respect of God, but not in respect of us. For we do
not, when we thus speak, use reasons to move God, or persuade him to do it, but
to persuade our selves that God will do this, and to confirm and assure us that
we shall be heard, and to acknowledge our necessity, and the goodness and
truth of God. Wherefore these reasons are not adjoined to our prayers, as
thereby to move God, but only to confirm and assure us, that God will do what
we desire, because these are the causes why he does it.

Thou art a most good King: therefore thou will give these things to thy
subjects Thou art most powerful and mighty: therefore thou will show thy power
in giving these gifts, which are most great, and which can be given of none
other, but of thee alone. It shall be to thy glory: therefore thou will do it,
because thou have care of thy glory.

Quest. 129. What means this particle, Amen?
Ans. That the thing is sure and out of doubt 2 Cor. 1.20. 2 Timothy 2.13.
. For my prayer is much more certainly heard of God, then I feel in my heart,
that I unfeignedly desire the same.

The Explication.
THis particle is added, not as a part of the prayer: but it notes and
betokens, 1. A true and sincere desire, wherewith we wish that we may be
heard: that the thing we ask may be sure and certain unto us, and that God
would condescend and answer unto our request. 2. A certainty and profession of
our confidence, or confirmation of our faith, whereby we trust that we shall be
heard. Wherefore the word Amen, signifies, 1. So be it: and, sure and certain
be that which we desire. 2. So God (being not unmindfull of his promise)
truly and certainly hear us.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Laus and Gloria.
A large Alphabeticall Table, containing all the chief and remarkable points
contained in this BOOK.
A
ABsolution. How the word of God does absolve and condemn. 485. Actions. All
actions are not sins in themselves, but by accident. 209. No action evil in it
self in respect of God. 210. Adultery. The meaning of the word Adultery. 601.
Vide Chastity. Affability. What it is. 613. Afflictions. How many kinds of
them. 103. How they are punishments* and how crosses, ibidem. Eight causes of
them on the godly. 104. The comforts which they have in them. 105. 106. Three
causes of the afflictions of the godly. 161. All. Why all men are not saved by
Christ, but the faithful only. 132. Whether Christ died for all. 298. A
reconciliation of those Scriptures which seem to make for Christ's dying for
all. 298. 299. Amen. What it signifies. 655. Angels. What good Angels are. 189.
They are finite. ibid. How they are called the children of God. 190. They are
the Ministers of the Elect. ib. Why called Powers. 191. of evil Angels. ibid.
Christ called an Angel. 256. Two reasons proving it. ibid. etc. Anger. Gods
anger against sin. 165. Anointed. Vid. Christ. Why Christ is so called. 226.
What this anointing is. ib. the Analogy between the sign and the thing
signified. 227. Christ is anointed spiritually. 228. Why God cannot be said to
be anointed. ibidem. and yet in what sort Christ may be said to be anointed,
according to his Godhead. ibidem. What the anointing of Christians is. 234
What it is to be the partaker of Christ's anointing. 235. Arrians. Their
heresies confuted, 263. 264. 265. etc. Ascension. What Christ's ascension is.
313. whither he ascended. ibid. The manner how. 314. The fruits of it. 320.
B
BAptism. What it is. 409. Three things comprehended in it. 410. The
differences between baptism and the washing of old. ibidem. Its ends, and why
it is not to be re-iterated. 411. What it is to be baptized into Christ's death.
412. A twofold washing in baptism. 413 What the right and lawful use of
baptism is. 414. The proper and improper forms of speaking of baptism. 415.
Why baptism is called the washing of the new birth. 416. The baptism of
Infants confirmed by many arguments. 417. The Anabaptists Arguments answered
about the baptism of Infants. 418. 419. etc. How baptism and circumcision
agree, and how they differ. 423. 424. Beget. Begotten. How Christ is said to be
the only begotten Son of God. 239. Why according to his manhood be cannot be
properly so called. 240. Believe. What it is to believe God, and IN God. 179.
what it is to believe IN Christ. 237. Vid. Faith. Blasphemy. The difference
between the blasphemy against God, and against the holy Ghost. 558. Blessings.
We may desire as well corporal as spiritual blessings. 641. why corporal
blessings are comprehended under the word Bread. 643. Body. How the parts of
man's body are attributed to God. 152. The Image of GOD in man does not argue a
bodily shape. ibidem. The similitude of man's body to declare our union with
Christ. 234. Of the bodies resurrection. Vide Resurrection. 372. 373. The
ubiquity of Christ's body confuted. 459. Borne. Five causes of Christ's being
borne of the Virgin Mary. 272. The benefit of it. 272. 273. Bounty. In what the
bounty of God is seen. 164. Bread. The breaking of Bread is one of the names
which the Lords Supper yet retains. 427. Two things signified by it. 434.
Four causes why this ceremony is yet retained. ibid. whether Bread and Wine
are the very body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament. 436. why the Bread is
called the body. 455. their Analogy. 456. How corporal blessings are
contained under the name of Bread. 643. how we call Bread (in the Lords Prayer)
Ours. ibid. why Daily Bread, and This Day. 644. Brother. Brotherhood. Of our
Brotherhood with Christ. 240. Burial. To what end Christ was buried. 300.
C
Catechism. Catechizing. What. 25. who were the Catechumeni. 25. 26. The
original and perpetual use of Catechism. 26. The parts and points of it. 27.
Why necessary. ibidem. Its ends. 29. Ceremonies. What they are, with their
several sorts. 588. whether the Church may ordain ceremonies. 589. Chastity.
What it is. 602. Its contrary vices. 602. 603. etc. Vide Adultery. Christ. He
is perfectly just four ways. 115. why Christ is the Son, and not Father,
nor holy Ghost. 118. 119. why all are not saved by him, and why the faithful
only. 132. why he is called Jesus, a Savior. 220. his office and benefits
differ. ibidem. He is our most perfect Savior. 223. whom he saves. 224. why
Jesus is called the Anointed. 226. 227. he is anointed spiritually. 228. Vide
Anoint. Christ's Prophetical function what 229. Vide Prophet. Why he is called
the Word. 230. why a Priest, with the circumstances thereof. See the word
Priest. Why Christ is a King, and what his Kingdom is. Vide King. 233. Christ
is our head in three respects. 235. how Christ can be called the only begotten
Son of GOD, when we also are called his sons. 238. Of Christ's Godhead.
241. his Godhead proved by our Regeneration. 251. Christ the Son of GOD, a
person really distinct from ^he Father and the holy Ghost. 257. Christ has the
whole Godhead entire. 258. The properties thereof. 259. he is equal in honor
with the Father and the holy Ghost. 260. Christians. Why we are so called.
233. what our anointing is. 234. Our Prophetical function and Priesthood.
236. Church. A definition of the doctrine of the Church. 1. Reasons why GOD
would have his Church distinguished from other Sects. ibidem. Notes of the
Church. 3. The parts of its doctrine, with the differences from other Sects. 3.
4. The difference between Church-doctrine and Philosophy. 3. 4. How the
Church-doctrine was delivered of God, and how confirmed. 4. 5. Reasons why the
Scriptures depend not on the Church. 5. Objections against this answered. 6. 7.
The Papists brag of their Churches not erring. 16. Not the Church, but the holy
Ghost is Judge of the Word. 21. Three Rules for having the Churches consent
therein. 22. What we believe concerning the holy Catholic Church. 346. 347.
What the Church is. 347. how many ways taken. 348. The difference between the
visible and invisible Church. ibid. Her marks. 349. Why she is called One,
Holy, Catholic Church. 350. Seven differences between Church and
Commonwealth. 351. Whence arises the difference between the Church and the
rest of mankind. ib. Whether any can be saved out of the Church. 352. Of
Church Discipline. Vid. Discipline, or Ordinances. 542. etc. Circumcision.
What, and why instituted. 422. Why abolished. 423. Baptism succeeds it.
ibid. How Baptism and Circumcision agree, and how they disagree. ibidem. Why
Christ was circumcised. 424. Comfort. What. 31. The true comfort proper to the
Church. 32. How many parts there are of this comfort. ibidem. Why spiritual
comfort is the only good and sound comfort. 33. How many things are required
for the attaining of this comfort. 34. Communion. What is meant by the
Communion of Saints. Vide Saints. 360. Conception. Three things to be observed
in Christ's conception. 271. The full meaning of the Article of Christ's
conception. page 272. Concupiscence. What. 614. How it differs from Original
sin. ibid. How it is natural unto us. ibid. Conscience. How it frames a
practical Syllogism. page 39. How the Elect may sin against conscience, but
not unto death. page 55. Of sinning against conscience, and not against
conscience. page 59. Consubstantiation. What it is. 450. Its Age and Parentage.
ibidem. The Schism of the Consubstantials. 451. 452. Two principal grounds
thereof. page 452. The refutation of the opinion. page 452. 453. etc. 473. 474.
476. etc. Contentedness. What. 608. Contracts. Ten sorts of them. 607.
Conversion. What works our conversion. page 90. The parts of it. page 500.
502. What it is, and why necessary. page 501. Why the latter part of our
conversion is called quickening. page 504. The manifold causes of it. 504. 505.
The effects. page 505. Whether our conversion be perfect in this life. ibidem.
In what a godly man's conversion differs from an ungodly man's. 506. Covenant. Of
the Covenant of GOD, and what a Covenant is. 124. Diverse sorts of it. ibidem.
Why a Covenant is called a Testament. ibidem. How a Covenant can be made
betwixt God and Man. page 125. Whether there be one or more Covenants. ibidem.
How the Sacrament is called a new Covenant. 435. Creation. The end of our
creation. page 40. 41. To create signifies three things. page 181. How the
creation is unknown to Philosophers. page 182. Their Arguments against it.
ibidem. Why God would have the doctrine of the creation held in the Church.
188. Credulity. What it is. 612. Creed. The Creed expounded. page 142. 143.
etc. Two reasons why it is called Apostolic. page 143. Four reasons why other
Creeds were received into the Church. ibidem. Why that is to be received before
other Creeds. ibid. The parts of that Creed. page 144. The great wisdom and
order of the Spirit and Church, in disposing the Articles of the Creed. 220.
Cross. Four causes, for which God would have Christ to suffer the death of
the cross. page 295. Ancient types of that death. ibidem. Curse. What cursing
is, and what kinds of it are lawful. 558.
D
DEath. How Christ is said to be dead. page 296. Whether it were requisite that
Christ should die. page 297. For whom he died, and whether he died for all.
page 298. Whether Christ's death has taken away our death. 301. The benefits.
301. Debts. What Christ, in the Lords Prayer, calls debts. 647. Decalogue.
Its division. page 527. Rules for the understanding of it. page 528. The
differences between the first and second Table in the Decalogue. 529. Deceive.
How God is said to deceive a deceived Prophet. 163. Deliver. Deliverance. Why
the knowledge of our delivery is necessary. page 34. 35. What man's delivery is,
and wherein it consists. 108. Three causes of the possiblenesse of man's
delivery. 108.109. Arguments against it answered. 110.111. Whether it be
necessary, certain, and absolute. 111.112. two means for it. ibidem.
Descension. Of Christ's descending into hell. Vide Hell. 303. etc. Devils. Their
sundry appellations, with the reasons. 191. They are unchangeably evil. 192.
Discipline. Reasons why civil discipline is necessary among the Unregenerate.
63. Of men's authority in the Churchdiscipline. 542.543. A difference between
Civil and Ecclesiastical laws. 544.
E
ELect. Election. That the Elect may sin against conscience, yet not unto
death. page. 55. How far known unto us. 358. Whether the Elect are always
certain of their election. ibidem. Whether they be always members of the
Church ibid. Whether they may finally fall. 359. Equity. What. 595. Err.
Error. The Papists boast of their Church not erring. page 16. Essence. Vide
Person. Excommunication. What. 482.494. Two sorts of it. ibidem. Persons that
are to be excommunicated, and the order. 486. The ends and uses of
excommunication. 487. The abuses of it. ibidem. Objections against the word
alleged for excommunication. 492.494.
F
FAith. Faith, what it is, with its nature, and diverse names, kinds, and
differences. 133.134. What Justifying Faith is, with the causes. 136.137. Faith
and Hope how differing. 137. The properties of justifying faith. ibid. The
principal cause of faith. 138. Its effects. 139. To whom justifying faith is
given. ibid. Faith with its profession necessary for five causes. 140. Three
ways to know that we have faith. ibid. Faith may faint, but not fall finally.
ibidem. How we may be made righteous by faith only. 385.386. Three causes of
it, and four reasons why it ought to be maintained against the Papists. 386.
Faith comes of the holy Ghost. 393. differently wrought by the Word and
Spirit, and Sacraments. ibid. Vices contrary to faith. 535. Fall. Whether God
does leave the fall of man unpunished. 101. The faith of Gods children shall
not fall away finally. 140. Fathers. The use of the Fathers testimonies in
points of doctrine. 18. Father. God called Father in diverse respects. 179.629.
Five sorts of Superiors understood by the name of Father and Mother. 590. Vide
Parents. Father in the Lords Prayer how taken. 630. Eight causes why we are to
call God Our Father in heaven. ibid. Fear. The fear and love of God how they
differ. 337. Three differences between son-like and slavish fear. ibidem. The
fear of God taken for his whole worship. 538. Fidelity. What. 608. Flattery.
What. 612. Flesh. The Word made flesh expounded. 242.243.254. Of the
resurrection of the flesh. 364.365. etc. What it is to eat the flesh of Christ
in the Lords Supper. 430.431. Forgive. Forgiveness. What forgiveness of sin
is. 362.647. Who gives it. ibid. By whom. 363. Whether it agrees with Gods
justice. ibid. To whom, and how it is given. 364. Why we are to desire
forgiveness. 648. How they are forgiven. ibid. Fortitude. What. 599. Fortune.
Fate or chance how accepted. 214. the difference between Stoics and
Christians herein. 215. What fortune is denied. 216. Free. Freedom. In what
God is said to be free. 164.165. Free Will. The state of the maine question
about free will. 75. What it is. 76. The difference of it in God, Angels, and
Men. ibid. 77.78.79. Whether there be any free will in us, and what it is.
82.83. The manner and degrees of man's free will. 83.84.86.87. The beginning of
man's will to good whence it is. 91. Reasons why the Regenerate use liberty not
only to good, but to evil also. 92.93.
G
GOds. Whence sprang the multitude of gods. 163. But there is but one, proved
by eight arguments. 168.169. Glory. Two things signified by Gods glory. 156.
God. How he is the cause of sin, not as sin, but as punishments. 67. Vide
plura. 68.69.70. Sin is not made of God, because it is no creature, but the
corruption of a creature. 71. God, though the mover of wicked wills, yet not the
mover of the wickedness of the will. 80. God is said to wish any thing two
ways. 87. Merely GOD could satisfy for man. 114. Three causes of men's
doubting whether there be a God. 146. Reasons proving that there is a God.
ibidem, etc. Who, and what God is. 149.150. Why Nature cannot thoroughly show
what GOD is. 150. The Theological and Philosophical descriptions of GOD. 151.
A threefold difference of God and Idols. ibidem. How the parts of man's body are
attributed to GOD. 152. More concerning the explication of Gods attributes.
152.153.154.155. etc. Three things meant by Gods unchangeablenesse, and five
reasons of it. 157. How he is said to repent. ibidem. Of his goodness and
righteousness 160. Proofs that there is but one God. 168.169. Two
significations of the word GOD. 169. God a Father in diverse respects. 179. Gods
providence what, and why to be known. 193.197. Arguments against the Divinity
of the Son and holy Ghost. 262.263, How GOD is said to be Our God. 532. What
it is to have other gods. 533. Errors touching God. ibid. God. Four
significations of Gods Name. 556. Goodness. Six significations of Gods
goodness in Scripture. 160. All good is done by the will of God. 199. what
things are said to be good. ibid. Gospel. The differences between the Law and
Gospel are two. page 2.126. yea, four. 130. The Gospel what, and its threefold
signification. 127. What order is to be observed in teaching the Law and the
Gospel. 128. Its perpetuity in the Church. ibid. etc. How the Gospel was
promised to our Fathers. 129. Its proper effects. 131. Its certainty how it
appears. ibid. Grace. Gods denial of grace no cruelty, but often a way to
greater mercy. 85. Readiness of mind to receive grace is not before
conversion, but after. 89. Gravity. What. 594.
H
HAllow. What it signifies. 632. How we pray for the hallowing of Gods name.
633. Hand. What the right hand of God signifies. 322. Four things wherein
Christ's sitting at Gods right hand consists. 322. A full description of it.
323. How he may be said to sit always there. 324. With other circumstances.
325.326. Head. Christ is our head in three respects. 235. Heaven. Two Arguments
why GOD is said to be specially in heaven. 184. Heaven is the seat of the
Elects blessedness. ibid. What heaven signifies. 313. How Christ ascended
thither. 314. Vide Ascension. Hell. Of Christ's descending into hell. 303. The
significations of the word hell in Scripture. ibid. etc. The use of Christ's
descending into hell. 306. Heresies. Diverse sorts of them confuted, 296. Holy.
What it signifies. 632. Vide Hallow. Holy Ghost. Of the sin against the holy
Ghost. 59. Why called Unpardonable. ibidem, etc. Why so called. 60. Rules
touching this sin. ibid. The differences between other sins pardoned, and
this of the holy Ghost. 60.61. It is not incident to the Elect. ibid. etc. We
may not judge any man to sin against the holy Ghost, until we see him dead in
apostasy and blasphemy. 61. How the Son was conceived by the holy Ghost.
270.271. What we believe concerning the holy Ghost. 335. With many necessary
circumstances concerning that person in Trinity. a page 335. and 346. Its
proceeding from the Son proved three ways. 338. Its diverse titles. 341. Its
gifts of two sorts. 342. What is meant by giving the holy Ghost. 343.344. The
sending of it is no local motion. 344. How retained, and how lost. 345. A
distinction between blasphemy against God, and against the holy Ghost. 558.
vide Spirit. Hope. Faith and Hope how they differ. 137. Vices contrary to Hope.
536. Humanity. What. 600. Humility. What. 538. Hypocrisy. What. 541.
I
JEhovah. No English word will retain it, but the word Lord. 261. Jesus. Why
the Son of God was called Jesus. 220. What the name signifies, and the
differences between his name and others so named. 121. How the whole three
persons may be said to be Saviors. ibid. From what evils, and how Jesus saves
us. 222.223. Whom he saves. 224. Why Jesus is called Christ. 226. Two causes
for which Jesus was called Christ, 227. Idols. Idolatry. A threefold
difference of God and Idols. 151. Idolatry what it is. 527. Two sorts of Idols.
334. A twofold Idolatry. 540. Image. What the image of God is in man. 42. How
far lost. 43. How repaired. 44. Christ called the image of God in two respects.
43. So Angels and Men. ibid. The ends for which God preserves a remnant of his
image in man. 44. Whether any images may be made. 546.547. The diverse names of
an image. 547. Images not simply forbidden. 547. Two sorts of unlawful images.
548. Four reasons of the unlawfulness of making an image of God. 548. A Table
for the distinction of images. 549.550. Whether all worship at images be
forbidden. 590. Why images are to be abolished. 551. Eight causes why images
are to be abolished in Churches. ibid. How, and by whom they are to be
abolished. 552. Three differences between the images in Solomon's time and ours.
553. Impossibilities. Whether God were unjust in imposing impossibilities. page
99. The causes and ends of his commanding them. 100. Incarnation. A confession
of the incarnation of the Word by the father of Antioch. 289. etc.
Inclinations. Proofs that corrupt inclinations are sin. 51. Indifferent.
Things indifferent are diligently to be discerned from Gods worship. 541.
Indignation. What. 599. Infants. Whether they sin, wanting will. 54. Their
baptism proved to be meet and lawful by four arguments. 417. Anabaptists
objections against it answered. 418.419. How infants believe. 420. Two reasons
why infants may not be admitted to the Lords Supper, though they are to
Baptism. 421. Intercession. How Christ makes intercession for us. 318. Judge.
Judgment. Of the last Judgment, with 13. circumstances thereof. See a page
327. ad 334. Just. Justice. Christ perfectly just four ways. 115. How we are
just before God. 379.382. What our justice is, and how manifold. 380.381. In
what Justice differs from Justification. 381. How Christ's satisfaction is
made our justice. 383. Vide Righteous or Righteousness. Communicative Justice
what. 606. What original justice toward God and our neighbor is. 614.
Justification. The signification of the word. 384. How we are justified by
grace, how by Christ's merit, how by faith. 385. Three causes why faith only
justifies. 386. Four reasons of our maintenance of this doctrine against
Papists. ibid. Ten causes why we cannot be justified by works. 387. That this
doctrine does not make men either careless or profane. 389.390. With what
difference faith and works are required in them that are to be justified. 390.
Vide Faith. Works.
K
KEy. What the power of the Keys of Gods Kingdom is, and why called a key.
481.482. Two parts of the power of these keys. 483. To whom the power of these
keys is committed. 485. How the power of the keys differs from the civil
power. 488.489. Kill. How the Letter is said to kill 23. King. Christians are
Kings. 237. Kingdom. What Christ's kingdom is. 233. what is the kingdom of
Christians. 237. Four differences between Christ's kingdom and ours. 237. How
the kingdom of heaven is opened. 480. 481. The power of the keys of this
kingdom, and what those keys are. 481. 482. Of Gods universal and special
kingdom. 634. The parts of Gods kingdom. ibid. etc. How manifold. ibid. Who
is king and head in this kingdom. 635. Of the Citizens and Laws of this
kingdom. 635. 636. Its enemies and laws. 636. How it is said to come. ibid.
Why we are to desire that it might come. 637.
L
LAW. The differences between the Law and the Gospel are two. page 2. What it
requires of us. 36. A distinction of Law and faith. 38. Why the love of our
neighbor is called the second commandment. 38. What it is to examine our
selves by the law, and how we do apply the curse of the law to our selves. 39.
What the law is in general. 516. Its parts. 517. How far abrogated, and not
abrogated by Christ. 519. 520. 522. By faith the Law is three ways
established. 523. In what the Moral law differs from the Gospel. 523. 524.
A difference between civil and ecclesiastical laws. 544. Four uses of the
ceremonial law. 617. Two of the Judicial and Moral law. ibid. Seven uses of
the Moral law in nature restored. 618. Why we are to desire the perfect
fulfilling of the law by us in this life. ibid. etc. How the law is the Letter,
and how the Gospel is the Spirit. 621. Christ in himself fulfilled the law two
ways. 621. And in us two ways. ibid. The law is said to increase sin two
ways. ibid. Letter. What is meant by the word Letter. in holy Writ. 23. How
the Letter is said to kill. ibid. Liberality. What. 608. The affinity between
liberality and parsimony. 609. Life. Eternal life what, 375. Who gives it.
376. To whom, for what cause, how. 377 When. 378. Whether in this life we may
be assured of everlasting life. 378. Lord. Why Christ is called Lord, why Our
Lord, and how many ways. 268. 269. Lost. Five means by which the Spirit is
lost. 346. Love. Why the love of God is called the first and greatest
commandment in the law. 37. The law and fear of God how they differ. 537.
Lust. What. 602. Three kinds of it. 602. 603. Lying. What, with distinctions.
611.
M
Magic. What. 534. Magistrates. Four duties which they owe. 592. Man. What
manner of creature he was made by God. page 40. The end of his creation. ibid.
What the image of God is in man. 42. How far forth lost, and how repaired in
man. 43. 44. It was necessary that man should have free power either to stand
or fall. 71. No other creature could sat is fie for man, but man. 113. How the
parts of man's body are attributed to God. 152. Marriage. What. 613. Its causes.
604. Eight conditions of lawful marriage. 604. Whether it be a thing
indifferent or no. 605. The duties of married persons. ibidem. Mass. The
original of the word. 456. 457. the difference between the Lords Supper and
it. 456. 457. 458. Nine causes for which the Mass is to be abolished. 460.
Means. It must be used for three causes. 217. Mediator. Our Mediator must be
very man. page 114. 115. He must be very God. 116. Reasons. 116. 117. Eight
reasons why the Son, not the Father, nor the holy Ghost should be Mediator.
118. 119. What a Mediator is, and what need man has of one. 120. The office of
a Mediator. 121. What our Mediator does for us, with the benefit of his
Mediatourship. 122. Three things in the person of a Mediator. 123. There can
be but one Mediator. 123. Christ Mediator according to both natures. 229.
Whether there be two natures in Christ our Mediator. 273. The office and
properties of Christ's Mediatourship. 285. 286. 287. Member. What it is to be a
member of Christ. 243. Mercy. Arguments of the mercy of God in preserving his
creatures. 163. Merits. No good work of the creature meriteth reward. 217. The
efficacy of Christ's merits performs three things unto us. 223. Whether our
good works can merit. 514. 515. Ministers Ministry. What. 587. Its end,
degrees, and duties. 587. 588. Unto whom it is to be committed. 588. Miracles.
How true miracles are discerned from false. 9. Misery. Why the knowledge of our
misery is necessary. 34. Whence known. 36. Its name and nature. ibid. Known
two ways 39. Modesty. What. 594. Murder. Why internal murder is forbidden.
596.
N
NAme. Four significations of distinctions of Gods name. 556. The parts and
virtues of the right and lawful usage of the name of God. 558. What the name of
God signifies. 632. Nature. Whence the wickedness of man's nature arises. 45.
Why Nature cannot thoroughly show what God is. 150. Whether there be two natures
in Christ our Mediator. 273. The truth of Christ's humane nature proved. 273.
Sin is not of the nature of man's flesh, but an accident only thereof. 275. The
union of the two natures in Christ. 278. A rule touching the properties of both
natures in Christ. 281. 282. etc. Whether Christ suffered according to both
natures. 293. Neighbor. Why the love of our neighbor is called the second
commandment. 39.
O
Oaths. Vide. Swearing. page 569. etc. Whether all oaths are to be kept. 573.
why the Israelites kept their oath made with the Gibeonites. 574. Omnipotency.
Three things signified by Gods omnipotency. 159. Two differences between the
Church of God and Philosophy, in conceiving of Gods omnipotency. ibid. Order. A
double liberty of the Church in matter of order. 18. There is order in the most
disordered things. 208.
P
PArents. Four reasons why parents rather then other Governors are to be
obeyed. 590. Four duties of Parents. 591. Passover. What it was. 467. 468.
Its ends and uses. 468. 469. Passion. Vide Suffering. What we believe
concerning Christ's passion. 290. What is meant by the name of Christ's passion.
291. Three differences between Christ's passion and men's sufferings. 292. The
causes impellent of Christ's passion. 294. the ends of it ibidem. Passions.
Humane passions attributed to God for two reasons. 157. Patience. What. 539.
Perfection. In what sense the Scripture does attribute perfection to the works
of the Regenerate, 94. How God is most perfect in himself. 155. Whether our
conversion has perfection in this life. 505. Whether our works be perfectly
good; and, being not so, how they can please God. 510. 511. Whether those that
are converted may perfectly keep the commandments of God. 615. 616. Permit.
Permission. Three causes why God is said to permit sin. 201. Gods permission
of sin confirmed by Scripture. 202. Gods permission is the withdrawing of his
grace. ibid. Person. Of the three persons in the Trinity, and why named three,
being but one in substance. 146. What a person is. 170. The difference between
Essence and Person. ibid. 171. The reason why this difference is to be held.
ibid. What reference Essence has to Person. 172. The properties of the Persons
are distinct and diverse. 257. 258. Whether Christ be one person or more. 275.
276. Objections against it answered. ibid. etc. Philosophy. Its nature, and
lawful, and fruitful use thereof. 3. The differences between it and Church
doctrine. ibid. worlds creation unknown to Philosophers. 182. Their Arguments
against it. ibid. Prayer. What 624. Four sorts of it. ibid. why prayer is
necessary for Christians. ibid. Eight conditions of true prayer. 626. A
difference of things to be prayed for. 627. A difference between the prayer of
the godly and of the wicked. 628. The Lords Prayer expounded. ibid. etc. The
causes why Christ taught us that form. ibid. etc. Predestination. Vide
Election. Nine circumstances thereof. 352. etc. what. 355. the difference
between it and Providence. ibid. Its causes. 355. 356. The effects of it. 357.
Whether unchangeable. 357. 358. whether we can be certain of our
predestination. 358. Presence. A five-fold manner of Christ's presence. 317.
Pride. What. 538. Priest. Priesthood. What Christ's Priesthood is. 231. The high
Priests prerogative under the law. ibid. Three differences between the Priests
and Prophets under the law. 232. Christ the true prefigured high priest. ibid.
Four differences between Christ and other priests. 232. 233. What a
Christians priesthood is, and its particulars. 236. How Christ makes us
Priests. ibidem. Promises. Gods promises not unprofitable to the unregenerate.
91. Profaneness. What. 541. Prophet. Prophetical. What Christ's prophetical
function is, and the signification of the name Prophet. 229. Two kinds of
Prophets. ibid. Four testimonies of the truth of the Prophets doctrine of old.
ib. What a Prophet of the New Testament is. 230. Christ a Prophet from the
beginning. ibidem. Six differences between Christ's being a Prophet and others
before him ibid. etc. Providence. What Gods providence is. 194. 197. The
proofs of it. 194. 195. 196. 202. Two parts of it. 197. The degrees of Gods
providence, and testimonies of it. 203. Proofs of his general and particular
providence. 204. 205. etc. Places of Scripture wrested against Gods providence.
218. What the knowledge of Gods providence profits us. ibid. Just causes why
it may be known. 219. The denial of it shakes all the grounds of Religion.
ibid. Punishment. How God may be said to will punishment. 68. The degrees of
punishments of the ungodly. 103. 104. The conditions of him that may be
punished for another. 113. The evil of punishment is a moral good, and is
done by God for three causes. 199.
Q.
Quickening. How the spirit quickneth. page 23. Three parts of quickening. 503.
why the latter part of our conversion is called quickening. 504. Quietness. Two
significations of the word in Philosophy. 183.
R
REason. How far we listen to Reason in divine matters. 443. Reconcile. It has
four parts. 120. No reconciliation without a Mediator. ibid. Regeneration. It
is but begun in this life. page 55. The regenerate lose the grace of God in
part, but not whole in this life. 56. The good works of the regenerate not
perfect in this like. 93. 94. In what sense the Scripture attributes perfection
to the works of the regenerate. 94. Regeneration does assure us of
Justification. 95. Christ's Godhead proved by our regeneration. 251. 252.
Whether the regenerate can perfectly keep the law. 616. A threefold difference
between the regenerates and unregenerates sinning. ibid. Repentance. How God
is said to repent. 157. Reprobation. How reprobates are said to be lightened and
sanctified. 61. Resurrection. What Christ's resurrection profits us. 306. The
manifold circumstances of his resurrection. 306. 307. 308. The fruits of it.
310. Five Reasons for our resurrection. 311. more of it. 364. 365. etc. What it
is, and the errors concerning it. 370. Proofs of its certainty. ibid. etc.
The same body shall rise. 372. How, when, and by what power the resurrection
shall be. 373. For what end, and to what estate we shall rise. 374. Reward. No
good work of the creature meriteth reward. page 217. 387. Three causes why God
promises to reward our works. 388. Riches. Whether it be lawful to desire
them 644. Or to lay them up for hereafter. 645. Righteousness. The
righteousness of God both general and particular. 160. How we are righteous
before God. 379. What righteousness is in general, and how manifold. 380.
Vide Justice. Imputed righteousness is eternal. 392.
S
SAbbath. Three causes why the commandment of the Sabbath was so severely
commanded. 576. What the Sabbath is, and how kept both by God and men. ibid.
What works are forbidden on the Sabbath. 577. Two reasons why our children and
families must keep the Sabbath. ibid. Objections about the Sabbath answered.
577. 578. Why our cattle must rest on the Sabbath. 578. How manifold the
Sabbath is. 578. 579. Many Sabbaths in the Old Testament. 579. A Table of the
distinction of the Sabbath. 580. How the Sabbath belongs to us Christians.
ibid. A double difference between the Christian and Jewish observation of the
Sabbath. 582. The causes why the Sabbath was instituted. ibid. How the Sabbath
is sanctified, and how profaned. 583. 584. 485. Saints. What is meant by the
Communion of Saints. 360. Popish objections for invocation of Saints answered.
562. 563. 564. etc. Sacraments. They are signs of the Covenant. 124. 393. The
original word Sacrament, what. 394. Its definition, with its difference from
other signs. 395. Their ends. 396. 397. Sacrament and Sacrifice, how
different. 397. How the old and new Sacraments differ. 398. The difference of
the signs and things signified in the Sacraments. 399. What is the right and
lawful use of Sacraments. 341. What the wicked receive in the Sacraments.
ibid. in what the Word and Sacraments agree, and in what they differ. 402.
their number. 403. Vide Baptism, and Supper of the Lord. Satisfaction. Of
Legal and Evangelicall satisfaction. 108. We can make no satisfaction for two
reasons. 112. No other creature could satisfy for man, but man. 113. Merely
God could not satisfy for man. 114. Christ's satisfaction is made ours two
ways. 383. When we may be assured of Christ's satisfaction imputed unto us.
384. Why and how. 384. 385. Sacrifice. Our sacrifices differ from Christ's three
ways. 236. How sacrifices and sacraments differ. 400. A propitiatory sacrifice
cannot be without blood. 461. Save. Savior. Vide Jesus. How the whole three
persons may be said to save. 221. 222. Christ is our most perfect Savior. 223.
Why all men are not saved by Christ, and why only the faithful. 132.
Scriptures. Their authority depend not on the Church. 5. 6. Objections against
this answered. 6. 7. Arguments showing the certainty of Scriptures. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12. Why no doctrine but the Scripture is to be received into the Church.
12. It is the rule of faith. ibid. The difference of it, and other men's
opinions. 13. The Scriptures sufficiency proved by the Ancients. 14. Objections
against it answered. ibid. etc. The Papists objection of the Scriptures
obscurity answered. 18. 19. Some places of Scripture more dark then other
some, confessed, and instanced. 19. Three points observable in the
interpretation of Scriptures. 20. 438. Not the Church, but the holy Ghost is
Judge of the Scriptures. 21. Six ways of deciding doubts in Scriptures. 21.
22. Servant. Whence the word is derived, and what it signifies. 269.
Shamefastness. What it is. 603. Silence. What 612. Simplicity. What. 612.
Sin, Vid. Wickedness. What sin, and what manner of sin the first sin of
man was. page 45. It consists in six things. page 45. 46. What were the causes
of its first sin. ibid. etc. and effects. 47. The cause of its permission by
God, with excellent uses of it. 47. 48. How we know that sin is in us. 48. What
sin is. 49. A two fold nature of it. ibid. Two proofs that corrupt
inclinations are sins. 50. What original sin is. ib. and 51. proofs of its
being derived to posterity. ibid. Four causes why Adams posterity abides the
punishment of his sin. 53. Whether Infants sin, seeing they want will. 54.
Actual sin what. ibid. Of reigning sin, and why so called. ibid. of mortal
and venial sin, that Popish distinction. 55. The Elect may sin against
conscience, yet not unto death. 55. All sin mortal in its own nature. 56.
Of sin against, and not against conscience. 59. Of the sin against the holy
Ghost, what, and why unpardonable. 59. 60. Sin, what it is of it self. 62. The
virtues of the unregenerate are sins by accident. ibid. What the causes of
sin are. 64. An order in the causes of sin. ibidem. Four pretended causes
of sin. 65. God no cause of it. ibid. It arises from man himself. 66. Its
beginning is from the Devil. 67. GOD is the causer of sin, not as sin, but
as punishments. ibid. The proper ends of sin. ibid. Sin is a natural
property of man corrupted. 71. The fearful effects of sin. 72. 73. All
sins not equal. 73. God, in sin, though he be the mover of the wicked
will, yet he is not the mover of the wickedness in the will. 80. Three causes
why God is said to permit sin. 201. The Question of Gods being thought to be
the cause of sin decided. 209. 210. 211. etc. Sin is not of the nature of
man's flesh, but by accident only. 275. The Article of remission of sins. 361.
Sit. Sitting. Why it is said, Christ sits at the right hand of God. 321.
322. Vide Hand of God. Slandering. What. 611. Son. Vide Christ. How Christ
can be called the only begotten Son of God, when we also are called his
sons. 238. 246. Diverse sorts of sons. ibidem. How Christ is the only and
first begotten Son of GOD. 239. How the natural Son of God. 239. 244. and
co-eternall. 244. 245. Christ so named before he took our flesh. 245. The
only begotten Son of God. 246. The Son has all things from the Father,
not by grace, but by nature. 260. He does all things with the Father, as the
Father does. ibidem. Arguments against the Sons Divinity answered. 264. 265.
Why the Son is called Lord, and why Our Lord. 268. How the Son was
conceived by the holy Ghost. 270. Soul. Whether immortal. 365. sundry places
of Scripture alleged against the immortality of the soul. 366. The Elects
souls estate separated from the body. 369. Spirit. Vide holy Ghost. The diverse
names which are given in the Scripture to the Spirit. 341. Suffering. Vide
passion. page 290. 291. 292. etc. Whether Christ suffered according to both
natures. 293. why he suffered under Pontius Pilate. 294. why on the Cross.
295. Ancient types of that death. ibidem. Superstition. Who are superstitious.
540. Supper. Vide Sacraments. What the Lords Supper is. 426. 427. Its manifold
names. 427. Its ends. 428. How Baptism and the Lords Supper differ. 429. What
it is to eat the flesh of Christ in the Lords Supper. 430. who ought to
approach to the Lords Supper, and who not. 462. what the wicked receive in the
Lords Supper. 463. Three causes for which the wicked are said to eat unto
themselves condemnation. 464. The right and lawful use of it. 465. Who are to
be admitted to it. 466. Vide Passover. page 467. etc. Reasons against the
real presence. 477. Suspicion. What it is. 611. Four roots of good and evil
suspicion. 612. Swearing. Of right and lawful swearing. 568. Whether lawful
to swear by the creatures. 569. By whom we must swear. 570. Five causes why
we must swear by GOD alone. 570. 571. Two principal causes of swearing. 573.
Vide Oaths.
T.
TEmperance. What it is. 603. Temptation. What it is, with its kinds. 650. What
it is to lead into temptation. 651. Testament. The Old and New Testament in
what they agree, and how they differ. 126. Thanks. Thankfulness. Why the
knowledge of our thankfulness is necessary. 35. 36. What man's thankfulness
is, and what Christian Thankfulness is. 498. 560. the danger of omitting of
it, or being cold in it. 560. 561. Transubstantiation. Of it very largely and
learnedly. 448. 449. etc. And Consubstantiation. 450. Trinity. What it is. 172.
Heretics Objections answered, that say that they are not named in the
Scripture. 173. The number of persons in Trinity. ibidem. Six strong proofs of
the three persons in Trinity. 174. How distinguished. 175. Their order, ibidem.
Their Attributes, Effects, and Operations what. 175. 176. The doctrine of the
Trinity necessary to be held and maintained in the Church. 177. Heretics
opposing that doctrine. 178. Truth. Six ways whereby we are taught the truth
of GOD in Scripture. 162. Truth what. 610.
V.
UBiquitaries. Their opinion refuted by many strong Arguments. 477. 478. etc.
Three pestilent weeds that grow in their Garden. 318. Virtue. Two causes why
the virtues of Ethnickes please not God. page 44. The virtues of the
Unregenerate are sins by accident. 62. The difference between the virtues of
the Regenerate, and of the Unregenerate. 63. Unchangeablenesse. Gods
unchangeablenesse proved. 157. 158. Union. The similitude of man's body, to
declare our union with Christ. 234. Of the union of Christ's two Natures, and
what it is in Nature, what in Person. 278. 279.
W
Wickedness. Whence the wickedness of man's nature arises. page 45. Will. See
the word Free Will. page 75. 76. etc. Will Worship is false worship. 540. What
GODS will is. 638. How we pray that that will may be done in earth, as it is
in heaven. 638. 639. Of whom Gods will is to be done. 640. Wisdom. Christ is
the wisdom of God, 255. Wish. How God is said to wish any thing. page 87.
Word. Vide Scripture abundantly. Why Christ is called the Word. 230. 249. The
word made flesh expounded. 242. 254. See the word Flesh. The word was a teacher
from the beginning of the world, proved by sundry testimonies. page 234. The
Word a person before Jesus was borne of the Virgin Mary. page 248. The Word is
equal with the Father. page 258. The Word is consubstantiall with the Father.
page 261. A confession of the Incarnation of the Word made by the Fathers of
Antioch. page 289. How the Word of GOD does absolve and condemn. page 485.
Works. Two reasons why the virtues of Ethnickes please not GOD. page 44. Our
good works that are praiseworthy, proceed not from our selves, but are Gods
gifts. page 87. Good works, how said to be Ours, how not. page 89. Not perfect
in the Regenerate, yet their imperfection pardoned. page 93. How Christ will
render to every man according to his works. page 94. No good work of the
creature meriteth reward. page 217. Evil works merit punishment justly.
ibidem. Why our works are imperfect. page 387. Ten causes why we cannot be
justified by works. ibidem. The reward of works are not of merit, but of
grace. ibidem. etc. Three causes why GOD promises to reward our works. page
388. We must not be careless of doing good works. page 389. With what
difference faith and good works are required in them that are to be justified.
page 392. Concerning the impulsive cause of good works. page 499. A Table of
their kinds. page 509. Three things make a good work. page 508. Three sorts
of works failing in the former conditions. page 509. A Table of the kinds of
good works. ibid. etc. Whether the Saints works be perfectly good. page 510
How they please GOD, though they be not perfectly good. page 511. Why we are
to do good works, and whether they be necessary. page 512. 513. Whether they
can merit of God. page 514. World. Five significations of the word World. page
181. The Creation of the world proved by Scripture and Reasons. page 181. 182.
How GOD made it. page 185. It was created of nothing. ibid. 168. Reasons why
not made in a moment. page 168. For what causes God created the world. page
187. Worship. What the true worship of GOD is. page 540. Will worship is false
worship. ibidem. Things indifferent are to be diligently discerned from Gods
worship. page 541.
Z
Zeal. What. page 599.
A Table of the most choice places of Scripture, which are occasionally
handled, by way either of Explication, Controversy, or Reconciliation, or by
way of Vindication from all Adversaries, especially Papists, Anabaptists, and
other Heretics. A work which was never done before, but now composed and
compiled with great labor and industry, for the conscionable Readers
satisfaction and benefit.
GENESIS.
Chapt. Ver. Page. 1 31 50 2 7 335 15 101 17 297. 366 4 13 506 16 169 6 9 94 7
1 169 15 6 391 16 53 28 12 191 32 30 152 45 5.7 209 8 202 48 16 567

Exodus.
3 14 173 12 2 210 21 6 320 31 27 581 32 7 384 33 11 152 19 201

Numbers.
15 30 482 23 19 207

DEUTERONOMY.
Chapt. Ver. Page. 4 10 152 5 24 152 15 8 156 ^0 490 17 ^^ 483 27 ^^ 387 32 29
87

Josua.
9 15 574

1 Samuel.
16 14 345

2 Samuel.
12 11 202 16 10 202 24 1 97. 202

1 Kings.
22 23 2^0

2 Kings.
19 34 566

2 Chronicles.
15 17 94

Job.
Chapt. Ver. Page. 5 1 567 7 7.10 369 10 20 368 12 25 202 14 2 367 17 1 369 19
1 368

Psalms.
8 6 169 10 4 147.283 14 1 147 32 1.2 382 37 24 140 45 8 228 51 4 507 12 345 55
2 147 82 6 169 88 10 368 104 4.29 335 106 31 392 110 1 251 115 3 205 116 3 303
11 94 119 2.9 94 10 202 143 3.22 382 146 4 368

Proverbs.
25 246 8 4 166.207 16 15 384 17 1 209 21

Ecclesiastes.
1 4 207 7 3 84 9 1 141

Esaias.
1 19 90 10 5 209 20 6 202 40 6 367 45 7 199 61 1 128 63 17 202

Jeremy.
Chapt. Ver. Page. 1 5 420 7.13 90 18 8 199 23 6 392 31 31 622 48 10 202

Lamentation.
3 37 202

Ezekiel.
8 14.19 554 12 25 206 14 9 167 18 13 199 20 53 24 141 33 11 102.165.199 43 7
521 47 1 521

Daniel.
4 32 209 9 24 392

Hosea.
13 9 199

Joel.
2 28 344

Amos.
3^ 6 101.186.199

Zachary.
1 3 90 11 567 12 10 331

Malachy.
3 1 256

Matthew.
1 21 222 3 11 235 4 3.6.9 193 5 6 490 19 58 25 56 48 94 6 24 446 34 646 7 17
56 18 389 10 16 353 12 37 384 31 57.558 13 15 353 30 489 15 41 192 16 19 489 18
16 420 Chapt. Ver. Page. 17 491 18 362.483 19 12 511 17 91 20 15 201 22 30
84.98 38.39 36.37. 23 35 53 37 165.168 24 25 367 25 40 567 26 53 214 27 46
291.292 28 10 565 19 410.412.414. 20 429

Mark.
5 36 386 10 14 26 12 30 36.37 13 32 334 14 25 439 16 16 414.420

Luke.
1 34 271, 337 37 215 10 21 91 27 36.37 14 23 490 15 10 564 16 21 366 23.25 564
17 10 383.387 22 25 487 23 43 304.365. 46 274 24 26 325

John.
1 3 340 5.10 249 12 250 13.14 166.239.241.246 16.18 231 18 129.130 26 258 51
191 2 19.21 243 3 16 246.353.357.298 17 277.330 18 332 36 299 4 1 412 21.22.23
458 24 335 Chapt. Ver. Page. 5 17.19 245.252 19 247.252 19.20 252 21 253 22.27
330 23 250 26 252.263 6 40.54.56 447 51 434 54 373 62.63 440.446. 7 39 319 8 41
244 44 218 46 152 9 3 73 10 16 359 26 253 29 263 12 40 249 47 330 6 130 14 17
344 21 249 15 5 130.389 16 356 26 337.343 16 7 319.343 11 331 17 3 266.267 5
265 9 353 24 319 26 265 19 30 305 36 468 20 23 363

Acts.
1 11 315.316.320 2 3 344 23 202.293 33 343 38 337 4 28 202 5 4 609 3.38 218 28
214 7 6 366 56 325 10 43 298 44 344 47 420 13 36 384 15 9 500 Chapt. Ver. Page.
23 351 16 4 351 17 27 353 28 207 29 166 18 10 359 20 29 359

Romans.
1 2 129 17 5 2 6 330 25 485 3 4 94 22 298 24.28 386 4 1.2 391 3 385 25 309.
311 5 1 621 19 52 6 12 54 14 621 7 4 622 8 621 31 622 8 1 621. 222 3.32 244 11
373 15.16 341 30 355 32 239 33 384 9 11.12 357 15.20 201 17 200 18 356 10 4 129
11 7 353 8 202 16 53 32 84 34 141 35 201 13 2 321 23 202 14 6 582 10 331 16 25
129

Corinth.
1 13 414 30 122. 302. 392 2 6 94 3 15 57 5 25 495 Chapt. Ver. Page. 6 9 57 7
14 53 8 6 166 9 9 218 10 2 398. 412. 442 12 140 16 470 21 464 11 24. etc. 433.
434. etc. 27 465 30 367 12 13 442. 447 14 645 13 2 135 9 367 14 20 94 33 207 15
24 263 44 372 47 43 50 372 51 331 53 332. 372

2 Corinthians.
2 6 496 3 6 23. 621 17 96 4 4 169. 218 6 15 446 13 12 152 13 13 339

Galatians.
2 19 622 3 10 113. 387 22 200 4 10 582

Ephesians.
1 3.4 355. 356 5 356 14 342 2 2 170 10 89 20 251 4 9 302 10 325 19 94 6 2 591
16 170

Philippians.
1 16 90 2 6 242 13 90 3 23 366

Colossians.
1 9.10 235 19 224 2 9 243 10 94.224 11 398 11.12.13 423 16 581 17 474

1 Thessalonians.
5 19 335

2 Thessalonians.
3 15 497 16 351

1 Timothy.
1 9 620 18.19 95 20 497 2 2.4 200 3 6 25 15 7 16 243 6 16 275

2 Timothy.
2 4 353 3 12 653

Titus.
1 16 467

Hebrews.
1 1 249 1.2 247 2 235.252 3 173 9 228 2 10 247 14 243 14.16 254 3 6 235 Chapt.
Ver. Page. 5 1 57 6 283 11 39 367

James.
1 2.13 218 17 57 2 10 73 24 391 3 2 58 4 17 362

1 Peter.
1 3 302 23 56 3 7 304 4 6 302

2 Peter.
1 10 129.357 2 19 358 3 9 200 16 18

1 John.
1 7 222.302.283.383 2 2 222 19 359 3 4 49 7 389 8 54 9 56 4 9 246 17.18 94

Jude.
6 192

Revelations.
1 18 278 3 21 324 6 10 366 14 4 365 21 22 521

FINIS.
THEOLOGICAL MISCELLANIES OF DOCTOR DAVID PAREUS:

In which the orthodoxall Tenets are briefly and solidly confirmed; and the
contrary Errors of the Papists, Ubiquitaries, Antitrinitaries, Eutychians,
Socinians, and Arminians fully refuted.

And now translated into English, out of the original Latin Copy,

By A.R.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, and are to be sold by Steven Bowtell, at the
sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

The Translatour to the READER.
Good READER,
THe Author of this Treatise was D. David Parie, a man eminent in knowledge,
both in Divinity and Philosophy. The place where he professed, is Heidelberge,
an ancient and famous Universitie, of about 300. years standing, founded in
the year of Christ 1346. by Rupert, the second Duke of Bavaria, and Count
Palatine; in which Munster, the famous Hebrician, did, above an hundred years
ago, profess the Hebrew tongue; in which Rodolphus Agricola, a man eminent in
all kind of literature, and many other learned Doctors, both before and since
the Reformation, have flourished. The subject of these Miscellanies is a solid
confirmation of our orthodox Tenets, and a refutation of Popery, Ubiquitarisme,
Socinianisme, Arminianisme, and other heterodoxall opinions. The manner he
uses both in confirming and confuting, is succinct, learned, and solid;
wherein he shows himself a good School-man, and no mean Philosopher. The
benefit which by this Work might redound to the good of such in these
Kingdoms, who have not the Latin tongue, gave an edge to the undertaking of
this Translation; out of which, if thou receive any satisfaction in these
points, I shall not think my labor lost, nor my time ill spent. The God of
peace put an end to the distractions of his afflicted Church, and make us all
of one mind, and of one heart, that there may be but one sheepfold under that
great Shepherd, who laid down his life for his sheep, the Lord Jesus. Amen.

Philip, the son of David Parie, to the Christian READER wishes all happiness.
TO this new Edition of the body of Divinity, professed by the Reformed
Churches, I intended to subjoyn some omitted catechetical passages out of my
fathers Lectures, as he left them in his scribled notes; but now (being
straightened by time) I thought good to reserve them till another Edition of his
Theological works. In the mean while, upon good advice, I resolved to set
forth some new catecheticall Miscellanies; the rather, because I am persuaded
they will not be a little beneficial to thee, and to the whole Church of God:
For, whereas these particular Miscellanies, which, by the leave of that
venerable ancient Doctor Parie, were by the Printers adjoined to the former
Editions (who so often have reprinted, and, as it were, from hand to hand
delivered this System of orthodox Divinity) do not properly handle the points
controverted between the reformed Divines and heterodoxall: and most of them
may be seen in the Theological works of that great Divine, Zacharias Ursinus;
the present afflicted condition of the Church pulled me by the ear, assuring
me, that I should not frustrate the expectation of the godly, if I did supply
the former Miscellanies with an addition of grave and holy Meditations;
especially, of those heads of Religion, which these many years have (on all
sides) miserably vexed the Reformed Churches: and which, by my reverend father,
D. David Parie (an earnest wisher of the Churches peace and tranquillity) have
been examined with that dexterity of judgment, that nothing in this kind can
be expected more exact and divine. Wherefore, Christian Reader, I doubt not,
but this our endeavor will be acceptable to thee: We beseech God, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will send laborers into his Vineyard in
these backsliding times; and, that at last he would commiserate his little
Flock, groaning under the cross for salvation and deliverance, whose Name be
blessed for ever, Amen.

Doctrinall APHORISMS of the reformed Churches, containing the chief, (and at
this day controverted) Articles of Christian Religion:
As they were proposed by D. Parie, President in the famous College of Wisdom
in Heidelberg, and chief Counselor of the Ecclesiastical Assembly, for his
degree of Doctor in Divinity, An. Dom. 1593. June 12. at 7. of the clock.
TO The noble and reverend President and Assistants of the holy Assembly, his
honored Colleagues, DAVID PARIE wishes health.
THat saying of Solomon is both true and godly, The heart of man disposes its
own way, but the Lord directs his paths. Of which, by mine own example, I
have experience: for, although hitherto I have neither wanted fair occasions
many times, nor my friends exhortations, nor other things which now draw me
from mine opinion; yet, I entertained that firm resolution still, never to do
that which now I undertake to do: From which not only did the conscience of
mine own infirmity withold me, but also the unhappy condition of Divinity
at this day; For they, who profess themselves Divines, are either most bitter
enemies to Divinity, and cruel persecutours of the truth: so that, among
these, the nimbler one is in railing, the greater Divine they account him; Or,
if they will be truly that which they are reported to be, they presently feel
those men's madness, and find their teeth are fastened in them, to the great
grief and scandal of the Church, to which end it seems they were made; and
so I conceived.

But behold, the Lord directing these things another way: for, what before
deterred me, now hinders me not; what before could not induce me, does now
strongly carry me forward. The knowledge of mine infirmity indeed remains, but
then I consider, that there are differences of gifts; and, that every man
prophesies according to the measure of grace and faith given to him from God.
Divinity has got a bad name, as if it were a deceitful and slanderous
doctrine, but this is given to it by bad men; for that holy doctrine is often
abused by Satan's artifice, and wicked men's malice. Besides, I know, that our
Lord has been, and is yet at this day the sign of contradiction.

By Gods appointment and the Magistrates, I have now some years born that
office in this famous College, which, by its own right, and the examples of
predecessors, has made me at last alter my resolution. Before me, this place
has been honored, to the Churches good, and to their own praise, by
Olevianus, Ursinus, Sohnius, Kimedoncius, whom I name, because I honor them;
for they were eminent men, and some of them were my teachers or masters, and
some my reverend colleagues. What? shall I be the first, that must impair the
dignity of so noble a function? Shall I overthrow so commendable, and so
excellent an order in our School? Shall I leave to successors a precedent so
dishonorable and injurious to our College? Besides that now the Act is at
hand, wherein seventeen very learned men in Physic, and in the Laws, are to
receive their ensigns of honor; the many exhortations of my friends, and your
most grave and serious reasons (honored Colleagues) by which not only have
you approved my resolution, but also have so strongly confirmed me in it, and
persuaded me, that I am drawn to this task by divine instinct. I beseech our
most merciful God so to direct my paths in his ways, that they may never go
astray; and that he would be pleased to make these my endeavors profitable
and wholesome, to this School first, and then to the whole Church of God.

I am resolved to set down out of Gods word, not a full, but a brief
repetition of our Churches doctrine, concerning certain heads which are at
this day chiefly controverted, that I might afford to young Students sufficient
matter of disputation; and that likewise the sum of our orthodox doctrine
might be, as it were in a brief Epitome, obvious to the enemies and
calumniators of our Churches.

These my endeavors I consecrate to you, honored Sirs, both because you are
the most vigilant preservers of sound doctrine in these Churches, and because
you are most courteous favorers of my studies. The Lord Jesus keep you in
safety for his Churches good. Amen.

At Heidelberge, in the College of Wisdom, June 1. Anno Domini 1593.

D. David Parie to the READER, out of the Dutch Edition.
AT the entreatie of many holy men, I have translated this Epitome of the
orthodox reformed Christian Religion, out of the Latin, into our vulgar
tongue; not without some addition, and a more full explication, having added
some Testimonies of Scriptures, Creeds, general Councels, and Fathers:
Therefore, in this Epitome, the Christian Reader may briefly understand which
is the doctrine of the Schools and Churches in the Archipalatinate, and
indeed, of all the reformed Churches through France, England, Scotland, the
Netherlands, Switzerland, Moravia, Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, and elsewhere.
Besides, he shall know, whether or no this doctrine be Calvinian and
heretical, as some injuriously style it; or not Apostolical rather, and
Christian, having its foundation in Gods word: But such mad clamours will not,
I hope, move those, in whom is the zeal of piety, and are careful of their
souls health; but will rather, after the example of those noble Jews of
Thessalonica, Act. 17.11.
in the fear of God weigh this doctrine, that from hence they may learn which
is the true Christian Religion: they will also examine the Testimonies of holy
writ, by which the doctrine of the orthodox reformed Religion is confirmed,
which we maintain; and which, before a general Council lawfully assembled;
yea, before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, that supreme and most just Judge, we
will not be ashamed to defend. This was the practice of the people of Beroe,
observing what doctrine Saint Paul taught them, and carefully searching if it
was consonant to Gods word: by which means it came to pass, that many of
them, both men and women, believed in Jesus Christ.

They are of another mind, who (at this day) call every doctrine Calvinisme,
which is not consonant to their opinion; by which intemperate speech, they may
easily refute Paul, and Christ himself: and I must not expect, that any other
name will be given to mine Aphorisms then this. But, surely if this be
Calvinisme, the whole Book of God, yea the whole doctrine of the primitive
Church, must be called Calvinian; for there are irrefragable testimonies which
cannot be contradicted: yea, besides, the learneder sort of Papists and
Jesuits, who follow the Schoole-mens doctrine, must be called likewise
Calvinists: For, even in the midst of Popery, God, for his Elects sake, did
preserve, by the Schoolmen, from corruption, the doctrine Of Christ's Person,
Death, and Merit, Of his Ascension into heaven, Of his sitting at the right
hand of God, and, Of Predestination, most plainly; as these points are
explained by us in these Aphorisms. But the other Articles, to wit, Of faith,
Of the Ministry of the Church, Of the Sacraments, were corrupted betimes in
Popery.

But, it is to be lamented, that they, who, having laid aside the name of
Christ and of Christians, desire to be called by men's names, have so far
departed from the consent of the Primitive Church, in the handling of these
Articles of faith, and do every day more and more deviate from that primitive
simplicity.

But why do I wonder, 2 These. 2.1. Hom. 3. in Romans and Hom. 3. in Tit. 3.
seeing God punishes the world, by sending upon it strong delusions, in that
it loves not the truth? But because, as Chrysostom says, Error is various
and intricate, and has a restless and unstable quality; it is no strange
thing, that of one error many do arise, and that out of one Controversy, ten
do proceed. At the first, the only Controversy was about the tenth Article,
concerning Christ's body lurking under the bread; as also of the orall
manducation in the Lords Supper; which Controversy was long in agitation
amongst the Lutherans: but in all the other Articles here set down by us,
there was a full consent, as the Acts of the Conference at Marpurge, Anno 1529.
do witness; yea, Divines began to agree in the doctrine of the Lords Supper,
Anno 1536. but this agreement was quickly broke, because, after Luthers death,
some could not handsomely maintainer their opinion of Christ's corporal
presence in the Bread, seeing none of the Evangelists did utter these words of
Christ, This is my body, after this manner, This bread is my body, or, under
the bread, or, under the species of bread lurks my body. Besides, Christ, whom
they include in the Wafer or Host, according to our Catholic belief, is not
now upon the earth, but in heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, from
whence he will come to judge the quick and the dead: they were in good hope to
shelter their opinion under some other Articles of faith, and chiefly under
that of the personal union of the two natures in Christ. Hence they went about
to establish his Ubiquity and Omnipotency, hitherto unheard of in the world,
using this shift, If Christ's body be everywhere, it will be also in every
Host; if it be in every Host, then it will be everywhere. Then they fondly
imagined the Article of Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father, to be
the same with that of the personal union of the two natures: as if you would
say, Christ's humanity with the Son of God, which is that very right hand of
God everywhere present, is personally united, and fills heaven and earth.
Thirdly, because they saw that the Article of Christ's Ascension, did overthrow
the Ubiquity, and corporal presence in the Bread, by an unheard of and
Allegorical way, they expounded Christ's Ascension to be meant of nothing else,
but of his vanishing into the air, of his advancing unto the Divinity, and of
his Ubiquity.

To these new monsters of opinions, as well the Pontifician Doctors, as those
of our profession, besides diverse of the Lutherans, did stoutly oppose
themselves, defending the ancient simplicity and truth of these Articles of our
faith: which the new Artists of Ubiquity perceiving, and finding that they
failed here of their purpose; they found out new engines, and began to accuse
those whom they style Calvinists, of other errors; to provoke them to
Conference and Disputation, not only about the Person of Christ, but also
about the other Articles of Christianity, bragging they could convince them of
many fundamental errors taught in the Reformed Churches.

Concerning Predestination, That all men were not elected, but that many were
called, and few elected. Concerning the merit of Christ's death; That the wicked
and incredulous, so long as they remained such, were not partakers thereof, but
only the Elect that believed; That the promises of the Gospel were universal
in respect of the faithful, but not of unbeleevers and Epicures. Concerning
faith, That it is the singular gift of God, That it is given only to the
Elect, in whom only it is rooted, and permanent; That the same can never be
finally lost, because it proceeds of the incorruptible seed of Gods word.
Concerning the Ministry, That Ministers were only outward dispensers of the
word; but God wrought inwardly by his Spirit. Concerning Sacraments, That
Christ was yesterday, to day, and the same for ever; and that therefore he was
the matter or subject of all Sacraments, both of the Old and New Testament.
Besides, that no man either by the word or Sacraments, could be partaker of
Christ without faith. Concerning Baptism, That there was a twofold washing:
one outward, of water, by which the filth of the body is washed away; the other
inward, of the blood and Spirit of Christ, which is the Covenant of a good
conscience with God: That the Minister baptized only with water; but Christ,
in the true administration of Baptism, did baptize with the holy Spirit: Also,
that Infidels were not regenerated by Baptism: Also, that the children of
Christians were children of the promise and of the Covenant even before
Baptism, and that for this cause they were to be baptized.

This doctrine, since the year 1586. has been not only condemned as
Calvinisticall and Heretical, but also reproached and accursed by them who
glory in the name of Lutherans: And when among the ignorant Vulgar, they
traduce these Articles as errors of Calvinisme, they think they have bravely
maintained their Cause, in defending their fictions of Ubiquity, and of a
carnal presence in the Lords Supper; which now we leave for a while,
committing our whole cause of God

But it is certain, that they have so far relapsed into the sink of
Pelagianisme and Popery, that, it is to be feared, they will overwhelme the
Lutheran Churches with greater darkness then ever heretofore: and yet (alas)
they stick not to call this the true Evangelicall doctrine, and that of the
Augustan Confession, teaching concerning predestination, that in God is no
election, but that he did promiscuously choose all men. Concerning Christ's
death, that he by his death redeemed all men, and reconciled them to God; that
he has sanctified them, and has received them into favor, whether they
believe or not. Concerning remission of sins, that a general pardon is given
to all men, both faithful and Infidels. Concerning the promises of the
Gospel, that they belong to all, both faithful and Infidel. Concerning
Faith, that it is the cause of Election; that God did first foresee who were to
believe and persevere; that faith is not in our power; that, notwithstanding,
it is a work which God promotes in us, and that it may be lost, and may be in
hypocrites. Concerning the Ministry, that Ministers may by their preaching
confer divine efficacy, and that they are dispensators both outwardly and
inwardly. Concerning Sacraments, that the Sacraments of the Old Testament were
only shadows, without Christ the body. Concerning Baptism, that there is a
mystical efficacy in the water, to wash away sin, and to regenerate; that
the holy Ghost, and his efficacy are annexed to the water; that the water and
Spirit have the same effect; that hypocrites and Infidels in Baptism are
regenerated by the holy Ghost; that the Minister does not only baptize with
water, but conferres also the holy Ghost; that Christian Infants, before
Baptism, belong no more to the Covenant, then the children of Turks: also,
that before Baptism, they are possessed by Satan, who is by words and
crossings to be cast out by the Exorcist, and other such like passages. Which
doctrine truly is repugnant to the Gospel; neither is it found in the Augustan
Confession, of which they so much brag, nor in the word of God; and which, by
M^. Luther with great zeal has been refuted and rejected. So thou may
see, Christian Reader, to what we are come to.

But, to what purpose is it to know the beginning of Controversies? Let us
rather endeavor how to be freed from them. Let us beseech God, that he will be
pleased to help his afflicted Church; to sanctify her in the truth of his
word; to incline the Teachers and Ministers of his* Gospel to moderation, and
to the love of Peace and concord, and then these Errors will easily fall to
the ground without any laborious refutation, and Truth will succeed in their
stead. For, Nothing is weaker then error, says Chrysostom; it is entangled
with its own wings; Hom. 28. in ^ Cor. 15. Hom. 4. de laudibus D. Pauli.
nor is there need of any other battery or assault. And, as the same Father
says, Such is the condition of error, that of it self, though none resist,
it will grow old, and fall away: On the contrary, the state of truth is such,
that when it is opposed by many, it is stirred up, and increases. Therefore,
it is no wonder that the unluckie tares grow up so fast in the Lords field; but
truth, the daughter of time, by Gods assistance, will root it up at last.
Neither is it needful that Gods faithful servants should weary themselves in
refelling our Adversaries virulent Libels, for this will tend no ways to
Peace: the only way to victory and concord is, if, with our infirmity, with
fear and trembling, with modesty and forbearance, with the evidence of the
Spirit, with the power of the word, we defend the Truth: which shall be my
chief endeavor in the explication of these Aphorisms; for, at last, the
Spirit of Christ will be stronger then the spirit of Satan, and the kingdom of
Christ will be more powerful then the kingdom of the Devil. Judgment shall
return to righteousness, and all they that are upright in heart shall follow
it. Psalm. 94.15.

Tertullian against Valentin. Truth is no ways ashamed, but only to be hid.

In the Catecheticall Miscellanies are contained these ensuing Heads:

I. Aphorisms containing the doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and the chief
heads of Christian Religion. Page 689. II. The secular Theme, concerning
Popery. Page 737 III. The Creed of blessed Athanasius, with Parie's Notes. Page
753 IV. The Creed of the Fathers of Antioch against Paulus Samosa^enus. Page
767 V. A Question, Whether God created all men in Adam for one end, to wit,
upon condition of the Law observed? Page 768 VI. Animadversions upon the Thesis
of D. Aegidius Hunnius, concerning the Hypostaticall Union. Page 770 VII. A
reconciling of the Controversy, concerning Christ's active and passive
righteousness. Page 791 VIII. A piece of a Speech, concerning the fruit of
Christ's Death. Page 807 IX. An Introduction to the Controversy of the
Eucharist. Page 812 X. The Epitome of Arminianisme: or, the Examination of the
five Articles of the Remonstrants in the Netherlands. Page 817
APHORISMS OF THE ORTHODOXALL DOCTRINE of the Reformed CHURCHES.
ARTICLE. I. Of the person of Christ.
I. WE believe and profess with our mouth and heart, before God and men: and
by this confession we will be known from all Infidels and Hypocrites, that
Jesus Christ is a person truly God and man, subsisting of two natures true and
perfect, the divine and humane personally (a) united: And therefore true (b)
God, of the same substance with the (c) Father; and coeternall according to his
(d) divinity: and true man (e) of the same substance with us in all (f) things;
borne of the Virgin Mary in time, according to his (g) humanity: the one (h)
and the only begotten of (i) God, and the Son of (k) man: the one and only
Mediator between God and (l) man: not two, but one Christ.

Testimonies of Scripture and of Creeds.
(a) Colos. 2.9. In him dwells the whole fullness of the Deity corporally.

1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God
manifested in the flesh.

(b) John 1.14. And that Word was made flesh.

1 John 15.20. This is that true God, and life eternal.

(c) John 1.14. We beheld his glory as of the only begotten Son, come out from
the Father.

Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

Prove. 8.24. When as yet there was no depths, I was formed.

Mic. 5.2. His going out was from the beginning, from everlasting ages.

(d) Phil 2.6. Who when he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God.

Heb. 1.3. He is the splendour of his Fathers glory, the character of his person.

Col. 1.15.17. He is the image of the invisible God, and the first borne of all
creatures, and he is before all things, and all things subsist by him.

(e) Phil. 2.7. He emptied himself, taking upon him the form of a servant,
made like unto men, and in shape was found as man.

Heb. 2.14, 16. Because therefore children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also was made partaker of the same: he took not on him the nature of Angels,
but the seed of Abraham he took.

(f) Romans 1.3. And to his Son made of the seed of David, according to the flesh.

Heb. 2.17. Whence he ought to be like his brethren in all things, that he
might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in the things concerning God,
to expiate the sins of the people.

(g) Gal. 4.4. After that the fullness of time came, God sent out his Son, made
of a woman.

Mat. 1.23. Esaias 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and shall bring forth a
Son.

Luke 2.7. Mary brought forth her first begotten Son.

(h) Romans 8.32. Who spared not his own Son, but gave him up for us all.

(i) John. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.

(k) Mat. 9.6. That you may know, that the Son of man has power on earth to
forgive sins.

(l) 1 Timothy 2.5. One God, and one Mediator between God and men; to wit, the
man Christ Jesus.

Acts 4.1. Nor is there salvation in any other, nor is there any other name
under heaven, given among men, by which we can be saved.

(m) Athanasius in Symbolo. This is the right faith, that we believe, and
confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and man; God of
the substance of the Father begotten before all time, and man of the substance
of his Mother, borne in time. Perfect God, and perfect man, of a reasonable
soul, and humane flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father in respect of his
Divinity, inferior to the Father in respect of his humanity: who, though he be
God and man, yet is not two, but one Christ.

II. The personal union of the two natures in Christ, according to the
Apostles (a) distinction, is the corporal inhabitation of all fullness of the
divinity in Christ: according to the Churches declaration, the hidden and
adorable conjunction of the deity of the Word, and of the humanity assumed into
one person or hypostasis, made in the mothers womb (b) without confusion,
without conversion, without division, without (c) separation; that is to say,
the natures and natural properties remaining whole and distinct, being
separable neither in time nor place.

Testimonies of Scripture and of Creeds.
(a) Col. 2.9. In him (Christ) dwells the whole fullness of the Deity bodily.

2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself.

Heb. 2.16. For he took not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham he took.

(b) John 1.14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us.

Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the virtue of the most
High shall overshadow thee; therefore that Holy thing which shall be borne of
thee, shall be called the Son of God.

(c) Athanas. in Symb. God and man is one Christ, not by converting of the
divinity into the flesh, but by assuming of the humanity into God.

In the Creed of the general Synod of Chalcedon, assembled by the Emperor
Martian, against Eutyches. Anno Dom. 453. We believe that Jesus Christ is the
one and only Son of God, and our Lord consisting of two natures in one person,
without confusion, without conversion, without division, without separation:
the diversity of the two natures being no ways made void, by reason of the
union, but the property of each nature remaining entire. So that Jesus Christ
is not divided or separated into two, but he is one and the same only begotten
Son of God, God the Word.

III. Because of this personal union, we believe that this person, Jesus
Christ, is truly and properly (not tropically or figuratively) God and Man, and
that both the natures, and natural properties, and actions are truly and
properly predicated interchangeably of the whole person in the concrete. For
truly and properly Christ God (a) is Man, borne of the (b) Virgin Mary, of the
seed of (c) David; he grew in age and (d) wisdom; he suffered, died, etc.
according to his (e) humanity. Truly also and properly Christ Man is (f) God;
begotten of the (g) Father, existing before (h) Abraham; (i) immortal, (k)
omniscient, (l) omnipotent, (m) omnipresent, creating and governing all things
with the Father, etc. according to his (n) divinity: being no less reasonable,
and immortal in the soul properly and truly then man, and according to his
body irrational and (o) mortal. For, as the reasonable soul (says
Athanasius in his Creed) and flesh is one man, so God and Man is one Christ.
Therefore as the properties of body and soul are really common to man, so the
properties are really common to the person of Christ, to whom both in name and
realitie they are attributed: yet not according to both natures, but according
to that to which properly they appertain. This is called the communication of
properties. And Damascen calls them the manner of (...).
mutual attribution.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of the Ancient Doctors.
(a) Phil. 2.6. Christ was made like unto man.

(b) Gal. 4.4. God sent his Son made of a woman.

(c) Romans 1.3. The Son of God was made of the seed of David, after the flesh.

(d) Luke 2.52. Jesus grew in wisdom, stature, and grace, with God and man.

(e) 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ died according to the flesh.

(f) 1 John 5.20. This is that true God, and life eternal.

(g) John 1.18. The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he
has showed him to us.

(h) John 8.58. Before Abraham was I am.

(i) John 5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the
Son to have life in himself.

(k) Mark 2.8. Jesus knew that they reasoned so with themselves in their mind.

John 2.25. Neither was it needful that any should bear witness to him of
the man, for he himself knew what was in man.

(l) I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end, says the Lord; that is, who
is, and who was, and who is to come, I say, that Almighty.

(m) Mat. 28.20. I am with you still, till the end of the world.

(n) John 5.17. The Father works even hitherto, and I work.

Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made the world, who sustaines all things by his
powerful word.

1 Pet. 3.18. Christ was quickened according to the Spirit.

(o) Just. Martyr in Expositione fidei. As man being but one, has
notwithstanding two different natures in himself, and with the one part he
consulteth, with the other he puts his consultation in execution, appointing in
his mind the fabric of the ship, but with his hands effecting what he had
appointed: so the same Son being of two natures, according to the one he works
his miracles, according to the other he suffers contemptible things; for, as he
is God, and of the Father, he wrought miracles; as he is Man, and of the
Virgin, he endured the Cross, and such like, naturally and willingly.

IV. After the same manner the name and actions of the Mediator are attributed
to the whole person, and in the concrete (by the concrete are understood the
names of the persons) are truly, and properly predicated according to both
natures, because both natures with their properties and actions are required to
the office of a Mediator: in execution of which, each nature by the
communication of the other, does operate those things which properly belong (a)
to it; for Christ, both according to his humanity, and his divinity, is our
Mediator, Preserver, Intercessor, Savior, King, Priest, Head, Lord, and Judge
of the world, who knows all things according to both natures, and by each
nature be operates those things which properly belong to it.

Testimonies of the Ancient Doctors.
(a) Damascen. l. 3. c. 15. de Orthodoxa fide. Christ works according to both
natures, and both natures work in him with the communication of the other. The
Word operates what belongs to the Word, such things as are of greater note and
majesty, by reason of the power and authority of the Deity: but the Body
performs those functions which are properly the Bodies, according to the
pleasure of the Word, which is united to it, and whose proper work it is.

Leo ad Flavianum cap. 4. He works in both forms what is proper with the
communion of the other; the Word operating that which is the Words, and the
flesh performing that which is the fleshes.

Idem ad Leon. August. Epist. 59. Although in one Lord Jesus Christ, the true
Son of God and Man, there is one Person of the Word and flesh, which has
inseparably and indivisibly its common actions; their qualities notwithstanding
are to be understood, and by a sincere faith we must discern to what things
the lowness of the flesh is promoted, and to what the highness of the
Divinity is abased: what it is that flesh without the Word acts not, what it
is that the Word without the flesh effects not.

Cyrillus These. l. 10. c. 11. Therefore, even as when he wrought miracles by
the Flesh, we did not attribute those things to him as Man, but as God: So
when, after the manner of men, he speaks any thing of himself, which seems
inconsonant to his Divinity, we ought to attribute that to his Flesh; for so,
by a congruous distribution of all his words and works, we shall not deviate
from the true knowledge of our Savior.

V. If we consider the properties of both natures in the personal union (for
out of this they are not) in the abstract; that is, in the names of the
natures, they cannot be changed, no more then the natures themselves: For, we
must not say, The Deity is the humanity, or man, or created, corporeal,
visible, finite, circumscribed, dead, buried, etc. neither can we say, The
humanity is the Deity, or God, or eternal, uncreated, incorporeall, invisible,
infinite, omnipresent, omnipotent, etc. but we must attribute to each nature
what properly belongs to it: to the Divinity, the divine properties; to the
Humanity, the humane: without this, the essential difference of the natures is
confounded, and is changed into an Eutychian and Swenkfieldian mingling of
natures: for, in the distinction of the properties, consists the distinction of
the natures; and so the two natures which have the same property (whether it
be by nature, or by communication) shall be no longer two natures, but one
nature (a) only; for it cannot be, that one nature together can contain two
contrary (b) properties.

Testimonies of the Ancient Doctors.
(a) Damascen. l. 3. c. 14. and 15. Whose nature is the same, their will and
action is the same; but their will and action is different, whose nature is
different: And again, whose will and action is the same, their nature is the
same; but whose will and action is different, their nature is also different.

(b) Ibid. 3. c. 3. How can the same nature according to the same respect, be
both created and uncreated, mortal and immortal, circumscribed and
uncircumscribed?

Theodoret Dial. 11. If Christ is only one nature, how can contraries be
attributed to him; for, to be in the beginning, and to take beginning from
Abraham and David, are altogether contraries.

VI. Hence it appears, that the humanity of Christ remains not, but is
changed into the Divinity, and so that nature is confounded: Also that in
Christ there remain not the two distinct natures, but that the two are changed
into one, if these positions be true, that the humanity, in and by the
personal union, did assume with the Word all the properties and operations of
the Word, that it is, and operates all which the word is and operates; that it
is invisible, uncircumscribed, omnipresent, etc. let these positions be
palliated which way you will. Yea so much the rather, if it be affirmed, that
in the humanity there are three sorts of properties; to wit, supernatural,
preternaturall, and divine; and therefore we reject these subsequent doctrines
of the Ancient and Modern Heretics, as unknown to the Scriptures, and to the
Catholic faith: as,

1. That Christ is not truly God, but merely Man. 2. That Christ, according to
his Deity, is only a spirit, created before all that have been made of
nothing. 3. That he is not a true and perfect man, of the same soul and body
with us, remaining also in glory. 4. That in Christ there is one person of the
Son of God, another of the Son of Mary. 5. That the personal union began in
the Mothers womb, but by the resurrection, ascension and sitting at the right
hand of the majesty of God, has its perfect consummation, by equalling the two
natures in glory; so that the flesh, body, and blood of Christ, are perfectly
of one essence, power, and efficacy with God, and with the Word. 6. That
Christ's humanity is equal with God, by reason of the glory and majesty
communicated to it, but in the nature thereof is not God. 7. That the
specificall difference of the union, is the real communication of all the
divine properties with the humanity, so that the omnipotency, omnipresence,
justice, and majesty of the Word, is really diffused into the Son of man. 8.
That in Christ there is a double Deity, the one communicating, and the other
communicated; or, the one participating, and the other participated. 9. That
the specificall difference of the inhabitation of the Word in the man Christ,
and in other holy men, is placed in this, that only some of the divine
properties are truly communicated to the Saints, but they are all bestowed on
the man Christ. 10. That Christ's humanity is really everywhere, yet not the
essence of his soul and body. 11. That the flesh of Christ is God. 12. That
the man Christ is not God natural. 13. That Christ's humane nature did visibly
die on the Cross, at Jerusalem; and yet, at the same time, it was invisibly
dead and alive everywhere, within and without the Sepulcher, before and after
the Resurrection. 14. That Christ's flesh, in respect of its union with the
Word, which is illocall, has far surmounted all locality, and has obtained
an illocall kind of existence in the Word. 15. Add this falsehood of the
Ubiquitaries: that not all, but half Christ is, suffers, does that which
Christ is, suffers, and does, according to either nature, and not according to
both.
Upon this ground they have falsely accused the Nestorian Churches of
Nestorianisme, for it would necessarily follow, that only half Christ from
eternity was begotten of the Father, borne of Mary, walked on the earth, died
for us, was buried, rose again, and ascended to heaven; which opinions we
condemn, and reject as heretical.

ARTICLE II. of Christ's death and merit.
I. WE believe that Christ our Redeemer did truly (a) die in the (b) flesh for
our (c) sins, and that with one oblation, he has for ever consecrated those
who are (d) sanctified.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Mat. 27.50. When Jesus again cried with a great voice, he gave up his
Spirit.

(b) 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ was mortified in the flesh.

1 Pet. 4.1. Seeing then Christ has suffered for us in the flesh.

(c) Romans 4.25. Christ was delivered to death for our offenses.

(d) Heb. 10.14. Christ with one oblation has consecrated for ever those that
are sanctified.

II. We believe also that this death of Christ alone, is a perfect and
sufficient ransom, to expiate and abolish all the (a) sins of the whole world,
that the merit of his justice is immense, that the medicine of his death is
universal, the ever-flowing and inexhausted spring of life (b) eternal.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Acts 4.12. Nor is there salvation in any other, nor is there any other
Name under heaven, which is given among men, by which they can be saved.

(b) John 1.29. Behold that Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

1 John 2.2. Christ is the propitiation for our sins; not for ours alone, but
also for the sins of the whole world.

III. But this we know, that this is the immovable and Catholic doctrine of
the Gospel, John 3.18.38. He that believes in the Son of God, has life
eternal; he that believes not in the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath
of God remains on him.

IV. Although then this most divine Panace or Catholic remedy is proposed to
all in the (a) Gospel, yet we believe that no efficacy of it can be
transfused, except there be an applying of this by faith in the Son of (b) God,
even as there can be no efficacy in Physic or medicaments, except the sick
patient hearken to the Physician, and apply his (c) medicines; which metaphor
the Holy Ghost uses in this case.

Testimonies of Scripture and of Divines.
(a) Mat. 11.28. Come to me all you who are weary and heavy laden, and I will
cause you to rest.

Mark 16.15. Preach the Gospel to all Creatures.

(b) John 3.36. He that believes in the Son has life eternal, but he that
obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.

John 8.24. Except you believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins.

Esaias 7.9. If you believe not my words, it is because you are not stable.

Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be condemned.

(c) Chemnitius Harmon. Evangel. l. 2. page 83. As drugs will not benefit the
sick man that makes no use of them: so, the virtue of Christ's passion is
sufficient to take away the sins of all the world; but is only effectual to
them who receive this Lamb.

(d) Esaias 53.5. With his stripes ue are healed.

1 Pet. 2.24. With whose stripes you are healed.

V. It is then out of doubt, that all they, and only they, are partakers of
the efficacy of Christ's death; that is, of redemption, reconciliation with God,
remission of sins, righteousness, and eternal life, so many as receive by
faith these benefits in the (a) Gospel: but such as pass over this life
without faith, remain for ever excluded from this power and benefits of his
(b) death.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) John 1.12. To all that received him, he gave this power to become the sons
of God; to wit, to such as believe in him.

John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever hears my words, and
believes in him that sent me, has life eternal.

John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that all who behold the Son,
and believe in him, should have eternal life.

Acts 10.43. To him bare all the Prophets witness, that every one, who
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins by his Name.

Heb. 5.9. Being consecrated, he is made author of eternal salvation to all
that hearken to him.

(b) John 3.18. He that believes not in him, is condemned already: because he
believes not in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.

Ibid. ver. 36. Who obeys not the Son, he shall not see life, but the wrath
of God remains upon him.

1 Cor. 6.9. Do you not know that the unjust shall not have the inheritance of
God?

Revel. 22.15. Without shall be dogs, and whoremongers.

Gal. 4.30. Cast out the handmaid and her Son, for the son of the handmaid
shall not inherit with the son of the freewoman.

VI. We know that the Evangelicall promises are universal, and appertain to
all: but not to the incredulous and unconverted Turks, Jews, Heathens,
Epicures, so long as they remain such, but to all believers; for to all
promises there is the condition of faith in Christ annexed, either implicitly,
or explicitly, that which the plain text of Scripture (a) shows.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) John 3.16. That whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have life
eternal.

Romans 3.22. The righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ toward all, and
on all that believe.

Acts 10.43. To him bare all the Prophets witness, that whosoever believes on
him, shall receive remission of sins through his Name.

Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has shut up all under sin, that the promise of faith
in Christ Jesus might be given to all believers.

VII. When the Scripture then says that Christ died (a) for all, that he gave
himself a ransom (b) for all, that he died (c) for all, that he is a
propitiation for the sins of the whole (d) world: this is necessarily
understood, either of the greatness of the price, or of the sufficiency of his
merit for all men, or of the effectual redemption of all Jews and Gentiles that
embrace by faith the benefits of his death: For in these, says Ambrose, a
certain (e) kind of universality is conceived. And this is no more repugnant
to the doctrine of the Gospel, then if some should say, that Christ by his
death did indifferently redeem, and reconcile to God faithful Christians, and
faithless Turks, Heathens, Epicures, Hypocrites, etc. although they receive
not the merit of Christ by faith: which opinion is both impious, and repugnant
to Gods word.

Testimonies of Scripture and of Ancient Doctors.
(a) 2 Cor. 5.15. Christ died for all, that they who live, may not hereafter
live to themselves, but unto him who died, and was raised again for them.

(b) 1 Timothy 2.6. Christ gave himself as the price of redemption for all men.

(c) Heb. 2.9. That he, by the grace of God should taste death for all men.

(d) 1 John 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the sins of all the world.

(e) Ambrose de vocatione Gentium l. 1. c. 3. Gods people have their own
fullness: and, although a great part of men either reject, or resist the grace
of their Savior; yet, in those that are elected and foreseen, and severed
from the generality of all men, a certain kind of universality is conceived,
that out of the whole world, the whole world may seem to be deliyered, and out
of all men, all men may seem to be assumed.

VIII. Hence is that received and fit distinction, that Christ died for all
men, in respect of the sufficiency of his merit, or the greatness of the
price: but in respect of the efficacy and fruit of his death, he died for all,
and only for the believers; seeing not all, but only the faithful receive
him: but the rest reject him through infidelity.

Testimonies of Schoolmen and Fathers.
Innocent. 3. l. 2. de myster. Missae. c. 4. An. Christi 1200. His blood was
poured out only for the predestinate, in respect of efficacy: but it was poured
out for all men, in respect of sufficiency. For the effusion of the blood of
that just One for the unjust, was so rich a price, that if the whole world
would believe in the Redeemer, the chains of Satan should not be able to
with-holy any; for, as the Apostle says, Where sin has abounded, grace has
much more abounded.

Thom. Aquinas de veritate mat. Art. 26. q. 7. An. Christi 1270. The
sufficiency of Christ's merit is equally extended to all, but not the efficacy
thereof: which comes to pass, partly by free will, partly by Divine election,
by which the effect of Christ's merits is conferred in mercy on some, and in
Gods just judgment it is withdrawn from some.

Idem. in cap. 5. Apocal. We may speak two ways of that Redemption which was
performed by the suffering of God: Either according to sufficiency, and so his
suffering redeemed all, because he delivered all, so far as concerned him; for
he is sufficient to save and redeem all, although there were infinite worlds,
as Anselme says, lib. 2. Cur Deus homo, etc. c. 14. or according to efficacy;
and so he redeemed not all by his suffering, because all do not adhere to the
Redeemer, and therefore, all have not the efficacy of redemption.

Peter Lombard l. 3. did. 22. Christ offered himself for all to God the
Trinity, in respect of the sufficency of the price: but only for the Elect, in
respect of efficacy; because he effected salvation only for the predestined.

Peter Galatinus de arcanis Cathol. veritatis l. 8. c. 14. on that place of
Esaias cap. 53. My just Servant shall justify many. Though the suffering of
Christ is sufficient to blot away the sins of all men, yet it was not to blot
them all away: but of those only who were to believe in him, and were to
repent: for that cause he says, And he took away, or ^are the sins of many.

IX. Thus, besides the Schoolmen, the Orthodox Fathers also teach: So Prosper
Aquitanicus, in the year of Christ 460. Resp. ad object. Vincent. object. 1.
Whereas it is rightly said, that our Savior was crucified for the redemption
of all the world, for undertaking the affairs of humane nature, and for the
common loss in Adam: yet, it may be said, that he died only for these, to whom
his death was profitable. And Cyril on John l. 11. c. 19. says, That Christ is
an Advocate for the sins of all the world: that is, not only for the Jews, but
also for other Nations; or, for all who, being called by faith, attain to
righteousness and sanctification; so that the benefit of a Mediator, not
without cause, belongs only to them, whose Mediator and High Priest he is.

X. But, of all men, Austin speaks most clearly; whose opinion (because it is
altogether ours) I thought to set in opposition to some Sycophants. Thus he
speaks: If we consider Tom. 1. ad Art. falso imp. Art. 1.
the greatness and power of the price, and that it belongs to the only cause
of mankind, the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole world; but they
that pass out of this life without faith and the Sacrament of regeneration,
they are not partakers of redemption. Whereas then by reason of that one nature
of all, and the one cause of all, undertaken by our Lord truly, all are said to
be redeemed, and yet not all are delivered from captivity; doubtless the
property of redemption is in them, out of whom the Prince of this world is
ejected: and now they are no more the vessels of Satan, but the members of
Christ. Whose death is not so spent upon mankind, that they also who are not
regenerated, should appertain to his redemption; but so, that what by one
example is done for all, by a particular Sacrament should be celebrated in each
one: for that cup of immortality, which was composed of our infirmity, and of
our verity, and of divine verity; it has in it self that, which may benefit
all; but if it be not drunk, it does not cure.

A monition of PHILIP PARRY to the Reader.
THis doctrine, of the efficacy of Christ's death, D. Parry handled more at
large in the first part of the golden Ladder of salvation, where he wrote a
particular Exercise of it: As also in the Epitome of Arminianisme, or The
examination of the five Articles of the Remonstrants in the Netherlands: As
also in the Body of Christian doctrine to the 40. Question, Edit. posthumae:
Also Collegio 18. disp. 23. of Christ's death for all: And, lastly, in that
peculiar Speech, which we placed among the Orations declaimed in the
University, Tom. 2. oper. Theol. D. Parry. In which Writings, he defends and
retains that distinction of the Schoolmen and Ancient Fathers, of
sufficiency and efficacy, with other Orthodox Divines: But the good old man, a
little before his death, when he understood, that in the Provincial Synod of
Dort, this was called into question unwisely by some brethren, under Parries
name and authority, he began to think more seriously of it, supposing that it
was not altogether so necessary; whereas without it, these (...), or seeming
contradictions of Scripture, may seem to be fitly reconciled.

XI. We therefore, with all our heart, reject the Epicurean blasphemies of the
late Pelagians; namely, Huberus, Puccius, and such like: by which the
foundation of Christian faith is utterly overthrown: as, 1. That Christ so
died for all men, that, by his death, truly and undoubtedly all men are freed
from all sin and condemnation, whether they believe or not. 2. That by Christ's
death God was reconciled to all mankind: and that he has truly received into
his favor the whole race of mankind, whether they be Turks, Jews, or
Epicures. 3. And that he has also received them to mercy, who before his death
were in hell: For Huberus in his 66. These, says, That Christ died effectually
for them. 4. That remission of sins is given equally to all. Idem These. 270.
Puccius de ^ffi^. page 7. Idem l^b MS. cap. 24.
5. That the pardon of sin is general. 6. That the Reprobates were as well
saved by Christ, as others. 7. That all, and every one by the bounty and
universal grace of God the Father in Christ, are saved. 8. That as Christ was
the Creator, so he is the Redeemer of all and every one.

One Egg is not liker to another, then Huberus is to Puccius: they both build
upon one foundation, to wit, upon the general redemption, pardon, and
salvation by Christ's death, without any particular faith; from which
notwithstanding Infidels fall away: here is only the difference, that what is
covertly and sophistically spoken by Huberus, is roundly professed by Puccius;
to wit, Pelagianisme, necessarily resulting thence, (as is showed in Margarita
Aurea) that there is no original sin, seeing that by the power of Christ's
death all men, and every one are borne, as they are men, according to Huberus;
as they are redeemed men, according to Puccius: in the state of grace and
salvation, says he; in the bosom and grace of God, says this, and therefore
in the state of blessedness, so they procure not their own destruction by
infidelity. Let the Church, yea, let God judge between these two, and between
Osiander, with what conscience he can deny, that there is any controversy
about this; to wit, Whether God has bestowed his Son upon all the world, that
is* on all and every man, to be a Savior, even to the ends of the earth, of
all them that embrace him by faith: whereas we do both know, and ^each the same
thing from the mouth of Christ: But Puccius and Huberus, on the contrary, cry
out, That Christ is given as a Savior to all men absolutely, and has saved
all men effectually, whether they believe or not. It is well then, that
Osiander fights for us, and refutes his own brethren himself.

ARTICLE III. Of Christ's ascension into Heaven.
I. WE believe, that properly, and without any trope, Christ ascended from
earth into (a) heaven, by a true and local motion of his body, by his divine
power, in the presence of his Disciples; and that he is for our sakes in (b)
heaven, until he return, to judge the quick and the (c) dead.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Acts 1.9, 10, 11. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld,
he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while they
looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold two men stood by them
in white apparel, Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, Why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

(b) Heb. 8.4. If Christ we upon earth, he were not a Priest.

Heb. 9.24. Christ is not entered into a sanctuary made with hands, etc. but
into heaven it self, that he may appear in the presence of God for us.

Col. 3.1. Seek the things which are above, where Christ is sitting at the
right hand of God.

Acts 3.21. The heavens must contain Christ, until the time of restitution of
all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since
the world began.

(c) Acts 1.11. This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

Mat. 24.30. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and they
shall see him come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

Mat. 25.31. But when the Son of man shall come in glory, and all his holy
Angels with him, then he shall sit down upon the throne of his glory.

1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall come down from heaven with a great
shout, with the voice of an Archangel, and with the trumpet of God.

Phil. 3.20. From whence we expect our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

II. What heaven that is, and what place it is unto which Christ ascended, we
will not inquire, but leave it to those that are curious, seeing it is written,
Isai. 64.4. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Notwithstanding, we
believe piously, and with the Scripture, that it (a) is a place, not on this
(b) earth, nor (c) below, nor everywhere: but above, and without this visible
(d) world, the heaven of (e) heavens, the habitation and throne (f) of God, in
light (g) inaccessible, the house of (h) our Father, the City of the living (i)
God, the Saints native (k) country, where Christ is (l) now at the right hand
of God interceding (m) for us, and preparing a place (n) for us, from whence we
expect he will (o) return, downward into the (p) clouds, that he may receive
us unto (q) himself.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) 1 King. 8.30. Hear the supplications of thy servant, and of thy people
Israel, which shall pray in this place: hear thou from the place of thy
habitation, that is, from heaven; hear and spare.

John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would
have told you: I go to prepare a place for you.

Phil. 3.20. From whence we expect our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

(b) Jer. 31.37. Thus says the Lord, If the heavens above can be measured, and
the foundations of the earth beneath.

(c) Luke 16.26. Besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot, neither can
they pass to us that would come from thence.

(d) Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended is he also that ascended far above all
heavens that he might fulfill all things.

Heb. 4.14. Having therefore our High Priest Jesus Christ, who has entered into
the heavens.

(e) 1 King. 8.27. The Heaven, and heaven of heavens do not contain thee.

Psalm. 115.16. The heaven is the Lords, but the earth he has given to the sons
of men.

(f) 1 King. 8.45. Hear from heaven, from the place of thy habitation, their
prayers.

1 Timothy 6.15. The King of kings, and Lord of lords inhabits light inaccessible.

(g) John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many mansions: I go to prepare a place
for you.

(h) Heb. 11.10. Abraham did look for a City having a foundation, whose
builder was God.

(i) Heb. 12.32. You are come to mount Sion, to the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels.

(k) Heb. 11.14. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek
a country.

(l) Heb. 9.24. Not into the sanctuary made with hands is Christ entered, but
into heaven it self, that he might appear now for us in the presence of God.

(m) Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died yea rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.

(n) John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you.

(o) Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

(p) Acts 1.11. This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven.

1 These. 4.16, 17. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught
up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall
we ever be with the Lord.

(q) John 14.3. I will come again, and will receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there you may be also.

John 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me.

III. Thither, not often, but (a) once; not in his mothers womb, but the
fortieth day after his (b) resurrection; not everywhere, but on mount (c)
Olivet; not apparently, but by the true motion of (d) his body; not invisibly,
but his Disciples looking on, and accompanying him with their eyes, not with
their feet, he (e) ascended, and left the (f) world, by a corporal departure
entering his body into heaven; not carrying away his majesty from the (g) world:
because, though he be absent in his body, presenting himself to the Father for
us, and sitting at his right hand, he yet dwells in the Saints by his Spirit,
and suffers them not to be Orphans, as religious Antiquity (h) speaks.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of the Ancient Fathers.
(a) Heb. 9.12. Christ by his own blood has entered once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption.

(b) Acts 1.3. After Christ had suffered, he showed himself alive to his
Disciples, with many certain signs, being seen of them for 40. days.

(c) Acts 1.11. Then the Apostles returned to Jerusalem from the mount called
Olivet, which is near to Jerusalem, being distant a Sabbath days journey.

(d) Acts 1.9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

(e) Austine Tract. in John 50. According to the flesh which the Word assumed;
according to that which was borne of the Virgin; according to that which was
apprehended by the Jews, which was fastened to the tree, which was taken down
from the Cross, which was wrapped in linen, which was laid in the Sepulcher,
which was manifested in the Resurrection, you shall not have him always with
you; Why? because he conversed, according to his bodily presence, 40. days
with the disciples; and, they accompanying him by seeing, not by following, he
ascended into heaven, and is not here.

Chrysostom. Sermon. de Ascens. Domini Tom. 2. p. 328. Because the space from earth
to heaven is great, and the sight of their eyes could not thoroughly perceive
the body that was carried unto such an altitude; but, as our eyesight fails
us, when we look upon a bird mounting high; so, the higher that body was
elevated, the more was the sight of the beholders eyes weakened, nature not
being able to reach higher with the eye: therefore the Angels stood, showing
the celestial journey, lest any should suppose but that he was carried up into
heaven, after the manner of Elias, who was elevated thither from you.

Ibid. See what space is between heaven and earth, or between earth and hell,
or how far this heaven is distant from the higher heaven, or how great the
space is from the higher heaven to the Angels; or from the higher powers, to
the seat of our Lord; above all these is our Nature elevated, that man, who was
here so low, that he could descend no lower, should be elevated unto such an
high seat, that he can ascend no higher: therefore Paul says, He that
ascended, is he also that descended.

Ibid. He descended into the lower parts of the earth, and ascended above all
heavens.

(f) John 16.28. Again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.

(g) August. Tract. in Joh. 102. He left the world by a corporal departure; he
went to the Father by a corporal ascension; nor did he forsake the world by
his presentiall government.

Idem Tract. in Joh. 50. The Priests commanded, that if any man knew where he
were, he should show it, that they might apprehend him. We (says he) will now
show to the Jews where Christ is. I wish that all, who are of their seed, would
hear and understand, who gave command that it should be showed them where
Christ is. Let them come to the Church, and hear where Christ is, and let them
apprehend him: They shall hear it of us, they shall hear it of the Gospel. He
was slain by their parents, he was buried, and rose again, he was known of
his Disciples, in their presence he ascended into heaven; there he sits at the
right hand of the Father: who was judged, shall come to judge: let them hear,
and hold. Thou will answer, Whom shall I hold? One that is absent? Send up
faith, and thou have held him. Thy parents held him in the flesh, hold thou him
in thine heart; because, Christ, being absent, is present: for, if he were not
present with us, he could not be held by us. But, because that is true which he
says, I am with you to the end of the world, he is both gone, and yet is here;
he has both returned, and not deserted us: He has entered his body into
heaven, and has not taken away his majesty from the earth.

(h) Cyril in Joh. l. 11. c. 3. For though he be absent in body, presenting
himself to the Father for us, and sitting at his right hand; yet he dwells in
his Saints by his Spirit, and suffers them not to be Orphans.

IV. By this only Orthodox faith, we know where Jesus Christ our treasure is to
be sought and called upon; to wit, above in heaven, at the right hand (a) of
God: for, where our treasure is, there will our (b) heart be; from whence we
must look for him, namely, from (c) heaven; where lastly our mansion must be
after this life; to wit, in heaven, where our Lord has prepared a place (d)
for us.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Col. 3.1. Seek the things above, where Christ is sitting at the right
hand of God.

(b) Mat. 6.21. Where our treasure is, there is our heart.

(c) Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven, whence we look for the
Savior, etc.

(d) John 14.3. I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also.

John 17.24. Father, I will that where I am, they may be with me, that they may
see my glory.

(e) 1 These. 4.17. We shall be caught in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air; and so we shall be always with the Lord.

V. We reject those odious fictions of the Ubiquitaries, (...) onera molesta.
as strangers from the Christian faith, concerning heaven, and Christ's
ascension; the most of which fopperies, to be seen in their books, are scarce
worthy of Lucian. Surely, pious posterity will have cause enough to groan, and
to wonder at the power of error.

1. They say, That the heaven which is above this world, which Brentius says
he laughs at, is an old wifes dream, or a Thalmudicall or Mahumeticall fancy.

2. That the heaven into which Christ ascended, is not a place, nor above, but
is God himself, (because, forsooth, the heaven was incarnate, and died for us)
that it is everywhere: in which also hell it self is; and in which not only
the Saints, but Satan also, and his Angels are found.

3. That Christ ascended often into heaven; invisibly in the womb of his
Mother, where the Word was made flesh: on the Cross, where, giving up the
ghost, he laid aside the form of a servant: in his resurrection from the dead.
Lastly, visibly, upon mount Olivet.

4. That this last Ascension was not a true Ascension into heaven, but a
wonderful lifting up of Christ's body, even to the clouds; a sight dispensed
with, or a visible vanishing.

5. That Christ in passing to his Father, that is, in his ascension to heaven,
did not a hairs breadth move his body from the earth.

6. To ascend to heaven, is to put off infirmity, to pass to a heavenly and
immortal state; to vanish, to be united to God, to sit at Gods right hand, to
be raised to high honors.

7. That Christ in his Ascension hid himself in a cloud, and, Proteus-like,
turned himself into shapes; or, as they say, he put on a cloudy hood, as the
Poets feign of Venus, Hom. Illiad. (...).
who, when she delivered Paris, hid him in a thick cloud: So Jeremie, Lament.
3.44. Thou have opposed to thy self a thick cloud, that the speeth may not
pass through.

8. We will not omit these bitter scoffs of the Brentians, that by
Mathematical computation, Christ, in regard of the bulk and violent motion of
his body upward, has not as yet perhaps pierced the planeticall Spheres, and
arrived unto his Fathers house.

9. That there he is walking up and down, or perhaps laid down to rest.

ARTICLE IV. of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God.
I. Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, is not the ascension it self
into heaven: for they differ, 1. In order of time; for he first ascended,
before he sat down at Gods right (a) hand. 2. In their form; Ascension is a
local motion (b) upward, Session is the glorious condition of the person (c)
ascending. 3. In their proximate ends; Ascension was performed for the (d)
Session, but Session for the (e) Church. 4. In duration; Ascension was done but
once, as being a transient act; but Session as an immanent act: the Kingdom
and glory of Christ endure for (f) ever. Lastly, in their subjects; for
Ascension belongs also to the (g) Saints, but the Session at Gods right hand is
the glory of the exalted Mediator (h) alone.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Mark 16.19. After that the Lord had spoken to them, he was received up
into heaven, and sits at Gods right hand.

(b) Acts 1.9. Whilst his Disciples beheld, he was lifted up.

(c) Heb. 8.1. We have such an High Priest, who is set down at the right hand
of the throne of the majesty in the heavens.

(d) Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and has given him a
name above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should how.

1 Pet. 3.22. Christ at the right hand of God, is gone into heaven.

Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into heaven, that he might appear in the sight of
God for us.

(e) Ephesians. 4.10. Christ has ascended far above all heavens, that he might
fill all things, etc.

(f) Luke 1.33. Of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet.

(g) 1 These. 4.17. We shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

(h) Heb. 1.13. To which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit at my right
hand.

II. Neither is this sitting of Christ the Incarnation it self, or the
personal union of the flesh with the Word, as some giddy heads contend;
because, 1. In the Symbol, in which is no tautologie, these are distinguished.
2. No where in Scripture is the humanity said to sit at the Word, but to be
assumed by the (a) Word. 3. The union was made in the womb of the mother, the
sitting is in (b) heaven. 4. The union was in the first minute of the
conception; but the sitting began after the (e) ascension. 5. The union is
simply immutable, the sitting is in some sort mutable, in respect of the
external form of the Kingdom, which, as the Apostle (d) witnesses, when
death is abolished, shall be altogether immediate and without enemy; for now
Christ, being in the midst of his enemies, as a Rose among thorns, reigns by
diverse media, or governes by diverse means; but then he shall reign without
any medium, or enemy, because God shall be all (e) in all.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Heb. 2.16. For he did not assume the Angels.

John 1.14. The Word was made flesh.

(bc) Luke 1.31. Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and shall bring forth a Son.

Ephesians. 1.20. God has placed Christ at his right hand in heaven.

(d) 1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he has put all his enemies under his
feet; the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

(e) Rev. 21.23. Esaias 60.19. The Sun shall no more be thy light by day, nor
shall the brightness of the Moon enlighten thee: but the Lord shall be thy
everlasting light.

III. But the full and absolute glory of Christ being exalted in his heavenly
Priesthood and Kingdom, is expressed by this phrase, taken from humane
affairs, and applied to divine: because Kings do most honor those whom they
place at their right hand; for, by the right hand of God, who is a spirit, we
cannot understand any corporeal member or place: neither does the sitting at
Gods right hand signify the corporal situation of Christ; for, except we
understand this spiritually, Tom. 6. contra Scr. Arian.
says Austine, the Father will be upon the Sons left hand.

IV. And this glory is so proper to Christ the Mediator, that it belongs not
to the Father, nor to the Holy Ghost, much less to any creature; for it was
not said to the Father, nor to the Holy Ghost, nor to any Angel, Sit at my
right hand, Heb. 1.13.
until I make thine enemies thy footstool: But of the Son only it is said, 1
Cor. 15.25.
He must reign until, etc. Whence it follows, that to sit at Gods right
hand, is not the same that Christ's humane nature, omnipotent, omniscient,
omnipresent; or lastly, to be equal with God, or to be God himself, whether
he has obtained that dignity by the personal union, or by his ascending into
heaven, or by other cause.

V. But albeit this glory of the Mediator is to us ineffable while we are in
this life; yet, if we carefully compare the Apostles three places, by which he
chiefly describes it, we shall in some manner conceive it, that it principally
consists in these.

Testimonies of Scripture, touching Christ's sitting at Gods right hand.
Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. God raised Christ from the dead, and set him at his
own right hand in the heavenly places; Far above all principality and power,
and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but also in that which is to come: And has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be head over all things to the Church, Which is his body, the
fullness of him that silleth all in all.

1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and
all authority, and power. For he must reign, till he has put all his enemies
under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death.

Phil. 2.9, 10. Therefore God has highly exalted him, and has given him a
name above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, on earth, and under the earth; and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

VI. The glory of Christ the Mediator, does first consist in that high
perfection and dignity of the person of the Mediator, even according to that
nature which was assumed, being adorned with unspeakeable excellencies of
endowents, with happiness and majesty, and with that sublime exaltation above
all principality, power, and dominion, all things being put under his feet,
that he might be the Head of the (a) Church, by which the Father governes all
things in heaven and (b) earth, the natures remaining whole and unconfused, as
also the properties of nature, in this glory, Which (as Austine says) gave to
the flesh to be immortal, but took not away the (c) nature.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of some Ancient Doctors.
(a) Ephesians. 1.20, 21. God placed Christ at his right hand in heaven, far above
all power, etc.

(b) John 5.22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son.

Acts 17.31. God will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he
has appointed.

(c) August. Epist. 57. ad Dardanum. Doubt not then, but the man Christ Jesus
is now there, from whence he will return: call to mind, and hold faithfully
the Christian Confession; because he is risen from the dead, has ascended into
heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father, nor from any other place, but
from thence will he come to judge the quick and dead; and so he will come (as
the Angel witnesses) after the same manner that he was seen to go into
heaven; that is, in the same form and substance: to whom he gave immortality,
but took not his nature away.

VII. Secondly, it consists in the glorious administration of his Prophetical,
Sacerdotall, and Regal offices; by which, as Mediator, he declares himself,
even in his assumed humane nature, that he is appointed Lord and Judge of all
(a) things, and that he rules most powerfully in heaven and (b) earth,
gathering to himself out of the race of mankind a perpetual (c) Church, by
the holy Ghost, and the Word, making intercession for (d) her, and defending
her by his divine power on (e) earth; until, having freed her from all
molestations, and from her enemies, he glorify her in (f) heaven.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Acts 2.36. Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Acts 5.31. God having exalted him at his right hand, has made him Prince and
Savior, that he might give to Israel repentance, and remission of sins. See
Act. 17.31. John 5.22.

(b) Psalm. 110.2. Bear thou rule in the midst of thine enemies.

1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet.

(c) Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Doctors.

Romans 1.17. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every one that
believes.

Mark 16.21. The Lord did cooperate, and confirmed the word with signs
following.

(d) Romans 8.34. Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for
us.

Heb. 9.24. Christ has now entered into heaven, that he might appear before
God for us.

1 John 2.1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

(e) Mat. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail against her.

John 10.28. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of mine hand.

(f) John 17.24. Father, I will that they whom thou have given to me, may be
where I am, that they may behold my glory.

VIII. Lastly, in the perfection of that honor and worship due (a) to the
Mediator, gloriously reigning even in our humane nature; to wit, that he is
acknowledged by Angels, men, and all creatures, and by them is adored and
celebrated as their head and Lord; as it is written, And let all the Angels of
God worship him. Also, Psalm. 1.6. Psalm. 97.7. Phil. 2.10.
At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, on earth, and
under the earth.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Acts 9.14. In this place he has power from the High Priest to bind all
that call on thy Name.

1 Cor. 1.2. To all that call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ in any
place, etc.

Rev. 5.9. Thou art worthy to receive the book, and to open the seals
thereof; because thou have been slain, and have redeemed us by thy blood out
of every Tribe, Langue, People, and Nation. See also Rev. 4.11. and 8.13. and
19.5, 6, 7.

IX. Therefore these, and such like doctrines of the Ubiquitaries, are false
and prodigious; 1. That Christ's humanity, presently in his conception, when the
Word was made flesh, did sit at the right hand of God. 2. That to sit at Gods
right hand, is nothing else, but to be united personally to the Son of God, who
is the Fathers right hand. 3. That it is all one with his ascending to heaven.
4. That it is to be made man, and to become God. 5. That it is all one with
Christ's humanity filling heaven and earth, and being everywhere.

ARTICLE. V. Of Predestination.
I. TO deny in God an eternal predestination of mankind, is to deny God
himself, and to give the lie to the holy Scripture; for, as Luther De servo
arb. cap. 143.
says truly, God, being spoiled of his power and wisdom in electing, what
will he be else, but the Idol of Fortune, by whose power all things are done
rashly or at random? And, at length, it will come to this, that men are damned
and saved with the knowledge of God, as who has not discriminated by a
certain election, those that shall be saved and damned: but, a general lenity
tolerating and hardening being proffered to all, then a correcting and punishing
mercy, he has left it to men's choice whether they will be saved or damned; he
himself, perhaps being gone to feast with the Ethiopians, as Homer says.
Austine in his book De bono persever. c. 18. averreth, That no man can
dispute, except he will fall into error, against this predestination; which,
says he, we defend, according to the holy Scripture: and cap. 21. Therefore,
it savours too much of contention (says he) to contradict predestination, or
to doubt of it.

II. Therefore, of predestination we must speak, and be silent with the
Scripture: for what God will have concealed, must not be enquired after; and
what he has revealed must not be neglected; lest in those we be found
unlawfully curious, in these damnably ungrateful: as l. 1. ad Monimum. p. 8.
Ambrose excellently.

III. Neither (that we may give this caution with Fulgentius) is there any
coactive necessity of man's will to be expressed by the name of predestination;
but rather, a merciful, just, and eternal disposition of Gods future work is
hereby declared.

IV. For predestination (that we may after the plainest way define it; to wit,
from the effects of God known to us irrefragably out of Scripture and
experience) is Gods eternal (a) counsel, by which, out of the lost (b) mass
of mankind, of his mere good will (c), he bestows justice, and life
eternal upon whom he pleases, in his mercy by faith in Christ, and freely by
Christ (d) saves them: and to whom he pleases he denies to give that faith,
justice, and (e) life; but leaving them in their wickedness, blindness, and
destruction (f) for their sins, he does most justly addict and condemn them
(g) to eternal pains: that, by saving of the believers, he might declare his
mercy (h) and grace; by damning the wicked, he might manifest his justice and
power to (i) all eternity.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Acts 15.18. The works of God are known to him from the beginning of the
world.

Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us before the foundations of the world were laid.

Acts 4.28. That they might do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had fore
appointed to be done.

Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God, which is according to election, might
remain sure.

(b) Romans 9.21. Has not the Potter power over the clay, that out of the same
lump, he may make one vessel to honor, another to dishonor?

Jerem. 18.6. Cannot I, as that Potter, do unto you, O house of Israel, says
the Lord? Behold, as the clay is in the hand of the Potter, so are you in mine
hand, O Israel.

(c) Mat. 11.26. Even so Father, because it has pleased thee.

Romans 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.

Ephesians. 1.5, 9. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: Having made
known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which
he had purposed in himself.

(d) Romans 8.29, 30. Whom he fore-knew, he also predestined to be made
conformable to the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among
many brethren. Whom he predestined, them also he has called; and whom he
has called, them he has justified; and whom he has justified, them he has
also glorified.

Ephesians. 1.4, 5. As he has elected us before the foundation of the world was
laid, that we might be holy and without blame before him in love. Who has
predestined us whom he has adopted to be his sons, through Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

(e) Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.

2 Timothy 2.25, 26. It behooveth the Jervant of God with all gentleness to try,
if at any time God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth,
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are
captivated by him at his will.

(f) Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will be
hardneth.

Psalm. 81.13. I left them therefore to the strength of their own heart, and
they walked in their own counsels.

Acts 14.16. And who in former ages suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways.

(g) Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is he that does not observe the words of this Law to
do them.

Ezekiel. 18.4. That soul that sins, shall die.

Colos. 3.6. For which things the wrath of God comes upon the disobedient.

(h) Romans 9.23. That he might make known the riches of his glory toward the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared for glory.

Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, who has freely made us
acceptable in his Beloved.

(i) Romans 9.22. But what if he, willing to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, has endured with much patience the vessels of wrath prepared for
destruction?

Prove. 16.4. God has made all things for himself, and the wicked also for the
evil day.

V. Now, because all the works of God are known to himself from (a) eternity,
and with the Father of lights there is no change or shadow of (b) turning:
therefore it is not to be doubted, but whatsoever God does in time, either in
saving, or condemning of men, that he did decree from eternity unchangeably to
do, and after that manner that he works now, and as the Scripture witnesses
he does (c) work.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Acts 15.18. All the works of God are known to him from the beginning of
the world.

(b) James 1.17. With the Father of lights there is no changing, or shadow of
turning.

(c) Isai. 14.27. The Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanull it?

VI. We may also otherwise define predestination out of Scripture, a priori, or
from the causes; That it is Gods (a) eternal, (b) free, (c) just, (d)
immutable, and (e) holy (f) counsel and (g) purpose; by which, from eternity,
before the foundation of the (h) world out of mankind, being equally corrupted
and (i) lost, (to wit, which shortly after the holy creation, by Satan's
instigation, was to fall, and to be liable to eternal (k) death) of his mere
good pleasure and (l) mercy he foresaw (m) some, and elected (n) them, and
writ them down in the Book of (o) life, and called them in (p) himself, and
ordained them for life (q) eternal, to have salvation in (r) Christ Jesus;
whom, from the beginning to the end of the world, by his Word and Spirit, he
has effectually (s) called to the knowledge of his Son Christ Jesus, has
bestowed on them true faith and hearty (t) conversion, has (u) justified, and
at last will (x) glorify them: But others, most justly and willingly he has
(y) pretermitted, and has not written them in the Book of (z) life, but has
decreed, as impute vessels of his wrath, for their sins, to plague them with
eternal (aa) death; and in time he pitieth (bb) them not, but has reprobated
(cc) them to be forsaken and left in their blindness and wickedness; that he
might make manifest the riches of his bounty and grace upon the elect vessels
of mercy, and upon the reprobate vessels of wrath the power of his (dd)
displeasure, that so the merciful and just Judge of the world might be to all
eternity acknowledged and praised.

Testimonies of Scripture concerning Predestination and Election.
(a) Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of
his heart from age to age.

(b) Romans 9.18. God shows mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

Mat. 20.15. May not I do with mine own as I list?

Esaias 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will fulfill all my pleasure.

(c) Dan. 9.14. The Lord our God is just in all the works that he has made.

(d) Prove. 19.21. The counsel of the Lord abides.

Isai. 14.24, 25. As I have thought, so shall it come to pass, as I have
purposed, it shall stand. This is the purpose that I have purposed, the Lord of
Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanull?

Isai. 45.7. Forming peace, and creating evil.

Isai. 46.11. I have purposed, and I will also do it.

Ezekiel. 12.25. I will speak the word, and I will do it.

Malac. 3.6. I am the Lord, and change not.

Romans 11.29. Of them God cannot repent.

Heb. 6.17. God, willing to show the immutability of his promise, confirmed it
by an oath.

James 1.17. With the Father of lights there is no change.

(e) Isai. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hosts.

Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

(f) Ephesians. 1.11. He did all things by the counsel of his will.

Acts 4.28. That they might do whatsoever thine hand, and thy counsel had
pre-ordained to be done.

(g) Romans 8.11. That the purpose of God which is according to election might
remain.

Ephesians. 1.11. In him we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to his purpose, who works all things by the counsel of his o^ne
will.

(h) Ephesians. 1.4. As he has elected us in himself before the foundations of
the world were laid.

(i) Ephesians. 2.5. When we were dead in our sins, God has quickened us together
with Christ.

Romans 9.21. Has not the Potter power of the same lump, to make one vessel to
honor? etc.

(k) Genes. 1. ver. 2, 3. etc.

(l) Tit. 3.5. Not by the just works which we have done, but by his mercy he
has saved us.

Romans 9.11.18. The children being yet not borne before they had done good or
evil, that the purpose of God which is according to election; that is, not of
works, but of him that calls, might stand sure. Therefore he will have mercy
on whom he will etc.

Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Not because of your multitude has the Lord loved you above all
other people, and chosen you; but because the Lord loved you.

(m) Romans 8.29. Whom he fore-knew, them he predestined, to be conformable to
the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.

(n) Mat. 22.14. Many are called, few chosen.

Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him.

(o) Phil. 4.3. Whose names are in the Book of life.

Dan. 12.1. At that time thy people shall escape, whosoever is found written in
the Book of life.

Luke 10.20. Rejoice that your names are written in heaven.

Rev. 20.12. And another book was opened, which is the Book of life.

Rev. 21.27. There shall no thing enter into it that defiles, or does any
abomination, or speaks lies, but who are written in the Lambs book of life.

Of the Book of life see also Exodus 32.32, 33. Psalm. 69.29. and 139.16. Ezekiel.
13.9. Rev. 17.8. and 20.15.

(p) Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

(q) Acts 13.48. And they believed, so many as were ordained to life eternal.

(r) Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

(s) Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them also he called.

(t) Mat. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
heaven.

Mat. 11.15. I thank thee, O Father, that thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes.

Acts 13.48. And as many as were ordained to life eternal, believed.

Ephesians. 1.4. That we might be holy before him in love.

Tit. 1.1. According to the faith of Gods elect.

(u) Romans 8.30. Whom he called, those also he justified.

(x) Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, those also he glorified.

(y) Mat. 22.14. Few are chosen.

Romans 11.7. The elect have obtained, the rest were hardened.

(z) Rev. 20.15. He that was not found written in the Book of life, was cast
into the burning lake.

Rev. 17.8. Whose names are not written in the Book of life, from the
foundation of the world.

(aa) Romans 9.22. He endured with great patience the vessels of wrath prepared
for destruction.

Mat. 25.41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

Prove. 16.4. God made all things for himself, and the wicked for the evil day.

Jude 4. and 2 P^t. 2.3. Who of old were ordained for this judgment.

(bb) Romans 9.18. He shows mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens.

Psalm. 59.6. Be not merciful to all the sins of the wicked.

Jer. 13.14. I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them.

(cc) Psalm. 81.13. I permitted them to the strength of their own hearts, and
they walked in their counsels.

Acts 14.16. God in former ages suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways.

Romans 1.24, 26, 28. Therefore God delivered them up to their own hearts
desires, to uncleanness, that they might defile their bodies one with another.

(dd) Romans 9.22, 23. What if he, willing to show his anger and make known his
power, endured with much patience the vessels of wrath prepared for
destruction: And that he might make known the riches of his glory to the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared for glory?

Romans 9.17. For this very cause have I raised thee, that I might make known my
power in thee, and that my Name may be declared through all the earth.

Exodus 9.16. And truly, for this cause have I set thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, etc.

Prove. 16.4. God has made all things for himself, even the wicked man for the
evil day.

(ee) Psalm. 145.7. They will call to mind the multitude of thy goodness, and
they will speak of thy righteousness.

Psalm. 75.8. God is Judge, he lifieth up one, and casts down the other.

VII. Out of these testimonies of Scripture it is manifest, that God, before
the foundation of the world, did put this difference between men, that he
says himself, he shows mercy (a) to some, and hardens (b) others; he
illuminateth some, and (c) blinds others; he calls some to repentance, and
calls not others; bestows faith on some, bestows it not on (d) others. Abel
was received of God, Cain (e) rejected: Sem retains the blessing of God, Cham
is (f) accursed: Abraham is called out of Ur of the Chaldees, others are (g)
forsaken: Isaac is made heir, Ismael is (h) ejected: Jacob is loved, Esau
hated: Peter after his fall is received unto (i) grace, Judas is left in
despair. In brief, that will be till the end of the world which Christ (k)
foretold, Then two shall be in the field, one shall be received, the other
shall be rejected; two shall be grinding in the Mill, the one shall be
received, the other refused. Who then will doubt whether God did not decree
that from eternity, which in time he will have done? For, with God, the Father
of lights, there is no change, Jam. 1.17. See above, Aphoris. 5.

VIII. Therefore, it is no less true that there is predestination, then that
God is God. See Luthers saying above, Aphoris. 1.

IX. The cause why God from eternity, out of lost mankind, did predestinate
some to life eternal, to be saved in Christ, is none other in the counsel of
God, then what in time moved him that he should bestow upon his Elect,
according to his revealed word, faith, and life eternal; to wit, his mere
good pleasure, and free will of electing them in (a) Christ, and not their
foreseen holiness or good (b) works; for they were all sinners alike, and
unapt for good (c) works, unless that God does operate these in them, because
he had predestined and (d) elected them before.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Romans 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens.

Ephesians. 1.5. Who has predestined us, whom he has adopted to be sons in
Christ Jesus to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

Mat. 11.26. Even so Father, because it has pleased thee.

(b) 1 John 4.10. In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us.

John 15.16. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

Romans 9.11. Not of works, but of him that calls.

Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but by his
mercy he has saved us.

Ephesians. 1.4. He has elected us in him, in love.

Deuteronomy. 7.7. Not because you were many, has God above all people loved and
chosen you, but because the Lord loved you.

(c) Ephesians. 2.3. We were all the children of wrath, as others were.

Mat. 7.8. An evil tree brings not forth good fruit.

(d) 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing
as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. See also Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.30.

X. Why God did not choose all, or did not forsake all, but some only; and why
he chose us, rather then others; I say, Jacob, Peter, and Paul, rather then
Esau, Judas, and Simon Magus, in Gods eternal counsel no other reason can be
given, then what is revealed in his Word; to wit, why he did not call all in
time, or not call; convert, or not convert; to wit, the gracious and just
pleasure of his (a) will, and not the foreseen inequality, worthiness, or
unworthiness of men; as if God had foreseen that these should be good in
themselves, and others should be wicked; for God saw all men equally corrupted,
and therefore, in respect of worth, he might have justly (b) rejected all. S.
Paul tells us, that the cause of this good will and pleasure of God, was the
manifestation of his mercy and (c) wrath: but why that seemed good to God thus,
and not otherwise, it is that unsearchable depth of the wisdom of God, to be
adored by us with the Apostle; O the (d) depth! The cause may be hid, it cannot
be unjust, says (e) Austine.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of the Ancient Fathers.
(a) Mat. 11.25, 26. I thank thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes: Even so, because it pleased thee, O Father. See also Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

(b) Romans 9.11. The children being yet unborne, when they had done neither good
nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain sure, according to election;
that is, not of works, but of him that calls.

(c) Romans 9.22. What if he, being willing to show his wrath, and make known
his power, has suffered with much gentleness the vessels of wrath prepared
for destruction, and to make known the riches of his glory toward the vessels
of mercy? etc.

Romans 9.17. For this cause have I raised thee, that I might make known my
power on thee, and that my Name might be declared through all the earth.

Prove. 16.4. God made all for himself, even the wicked for the evil day.

(d) Romans 11.33. O the deep riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

(e) August. ad Paul. epist. 59. Why some belong to predestination, some do not
belong, the cause may be occult, it cannot be unjust.

XI. But the cause why God chooses not these, as unclean vessels ordained to
wrath and eternal (a) damnation, is none other, then why now, and for ever,
according to Law and Gospel, he punishes and condemns them: to wit, in
regard of God, his most just anger against (b) sin; in regard of the reprobate,
their sins, malice, and (c) infidelity: for, as God in his justice punishes
none but for (d) sin; so he predestined no man to punishment, but for sin.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Prove. 16.4. God has made all for himself, the wicked also for the evil
day. See Romans 9.22. Mat. 25.41. Jude 4.

(b) Psalm. 5.6. He hates all the workers of iniquity.

(c) Ephesians. 5.6. For these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience.

(d) Ezekiel. 18.4. That soul that sins shall die.

XII. Therefore, there is no injustice in Gods predestination, but all things
are done graciously and justly: for, it is an act of grace to pardon the Elect
that debt, which he might have justly exacted from them; and it is an act of
justice to require it of the reprobate, which he was not bound to remit unto
(a) them; yea, God should be just, if he punish (b) both, because he found both
in the same corruption: they then that are condemned cannot pretend, that they
have not deserved punishment, nor can they who are justified, glory that they
have deserved grace and (c) salvation.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of Ancient Doctors.
(a) Mat. 20.13, 15. Friend, I do thee no wrong; may not I do with mine own
what I please? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?

Romans 11.35. Or, who has first given to him, that he might be repaied?

(b) August. de bono perseverant. cap. 8. He should be just, though he punished
both: he who is delivered, has cause to give thanks; he who is condemned, has
no cause to complain.

(c) Ambrose l. 2. c. 1. De vocat. Gent. Neither is the complaint of the damned
man just, nor the bragging of the justified true, if either the one say, that
he has deserved punishment, or the other affirm, that he has merited grace.

XIII. All things (says Luther) depend upon Gods predestination; to wit, In
praefat. comment. ad Romans
who are to believe, who not; who are to be freed from sin, who are to be
blinded; who are to be condemned, and who justified: For, in them who are
elected to life, he works, by calling them to repentance, faith, justice,
comfort, (a) glory; in those that are predestined to damnation, he does not
work, but in them he finds sin, infidelity, injustice, desperation and
shame; in many, notwithstanding, he works most just (b) induration, and in
all eternal desertion, and rejection from Gods (c) presence.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Romans 8.29, 30. Whom he fore-knew, he also predestined to be conformable
to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.
Those whom he predestined, he called; whom he called, them he has justified;
whom he justified, those he glorified.

Acts 15.48. And so many as were ordained for life eternal, believed.

(b) Romans 9.18. He hardens whom he will.

Romans 11.7, 8. The Elect have attained, the rest are hardened: As it is
written, God gave them the spirit of slumber: eyes that they might not see,
ears that they might not hear.

(c) Jer. 16.5. I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord,
mercy, etc.

Mat. 23.38. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.

Mat. 25.41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

XIV. Therefore, whomsoever God in Christ has predestined to life, he also
calls them certainly and unchangeably to faith, he justifies, and glorifieth
(a) them: It is therefore impossible for the Elect to perish, and to be blotted
out of the Book of (b) life. If any of these perish, God is deceived, says
Austine: De corr. and gratia. c. 6.
but none of them perish, because God is not deceived. If any of these perish,
then God may be overcome by man's wickedness; but none of them do perish,
because, in nothing can God be overcome: but the rest who are deserted by God,
and left to themselves, do surely and infallibly perish; for, An evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit. Mat. 7.18.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Romans 29.30. Whom he fore-knew, them he also called and justified.

(b) Mat. 24.24. If it were possible, the Elect should be seduced.

John 10.28. I give to my sheep life eternal, and none shall take them out of
mine hand.

Rev. 3.5. He that overcomes shall be clothed in white, and I will never blot
his name out of the Book of life.

XV. Against hypocrites and enemies, the Scripture (a) threatens, that they
shall be blotted out of the Book of life; not as if they had before been
written in it; (for, it is added, And they shall not be written among the
just,) but because outwardly they brag, or are accounted such as are written in
the Book of life. This is not so to be understood, (says Austine in Psalm.
69.29.) as if God did write down any man in the Book of life, and then blot
him out: if a man could say, what I have written, I have written, concerning
the title, King of the Jews; does God write down any man, and then blot him
out again?

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Psalm. 69.29. Let them be blotted out of the Book of life, and not be
written among the just.

XVI. That there is a certain number of the (a) Elect, and that there are
fewer Elect then reprobate, the holy Scripture (b) witnesses; neither (alas!)
does daily experience permit us to doubt (c) of this.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) John 13.18. I know whom I have chosen.

2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal: The Lord
knows who are his.

(b) Mat. 22.14. Many are called, few are chosen.

(c) Mat. 7.13. The gate is large, and the way broad which leads to
destruction, and many there are who go in thereat.

XVII. Besides, if we will search into our predestination and election, we need
not climb up into Gods secret counsel: for, such curious searchers into Gods
secrets, who judge a priori, Praef. com. ad Romans
or from the cause of election, without doubt, says Luther, will fling
themselves headlong, by this their foolish curiosity, into despair, and
confusion of conscience. But we must descend to the effects, to our (a)
vocation; that we may try whether we are in the faith, and prove if Christ
dwells (b) in us: for these are truly the effects and signs of election, and
gifts proper to the Elect; as our effectual calling by the Gospel to (c)
repentance, true faith in (d) Christ, new (e) obedience, peace with (f) God,
the witness of the holy Ghost in our hearts of our (g) adoption. If we truly
feel these signs in our selves and in others, we may be sure of our own, and
of others election: and of our own election, we judge by the rule of faith,
which cannot be deceived; but of other men's election, by the rule of charity,
which may be deceived, as Luther (h) says.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) 1 Cor. 1.26. Brethren, you see your vocation.

(b) 2 Cor. 13.5. Try your selves, if you be in the faith: examine your selves.
Know ye not your own selves, how Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates?

(c) Romans 8.30. Whom he has predestined, them also he called.

1 These. 1.4, 5. Brethren, we know your election of God, because our Gospel was
not among you only in word, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in
much assurance.

(d) Tit. 1.1. An Apostle according to the faith of Gods elect.

2 These. 3.2. All have not faith.

Acts 13.48. They believed so many as were ordained to life eternal.

(e) Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, that we might be holy, and
blameless before him in love.

1 Pet. 1.2. To the elect by the foreknowledge of God the Father, to the
sanctification of the Spirit, by obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ.

2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore, brethren, rather study to make your election and
vocation sure.

(f) Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

(g) Romans 8.14, 16. Whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God. The Spirit himself witnesses with our spirits, that we are the sons
of God.

(h) Luther de servo arbitr. cap. 61. I call and account them holy: I call and
esteem them the Church of God, by the rule of Charity, not by the rule of
Faith: that is, Charity, which thinks the best still of any man, is not
suspicious, believes and presumes every thing that is good of our neighbors,
calls every one that is baptized holy; nor is there any danger if she err, for
it is the nature of Charity to be deceived, being she is exposed to all uses
and abuses for all men, the common servant of good men and bad, of faithful
and faithless, of true and false: But Faith calls no man holy, but him who is
declared to be so by divine judgment; because Faith cannot be deceived:
therefore, whereas we all should be accounted holy one toward another by the
law of charity, yet no man should be deemed holy by the law of faith, as
though it were an Article of faith.

XVIII. It is needful that this doctrine of Predestination should be retained
in the Church, both for Gods glory and our comfort: First, lest the glory of
our faith, justification, and eternal life should be attributed to our selves,
or to our free will and strength, but rather to God alone, and to his most free
will and mercy: For the doctrine of man's Justification by faith alone cannot
subsist, or be understood, or defended; except the doctrine also of
Predestination and Election be rightly understood, and entirely preserved in
the reformed Churches: Because not only eternal happiness and justification
by faith, but even faith it self is the mere gift of God, and the effect of
Predestination, in which God has preferred (a) us to others, although we
neither were better, nor were to be better then others. But if faith, either in
part or in whole, should proceed from us, presently justification by faith
without works should brag against (b) God. Then secondly, that we may be
assured, that as faith and salvation are not from our selves, so they are not
in our power, but are founded upon Gods immutable and eternal predestination;
and consequently, that these are not uncertain, but sure and immutable,
howsoever the Devil on the contrary may tempt us: And so Luther writes; And
truly (says he) this stable doctrine and immovable necessity of
predestination is very needful: for we are so feeble of our selves, In praef.
epist. ad Romans
that if we were in our own power, few or none of us should be saved; for
Satan would be too hard for us all. Now, seeing this stable and most certain
determination of God cannot be changed, or shaken by any creature, surely some
hope we have that at last we shall master sin, although yet it rages in our
flesh.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Ephesians. 2.3, 5. We were by nature the sons of wrath, and dead in our sins.

1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou that thou have not received? But if thou have
received, why boastest thou as if thou had not received?

(b) 1 Cor. 1. 29. Lest any flesh should glory before him.

Romans 3.19. For we know, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them who
are under the Law, that every man's mouth may be stopped, and that the whole
world may be under condemmation.

(c) John 10.28. I give unto my sheep life eternal, and no man shall take them
out of mine hand.

Matthew. 24.24. If it were possible the elect should be seduced.

Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fail.

2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal: The Lord
knows who are his.

1 Pet. 1.5. Who are preserved by the help of Gods power through faith unto
salvation, which is prepared to be revealed in the latter time.

XIX. We reject then the Pelagian inconsistent, and selfe-destroying opinions
of Puccius, Huberus, and such like, as strangers from faith and Christian
consolation: 1. That in God there is no purpose of election and reprobation. 2.
That there is a general election of all. 3. That Paul, Ephesians. 1.4. generally
teaches all men to be elected in Christ, before the foundation of the world,
Hub. these. 741. 4. That all men were elected in Christ, since the fall of Adam,
Hub. these. 1001. 5. That some are named elect from the event, because they are
better then others: as pure gold is called elect or choice gold; and the air,
from its serenity and cleernesse, is called pure. 6. That there is, in respect
of God, no particular election; but in respect of men, who apply universal
grace to themselves, these. 735. which is as much, as if you would say, Not God,
but we men have chosen our selves. 7. That many elect perish. 8. That there is
not with God any certain number of the elect. 9. That the doctrine of
Predestination is not to be taught, because it breeds profaneness and
desperation. 10. That if God has chosen some, and not others, by this means he
will be accounted unjust, cruel, a tyrant, a rejoycer at others evil,
envious, the author of sin and corruption in man. 11. That faith is the cause,
not the effect of election, that is, that God has chosen us for our faith.

ARTICLE VI. Of Faith and Perseverance.
1. WE believe, that faith in Christ is the gift of (a) God, not a general
gift, and common to (b) all, but a particular effect of Gods (c)
predestination, which is given to all, and solely to the (d) elect, not only in
respect of its increase, but also in respect of its first (e) beginning; De
vocat. gentium, l. 1. c. 1.
as it is truly said by Ambrose, God is the doner both of the beginning and of
the increment of faith. And Luther, in his Preface on the Epistle to the
Romans, says, that properly it arises from Gods eternal predestination, who
ought to believe, or not to believe: that by these means our holiness may not
be in our own hands, but in the power of God alone.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) John 6.29. This is the work of God, that you believe on him whom he has
sent.

Galat. 5.22. The fruit of the spirit is faith.

Ephesians. 2.8. By grace you are saved, through faith.

Phil. 1.29. Because it is freely given to you in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him.

(b) 2 These. 3.2. Every one has not faith.

(c) Acts 13.48. So many as were ordained to life eternal, believed.

(d) Tit. 1.1. According to the faith of Gods chosen.

Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you both to will and to do, according
to his free pleasure.

Phil. 1.6. Who has begun in you a good work, will perfect it till the day of
Jesus Christ.

II. Perseverance, by which men continue in faith to the end, and without which
no man shall be saved, is such a gift of God, as is assuredly given to all the
elect, Matthew. 24.14.

III. For this God has (a) promised, I will put my fear in their hearts,
Jerem. 32.40. De bone persev. cap. 2.
that they shall not depart from me, etc. which, what else is it, says (b)
Austine, but such and so great a fear which I will put in their heart, that
they shall with perseverance adhere to me?

IV. And the Saints do daily beg of God perseverance in (a) faith, Lead us
not into temptation.
undoubtedly then they obtain it of God, according to Christ's promise, John
16.23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you ask of the Father in my
name, he shall give it to you. So Austine in the same place: Why is
perseverance begged of God, if it be not given by God?

V. They ask then, and they receive of God not only that grace, that in the
end of their life they may have faith; but also, that they may perpetually
retain the same: which in the Schools is called, a final and total
perseverance.

VI. For, although many times they offend God by grievous falls, and grieve the
holy Spirit, they cast away and lose many of his gifts, they defile their
conscience, they weaken their faith, and, as much as in them is, break it off,
as the examples of David and Peter show; yet they do not so oppose God with
all their hearts, as to become his enemies, and to lose his favor for ever,
and totally to shake off the holy Ghost, and utterly to lose faith: because the
seed of God (a) remains in them, although that powerful force and sense of
Gods gifts does not at all times show it self, but does under the infirmity of
the flesh (as the Sun under a cloud, or fire under ashes) for awhile lurk,
until God by true repentance stir the same up again, which is done before
death, lest they perish. Wherefore totally they never fall from the grace of
God; but God is so angry with them for sin, that, notwithstanding he hates
them not, being his sons, he so corrects them, that yet he does not totally
reject (b) them: Even as an earthly father will not presently thrust his son
out of doors when he offends him, much less will he shake off his fatherly
affection, although he may severely reprove and correct him.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) John 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, because his seed is in
him; nor can he sin, because he is borne of God.

(b) Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not be cast off: for the Lord
helps him with his hand.

2 Samuel 7.14, 15. I will be his father, and he shall be my son; whom when he
offends, I will visit with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the sons
of men: but my mercy shall not depart from him.

VII. With this comfort David erected himself when he fell: Cast me not away
from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. If the
righteous man fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts his hand under
him.

VIII. This maine comfort the Saints have in their spiritual conflicts, that
they know they do believe, and by Gods grace will more and more believe, and
that their faith shall not totally fail them, as to be damned; because by the
Gospel they are taught, that it is sustained by Gods immutable (a) election,
and Christ's most effectual merit and (b) intercession, and that it is
preserved by the power of (c) God.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Ephesians. 1.4. He has elected us in Christ, before the foundation of the
world was laid.

Romans 8.39. Whom he predestined, these he has called: and whom he has
called, these he has justified: whom he justified, these he has glorified.

2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows who are his.

(b) Rom 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies: Who shall condemn? It is Christ that is dead, yea rather, that
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes intercession
for us.

John 17.15. I desire that thou should keep them from the evil.

Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon, Satan has sought to winnow thee as wheat, but I
have prayed to my Father, that thy faith may not fail.

(c) 1 Pet. 1.5. Who by the help of Gods power are preserved through faith to
salvation.

IX. To these may be added other express assurances out of Scripture of this
(...).
fullness of faith: That it is impossible for the elect to be (a) seduced, for
Christ's sheep to be taken out of his (b) hands, for the faithful to be
separated from the love of God in (c) Christ: That vocation and the gifts of
God are without (d) repentance (...).
: That an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, unfading, is reserved for us in
(e) heaven: That by the power of God through faith we are preserved to (f)
salvation: That God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above
our strength, but with the tentation gives an issue, that we may (g) bear it.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Matthew. 24.24. It is impossible for the elect to be seduced.

(b) John 10.28. My sheep shall never perish, nor shall any man take them out
of mine hand.

(c) Romans 8.39. Nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

(d) Romans 11.29. These gifts and calling of God are such as are not to be
repented of.

(e) 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. Christ has again begotten us to an inheritance which
cannot perish, nor be defiled, nor wither, reserved for us in heaven.

(f) Ibid. Who by the help of Gods power are preserved through faith to
salvation, which is ready to be revealed in the last time.

(g) 1 Corinthians. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above your strength, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that you may be able to bear it.

X. But they who doubt of perseverance, believe not life eternal: yea, they
slight faith and all hope, seeing that is an assured confidence of Gods mercy
both present and to come: this a certain expectation of life eternal, which
makes not ashamed. Romans 5.5. Hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given to us. Faith is
the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11.1.
But doubting confounds, Jam. 1.6.

XI. Neither is this a doctrine of security, except of (a) spiritual; for,
with the certainty of perseverance in the Saints, there remains always a
purpose to avoid sin, or to repent for (b) sin, God working all this immutably,
according to his eternal purpose in them, nor withdrawing his mercy utterly
from them, lest they (c) perish.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Romans 8.38. For I am persuaded, that neither life, nor death, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any
other creature, can be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

1 John 5.10. He that believes in the Son of God, has the witness in
himself.

2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able
to keep what I have committed to him against that day.

(b) Romans 7.15. For what I would do, I do not; but what I hate, that I do:
if I do that which I would not, I consent to the law, that it is good.

(c) Ephesians. 1.11. In whom we have obtained an inheritance, when we were
predestined according to his purpose, who does all things according to the
counsel of his will.

2 Samuel 7.14. and Psalm. 89.30. I will keep my mercy for him for ever, and my
covenant shall stand fast to him.

XII. We reject the opinions of Puccius, Huberus, and others, who have been
bred in the school of Pelagius, as being contrary to this most comfortable
doctrine: 1. That faith now in the state of grace is natural, that it is Gods
gift common to all; as the Sun by Gods bounty shines on the good and bad. 2.
That faith has its increase from God, but not its beginning. 3. That it is our
work to believe, that is, to suffer God to help us. 4. That we may doubt of our
perseverance to the end. 5. That the certainty of Gods gifts, which we brag
of out of the Apostle, Romans 11.29. is vain. So Huberus, these. 777. 6. That the
Saints, as soon as they sin mortally, utterly fall off from grace, utterly cast
off the holy Ghost, and altogether lose their faith; and so, many of the elect
are damned, and perish.

ARTICLE VII. Of the ministry of the Church.
I. COncerning the ministry of the Church in the New Testament, we believe and
teach, that it is the office of public teaching and governing the Church by
the voice of the Prophets and Apostles, instituted by Christ, for finishing the
salvation of the (a) elect.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Matthew. 28.19. Go and teach all nations, baptising them in the Name of the
Father Son, and holy Ghost.

Mark 16.16. Preach the Gospel to all creatures, he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be condemned.

Ephesians. 2.20. You are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.

Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and
some to be pastors and doctors.

II. And that it is an effectual means, by which the holy Ghost stirs up,
confirms, and (a) operates faith and conversion in the hearts of the elect.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every one that
believes. Romans 1.17. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

Acts 10.44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell upon all
them that heard this speech.

Acts 16.14. A certain woman named Lydia, who sold purple in the city of the
Thyatirians, fearing God, did hear us, whose heart the Lord opened, that she
should hear what was said by Paul.

2 Timothy 3.16, 17. The whole Scripture is inspired by God, and profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect, and perfectly furnished for every good work.

III. Yet that internal power and efficacy, by which we are sanctified, is
not the Ministers, nor is it tied to, or shut up with in their words and
actions; but it is the holy (a) Ghosts. The external ministry is (b) man's,
which the Spirit of God makes use of, for moving the minds and hearts of the
elect, when and how he (c) pleases: Not as if he could not do otherwise, but
because it pleased his divine wisdom, by the foolish preaching of the Cross,
to save such as (d) believe.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Esaias 43.25. I, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions.

John 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but thou know not whence it comes, or wither it goes: so it is
with every one that is born of the spirit.

1 Cor. 12.11. All these things are done by one and the same spirit,
distributing to every one apart as he pleases.

(b) Matthew. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water to repentance, but he who
comes after me is stronger then I, he will baptize you with fire, and with the
holy Ghost.

John 1.23, 33. I am the voice of him that cries in the desert: But he that
sent me to baptize with water, he it is who baptiseth with the holy Ghost.

(c) 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. Who then is Paul, who is Apollo, but ministers by whom you
have believed, and as God has given to every man? I plant, Apollo waters, but
God gives the increase: Therefore neither is he that planteth any thing, nor
he that waters, but God who gives the increase.

(d) John 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but thou know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is
every one that is borne of the spirit.

1 Cor. 12.11. But all these things are done by one and the same spirit,
distributing to every one apart as he pleases.

1 Cor. 1.21. But after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by that wisdom
knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save believers.

IV. But these Tenants are partly impious, and partly too hyperbolicall: 1.
That God immediately does infuse faith and conversion: 2. That the ministry
is a dead letter, but the exercise only of the outward man: 3. That the faith
which we have by hearing of the word, is not justifying, but historical only:
4. That saving power is in the voice, and under the voice of the ministry;
and that Christ's part is internal, but ministers partly external, partly
internal.

ARTICLE. VIII. Of the Sacraments in general.
I. WE judge the general doctrine of the Sacraments to be both profitable and
needful; for, without this, we cannot know why Baptism and the Lords Supper
are Sacraments; besides, it gives a great light to the particular doctrine of
each Sacrament, by which we may avoid diverse errors, lest, by giving them too
little, we esteem them but bare Ceremonies; and by giving them too much, we
transform them into Idols; which will necessarily be, if we do not carefully
observe what Sacraments are, and why instituted by God, and what is their use
and end: for, Ecclesiastical stories tell us, that the Pope could not
establish Transubstantiation, until he had overthrown the nature, efficacy,
and use of Sacraments.

II. Sacraments are signs of the Covenant, or of the promise of (a) grace,
instituted by God for the confirmation of our (b) faith.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Genesis 17.11. And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it
shall be a sign of the Covenant between me and you.

(b) Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of Circumcision, the seal of
righteousness by faith in his foreskin.

Sacraments are not only notes of profession between men, as some imagine;
but they are rather signs and testimonies of Gods will toward us, by which
God moves the heart to believe; as it is in the Apology of the Augustan
Confession, Tit. De usu Sacramenti.

III. Sacraments consist of the Element and (a) Word, or of external signs,
and the promises of spiritual grace; which grace in the Word, and in all
Sacraments is one; to wit, Christ with all his (b) benefits: for there is one
Christ, yesterday, to day, and for (c) ever; and there is one communion of
Saints, from the beginning of the world to the (d) end, which is that
spiritual union that is between Christ and the Saints, and of the Saints
among themselves, to the same love by the holy Spirit, in Christ as the Head,
and in us as his members, in whom he dwells: although this one communion,
according to the diversity of signs, is diversely called and represented in
diverse Sacraments.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) Apologia August. Confess. Tit. De usu Sacramenti, etc. Sacraments are
signs of Gods will toward us, and not only signs of men among themselves:
And they define Sacraments rightly in the New Testament, to be signs of grace.
And, because two things are in Sacraments, the Sign and the Word; the Word in
the New Testament, is the promise of the remission of sins.

(b) Ibidem. The same is the effect of the Word and Sacrament; as it is
excellently said by Austine, The Sacrament is the visible Word; because the
ceremony is received by the eye, and is as it were the picture of the Word,
signifying the same thing that the Word does; wherefore the effect of both is
the same.

(c) Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever.

1 Cor. 8.6. We have one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him,
and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

(d) 1 Cor. 10.4. All did eat the same spiritual food, and all did drink the
same spiritual drink; for they drank of the spiritual Rock which followed
them, and that Rock was Christ.

1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, both Jews and
Greeks; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.

Ephesians. 1.4, 5. He elected us in him before the foundation of the world was
laid: and has predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

IV. The spiritual grace, or the thing signified, is with the signs received
in the true use of the Sacrament; which is, when, with true faith and
conversion to God, the Sacrament is (a) received: for, God so instituted the
Sacraments, that the signs, ordained to confirm our faith, should be received
out of the hand of the Minister; the promise annexed to the signs, and
spiritual grace it self promised, should be received by faith from (b) God; as
the promise cannot be received but by faith. Hence the Sacraments are not
availeable to those that are without faith and conversion.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) John 1.26, 33. I baptize you with water, but he stands in the midst of
you whom ye know not; he it is who baptiseth with the holy Ghost.

1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted, Apollo has watered; but God gives the increase.

(b) Romans 2.25. But if thou breakest the Law, thy circumcision is become
uncircumcision.

1 Cor. 11.20. When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to
eat the Lords Supper.

Apol. August. Confess. Tit. De usu Sacram. Therefore, as the promise is
ineffectuall, if it be not received by faith; so the Ceremony is unprofitable,
if faith be not added, which truly assures us, that here remission of sins is
proffered.

V. Here is the true use of Sacraments, when the Sacramental signs are
received with true faith and (a) repentance, and are directed to that end, for
which they were ordained by God.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

Romans 2.25. Circumcision indeed avails, if thou fulfill the Law.

Apol. August. Confess. De Sacram. etc. Therefore, we teach, that in the use of
the Sacraments faith is required, which may believe these promises, and may
receive the things promised, which are there offered in the Sacrament: and it
is a most plain and firm reason, that the promise is useless, if it be not
received by faith.

Idem. De usu Sacram. And such an use of the Sacrament is the worship of the
New Testament, when faith quickneth the affrighted soul,

Idem. But that faith acknowledges mercy, and this is the principal use of
the Sacrament.

VI. By reason of the Sacramental signification, obsignation, and exhibition
of things by signs, it comes to pass, that oftentimes the signs do retain
the names of the things signified; which phrase is called Sacramental.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
Genesis 17.18. This is my Covenant.

Verse 11. This shall be the sign of the Covenant between me and you.

Exodus 12.11. This is the Lords Passover.

1 Cor. 11.24, 25. This is my Body. This Cup is the New Testament in my blood.

August. Ad Bonifac. Epist. 23. If Sacraments had not a certain similitude of
these things, of which they are Sacraments, they could not be Sacraments at
all; and by reason of this similitude, many times they receive the names of the
things themselves.

Idem. Tom. 4. in Levit. quaest. 57. The thing which signifies is wont to be
called by the name of that thing which it signifies; as it is written, The
seven sheaves are seven years.

VII. We therefore reject these truly Sacramentarian errors, which are partly
Papisticall and partly Ubiquitarian: as, 1. That there is no need of the
general doctrine of Sacraments. 2. That Sacraments are not fully, but only in
some sort, defined by the efficient and small cause, or by their effects; as
the Apology of Exfurt teaches. 3. That they are not the Seals of the promises
of grace; nor do they confirm our faith, as the Jesuits and Anabaptists
contend. 4. That they contain justifying grace in them, as it were the
pitchers or vessels thereof: that they are the instruments of justification by
conferring it. 5. That by their force they confer justifying grace, by the
work wrought; as they say. 6. That there is not the same spiritual grace in
the Word, and in all the Sacraments, nor the same communion of Christ. 7. That
the old Sacraments were bare signs, without the true exhibition of the things
themselves in their true use. 8. That the spiritual things signified, no less
then the signs signifying, are carried in, and dispensed by the hands of the
Minister. 8. That spiritual things, are received by the wicked, even without
faith. 9. That there are no phrases figurative and Sacramental, but all proper
in the Sacraments. 10. That there are seven, or more Sacraments then the two,
of Baptism and the Lords Supper, instituted by God.

ARTICLE. IX. Of Baptism.
I. WE believe that Baptism is the laver of water in the Word, by which Christ
cleanses his Church, regenerating and renewing it by the holy (a) Ghost; that
is to say, that it is a Sacrament instituted by Christ, in which God witnesses
to those that are baptized with water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
(b) Ghost, that he receives them into the Covenant of grace through Christ,
and that he renews and cleanses them from sin, by the holy Spirit through
his blood.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Ephesians. 5.26. Even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for her,
that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the laver of water in the
Word.

Tit. 3.5. By his mercy he has saved us, through the laver of regeneration,
and renewing of the holy Ghost.

(b) Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

1 Cor. 6.11. You are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified, in the
Name of the Lord Jesus.

1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit, we are baptized into one body.

II. We say, that it consists of the Element, and the (a) Word, according to
that vulgar saying, Add to the Word the Element, and it becomes a Sacrament;
as if it were a visible word: and therefore it consists of a twofold (b)
washing; the one external, of water, obvious to the sense; the other internal,
of blood, and of the holy Ghost, and of this the Word instructs us. The
external signifying washing, which is a sign, is done by the Minister,
touching the body externally; the internal, which is the thing signified, is
performed by God, washing the soul inwardly; for, I (says the Baptist)
baptize you with water; Christ baptiseth you with the holy Ghost. And Ambrose,
With water the body is washed, by the Spirit the soul is cleansed from sin.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) Augustine in Joh. Tract. 8. and de Catechis. c. 3.

(b) 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism also saves us, not as if by it the filth of the
flesh were done away, but the answer of a good conscience toward God.

(c) John 1.33. He it is who baptiseth you with the holy Ghost.

Ephesians. 5.26. Christ sanctifies his Church, having purged her through the
washing of water in the Word.

(d) Ambrose in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 3.

III. Yet we do not for this make a double Sacrament of Baptism, when we name
the washing of water, and of the Spirit; or external, and internal: but we
say, there are two parts of one Baptism, that we may distinctly teach, what is
done by man the Minister, and what by God the Author. Neither did Paul divide
the Sacrament of Circumcision into two, when he distinguished the circumcision
of the flesh, and of the (a) heart; which distinction whosoever takes away,
either they leave nothing, or surely less to God in the Sacrament, then to the
Ministers; allowing to God only the internal parts, but to the Ministers,
both external and internal.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) Romans 2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter.

IV. In the lawful use of Baptism, the internal is signified by the
external, and is truly exhibited and sealed, according to the promise, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. As for hypocrites and Infidels,
when they are dipped in water, they are not baptized by the Spirit, because the
holy Ghost flies from a counterfeit man, and he dwells not in a body subject to
sins; Hom. 5. in Mat. operis impers.
and therefore, he cannot be the child of God, as Chrysostom most truly says.

V. Baptism then washes away sins, it regenerates, it saves, etc. not by any
secret force annexed or imprinted in the water, nor by the work wrought, but by
a Sacramental phrase; because there is a near conjunction of both the
washings in the lawful use that is attributed to the external, which is
proper to the internal; or, by a Synecdoche, that is given to the whole, which
belongs to the part.

VI. Whereas Baptism has succeeded Circumcision, that it might be the
Sacrament of initiation in the new Covenant, it ought not to be iterated,
although it has been unworthily received, or before conversion; because it
remains always ratified to those that are converted, as the promise of the
Gospel is, and the Covenant: but to those that repent, it is both ratified,
and it is saving; and the use thereof, before unlawful, is now made lawful to
them: to which purpose Austine says, If he that receives the Sacrament,
Contra Crescent. l. 2. c. 28.
had never received it, is not so cut off, but is acknowledged, which of it
self was hurtful, to him that is amended, will be profitable.

Testimonies of Scripture.
Jerem. 3.1. Thou have gone a whoring after many lovers, but return to me,
says the Lord.

Ezekiel. 16.59, 60. I will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have
despised the oath, in breaking the covenant. Nevertheless, I will remember my
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth; and I will establish unto thee an
everlasting covenant.

VII. The Church should confer Baptism, as Christ has commanded, upon all
that are in years, professing the faith of Christ, and (a) repentance; and
upon Infants also borne in the Church, or who with their parents are come into
the Church; because, to these also the promise and covenant (b) appertain, and
these are to be brought to (c) Christ: which should be done by the ordinary
Ministers, not by women, or other persons, having no calling to the
Ministerial (d) function, the administration of which is a part of the (e)
Sacrament.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations, baptising them.

(b) Mark. 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, etc.

Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.

Acts 2.38, 39. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are a
far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

(c) Mat. 19.14. Suffer these little ones, and forbid them not to come to me,
for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven.

(d) Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.16.

(e) Council. Carthag. 4. Canon. 100. Let not a woman presume to baptize; for
that addition, Except necessity urge, is not in the Canon of the Council, but
is foisted in by the Pope ( Decret. did. 4. de consecr. C. Mulier.) against
the meaning both of the Council, and the command of Christ, which cannot,
without sin, be violated, except some other special command from God should be
given.

VIII. These contrary doctrines we impugn, 1. That Baptism is no sign of
grace, but only a badge or mark, by which Christians are discerned, tying
them to faith, and to the Cross. 2. That water and the Word, are not the
essential parts of Baptism; but water, and the person of the holy Ghost
included in the Word. 3. That there is annexed and affixed a secret virtue,
which confers upon the baptized the grace of the holy Ghost. 4. That the holy
Spirit, with his effects, are tied to Baptism. 5. That the effects of the holy
Spirit, and of Baptism, are alike or equal. 6. That baptized Hypocrites and
Infidels, as Judas, and Simon Magus, etc. are regenerated in Baptism by the
holy Ghost, no less then the faithful. 7. That Ministers baptize not only
with water, but also with the holy Ghost; and so they do more in baptism then
Christ himself did. 8. That the Infants of the Church are not to be baptized:
that the baptized are to be re-baptised. 9. That the Infants of the Church,
before Baptism, are spiritually possessed by Satan, and therefore are to be
exorcised with certain words and crossings. 10. That the children of the
Church, before Baptism, do no more belong to the Covenant of God, then the
children of Turks; and that there is no difference at all between Turkish and
Christian children. 11. That in case of necessity, Mid-wives, or any other that
have no calling, do duly baptize.

ARTICLE. X. Of the Lords Supper.
I. WE believe the holy Supper to be the communion of the body and blood of
Christ, which is by taking the bread broken, and the cup being (a) blessed, in
memory of Christ's death till he (b) come; that is to say, that it is the other
Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, by which he testifies to
us, who receive the consecrated bread and wine, with a faithful remembrance of
his death, that he feeds us with his body, which was given for us, and with
his blood, which was powered out for us; and that he quickneth (d) us, that
with him, and amongst our selves, we may grow up into one (e) body, and that
the covenant begun with God in Baptism, may remain (f) ratified to us for
ever.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ?

(b) 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup, you shall declare the Lords death until he come.

(c) Matthew. 26.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.17. 1 Cor. 11.21. While they were
eating, he took bread, and blessed, and brake it, then gave it to his
disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body.

(d) John 6.54. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life
eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day.

(e) John 6.56. Who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he abides in me,
and I in him.

1 Cor. 10.17. Because there is one bread, we being many are one bread and one
body: for we all partake of that one bread.

1 Cor. 12.13. We have all drunk into one spirit.

(f) 1 Cor. 11.25. This cup is the New Testament in my blood.

II. We say also, that this Sacrament consists of external signs, and of
the promises of grace in the word annexed to the (a) signs; and, consequently,
of a twofold food, and a twofold eating or taking: to wit, an external of
bread and wine, which is done by the mouth of the body, out of the hand of the
Minister, as our sense witnesses; and an internal spiritual of Christ's body
and blood, which is by faith, out of the hands of God himself: and by the
external, it is both signified, exhibited, and sealed in the lawful use of
the Sacrament, as the promise annexed to the Symboles (b) witnesses.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) Apolog. August. Confess. tit. De use Sacram. etc. And because in the
Sacraments there are two things, to wit, the sign and the word; the word in
the New Testament is the promise of grace added to the sign. The promise of
the New Testament, is the promise of the remission of sins, as this Text says:
This is my body, which is given for you: This is the cup of the New Testament
with my blood, which is shed for many to the remission of sins. The word then
offers remission of sins; and the ceremony is as it were the pledge of the word
or feale, as Paul calls it, showing the promise.

(b) Matthew. 26. etc.

III. For, whereas all Sacraments are seals of grace promised in the (a)
Gospel, it is not to be doubted, but these words of promise in the Supper, This
is my body, which is given for you. This is my blood, which is powered out for
you, etc. are the very same Evangelicall promise in (b) John, [The bread which
I will give you, is my flesh, which I will give you for the life of the world:
for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed,] being covered with
the sacramental ceremony, and confirmed with a symbolicall eating, for the
greater safety or assurance: but that it speaks of the spiritual food of
Christ's body and blood, which is by faith, is (c) manifest.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
justice of faith received in the foreskin.

Apolog. August. Confess. tit. De usu Sacram. etc. The word in the New Testament
is the promise of grace, as above.

(b) John 6.5. I am that living bread that came down from heaven; if any man
eat of this bread he shall live for ever: But the bread which I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

(c) John 6.35. I am that bread of life: he that comes to me shall not hunger,
and he that believes in me shall never thirst.

IV. Christ never promised in the Gospel any orall manducation of his flesh,
but by express arguments rejected (a) it; and therefore never established it
by the Sacrament of his Supper: And doubtless they sin grievously, who at this
day disturb the Church with their orall manducation, which to acknowledge is no
ways necessary to salvation to any, but rather pernicious to many.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) John 6.61, 62, 63. When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured
at it, he said unto them, Does this offend you? What and if you shall see the
Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit that quickneth, the
flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and
they are life.

V. The particle This, as we teach and believe, does demonstrate the bread
which Christ brake; and that it is the true body of Christ, not by conversion
into the body, nor by any real co-existence with the body, but by a
sacramental way; because it is the Sacrament of Christ's body, or a sacred
sign of it: So the Apostle interprets Christ's (a) meaning, when he calls the
cup, The New Testament, that is, the Sacrament of the New Testament; the bread,
The communion of Christ's (b) body, that is, the Sacrament of that communion. So
(c) Austine: The Lord (says he) doubted not to say, This is my body, when he
gave the sign of his body. So (d) Prosper says, The bread is after a manner
called the body of Christ, and the sacramental action is called the passion,
death, and crucifying of Christ; not in a real verity, but in a signifying
mystery.

Testimonies of Scripture, and of others.
(a) 1 Cor. 11.25. This cup is the New Testament in my blood.

(b) 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break, etc.

(c) August. cont. Adimant. cap. 12.

(d) Prosper in Decret. de Consecrat. did. 2. cap. Hoc est.

VI. And whereas Christ's body neither in the bread, nor under the species of
bread, but rather in the word of promise is exhibited to us, to be eaten by
faith; the wicked indeed eat the signs to their own condemnation, by abusing
of which they sin against Christ himself; but being destitute of faith, they
receive not his body: Of which notwithstanding, by the Apostles testimony,
they are guilty, not that they receive it, which by their infidelity they
tread upon, but because they unworthily eat that bread, which is the symbol or
(a) sign of it.

Testimonies of Scripture.
(a) 1 Corinthians. 11.27, 29. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Also, Who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body.

Hebr. 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye be shall be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite unto the spirit of grace?

VII. Therefore we dis-approve those other doctrines which teach: 1. That
Christ's body is in the bread, (...).
or under the accidents of bread corporally present by consubstantiation, or by
transubstantiation. 2. That Christ's body is properly carried in the Ministers
hands. 3. That it is eaten by the bodily mouth. 4. That the Pronoune [This]
does show an uncertain individuum or singularity, or an indeterminate
substance. 5. That [This] demonstrates both the bread, and also Christ's body
lurking invisibly in the bread. 6. That wicked men do properly eat Christ's
body.

ARTICLE. XI. Of the Civil Magistrate. Translated out of Dutch into Latin.

I. IN man there is a twofold government: the one belonging to the soul, or
the inward man, making him truly to know God, rightly to worship him, and at
length to attain righteousness and life eternal; the other governes the
body and outward man, that he might pass this political life amongst men
with all modesty and honesty.

II. And although the holy Scripture chiefly handles the government of the
soul, and is ordained principally by God, to give directions to the soul; yet
it delivers also many excellent and wholesome precepts concerning the outward
government of the body. And, for the better administration of this, that
mankind might be preserved, God has commanded in his word, that, among men,
some should command, and have the charge of civil government; others should
obey, and be subject to that government: Those by a relation are called
Magistrates, and Subjects.

III. The power of the civil Magistrate is no less, nay more necessary then
our daily food, then the sun, air, or water; seeing this terrene life cannot
subsist without these: for by these natural things man breathes, eats, drinks,
lives and moves, as other creatures, which enjoy these things in common with
man. Now, that men may not live like beasts, but like men; that is, that they
may live with all modesty and honesty before God and men, that they may
beware of all idolatry, blasphemy, or any other abuse of Gods Name; also, that
they may avoid all sort of filthiness and damages, by which either we our
selves, or the life, fame, and possessions of our neighbor may be hurt; and
that the true knowledge of God, sincere worship and fear, and that all civil
honesty may prevail, and that the public peace and tranquillity among men
may not be troubled, that every one may safely enjoy his own, that honest and
necessary contracts may flourish; and lastly, that all things in the
Commonwealth may be done in a lawful way, the civil Magistrate should be
very careful of, seeing he is ordained for this end by God: therefore they may
truly be called beasts rather then men, who would remove and overthrow this
ordinance of God among men.

IV. The doctrine of the civil Magistrate consists of these three heads:
First, concerning the authority of the Magistrate, whether it is ordained by
God, or pleasing to him; also of his office, right and power, as well in
ecclesiastical as politic affairs. Secondly, of the laws to which Christian
Magistrates are tied. Thirdly, of the duty of subjects, what they owe to their
Magistrates, and how far they are to obey them. Of each of these, what is to be
concluded out of Gods word, the ensuing Aphorisms will teach.

V. The Apostle expressly teaches, that the Magistrate is ordained by God, in
these words: There is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of
God. Romans 13.1, 4.
For he is the minister of God to thee for good. By this divine authority the
Magistrate being guarded, let him think how wisely and diligently he must carry
himself in his office: For, if he be so from God, that he is the minister of
God, surely he should endeavor, with all care, that all things be done
according to Gods ordinance, as well in ecclesiastical, as in politic
affairs; neither must he do any thing wittingly and willingly against it.
From this ground of divine ordination, Moses the man of God, and holy King
Jehosaphat did so speak unto their Judges and Governors: Take heed what ye
do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.
who is with you in the judgment: Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be
upon you, take heed, and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our
God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. Again, if the Magistrate be
ordained by God to be his minister, he ought to assure himself, that he must
serve God, that he must do all to his honor, and for man's benefit, so he do
that according to the prescription of Gods word.

VI. Therefore that cannot be unpleasing to God, which he himself ordained:
Yea, he calls Magistrates by his own Name, (...) Gods, because they exercise
judgment in stead of God. Exodus 22.8. If the thief cannot be found, then
shall the master of the house be brought unto the gods. God stands in the
midst of gods: Psalm. 82.1.
which Psalm Christ alleges, John 10.35. If he called them gods, to whom the
word of God came, I have said, Ye are gods. Besides, the Scripture witnesses,
that many holy men did exercise the office of the Magistrate: as Josuah, David,
Ezechia, among the Kings: Joseph and Daniel among Princes: Moses, Josuah,
Gedeon amongst the Dukes or Judges.

VII. Away then with these fooleries of Anabaptists and other fanaticall
spirits, saying, That in the Old Testament the office of the Magistrate was
necessary to Gods people, by reason of the imperfection of the Jewish nation;
but that its written in the New Testament: The kings of the Gentiles exercise
lordship over them, Luke 22.25.
and they that exercise authority upon them, are called benefactors: But it
shall not be so with you. Galat. 5.16.
Again, In Christ nothing avails, except the new creature. Also, I say unto
you, Matthew. 5.39.
Do not resist the evil.

VIII. For first, if the imperfection of the Jewish people did necessarily
require a Magistrate, surely much more necessary will the having of a
Magistrate be to us Christians; seeing it is written also of us, In many things
we offend all: But they who offend in many things, must needs be imperfect; yet
we deny not, James 3.2.
but that Christians, by Gods favor, have a great prerogative above the Jews,
in respect of the clear knowledge we have of God, and of that grace which is
exhibited to us by Christ: but, in respect of our politic life, we have no
less need of this divine ordination of Magistrates, then the Jews had.
Besides, it is written in the New Testament, not in the Old, He is minister of
God to thee for good. Romans 13.4.


IX. In that saying of Luke 22.25. Christ does not debar such kings from the
Church; but he only forbids the Apostles and Ministers of the Church to meddle
with riotousnesse, pre-eminence, and civil dominion. But Paul, Gal. 6.15. does
not speak of the external habit of Christians: of whom some were circumcised,
as the faithful Jews; and some were uncircumcised, as the Christians, who had
been Gentiles. To which saying answers that Galat. 3.28. There is neither Jew
nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female:
Which words, if they understand literally, surely they must also be separated
from Christ, seeing they are either servants or free, either males or females.
The sense then of the Apostle is this, That the outward differences of men do
nothing hinder or promote eternal salvation; and that only the new creature
in Christ Jesus is necessary to salvation.

X. Lastly, by that saying of Mat. 5.39. Christ does not take away punishments
due to the wicked, but only private revenge: for otherwise no Christian,
neither father, nor mother, nor schoolmasters, nor any minister of the Church,
could be suffered: the duty of all which is, to resist evil and wicked men,
and to maintain discipline, every one in his place; without which an horrible
ataxie and confusion would ensue; too much liberty would be brought in, and at
length would follow the subversion both of humane society, and of the Church
it self. Surely, Christ and his Apostles did very often resist evil. Neither
do we read any where in the Scripture, that they, who were appointed for
political functions, did (after their conversion to Christianity) desert
their province or calling, or that ever they were commanded to forsake it. So
that Ruler, in the fourth of John, ver. 33. believed himself, and all his
house. Sergius Paulus the Deputy, Act. 13.12. believed. So the Keeper of the
prison, Act. 16.33. was baptized, he and all his household.

XI. Concerning the diverse forms of Commonwealths, which of them is best, let
Politicians dispute. In the Scripture we read of Cesars, Kings, Princes,
Governors, Presidents, Pretors, Consuls, Captains, Dukes, and in a word, both
of inferior and superior Magistrates. Of whom is this general saying of Paul
the Apostle, There is no power but of God. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17.
The powers that be, are ordained of God. And of S. Peter, Submit your selves
to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as
supreme; or unto Governors, as being sent by him. Also, Fear God. Honor the
King. Where we may note, that when the Magistrates office, by Peter, is called
an humane ordinance; this is not repugnant to Paul, who calls it, a divine
ordinance. For, God only ordained the Magistrate; but as for the forms of
Common-weathls, and their distinct degrees, to wit, that in them should be
Emperors, Kings, Princes, superiors, inferiors, this depends from humane
ordination and political sanction; yet all are alike governed by God:
therefore we must be subject to humane ordinance for the Lords sake, says S.
Peter.

XII. Of the right of Magistrates, thus says Paul, For this cause pay you
tribute also: for they are Gods ministers, Romans 13.6, 7.
attending continually upon this very thing: Render therefore to all their
dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor. Again, Give to Caesar what is Cesars. Whence we
gather, that the right of Magistrates consists of three things: First, that
he may be known as the minister of God; to whom therefore honor and
reverence is due, because he is in stead of God: for this cause (as it said)
Magistrates are called gods. Secondly, that for the authority of so great a
function, they should be reverenced, honored, and feared by their subjects, no
less then parents are by their children: for, Magistrates should be to
subjects in stead of parents. Thirdly, that customs and tributes, due to
Magistrates, should be paid them, that out of them they may be able to sustain
the heavy burden of their function, preserve their lives and dignity, and
exercise their bounty toward others: Yet the Magistrate must be as far from
riotousnesse, as the subjects themselves, as it is in Jer. 22.14, 15. and
everywhere else in Scripture.

XIII. God has furnished the Magistrate with chief power, that he may
command some, and may govern others; and use the sword also, if need require,
against the disobedient, and maintain and defend his own authority: For so
it is written, Dan. 4.22.
The most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will Again, The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, Mat.
20.25.
and they that are great exercise authority upon them. Again, Romans 13.4.
He bears not the sword in vain.

XIV. God also for this cause laid upon the magistrate this careful and
troublesome burden, that he might urge, promote, and preserve among men the
obedience due to Gods Law; chiefly among Christians: For first, he ought
entirely to maintain the honor and worship of God, according to the prescript
of the first Table, and to propagate piety, with the true worship of God
amongst his subjects, according to Gods will and word: For so God commanded
Josuah, Jos. 1.8.
This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according to
all that is written therein. So Paul, Romans 13.4.
He is the minister of God to thee for good. Now, the chief happiness of
subjects consists in true religion, and the true worship of God.

XV. Again, the office of the Magistrate is to maintain right and justice,
and to preserve honesty, peace, and concord; to love the good, to afright and
punish the wicked; to maintain and defend their subjects and territories, even
with the sword, against domestic and foreign enemies: As it is written, Jer.
22.3. Psalm. 82.3.
Thus says the Lord, Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to
the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in
this place. Again, Magistrates are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good; but
if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he bears not the sword in
vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil.

XVI. Both offices of the Magistrate are usually impugned by Pontificians,
Anabaptists, and other fanaticall persons.

XVII. In Popery the Pontificians confess, Bellarm l. 4. de Laicis. c. 17, 18.
that the Magistrate ought not only to have a care of the civil government,
and to promote the public peace; but also by all means to defend Gods
worship, as it is administered by the Priests in Popery, and to exterminate all
other religions, which they condemn: but they will not permit the civil
Magistrate to enquire into their religion and worship, to wit, whether it be
true or false; consonant to holy writ, or not: whether Priests and Clergymen
live godly, or profanely: whether Churches and Schools be well provided for:
And lastly, whether they can by right challenge to themselves ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and such like.

XVIII. But this right of governing Churches and Schools, the holy Scripture
in plain terms attributes to the civil Magistrate: for, as he is bound with
all diligence to procure, that the civil good, that is, justice and equity,
be lawfully administered, according to the laws of every province, by men
skillful in the law, and political prudence, within the courts and places of
Judicature: even so his care should not be less, but rather more, that the
divine law, which is the good of souls; that is, true religion and piety, be
taught by Divines, holy, religious, learned and honest men in Schools and
Churches, to their subjects, for their souls health, according to the law and
testimony, as the Scripture commands. Isa. 8.20. Deuteronomy. 17.18.
This was enjoined by God to Moses and Josuah. This is confirmed by the example
of many worthy Princes: as David, Solomon, Jehosaphat, Ezechia, Josia, and
others, who carefully promoted the worship of God, reproved grievously wicked
and disordered Priests. (...).
So Paul speaks to the Christian Romans, He is the minister of God for thy
good. Where he understands every kind of good, as well civil and earthly, as
ecclesiastical and spiritual, otherwise the Magistracy were no more
advantageous to a Christian, then to a Pagan. And surely, it is to be lamented,
that the Heathens heretofore in this point were of a better mind, who, by
unanimous consent, committed to their Kings the care of religion, and of the
worship of their gods, being persuaded thereto both by the law of nature, and
of nations; for they held this to be the proper office of the civil
Magistrate, to govern their subjects civilly, that is, to season them with all
kind of virtue, especially with military fortitude, and such like.

XIX. The Anabaptists also and Enthusiasts do admit and grant, that the
Magistrates office is not only to be conversant in the Courts of Judicature,
to administer justice; but to punish evil, both in time of peace and war, with
the sword: but they will not have Christians to do this, or to have any power
to do it; because Christ said to his disciples, Mat. 5.38. Mat. 26.15.
Resist not evil. Neither did he give the sword to them, but inhibited it to
them in these words, He that takes the sword, shall perish with the sword. The
same also say, That the New Testament does not exhort us to shed blood, but to
love one another. Such phantomes they have out of the Schools of the
Manichees, that they may remove from the Commonwealth of Christians all
Magistracy.

XX. To them we oppose the Apostles doctrine: Romans 13.1, 4.
All power is from God; and he is the minister of God. What? has God ordained
any thing, which either lawfully may not, or cannot be performed? Shall a
Heathen serve God better then a Christian? Away then with these weak simple
men, (...).
and their fooleries: Yet let them be tolerated so long as they trouble not the
Church, or deny not that obedience and honor which is due to the Magistrate;
of which matter, in the Imperial Constitutions there is a provident caveat
made. Of that saying, Matthew. 5.39. we have already said in the tenth Aphorism.
In Matthew. 26.52. Christ has prohibited his disciples, and other private men,
to meddle with the sword, because it is not due to Apostles, Bishops,
Ministers, and other subjects: but God has taken the sword from Caesar, to whom
before he gave it; but rather committed it to him: for, he said, Give to Caesar
what is Cesars. And by the Apostle, He is the minister of God; nor does he
carry the sword in vain. It is also true, that the New Testament persuades
charity, not bloud-shedding, in regard of ecclesiastical and civil society.
Sometimes notwithstanding he commands to draw the sword against domestic and
foreign enemies, for preservation of the Commonwealth, of the Church, and of
common tranquillity and peace. For, God has commanded expressly, even in the
New Testament, such a revenge: and therefore obedience is a part of divine
worship. Such a revenge also tends to the defense of the godly, and therefore
it is not contrary, but consentaneous to Charity.

XXI. But the same men reply, That in the New Testament it cannot be proved,
neither by testimonies nor examples, that Christians ought to make war. We
answer: First, the New Testament does no ways take away the defense of
subjects, which sometimes cannot be procured by the Magistrate, but by force of
arms. Secondly, the Apostles have writ nothing concerning wars, because they
were not sent to set up a new form of Commonwealth in the world; but that in
the ancient civil government of every place, (where they left to every one
their own privileges and rights, as it appears by Paul, Romans 13. and
elsewhere) they should gather together a new Church to Christ. Thirdly, John
Baptist, Christ's forerunner, being asked by the soldiers what they should do,
did not answer thus: Leave off your warring; Luke 3.14.
but, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with
your wages. But these wages were paid to soldiers in the wars; therefore John
did not prohibit war. It Is false then, that in the New Testament neither
testimonies nor examples are found, in which war is mentioned.

XXII. We will not now dispute upon what causes, or how lawfully war may be
waged. Let Christian Princes and Magistrates propose this to themselves, and
think, that no lawful war can be performed, but for the recovering of peace;
and, that this is the nature of war, that it brings with it much mischief.
Neither can any war be so just, but that there is much injustice mingled with
it: So that it is far better to fling away Arms, to avoid unnecessary
wars, and not to undertake a just war, until first all means be tried, to
recover peace without it; not only, because the Poet says, Sil. Ital. l. 11.
sub. fin. Romans 12.18.
That peace is the best of all things that ever was bestowed upon man, and that
one peace is to be preferred to innumerable triumphs: but much rather, because
the Word of God says, If it be possible, as much as lies in you, have peace
with all men.

XXIII. Secondly, as for the Laws to which the Christian Magistrate is tied in
his government, the Ancients said well, that Laws were the soul of the
Commonwealth; and that the Magistrate is a living Law: for, as no State can
subsist without Laws, so Laws can have no force without the Magistrate. But
now, we make no inquiry of the Laws in general, what, of how many kinds, and
which be best; but rather, what these Laws should be, according to which the
Magistrate ought to govern a Commonwealth.

XXIV. Which question ought not to be accounted superfluous, because, many have
been so ignorant, that they have not doubted to assever, that Christians ought
in all things to be subject to the Laws of Moses, then which no better
judicial Laws can be made, seeing God himself did prescribe them to the
Israelites: which preposterous opinion made great stirs in the Church and
Commonwealth, at that time, when there were such tumults in Munster.

XXV. We must know then, that there is not a better Law, nor more excellent,
then the Law of God himself, which is justly preferred to all others; but with
this difference, that it be done, according to Gods will and mind revealed in
his Word: This difference is taken from the threefold end and scope of Moses
Law.

For one end considers the manners, virtues, and vices of all men
promiscuously; which, by the law of Nature, to every man are either commanded
or prohibited; and so God would have his Law, contained in the Decalogue, to be
observed by all men.

The other end and scope of the Mosaicall Law, was to govern the Leviticall
Priesthood, by certain rites and ceremonies, which were types of Christ's
Priesthood. These Laws of Aarons Priesthood, God would have to continue and
flourish, no longer then till the exhibition of Christ, and then to be
abrogated. He that will go about to introduce into the New Testament these
legal Ceremonies, he must needs both introduce Judaisme, and withal deny,
that Christ is yet come in the flesh.

The third scope and end of the Law respects the Judaicall polity; in which
God would discriminate the Israelites from all other people, by certain Laws;
because, Messiah, the Savior of the world, was to be borne of the Tribe of
Judah: this Law God would have to continue, so long as the difference of people
was observed; but when Christ was borne, this difference ceased, and of two
people he made one; Mark 16.16.
to wit, Christians, of Jews and Gentiles, as Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 2.14.
Therefore Christ commanded his Disciples and Apostles, that they should preach
the Gospel, not to one people alone, but to all people through the whole
world. If any then would obtrude upon Christians this Civil Law, as absolutely
necessary; what else, I pray did he do, then deny Christ to be yet come in the
flesh, for the redemption of his people?

XXVI. Hence it appears, that the Ceremonial and Judicial Law of God, was
heretofore to the Jews an excellent Law, till Christ came; but both these, God
so appointing it, at this day are abrogated by Christ; so that the Jews
themselves, at this time, neither will, nor can keep either of them.
Therefore, all people that have among them the Church of Christ, have this
liberty granted them, that they may rule their Commonwealths by their own
usual and positive Laws. As for the Moral Law, which is the express image of
the law of Nature, (...).
and of common equity, God has not abolished it; but it ties all men by Gods
own prescription, both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians, to the observation
thereof.

XXVII. The sum of all this is, 1. That it is the duty of a Christian Prince
and Magistrate, to rule their subjects according to the Moral Law of God, set
down in the two Tables of the Decalogue, as the only and surest rule of
equity and justice, from which rule they are not to depart a hairs breadth in
the government of their States.

2. Seeing that Civil causes, or pleadings (without which, humane society
cannot subsist) concerning Judicature, Offices, buying and selling, and other
contracts; also, concerning Inheritances, Fines, and punishments, and such like
Statutes, are not expressed, or commanded in Gods Law, but are left free to the
Christian Magistrate, to be determined by his arbitrament: therefore, these
particular Laws may be enacted and proclaimed, according to the custom and
privileges of each Religion, Province, People, or City, by any godly
Magistrate; yet having regard still to common and natural equity. But, among
all Civil Laws of all other people, those were always accounted most just, as
being most consonant to the Law of God and of Nature, which of old were enacted
by the Romans; which Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and subjects have
everywhere retained and approved: even Paul the Apostle also, when as yet he
conversed with the Jews, did willingly submit himself to these same Laws, and
in the Acts did often appeal to them; Acts 22.28. and 25.10, 12. 1 Pet.
2.13.17.
I (says he) am a Roman Citizen borne: and, I stand here at Cesars Tribunal,
where I must be judged. I appeal to Caesar. Petor also the Apostle, exhorts
Christians, to subject themselves to the Roman Laws, and to obey them: he
therefore approves of the Roman Republique and of their Civil Laws, which he
would have to be observed by the Christian Civil Magistrate.

3. When, lastly, Judicial Laws are neither expressed in the Moral Law of
God, but are left to the arbitrament of Christian Princes, and their subjects;
neither in the written Laws of the Romans, (which are approved, for the most
part, by Christian Commonwealths) are all cases of every People, Nation,
place, City, expressly comprehended, neither are municipall Laws, Customs, and
particular Constitutions repealed; Princes, and Christian Magistrates should
carefully provide, that adiaphorous, or things indifferent, which by God have
been neither commanded nor prohibited, (for ought we read) may be determined:
For example, Whether there is need of such and such Offices? Whether a greater
or lesser Tribute or Subsidy is to be imposed on the people? Whether Subjects
should bear Arms? and such like; which are called positive Laws by the
Lawyers: that they may be consentaneous, both to the law of Nature, and to the
Law of God, being enacted for promoting the public good; and therefore, to be
observed carefully by the subjects; nor to be slighted, without wronging the
conscience; as it is written, We must be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience.

XXVIII. The office and right of Subjects consists in three things. 1. That
they afford due reverence and honor to the Magistrate; to wit, for that
dignity which he has received from God. This honor is not properly in
external gesture; given to the Magistrate, whom wicked men also do thus
reverence, accounting Magistrates necessary evils; but the Magistrate is duly
and chieflly honored, when the subjects acknowledge Gods Ordinance in him,
that he is Gods Vicegerent and Minister, to whom God himself has delivered
his own power, to rule subjects according to Gods will. From hence depend
reverence and love, fear also, and obedience due to the Magistrate; which
honor God has commanded in his Law; Honor thy Father, Exodus 20.12.
and Mother: for the Magistrate is the Father of the people, as the Egyptians
testified by their acclamations to Joseph, Genesis 41.43. and the Wiseman says,
Prove. 11.1. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.17.
My son, fear God, and the King: And Paul, Give fear to whom fear is due,
and honor to whom honor appertains: And Peter, Fear God, Honor the King.

XXIX. To this honor succeeds subjection; to wit, that godly subjects yield
to their Magistrate, in all just things, obedience in the Lord: which obedience
consists in three things: 1. That subjects obey all the precepts, and
commands of the Magistrate. 2. That they pay them their due Tributes and
Customs. 3. That they bear the Civil burdens without murmuring: such as
conduce to the preservation of the State, and defense of the Country. Of these
Paul speaks, Tit. 1.3.
Put them in mind, that they submit themselves to Principalities and powers:
that they may be obedient, that they may be prepared for every good ^orke: And,
Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Where we must note, that he
says, to the higher powers; for, subjects are not subject to a foreigne and
strange Magistrate, but to their own; as the Magistrate is to command his own
subjects, and not strangers or foreigners.

XXX. The Apostles reasons, by which he commends this subjection to subjects,
are chiefly six: The first is taken from Gods command. God so ordained, that
Magistrates should rule their subjects, and subjects should obey their
Magistrates; but it is not lawful to resist Gods Ordinance. 2. From the
contrary wicked and pernicious effect. It is most unjust, that the creature
should resist the Creator: but, to resist the Migistrate, is to resist God;
for, he is ordained to be Gods Minister and Vicegerent. 3. From an effect also
pernicious. The disobedience and contempt of the Magistrate, brings revenge and
punishment, for the Magistrate should be a terror to the wicked; but, it is a
foolish thing for a man, to cast himself rashly upon punishment. 4. From a
profitable effect. For, it is praiseworthy to obey the Laws, and the
Magistrate; for, he is given to the subjects for their good. (...).
5. From the impulsive antecedent cause, and the end thereof. If the
disobedient fear not the punishment of the Magistrate, yet they ought to keep
their conscience inviolated, which, by their disobedience, they wrong
shamefully, and provoke Gods anger against them, both temporal, and eternal.
6. From the adjuncts. To whom tribute is due, to him obedience cannot be
denied: the subjects then paying rightly tribute to their Magistrates, they
ought also to perform due obedience. By these arguments of Paul, the Subjects,
through all Churches and Commonwealths, should by all means be driven to
yield due obedience to the Magistrate.

XXXI. There is also required in Subjects forbearance, in bearing with the
blemishes and infirmities of the Magistrates; as likewise, they ought to pray
to God for them: for, because the burden of the Magistrate is no less
dangerous then laborious, under which oftentimes they faint, and are forced to
endure much extremity, so that sometimes they have scarce time or place to
breathe in; therefore, it is no wonder, if many times he is carried away with
humane affections; to wit, with pride, ambition, intemperance, pleasures,
sloth, forgetfulness, security, anger, fury, and such like passions; to which,
so much the more then other men they use to be obnoxious, by how much more they
are urged and assaulted with molestations more then other men. It will be then
the duty of pious Subjects, to bear patiently with these infirmities; no less
then children should patiently endure the blemishes of their Parents. Besides,
they ought to beseech God for their safety and prosperity, as the Apostle
prescribes; I exhort, above all things, that intercession, prayer, and
supplication be made for all men; for Kings, and all that be in authority, that
we may live a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty, for this
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

XXXII. In the saying of Paul, which we alleged a little above, three
questions use to be moved, to which we will briefly and succinctly answer: The
first is on the Subjects part; Whether the Pope Bishops, and other Clergymen,
are contained also under the name of higher Powers. The second, as also the
third are of the Magistrates part; Whether wicked Magistrates, as were Nero and
Caligula or such as are given to Idolatry, be worthy of honor: Also, Whether
obedience is to be given to that Magistrate, who oppresses his Subjects with
diverse wrongs and burdens, and so becomes a Tyrant, commanding, oftentimes
that which is repugnant to good manners, and honesty, against God and his Word.

XXXIII. To the first question it is thus answered, Though Bishops, Ministers,
and Pastors, in respect of their Doctrine and Function, immediately are subject
to God; yet, notwithstanding, in respect of the Calling it self; to wit, the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, and their diligence in performing of it: yea, much
more in respect of their strength and life, the government of their families
and possessions, by the general command of the Apostle, they are no less
subject to the Magistrate, to his power and jurisdiction, then all other
Christians. Hence we read in the Old Testament, that the Priests and Levites
in their Office, depended on the Kings beck and pleasure, and did all things
accordingly; as we see in the history of David, Solomon, Mat. 22.21. Mat.
17.27. Romans 13.1.
Josaphat, Josiah, Ezekiah: In the New Testament says Christ, Give to Caesar
that which is Cesars. Christ also paid tribute for himself, and for Peter; the
Apostle also says, without any limitation, Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers. The same does Gregory acknowledge of the Roman Prelates. l. 1.
Epist. 31. and so does Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople expound that saying
of Paul, Let every soul be subject: This (says he) is enjoined not only to
secular men, but also to all Priests and Monks, whether he be an Evangelist, an
Apostle, or a Prophet; or whosoever has attained to high places; for this
subjection is no hinderance to piety. S. Bernard also thus writes to Henry
Archbishop of Sena or Senon, Bern. Ep. 42.
who refused to obey the King; Let every soul be subject to the Powers: If
all, then yours; Who will except you out of this universality? He that goes
about to except you, goes about to delude you; Christ both commanded and
practiced otherwise: Give (says he) to Caesar what is Cesars and to God what
belongs to God: what he uttered verbally, he performed really. Cesars Maker
stuck not to pay tribute to Caesar, he left this example for you to follow. By
the Imperial Law it is thus commanded. Let all live according to the Laws,
although they belong to the house of God. l. Omnes C. de leg. and Constable.
Princip.

XXXIV. From this command and practice of Christ, the Bishop of Rome has freed
himself, by denying tribute or obedience to Caesar; nor has he only exempted
himself, but also the whole Clergy, who, with his shaved troop, make up
almost the third part of Christendom: Neither has he only withdrawn himself
and his whole Clergy from the Emperors obedience, but he has also violently
wrung out of Cesars hands, all his Territories, Cities, Goods, Revenues,
Tithes, Tributes, Toles, and other innumerable revenues, which anciently
belonged to the Emperor, but now exceed doubly the in-comes of all secular
Princes: and not only has he done so, but, which is more, he has put under
his feet Caesar himself, with all Kings, Princes, and whatsoever secular
Magistrates belong to Christianity; and so he has wickedly inverted the sense
of the Apostles, saying thus; That the Emperor must swear fealty to the Pope.
Did. 63. C. Tibi Domino. Did. 93. C. Duo. Did. 93. C. Caerim. Eccl. Romans l.
1. sect. 3. Gloss. et Dd. in C. Ad Apostolicae. De sentent. ^t re judicata in 6.
That the Emperor should be subject to the Popes judgment, and not the Pope
to the Emperors. That the Emperor ought to bow himself to the Pope, and hold
his stirrup while he takes horse. That the Pope can Excommunicate, yea, Depose
the Emperor.

Here Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes should be watchful, and consider
with themselves with whom they have to do, whether with Christ's Vicar, and
Peter's Successor, or whether not rather with the sworn enemies of Christ, of
Paul, and Peter: for Peter has left this injunction to all Christians, both
Lay and Clergy, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Be subject to every humane Ordinance for the
Lords sake, whether to the King, as to the supreme; or to Governors who are
sent by him, both for the punishment of wicked men, and for the praise of those
that do well.

XXXV. To the other question, this is the brief and solid answer; Subjects
ought to look not so much upon the person, as upon the Office of the
Magistrate. Nero Caesar was a most flagitious man, who did prostitute himself
to all naughtiness and impiety; in which respect he deserved punishment rather
then honor, as Historians record; yet, because he was Emperor, Peter and Paul
warn Christians, to honor the King: He is then to be honored, by reason of
Gods Ordinance; as all others likewise, who administer this divine Ordinance,
and have power over us, although they were most wicked and blasphemous if it
were but for the dignity of their Office which they sustain; as for their
blemishes and vices, they must be left to God.

XXXVI. To the third question we may answer distinctly out of Gods Word:
Pharaoh King of Egypt used the Israelites tyrannically, by laying upon them
insupportable burdens; yet he was to be honored by them, till such time as
God should ease them of their yoke. Nebuchadnezzar was a most cruel tyrant and
robber, grievously afflicting the Jews; yet Daniel speaks to him in this
manner, Dan. 2.37. Jer. 19.7.
God has conferred on thee power, strength, and glory. Jeremy exhorts the
captive Jews to obedience, and to pray for the City of Babel, though it was
Idolatrous. We must then not only obey good Magistrates, but Tyrants also: yea,
we must rather bear with any injuries, then resist their power, or Gods
Ordinance: and we must practice Peter's rule; Be subject with all fear of the
Lord, 1 Pet. 2.18.
not only to those that are good and just, but also to the evil; thinking
with our selves, that all Powers, as well good, as bad, are set over us by God:
good, that in them he may show his grace and mercy; but Tyrants, that in them
we may acknowledge Gods anger against our sins. Therefore, it is not lawful
for any subject, or private man (except it be in his own just defense) to
invade a Tyrant, even though he have occasion. David could have killed Saul,
whom notwithstanding he let go; because, as yet he was not driven to extreme
necessity; 1 Samuel 24.11.
I will not (says he) put out mine hand against my Lord, because he is the
Lords Anointed. For, God knows how to punish Tyrants, either by the ordinary
power of some other Kingdom, or else by some miraculous way.

XXXVII. Although this obedience has certain limits; for, when Tyrants go
about to force their Subjects to manifest Idolatry, or to some wickedness,
against the express Word of God; in this case the Scripture commands us, that
in no ways we obey such tyrannical Edicts, but that every man, according to
the condition of his calling, make resistance, and rather endure any thing.
For, when Nebuchadnezzer would have his Idol to be worshipped by all men, under
pain of the hot fiery furnace; Daniels three fellows stoutly refused it,
telling the King, Dan. 3.16.
We must not in this thing obey thee; behold, our God whom we worship, can
deliver us out of the hot fiery Furnace, and he can rescue us out of thine
hand, O King: But, if he will not rescue us, be it known to thee, O King, that
we will not worship thy god, nor will we adore thy statue which thou have set
up. So Daniel did not obey King Darius, Dan. 6.16.
who commanded that he alone should be worshipped, and not God; for which cause
he was cast into the Lions den. That wicked King Zedekias, forbad the Prophet
Jeremiah to make known to the people Gods command, that he should deliver
himself into the hands of the Chaldees; but for this cause he was imprisoned.
The Apostles, Peter and John, being forbid by the Magistrate to preach in the
Name of Jesus, answer thus; Whether this be just in the sight of God, to obey
you rather then God, Acts 4.19.
judge ye.

XXXVIII. Therefore, that saying is good, The Magistrate must be obeyed as far
as the Altars: and Hierome says, We must obey Judges, in the things that are
true, Comment, in Romans 13.
but not in such things as are contrary to Religion; even for this reason,
because it were great injustice, so to serve the King in this world, as to
dishonor the King of heaven. Hence Thomas says well, Every humane power is
subordinate to the power of God, and no humane power is to be obeyed against
God: according to that, Acts 4.19. We must obey God rather then man. So
Chrysostom. in Mat. 22.22. If Caesar will take upon him that which is Gods, to
command wicked Acts, it will not be Cesars tribute, but the Devils service.

This is the Orthodox doctrine of Magistracy and Civil power, and of the
Subjects duty to the Magistrate, which, out of Gods Word, and Ecclesiastical
Writers, is wont to be taught openly in all Churches and Schools of the
Evangelicall Princes, as well within the Roman Empire, as without.

The end of the doctrinall Aphorisms of the Reformed CHURCHES.
D. David Parrie's secular Theme, concerning the causes why, an hundred years
ago, Popery (which is still to be avoided) was by Gods great blessing driven
out of the Reformed Churches of GERMANY: Being proposed in a solemn
disquisition in the famous Universitie of the Arch-Palatinate of Heidelberge,
Andrew Pragai, an Hungarian then answering, Novem. 1. 1617.
Also his Assertion or Defense against the foolish scoffs of Maximilian
Sandaeus, Priest, and Jesuit of Herbipolis.
WHereas one Maximilian a Jesuit, Conzio-Sandaeus, or Sandaeo-Conzius, has
lately, in a satyricall wanton strain, boldly canvised, and with lies torn
and defiled the secular Theme, concerning the causes why, an hundred years
since, Popery (which is always to be avoided) was driven out of our
Evangelicall Churches; which Theme was the former year the first of November
proposed and divulged at Heidelberge, by public authority, D. David Parrie,
Professor of Divinity, being President, and Andrew Pragai, an Hungarian, a
Candidate or Student in Divinity, at that time Respondent. But the Jesuit
does nothing in this unusual to his Sect, which has from the cradle resolved,
to restore with all the lies they can, the decayed condition of the Roman
Antichrist, and to keep under the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, with their
calumnies and sophistry. But we must look for nothing else from them, who, if
they dare belie the sacred Name of our Savior JESUS, what wonder if they lie
in every thing else? But because he has made no scruple to direct by writing,
and obtrude to us his lies, we thought it was our part not to reject altogether
his provocation, not yet to answer a fool, according to his folly: therefore
we thought it best to divulge again the whole secular Theme, with a short
Defense of those passages, which we find depraved by his lies and sophistry;
whence the ingenuous Reader may easily judge, that the causes, demonstrated in
the secular Theme, are no ways shaken or weakened by that thick, close joined
heap of lies, reproaches, and calumnies, which the folly, malice, and impudence
of Sandaeo-Conzius has so incredibly complicated.

He makes show, as if he did not deny, but that an Apostolical Synagogue, an
Idolatrous profanation, and Tyrannical cruelty, ought to be avoided and
exterminated; but he denies, that any of these is to be found in Popery: I
warrant you, as that servant in Terence, excusing his masters naughtiness,
Eunuch. 5.4.
Who (quoth he) ever saw in a whores house any man apprehended for an
adulterer? Will you exspect, that the Beast will confess himself to be the
Beast? Or that the whore will profess her self to be the great Whore? Or that
her worshippers will not deny what they do? The contumelies of ancient
Christians belong nothing to them, in that they were called Asinarii,
Sarmentitii, Semissii: These do no more belong to Popery, then the praises of
the Virgin to Bacchus; these were so many badges of the Christians innocence.
That these men do not worship the Whore, who sits upon the seven-hilled City;
that they are not the ministers of Antichristian tyranny, and that they do
not sacrifice to Idols, the Christian world will then believe, when they give
over to practice such vanities. Your fornication is too naked and apparent;
God, by the light of his word, has detected your filthy pollutions, that for
the covering thereof, this Sandaeo-Conzius does in vain crack of the
Protestantick Synagogue, calling our Assemblies so in scoff. In vain does he
go about to paint the Whore, and to hide her filthiness from us, by casting a
cloak patched up of so many calumnies, and of old, torn, and rotten complaints
upon us, of purpose to blindfold us. All which are either apparently false, or
reproachful, or frivolous and ridiculous, and indeed, documents of Jesuiticall
falsehood, ignorance, and impudence, of purpose devised to avoid open plea in
the Court of Justice, in which the guilty party convented, ought first to put
in his answer to the interrogatories, before he can have liberty to sue his
accuser. Now, whereas there are above two hundred Positions, he has scarce
snapt at and gnawn the fourth part of them, and that cursorily; or, like that
little curre Lycisca, he has barked at the Moon. But, though we give him
leave to bark, yet our cause remains unconquered. But it is sufficient that we
have pointed at this. As for his Corybantick Scheme or cloak (fit for the
Corybantes, Cybelles Priests) which he calls the Protestantick Synagogue (he
should rather have named it, The Jesuiticall sink of lies, reproaches, and
prattling) whereas his filth belongs not to us, we return it to the authors of
it, by the postliminian right, or that law, whereby things unlawfully taken
away, were lawfully recovered.

The secular Theme, or Argument of the causes, why, an hundred years ago, by
Gods great mercy, Popery, (still to be avoided) was driven out of the
Evangelicall CHURCHES: Against the wranglings, subtle shifts, and calumnies of
Maximilian Sands, Jesuit, briefly asserted.
1. Whosoever will be saved, above all things, it is needful that he avoid
Popery. 2. For, Popery is the overthrow of the whole Christian Religion, under
the name of Christ, which cannot stand with salvation. 3. Christian Religion
consists in Faith and Evangelicall obedience; obedience, in worship and
discipline. 4. Popery has turned Faith into Apostasy, worship into Idolatry,
discipline into Tyranny. 5. So the many causes of abandoning, by Gods
assistance, Popery of old being by others handled at large, we will briefly
reduce to three: First, the damnable apostasy from faith. Secondly, horrible
Idolatry, in stead of Gods worship. Thirdly, Antichristian tyranny, for
Evangelicall discipline.

I. The damnable apostasy of Popery from the faith, which we believe, and by
which we believe.

6. Concerning the apostasy of Popery from the faith, we will not handle a
past, but a present history. 7. To shake first the principle of faith, which is
believed, and into which Christian faith is lastly resolved, is to fall off
from the faith, to overthrow faith and salvation. 8. The principle of faith
which is believed, and lastly terminating Christian faith, is the holy
Scripture, contained in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, and that
alone. 9. For, The Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, 2 Timothy 2.16.
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 10. This principle of faith,
which is believed, Popery has many ways, and at this day is still pulling at
it. 11. It teaches, that in the holy Scripture there is no Divinity, but what
it receives from the Church.

The Assertion. The Jesuit, in a whispering way, has allowed of these ten
Positions, therefore they need no defense; but by the way we must note, that
the distinction of faith, Lib. 12. de Trinit. c. 2.
which we believe, and by which we believe, is extant in Austine, and is
delivered by Lombard, l. 3. distinct. 23. C. Against the eleventh he exclaimes,
Parrie lies. What if the Jesuit lie? Parrie wrote truth out of Andradius the
Portugal Doctor, Lib. 11. defensionis page 257.
the authentic Defender of the Council of Trent, whose words are these:
Neither is there in the books themselves, in which the sacred mysteries are
written, any Divinity, which can tie us by any religion to believe the things
contained in them; but such force and amplitude there is in the Church, which
teaches us, that those books are sacred, and recommends the faith and piety
of the ancient Fathers, that no man can oppugn them, without grievous impiety.
Thus he.

Now he speaks not of the characters, papers, or parchment of the books, the
trust and authority whereof is among the Book-keepers or Stationers; but of
the Scriptures themselves, of whose authority we dispute. Concerning these he
affirms both the heads of the Position: 1. That there is no Divinity in them;
for these words, [Nor any thing] and [Nothing] are equivalent. 2. Except so
much as it receives from the Church: for, this is the meaning of the adversary;
[but there is so much force in the Church.] We omit other Writers for brevities
sake. Let the Christian world judge of this Jesuits boldness, and whether
this Position alone be not sufficient to defend the assumption.

12. Neither does he account them authentical, but by the Churches authority.
13. Yea, he believes not God himself, but for the Church.

The Assertion. Here the Jesuit flings away both buckler and spear; for he
knows too well, that Popery is held here. Both these false and impious
Positions have been blabbed abroad by their Triarian and Manipular, that is,
their better and meaner sort of Writers: The former by Eckius in his
Enchiridion, in these words, The Scripture is not authentical, without the
Churches authority. This he calls in the margin, His Achilles for the
Catholics. And shortly after, Hence it appears, that the Church is more
ancient then the Scripture; and that the Scripture is not authentical, but by
the Churches authority. The other by Stapleton against Whitaker, Cap. 10.. 3.
lib. De author. Script. We do not believe God, but for the Church. Is not
this, I pray you, blasphemously to subject God and his word to the Pope and his
Church?

Neither can so great a blasphemy be eluded by the Jesuits cavills, to wit,
That the Scripture, in respect of it self, has its own authentic authority
from its own worth, (...).
whereby it should be credited, whose author is the first Truth, not the Pope:
and that the Church, as the ground and pillar of truth, does confer somewhat
to the credit of Scripture. For this later point was never yet questioned for
ought we know. Whether the Church conferres any thing toward the credit of
the Scripture. But that former assertion of the Sophisters, Whether we do not
believe God and the Scripture, but for the Church: that former passage, though
it be truly said, yet it is not truly believed in Popery. For, they detract
from the Scripture that internal worth of credit, as it was but now showed out
of Andradius, denying any Divinity to be in Scripture. And their opinion is
still firm, That the Scripture is not worthy to be credited either in it
self, or by us, but for the Church.

14. It makes the Scriptures authority depend upon the Popes arbitrament;
because that authority resides in the Pope, as in the head of the whole Church.

The Assertion. Here, that he might make show of denying the former, he has
cunningly muttered out the later, which being added, he saw necessarily, that
the former would follow: For, if in the Pope, as in the head of the whole
Church, the whole authority of the Church resides; and, if in the authority of
the Church the Scriptures authority resides, as the two former Positions have,
it must necessarily follow, that in the Pope the whole authority of Scripture
resides, and depends upon his beck. Now, that this authority of the Church
resides in the Pope alone, as in the head of the universal Church, it is the
common style of the Canonists and Sophisters, who advance the Pope above
Councels. Gregory de Valentia, a Jesuit of an approved cut or coin, tells us
plainly, that in the Pope, as in the head of the whole Church, this authority
resides. The Position then remains, and the proof of the assumption.

15. And because the Pope alone, or with his Prelates, is the Church; therefore
the Pope and his Prelates believe the Scriptures for themselves: but they will
have the lay people to believe the Scriptures for the Pope and Prelates.

The Assertion. The Jesuits were fools, if they should openly speak so; but as
foolishly do they deny this, affirming what they do affirm: That we believe
not either Scripture, or God himself, but for the Church; and, that the Pope
with his Prelates are the Church. For, from hence it is as needful to affirm
both, to wit, that the Pope and Prelates believe the Scriptures and God for
themselves; because they believe not but for the Church, which themselves are:
the Laics believe for the Pope and Prelates; because they believe for the
Church, which is the Pope and Prelates. This as necessarily follows, as if we
should prove there be four Evangelists, on this ground, that there are twice
two Evangelists. Therefore not Parrie, in affirming; but the Jesuit, in
denying this Thesis, lies: and the assumption remains.

16. Thus the faith of Popes, Prelates, Laymen, concerning the Scriptures,
stands upon the sandy foundation of humane testimony; which, indeed, is no
foundation.

The Assertion. Every one may see, that this is the consectary of the former:
For, if the faith of Popes and Prelates, Mat. 7. Bellar. l. 3. de Justificat. c.
2.
(who are men, not gods, nor angels) stands upon themselves; and, if the faith
of the Laity stands upon the Pope and Prelates, it must needs stand upon humane
testimony. Now, for faith in divine things to stand upon this, what else is it,
but to stand upon a sandy foundation, that is, upon an unstable, movable each
hour, uncertain, and indeed, no foundation? For, in divine things, an
uncertain faith is no faith: when, by Bellarmine's own testimony, it behooves
true faith to be most certain. Neither will that painted shift of the Valentian
Jesuit avail him, saying, That the authority of the Church, that is, of the
Pope and Prelates, is not purely humane, nor purely divine; but partly divine,
partly humane. Such indeed was the authority of the Prophets and Apostles, who
we know were immediately called and illuminated by God. Though they were men,
yet they spoke and wrote in the Church by divine inspiration. We will give
equal authority to the Pope and Prelates with the Apostles, if they can show
us, that they write and speak by the same inspiration. If they can produce the
word of those that were divinely inspired, that is, the holy Scriptures;
otherwise, their Decrees are but humane testimonies, and sand.

17. They accuse the Scriptures of so great obscurity in things that concern
faith, worship, and manners, that without the Popes interpretation, no man can
understand them.

The Assertion. The first part is the ordinary style of Papists; and it is at
large defended by Bellarmine. That the Scriptures are very obscure, Lib. 1. de
Verb. cap. 1. and 2.
both in the things that are set down, and in the manner of setting them down.
But what can be more false, or more contumelious against God, and his holy
Prophets and Apostles? seeing the word of God, and of the Prophets, but much
more of the Apostles, Psalm. 119.105.
is called a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths, shining in a dark
place. 2 Pet. 1.19.
This indeed the Jesuit whispered, but afterward shamelesly denied it: As
though (forsooth) this were not the common style of Popery, That no man can be
the Interpreter of Scripture, or Judge of the true meaning thereof, but the
Church; that is, the Pope, either with, or without a Council. And that in the
Pope, as in the head of the Catholic Church, all power of interpreting
resides. Is not this to tell us, that the Scriptures can be understood by none,
without the Popes interpretation? See Bellarmine, Lib. 3. de verb. cap. 3.
where he strives to prove, that the meaning of Scripture depends upon one
Judge, which is the Pope.

18. It makes the Pope supreme Judge of all questions concerning faith, in
which it behooves faith to stay at last, even in those things that are in
controversy between the Pope and Protestants.

The Assertion. Whereas there be three members in this Position; the first and
third, as being known to every one, are by the Jesnite swallowed down in
silence. The Pope makes himself supreme Judge of all questions of faith; but by
what right? It is a question of faith, If there be a God? if there be a
Trinity in unity? if he made the world? if Christ be God and man? if he died
for us? if he rose again? if there be heaven and hell? etc. Shall then
Christians, Jews, Turks, and Atheists repair to the Pope, as the supreme
Judge, for resolution of these? What greater madness can be? The question is,
If the Pope be head of the Church? if Christ's Viceroy? if the Monarch of
Christendom? if the Lord of Kings and Emperors? if the supreme Interpreter,
Censor, and Judge of Scripture, and of all questions of faith? Or, if he be not
rather, that man of perdition, sitting in the Temple of God, as God? the Beast?
the Whore sitting in the great City upon seven hills? Finally, Antichrist?
What? shall the Protestants, who are at controversy with the Jesuits about
these questions, repair to the Pope, as supreme Judge? what is more foolish?
what more unjust?

The middle member the Jesuit calls a lie, to wit, that our faith must at last
stay upon the Pope. Truly, what he says is a lie; but that Popery teaches
this, is no lie, except it be a lie also, that the Pope is supreme Judge of all
questions of faith; for, it is only he, on whom the faith of all questions does
at last stay: Or, that we may speak more clearly, from whom there is no
appealing to a superior. But an appeal may be made from the Pope to the
Scriptures, or to God, as to a Superior; and the Jesuit himself, confessing
Christian faith, is resolved into this first verity, which is believed for it
self: therefore this Position stands firm in all its members, and the proof
of the assumption.

Furthermore, who ought to be supreme Judge of faith, interpretations, and
controversies of faith; whether the Pope, or not; and whether the Scripture
alone be the rule of faith and controversies, or traditions also: Or, whether
the Scriptures alone can be both a Rule and a Judge; which the Jesuit barks
out with a dogs, not with a man's mouth, that we may pay him home in his own
language, whole books of Protestants are extant concerning these, nor do they
belong to the argument of our secular Theme.

19. It accuses the Scripture of imperfection, as if it were neither
sufficient to beget faith and piety, nor to attain to salvation, except it be
supplied by traditions.

. 20. Hence, it calls traditions, The unwritten word of God, as certain, in
fallible, canonical, and as necessary to salvation, as the written word of
God, and to be received with the like affection of piety and reverence.

The Assertion. Whereas our adversary conceales both these Positions, they
need no defense. It is the common style of Popery thus to speak of both; and
it is unspeakable, how witty, eloquent, and earnest they are at this day, all
of them, in aggravating the imperfection and defects of the Bibles or
Scriptures which are among Christians: And, on the contrary, in extolling the
divinity and necessity of their traditions. In stead of all, see Bellarmine,
lib. 4. of the unwritten word, throughout all the book. But how contumelious it
is against God, to defile with the blemish of imperfection his written word,
which, as it testifies of it self, is able to make the man of God perfect for
every good work. And, to give life eternal to them that believe. On the
contrary, what arrogance, vanity, and how full of danger it is, not only to
equal to, but to extol above, and more religiously to reverence humane
traditions, with which God (whatsoever men lie to the contrary) is worshipped
in vain: I say, to extol these above Gods sacred word, is not now our purpose
to speak many words; seeing all good men do easily understand this point, and
it has been often demonstrated by our Writers.

21. It blasphemously calls the Scripture a Nose of wax, a doubtful and dead
letter written with ink, which needed the Churches confirmation. Like a
sheath, receiving any blade, whether it be of steel, lead, wood, or brass.

The Assertion. The Jesuit silently acknowledges these blasphemies worthy of
Anathema; yet he is willing to wash them away with a lie, as if injuriously
they were imputed to Popery: but indeed, here is no fiction, yet too little
has been said; for Lindanus does openly profess, In Panoplia.
that the holy Scripture in Popery is commonly accounted a Nose of wax, an
ambiguous word, and such as may be turned which way you will, and that it is
rightly so esteemed. For, he advises Papists not to dispute with Heretics
(he means Protestants) out of the holy Scriptures hereafter: Because (says
he) as commonly you may see, it is easily bent to what opinion you will;
therefore it is compared, and very fitly too, to a Nose of wax. Thus he
approves, excuses, defends that reproach, which the Jesuit calls a lie.

Costerus, one of their chief Jesuits, devises a threefold holy Scripture:
One spiritual, inspired by the holy Ghost, in the minds of the Church and
Pope. The other left by the Apostles to the Church, written with ink, in paper
and parchment books. The third grounded on the Pontificiall Decrees and
general Councels. Of the paper Scriptures (for so this paper-brawler
disgracefully calls the Prophetical and Apostolical books) speaking: These
former (says he) needed the confirmation of that; for these are a dead
letter, written with ink, in parchment or paper, which can feel nothing,
though one should cut or wring it: therefore it is like a scabberd, which admits
of any sword, not of steel only, but of wood also, or lead, or brass. Does
then Parrie lie in this? or has the Jesuit lost his shame?

But yet they tear and defile the Scripture more miserably; for thus Lindanus
compares those that dispute out of Scripture, to men drawing a wooden saw, to
whom, being weary, there is no end of deluding.

Hosius in his book, De expresso Dei verbo, throughout it all, handles these
Positions: That it is the property of Heretics to dispute out of the
Scriptures, That they must not encounter with Heretics out of the Scriptures,
That the Scriptures make Heretics, That the express word of God, being
alleged by Heretics, (Protestants he means) against the sense of all other,
that is, of the Popish Church, is the express word of the Devil. We will not
speak of other abominable passages, which neither Jews could attribute to
Moses his Law, nor Mahumetans to their Alchoran, without punishment. If
heretofore such words had been spoken of Sibylla's leaves, the Romans had
punished them with death: Yet for these or the like meritorious words, by which
they think they have cut off the Protestant sinews, one receives a Bishops
robe, another a Cardinals Hat, as a reward from the Pope. O (say they
scoffingly) what conferres your Scripture on you? But boast not in thy
wickedness; Psalm. 52.3. Page 24.
the goodness of the Lord is powerful every day.

But (says the Jesuit) this is devised by Parrie, Whitaker, and such like
deformed Reformers, That in Popery, the Scriptures are as much accounted as
Aesops Fables, without the Churches testimony; That the Pope preferres the
Church to the Scripture: That in Popery they deny the word of God to be the
rule of living and believing aright. I answer, that nothing of this is objected
to us in the secular Theme; why then do you pass by things truly objected,
and accuse Popery of these things? Cover, if you be wise, the ulcers of your
Babylon.

The first, concerning Aesops Fables, Brentius objected to Peter Asoto, a black
Friar, anno 1556. He does not obscurely (says he) intimate, that he has
plainly the same opinion of the Scriptures, that any other Asoticus has, or
has written of, to wit, that the Scripture avails as much as Aesops Fables,
without the Churches authority.

To whom Hosius answering anno 1557. says thus, This might be spoken in a
pious meaning, which any godly man, endued with charity, and that thinks no
evil, might draw out of these words: For truly, if the Churches authority did
not teach us, that this Scripture is Canonical, it should have but little
weight with us.

I pray you then, how can you deny Popery to be of this opinion, which
Hosius, so great a pillar of the Romish Church, confesses may be spoken in a
pious sense? Tell me then, what odds is there between these words, [To have a
very little weight,] and between these, [To avail as much as Aesops Fables?]

I wonder you touch the other sore, Lib. de Council. col. 12.13.
which the chiefest of your side do avoid willingly, as a rock in the sea:
Bellarmine has so touched it, that he equals the Decrees of Councels in
truth, infallibility, and Canonical authority, to the Gospels and holy
Scriptures, and extolls the Pope far above Decrees of Councels. How then is the
Pope, according to Bellarmine, not preferred to Scripture?

As for the third, though we know not who objecteth it to you, as you utter it;
yet it is doubtless true: For, according to the same Cardinal of yours, the
word of God written, is but a partial rule of right living and believing: But
a partial rule is no rule, if you will urge the nature of a rule; for a rule
[in Greek, (...),] is an infallible rule, requiring or admitting of no addition
or diminution to this, that it may be a rule, as the Jesuit knows a rule to
be defined by Basil and Varinus. If then in Popery, the written word of God be
but a partial law of good life and faith, not only admitting, but requiring
also the addition of traditions; it follows, that this is plainly denied in
Popery, which this fellow lies, was devised by Parrie, to wit, that the
written word of God, is the rule of right living and believing.

22. Lastly, what Irenaeus wrote of ancient Heretics, when Roman Popery is
argued out of Scriptures, it is turned to the accusation of the very
Scriptures, as if they were not right, or had any authority; and because they
are diversely taken, and because truth cannot be found out of them that want
tradition.

23. Roman Popery then, so many ways the original of faith, which is
believed, by tearing in pieces, and blaspheming, is deficient from the faith,
it overthrows faith both to it self, and to its friends.

The Assertion. If at this day Irenaeus, that most ancient defender of the holy
Scriptures against Heretics, did see our present controversies, what else
would he say (think you) against Popery, then what he wrote against the
traditionarie Heretics of his time, that they cannot abide an encounter, when
they are convicted out of Scripture; but fall upon accusing of the very words
of God? and that three ways: First, that they are not of authority: Secondly,
that they are diversely spoken, obscure, doubtful: That, finally, they are
imperfect, not containing all truth. At last they fix upon traditions, which
they think to be more perfect then the Scriptures they received from the
Apostles. All the Popish Masters now these hundred years past, have after no
other way handled this argument, then what was the proper way of Heretics of
old: For, as often as they are convicted by our men out of Scripture, do not
they dissuade any meeting or encounter? That it is a vain thing to draw a
wooden saw with us? Do they not fall upon accusing the Scriptures themselves,
that they have no authority, but what they have from the Church? That they are
most obscure, and diversely spoken? That by reason of their imperfection, all
truth cannot be found in them? Does not at length all their disputation end in
tradition? See the disputes and discourses of the Scriptures in Bellarmine,
Stapleton, Lindanus, Hosius, Valentian, and others. Popery then (I hope)
understands whose successors the Scholastic Synagogues, and Canonisticall in
this part are; and what principle of faith, which is believed, has by unworthy
tearing and blaspheming fallen from the faith; and has made the way of
salvation unpassable, both to it self, and friends.

24. Secondly, to shake saving Faith, by which we believe unto righteousness,
and to pull it out of men's hearts, is to fail from the Faith, and to overthrow
faith, both to themselves and others.

25. Saving faith, by which we believe unto righteousness, is not only an
assent or knowledge of these things, which, concerning God and Christ, are
written in Gods Word; but especially a confidence in the promises of the
Gospel, concerning remission of sins for the merits of Christ. 26. Neither
does this stick in the brain but it is rooted in the heart; Romans 10.11.
because, With the heart we believe unto righteousness. 27. Hence the Apostle
defines faith, to be the subsistence of things hoped for: because, it makes
these objects of our hope, as it were really present in our hearts and minds.
28. And the evidence of things not seen, because it subdues men's minds and
hearts, causing in the one a sure assent to those things, and in the other a
sure confidence. 29. Hence Austine, de Fide and Symbol. c. 1. Let us profess
that Faith with our mouth, which we carry in our heart. 30. That faith which
sticks only in the brain, without assurance in the heart, or, which does not
work by charity, it is a vain and dead faith, and the peculiar faith of
hypocrites and Devils. 31. For, to believe that God is God, and that Christ is
Christ, will no more help thee, then to believe that Venice is a rich City, in
which notwithstanding thou have never a house. 32. This saving faith, by which
we believe to righteousness, Popery shakes by diverse ways, and plucks it up
out of men's hearts. 33. It makes saving faith, not a knowledge, but ignorance,
with an implicit assent to those things which the Church believes.

The Assertion. All these Themes, by which the nature of justifying and saving
Faith is explained, the Jesuit neither did shake, nor did he go about to do it;
but some of them he so endeavors to elude with lies and calumnies, that he
has so much the more exasperated the ulcers of Popery. First, he says, That
Parry lies, in saying, that what Popery teaches is contrary to the Apostles
definition; to wit, that Christian Faith is a knowledge. But indeed, the Jesuit
lies, in saying that Parry did object this against Popery.

So much of the Assertion of the Secular Theme was found among Parrie's blotted
papers; but the rest of his papers were lost in the plundering of his Library
by wicked hands at Heidelberge.

Follow the rest of the Themes.

34. That saving Faith is a confidence of Gods mercy; this it condemns for
Herefie. 35. It contends, that justifying Faith is separable from love, and
from all spiritual and moral virtues. 36. It will not yield that there is any
certainty of Faith, but that it is conjecturall, such as opinion is. 37. Of
which no man can be assured with himself that he has it, except in opinion.
38. Much less can any man certainly confide of the grace of God, of remission
of sins, of justification, and salvation. 39. Because it is always joined with
anxiety, fear of deception, and doubting. 40. Which, indeed, is not faith
raising a sinner, but opinion, tormenting wavering consciences. 41. For, the
Locusts of the bottomless pit, were to torment men five months. 42. But also,
it is a doubting, accusing God of a lie, and blaspheming. 43. Popery then is
fallen from faith, and has overthrown faith to it self and friends, in
shaking so many ways that faith by which we believe unto righteousness. 44.
Thirdly, to overthrow the ground of salvation, concerning justification by
faith, by the imputed righteousness of faith, and merit without works, is to
fall from the faith of the Gospel, and to overthrow salvation. Romans 3.28.
45. For, the Apostle says, We conclude then, that man is justified by faith,
Romans 4.6. Romans 5.1.
without the works of the Law. 46. And, Blessed is the man, to whom God
imputes righteousness without works. 47. And, Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God. 48. And, By the righteousness of one man; to wit, Christ,
Romans 5.18.
grace has abounded to all men, to the justification of life. 49. And, Gal.
2.16. Gal. 3.10.
Knowing that man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Christ Jesus. 50. But whosoever are under the works of the Law (or will be
justified by works) are under the curse. 51. This foundation is diversely
overthrown by Popery. 52. It denies, against the Apostles words, that man is
justified by faith without works. 53. It Anathematises those that believe, that
they are justified by the imputation of Christ's righteousness without works.
54. It teaches, that we are not justified by faith, but are disposed to
justification. 55. It teaches, that charity (which in the Saints is as cold
almost as ice, it is so far from being perfect) is the habit of perfect
righteousness. 56. It teaches, that men are justified by the perfection of
their virtues, or good works. 57. That which was the faith heretofore of
Philosophers and Pharisees, is at this day the faith of the Turks and Jews, the
name of Christ being changed. 58. It teaches, that Christ has merited for us
power to merit; that it is in us to merit life eternal, by this power flowing
from Christ's merit. 59. So it blasphemes Christ's merit, substituting instead of
it their own proper merits. 60. So, whilst it goes about to elevate men to
heaven, being puffed up with the pride of their own merits, it tumbleth them
down to hell; which is common to it with the Alcharon and Thalmud. 61.
Therefore Popery, by pulling and shaking the ground of salvation about
justification of sinners before God, by so many ways, is fallen from the faith
of the Gospel, and has overthrown salvation to it self and friends. 62.
Fourthly, To defend false doctrines, impious, blasphemous, repugnant to holy
Scripture, and the foundation of faith, is to fall from faith, and to overthrow
salvation. 63. Popery defends innumerable such stuff (besides what is now
said:) take these few examples: 64. It defends corruption by Adams fall, or
original sin, not to consist in any evil quality, nor to be a sin, but the
punishment of sin; and such a defect as is the crookedness of the finger or
leg; that it is not against, but besides the Law, which is directly against
Scripture, affirming, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21.
Every imagination of man's heart to be evil, from his youth upward. 65.
Another falsehood it teaches, in saying, Some sins of their own nature to be
venial, and to be pardoned rather then punished; against this Scripture, The
wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.
66. Another falsehood is this, That the natural man's free will is not the
servant of sin, against this Scripture, You were the servants of sin. Romans 6.20.
67. And that they can cooperate with the first grace; against these
Scriptues, When you were dead in your sins: Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh cannot be subject to the Law of God. 68. And that of
two hearers of the Word, the one believes, because he was willing; the other
believes not, because he would not cooperate with grace; against this
Scripture, 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that thou have not received? 69. And this falsehood, that the
grace of God, by which we are said to be saved, is a general influx,
indifferent, which can receive a good or evil specification, according to the
natural man's will. 70. Or, that it is a special influx, but only suasive,
the efficacy of which is in man's will; against these Scriptures, God gives to
will and to do. And, No man can come to me, Phil. 2.13. John 6.44.
except the Father draw him. 71. Another impious falsehood, That they whom God
predestined to glory, were by their foreseen merits predestined, or after
and for their foreseen merits; against these Scriptures, Before the children
had done good or evil. Romans 9.11. Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
He elected us before the foundation of the world, that we might be holy, and
without blame. He elected us according to the purpose of his will unto the
praise of the glory of his grace. 72. Which Pelagian dream, is not to be
called predestination, but post-destination. 73. Another impious falsehood, that
they can absolutely fulfill Gods Law, against this Scripture, In many things we
offend all. And, Jam. 3.2. Romans 8.3.
What was impossible to the Law. 74. Yea, that they can do more then by the Law
they should do; against this Scripture, When you have done all you can, say, We
are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10.
we have done what we ought to do. 75. Yea, that they can be free from all sin
in this life, if they will; against this Scripture, Surely there is none just
upon earth, Eccles. 7.21.
who does good, and sins not. 76. Of this the Pelagians of old did brag,
Mat. 6.12. Luke 11.4.
therefore were bid blot out of the Lords Prayer these words, Forgive us our
sins; that is, to make an officious lie, or to mock God. 77. And another
impious falsehood, That by good works they merit life eternal of condignity;
Romans 6.23.
against this Scripture, Life eternal is the gift of God. 78. Another
falsehood, That by reason of their good works, they can be confident in the day
of Gods judgments; Psalm. 130.3.
against this Scripture, Lord, if thou observe our sins, who can endure it.
79. Another blasphemy, That by their merits they make God indebted to them,
that if he do not give them life eternal, he must be unjust; who, forsooth,
may be sued for such an injury; against these Scriptures, Romans 2.13. and
11.35. and 9.20.
We are debtors. Who gave to him first, and it shall be restored to him? What
art thou that answerest God? 80. And it is no less blasphemous, that Christ
alone is not our Mediator, but the Saints Canonized by the Pope make
Intercession for us, 1 Timothy 2.5.
as mediators in heaven; against this Scripture, There is one Mediator of God
and man, the man Christ Jesus. 81. Such as this, that They who depart in the
faith, go into Purgatory fire, to suffer for their venial sins; against the
Gospel, Blessed are they from henceforth who die in the Lord. Rev. 14.13. John
2.24.
He that believes in me has life eternal, neither does he come into
judgment, but passes from death to life. 82. Another hypocritical falsehood
is, That the Sacraments instituted by God, are not signs of grace confirming
faith, but vessels containing and confirming grace by the work wrought; against
this Scripture, Romans 4.11.
Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of
faith. 83. And this also of the seven Sacraments of the New Testament, unknown
in the Gospel, and in the primitive Church. 84. And this also of forbidden
meats, which in the New Testament the Apostle calls the doctrine of Devils.
85. And this doctrine which prohibits Bishops to marry; against this Scripture,
1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.6.
Let a Bishop be the husband of one wife. 86. And this blasphemous falsehood,
That the Priests, by the five words of consecration, do transubstantiate in the
Mass the Host into the very body of Christ, daily sanctifying it to God the
Father, and destroying it for the sins of them that live on the earth, or that
are dead in heaven and Purgatory; Romans 6.9. Heb. 10.13.
against these Scriptures, Christ dies no more. By one oblation he has
consummated all. 87. And who is able to rehearse their other falsehoods,
impieties, and blasphemies, concerning the Cup, of which, sacrilegiously they
have robbed the people; of Contritions, Confessions, Satisfactions,
Indulgences, Jubilees, Holy Days, Fastings, etc? 88. Therefore Popery, by
maintaining so many false, impious, blasphemous doctrines, has fallen from the
faith, and has overthrown salvation both to it self and friends. 89. Which
apostasy from the Faith, the Spirit has plainly foretold, 1 Timothy 4.2, 3.
That in the latter times some shall fall from the faith, giving heed to
deceiving spirits, and doctrines of Devils; speaking falsehoods, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has made to be
received with thanksgiving. 1 These. 2.3.
90. The Apostle also foretold, that this apostasy should be the sign of
revealing the Man of sin, and son of perdition; that is, Antichrist. 91. This
is that great earthquake, by which Christ, the Son of righteousness, was made
black as a sackcloth; the Moon, that is, the Church, was turned into blood;
the Stars, that is, the Bishops fell from heaven to earth; the firmament of the
Scripture being foulded up, departed in the second vision of the Revelation.
92. This pestilent fume, whilst the fifth Trumpet blew, openly flying out of
the bottomless pit, by Antichrists means, that apostaticall Star; the black
enchantments of Papal decretals, and of School Divinity, by which Christ, the
Son of righteousness, and the heir of heavenly doctrine was obscured, and the
innumerable vermin of Clericall and Monastical Locusts, eating up the green
pasture of the Church, and tormenting men, were brought into the Christian
world, in the third vision of the Revelation. 93. These are the great
blasphemies (but yet not all) to which the Beast that came out of the sea
opened his mouth: And this is the Dragon-language of that earthly Beast, making
show of the Lambs two horns, in the fourth vision of the Revelation. 94. These
are the darknesses with which his kingdom was obscured, when the fifth Violl
was powered out upon the Beasts throne, etc. in the fifth vision of the
Revelation. 95. We have the apostasy of Popery from the Faith, foretold long
ago by the Angel to John; and, the revolution of an age being accomplished, it
is revealed again by the renewed light of the Gospel. 96. Which was the most
urgent cause why our Parents forsook Popery; and this is the cause why we do
the same; and so it is concluded, 97. That a Church apostatising from faith, it
to be deserted and forsaken; for, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
What union is there between light and darkness? 98. Popery is that Church
that is fallen from the faith, as is said: 99. Therefore Popery is to be
deserted and avoided.

II. The horrible Idolatry of Popery.

100. God only is to be religiously worshipped. 101. For, Religion by
Lactantius his definition, is the bond of piety, by which we are bound to God,
or by which God does bind man to himself. 102. By Cicero likewise, Religion is
that, by which we are careful, by reverend Ceremonies, to adore that supreme
Nature which we call God. 103. Religion differs from superstition, says
Lactantius; because Religion is a true worship, superstition is a false one.
104. Religion then given to creatures, or to any thing besides God, is false,
which the Scripture calls Superstition and Idolatry. 105. For, Idolatry is a
fictitious or superstitious worship of God: 106. Of which there are two
principal kinds; one is when a fictitious deity is worshipped; that is, when
instead of the true God, or besides him, religious worship, due to God alone,
is exhibited, either outwardly or inwardly, to any thing that is existent, or
but fained. 107. This is forbid in the first Commandment, Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. 108. Such was the Gentiles Idolatry in
their Religious worship of feigned gods; inwardly, by trusting in them;
outwardly, by Ceremonies, and erecting of Statues to them. 109. Such Idolatry
is covetousness with the Apostle, when, with inward confidence, we worship
money instead of God. 110. The other Idolatry, is error in the kind of
worship; when a worship is devised to be exhibited to God, which either he has
not commanded, or has prohibited; that is, when we devise Statues, and
Ceremonies for him. 111. This is forbid in the second Commandment, Thou shall
make to thy self no graven Image, etc. Exodus 20.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31.
112. Which is expounded in Deuteronomy, Do not seek after the gods of the
Gentiles, saying, As these Gentiles have worshipped their gods, so will I. Thou
shall not do so to the Lord thy God, for every thing that is abomination to
the Lord, they did unto their gods, which I hate. (...).
113. For, what is properly will worship in respect of the manner, becomes
Idolatry in respect of the object. 114. For, to worship God with a strange
worship, is to give him another will then he has; therefore, it is to feign
another God, or to worship an Idol instead of God. 115. Such Idolatry it is
when God is painted, and is fained to be worshipped in that picture. 116. Such
also is the worshipping of God by Statues, and Images of creatures, celestial
or terrestrial, put up for the honor of God, or of his Saints; whether that
worship be devised to be terminated or bounded within the Statues, or Saints,
or to be emanent and transient to God. 117. Against both these God speaks,
Deuteronomy 4.15, 16. thus, Take heed to your selves (for you saw no similitude
in the day that the Lord spoke to you in Mount Horeb) lest you defile your
souls, and make to your selves any graven Image, the similitude of any figure,
the Image of male or female, etc. 118. In the New Testament especially, when
God will be worshipped in spirit and truth, we are strictly commanded to fly
from Idolatry and every kind of superstition, Beware of Idols. Flee from
Idolatry, and every kind of superstition. 1 John 5.21. 1 Cor. 10.7. Colos. 2.8.
Let no man seduce you with will worship. 119. All Idolaters are directly
excluded from the kingdom of God; Be not deceived, neither whoremongers, nor
Idolaters, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Without are whoremongers,
Idolaters, and witches. 120. But Popery, for now a thousand years, is
altogether made up of filthy superstitions, and by impure Idolatry is every day
more and more profaned. 121. Who is able to reckon up the infinite, vain, and
impious superstitions, to which daily men give themselves in Popery with great
devotion, to pacify Gods anger, to merit pardon for sins, to redeem sins,
and the pains of hell, and purgatory, devised to in rich the Priests? Such
are, Prayers, and watchings for the dead, their yearly septimes and trentals,
the treasure and suffrages of the Church for Purgatory, pilgrimages to the
Images of Saints, to holy places, to the bones and relics of Saints, their
fraternities, religious dedications of Churches and Altars, their exorcismes,
consecrations of Images and graves, the baptising of Bells, using of
Godfathers to that purpose, the choice of meats, their quarterly and Lent
fasts, their religious and consecrated clothes, canonical hours, devoute
processions, perambulations, bacchanals, consecrations of Priests, anointing of
the s^ck, exorcising of Chrismes and Fonts, clipping and shaving their hooded
coats, surplesses and quirerobes, candlesticks, consecrated wax tapers,
lamps, glass viols, torches, tippets, banners, censers, drums, wafer coffers,
little bells, holy waters, with their exorcisings; hallowed salt, hallowed
wafers, exorcised herbs to chase away devils, ringing of bells against thunder,
little Images of Saints wrapped up in clouts, the Letanies of Saints,
confessions, satisfactions, rosaries, consecrated palm branches, Asses crowned
with palms, kisses and adorations of the Cross, the Cross laid up in the
grave, their Mattins at the Sepulcher, their solemn tumults, their wooden
busling noise in the night; the ridiculous ascending of an Idol instead of
Christ upon the cieling of the Church, their flinging down of fire and water,
their carrying about of the consecrated host, the innumerable Saints
holy days, to be kept under pain of mortal sin; indulgences, washings of
feet and of Altars, the waxen Images of the Cross, their Agni Dei, and
innumerable such like toys, full of superstition, Magic, and Idolatry. 122.
Which the ambitious Bishops, chiefly the Popes, to please the people, have
borrowed from Gentilisme, and, that they might seem to have the more divinity,
have transferred them from Judaisme to the Christian Religion; all which our
Savior, Mat. 15.9. Esaias 29.13, 14.
in one word, has overthrown, saying, In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines men's traditions. 123. So much the more horrible is the Romish
Idolatry, in that it places in Temples, Images and fictitious Statues to the
most holy Trinity, the most incomprehensible and invisible God: which Images
they worship with wax candles, Incense, geniculations, groanings and vows, as
religiously as they do God himself. 124. That they hang up, and again
crucify Christ our Savior, now gloriously reigning in heaven; and set up his
Image of wood or stone in all their Churches, and corners of their streets, and
high ways, to be worshipped devoutly by the faithful, under pain of death,
to the great scandal and mockery of Infidels. 125. That they worship as
devoutly the wood of the Cross, as Christ himself. 126. That they account as
sacred and venerable the sign of the Cross in the forehead, or in the air,
or upon any thing, as it is expressed by the finger, against the power of the
Devil, and good for hallowing of themselves. 127. That under the species of
the Host, they really offer, sacrifice, destroy; that is, kill, and crucify
Christ (being alive and glorious) every day in the Host more wickedly, then the
soldiers did, when they crucified him in his humility. 128. That it exhibits
the Host of bread, being elevated in the Mass, to be adored for a God; the
beholders, before they eat, knocking their breasts, they worship on their
face, and say, Thou art God my Redeemer. 129. That it has private Masses in
every corner of their Churches for the quick and the dead. 130. That is makes
Masses, concerning the Crown of thorns, the three nails, and Christ's
foreskin, for Sailers, for Travelers on foot or horseback, for great bellied
women, for women in travel, for barren women, for such as are sick of a
quartan or continual fever. 131. That besides their innumerable fictitious
relics, as they call them, Christ's consecrated slippers, as an antidote
against sin, are showed to religious people, to be gazed upon, which Pope
Stephen did at Ravenna. 132. That it religiously worships, adores, invocates
dead men which it has made Saints, crying out to them, Saint Peter, S.
Hyachinth, Have mercy on me, save me, open heaven gates to me, give me health
of body, etc. after the Pagan manner, who honored, instead of gods, those men
whom they thought were received into heaven, says Lactantius. 133. That to the
same dead men it consecrates Temples, Altars, Holy Days, Masses and
Sacrifices, and places the same as tutelar gods over Cities and Provinces.
134. That it worships, honors, adores, for the souls health, the images and
statues of the same men, in their temples, narrow lanes, and streets. 135. That
they have erected to the Virgin Mary more sumptuous statues, then to God or
Christ, being trimmed with gold and silk; and consecrate to the same, wax
candles, temples, holy days, priests, and masses. 136. That it devoutly, night
and day, invocates the Virgin Mary, stiling her, The gate of Paradise, the
mother of mercies, the life and sweetness, the treasurer of grace, the
sanctuary of sinners, the atoner of wickedness, and mediatresse of men; and so
it leaves nothing but bare words for Christ. 137. That it salutes every day
Mary the Queen of Heaven in that habit or worship, which, among the Pagans, was
proper to Isis; which Apuleius the Platonist, that he might be transformed
again from his Asinine shape to a humane, humbly called upon, Queen of Heaven,
or thou beautiful Ceres, etc. 138. Demanding that Mary should command her son,
by the right of her motherhood, it roares out these words, O happy mother,
which expiates our sins by right of thy motherhood, command our Redeemer. 139.
That in Popery, neither God nor Christ, but Mary only is the Alpha and Omega,
the haven and wind of salvation to all men, in that hymn; Thou only hope of
the miserable, the true mother of orphans, the ease of the oppressed, the
physic of the sick, and all things to all men. 140. That in Popery Mary is
truly their God, seeing that upon her they have conferred the whole honor due
to Almighty God alone, by a most horrible sacrilege in Mary's Psalterie;
praying to her as to God, and adulterating the holy Scriptures: Lady, in thee
have I trusted, let me never be confounded. I trust in the Lady. Mother save
me. The heavens declare thy glory, O Virgin mother. Be merciful to me, O
Lady. Incline thine ear to me, O Lady, and hear me. Save me, O Lady, for
thy names sake. In thine hand, O Lady, there is life and salvation. Wash away
all our sins, and heal all our infirmities, O Lady. Into thine hands, O Lady,
I commend my spirit. In thy name, O Lady, every knee bows it self, both of
things in heaven, on earth, and under the earth, etc. 141. That, lastly,
Popery has drowned the Christian world in the deep mud of these
superstitions, and has made drunk, with the cup of these fornications, the
Kings and inhabitants of the earth, great and small, rich and poor, free and
bond, as much as in it lies, has drawn them with it self from Christ, to the
hazarding of their eternal salvation. 142. This is that holy City, trod upon
by the Gentiles, that is, the Church wasted by the Gentilizing Romans, as
Jerusalem was trod upon by the Roman Gentiles, and that for forty two months,
thirty four of which (if we may guess) are almost gone; God grant that the
other eight months of their treading may be shortened for the Elects sake: in
the third vision of the Revelation. 143. This is that spiritual Sodom, the
filthy shop of whoredoms, and of spiritual and corporal Sodomites (for these
love to go together) of whom long since Petrarch spoke, Whoredoms, rapes,
incests, adulteries, are now the sports of Pontificiall wantonness: in the
same vision of the Revelation. 144. These are the blasphemies, to which the
Beast out of the sea opened his mouth, against God and his Name, whose whole
glory he has translated to his Idols, yet (as it will follow) upon himself:
145. And against his Tabernacle, the Church, which he has defiled with the
poison of pestilent doctrine, has seduced with lying signs, and has by
horrible idolatry thrust into destruction: 146. And against those that dwell in
heaven, upon whom, against their wills, they have, for their own gain, thrust
divine honors, until they compelled them to succeed into the place of the
Gentile Idols, and have wearied them with diverse and sordid offices; giving to
one the charge of Hogs; to another, of Horses; to the third, of Asses: making
such a Saint the tutelar god of such a town: another, the furtherer of such a
trade: another, the curer of such a disease, or driver away of such a
calamity, etc. in the fourth vision of the Revelation. 147. This image of the
Beast, is that imaginary Kingdom of Popery, filling temples, chapels,
streets, cathedrals, with images, pictures, altars, lamps, holy water pots;
which kingdom or image who adores not, is murdered: in the same vision of the
Revelation. 148. This is that great Babylon, the mother of fornications and
abominations of the earth, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication, and with the wine of whose fornication the inhabitants of the
earth are drunk; in the same vision of the Revelation. 149. We have the
horrible Idolatry of Popery, into which Gods worship is converted, long since
foretold by the Angel to John, and now, after the revolution of an age,
detected, by the renewing light of the Gospel. 150. Which other cause was most
urgent for our fathers to forsake and avoid Popery; and so we conclude, 151.
That an Idolatrous Church is to be forsaken and avoided, because it is written,
Flee from Idolatry. 152. Popery is such an Idolatrous Church, as is said. 153.
Therefore Popery is to be avoided and forsaken.

III. The Antichristian tyranny of Popery.

154. The damnable apostasy, and horrible idolatry of Popery, is too great a
cause, why we should fly from it. 155. How much more detestable is it, by the
accession of Antichristian tyranny? 156. Yet this is more properly the fault
of the head, when these others have invaded the whole body. 157. The two
former mischiefs have begot this third, or necessarily gone before them. 158.
For, if the Christian world had not been seduced by apostasy, fascinated by
idolatry, it had never submitted it self to the slavery and yoke of
Antichristian tyranny. 159. It is tyranny to oppress and undo a Commonwealth
got by right or wrong, against all right and equity. 160. The Pope has
invaded and oppressed the Church and State of Christendom with a double
tyranny, to wit, spiritual and corporal. 161. He invaded the Church in a
spiritual tyranny, when, by his pride, he overthrow the Apostolical
discipline of the Church. 162. The Apostolical discipline was Oeconomicall,
that under one head, or master of the family (our Savior having gone to
heaven, as it were into a far country) diverse household servants, as Apostles;
and, after them, Bishops, equal in power, should every one of them disperse
their own talents, according to every man's place, for the benefit of the house
of the living God. 163. For, Let a man so esteem of us (says the Apostle) as
of the ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1.
and stewards of the mysteries of God. 164. And we read, that Christ,
ascending into heaven, gave to the Church, besides Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, Doctors also and Pastors, or Bishops. 165. But we read not, that
he gave to the Church a Prince of Priests, or high Pontifie. 166. For there is
but one Bishopric (says Cyprian) which is communicated by parcells to every
one. 167. Neither any of us, says the same Father, has made himself a Bishop
of bishops; or, by tyrannical tyranny, does compel his colleagues to a
necessity of obedience. 168. But, when the Church began to increase, and
withal, the ambition of Bishops; for orders sake, because Rome was the head of
the Empire, to the Bishop of old Rome the first seat was given. 169. Yet
observing the Canon under written by Austines hand, the Bishop of the first
seat is not called the Prince of Priests, or high Priest, or any such like
thing; but only the Bishop of the first seat. 170. This order, and this
Oeconomicall discipline, continued in the Christian Church for six hundred
years after Christ. 171. Boniface the Third was the first that was stirred up
by Satan, out of desire of government and pride, to break down the bars of
Apostolical discipline, and with much contention played the Tyrant in the
Church, being pronounced universal Bishop by Phocas the Tyrant: But, by the
sentence of Gregory his predecessor, Antichrist was declared to the world. 172.
From him began these words of tyranny to be used in the Roman See, lest their
tyranny might not be known, So we will, So we command. 173. In the Chair of
universal pestilence scarce did he sit one full year, according to the
Proverb, Too rigid Lords never reign long. 174. From thence the fume of
Catholic pride by Satan was blown upon the Roman Chair, which has
propagated the Ecclesiastical tyranny, and increased it unmeasurably. 175.
Hence the Pope has an heavenly power. 176. The Pope has the same Consistory
with God, the same Tribunal with Christ. 177. The Pope is a certain Deity,
representing some visible God. 178. The Pope has all laws within the cabinet
of his breast. 179. The Pope is Bishop of the whole world, to whom all Bishops
and Patriarchs ought to be subject necessarily upon salvation. 180. The Pope is
an universal Prince, King of kings, and head of all within the militant
Church. 181. The Pope has all men for his subjects. 182. To the Pope every
humane creature is subject. 183. To the Pope all power is given, in heaven and
earth. 184. The Pope is made Judge over the angels. 185. From the Pope there is
no appeal, no not to God. 186. The Pope is above all Councels; he alone has
power to call, direct, confirm, disanull them. 187. The Pope conferres
jurisdiction upon all Bishops. 188. The Pope cannot submit himself to
Councels. 189. The Pope makes laws to compel the conscience. 190. The Pope
alone judges all men, but is judged of none. 191. If the Pope should send
headlong to Hell many thousands of souls, no man must say, Why do thou so?
192. The Pope can do all that God does. 193. The Pope is neither God, nor
angel, nor man, according to that Verse, O Pope, the amazement of the world,
who alone art the greatest of things, thou art neither God, nor man, but a
neuter between both. 194. Yea, the Pope is God. 195. The Pope is the cause of
causes, and Lord of lords. 196. The Pope is Gods supreme Vicar; and whosoever
speaks the contrary, is a liar. 197. We must stand to the Popes judgment,
though the whole world should think to the contrary. 198. None is equal to
the Pope, but God. 199. The Pope is the head and bridegroom of the Catholic
Church. 200. Hence we must bear, and with pious devotion endure the yoke,
which is imposed by the holy See, though it may seem intolerable. 201. But he
that makes himself a God, the Churches husband, is not he the enemy of God,
and of Christ, even the Antichrist? 202. Now, except the Serpent devour the
Serpent, it cannot become a Dragon, as it is in the Proverb. 203. So, if the
Pope had not devoured the Roman Empire, he had not been Antichrist. 204. With
the spiritual tyranny he snatched also the secular. 205. By virtue of that
feigned patrimony of Peter, or of the Church, let the Pope be one of the
Princes of Italy, by humane prescription. 206. The Pope, being clothed with the
Imperial robe, and crowned with the Emperors crown, holding the sword in his
hand, and saying, I am Caesar, is not he the Tyrant of the Empire, and Cesars
enemy? 207. Neither did any one Pope this by chance; the Papal ambition, for
these eight hundred years, has devoured the Roman Empire, and trod upon the
Emperors. 208. The Emperor should take the oath of allegiance and obedience to
the Pope. 209. The Emperor should depend on the Popes judgment, and not the
Pope on the Emperors, as is said. 210. The Emperor should bow himself to the
Pope; whilst he takes horse he must stand by as a Lackie, and must hold his
bridle and stirrup. 211. At a feast, the Emperor should hold water to the Pope
whilst he washes his hands. 212. The Emperor ought to carry the first dish to
the Popes table. 213. The Pope can excommunicate, depose, and kill the Emperor.
214. The Pope has power over all Kings and Princes, over all the Kingdoms of
the world, directly, or indirectly, and can give them to whom he will. 215.
Hence the Pope has two bodies, and two chief Pontificalities, like another
Numa Pompilius: One way he is like the Gentile Archflamine; another way like
the Roman Emperor, after the Emperor left off the profane title of Pontifex
maximus, which Gratian did first abandon, as some think. 216. Hence he is armed
with two swords, the spiritual and secular; because Boniface the Eighth said,
Behold, Luke 22.38.
here are two swords. 217. Neither did he obtain this great tyranny by force
only, at which you may wonder; but by art also, and that three ways: by
Simonie, by Cunning, and by Cursing. 218. By Simonie, he made all the Clergy
throughout the world subject to him; in selling the sacred wares of
Patriarchats, Bishoprics, Dispensations, Absolutions, Indulgences, Purgatory
fire, Humane souls; lastly, of Hell and Heaven: he drew to Rome the treasures
of Kings, Churches, and Nations; And what could not the Popes money do? 219.
By deceit, especially of three sorts, as it were with so many spells, he did so
enslave the Christian world to him, that not to obey his words, deeds, and
beck, by a blind obedience, was counted an heinous crime. 220. First, by a
forged Vicarship of Christ, and Saint Peter's seat and succession; then by the
pretense of the Roman Catholic Church, to which all, upon necessity of
salvation, must be subject: by which vizard, as by Gorgons head, they turned,
as it were into stones, Kings, and the inhabitants of the earth, both great and
small, rich and poor, free and bond, and had them at his beck. 221. To these
he added prodigies, and lying signs, and sometimes poisoned hosts, by which he
proved himself a God in the very event, according to the Apostles oracle, 2
These. 2.7, 10.
Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness. 222. He did
easily suppress, by stirring up the people, and absolving them from the oath
of allegiance to those Princes, whom he struck with the thunder of
excommunication, if they seemed to slight it. 223. By this means, Gregory the
second drove out of the Exarchat of Italy, Philip and Leo, Emperors of the
East, because they forbade Image Worship, which is condemned by Gods word. 224.
And a little after, Pope Leo (the Eastern Emperors upon the same pretense
being quite driven out of Italy) challenged to himself the Roman spoils,
invaded the whole Exarchat; neither did he ever restore it again to the
succeeding Emperors, though Image-worshippers. 2 These. 2.3, 4.
225. This then is that man of sin, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and
exalting himself above every thing that is called God. 226. This is that double
beast, having a double rising, out of the sea and earth, like an Amphibion, and
of two forms, of a double nature, in emulation of Christ; both as a secular
Monarch, and as an Ecclesiastical seducer; the Antichrist, figured in the
fourth vision of the Revelations. Rev. 17.1, 7.
227. This is that Whore, clothed with purple and scarlet, drunk with the blood
of the Saints and of the Martyrs; curbing with a bit the beast which she sits
upon; in the fifth vision of the Apocalypse. 228. This is that Babylon, great,
proud, tyrannical, Rev. 18.4.
saying in her heart, I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, nor shall I see
mourning. 229. Here we have the double tyranny of Popery, of old foretold by
the Angel to S. John; and now, after the revolution of an age, detected by the
renewing light of the Gospel. 230. Which third cause was most urgent for our
fathers to forsake, and for us to avoid Popery: And so we conclude. 231. The
tyrannical Church, Babylon, is to be deserted and avoided, according to the
voice from heaven, Rev. 18.7.
saying, Go out of her, my people, lest you be partakers of her sins, and
receive of her plagues. 232. The Pontificalitie with Roman Popery, is a
tyrannical Church, and Babylon. 233. Therefore the Pontificalitie with Popery
was to be deserted, and is to be avoided. 234. Whosoever then continues a
Papist formally (as they speak) that is, whosoever dies without repentance in
this Apostasy, and in this Idolatry, and under this tyranny of the
Pontificalitie and Popery, shall, without doubt, perish eternally. 235. In
saying of this we condemn not, nor do we teach, that their persons should be
deserted or avoided (God is our witness) but only their errors and excesses
above named, which are condemned by Gods word. 236. But rather, charity so
commanding us, we heartily pray to God for all that live in Popery; for kings
and subjects, for great and small, for the Pope himself and his whole Clergy,
that, according to his great mercy, he would open the eyes of their hearts,
and would convert such as are to be converted, and save such as will be saved,
being sealed with the seal of God in their foreheads, for Christ Jesus sake
our Lord. To whom be glory, power, and honor for ever. Amen.

The CREED of blessed Athanasius, concerning the most sacred Trinity, and the
Incarnation of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Son of God: With the Notes of D.
David Parrie.
Of the Catholic Faith, concerning the Trinity. ARTICLE I.
I. Whosoever would be saved, before all things it is needful, that he hold
the Catholic Faith, which, except every man keep whole and inviolate, he shall
doubtless perish everlastingly.

The Declaration.
1. WHosoever.] So the necessity of the Catholic faith to salvation is
everywhere declared in Scripture. Mar. 16.16. He that beleedeth, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be condemned. Where
it is manifest, that the first thing required, is the belief of the Trinity,
out of Mat. 28.19. Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God:
Therefore it is impossible to be saved. 2 These. 1.8. The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. They then that know
not God, nor obey the Gospel, they hold not in every point the Catholic faith;
therefore cannot be saved, but shall doubtless perish everlastingly.

ARTICLE II.
2. And this is the Catholic faith, 3. that we worship one God in Trinity,
and the Trinity in unity, 4. neither confounding the persons, 5. nor dividing
the essence.

The Declaration.
2. THe Catholic faith.] That is called the Catholic or universal faith, not
which is believed by all, but which is necessary to be believed to salvation by
all. For so Euphronius, Presbyter, in his exposition of this Symbol of
Athanasius, says, That is called the Catholic or universal faith, that is
the right faith, which the universal Church should hold. It is set down in two
heads chiefly in this Symbol of Athanasius: to wit, the faith of the holy
Trinity; and the faith of the Incarnation and Mediation of the Son of God.

3. That one God.] This is the first and chief mystery, by which Christian
faith is discerned from the sects of Pagans, Jews, Mahumetans, and Heretics:
For to them it is thought an absurdity, to worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in unity, that is to say, to worship and believe one God in essence,
and three in persons Father, Son, and holy Ghost: As though (forsooth) it were
less absurd in humane reason (by which they measure faith) to believe the
worlds creation of nothing, and man's of the earth; or, as the Alchoran feignes,
of a bubble of water, and the resurrection of the dead, after they are consumed
by worms, by the power of God; which notwithstanding they believe. But what we
believe and determine concerning God, must not be measured by the shallow
capacity of humane reason, from which the nature of God is most distant; but
rather according to his divine will revealed in his word. Now, these testify,
that the true and eternal God is but one in number and essence, 1 Cor. 8.4.
Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, to wit, in essence.
(For the name Jehovah in Hebrew, is from being, and properly signifies essence
or being.) He is also three in persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Hebr.
12.2.
For Christ (who is the author and finisher of our faith) being willing, that
in the New Testament all the Gentiles should by a new sacrament be consecrated
into one faith and worship of one true God, commanded all to be baptized in the
Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as it were in the name and faith of
one true God, consisting of these three hypostases, or persons: For the Father
is expressly called (...), or divine person, Heb. 1.3. Now, such as is the
Father, such is the Son, and such is the holy Ghost, Article 4. Neither are we
baptized but in the Name of the divine hypostasis, or person; the Son then is a
divine hypostasis also, and so is the holy Ghost: And these three divine
hypostases are one and the eternal God. S. John did more clearly express this
mystery of the Trinity in unity, saying, There are three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: 1 John 5.7.
and these three are one. He calls the Son, the Word, usually. Now, by these
three witnesses in Heaven, he understands either three Gods, or three divine
persons. But not three Gods; for God is one: therefore the three divine persons
are understood. And he says, that these three are one, either in essence, or
in personalitie; but not in personalitie, for so they could not be three:
therefore in essence. And for this cause he teaches, that these three are one
God in their will, and consent of witnessing.

It may be easily proved, that this mystery of the faith was not altogether
unknown to the Fathers of the Old Testament; but not so clearly manifest to
all of them, as now. And, it is no wonder, seeing the full revelation both of
this, and of other mysteries, were reserved for the ministry of the Son of God,
manifested in the flesh, John 1.18.
as the finisher of our faith, by John's testimony, No man has seen God at any
time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him.

What the enemies of the blessed Trinity, out of humane reason, or out of
Scripture, maliciously depraved, use to dispute against this doctrine, shall be
explained in the progress of our disputation.

4. Neither confounding.] As the Noetian, Sabellian, Patrispassian Heretics
did; who, as they held but one God, so they would acknowledge but one person:
sometime of the Father, sometime of the Son, sometime of the holy Ghost; using
this reason for a principle, at this day common to Jews, Mahumetans, and
Heretics, That of one individual nature, there can be but one hypostasis, or
person: which indeed is true of a finite, and created individual nature; but
of the divine, infinite, uncreated nature, it is false, as divine Oracles do
evince.

5. Nor dividing the essence.] As the Tritheits do, and have done, multiplying
the essence of God, with the divine persons, against Scripture.

ARTICLE III.
6. For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, another of the
holy Ghost: 7. But the divinity of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost is one, the
glory equal, the majesty co-eternall.

The Declaration.
6. FOr there is one.] The distinction of the persons, that one is not the
other; but the Father is one, the Son another, and the holy Ghost another, is
evidently taught in Scripture. John 5.32. There is another who bears witness
of me, and who sent me, even the Father, he it is that has testified of me.
John 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name. John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter. But how the persons are distinguished, it follows in the
eighth Article.

7. But of the Father, and of the Son.] Here the consubstantialitie and
co-equalitie of the divine persons, is asserted against Arians, and Photinians,
according to Scripture. John 10.30. I and my Father are one, to wit, in the
divine essence; and therefore in strength and power: but in respect of the
humane nature, the Father and Son are not one. John 5.7. And these three are
one, to wit, in respect of the divinity; and therefore in the unity of will
and testimony. So we are baptized, not in the names of three, but in the name
as of one true God. John 5.18. and Joh. 10.33. The Jews understood that Christ
made himself equal with God; but he did not equal himself with God in his
humane nature; (for, so they might truly have said, that he had blasphemed:)
but in the glory of his divinity, and divine operations. John 16.15. All
things that the Father has, are mine: therefore that one and co-eternall
majesty of the divinity, which the Father has, is also the Sons, and likewise
the holy Ghosts: For, the Father and Son neither are, nor were from eternity,
without the holy Ghost: therefore of the three there is one divinity, an
equal glory, and co-eternall majesty.

ARTICLE IV.
8. Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the holy Ghost: the
Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the holy Ghost uncreate: the Father
immense, the Son immense, and the holy Ghost immense: the Father eternal, the
Son eternal, and the holy Ghost eternal. 9. And yet not three eternalls, but
one eternal: as there are not three uncreated, nor three incomprehensible; but
one uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

The Declaration.
8. SUch as the Father.] Here is declared the co-equalitie and
consubstantialitie of the divine persons, by the identitie of Gods essential
attributes; because, as the Father, so the Son, and holy Ghost is uncreated,
immense, eternal. Of the Father no man doubts. The Son is also uncreated;
because he was in the beginning of the creation; and he was God, and all
things were made by him, John 1.1, 3.
and nothing was made without him which was made. He is also immense; Hebr. 1.2.
because he makes his abode with the Father, and dwells in the hearts of all
the faithful, John 14.23. Ephesians. 3.17. And, He is with us always, even to the
end of the world. Likewise eternal; Mat. 28.20.
because before the foundation of the mountains were laid, before the hills he
was borne, Prove. 8.25. John 1.1. And, he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
ending, the first and the last. Revel. 1.8. and 21.6. and 22.13. The holy Ghost
likewise is uncreated; because, in the beginning of the creation, as the
Creator, he moved upon the superficies of the waters, Genesis 1.2. He adorned, or
made the heavens. Job 36.13. He made, and he put life in Job, Job 33.4. etc. He
is also immense; because he dwells in us, Romans 8.9. 1 Corinthians. 3.16. 2 Timothy
1.14. Hence Didymus says well, Didym. lib. 1. de Spiritu sancto.
If the holy Ghost were one of the creatures, he should have a substance
circumscribed, as all things that are made, although they are not
circumscribed: For, seeing the holy Ghost is in many, he has not a
circumscribed substance. Likewise eternal, because he was in the beginning of
things, Genesis 1.2. and because God was never without his Spirit.

9. And yet not three.] As the divine Essence is not multiplied with the
persons, because there is one common to three; so the right faith forbids us to
multiply Gods essential attributes with the persons, because they are one and
the same common to three. As the Catholic faith then forbids us to believe
with the Tritheits, three Gods, but worshippeth one God in Trinity: so it
forbids us to say three uncreated, three immense, three eternal; but one
uncreated, one immense, and one eternal it professes to be in the Trinity.

ARTICLE V.
10. Likewise, the Father is almighty, the Son almighty, and the holy Ghost
almighty; 11. And yet there are not three Almighties, but one Almighty: even
so, the Father is God, the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God; and yet not
three Gods, but one God. So the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the holy
Ghost Lord; and yet not three Lords, but one Lord.

The Declaration.
10 LIkewise almighty.] Here is further declared the coequality and
consubstantiality of the divine persons, out of the unity of the divine
attributes, and of the divinity it self; because, as the Father, so the Son,
and so the holy Ghost is Almighty, and God, and Lord. Of the Father no man
doubts. The Son is also omnipotent; because, whatsoever the Father has, the
Son has also, and therefore omnipotency, Joh. 16.15. And he is called expressly
God almighty. Rev. 1.8. and 4.8. He is also God, and the true God, 1 John 5.20.
God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. Where the Name of God does surely signify the
Divine subsistence, and not the attribute only of that subsistence: against
two most impudent sayings of Socinus, That the simple Name of God, when it is
given to Christ, does no where signify his subsistence: and that it is no
where found in the Scripture, where the Name of God, being the subject, is
necessarily referred to Christ. The first of these is refelled by diverse places
of Scripture, especially these, Romans 9.5. Of whom Christ is after the flesh,
who is above all, God blessed for ever. 1 John 5.20. We are in that true one,
in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God, and life eternal. The latter is
false, both by these and other places, Acts 20.28. God has purchased the
Church by his own blood. 1 Timothy 3.16. God was made manifest in the flesh. He
is also Lord. Luke 2.11. To you is borne this day a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord. The holy Ghost is also omnipotent, Because all graces and divine
operations one and the same Spirit does work, distributing them apart to every
one as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

Likewise, he is that God and Lord, who spoke of old by the Prophet Isaiah,
Acts 28.25. And by the mouth of David, Acts 1.25. In whose Name we are
baptized, Mat. 28.19. And, who is a witness in heaven with the Father and
Son, 1 John 5.7. The Heretics cavil, that they find it not literally
written, that the holy Ghost is God: which is too frivolous a subterfuge. Where
is it literally written, the Father is God, the Son is God? What faithful man
will require so many letters written, when the thing it self is written? Is it
not plainly written, 1 John 5.7. The holy Spirit bears record in heaven? And
presently after, The witness of God is greater? Acts 5.3. Thou have lied to
the holy Ghost? Then by and by, Thou have lied to God? 1 Cor. 3.36. You are the
temple of God, and the holy Spirit dwells in you? And shortly after, c. 6.19.
You are the temple of the holy Ghost? He is also Lord; because we are as well
baptized in the Name of the holy Ghost, (that is, into his worship, service,
and obedience) as in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, Mat. 28.19. and
the Apostles call upon God, who spoke by the mouth of David, Why did the
Gentiles rage? that is, they call upon the holy Ghost thus; Lord, thou art that
God, who made the heaven and earth, seas, and all things in them, Acts 4.24.

11. And yet not three.] See Numb. 8.

12. And yet not three.] But one Lord; to wit, Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. Is not
then the Father Lord, nor the holy Ghost Lord? The Catholic faith does thus
reconcile this, that only the Father is Lord, the Son and holy Ghost by the
dominion of the deity common to the three Persons, which consists in the
creation and government of all things: and from which dominion the Apostle, 1
Cor. 8.6. excludes not the Father and holy Ghost, but false gods and all
creatures: But Jesus Christ is the one and only Lord by the dominion of
mediation, which is not common to the three Persons, but proper to Christ,
which consists in the Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly office of the
Mediator, and from which the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.6. excludes not so much the
Father and holy Ghost, as the fictitious mediators of Pagans, Jews, and
Antichristians.

ARTICLE VI.
13. For, as we are compelled by the Christian verity to confess severally
each person to be God and Lord, so we are forbid by the Catholic faith to say,
there be three Gods, or three Lords.

The Declaration.
13. FOr as.] This Article gives a reason of the Antithesis of the fourth and
fifth Article; which reason was declared before out of Scripture, in which
alone the Christian truth, and Catholic religion is grounded, both in respect
of the equality of each person, as also in regard of the consubstantialitie of
the same in the Trinity: therefore the Christian verity compells us to
confess, each person to be God and Lord, because the Scriptures, which affirm
the same, cannot fail, as it was Number 9. And the Catholic faith forbids us
to say, there are three Gods or Lords; because the Scriptures which affirm one
God and one Lord, cannot fail, as is said Numb. 3. and 11.

ARTICLE VII.
14. The Father 15. is made of none, 16. nor created, 17. nor begotten; 18. the
Son is from the Father alone, 19. not made, 20. nor created, 21. but
begotten: the holy Ghost 22. is from the Father and the Son, 23. neither made,
nor created, 24. nor begotten, 25. but proceeding. There is then one Father*
not three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons; one holy Ghost, not three holy
Ghosts.

The Declaration.
14. FAther.] This Article declares the third, concerning the distinction of
the persons, which consists in a distinct manner of existing, proper for each
person.

15. Of none.] The Greek is (...). that is, made of, or from none, having no
off spring or original from any other, because he is from himself.

16. Nor created.] The Greek is (...), neither made of any; for, (neither
created) otherwise he should be the creature of another.

17. Nor begotten.] So it is in the Greek: hence the Greek Divines call the
Father (...), unbegotten; for, if he were begotten, he should be the Son, not
the Father: And this is the manner of existing, by which the Father is
distinguished from the Son, and holy Ghost, because he is of none but of
himself.

18. The Son from the Father.] Not also from the holy Ghost; for, as the Father
only has the Son, so the Son is only from the Father: therefore he is not
the Son of Abraham, David, and Mary, but according to the flesh.

19. Not made.] When the Apostle says, He was made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. that
is understood according to the flesh, not according to the divinity.

20. Nor created.] As Arius blasphemed, that the Son was first created; abusing
a corrupted place in the Apochrypha, Syrac. 24.14. and depraving other
Scriptures, which call Christ the beginning of the creature of God; to wit, not
a passive, but an active beginning. Col. 1.5.18. Rev. 3.4.

21. But begotten.] In the Greek it is, begotten of the Father, and that alone;
therefore he is the only begotten of the Father, John 1.14. and that Wisdom
that was begot, before the mountains were made, Prove. 8.25. that is, from
eternity. This eternal generation of the Son from the Father, is the ineffable
communication of the divine Essence, by which alone the second person of the
divinity from the first alone, as a son from the father, receives the same
essence, whole and entire which the father has: and this is the way of
existing by which the Son is distinguished from the Father and the holy Ghost,
because he is only begotten of the Father.

22. From the Father.] So it is in the Greek, from the Father, as John 15.26.
(...), etc. Who proceeds from the Father; but Athanasius says not, from the
Father alone, as he spoke of the Son, (...), of the Father alone: which
exclusive particle, when the later Grecians, against the mind of the Apostles,
and of Athanasius, at length added; the Latin Church, to fill up the
Scriptures meaning, said, [From the Father, and the Son.]

23. Not made.] This is against the Macedonians, who feigned the holy Ghost to
be a creature, created motions, and created spiritual gifts.

24. Nor begotten.] Because, so he were the Son; for, to be begotten, is to be
the Son.

25. But proceeding.] So it is in the Greek, as it is said, John 15.46. for,
this procession or emanation is the ineffable communication of the divine
Essence, by which alone the third person of the divinity from the Father and
the Son, as a Spirit from him whose Spirit he is, receives the same entire
essence which the Father and Son have. Concerning the manner of this procession
and generation, to those that curiously enquire, that of Damascen should be
answered, (...) etc. Dam. l. 4. Orth. Fid. c. 10.
That there is a difference between generation and procession we have learned,
but which is the manner or way of this difference we know not. And that of
Ambrose. Licet scire, etc. We may know that the Son is begot, (and so that the
holy Ghost proceeds) but we may not know how he is begot, and how he proceeds.
And this is the way of existing, that he proceeds from the Father and the Son:
for, he is the Spirit of the Son, no less then of the Father, Romans 8.9. Gal.
4.6. and he is sent from both, John 15.26. he proceeds then from both.

ARTICLE VIII.
And in this Trinity 26. none is before or after other, 27. none lesser or
greater then other; 28. but all the three persons are co-eternall among
themselves, and co-equall: so that in all things, as is said, the unity in
trinity, and trinity in unity is to be worshipped: 29. He then that will be
saved, must thus think of the Trinity.

The Declaration.
26. NOne before.] To wit, in nature and time; though in order of existence the
Father be the first, the Son the second, and the holy Ghost the third person.

27. None greater.] Because God admits no quantity: but when Christ says, he
is lesser then the Father, John 14.28. he says this, not in respect of his
divinity, but only in regard of his mediation and humanity; otherwise, that
could not be true, when he says, I and my Father are one. All that the Father
has are mine.

28. But all.] The co-eternity then, and co-equality, and the co-essentiality
also of the Trinity, is altogether to be worshipped.

29. He then that will.] He therefore hates his own salvation, who believes
not the holy Trinity: for, Whosoever denies the Son, has not the Father, 1
John 2.23. And, Who has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9.
For no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3.

The Catholic Faith, concerning the Incarnation of the Son of GOD, our Lord
JESUS CHRIST; According to the Creed of ATHANASIUS, briefly declared and
asserted.
ARTICLE I. Of the Creed the ninth.
But 1. it is necessary unto eternal salvation, that whosoever will be saved,
2. he believe rightly the 3. Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Declaration.
1. But it is necessary.] This necessity is every where delivered in Scripture:
John 3.36. He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.
Joh. 6.14. This is the will of him that sent me, that all that see the Son, and
believe in him, may have life eternal. John 17.3. This is life eternal, to
know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. 1 John 4.3.
And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
not of God. Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is
none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. Acts
10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that whosoever believes in his
Name, shall receive remission of sins by his Name. By faith then in the Son of
God made man, it behooveth all to be saved, and without this faith no man can
be saved.

2. Incarnation also.] In Greek (...), his inhumanation, (...), his
incorporation; of the causes, truth, and manner of which, Athanasius lest a
famous Book entitled, The inhumanation of the Word of God; other Greeks
commonly call this, The Incarnation: which word is made out of the sayings of
Scripture, in which the Incarnation of the Son of God is chiefly grounded, John
1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. 1 Timothy 3.16. God was
manifested in the flesh. Heb. 2.14. Because children are partakers of flesh and
blood, the Son of God himself was made partaker of the same; and ver. 16. He
took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the flesh, is of
God. To this purpose are the Angels words to the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the virtue of the most High shall
over-shadow thee; therefore that holy thing that shall be borne of thee, shall
be called the Son of God. And that of the Apostle, Gal. 4.4. God sent his Son,
made of a woman: out of which is understood, that this Incarnation is the
miraculous assumption of humane flesh or nature, by the operation of the holy
Ghost in the Virgins womb, being performed by the Son of God, into the unity of
his personality.

3. Believe faithfully.] In the Greek it is firmly; (...).
in the last Article it is faithfully and firmly; of which, the first respects
the sincerity of this faith, purified from error, denial and heresy
whatsoever, concerning this mystery: the latter requires an assurance and
confidence of salvation in the Son of God incarnate, (...).
being opposite to doubt and conjecturall opinion.

ARTICLE II. Of the Creed the X.
This then 4. is the right Faith, 5. that we believe and confess, that 6. our
Lord Jesus Christ, 7. the Son of God, is 8. God and man.

The Declaration.
4. RIght faith.] The right faith concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God,
is briefly set out in two heads: The first is of the very mystery of the
Incarnation, or of the person of the Son of God incarnate. The later is
concerning his office, or the mystery of our redemption, which was performed,
and to be performed by him in the flesh. It is equally necessary to salvation
to believe both; and the first for the later. The faith of which, except it be
held entire and untainted, as the Gospel declares it, to believe Christ to be
God and man (which the devils also believe, and tremble) will help nothing to
salvation.

5. That we may believe.] We must believe and confess, because with the heart
we believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth we confess to salvation.

6. Our Lord.] So the Angel calls him the same day he was borne, Luke 2.11.
There is borne to us this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: And the New
Testament in very many places, chiefly 1 Cor. 8.6. We have one Lord, Jesus
Christ. And he will be so called of us; John 13.13. You call me Lord, and you
say well: for so I am. Hence, in the Creed, we believe in Jesus Christ our
Lord. The Septuagint everywhere express the word (...), Lord, by Gods proper
name (...), which is worth the observing; because it affords an ample argument
of the true Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ: For, if (...), be the same that
Jehovah, surely (...), our Lord, is God Jehovah. The Son of God then is our
Lord by a twofold dominion; one of his Deity, common to him, with the Father
and holy Ghost, which is his absolute power over all things: the other is of
mediation, proper to himself; by which, as he is the Mediator between God and
men, he alone is at the right hand of God, appointed head of the Church over
all things, Ephesians. 1.22.

7. He is the Son of God.] Not a son by the grace of creation, as the Angels
are Gods Sons, Job 1.6. nor a son by the grace of adoption, as those that are
predestinate, are adopted to be sons by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. but the
proper Son of God, Romans 8.32. The only begotten of the Father, John 1.14.
Begotten before all created things, from eternity, Prove. 8.23, 25. Whose going
forth from the beginning, from the days of eternity, Mich. 5.4. By whom all
things were made, and without whom nothing was made that was made, John 1.3.

8. God and man.] Not God alone; for so he were not truly Christ, that is,
anointed: for, God alone is the anointer, not the anointed: Nor man alone; for
so he were not truly Jesus, that is, a Savior: for, man alone is not the
Savior, but the saved; but God and man, one and the same Son, consisting of
two natures, the divine and the humane, in the unity of the hypostasis.

Furthermore, why the Son of God, the second person of the blessed Trinity,
rather then any of the other persons, to wit, the Father, or the holy Ghost,
united humane flesh to himself, although that humane reason should stand
amazed, Christian faith should humbly adore, and not search this mystery; some
reasons, notwithstanding, are unfolded by Divines, not improbable; to wit, that
it was fit, that he, who was the Son of God, begotten of the Father before the
world, should likewise be the Son of man, borne in time, of the substance of
his mother: First, lest by the Incarnation, the denomination of the divine
persons should be changed, or a confusion introduced; which had happened, if
either the Father, or the holy Ghost, or all together, by the dispensation of
the flesh, had challenged to themselves the name of Son. Secondly, the benefit
of the Incarnation was by God ordained, and bestowed upon men, for this end,
that we might become the sons of God: for it was meet, that we should be made
Gods adopted sons by him, who is Gods natural Son. Thirdly, it was most
convenient, that he, who had obtained a middle place among the creatures,
should be repaired by the middle person of the Trinity, that there might be a
decent correspondencie between the middle and middle. Now, man has a middle
place among the creatures, having obtained to be under the spiritual, and
above the corporeal creatures; it was then fit, that man should be repaired by
the middle person of the Trinity. Lastly, there is nothing more decent, than
that decayed nature should be restored by him, by whom it was created; because
all things were made by him, John 1.3. therefore man was to be repaired and
restored to his former dignity by the Son of God.

ARTICLE III. Of the Creed the XI.
9. He is God, 10. of the substance of his Father, 11. begotten before the
world: and man 12. of the substance of his mother. 13. Borne in the world. 14.
Perfect God. 15. Perfect man, of a reasonable soul and humane flesh
subsisting. 16. Equal to the Father, according to his Divinity: 17. inferior
to the Father, according to his humanity.

The Declaration.
9. He is God.] It is as evident, that the proper and only begotten Son of
God, is God; as the proper and only begotten son of man, is man: which the
Scripture in innumerable places confirms.

10. Of the substance of his Father.] This also the Scripture confirms, as
often as it witnesses the Son of God to be begotten, and the only begotten of
the Father. For, when an intelligent nature is said to beget, it is properly to
bring forth an issue out of its own substance, that is, the begetter to that
which is begot, the father to the son communicates his own substance.

11. Begotten before the world.] Wisdom, which is the Son of God, Prove. 8.22,
23, 25, 30.
three or four times plainly restifieth, that she was begot before time, and
before the world was made. And this, among sensible or rational men, (not to
speak of godly men) ought not to be doubted. For, how could God be a Father
before the world, if he begot not his Son before the world? The Church
confesses, that the manner of this generation is ineffable. Rufinus in his
Exposition of the Creed (which is commonly attributed to Cyprian) says thus,
(...).
I will not have thee discuss how God the Father begot his Son, neither search
too curiously into the depth of this mystery, lest perhaps, whilst thou art
making too strict a scrutiny, to find out the splendour of this inaccessible
light, thou forfeit that small and weak sight, which, by divine bounty is
bestowed upon men. Know, that the mystery of this divine generation is as far
different and eminent above all things that are in us, as the Creator is more
potent then the creature, and the Artificer more excellent then his work, etc.
When thou hear of this Son, I would not have thee think of a carnal
nativity; but remember, that these things are spoken of the simple nature of an
incorporeall substance. For, if in that word, which the heart; or in that
meaning, which the mind; or in that brightnesses which the light begets of it
self; if, I say, there is no weakness in that generation: how much purer must
our thoughts be of him, who is the Creator of all these? By this manner then
of subsisting proper to himself, is the Son of God distinguished in the holy
Trinity, from the Father and holy Ghost, because he alone is begotten of the
Father before the world: and therefore he only assumed man's flesh, and was
borne of the Virgin in time.

12. Of the substance of his mother.] As the Angel said to the Virgin Mary,
Luke 1.35. That holy thing which shall be borne of thee, that is, of thy
substance and womb, shall be called the Son of God. For, the Son of God should
have been the son of David, according to the promise, 1 Chronicles. 22.10. Hebr.
1.5. Math. 1.1. Of the seed of David, according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. Hence
he is called the fruit of Mary's womb, Luke 1.42. But the fruit is begot of
the substance of the tree; which is flat against the madness of Valentinus,
affirming, that Christ was sent by the Father, and brought with him an heavenly
body, and that he assumed nothing of the Virgin Mary; but that he past
through her, as through a channel or pipe, without taking any flesh of her,
August. de haeres. 10.

13. In the world.] That is, in time, or in the fullness of time, to wit,
prefixed by God, Gala^. 4.4. which was in the 42. year of Augustus his reign,
and in the year of the world 3928. according to Beroaldus his best account.

14. Perfect God.] In Greek, perfect God is the same that 1 John 5.20. the true
God: for, there is but that one and eternal God by nature, (...) who calls
himself, Genesis 17.1.
the God of sufficiency or perfection. He is not then God equivocally, in
respect of the excellency of his gifts and office, as Angels, Psalm. 97.7. Or,
as Princes, Psalm. 82.6. as Samosatenus and Photinus of old blasphemed; and of
late, the Servetians and Socinians, affirming Christ to have taken his
beginning from Mary, and not to have had any being before her. Neither a
factitious or created God before all things of non-entities, as Arius madly
said. For no creature can attain to the perfection of the Creator, whereas
every creature proceeds from non-entitie to entitie; but not to be, is
absolutely repugnant to God, and to his perfection.

15. Perfect man.] A true and entire man, consisting of a reasonable soul, and
a humane body; which is contrary to the heresy of Marcion and Manichoeus,
affirming, that Christ came in the later times to deliver souls, not bodies;
and that he was not truly in the flesh, but only to delude humane senses, he
made show of humane flesh. This is also against the error of Apollinaris the
Syrian, affirming the Son of God to have assumed the flesh without the soul,
and that the Word was in stead of the soul in him, August. de haeres. 46.55.
Christ himself did pithily refute both these: the former, when, rising from
the dead, he showed himself to his disciples, who, being affrighted with his
sight, supposed they had seen a spirit; to whom Christ faith, Why are you
troubled? See my hands and feet: for I am the same. Touch me and see; for a
spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have, Luke 24.39. But the later
he refells, when, in the garden, in his fear and agony, he cried out, My
soul is heavy unto death, Matthew. 26.38. Now, the Word could not either be
troubled with passions of the mind, or with the fear of death; because the
nature of man, being assumed into the hypostasis, does not subsist by it self,
but in the person of the Word, which is so far from diminishing man's
perfection, that it rather perfects it. As for man's person, to be, or to
subsist, it is the perfection of a mere man, which, indeed, should make Christ
to be merely man: But to subsist in the person of the Word of God, is the
perfection of him that is both God and man; or of man assumed into the Godhead,
as Athanasius speaks in the following Article.

16. Equal to the Father.] That Christ was the Son of God, and God, the
forenamed Heretics of old did not, and the modern do not deny; but they did,
as they do at this day, trifle with an equivocation, affirming a factitious
god, in respect of gifts and divine operations; or a God created before all
things, but lesser and inferior to the Father: which is directly against the
assertors of the Christian faith, amongst whom Athanasius was not the meanest:
who, by evident testimonies out of Scripture, and arguments, did demonstrate,
that the Son of God was God, equal and consubstantiall with the Father. Here
let a few serve: We are inaugurated by baptism equally in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as in the name of one true God. The Jews
themselves did acknowledge Christ, when he said, John 5.17. My Father works
hitherto, and I work, that he called God his own Father, and that he made
himself equal with God; which Christ was so far from denying or reproving,
that through the whole Chapter he confirms it by notable documents, taken from
the equality and identity, both of his own and Fathers works and operations,
power and authority, honor and worship: Whatsoever (says he) the Father
does, the Son does the same also. For, as the Father raises the dead, and
quickneth them; so does the Son quicken those whom he will, etc. The Father
has committed all judgment to the Son, that all may honor the Son, as they
honor the Father. As the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the
Son to have life in himself, etc. There needs no more: Christ's own witness
alone of himself is sufficient to confirm our faith, and to overthrow
heresies; John 8.14.
For if (says he) I testify of my self, my testimony is true: but he
testifies of himself, that God is his proper Father, and that he is equal
with God the Father; therefore his testimony of himself is true. Hence the
malicious stupiditie of Heretics, derogating authority from his testimony, is
more to be detested, then that of the Jews.

According to his divinity.] Not according to his humanity; otherwise he were
not true man: therefore the doctrine of Schwenckfeldius if false, which equals
Christ's humanity in all things to God; or, which makes Christ's humanity equal
to God.

17. Lesser then the Father.] And this Christ witnesses of himself, saying,
My Father is greater then I, John 14.28. to wit, by reason of my Incarnation,
as man, I am lesser then the Father. Which, because Arius drew this to the
inequality of the divinity, he brought in the heresy of the Anomaei, Cyril.
l. 2. these. c. 3. So far is the Son equal to the Father, in that he is by
nature God; but in that he was made man, and as a man was crucified and died,
he is less then the Father. The definition of Chalcedon afterward against
Eutyches thus declares it, Consubstantiall to the Father, according to the
divinity; consubstantiall to us, according to the humanity. In all things like
to us, except the filth of sin, Hebr. 2.17. and 4.15.

ARTICLE IV. Of the Creed the XII.
18. Who, though he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ. 19. One,
not by converting of the divinity into flesh, 20. but by assuming of the
humanity into God. 21. One altogether, not by conversion of the substance, 22.
but by unity of the person. 23. For, as the reasonable soul and flesh are one
man, so God and man is one Christ.

The Declaration.
18. WHo, though God.] Hitherto of the truth of the two natures of the Son of
God incarnate: now, of their union; or of the personal unity. The Article in
the beginning has a Prolepsis or anticipation: whereas God and man are two
diverse subsistances; therefore, if Christ be God and man, he will not be one,
but two. Yet one Christ, God and man, not two; (...).
because of the union of the natures. God, indeed, and man are different
subsistences, without the personal union; but Christ is God and man in the
personal unity. Upon this part of the Article pitcheth that heresy, which,
about an hundred years after Athanasius, Nestorius, the Patriarch of
Constantinople, brought into the Church; but was condemned by the Council of
Ephesus.

19. One, not by conversion.] The reason of the unity consists not in the
conversion of the divinity into flesh, which heresy was devised two hundred
years after Athanasius, by Eutyches a Monk of Constantinople, who expounded
the words of John, The word was made flesh, of the conversion of the word into
flesh: As the water is said to be made wine, that is, converted into wine, John
2.8. affirming, that after the incarnation, not two natures did remain, but
one only; to wit, the flesh made of the Word. But not without cause he was
suppressed by the authority of the Council of Chalcedon: For, how can the
divinity be turned into flesh? or an uncreated nature, void of mutation, be
converted into a creature? By this means, Christ should neither be God nor man
truly; because he must lose both the Divinity and the humanity together.

20. But by assuming the humanity into God.] In the Greek, into the Deity; yet
not absolutely, but into one of the persons of the Deity, or of the Word. For
this alone, not the Father, not holy Ghost, assumed humane flesh into the
unity of the hypostasis. See the 8. and 1. Note. Of this assumption the
Apostle thus, Hebr. 2.14. He was made partaker of flesh and blood. And ver. 16.
He took not on him the nature of Angels: but he took on him the seed of
Abraham; that is, he united it to himself personally, as the Schools speak,
that there might be one hypostasis of the Word and flesh. The true reason or
manner then of the unity of Christ's person, is not the conversion of the Word
into flesh, but the hypostaticall union of the Word with flesh.

21. Not by confusion of the substance.] That is, not by commixtion of the
nature and natural properties of them both, into some third thing, such as is
the confusion of water and honey in Metheglin, which was the heresy afterward
of the Monophysits sprung out of Eutyches his follies, against which Damascen
disputes at large, lib. 3. orthod. fidei. c. 3.

22. But by unity of the person.] To wit, of God-man, or the Word incarnate:
the natures of the Word and flesh, and their essential properties remaining
distinct and safe; as, after Athanasius, the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 20.
has more fully explained, in these words, We all acknowledge our Lord Jesus
Christ in two natures inconfusedly, immutably, indivisibly, inseparably; the
diversity of the two natures being no ways made void, by reason of the union:
rather the propriety of each nature, agreeing in one person, is preserved; so
that he is not divided or severed into two natures, but Jesus Christ is one,
and the same only begotten Son, God the Word.

23. For as the reasonable soul.] The manner of the union of the Word and
flesh is illustrated by a Similie, which, before Athanasius, Justin Martyr, a
very ancient Writer, in his Exposition of the Faith, did make use of, whose
words we thought good to set down that we may understand how much they agree:
Let no man (says he) enquire of me the manner of this union; for I am not
ashamed to confess my ignorance: yet I will rather glory, that I believe those
hidden mysteries, with which I was initiated, which are not perceptible to
reason and understanding. Some there are, who understand this union, as they
do that of the soul and body, and so they teach. And the example agrees, if
not in all, yet in parts: For, as man, being one, has two different natures;
and with one part he consulteth, and with the other he puts his counsel in
execution; with his mind he decrees to build a ship, with his hands he puts in
practice the work which he decreed: So one Son, being of two natures; according
to the one he works miracles, according to the other, he takes upon him all
sort of humility: For, as he is of the Father, and God, he works miracles; as
he is of the Virgin, and man, of his own accord he did naturally undergo the
cross and passion, and such like. Hitherto if one compare, the similitude does
well agree; on the other side, if he compare the whole with the whole, he takes
away the difference: For, though man consist of body and soul, yet he is not
the same with these, but some other thing; as he is man, he consists in the
union of body and soul, and so existeth some other third thing: But Christ is
not made of the Deity and humanity, when he is not different from these two,
but both, God and man. Again, the soul is always affected with the body,
which no Orthodox man, that is well in his wits, dare say or think of Christ's
divinity: therefore this example of man is partly to be received, partly to be
avoided.

By which words we understand, that the similitude consists in two things, and
in so many is discrepant. It agrees first, that as the reasonable soul is
coupled with man's body into one person of man; so God the Word, with the nature
of man, is coupled in the one person of God and man, and that by an unspeakable
way. Again, as the union of the soul with the body is made, the essential
properties of both natures remaining entire; for, the soul remains in the
union invisible, spiritual, immortal, rational, impartible; but the body is
visible, tangible, mortal, void of reason, and partable. The union also is
made without transfusion of the essential properties of the one nature into
the other: The soul is not made visible corporeal, mortal, irrational,
partible, for being united to the body: The body is not made invisible,
spiritual, immortal, rational, impartible, because united to the soul. The
union notwithstanding is made with the communion of the essential properties
of body and soul, really transient into the person of man, in respect of each
nature: As man really becomes immortal, rational, according to his soul; so
he becomes mortal, and void of reason, according to his body. So the union of
God the Word was made, the properties of both natures remaining entire. God the
Word remained in this union eternal, uncreated, most simple, infinite,
omnipresent, omnipotent, omniscient, impassible, immortal, etc. The flesh in
time was created, compounded, finite, in respect of place, power, knowledge,
passible, mortal, etc. The union also was made without transfusion of the
essential properties of God the Word into the flesh, or of the flesh into God
the Word. The Word was not made temporary, was not created, nor compounded, nor
finite in place, power, and knowledge, nor passible, or mortal, by the union
with the flesh: So the flesh was not made eternal, uncreated, uncompounded,
infinite, omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, impassible, immortal, by the
union with the Word; yet the union was made with the communion of the
essential properties of the Word and flesh, really transient into the person
of Christ, God and man, or the Word incarnate, in respect of each nature (which
Damascen calls the manner of alternation, lib. 3. orthod fid. cap. 4.) As
Christ-God becomes man really in time, (...).
created and borne, compounded, finite in place, power, and knowledge, and was
passible, mortal, suffered, died, according to the nature assumed; so
Christ-man is really God, eternal, uncreated, most simple, finite, omnipotent,
omnipresent, omniscient, according to the divinity assuming.

But the similitude agrees not in this: First, that in man, by reason of the
union of the reasonable soul and body, some third thing, specifically
different, is made up, to wit, man, as of matter and form, neither of which is
man. It Is not so in Christ; because the Word, assuming the flesh, both before
and after the incarnation, was God and the same person, heretofore without
flesh, afterward clothed with it. Secondly, the soul of man receives into it
the passions of the body, with which it grieveth and rejoices; but God the
Word is void of all affection and passion.

ARTICLE V. Of the Creed the XIII.
24. Who suffered for our salvation. 25. Went down to Hell. 26. The third day
rose again from the dead. 27. Ascended into Heaven. 28. He sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty. 29. From thence he shall come to judge
the quick and dead.

The Declaration.
24. WHo suffered.] Hitherto of the mystery of the Incarnation; follows the
office of the Son of God incarnate: the words are almost a succinct repetition
of the Apostles Creed. Now, these are the things, for which we believe the Son
of God to be incarnate, and without the assurance of which, in vain we should
believe the incarnation of the Son of God. For, because the Son of God became
our surety in the judgment of God, he ought in our flesh to have suffered for
us an accursed death, that he might satisfy for us the curse of the Law, and
restore to us by his death life and righteousness, which were lost: he suffered
therefore the death of the Cross, to recover our salvation, Romans 4.25. Phil.
2.8. Heb. 2.14 etc.

25. He descended into Hell.] That he might free us from the terrors of Hell;
but not by a corporeal descending, or in his soul, after death, into the
place of Hell. For the Scripture is clearly against such a descending, Luke
23.43, 53. but in a spiritual wrestlings with the sorrows of Hell ( which the
Scripture usually calls a descending into Hell, 1 Samuel 2.6. Psalm. 16.18. and
116.3.) before his death in the garden, and on the Cross, Mat. 26.38. Luke
22.44. Mat. 23.46.

26. The third day he rose again.] For our justification, Romans 4.25. This
Article is the ground of Christian hope and comfort: For, if Christ be not
raised from the dead, our preaching is in vain, our faith is in vain, and we
are yet in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.17.

27. He ascended into Heaven.] He is always with us by his divinity; but if he
had not corporally departed from us, we had still seen his body carnally, and
should never believe spiritually; by which faith we are justified, August.
sermon. 60. de verbo Domini.

28. He sits at the right hand, etc.] According to the promise, Psalm. 110.1.
Sit at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool; which the
Apostle interprets, 1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign, till he has put all his
enemies under his feet. And, Ephesians. 1.2. He has placed him above all dominion
and power, etc. and has put all things under his feet, and has made him head
over all, to his Church: Therefore the g^ory of Christ's sitting at his Fathers
right hand, is the Kingdom of the Mediator exalted in his own flesh, and not
the diffusion of the flesh, or ubiquity, which is repugnant to that which
follows.

29. From thence he shall come to judge.] Phil. 3.20. 2 Timothy 4.1. He is to
judge the quick and the dead at his glorious coming in his Kingdom, August.
Epist. 57. ad Dardan. Doubt not therefore that now the man Christ Jesus is
there, from whence he is to come. Call to mind, and hold fast the Christian
confession; because he is risen from the dead, has ascended into heaven,
sits at the right hand of the Father, and from no other place but from
thence will he come to judge the quick and the dead: and he will so come, as
the Angels witnessed, after the same manner that he was seen to go into
heaven; that is, in the same form and substance of flesh, to which he has
given immortality; but has not taken away its nature. According to this form,
he must not be thought to be diffused everywhere: for we must take heed, that
by asserting the divinity of man, we take not away the verity of his body, etc.

ARTICLE VI. Of the Creed the XIV.
30. At whose coming all men shall rise, 31. with their bodies, 32. and shall
give an account of their own deeds. 33. And who have done good, shall go into
life eternal; but who have done evil, into everlasting fire.

The Declaration.
30. AT whose coming.] So it is taught, 1 These. 4.16. With the voice of the
Archangell, and the Trumpet of God, he shall come down from heaven: and they
that are dead in Christ, shall rise first. 1 Cor. 15.52. In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet, the dead shall be raised
incorruptible.

31. With their bodies.] For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53.

32. And they shall render.] So it is written, Matthew. 12.36. I tell you,
whatsoever idle word men shall speak, they shall render an account of it, in
the day of Judgment. For, we must all of us appear before the Tribunal of
Christ; that every man may receive what he has done in his body, whether it
be good or evil, 2 Cor. 6.10. The dead were judged of these things which were
written in the Books, according to their works, Rev. 20.12.

33. And who have done good.] As Daniel prophesied, chap. 12.2. And many of
them which sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake; some to life eternal,
and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And Christ, John 5.28. The hour
shall come, when all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and come
forth: Who have done good, unto the resurrection of life; but who have done
evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.

ARTICLE VII. Of the Creed the XV.
This is the Catholic faith, 34. which except every one do faithfully and
firmly believe, he cannot be saved.

The Declaration.
34. WHich except.] See the 1. Art. Number. 1. Of the holy Trinity, and above,
Art. 1. Number. 3.

Of the Incarnation of the Word.
The Creed of the Fathers of Antioch, against PAULUS SAMOSATENUS: Out of the
Acts of the first Council of Ephesus.

WE confess that our Lord Jesus Christ was begotten of the Father before all
worlds, but in the last times by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, according
to the flesh, subsisting only in one person, which consists of the divinity
and humane flesh: whole God, and whole man; whole God also with the body, but
not God according to the body: whole man also with the divinity, but not man
according to the divinity: whole (again) to be adored with the body, but not
to be adored according to the body: whole adoring also with the divinity, but
not adoring according to the divinity: whole uncreated also with the body, but
not uncreated according to the body: whole formed also with the divinity, but
not formed according to the divinity: whole with God, of the same substance
also with the body, but not of the same substance, according to the body: Even
as he is not, according to his divinity co-essentiall with men, but he is of
the same substance with us even existent in the divinity: For, when we say,
that he is according to the Spirit co-essentiall with God; we do not say, that
he is co-essentiall with men according to the Spirit. On the other side, when
we preach, that, according to the flesh, he is consubstantiall with men; we do
not preach, that he is, according to the flesh, consubstantiall with God: for,
as according to the Spirit he is not consubstantiall with us; (for, so he is
consubstantiall with God) so again, he is not according to the flesh
consubstantiall with God; for, according to this he is consubstantiall with us;
but as we pronounce these to be distinct and separated, not to introduce a
division of that person which is one and individed, but to denote a distinction
and inconfusion of the natures and properties of the Word and flesh: so we
preach and worship what conduces to the manner of this individed union and
composition.

Vigilius lib. 4. against Eutyches. Therefore, on the contrary, if the flesh be
found everywhere, why is there not one nature of the flesh and Word which is
everywhere.
If there be one nature of the Word and flesh, how is it, that, whereas the Word
is everywhere, the flesh is not also found everywhere? For, when it was upon
the earth, it was not in heaven; and now, because it is in heaven, it is not
upon the earth: and it is so far from being here on earth, that, according to
it, we expect Christ to come from heaven, whom, according to the Word, we
believe to be with us on earth. Therefore, according to your opinion, either
the Word is contained with the flesh in its place, or else the flesh with the
Word is everywhere; seeing one nature cannot receive in it self what is
contrary and diverse. Now, to be circumscribed to a place, and to be
everywhere, are things very different and unlike: and because the Word is
everywhere, but the flesh is not everywhere, it is apparent, that one and the
same Christ has both natures, and that he is everywhere according to the
nature of his divinity; and contained in a place, according to the nature of
his humanity; that he is created, and has no beginning, subject to death, and
cannot die; the one whereof belongs to him out of the nature of the Word, by
which he is God, the other, out of the nature of the flesh, by which the same
God is man: therefore one Son of God, and the same being made the Son of man,
has a beginning out of the nature of his flesh, and has no beginning out of
the nature of his divinity. He is created by the nature of his flesh, and is
not created by the nature of his divinity; he is circumscribed to place by the
nature of his flesh, and is not contained in any place by the nature of his
divinity; he is lesser then the Angels by the nature of his flesh, and is
equal to the Father by the nature of his divinity; he died by the nature of
his flesh, and died not by the nature of his divinity. This is the Faith, and
the Catholic Confession, which the Apostles delivered, the Martyrs confirmed,
and the faithful hitherto maintain. How then dare thou, who art most
impious, and infected with the poison of Eutychian Heresy, reprove Leo;
whilst, out of the diversity of the actions of one Lord Christ, he teaches the
truth of both natures; that what he produces to demonstrate both natures, thou
calumniates, as if he professed two persons?

A Question proposed to DAVID PARRY, By Mr. MOSES VASHARHELINUS, Rector of the
famous School of PATACHIN in Hungary, An. 1601. a. d. 14. August. Gregor.
Whether God created all men for one end in Adam to salvation, upon condition
of keeping the Law?
I See here, says Mr. Moses, that there is, if not truly, yet seemingly, a
contradiction among Writers, Mr. Calvin says, l. 3. Inst. c. 21.. 5. That all
men were not created in the same condition. Dr. Vrsinus, quaest. 6. Catech.
affirms, That God created man, that he might live for ever with him in
blessedness. If this be so, it seems that man's fall is not subject to divine
providence, and that God did not attain his end which he intended in the
creation. Piscator against Andrew Schaffman, Propos. 29. says, That God
created all mankind in one, but not for one end: And in the Question 37. to
this argument of Schaffmans, The Image of God was concreated, holiness and
righteousness were to be propagated, for which man both pleased God, and by
obeying his will, which was then sound, he was to be made partaker of eternal
joy. Piscator answers, That it is false, that holiness which was concreated
should be propagated; because it is true, that by Gods Decree it was to be
lost, before our first Parents should propagate children: for, if an hair of
our head cannot fall, without the will of our heavenly Father; how much less
could that holiness be lost without his will and providence?

Dr. Parrie's Answer.
You enquire, Mr. Moses, Whether God created all men in Adam for one end to
salvation, upon condition of observing the Law: And of this Question you show
the different opinions of Authors. If I say, that I am willingly ignorant of
this Question, I shall not lie; for it is fetched out of the secret closet of
Gods hidden decrees; having in it more quickness of wit, then edification.
Yet, I will tell you what I think of this matter: If you consider it a priori,
I affirm, that all were made for one end in Adam, as the branches of the tree
in the stock; but with this condition, if in the Image of God (which was the
beginning and a part of salvation) Adam himself had stood, and had propagated
it to posterity; or, in it had propagated all men in it: but, because this
condition, was neither placed in the counsel of God, nor was to be placed in
the event; ( a posteriori) we are forced to deny, except we will believe that
God has failed in his end, or has changed his counsel; whereas, it is
apparent, that many never attain to salvation. But, to cut off all Sophistry,
so I state it:

Adam has a double consideration; one before his fall, as the stock of
mankind potentially in him, which was never to be brought into act; for God
(as we are taught by the event) not only created man mutably good, who, being
tempted, might lose his uprightness before he did procreate; but he decreed
also to suffer him to be tempted, to fall, and to lose his righteousness,
before he did procreate: which being granted, he was not to procreate any men
at all in this estate. It is idle then, to ask if God created all men to
salvation in him, which he did not decree them to procreate of him, for causes
hid in his manifold wisdom. Then, he is considered after his fall, as the
stock of mankind actually; when, not only by nature, but also by divine
disposition, man was actually to procreate mankind, but such as himself was;
to wit, evil, and liable to the curse: and to this belongs the present
question, as the whole decree of predestination about election and reprobation.
Now, an answer out of Scripture and experience ( a posteriori) may easily be
given, that as all men, begotten of sinful Adam, do not aim at the same end,
but some at life, others at death: so, all are not procreated of Adam to the
same end, and therefore, all are not created of God to the same end. Nor can it
be said that they were created in lapsed Adam, except we will utterly exclude
God from creating man, or make him idle in it, or yield, that he is frustrated
of his intention. Every man then is created to that end, to which either by the
pravity of his nature he is permitted to tend, that is, to death; or to which,
by the means of grace in Christ he is directed, that is, to salvation. For
doubtless, God did not idly see or foresee that divorce which presently
appeared amongst the sons of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, etc. being by nature
corrupted, but what by grace he effected in time, according to that, (Jacob
have I loved, Esau have I hated; and, Before the children were borne, when they
had not as yet done good or evil, that the purpose of God might remain firm
according to election) so he decreed from eternity. You see the question
nearly agrees with the doctrine of election, of which therefore I will add no
more, to avoid prolixity; Calvin then says well, That all men are not created
in the like condition; to wit, after the fall, in respect of the end, not of
the estate: for, all men are borne alike in the same estate, to wit, all the
sons of wrath; for, concerning the diversity of the end, it is said of the
elect, He has appointed us to salvttion, etc. 1 These. 5.9. of the rest; He
made the wicked for the evil day. When Vrsinus then says, That God created
man, to the end he might live with him in bliss for ever, he must be
understood conditionally, so far as man should persevere in integrity; the end
therefore was conditional, not to be placed in Adam, but in Christ; if, as it
came to pass Adam had fallen: and so Schaffman is to be understood, That the
holiness which was concreated with Adam, was to be propagated to all men, to
wit, if Adam did not lose it before he did procreate all; therefore, he speaks
truth conditionally, but false absolutely, which is that Piscator says.

Thus briefly Mr. Moses of that great Question, that you may have matter to
think more at large, although it becomes you and us all in this, according to
the Apostles rule, Not to think of our selves more highly then we ought to
think, but to think soberly.

royal blazon or coat of arms ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE POSITIONS OF Dr. AEGIDIUS
HUNNIUS, Concerning the Hypostaticall Union, by Dr. DAVID PARRY, In Witteberg,
An. 1592. a.d. Disputed the 23. of May: IN WHICH The Orthodox Doctrine of the
Person of JESUS CHRIST is asserted, according to the rule of holy Scripture,
and the consent of pious Antiquity.
The Argument of HUNNIUS his Theses. Of the hypostaticall Union.
THese positions of Hunnius have in their front and title honey cunningly
couched, but in the belly very gall. The front extends almost to the 17.
Thesis; so far orthodoxally enough, (if you except the ambushes) they confute
the old Heresies, by proving that Christ is a person God and Man, consisting of
two natures, true and entire; to wit, the divine and the humane; and that the
Son of God, the Word, was made flesh, not by conversion of the deity into
flesh, but by assumption of the divinity into God; to which, who freely and
heartily subscribes not, he is not Orthodox.

The belly swells with Ubiquitary poison in the next Thesis to the 39. for, he
lays certain hypotheses or suppositions, concerning the manner and force of
the union, as it were foundations of the future Disputation, concerning the
real communication of the properties, and of the omnipresence of his flesh,
which he paints with wonderful Sophistry; but all of them are false; to wit,
That the whole Word did assume the whole flesh so, that as the flesh is never
without the Word, so the Word is never without the flesh; that is, without the
dimensions of the flesh: that such an union is the dwelling of the whole
fullness of the deity within the flesh, that without the flesh, the deity of
the Word is no where: that finally, the flesh has most eminently transcended
all locality, being in the illocall person of the Word, and that it has truly
obtained an illocall manner of existing; that is, to be illocall in the union.
In the interim, he cunningly conceales the definition and form of the
hypostaticall union, which he ought first to have explained, as being the head
of the whole dispute, and not delude people with a lying title. But this he
did, lest the manifest falsehood of the specificall difference should have
weakened and shaken his cause before its time.

The tail again shows the honey, but hides the sting; for he deduceth four
consectaries or corollaries: 1. That the union should be defined by the true
and solid communion. 2. That the person of the Word be communicated and
conferred upon the flesh ineffably. 3. That the deity of the person of the
Word, or the whole fullness of the deity, be communicated to the humanity. 4.
That finally, under this plenitude of the whole deity, the majesty of the
properties of the Word be infallibly understood. No Orthodox man will
contradict these points, if they be meant of the true union of the natures, and
communion of the properties in the concret; but that both these, and the
precedent passages, for the most part, all of them are nothing else then
treacherous subterfuges of Ubiquity, even those that have but weak eyes may
see; and this in a brief examination shall be showed.

The Positions of Hunnius concerning the union.
I.
Jesus Christ, in the true knowledge of whom consists our eternal salvation,
is God and man; that is, a person subsisting of two natures; to wit, the divine
and the humane.

The Animadversion.
How the person of Christ is made up of two natures.
Thus speak some of the Fathers, and almost all the Schoolmen, that the
person of Christ does consist, is made up, is constituted, is compounded, is
made of two natures, the divine and humane; or of three substances, the deity,
the soul, and the body: but so they explain this, that they neither make any
confusion of natures, nor any imperfection of the person of the Word, before
the Incarnation; nor yet a quaternity of the persons in the divinity; for they
teach, that diverse ways one thing may be made up of two or three things: One
way is, when of two or more things remaining entire and perfect, one thing is
made up; as in those, A thing is said diversely to be made up of more things.
the form whereof is composition, order, or figure: so a heap of wheat is
made up of many grains, and a City of many Citizens. Another way is, when one
thing is made up of others which remain not in their perfection, but are
changed; as when a mixed body is made up of the elements; Metheglen is made of
water, and honey. The third way is, when some third thing different
specifically is made up of two imperfect things without mixture, as of matter
and form; as man is composed of the reasonable soul and the body. None of
these ways is the person of Christ said to consist of two natures, or properly
composed of them: for, the hypostaticall union, is not the confusion of the
natures, or only an ordered disposition between themselves, as was that
Nestorian parastasis, rather then hypostasis: (...). See Cassian l. 1. de Incar.
neither is it a permixtion (for some of the Ancients improperly called it a
mixtion:) neither is it a composition of matter and form into one third thing
which is neither of them: for the Word is not the form of the flesh, nor is
this the matter of the Word; neither again, was the Word, by assuming the
flesh, made a person, or an other person, which the 8. and 12. Thesis confess.
The fourth way is, when improperly, and at large, a thing is said to consist of
many, in which many things are put together; and so at length they say in this
sense, that the person of Christ consists, or is compounded of two natures,
whereas a composition, in a large sense, is the position of many things
together; for, so they call the hypostaticall union a composition. Wherefore,
to avoid error, they speak more warily, and they say, that the person of
Christ subsisteth in two natures: which phrase the Orthodox Writers retain, as
being more proper; although we think it not fit to contend about words with
any, who have a right opinion of the matter it self.

II.
The divine nature, and so this word [God] is not here taken absolutely (for so
the whole Trinity should be incarnate) but relatively is understood the second
person, the only begotten Son; who, in the bosom of the Father, and with the
Father, is one and the same, John 1. and 10. The Image of the invisible God.
Col. 1. The brightness of the Fathers glory, and the character of his
substance, Heb. 1. God the Word, John 1. The mighty God, Isaiah 9. God blessed
for ever, Romans 9.

The Animadversion.
Damascen, and the Ancients write, that the divine nature assumed the flesh in
one of the persons, or in the person of the Word. It is rightly said then, that
the divine nature in Christ is not to be understood absolutely, as a nature;
but relatively, as a person: Therefore Thomas, and the Schoolmen, use rather
to say, that the person of the Word assumed the nature, then that the nature
assumed the nature; or, the nature assumed the nature mediately, the person
immediately assumed the nature; because, as they speak, the union is
immediately terminated in the person, mediatly in the divine nature.

III.
The humanity in Christ is not a person subsisting in it self, but a nature
having no proper personality; but, by reason of the union, fully capable and
participant of the person of the Word.

The Animadversion.
It is rightly said, that the humanity wants a proper personality: for, a
personality is a subsistence, or the power of subsisting by it self without
any other, and without any other suppositum or supporting subject of a
rational nature, which power the humanity neither had, Whether, and how the
flesh is capable of the person.
nor has; but, it is a new, improper and deceitful saying, that by force of
the union, the flesh is made fully capable and partaker of the person of the
Word. It is first new, because, neither the Scripture, nor the Church speaks
thus, that the flesh is capable of the person. 2. Improper, because the flesh
neither contains, nor incloseth the person of the Word, as the place is said
to be capable of the thing placed: He begins to speak thus These. 44.
neither becomes it the person it self, or is it informed by the personality,
as the subject is capable of the form. 3. Deceitful, because the Sophister
uses this phrase, as a preparative for the real communication of the
properties in the natures; to wit, that he may say, that the flesh is after the
same manner capable and partaker of the deity and omnipresence, as it is
(according to his saying) partaker and capable of the personality; and that
therefore, not by its own, but by the deity and immensity of the Word, it is
God and omnipresent, even as not by its own, but by the personality of the
Word it subsisteth. But orthodox men confess, with Damascen, that the person
of the Word, by reason of the union, is common to both natures; that now the
humanity subsisteth in Christ by the same personality that the divinity does:
but, they deny that the flesh is made so capable and partaker of the person, as
if it were the person it self: as they also deny, that it is made so partaker
of the deity and omnipresence, as if it were the deity of God himself, the
omnipresence, or omnipresent, etc. neither do they grant, that it is otherwise
partaker of the person, of the deity, of the omnipresence, or can be, then by
the union, which makes not that the humanity, but that man is the person is
God, is omnipresent; in which sense the Apostle says, That the Son of God was
made partaker of the flesh and blood of the children; to wit, Heb. 2.
by assuming the seed of Abraham into his personality, or by the hypostaticall
union; whereby, not the deity of the Son, but God the Son is made flesh and
blood; that is to say, true man. In this sense also it may be rightly said,
that the flesh, or humanity of Christ, is partaker of the person of the deity,
of omnipresence; to wit, by the union with the divine person, and omnipresent;
which union, makes not that the humanity of Christ, but that the man Christ is
a person, is God, is omnipresent.

IV.
This in the Scripture is called flesh: by which word not the only corporeal
mass is understood, but the full and entire humanity, consisting of a true
body, and a reasonable soul.

V.
For the Son of God is made partaker of flesh and blood, as we are, to wit, in
all things made like to his brethren, except sin.

The Animadversion.
He says well, That under the term of flesh, is meant the entire humanity,
consisting of a true body and soul, so he would add these words, With the
true properties of both, and withal the infirmities, except sin: For, if he be
like his brethren in all things, then surely in locality and circumscription
he is made like to them, and that in the union, and in the Word. For, without
the union, and without the Word, the flesh has neither being nor subsistence
at any time: Therefore that is false, which he affirms in the 36. Thesis, That
the flesh, by power of the union, has, in a most eminent way, transcended all
locality, in the illocall Word, and that it has obtained an illocall manner of
existence.

VI.
Therefore the Word did not assume an imaginary, but a true and solid body,
consisting of flesh and bones, Luke 24. of flesh and blood, John 16. which also
in glory remains a true body, conformable to the glorified bodies of the
Saints, both in substance and qualities.

The Animadversion.
This Thesis alone does strongly refute these ensuing subterfuges:

1. For, if the Word assumed not a fantastical, but a true and solid body;
then, doubtless, it assumed a body endued with quantity, dimension,
visibilitie, and localitie: For, that is not a true body, but an imaginary,
that wants quantity; nor can that be solid, which wants dimensions; and that
has no dimensions, (...).
which is indivisible and illocall; for, an uncircumscribed nature is
invisible, says Theodoret. Now, such a body as the Word did assume, such a
body assumed is in the Word: Therefore it is false, That the body of Christ in
the Word, which is illocall, did obtain an illocall way of subsisting; that
is, that it is made, and becomes illocall.

2. If the body, assumed by the Word, consists of flesh and bones, Luke 24.
of flesh and blood, Hebr. 2. certainly, that body which is feigned to lurk in a
crust of bread, or under the accidents of bread, and to be eaten by the mouth,
is not that true and solid body assumed by the Word; because it has not flesh
and bones.

3. If also it remains in glory such a body, to wit, solid and true,
consisting of flesh and bones, having dimensions; then, doubtless, in glory it
retains the definition of a true body: from which definition, the three
dimensions, and, by reason of these, circumscription and locality can be no
more separated, then rationality from man.

4. If it be conformable to the glorified bodies of the Saints in substance and
qualities, it cannot then be illocall, immense, everywhere: for, our bodies
shall not be illocall, nor everywhere; but shall have their Vbs, by Christ's
own testimony. John 17.24. Father, I will, that they whom thou have given to
me, may be with me where I am, John 14.2, 3. I go to prepare a place for you;
and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there you may be.

They need not then cavil thus, That the body is such in its own substance;
but in the Word, by reason of the union, it is not such: for, whereas it has
its being not in it self, but in the Word, which assumeth it, and always had;
doubtless it is, and remains such in the Word, and in the union, as it was
assumed. Nor can there be any true reason of that union, which destroys the
reason of the substance of flesh: but that reason of the union which he
feignes, by a certain contradiction, destroys the reason of the substance;
because it makes that which is local, to be illocall; that which has
dimensions, to have no dimensions; that which has quantity, to have no
quantity; a body, to be no body; and, a substance, no substance.

VII.
But he also assumed a soul: for he said, My soul is heavy unto the death,
Mat. 26. which also he breathed out on the Cross, Mat. 27. to wit, an
intelligent soul, which after death should remain, and which might grow in
wisdom, in the time of his humiliation, Luke 2.

The Animadversion.
This Thesis is right opposed, 1. To the error of Apollinaris, feigning, that
the Word assumed flesh without a soul, and that he himself was in stead of a
soul. See Ambrose de Incay. l. 1. c. 7.

2. To that Papisticall fiction of such a perfection in Christ's soul, as from
its creation, was so replenished with knowledge and grace, that it could not
learn any knowledge (or grow therein) which it knew not before. See Bellarm de
Christo, l. 4. c. 1, 2, 3, 4.

3. To the folly of Ubiquitaries, and of this teacher, concerning the ubiquitie
and omniscience of Christ's humanity, even from the moment of his conception and
union: for, if Christ did truly breathe out his soul upon the Cross, there
must needs be a truly local separation of the soul and body in death;
therefore by no means could the soul or body then be everywhere: Or, if then
the soul or the body was in any wise everywhere; and, if in any sort there
was not made a true separation of both, neither did Christ in some sort truly
breathe out his soul; that i^, he did not truly dye, which is false,
notwithstanding then, that is, in that separation of the body and soul, the
humanity was not separated from the Word, but inseparably the union of the
natures remained in death: For, Christ then was not truly man, although he
died, according to his body; but living, according to his soul: therefore it
follows irrefragably,

1. That by affirming the ubiquity of Christ's body, or soul, or of both, we
must deny that Christ truly died. 2. That ubiquity neither is the form of the
hypostaticall union, nor the specificall difference of it, which Smidlinus, in
the conference at Maulbrun, Page 14. Lat. p. 9. Germ.
affirmed, and labored for. Nor is it the effect or consequence thereof, which
afterward Chemnitius devised, to correct Smidlinus his opinion: For, the union
remained not only in death, but also in the whole state of his humility,
without any real transfusion of the ubiquity, or any other of the divine
properties into the flesh; without which the Ubiquitaries cry out, that Christ
is no more God, then Peter was.

Out of all which, it is plain, that ubiquity, by this Thesis, cuts its own
throat: For, how can a dead body, hanging on the Cross, and lying in the
grave, and yet not separated from the Word, have an illocall-manner of
subsisting? Likewise, if the soul, which the Word assumed, could in the time
of humiliation increase in wisdom, as Luke 2. then doubtless, from the womb
it could not be omniscient, although it subsisted in the Word.

VIII.
This humane nature of Christ is not required to the dignity of the person of
the Word, as it is simply the Word: (...).
For, the Word is a person of it self perfect, and every way complete, even
from his eternal generation of the Father.

IX.
It belongs notwithstanding to the integrity of the Word incarnate, or of
Christ, as be is Christ; (...).
whose person, after the Incarnation, is compounded, as the Ecclesiastic
Writers do witness.

The Animadversion.
If the flesh belong to the integrity of the person of the Word incarnate.
In the ninth Position there lies some deceit: for he says, that the flesh
belongs to the integrity of the Word incarnate, that afterward he may conclude
the ubiquitie of the flesh; when as the entire Word, being incarnate, is
everywhere. But he cunningly says, that it belongs to the integrity of the
Word incarnate, but not to the integrity of the person of the Word incarnate;
lest he should seem to conclude a quaternitie, or make the Word one person,
and the Word incarnate another. To the same purpose is it, when he calls the
person of the Word incarnate, or of Christ, (...), compounded. Now, the
orthodox Writers, though they reject not simply these speeches (for they
themselves speak so, without any fear of cavilling) yet they warn us to
understand them aright, to wit, in that sense as they were used by
Ecclesiastic Writers; to whose testimony our adversaries appeal, lest we
should conclude, that the hypostasis of the Word, before its Incarnation, was
imperfect; or, that it is from some other hypostasis of the Word incarnate: For
so, of necessity, a quaternity must follow. We must then stick to that which
our adversary confesses rightly, These. 8. that the Word is in it self
altogether perfect and entire. We must also hold what he acknowledges, These.
12. that there is not one Son begot of the Father from eternity, and another
conceived and begot of Mary in time; but that there is one and the same: For,
these being granted, it is plain, that the Word, and the Word incarnate are
not two different persons, but one and the same numericall hypostasis; and that
they differ not essentially, but only in some respect: as Peter, when he is
clothed, and when he is naked, is one and the same person, differing from it
self not subjectively, but accidentally.

Hence further it follows manifestly, that nothing can be properly said to
belong to the integrity of the Word incarnate, which does not also belong to
the integrity of the person of the Word; but to say this, were to deny the
perfection of the Word, and to make a composition in God.

The Word incarnate is improperly a person created.
That the flesh then does belong to the integrity of the person of the Word, is
to be so understood, as the person is called compounded by Writers, to wit, not
properly, but improperly: For, on the first Thesis we showed, That the person
of the Word incarnate is compounded, made up, constituted, consists of two
natures; not as an heap of corn is made up of many grains, a mixed body of
elements: Or, as a living creature, is compounded of a body and soul, which
are peculiar ways of composition. Neither can they be attributed to the person
of Christ, unless many absurdities do follow hence, as Thomas shows at
length. But the term Composition is here taken in a large signification, How
the hypostaticall union is a composition.
for the position of diverse things together in one, which way soever it be;
for, so the hypostaticall union may be called a composition: to wit, that by it
the person of the Son of God, before subsisting of one nature, now subsisteth
of two, remaining in the interim perfect and simple in it self: But not as if
the person of the Word incarnate were made up of two natures, or of a person
and a nature, neither of which that person is; as man is made up of a
reasonable soul and body, but neither of these is man. After the same manner
the flesh may be said to belong to the integrity of the person of the Word
incarnate, not as a part integrating and completing an incomplete person; but,
as a nature assumed into the hypostasis of the Word, in which the same Word
inhabiteth whole and entire corporally, as it were in his Temple, and exhibits
himself, as it were clothed with a garment or veil, to be seen and felt, he
being in himself invisible and unpalpable: For so we see the Scripture speaks
of that inhabitation of the Word in the flesh assumed, John 2.21. Phil. 2.8.
Hebr. 10.20. and so do the Orthodox Fathers: among the rest, Austin; Lib. 1.
c. 21. de Trin.
The Word (says he) was made flesh, that is, man; yet not converted, nor
changed into that which was made: but clothed with flesh, that he might be seen
of fleshly men, in a fleshly manner. Neither does our Adversary speak
otherwise, when he says, These. 18. that the whole Word was clothed and covered
with flesh.

The Word clothed with flesh not accidentally, but personally.
But let us not imagine, that the flesh accidentally only, and by way of an
external habit, is super-added and joined to the Word, as a garment
extrinsecally adheres to a man; or accidentally and changeably; which, as
Lombard witnesses, was the opinion of some: for the flesh is so assumed into
the most intimate and inward hypostasis of the Word, that the union thereof
with the Word is truly hypostaticall; that is, it has the same subsistence
with the Word.

These things being observed, there will be no danger of fallacies; for it will
be easy, out of the distinction and true explication of the phrase, to destroy
whatsoever the Adversary can hereafter allege from thence, for the
omnipresence of the flesh: For, the entire and whole person of the Word
incarnate is God, and immense, and omnipresent; eternal also, and begotten of
the Father, and illocall, etc. Although the flesh assumed into that person be
not, or is not made God, nor immense, nor omnipresent, and much less eternal,
begot of the Father, illocall, etc. For it will not follow, says Austin, that
whatsoever is in God, must be everywhere as God.

X.
The person then of our Savior consists not of one nature only, but of two
coupled together immutably, and without confusion; so likewise indivisibly, and
without separation: and so they meet together in one hypostasis, according to
the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon.

The Animadversion.
The person of our Savior consists of two natures, not by the composition of
one third of integrall parts, or essential either, as of matter and form, as
this Doctor does tacitly imply; but only by that way which was declared in
the first and ninth Thesis: (...), etc.
for otherwise, there would be a quaternity. The words of the Canon of the
Council of Chalcedon sound thus, The Son of God was manifested in two natures,
without confusion, without conversion, without division, without separation;
the difference of the natures, being no ways abolished by the union, but
rather the propriety of each nature, meeting in one person or hypostasis, is
preserved. That fiction then of our Adversary, which follows in the 36.
Thesis, is repugnant to this Canon; to wit, That the humanity, in respect of
the union, has most eminently transcended all localitie in the illocall Word,
and has obtained an illocall way of subsisting: For so, the properties of both
natures should not be preserved, but confused; for, the flesh should lose its
localitie in the illocall Word: and, consequently, its circumscription,
dimensions, quantity and substance: Neither can it be in any case both local
and illocall; for it is impossible, that one and the same nature can be
susceptible of contrary properties or affections together, Theod. dial. 2.
Damasc. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 4. c. 19.
as, with Theodoret, Damascen teaches everywhere.

XI.
Hence there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8. and in the two natures and
nativities, which are more then generically different, there is but one only
Son, in his eternal generation without a mother, in his temporal nativity
without a Father, Hebr. 7.

XII.
Neither did the Father from eternity beget one Son, and Mary his mother
another, by a temporal birth and conception; but that only one Son of God and
man.

The Animadversion.
As the Father begot not one Son from eternity, and Mary another in time, but
the very same; so there is not a different, but the person of the Word, before
and after the Incarnation, is the same in essence and number: For, the second
person of the Trinity, was neither changed by the Incarnation, nor was it
multiplied or perfected; therefore the younger Divines were well warned to take
heed, and rightly to understand the Adversaries phrase, These. 9.
when he says, that the flesh belongs to the integrity of the Word incarnate;
and that the person of the Word incarnate was composed: For, it is very
improper to say, That the person of the Word, is a part of the person of the
Word incarnate; because the person is not made a part of the person, either of
its own, or of another: For, if of its own, then the whole should be a part
of it self; if of another, there would not be the same Son, begot of his
Father, and borne of his mother: and necessarily there will follow a
multiplication and quaternity of the persons; therefore Austin says well,
Christ is one person of a double substance (says he, Lib. 3. c. 10. cont. Max.
) because he is God and man; and yet, neither God nor man can be called a part
of this person: otherwise God, the Son of God, before he took the form of a
servant, was not whole; and he increased, when man was added to his divinity.

XIII.
As Gabriel said, What shall be borne of thee, shall be called holy* and the
Son of God. Hence Elisabeth, being full of the holy Ghost, calls her the mother
of her Lord.

XIV.
By reason of this identity of the person or hypostasis, the Word was said to
be made flesh, John 1. The branch of David, Jehovah, Jerem. 23. The Son of man,
Son of the living God, Matthew. 16. The second man, the Lord from heaven, 1 Cor.
15. And the second Adam made a quickening Spirit, Ibid.

XV.
Now, there is one Christ, not by conversion of the Deity into flesh, but by
assumption of the humanity into God.

XVI.
Wherefore, lest the phrase of the Evangelist, The Word was made flesh, might
seem to sound of any change of the Word into flesh, the holy Ghost explaines it
by words equivalent, saying, That God is manifested in the flesh, that Jesus
Christ came in the flesh, that the Son of God was made partaker of flesh and
blood, and took the seed of Abraham; and that in Christ dwells all fullness of
the Godhead bodily, 1 Timothy 3. 1 John. 4. Heb. 2. Col. 2.

The Animadversion.
All this is right, if the phrase of Athanasius (The assumption of the humanity
into God) be not wrested against the meaning of Athanasius: These. 15.
as if he had signified either a changing of the humanity into God, or an
equalling of it with God, or a transfusion of the properties of the Godhead
into it, by which it is made God: For, whatsoever is created (says the same
Athanasius) cannot be God; therefore let the assumption of the humanity into
God, De Arian. and Cathol. confess.
be understood of its hypostaticall union with God, or the Word, the properties
of both being preserved, according to the declaration of the Synod of
Chalcedon, etc. And of Austin, in his book de fide ad Petrum, God then received
into his person the form of a servant, that is, the nature of a servant, etc.

XVII.
But the Word was not so made flesh, as that any part thereof was associated
with the flesh, which was assumed: For the Word, being of a spiritual nature,
is not cut or divided into parts.

XVIII.
But the whole Word, in the whole fullness of its Deity, is united to the
flesh: All of it (as the Orthodox Fathers tell us) was clothed with flesh, and
covered with it, (...).
wholly incarnate, inhumanated, and incorporated.

The Animadversion.
And this is also right: For neither can there be, nor can we imagine how there
should be, any union of parts between the flesh and the Word, which is
indivisible: The whole Word then assumed the whole flesh, and with the whole
flesh the whole Word was personally united.

In what sense the Word is said to be clothed, and covered with flesh, etc. we
have already explained in the ninth Thesis, to wit, not by way of an external
habit accidentally, but by way of an intrinsecall union substantially. Hence
then it appears, that the Word was not changed into flesh, by taking of man;
no more then our limbs, being clothed, are changed, as Austin speaks. Lib.
qu. 38. quaest. 73.
Neither is it a speech proper enough, when they say, that the flesh
appertains to the integrity of the person of the Word incarnate; that is,
that it is an integrall part of it, as three feet belong to the integrity of
the three-footed stool: but rather, that the flesh belongs to the person of
the Word incarnate, as being the nature assumed by the Word into the unity of
the person, in which it might manifest it self to the world: as Austin says,
The Word was made flesh, that is, clothed with flesh, that to fleshly men he
might appear in a fleshly way.

Yet no man will deny or doubt, that the Incarnation of the Word, which is
indivisible, was totally made; if that be understood, without including the
immensity of the Word, within the dimensions of the flesh: as also without an
ubiquitary diffusion of the finite flesh with the infinite Word.

XIX.
Which union, because total, is foolishly compared with examples of partial
unions; to wit, of the Sun, touching some part of his Orb: Of the stone,
enclosed within some part of the ring: Of Antwerp, situated near a part of the
sea.

The Animadversion.
We must confess, that this hidden and admirable union of the unmeasurable
nature of God, with the measured nature of man, cannot fully be expressed by
any similitude. And, although both ancient and modern Divines make use of
diverse Similies; yet, we may truly say of them all, with Damascen, In all
smilitudes, there are many dissimilitudes. And, it is impossible to find
examples, that may express the Deity and Incarnation in every thing. Justin,
Cyril, Athanasius made use of these Similies that are taken from the Sun, a
Ring, the Ocean. Basil uses the similitude of an hot iron: Athanasius of a
burned stick, or burning iron: Cyril of a burning coal: Damascen of a fiery
sword: Justin and Athanasius of the body and light of the Sun: But none of all
these similitudes will exactly agree with the thing it self. This man touches
our Divines, for using examples of partial unions; but with little sincerity:
for, sometimes they make use of such Similies, not to declare exactly the thing
it self, from which, we confess, the examples of finite things are far
distant; but only to show the sophistry of Ubiquitaries: For example; When
Jacobus Andreas, at Maulbrun, did foolishly demonstrate the Ubiquity thus, Gods
right hand is everywhere; the humanity of Christ sits at Gods right hand:
Ergo, the humanity is everywhere. Our men, by a Syllogism, altogether like
this (if you look up on the form) made it appear, that this was a naughty
argument, and consisted of four terms: The Ocean encompasseth the whole
world; Antwerp is seated near the Ocean: Ergo, Antwerp encompasseth the whole
world. By this way they did not compare matter with matter, but one fault with
another; for both Syllogismes were alike faulty: therefore the showing of this
error was not foolish. Neither does Doctor Hunnius demonstrate better the
illocalitie of the flesh in the Word below, in his 36. Thesis. It is thus in
brief, The Word is illocall, the flesh was assumed into the Word: Ergo, the
flesh is illocall. Why then do we not send this Disputer to the four terms
of Antwerp, and the Ocean? For, as these are different terms, To be the Ocean,
and to be seated near the Ocean; so these are different, To be the Word, and
to be in the Word: as in the Vulcanian demonstration these were different
speeches, To be Gods right hand, and, To sit at Gods right hand.

XX.
The similitude of the union of the soul and body is more apt to declare this
mystery, Smidlin. in colloq. Maulbrun. p. 43.
which Athanasius used in his Creed; and Cyrillus, after him, in his Synodicall
Epistle, saying, The Word, in the assumed nature, has made such an habitation
for it self, as the soul is believed to have in its proper body.

The Animadversion.
Of this Similie thus writes Justin; In Exposit. Symb. p. 301.
Some (says he) having conceived in their mind of this union, as of the union
of soul and body, have so delivered it; and it is a convenient example, though
not in all points, yet in some. Also the example of man is in some respect to
be admitted, and in some respect to be avoided. And it is so indeed: For they
agree thus, That, as the reasonable soul and body are united into one person;
and, as in one hypostasis subsist two natures, distinct in their essences and
properties, and concurring in these operations that are proper to men; and one
of them working what is proper to it, but not without the communion of the
other: Even so, says Hierome, it is known, that one and the same Christ is
God and man, and that he did work according to both forms; Ad Paulam and
Eustoch.
to wit, of the humanity and divinity, and that by this he exercised two
operations: For, both forms or natures did operate; the one communicating with
the other in that which was proper to it: The Word operating what is proper to
the Word, and the flesh putting in execution what belongs to the flesh, etc.
But in many things the Similie will not hold: For, in man there is an union of
two finite natures; but in Christ, of a finite nature, and an infinite. In man,
both natures are shut up within the same bounds; but in Christ, the divinity
is not confined to the narrow limits of the flesh. In man, the union is the
composition of matter and form; but in Christ, the flesh is not the matter of
the divinity, nor this the form of the flesh. In man, there results a third
thing out of the composition, which is neither of the other two; but in Christ,
the Word or person is the same before the union, but naked and simple; after
the union, clothed with flesh, and in a manner compounded. In man, the union is
dissolved by death; but Christ will never lay aside the nature which he once
assumed. Lastly, to this purpose serves that which Thomas observes: Part. ult.
quaest. 2.
In man (says he) there is a two fold unity made up; to wit, of the nature,
and of the person: of the nature, when as the soul is formally united to the
body, perfecting it; that of two, there may be made up one nature, as of the
act and potentiality, of the matter and form: and in this regard the
similitude consists not; because the divine nature cannot be the form of the
body. 2. Of the person, as when of these is made up one man, consisting of a
body and a soul; and in this is the similitude: for one Christ subsisteth in
the divine and humane nature.

XXI.
Therefore, as the soul, in respect of its substance, is not without the body;
for it is all united to its body: so the whole Word incarnate can neither be,
nor be found, nor ought to be enquired for, out of its own flesh.

The Animadversion.
By a manifest fallacy, from that which is said respectively, or secundum
quid, to that which is spoken simply, of a similitude, he concludes a
falsehood: For, this is Hunnius his collection, The Similie drawn from man, is
more fit then from other things: Ergo, it agrees in every thing; and,
consequently, the reason is alike of the soul and of the deity: that, as the
soul is confined to the bounds of the body; so the deity does no where subsist
without the flesh. Who may not here sensibly perceive the imposture? He makes a
comparison between the soul and the Word, as if there were a parity between
them; whereas there is an extreme imparity: for the soul, being a finite
spirit, cannot be without the body, in which it is, so long as it is tied to
the body, though it be all in all, and all in every part: But the Deity of
the Word is not a finite spirit, but immense, and most pure, by its most simple
immensity, all in the finite flesh, and all, and the same together without the
finite flesh, and subsisting without all things: For who will say, that the
Deity of the Word was only there; suppose in the mothers womb, in the Temple,
in the Justice-Hall, on the Cross, in the Sepulcher, etc. where his flesh was
said to be circumscribed, and to be absent in other places, where his flesh was
not? Who will say, that he did not fill heaven and earth, that he was not at
Rome, at Athens, and everywhere without Judea, at the same time when his
body, that was most united then to him, did remain within the limits of Judea
alone? Surely, he who affirms the contrary, either feignes a Deity enclosed
and circumscribed in the narrow bounds of the body; or else a body diffused
everywhere with the Deity; that is (to use few words) he makes either a
finite Deity, or an infinite body. This then is one of these false hypotheses,
by which this Sophister under-props the ubiquity of the flesh. He adds also
sophistically, that the Word neither is, nor can be sought or found, without
its flesh: which words neither have the same meaning, nor the same truth. For
Orthodoxe men confess, that the Word is not to be sought out of the flesh;
because in the flesh only, as in his temple, he will be sought and worshipped
by faith and prayers. And from hence they gather against the Ubiquitaries, that
the flesh of the Word does not lurk within a sacramental crust; because they
neither worship it, nor ought they to worship it: yet they deny not therefore,
that the Word is not elsewhere by that essential immensitie, which he has in
common with the Father and the holy Ghost: For so the Word, being enclosed
within finite flesh, should be terminated or bounded; or else the flesh should
have an immensity everywhere, with the immensity of the Word; both which is
false. Nor do the Orthodox Fathers otherwise speak or think. Athanasius, De
Incarnat. Verbi.
The Word is in the flesh, and over and above all things. Ibid. He subsisteth
over and above all things. Ibid. At the same moment, when he was in an humane
body, he was over and above all things. So Hieron ad Marcel. He who was
infinite, was also in the Son of man total. August. Lib. 2. de Incarn.
The Son of God was total in the body, and total everywhere.

XXII.
They are deceived then, and they reduce this admirable union to the
narrowness of one only place, who dream, that the Word in the flesh is in
one, and only in that place, where the humane nature of Christ visibly dwells;
but besides this place, that it subsisteth over and above it, in other places
innumerable.

The Animadversion.
He condemns for an error, not ours, but the doctrine both of holy Writ, and
of godly Antiquity: for, the Scriptures unanimously witness, that the humane
nature of Christ was visibly confined still to one place, and not to two or
more at once invisibly; the incomprehensible [Word] in the mean time showing
its presence, both in its flesh, and elsewhere, where the flesh is not, and
the union still remaining entire. The Fathers also write clearly, that the
Word was so in the flesh, that it was not shut up within those narrow confines,
but that it subsisted out of it, and over and above all things else. It is a
fallacy, if not a falsehood, when he says, that now this admirable union, is
not to be confined to the narrow enclosure of one only place: for, though the
flesh be shut up in one place, it will not follow, that therefore the union is
to be reduced to these narrow straits; because, to be reduced to a narrow
place, and to be in a place, is the property of the flesh, not of the union;
but the properties of the natures neither make the union, nor effect it:
otherwise, by the same reason one might cavil, that the union is corporeal,
visible, dead; because, the flesh is corporeal, visible, and dead: or, that it
is eternal, immense, and God; because, the Word is eternal, immense, and God.
But, although the flesh is not diffused everywhere with the [Word,] nor the
Word circumscribed by the narrowness of the flesh; notwithstanding the flesh
is nowhere not united to the Word, and subsisting by the Word; and the Word is
nowhere not united to the flesh, and subsisting in the flesh: wheresoever then
the flesh is, there is the union; and wheresoever the Word is, there is the
union; not by reason of the diffusion of the flesh, but by reason of that most
simple immensity of the Word; by which he is so in the flesh, that he is not
therefore contained in the flesh, but everywhere together without it he
fills all things; and so he is without the flesh, that notwithstanding he
subsisteth every where in it, and that not by any one part of himself, but
total; neither another person, but the same; for, we must not imagine, that
there is one part of the Word in the flesh, and another without it; but he
wholly subsisteth in the flesh, and wholly without the flesh; because he is
immense and impartible. Neither is there one Word in heaven, and another on
earth, but the same is everywhere in the flesh, or incarnate, because most
simple; although in the mean while, the flesh, both by the verity of its
essence, and in one place where it wills, it remains.

We do not therefore dream, that the [Word] in the flesh is only in one place,
in other infinite places without the flesh, and therefore, without the union:
for, it is everywhere in its own flesh, supporting and moving by a secret and
indissoluble union; but no where, and at no time deserting it, or distant from
it: but properly it is not either in one, or in infinite places, seeing these
things are in place only, that have dimensions. But God the Word is of that
immensity, that he has neither a corporal, nor an intellectual place, but
metaphorically only, being said to be there where his operation is known,
Lib. 1. c. 16.
as Damascene witnesses. In brief, the [Word] is everywhere, and so
remains united to its flesh, even existing without it; for, it can never be
absent from the flesh, being immense, and everywhere wholly the same, without
extension or multiplication, though in the mean while, the essence of the
flesh is only in one place.

But, if this Ubiquitary Doctor understands not, or approves not of these
things, let him proceed in his dream, of his dimensive and extensive [Word;]
which is not total everywhere, but some-where it existeth in some part of it,
or else is wholly some-where absent: but, we believe with Athanasius, that this
is of high admiration, that the Word contained by none, contains
notwithstanding all things; and being present in the body, is not elsewhere
absent, but subsisteth over and above all things, and yet is most present in
the natures of all things, but more chiefly in his own flesh. These my steries
are to be adored, but not to be squared by the dull edge of humane reason.

XXIII.
But because, by the Apostles definition, the whole personal union is and
consists in that corporal inhabitation and immanency of all fullness of the
deity in the flesh, by an unavoidable consequence we infer, that where it
dwells not in the flesh, but is imagined to be without it, there it cannot be
said to be united to it.

The Animadversion.
He proves the Word to be nowhere without the flesh, but first out of Paul's
definition of union, as he says; then, by a contraposition out of the
definition, he thus seems to gather: What is immanent in the flesh, is not
without it; the Word is immanent or dwells in the flesh, because the union is
the inhabitation, or immanency of the Word in the flesh; therefore the Word is
not without the flesh. Answ. If he did contend, that the Word was nowhere so
without the flesh, but that it is also in the flesh, we would yield to him in
all this: But, when he simply denies the Word to have any existence out of the
flesh, that he may diffuse the flesh everywhere with it; we answer to the
Major proposition, with a distinction; That cannot be without the flesh, which
is so inherent in it, as that it is shut up within the dimensions of it: But we
deny the Word to be so inherent in the flesh, or that it is such an immanency
by which the Apostle shows rather the union, then defines it to be the
corporal inhabitation of all fullness of the deity in the flesh; and the
Adversary himself shortly after denies it.

For, the Word does not so inhabit, as to be circumscribed by the limits of the
flesh; nor is he so immanent, that he is no where without it; as the soul
existing in the body, is no where out of the body: but that he is never
separated or absent from it. The inhabitation then is not the enclosing of the
Word within the flesh, but a secret conjunction with the flesh into one
hypostasis.

In that he calls the union an immanency, he has not this out of the Apostle,
but out of Damascen, who calls it (...). (which word some translate a
permeation; others, an immeation, others, an immanency, or inhabitation) no
ways understanding the Eutychian mixture of the natures, or the
circumscription of the Word in the flesh, or the diffusion of the flesh with
the Word; but a mutual, intimate, and indissoluble union of both natures into
one hypostasis, the natures and properties remaining entire: which is so well
known out of Damascen, that it needs not be insisted on.

By a contraposition out of the definition he thus gathers, Where the Word is
united to the flesh, there it dwells in the flesh, and so remains in it, as
that it is no where without it: therefore where it dwells not in the flesh, but
is fancied to be without it, there it cannot be said to be united with it;
which, because it is absurd (for so there will follow a Nestorian separation)
it is also absurd, that the Word should be any-where without the flesh.

But first, we have said before, (...).
that Ubiety is improperly attributed to the Word and union; then it is false,
which in the converting proposition he assumes of such an immanency, as that
the Word is nowhere without the flesh; for this is to beg the matter in
question. Besides, in the Proposition converted, he admits of that fallacy
which is called ( Ignoratio elenchi, or) the ignorance of the reprehending
Argument, feigning these two to be repugnant; to wit, The Word inhabiteth in
the flesh, and, the Word is without the flesh, which indeed are not repugnant,
by reason of the most simple immensity of the Word, as is showed. The Argument
of our Adversary directly concluding, is this, Where the Word is united to the
flesh, there it is not out of the flesh, because the union is the inhabitation;
but the Word is everywhere united to the flesh; therefore it is nowhere
without the flesh. But the Minor Proposition has this ignoration of the
Elenchus, and trusts to a false definition: for, we will not yield him, that
the union is such an inhabitation as he fancies; wherefore we deny the Major:
for, wheresoever the Word is, he inhabits all in the flesh, and all without the
narrowness of the flesh, filling heaven and earth with the immensity of his
essence,

XXIV.
Especially, because, according to this opinion, we must determine that the
whole Word, (seeing he cannot be divided into parts) in his whole personality,
and in the whole plenitude of the deity, is in innumerable places without his
humanity; which were truly to draw in sunder through many places, that most
intrinsecall, and altogether indistant union.

The Animadversion.
You sing over again the same song: To place the whole Word in his whole
personality, and in the whole fullness of the deity in innumerable places
without his own flesh, is to distract in sunder the indistant union of the
natures; but to do this is a wicked thing; therefore so must that. We again
deny the Major, for the union remains indistant, even when the whole Word
without the narrowness of the flesh fills all other things; because, by his
most simple immensity, neither all, nor half of him (seeing he is individed)
departs, or is absent from his flesh; neither is he pulled away or separated by
any distance of place, but he subsists so all within it, that he is also
all-present everywhere without it: whereas, not another, but the same and
entire Word is within the flesh which is without it. And this argument of
pulling asunder the natures, is very silly; for it flows from a false
imagination, that the Word existing without the flesh, remains not united to
the flesh; which is both most false, and impossible: for, if it were any-where
absent from its flesh, it were not immense; and, if in any part only it
remained in the flesh, it should be divided. Therefore, to feign any distance
between the natures, is truly to feign a Word having dimensions; which our
Adversary, by clearing of himself, sufficiently shows.

Some orthodox men untie this knot, by distinguishing the personality and deity
of the Word; confessing that to be nowhere out of his flesh, seeing there is
one personality of both: but this they make all to exist within and without the
flesh, in that the essence of the Word is simply infinite. But, lest our
Adversaries should cavil, that so we do not make the personality equally
infinite with the essence of the Word; therefore we will wave this distinction.
We know that the personality and divinity of the Word differ not subjectively,
but only in some respect: when as then both are equally immense and most
simple; by the same reason it must necessarily follow, that both subsist wholly
in their flesh, and wholly without the flesh, and, with the Father and holy
Ghost, fill heaven and earth.

XXV.
In the mean time, out of our doctrine, there does not follow such a shutting
up of the Word into the nature assumed, as makes the person of the Word lose
his infinity, or become finite; but from bence rather is inferred this
perpetual immanency, inhabitation, and incarnation we speak of, which
elevates the finite humanity, into the infinite personality of the Son of God,
and consequently, it makes that the Word is never absent from its flesh, never
distant from it, (...).
and never subsisteth without it; but that without distance, as ( Damascen
says) it is united with it, and remains with it above all locality of this
created world, ineffably, and still present.

The Animadversion.
Here he perceives, that out of his immanency or inhabitation, necessarily
follows the inclusion and finity of the Word; therefore he denies the sequel:
but in vain, for thus he is convinced; What is so immanent in the finite
flesh, that it existeth nowhere without it; that must necessarily be shut up
within the dimensions of the flesh, and be finite, as the flesh is finite: But
the Word is thus immanent in the flesh; it is therefore shut up within the
finite dimensions of the flesh; which is absurd. The Major is most true: our
Adversaries Minor is absurd, there follows then an absurd conclusion: He
says, that the perpetual immanency follows out of his doctrine rather; but,
this is to beg the matter in question, to infer an immanency out of an
immanency. He says, A prodigious speech.
that the immanency elevateth the finite humanity, into the infinite
personality of the Son of God. If he understood this Teratologie of the union
of the flesh with the infinite hypostasis of the flesh, retaining the
properties thereof, no orthodox man would reject it; but the style of truth is
plain, whereas that of a lie is intricate: such as this is. For, he does not
mean this of the union, as he says, but of an ubiquitary diffusion of the
flesh with the Word, which orthodox Divines simply deny; for, the flesh can no
more cast off her finity and dimensions, then she can her very nature, no not
in the union it self. Now, if remaining finite, she is elevated into an
infinity; that is, is made infinite; then sure it must be both at once finite
and infinite, quantitative and without quantity, flesh and no flesh: and, what
is this, but to fancy an Vtopian Chimera? Again, he says, by means of this
immanency, the Word is never absent, nowhere distant from his flesh: but
indeed, this is effected, not by the immanency which he feignes, but by his
most simple immensity; for, by this it is that the Word is all the same in his
flesh, and everywhere without all. He says, that by the means of this
immanency, the Word never subsisteth without the flesh, but inseparably is
united to it. But, again, he ascribes a false effect, to an untrue cause, and
admits ignorationem elenchi; for, the inhabitation of the Word in the flesh,
(which he, by an ambiguous term, will rather call an immanency) is not his
inclusion, or confining within the flesh; that is, within the dimensions of the
flesh: neither do these two, To be without the flesh, and, To remain
inseparably united to the flesh, destroy one another, as was showed but now.
Yet, if both be not true together concerning the Word; neither can he be
immense, nor can he be God. Lastly, in that, he says, the flesh united to the
Word, or the Word to the flesh, remains so above all locality of this created
world, it is either a vain Teratologie, or a false opinion, that the flesh is
made illocall by the union, because the Word is illocall; of which hereafter we
will speak upon the 36. These.

XXVI.
But, it no ways follows, if the Word, after the Incarnation, be not without
the nature which was personally assumed; that therefore, we must believe him to
be nowhere without that place, in which Christ's humane nature, by the
condition of its essence, remains.

The Animadversion.
Here he avoids another rock, that, granting the immanency which he feignes,
the Word will never be without the place of the nature assumed, therefore he
must needs be finite: he denies the sequel of this, but in vain; for he is
convinced thus: What is not without a finite nature existing in a certain
place, neither is it without that place, in which the finite nature existeth;
but the Word is no where without his finite nature assumed, existing in a
certain place, wherever it be; ergo, it is no where without that place, and
consequently, the Word is made finite. The Minor is our Adversaries, the reason
of the Major is manifest and firm: That, albeit the place be one thing, and
the nature existing in that place be another thing; notwithstanding the nature
assumed, by the condition of its essence (as our Adversary rightly confesses)
is not without a place, nor remains out of a place, and the place is equal to
it: whatsoever then is not without the nature assumed, as the thing contained
or placed, neither is that without the place containing; because, the thing
containing, and the thing contained; the place, and the thing placed, are
equal.

XXVII.
For the reason of the humanity it self is far different from that of the
place, which naturally encompasseth and contains it.

XXVIII.
For the humanity it self is elevated and translated by the union into the
hypostasis of the only begotten Word: but the ambient place, without that
hypostasis of the Word, remains perpetually.

The Animadversion.
This eluding of the Major is too frivolous; for, although the reason of the
humanity, and of the place be unlike in this, in that the one was assumed, the
other was not assumed by the Word; yet, this remains, that they are together,
and equal in their limits and bounds: Hence it follows necessarily, that
whatsoever is not without the one, is not without the other. All then that the
Sophister proves, is, that the humanity is not the place; but he cannot
overthrow that most true Maxim, Whatsoever is not without the thing placed,
neither can it be without the place of the thing placed.

XXIX.
What wonder then if the Word be without the place of the humanity, but not
without the substance of the humanity? seeing that the very flesh, though in a
place existing and appearing when it will; yet, notwithstanding, by virtue of
the union, it subsisteth above locality, in the very person of the Son of God.
Surely, in this respect it transcendeth ineffably, the very same place in which
otherwise it remains.

The Animadversion.
Yes, a great wonder it is; for, it is both a wonder, and an absurdity to
devise any thing without the thing containing, which is not also without the
thing contained; without the place, which is not also without the thing placed:
for example, without the walls of the City, which is not also without the
towne-Hall of the City: without Witteberg, which is not also without the Palace
of Hunnius, which he lately received in a present at Witteberg, over against
the Tower, etc.

The flesh of Christ remains in a place, not only by reason of its will, but
also, because of the condition of its essence; witness the 26. These.
therefore, it is not in a place only when it wills, but so long as it retains
its nature, it is necessarily in a place; whether that place be physical, as
was here on earth; or heavenly, as it is now in glory.

That the flesh, by virtue of the union, subsisteth above locality, and
transcendeth the place in which it abides, is both false, and implies a
contradiction: false, because the Adversary himself, in the 5. and 6. Thesis
confessed, that the flesh united to the Word, or in the union it self, is made
like unto us in all things except sin; therefore in the union it self it must
be like to us, in regard of locality. But these are contradictories: That the
flesh, by the condition of its essence remains in a place, and yet by its
essence transcendeth the same place; that is, not to remain in a place, by
what virtue soever that be done: for his subterfuge, concerning the diverse
reason of the essence and union, cannot, in this respect, remove the
contradiction; whereas, the same reason or respect does implicate or entangle
it self, and is nothing else but an empty smoke; as before was showed in the
6. These.

XXX.
The matter will appear more clearly, if we observe the force of the Apostles
phrase, by which he teaches, That the Son of God was the seed of Abraham; or,
that he assumed humane nature of Abraham's seed, Heb. 2.

XXXI.
Here are to be considered the bounds of this divine assumption, as the
Schoolmen speak; to wit, from whence the Word assumed it, and to what he
assumed it.

XXXII.
But he assumed his flesh out of the substance of the Virgin Mary, which,
because it draws its original from Abraham, the Apostle rightly says, that
the seed of Abraham was taken.

XXXIII.
The Word assumed that mass which he took of the Virgin, not hither or
thither, to this or that place.

XXXIV.
For, although the Son of God would have his flesh in the time of his
humiliation, that he might perform his work on earth, to be subject to
locality; and although, as yet, he can visibly appear, when, and where he
will, in some place or other: yet, notwithstanding, not any place, but the
illocall hypostasis of the only begotten Word is the limits, or bounds of this
divine assumption, into which the flesh of our Savior is transferred by the
union.

XXXV.
Which S. Athanasius, in his Creed, has learnedly and briefly comprehended;
when he defines the hypostaticall union, to be the assuming of the humanity
into God.

XXXVI.
The humanity then of Christ, by a real assumption being transferred into God,
or the personality of God, in which, all thought of place and locality cease;
or, as Damascen orthodoxally writes, having its existence in the very Word it
self; the humanity, I say, in respect of this personal union, does, in a most
high manner, transcend all locality, and has truly obtained in the Word an
illocall manner of existing.

XXXVII.
Therefore, that I may conclude in the most grave words of Doctor Chemnitius,
The assumed nature is so united personally to the whole plenitude of the Deity
of the Son of God, that the Word within that secret, most strait, intimate,
profound and excellent embracement, not of any one parcel, but of the whole
fullness of the Godhead, which with it is above, and without all place, has
the said humanity within it self, with it self, and in its power personally
united, and always most present. And in that fullness of the united Deity, the
assumed nature, as Damascen says, has an individable, inseparable,
undis-jointed; or, in respect of place, an indistant immanencie.

XXXVIII.
The same opinion is at large handled in both the Confessions of Master Luther;
and by the alleging of Luthers words, in the breviate, or form of that
agreement publicly received in those countries, it is plain, that it is
approved by it.

The Animadversion.
Who will not cry out here, With what knot shall I hold Proteus, so often
changing his countenance? Who can here catch the Sophister? I warrant you,
unskilful men will grow amazed at such stupendous teratologies. He says,
that the mass of mankind is not assumed hither or thither, to this or that
place; Monstrous speeches.
that not any place, but the illocall hypostasis of the Son of God is the But,
or Terminus ad quem of the assumption: That the flesh of our Savior was
transferred to be the Terminus of the assumption: That it has in a most high
manner transcended all localitie: That in the Word it has obtained an illocall
way of subsisting: That the Word has the assumed nature within the embracement
of the whole fullness of the divine nature, with it self, within it self, by
it self, in its power: That the humane nature, in the fullness of the united
Deity, has its immanencie undisjoynted. Who ever spoke thus in the Church?
This is the black stuff of the fish Sepia, and the empty smoke of juggling
tricks, by which the simple doctrine of the Son of God is obscured, and the
foolish world is bewitched, that living and seeing they see not, nor feel such
gross lies. (...).
This is a new and a treacherous way of speaking, quite different from these
brief delineations of wholesome words in Scripture, and in pious antiquity,
concerning this mystery; by which the Sophister sufficiently, if I am not
deceived, has testified, that this which he utters is a new and monstrous kind
of doctrine: For, they that broach new doctrines, do for the most part devise
new phrases.

Now to the matter: The Sophister in these Positions devises another false
supposition, by which he may keep up the ubiquitie of the flesh; That the
flesh of our Savior, in the union of the Word, is made illocall. This he
endeavors to beat out of the Apostolical term of Assumption, besprinkling
some Schoole-termes.

But he maliciously depraves the words of Scripture, and phrases of the
Schoolmen: For, the assuming of Abraham's seed does not signify in Paul an
exalting, or transferring of man's nature into the illocalitie of the Son of
God, by which it is also made illocall; but an individual hypostaticall union
with the Son of God, the nature remaining entire, and the true properties
thereof: because the flesh assumed, is the flesh of the Son of God; not out of
the union, but in the union; not without the Word, but in the Word, both
before, and in his glory. And the Son of God is our brother, flesh of our
flesh, and bone of our bones: in which communion of our flesh with the Son of
God, all Christian comfort and salvation consists. So the Apostle himself,
in the precedent words, explaines this assuming: The Son of God is made
partaker of flesh and blood, as the children are, after the same manner.

He corrupts also the Schoole-termes: For, they tell us, that the Terminus ad
quem of the assumption, is not the nature, but the person: because (as they
say) the union was made in the person, not in the nature; that is, because, by
the union, the two natures did not unite into one nature, but into one person
of the Son of God; subsisting first in one, now in two natures, the divine and
humane, inconfused and entire. But in no case do they speak or agree with this
Sophister, that the flesh of our Savior was transferred into the term of the
assumption; that is, into the illocall hypostasis of God, that therein it might
be illocall. These are pestilent snares: for, so the Sophister may readily
infer, that, by the same way, the flesh in the Word is God, is immense, is
everywhere. But let us wipe away the painting, and reduce this prodigious
sophistry to a few points. Thus then in brief he argues:

What is assumed into the illocall hypostasis of the Word, that does obtain,
by this assumption, an illocall manner of existence in the Word; that is, to be
illocall. The flesh of our Savior was assumed into the illocall hypostasis of
the Word: Ergo, the flesh of our Savior has obtained in the Word an illocall
manner of existence; that is, to be illocall. He proves the Major, These. 36.
Because in God, and in the hypostasis of God, all thought of place and
localitie cease. The Minor, These. 34. Because the illocall hypostasis of the
Word, is the term of the assumption, into which, by the union, the flesh is
tranferred. Also, by the authority of Athanasius, defining the hypostaticall
union, by the assuming of the humanity into God. Answ. That here is sophistry,
is plain, by the manifest falsehood of the Conclusion, fighting against the
whole Evangelicall history, which testifies, that the humane nature of Christ,
assumed by the Word, was always local. The Major then is only true of that
which is assumed either by conversion into that local hypostasis of the Word,
or by coequation with it; but not of that which is assumed by such an
hypostaticall union, which leaves, and preserves entire and inconfused, the
nature and properties of that which assumeth, and of that which is assumed.
Now, that in this sense and manner the flesh of our Savior was assumed into
the illocall hypostasis of the Son of God, none but a Nestorian or Eutychian
Heretic will deny. So then, here are four terms in this Argument. If the
Sophister will not admit of a distinction, and also will contend the Major to
be true of that which is assumed by the hypostaticall union, the proprieties
being preserved, we deny it all, as being most false: For the hypostasis of
the Word, as it is illocall, so also it is infinite, eternal, incorporeall,
begot of the Father, incarnate, by nature God: neither for this is it true,
that whatsoever is assumed by such an hypostasis of the Word, that must be also
infinite, eternal, incorporeall, begot of the Father, incarnate, and by nature
God.

Secondly, we deny also the consequence; because it is a manifest fallacy of
that which is not the cause, as if it were the cause: For, the cause of the
illocalitie of the flesh, is feigned to be the assumption of the flesh into the
illocall Word, which cause is no cause. For, the Word assumed not the flesh, by
which, or because it is illocall; but by which, or because it is the second
person, distinguished from the Father and holy Ghost. The reason of this is
firm and manifest, which the Sophister, by no ink of the Sepia, can darken;
because the assumption of the flesh was made, not according to any natural
property, as is illocalitie, by which the Word is united to the Father and
holy Ghost; but according to the characteristicall properties, by which he is
distinguished from the Father and holy Ghost, as Damascen excellently shows:
Lib. 3. cap. 7.
Otherwise, either the assumption had not been made solely by the Word, but
also by the Father and holy Ghost; or else surely all the other natural
attributes of the Word, none excepted, should be attributed to the flesh, by
the assumption or virtue of the union: and so monstrously we might affirm,
that the flesh in the eternal, infinite, incorporeall Word, etc. did most
eminently transcend all respect of time, finitie, corporietie, etc. and has
truly obtained an eternal, infinite, incorporeall way of existing. If so, what
will ubiquitarisme leave for Eutyches? Where will our Adversaries sixth Thesis
stand? Where will our brother be? our flesh? our faith and comfort?

Wherefore, in that with so much cunning the Sophister urges the illocalitie
of the Word, he paints to no purpose: for, by this he will be no more able to
prove the local, true, and solid flesh, as he calls it, to be made illocall,
by the illocall Word, in the virtue of the union; then if he should say, that
man's body, by the force of union, has most highly transcended all densitie,
corporietie, mortality, etc. and does truly obtain in the soul a rational,
spiritual, immortal, etc. manner of existing, because it is hypostatically
united with the reasonable, spiritual, immortal soul. Away with such trifles.

The proof of the Major is nothing, but like to the former fallacy of non
causae; because the illocalitie of God assuming, is no more the cause of the
illocalitie of the flesh assumed, then the eternity, simplicity, immensitie
of the same, makes the flesh eternal, most simple, and immense. We are not
only not to conceive any place or localitie in God, but also time, finitie,
and humanity must cease to be in our thoughts. Answ. Must then the thought of
these in the flesh assumed cease? No: because the union is so made, that the
natures and natural properties remain entire, and inconfused.

Neither is the proof of the Minor to any purpose; for, the illocall
hypostasis of the Word, is the term or limit, not of the flesh, but of the
assumption of the flesh. Neither is the flesh made the very illocall hypostasis
of the Word, or changed into it; but so by it and in it assumed, that it
subsisteth in it, and is sustained and borne up by it, as the proper flesh of
the Word. In the mean while, let it be and remain even in the Word the true
and local flesh, such as was by the Word, and in the Word assumed.

Neither is this the opinion of the Schools, as I showed before, when they
say, That the hypostasis is the Terminus ad quem of the Assumption; or, that
the union is terminated in the person, as if the nature assumed were made the
hypostasis, or were terminated and defined by the hypostasis; but that with the
Word assuming, it is united into one hypostasis; and that the union of two
natures makes not one nature, but one person. In which sense they also dispute,
that the union is not made in the person, but in the nature. In vain then,
under this vizard of the Schoolmen, does he seek to hide himself. Furthermore,
Athanasius understands the humanity to be so assumed into God, that it is not
therefore made God, but that it subsisteth in the person of God, and is the
proper flesh of God; that God may be truly man, and man truly God.

As for Chemnitius his swelling words, the simple truth is no ways moved by
them. In vain then does the Sophister defend himself with this target. What
is more usual then, Claw me, and I will claw thee?

From Master Luther (who, though in some passages he wrote well, concerning
our Lords last words) our orthodox men appeal (lest they should seem to depend
on men) to Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter: all which testify, that the
flesh of our Savior, even in the Word, was and remained local. They appeal
to our Savior himself, who, after his resurrection, in his local flesh, not
without the Word, but in the Word; not without the union, but being then most
united to the Word, standing in the midst of his Disciples locally, said, See,
and touch; a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. They appeal
from both the Confessions of Luther, to both the Testaments of the living God,
to the Augustan Confession, and to Master Luthers own sounder writings: in
which he rejects the ubiquitie of the flesh. Finally, they appeal from the
Bergensin harmony, to the harmony of the holy Evangelists and Apostles;
which, we know, is publicly received in the Church of Christ.

XXXIX.
Out of what is said, it appears also, that the union of the Word with the
flesh, and of the natures themselves, one with another, is to be described by a
true and solid communion.

The Animadversion.
Now, in the end, he deduceth such consectaries, which, being rightly
understood, no orthodox Divine will reject: But all of them are full of snares;
of which, the younger sort must be briefly warned.

The first is, That the union of the natures themselves, one with another, is
to be described by a true and solid communion; This is well. Why then hitherto
did he not thus describe it, but defined it, a bare immanencie; when plainly
and fully it should have been defined an union, lest the title should lie? But
before I gave the Reader a caveat concerning this cunning, in the Argument.

Among the orthodox Fathers, Communion often signifies an union; because the
one common hypostasis of the two natures is made up by union: and this is the
true and solid communion of the natures; because truly and solidly, that is,
most really and narrowly the Deity is communicated to the humanity, and the
humanity to the Deity; that is, so united, that they are one person, their
natures and properties remaining entire. So Damascen, lib. 3. cap. 6. The
divinity, in one of his hypostasis, has totally communicated himself, (...).
or is united to us. Fulgentius to Donat. Man should never have received from
God the grace of salvation, if the communion, that is, the union of the divine
and humane nature, did not remain in one person of Christ.

Yet oftener, and properly in the Fathers, Communion signifies the common
predication of either of the natures and properties thereof, on the whole
person in the concrete: Which communication is not the union it self, but the
effect or consequence of the union; and this communion is true and solid, and
(as they speak) most really in the person: for it makes, that God the Word is
really, solidly, and truly man, who suffered, died, rose again, and was
received into glory; and that man, truly, solidly, and most really, is God
eternal, omnipotent, immense, and everywhere. But he cannot be called so in
the natures; for, it is not the cause that the Deity is truly and solidly the
humanity, or man, or that it suffered, and died, and was raised and assumed
into glory, etc. nor that the humanity is truly and solidly God, or the
Deity, eternal, omnipotent, immense, and everywhere: for what else were such
a communication, then an Eutychian confusion of the properties, and therefore
of the natures? And so much of the first consectarie.

But the Sophister cunningly understands the true and solid communion of the
natures, to be that real and mutual communication of the properties made in
the natures; that is, the transfusion of the divine properties into the flesh,
and of the humane into the Deity: although Chemnitius, and some of the sounder
Ubiquitaries, have not as yet absolutely confessed this mutual communication,
feigning of a true mutual union, a communication not truly mutual in the
natures, but in the humane nature only: which wise remedy overthrowes it self
sufficiently, and is cunningly concealed here by the Sophister; until by the
next Disputation he produce it again upon the stage, but died in brighter
colors, I warrant you.

XL.
Therefore we affirm, that the very person or hypostasis of the Word is
communicated, and (that I may use the words of S. Cyril) ineffably conferred;
so that, according to Damascen, that hypostasis of the Word, is also made the
hypostasis of the flesh.

XLI.
For, if the Deity, and the nature of the assumed humanity in Christ be one
person, it is necessary, that that person of the Deity of the Word be common to
both natures; to the Deity naturally, but to the humanity, by virtue of the
union, personally.

XLII.
For, if the Word, no less then the children, be really participant of flesh
and blood, Heb. 2. why has not the flesh by turn been partaker of the Word
also? or (which is all one) of its hypostasis? and that not in name only, but
truly and solidly?

XLIII.
For, either the flesh will really be the person, which is absurd; or (which is
a necessary consequence) will really communicate with the person of the Word
assuming.

The Animadversion.
This is the other Corollarie, That the very hypostasis is communicated to, and
collated upon the humanity ineffably. This is also granted, if it be rightly
understood, that this communication or collation is made by the hypostaticall
union; by which, one and the same hypostasis of the Word and flesh is made up,
the natures, and natural properties remaining entire: But this communication
or collation of the hypostasis, does in no wise make the flesh it self the
hypostasis: and therefore, nor God, nor omnipotent, immense, illocall,
everywhere, etc. which cunningly he intimates does follow from thence, and
goes about to make it so. In the like sense we receive as orthodox, when he
says, That the flesh truly and solidly has become partaker of the hypostasis
of the Word, and communicates really with the hypostasis of the Word assuming.
Neither needed he to sweat and toil so much in proving of this; but who
observes not, and abhorres the Sophisters cunning, concerning the ubiquitary
communication, by which the flesh is made God, immense, illocall, everywhere?
Above also, These. 3. he made the flesh partaker of the person of the Word, by
force of the union: Of which phrase, see the Animadversion there.

XLIV. But, if the person of the Word is communicated and collated upon the
humanity; doubtless, the Deity of this person must needs also be communicated
to it: lest we imagine, that the Deity of the Word is really different from its
hypostasis.

The Animadversion. Nor do we deny this third consectary, That the very Deity
of the Word was communicated to the humanity; that is, personally united: For
the Deity of the Word, and the hypostasis of the Word, are the same in
essence; they only differ in some respect: therefore, as the hypostasis, so
also the Deity of the Word, is truly said to be; and, is indeed, communicated
to the humanity: Or, as he in great letters writes it, COLLATED; to wit, by
the hypostaticall union, which makes that man, but not the humanity, is God,
and everywhere: For, the union makes the natures and properties common, not to
the nature or natures in the abstract; as if one nature should be another, or
both, or have the properties of both: but to the person in the concrete, that
of both natures there be one person, having and requiring in it self the
properties of both.

XLV.
For this cause the Apostle teaches, That all fullness of the Deity in Christ
dwells bodily, in the highest way of communion, next to the mystery of the
Trinity, which Ecclesiastic Writers illustrate and express, by the Similie of
soul and body: as likewise of the fire, and burning iron.

The Animadversion.
The Deity of the Word, and the fullness of the Deity of the Word are the
same; for, the Deity is void of all division and multiplication: therefore, as
that, so this is communicated to the humanity; or, as the Apostle speaks, It
dwells in Christ bodily or personally: So that the fullness of the Deity
inhabiting, and this mass inhabited, are one body, one person, one
Suppositum, as the Schoolmen call it. But what is this inhabitation to that
fictitious effusion of the divine properties into the flesh? As for the Similie
of the soul and body, how it agrees, we have noted above upon the 20. Thesis.

The Similie of iron, and a coal, and a fiery sword, is used by Athanasius,
Cyril, and Damascen, to declare that most inward and inseparable union and
communication of the natures; but it is not like in every thing: and if it
were, it would not help the ubiquitarie communion; it could prove nothing
against Scripture: for the union there, is not of two substances, but the
formal copulation of subject and accident: which, as it makes not the heat to
be iron, nor hard, not heavy; so neither does the heat make iron, nor soft,
nor light, etc.

XLVI.
Under this plenitude of all the Deity, infallibly all the majesty of the
properties of the Word is understood. Of the communication of which majesty,
as also of the properties, by Gods help, we will discourse in the next
Disputation.

The Animadversion.
Neither is this last denied by orthodox men, That under the plenitude of all
the Deity, all the majesty of the properties of the Word is understood: For,
what else are the properties of the Word, whether natural, or
characteristicall, then the very fullness of the Deity of the Word? But away
with sophistical cunningnesse; That the majesty of the properties of the Word
is the Deity, the immensitie, the illocalitie, the ubiquitie transsused by
virtue of the union from the Word into the flesh really: which, if the
Sophister shall attempt to prove in his next disputation, by Gods help, there
shall be those, who, with solid arguments out of Gods word, and pious
antiquity, will overthrow what he binds. In the mean while he is warned, if
he cherishes no monster, that he speak with an upright mouth, (...).
without prodigious phrases: For, a wise man's words are upright.

The Epistle of D. David Parie to the illustrious and noble Count, Lord
Ludovick Witgenstenius, etc.
CONCERNING Christ's active and passive justice.
Illustrious and noble Count,
IN that I answer your demand later then is fitting, I humbly entreat, that you
will not impute this to any fault or neglect in me: For I acknowledge, that
you have deserved so well of the Church in general, as of my self in
particular, that your beck shall command both willing and deserved service from
me. A concatenation of business has hitherto withheld and pulled me back,
now and then, from that which I had heretofore begun to write: but, that I may
speak plainly and ingenuously, I desire not to interpose my judgment in
matters of controversy; because I am conscious of mine own weakness that
way: as likewise in regard of that affection I have to peace, which I have
always loved, I am averse from meddling with strange controversies, and
especially, with this of Justice; which makes me fear, I know not how, (...).
that it will prove both beneficial and hurt full to our Churches. We know,
that the reformation of doctrine in our times began from this head; I wish it
may not end in this. The Scripture phrase is plain and simple, That we are
justified by the blood and death of Christ; and, that our justification
consists in remission of sins. Now, the dispute is, Whether we are justified
by the death of Christ? whether by it alone? whether it be temporary? whether
the matter, by imputation of which we are justified, be one, or multiplied;
simple, or made up of parts; two, or three? Whether the imputation be one, or
double, or triple? Whether remission of sins be whole, or half of our
justification, and I know not what else? In which, my judgment is, that there
is more dangerous subtletie, then solid verity; and, that many work more with
their wit, then with their faith. And these digladiations are not only in our
neighbor countries exercised, but are also everywhere spread abroad, and
diversely agitated, according to the acuteness of men's wits. In another corner,
not far from you, (...).
there is risen another strife, more dangerous, concerning Gods vindicative
justice, whether it is naturally or voluntarily in God: That, as God will
rain, or not rain to morrow, his nature requiting none of these; so, whether
he will punish, or not punish the sins of Devils and wicked men, his nature
requiring neither of these: which, some, seasoned with Socinian subtleties,
have begun lately to move. By which craft, Satan (doubtless) goes about to
undermine the necessity of satisfaction; and, withal, Christ's satisfaction
for us; and consequently, our whole faith, and utterly to destroy these: For it
is not unknown, that Socinian nicities aim at this. Good God! what means
this itching humor of arguing, and this lust of innovating and pulling up of
every thing? Whatsoever yesternight they dreamed of, to day they utter it in
their Pulpits, as if they were Oracles; and with great eagerness defend: to
morrow they are of another opinion, and they change their opinions, as often as
they do their clothes; as though there were not already too many strifes, and
monstrous opinions in the Church. I fear, lest these sparks shortly burst out
into a flame, which will by degrees set our Churches in a combustion, if we be
not the more watchful: Therefore, Noble Count, your singular care and study
deserve high commendation, in that (out of your grave wisdom and excellent
piety) you do not slightly pass over these increasing evils; but you
perceive that you are concerned, when your neighbors house is on fire: and
therefore you endeavor to find out fit remedies for these fresh wounds. As for
my self, although I confess that I am not willing to meddle with this
controversy, but by all means desire it may be buried; both because I judge
it unworthy of our Churches, and Evangelicall Schools, especially in this
clear light of Scripture and Reformation; as also, because I perceive our
Adversaries take occasion to oppress the truth by our wranglings; then lastly,
because whatsoever I say, will presently be thought a casting of oil into the
fire, as the Proverb is, by reason of the heat of some, who are so violent in
maintaining this cause, that they can scarce abide their brethren, if they be
of another opinion. Notwithstanding, seeing what in this case is demanded from
me, is not dissonant to mine office and profession, I shall think it no
burden, freely to deliver mine opinion of this question: and that I may answer
in order to all your Lordships interrogatories, I will first of all briefly
touch the chief opinions and reasons of moment in this controversy; to wit,

As for the first head, That the state of the controversy may be better
understood, we must know in what these Disputers agree, or disagree. They all
agree, 1. That to justify, in that sense it is used in the Courts of Justice,
(signifies to absolve from guilt, and to repute one just. 2. That we sinners
are justified before God, not legally, but evangelically; that is, not by
works, but by faith: not by our own, but by another justice. 3. That this
justice of another is not infused, but imputed by God to the faithful, and
that freely. 4. That the application of imputed justice is done by faith only;
and, that to be justified by faith, is the same that is to be justified by the
justice of another imputed, and by faith applied. 5. That this external
justice is the merit of Christ alone, and his satisfaction for us, or Christ's
righteousness imputed to us.

But they disagree in the explication of this merit, or of Christ's justice:
First, as the justice of God in Scripture equivocally signifies sometimes
that, by which God himself is just; sometimes that, by which he justifies us:
So, the justice of Christ equivocally is called that, by which Christ, God and
man, is just; as also that, which he has merited for us, and which by faith
he bestows on us: the neglect of this equivocation is the cause of all the
controversy.

Again, when in Christ, as God and man, there is a fourfold justice affirmed
by some: 1. His divine or essential. 2. His humane, or formal, or original.
3. His active filling of the Law. 4. His passive obedience; the question is,
Whether all these justices, or some, or the last only, be that thing, by the
imputation of which, we are justified? Some call this the matter, others the
form of our justice; I, to be better understood, will call it the matter.

This question has drawn with it another, concerning the form of our
justification, whether remission of sins be the whole, or only the half of
our justification? And so far, as I can remember, this controversy began first
to be in agitation amongst some Divines of Marchia, about the year 64. then in
the year 70. by the mediation of the University of Witteberg, it was in some
sort laid asleep, or rather suppressed: heretofore it was unknown to the
Reformed Churches; neither is there any mention or dispute of it, for ought I
know, in the writings of Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Calvin, Martyr,
Musculus, Hyperius, or of the other Divines of this Age. But the simple
doctrine of Scripture, was received by consent of all, to wit, that we are
justified by the death of Christ, whereas by it we have remission of sins. Now,
there are in a manner four opinions, which, whilst I am writing, I think of
Lombard, who rehearses also four opinions of his side, Lib. 3. d. 19.
concerning Justification, he himself being ignorant what to think.

The first sort are they, who will have all these four justices of Christ at
once to be imputed to us; to them the matter of justification is the fourfold
righteousness of Christ; the form, the quadripartite imputation: yet, this
they reduce sometimes to two parts; to wit, the remission of sins by the death
of Christ, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness, divine, humane,
active, etc. and the proper reason of these is, that whole of Christ, God and
man, is our Savior, King, and Priest, etc. and that the dignity of Christ's
merit, especially from the dignity of the person, that is, of the divinity,
has its dependence.

Others will have the three latter justices of Christ to be the matter, and the
threefold imputation of them, to be the form of justification: And they
teach, that first is imputed to us the passive obedience, to this end, that we
may not be unjust; that is, for remission of sins. Secondly, the active
obedience, for this end, that we may be just; that is, to righteousness.
Thirdly, the formal, or, as they call it, the habitual sanctity, for this
end, that we may be accounted holy; that is, to perfect holiness.

The third sort make the two latter justices only of Christ the matter of
justification, and the twofold imputation of them, the form of justification.
All these three agree in this, that they distinguish remission of sins and
justification, as the part and the whole, sometime also as the integrall parts
of the whole; and the former they attribute to the death of Christ, the latter
to his active obedience: they all likewise use the same arguments, and words of
Scripture, of which I will briefly set down the chiefest.

1. As by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, many are made righteous, Romans 5. But Adams disobedience was
active; therefore we are justified by Christ's active obedience. 2. He was made
obedient, even to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. Here is a twofold
obedience of Christ, the one before death, the other in death; therefore both
are imputed. 3. God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, and made under the
Law, that he might redeem those that were under the Law, Gal. 4. Therefore,
the active fulfilling of the Law by Christ is imputed to us. 4. He was made of
God to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, etc. 1 Cor. 1. Therefore
his justice and sanctity are imputed to us. 5. The Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, freed me from the law of sin, and of death, Romans 8.2. Therefore,
the life of Christ, or his active obedience, is imputed to us. 6. Whole Christ
is our justice, with which he justifies us; therefore, whole Christ is
imputed. 7. Active justice cannot be excluded from Christ's merit, and from
justification, ergo, it is imputed. 8. The Law obliges both to obedience, and
to punishment; therefore, it behooved Christ both to fulfill the obedience of
the Law for us, and also to suffer punishment. 9. To whom the Law does promise
life, such must we be by the grace of Christ, that we may obtain life: the Law
promises life, not to them who transgress not the Law, but to them who
fulfill it all: but by the imputation of his passive obedience, we are
accounted indeed not unjust, not sinners, or, not transgressors of the Law; but
we are not as yet accounted just, or fulfillers of the Law; for, what is more
vain, then to call him just, who has not fulfilled the Law? Therefore, not
only must his passive obedience be imputed to us for this, that we may not be
unjust, or not transgressors of the Law; but also his active, for this, that
we may be just, or fulfillers of the Law: for, he that in Christ is accounted
for no sinner, shall escape death; but by what right shall he also sue for
life, unless he fulfill the whole righteousness of the Law in the same
Christ? 10. The sacrifice and death of Christ comfort us against the guilt, and
death eternal: but his holiness against our inherent impurity, or the
remainders of sin; therefore, the imputation of both is necessary for our
consolation, 11. Lastly, the Catechism of the Palatinate teaches qq. 60. and
61. that the perfect satisfaction, justice, and sanctity of Christ, are imputed
and given to us, to be our justice: and q. 36. that our Mediator, by his
innocence, and perfect sanctity covers our sins in which we were conceived,
lest they should appear in the sight of God. The same is found everywhere in
the Palatinate Directory.

I have faithfully set down the arguments, by which the former sort maintain
their opinions: the fourth sort remain, who make Christ's passive obedience
only our righteousness, and define justification by remission of sins only;
these make use chiefly of two arguments taken our of Scripture, the one from
the matter, the other from the form of justification: The first is this; The
Scripture shows the whole matter of our righteousness to consist in the
passion, Cross, blood, and death of Christ; therefore, this only is it for
which we are justified. They prove the Antecedent by testimonies of Scripture:
Romans 3.24.
We are justified freely by redemption made in Christ Jesus, whom God has set
as a propitiation by faith in his blood. Romans 5.9.
We are justified by his blood, being reconciled by the death of his Son. 2
Cor. 5.21.
Him who knew no sin, be has made sin, (that is, a sacrifice for sin), that we
might become the righteousness of God in him. Gal. 3.13.
He being made a curse for us upon the tree, has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.
We have redemption by his blood. Col. 1.20.
Having made peace by the blood of his Cross, by him he has reconciled all
things to himself; has reconciled them in the body of his flesh by death. 1
Pet. 1.18.
We are redeemed by the precious blood of the immaculate Lamb. Isa. 53.5.
By whose stripes we are healed 1 John 1.7.
The blood of Christ purges us from all our sins. Rev. 19. and 7.14.
Thou have redeemed us by thy blood. They have washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb.

The latter is this: The Scripture defines our whole justification, by
remission of sins through the blood of Christ; therefore, only the effusion of
blood is that, by imputation of which we are justified; and the remission of
sins is our whole righteousness. They confirm the Antecedent by testimonies
of Scripture: Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, that he went down unto his house
justified rather then the other. Acts 13.38.
Be it known to you, that to you is preached remission of sins, through him;
and from all things, from which by the Law you could not be absolved, by him
all that believe are justified. Here, to be absolved, to be justified, to have
remission of sins, are the same things. David pronounces that man blessed, to
whom God imputes righteousness without works: Romans 4.7. Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven, and whose iniquities are hid.
Blessed is the man to whom God imputes no sin. Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies; who shall condemn? It is Christ who is dead, etc. 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ, reconciling to himself the world by not imputing to them
their sins. Ephesians. 1.7.
In whom we have redemption by his blood; that is, remission of sins, etc. They
have also other arguments, which, for brevities sake, I omit; they allege also
for themselves the Catechism of the Palatinate, qq.
37.45.66.55.57.72.76.80.84. etc. In which it is taught, that we obtain
remission of sins, justice, and life eternal, for the alone sacrifice of
Christ on the Cross; and that only the blood of Christ purges us from all
sin: which very thing, is everywhere found in the Directory of the Palatinate.
Hitherto the different opinions concerning justice.

I now pass to the second head, where I will briefly show, without prejudice
to others, what I can approve or disapprove in those who follow the first
opinion: I cannot see how they can prove out of Scripture the imputation of
Gods essential justice: or, why that should be said to be imputed, seeing man
was never obliged, either to the possession or performance of it: for, God
never conferred upon man his essential justice, and man never lost it. They
make God then unjust, as if he did require of man divine justice, which he
never gave him, nor ever will give him.

The reason is a Paralogisme non causae; for, although whole Christ is a King,
Priest, and Savior, and whole Christ justifies; yet, it is known, that he
performs the effects of his office, among which is justification, by the
distinct operations of his natures: therefore whole Christ justifies; but one
way, according to his divinity, to wit, as the efficient cause; another way,
according to his humanity, to wit, as a meritorious cause: and the dignity of
the merit flows from the dignity of the person; that is, from the deity of the
Mediator. But from hence it does not follow, that the deity can challenge any
part of the merit, being the fountain of merit. It behooved then the Mediator
to be God, not that the deity, or justice of the deity might be imputed to us;
or, according to Osianders madness, essentially dwelling in us, might become
our justice: but for the cause explained in the Catechism, q. 17. Therefore,
the justice of the divinity differs from merit, as the cause from the effect.

Other inconveniences also of this opinion belong to the two ensuing;
therefore, I join the second and third opinion together; for, they differ not,
save only that the one makes two parts, the other three parts of imputative
justice. All which opinions are subject to the same inconveniences.

1. All confound the justice of the person, and of the merit of Christ, which
the Scripture oftentimes conjoynes, but does also manifestly distinguish, as
the efficient cause, or sine qua non; and the material cause of our justice:
as, My righteous servant by his knowledge shall justify many. For, such an
High Priest became us, who might be holy, separated from sinners: that he might
offer not for his own, but for the sins of the people. Him who knew not sin,
he has made sin for us, that we, etc. 1 Pet. 3. Christ suffered once, the just
for the unjust. And so our Catechism, quest. 15.16.

2. These distinctions which they make between not unjust, and just; between
not transgressing of the Law, and fulfilling of the Law; between not dead, and
alive: they have more subtlety then verity; being indeed equivalent terms, as
I will afterward show: for, of necessity, he that before God is not unjust,
must be just; who transgresses not the Law, fulfils it; who is not dead, is
alive. Seeing all these are immediate contraries, one of which being affirmed
or denied, the other must necessarily be affirmed or denied.

3. If by the imputation of the passive obedience we are not as yet just, but
only not unjust, how is this true, We are justified by the blood of his Son?
We are reconciled by his death, etc?

4. If remission of sins be not whole justification, how can that be true,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven? Romans 4. etc. how does the
Apostle in the same place take for the same thing, To impute righteousness,
and, Not to impute sin?

5. If the omission of obedience to the Law, and the imperfection of our
holiness, are not expiated by Christ's passive obedience, but necessarily that
must be covered with Christ's actual obedience, this with his natural
holiness; how again can this be true, The blood of Jesus Christ purges us
from all sin? unless, perhaps, omission and imperfection be not sins.

6. If we are not justified by the passive, but by the active obedience of
Christ; how is it, that Christ died not in vain? For, what need was there that
Christ should die, and by his death procure to us pardon for our sins, if by
his just and holy life, he had already merited righteousness for us? for,
righteousness necessarily presupposes remission of sins.

7. It is manifest, that all these partitions of Christ's merits into two or
three members, do exceedingly derogate, either from the death of Christ, or
from the justice of God. For, these two or three parts of our justice, are
either three perfect justices of Christ, every one of which apart satisfies
the Law; or, they are so many imperfect justices, concurring to make up one
perfect righteousness. If they are imperfect, do they not manifestly derogate
from the death of Christ? If perfect, how is not God unjust, who, for one
fault, demands two or three perfect satisfactions, whereas his justice requires
but one?

8. If a part of our justice must be sought for here, a part there, a part in
the death, a part in the actual Antecedent obedience, and a part in the
natural holiness of Christ; is not our faith dangerously distracted, and our
comfort undermined?

9. Lastly, that which chiefly withholds me, is, that I read nowhere in
Scripture, such a tripartite, or bipartite division of our justice: I read
nowhere, that Christ's humane holiness is imputed to us; that either it, or
any part of it, is our righteousness. If any man has read it, I entreat him
to show it, that I may also read and believe it. Neither do I read this
any-where of actual obedience; nor do the five testimonies which they bring,
prove any such thing; which I briefly show, thus:

Out of that saying Romans 5. they conclude more then follows; for, the
consequence will not hold: We are justified by Christ's obedience, ergo, by his
active obedience. The Apostle sets in opposition, Christ's obedience, and Adams
disobedience; not as action against action, but as satisfaction against the
fault, as the remedy against the disease; otherwise, the sins of omission
were not transgressions: but Adams sin was not only a perpetration of evil,
but the omission of good also. Now, the obedience which he understands here, in
another place he does more expressly declare, saying, He was made obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross. But this was the obedience of his
exinanition, and of death; and of the same obedience Theophylact interprets
both places. Therefore, we deny that in this other place, which they object the
second time, any mention is made of two obediences: for, the text shows, that
the Apostle speaks of his continuated obedience, Even to the death of the
Cross; Phil. 2.
which began, when he assumed a servile condition, and ended with his death.
Gal. 4.
Neither does that place, Gal. 4. avail any whit to the active obedience; for,
how Christ for us was made subject to the Law, the Apostle himself explaines
clearly, chap. 3. He redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse
for us; that the blessing of Abraham may be extended upon the Gentiles in
Christ Jesus. But this is understood of Christ's voluntary humiliation, even to
the death appointed by the Law for our sins. How, notwithstanding, this place
may be understood of the servitude to the whole Law, I will speak hereafter.

In that saying to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.
the Apostle joyneth four things, but not as parts of imputed justice, (for,
who will reckon among these, wisdom, or redemption it self?) but as the
chief heads of Christ's benefits; of which, some do help us only by
imputation, as justice; others, by real participation also: in this life
inchoatively, in the other life perfectly, as all the rest. Hence then no
partition can be proved.

In that place to the Romans is the fallacy of Figura dictionis; Romans 8.
for there, The Law of the Spirit of life, does not signify life, or Christ's
active obedience, much less his formal holiness; but it signifies, the
doctrine, or quickening grace of the Gospel. The place is somewhat obscure;
but, by the scope, the simple meaning may be known: that the remainders of the
flesh condemn not godly men, if so be they make resistance against them, by
the help of the Spirit. What the Apostle said in the first verse, he proves in
the second, by supposing his own person, from the effect of the Gospel: The
Law, says he, of the spirit of life; that is, the doctrine or grace of the
Gospel, which is the ministry of the Spirit of life, or of that which makes
us live in Christ Jesus: has made me free; that is, has absolved me, and all
the faithful, and pronounces us free from the law of sin and of death; that
is, from condemnation, with which the Law threatens sinners; therefore, the
Apostle opposes here, the law of the Spirit, and the law of death; as he
opposes the ministry of the Spirit, and the Ministry of condemnation, 2 Cor.
3.8. as if he would say, Although that killing law endeavors to condemn
those that are justified in Christ Jesus, because of the remainders of sin in
them, with which as yet they wrestle: yet, the Law of the Spirit of life; that
is, the living doctrine and grace of the Gospel, does absolve them from
damnation, notwithstanding these remainders of sin, seeing these also are
pardoned them through Christ; for, The blood of Jesus Christ purges us from
all sin, and from all remainders of sin. This (without prejudice to other men's
judgments) seems to me, to be the genuine meaning of the Apostle. But this by
the way: I hasten to the other Arguments.

To the sixth we have already answered. Christ wholly quickneth us: but one
way, as he is the efficient; another way, as he is the matter of
righteousness. And nevertheless he all justifies, although his passion or
death is only said to be imputed: for, he all suffered and dyed. Neither is
his active obedience excluded from merit or justification, though it is not
said to be imputed; which is that the seventh Reason would have. For, how can
the efficient cause, or that which is called sine qua non, be excluded from its
effect? Truly, both the obediences, as well the active, as the passive, were
required in the Mediatiour, for our justification, but after a diverse way:
that, as the cause, sine qua non, or without which the effect cannot be
produced, as also his natural holiness: this, as the matter.

In the eighth Reason we deny the Antecedent: For, it was never heard, that the
Law did oblige both to obedience and punishment, at the same time; but every
law obliges (dis-junctively, not copulatively) either to obedience, or to
punishment: For, so long as obedience is performed, the Law obliges no man to
punishment; that is, it pronounces no man guilty of punishment, but promises
life: but when obedience is violated, then the Law obliges the sinner to
punishment. This is generally true, both of divine and humane laws.

Therefore their suppositions, which they here assume, are untrue, and
repugnant to Gods justice: 1. That Adam, before his fall, at once was tied to
obedience and punishment. 2. That man, after his fall (and so the Mediator for
man) was obliged both to fulfill the Law, and to suffer punishment. When
obedience, indeed, is violated, the sinner is bound to make satisfaction by
punishment; this being performed, he is no more a sinner: and he is tied to
obedience, not to that, for the violation of which he has satisfied by
punishment, but to another new obedience; or, if again he violate this, to a
new punishment. Christ then, taking upon him our person, he is obliged to
satisfy for us, by suffering punishment; this being paid, and imputed to us by
faith, we are just: and are tied furthermore to new obedience, or to new
punishment. This new obedience Christ also by regeneration repaires in us, but
imperfectly; and this imperfection is hid by Christ's satisfaction, that it may
not condemn us: because the blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all
sins, as well from those that follow, as from those that precede justification.

The ninth Reason seems to be the quickest of all, but is indeed fraughted with
contradictions, and overthrowes it self; and besides, is repugnant to
Scripture. First, there is a manifest contradiction, when it says, That the
Law promises life to those that fulfill the Law, and promises not life to
those that transgress it not: The reason is, because, not to transgress the
Law, and to fulfill the Law, are the same in effect. This is proved by the
contrary: to transgress the Law, is to violate the Law; either by committing
what the Law forbids, or by omitting what it commands: therefore not to
transgress the Law, is not to violate the Law, by committing what it forbids,
or by omitting what it commands; but this is truly to fulfill the Law: for, he
that commits nothing against the Law, nor omits what should be done by the Law,
does truly fulfill the Law: therefore whosoever does not transgress the Law,
fulfils it. This is manifest in our first father Adam before his fall: for, so
long as he sinned not, he fulfilled the Law, by a continual act in his
original integrity. And do not the Angels in heaven fulfill the Law, even in
that they sin not? And shall not we in life eternal fulfill the Law, when we
shall not offend against it? Either then these are the same, or so knit
together, that it is impossible either to separate them, or to devise a medium
betwixt them. Secondly, this also is inconsistent which they say, That the Law
does not promise life to them that transgress it not; but it promises life to
the fulfillers of the Law. Now, not to transgress, is to fulfill. Thirdly,
this implies a contradiction, when they say, That by passive obedience we are
accounted not unjust, or not sinners; and yet are not accounted just: Also,
That they who sin not, in Christ do escape death, but dare not sue for life:
for the same thing here is both affirmed and denied of terms equivalent: for
surely, he that is not a sinner before God, is just; and, who is not dead, or
who has escaped death, is alive: For these are immediate contraries, as is
said. Fourthly, this is plainly repugnant to Scripture, when it is said, that
we are not accounted just by Christ's passive obedience, that is not justified:
For, on the contrary, it is said expressly, Being justified by his blood, being
reconciled by his death, they have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb.
They that can reconcile their subtleties one with another, and with these and
such like plain sayings, let them; I confess, I cannot.

To the tenth Reason we answer out of that saying, The blood of Jesus Christ
purges us from all sin. But surely, that impuritie that sticks to the Saints,
is sin: therefore from that also the blood of Christ purges us. Why then
should trembling consciences be driven in their temptations from the blood of
Christ, to seek out other remedies, against so manifest a Scripture?

Lastly, as for the Palatinate Catechism, that tells us in two places, that
the satisfaction, justice, and sanctity of Christ is imputed to us. And once,
that original sin is covered by the holy nativitie and conception of the
Mediator. But that these Authors never thought of a tripartite matter in
imputative justice, or of derogating the expiation of original sin, and
justification from the blood of Christ, is assuredly known by this, in that
elsewhere so often and so plainly, they ascribe the merit of justice and life
eternal, to the passion, death, and sacrifice of Christ, and that solely and
only to it. And they witness, that our inherent sin is forgiven us for this
merit. Either then the Catechism is repugnant to it self, which, God forbid;
or it makes no tripartite division of justice imputative: nor does it derogate
from Christ's passive obedience the merit of righteousness.

The fourth opinion remains, That our justice is the obedience even to death,
or the punishment of the Son of God for our sins, that whole justification is
the remission of sins, for this satisfaction imputed to us. Which opinion, as
being truer, simpler, and safer, I confess, I do embrace; but so, as it may
be understood and explained rightly, and according to the Scriptures meaning. I
say, it is truer; because it is the constant voice of the whole Gospel, That
we are justified by the death and blood of the Son of God, and that our
justification consists in the sole remission of sin. The testimonies of the
Gospel were rehearsed above.

Object. But there is a Synecdoche totius in the terms of blood death, etc.
Answ. There is, indeed, but not such an one, as has gathered into one merit
two or three justices altogether heterogeneous; such as the natural sanctity,
the active justice, and the passive obedience; for, there is no reason why the
two former should be called by the name of death and blood: but it is the
Synecdoche of the whole humiliation, as shall be said. I say also, it is
simpler: for, it does not distract our faith hither and thither, by any
partition of merit; nor does it disturb our comfort; but in our spiritual
wrestlings with the Scriptures, it sends our consciences to the only death of
Christ; to wit, by which alone Gods justice and commination is satisfied. Thou
shall dye the death: By this satisfaction, being applied to us by faith, we our
selves have satisfied, are absolved, justified, reconciled to God, by the blood
of his Son.

But, you will say, To make us just, it is not enough to suffer for sin, but
the fulfilling of the Law is also required. Answ. The punishment is the
fulfilling of the Law; then it is sufficient: For, the Law is fulfilled two
ways; either by yielding perfect obedience, or, when this is violated, by
suffering condign punishment: by both there is ^atisfaction made to Gods
justice; each then is the fulfilling of the Law, 1 John 3.7. Romans 6.7.
and each is justice. Of the former it is said, He that does righteousness, is
righteous. Of the later, He that is dead, is justified from sin. The first
fulfilling was in man, before his fall; and by that he was just: Neither was he
tied to the other, so long as he sinned not; because Gods justice requires not
both together, but either of them: seeing the Law, as is said, does tie the
reasonable creatures, not conjunctively to obedience and punishment together
(for it were great iniquity, to oblige them to punishment, that obey the Law:)
but dis-junctively, either to obedience, (...) of his humane justice with the
Law, as the chief perfection of the person of the Mediator, without which, he
could not be our High Priest and Savior: so the justice of his merit, or
(...), is not only the blood and death, but comprehends also all the obedience
of his humiliation, from the minute of his conception, even till the death of
the Cross. For the whole life of Christ, being full of miseries and sorrows,
what else was it, then a perpetual suffering and punishment for our sins? For,
by the order of divine justice, whereas Christ was most just, his life should
not have been miserable and calamitous; but altogether sorrowlesse, fortunate,
and happy: but in that it was miserable, it was by reason he suffered and
satisfied for our sins.

4. Therefore, when the Scripture points out to us justice in the blood,
cross, and death of Christ; he does not speak exclusively, as if the
sufferings that went before his death did nothing belong to his merit; but
synecdochically, comprehending under the complete finishing of our redemption,
all the antecedent degrees also; that is, the beginning, increase, and
consummation. The beginning was in his Incarnation; when, having assumed the
form of a servant, he became poor, etc. for us. The increase was throughout
all his life, which he led in perpetual miseries, tentations, and dangers,
being subject to Gods wrath for us. Lastly, the consummation was in his cross
and death; when, giving up the ghost, he cried out, It is finished. All these
the Prophet conjoynes in the price of our redemption, which Christ paid for us:
He did truly bear our infirmities, Isa. 53.
and took upon him our sorrows; he was wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities: and with his stripes we are healed. So the Apostle,
2 Corinthians. 5. When he was rich, be became poor for us; that we, by his
poverty, might be rich. So Herb. 2. He was made somewhat inferior to the
Angels, by suffering of death. But chiefly, Phil. 2. Being in the form of God,
he emptied himself, taking the form of a servant; and he humbled himself,
being made obedient even to the death of the Cross. Nor will their cavil
avail, in saying, that the Apostle speaks not here of the matter of our
justice: it is enough, that he here extends Christ's obedience, which elsewhere
he showed was our justice, to his whole humiliation. Neither is that place,
Hebr. 9.22. against us, Without shedding of blood there is no remission: It
only follows from hence, that the shedding (...) blood is not excluded from
the cause of remission; but that it is the cause sine qua non of this. But it
will not follow, that it is the only cause; or, that death which followed, or
the antecedent sufferings are excluded: Therefore to Christ's death belongs
the whole obedience of his humiliation, even to the death of the Cross.

5. But why the Scripture ascribes merit, which Christ has purchased for us in
all the course of his obedience, to his death; as if it were peculiar only,
and proper to that; the reason is, because the sufficiency of merit consists
in the death of Christ alone: for, had he not dyed, the obedience of his
humiliation had not been absolute; neither had the wrath of God, in threatening
death to Adam, been satisfied: Therefore all the rest of Christ's obedience,
without dying, had been an insufficient merit, and unprofitable to us. But
they, who attribute the merit of justice to his active obedience, or natural
holiness, they make void (doubtless) the death of Christ.

This explication, true and consonant to Scripture, being observed, it will
appear, 1. That there is something amiss in both sides of the controvertents:
in the former, because they confound the justice of the person, with the
justice of merit; and, by dividing merit into many heterogeneall parts, they
do not only disturb our faith and comfort; but also, against Scripture, they
separate justification from Christ's death. In the later, because from the
justice of merit, they exclude the whole life of Christ, with his humility and
sufferings, that went before his death. And they oppose the exclusive particle
Alone in their phrases (as when they say, The death of Christ alone justifies,
His blood alone purges) to his life and antecedent obedience; whereas it is
opposed in meritorious or material causes partly to personal justice, partly
and chiefly to men's merits, and all other external causes; except they
restrain this particle Alone to sufficiency, of which we have said in the
fifth position. Again, it will appear, that this will be an easy way to
reconcile the controversy, if all of them will agree to urge against the
Papists, and men's merits, all these common passages, in which (as I said
already) they agree, concerning free justification of faith, by Christ's imputed
justice; and that they would not use scrupulous disputations, concerning this
justice, or the matter of imputative justice before the people in their
Sermons; but that they would use Scripture phrases, and be content, that we are
justified not by works, but by faith; not by our own righteousness, but by
another obedience; to wit, by the blood and death of the Son of God, imputed
to us, and applied by faith, etc. For these are sufficient to beget true
comfort to all, and to refute humane merits.

As for the controversy it self, if it must at all be handled in the
Schools, it is needful for a tolerable reconciliation to beware on both
sides, that the Disputants minds may not be too much alienated. The later sort
are offended at the partition of merit into so many diverse pieces; because they
see many absurdities spring from thence, and the Scripture to be wronged. On
the other side, the former are offended, by restraining merit to the death of
Christ; because they fear, lest his life and antecedent obedience be excluded
against the Scripture. What shall be done then? It is needful, that the one
forbear to divide the matter of merit into two, three, or four, as they use:
and that they do not separate the merit of justice from Christ's death, nor
justification from remission of sins: That the others restrain not merit to
the effusion of blood upon the Cross, or to the three days death; and, that
they exclude not his life and antecedent obedience: And both must distinguish,
with the Scripture, personal justice from merit, as the efficient cause, or
sine qua non, from the material; seeing many inconveniences must arise of
confusion, by which, the sense of Scripture is overthrown, the consciences are
disturbed, and occasion of cavilling is ministered to Papists, as we showed in
the first and second Position. 2. Let the personal justice of the Mediator be
rightly limited, according to the third Position. 3. Let the justice of merit
be rightly defined, and let the Synecdoche of the blood, death, and passive
obedience, etc. be understood of Christ's whole humiliation, according to the
fourth and fifth Positions. 4. For a better reconciliation, let this also be
added, That under the humiliation, is comprehended his voluntary subjection to
the Law; and consequently, his active obedience, as they call it: so that this
also, in some respect comes under the notion of merit; to wit, so far as it is
considered to be a voluntary servitude, undertaken and performed for us by the
Son of God. For, this obedience may be considered two ways: 1. As it is a
conformity with the Law, and so it is the personal justice of the Mediator.
2. As the servitude of the Law, to which, for our sakes, Christ made himself
obnoxious; and so it belongs to merit: For, although Christ, as man, was bound
to obey the Law; yet, as just, holy, and the Son of God; yea, even according to
his humanity, he was not obliged to many duties of the first and second Table,
to which nevertheless he did spontaneously subject himself; and so he was
made a servant to the whole Law for us, that he might redeem us from the
servitude, coaction, and damnation of the Law. So, it was a voluntary
servitude, that he would be circumcised, that he would observe the Sabbaths
and Feasts, that he was subject to his parents, and paid tribute to Caesar, and
served his neighbor, etc. being Lord of the circumcision, of the Sabbath, of
patents, of Caesar, of his neighbor, etc. Of this servitude of the Law, that of
the Apostle is to be understood, Galat. 4.
God sent his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, etc. and so, the
complaint of excluding active obedience from merit, will be of less force.
This way of reconciliation, perhaps, will not satisfy the scrupulous; yet it
will not be displeasing to them, who desire these differences of opinions may
be buried: or else, surely, they will think more of some means of peace, and
will show better. In the interim, I am satisfied with these.

By what we have said, Chap. 3.
it will now appear (which was our third Quere) how this doctrine is to be
handled in popular Sermons: whether positively, and refutatively it will be fit
to dispute of it before the people. For my part, I think it is not fitting:
for, what else can be expected of such a disceptation, but that the more
ignorant sort will stagger in their faith, and will presently think, that the
doctrine of faith, hitherto taught in our Churches, has been very slippery and
uncertain; which, notwithstanding, caused us first of all to renounce Popery?
And the Church can be edified in faith and consolation, without such
opposition: by which, not our Adversaries, but our brethren should be touched,
and wrung; their minds distracted into dangerous divisions and contentions, and
scandals should be increased by our fault. Surely, the Romanists willingly,
with both hands, would lay hold upon this opportunity, to traduce us; to wit,
that we cannot agree in that, which we make the maine point of the Gospel. When
Luther began, with others, to reform the doctrine of Justification, Popery
received a deadly wound. What? shall we go about to heal again this wound of
the Beast? And do we not think, what an account we are to make unto God, for
the delight we take in strife and altercation?

But you will say, There is danger, lest error, in stead of truth, should
prevail in the Church. Truly, there is none; if so be these things be
retained, and diligently taught, which are in our Confession: In other points,
let moderation and candor be used. Let our brethren be heard with calmnesse,
and let their opinions be compared one with another, and with Gods word.
Lastly, seek not a knot in a bulrush.

The fourth head remains, concerning the Catechism, Chap. 4.
and Palatinate Directorie, Whether it be sit to omit, or put out any thing in
them? Here I know not, whether I should rather admire, or grieve at the
precipitate temerity of some, who think, they may lawfully judge and censure
sacred and profane things as they list; choose and reject what they please:
this humor is not to be endured. If their wisdom be greater then other men's,
they should do well to new-mould their own Catechism and Directorie: Or, if
they have perceived any error in that of the Palatinate, they should, in a
brotherly way, admonish those, who have the care of this, and who will be ready
to give them an account. Sure, this pretended zeal seems neither to have much
conscience, nor knowledge in it: For, with what conscience can they pass by
their own Catechismes, and make changings in ours? Shall private men put out
that, which publicly belongs to many Churches? If they have knowledge
sufficient, that is, if they understand well the meaning of the Catechism in
every passage, and will be ingenuous, as they ought to be in ambiguous matters,
they will find they have no reason to do thus; because all things agree
sufficiently, if so be that which is doubtful, be explained by that which is
cleerer; and what is briefly set down, be enlarged as if fitting.

But you will say, that in the Catechism nothing should be ambiguous or
doubtful. I confess, indeed: neither had any such thing crept into our
Catechism, if it were now to be written, since the moving of these scruples.
But the passages of our Catechism, which be more manifest, and at large, are
these:

Quest. 12. and 14. there is taught, That no other way of deliverance and of
reconciliation with God could be found, then that either the sinner himself, or
else a Mediator for the sinner, should, by condign punishment, satisfy
divine justice: therefore the punishment of the Mediator for us, is our
satisfaction; and that thing, by and for which we are justified and reconciled
to God: for, in the Apostle, these two are all one, Romans 5.9, 10.

Quest. 15.16. there is taught, That it was needful for the Mediator to be
true God, and true man, and perfectly just; that he might be able to pay the
ransom for us, which we sinners could not pay: therefore the justice of the
person is distinguished from the ransom, as the cause from the effect; so that
the actual and formal justice of the Mediator, belongs to the justice of the
person, as the cause sine qua non.

Quest. 21. is taught, That for this ransom of Christ's remission of sins,
eternal justice and life are bestowed upon all believers: therefore the
Catechism does not so divide remission of sins and justice, as if that were
given because of the ransom, and this, because of Christ active justice.

Quest. 37. it is taught, That Christ by his Passion, as by the only
propitiatory Sacrifice has obtained for us the favor of God, justice, and
life; and that this his suffering extends through the whole course of his life
that he lived here on earth; albeit the chief act of his suffering was in the
end of his life: therefore again, the merit of justice and of life is not
ascribed to active, but to passive obedience; and with all, the Passion
Synecdochically is understood of the whole humiliation.

Quest. 40. it is again taught, That by no other means could satisfaction be
made to divine truth and justice for our sins, then by the death of the Son of
God; therefore it is confirmed again, that the death of the Son of God is our
satisfaction; that is to say, that thing for, and by which we are justified.

Quest. 45. the Catechism says, That Christ therefore rose, that he might
make us partakers of his justice, which he purchased for us by his death.
Therefore, the death of Christ has obtained justice for us, and by imputation
thereof we are accounted not only not unjust, but just also.

Quest. 56. teaches, That God, for the satisfaction of Christ (which is his
punishment and death) has forgot all our sins, even original too, and has
bestowed freely upon us the righteousness of Christ. Therefore it confirms
again, That his death is not only the merit of the remission of all our sins,
even of original too, but also of justification: and that it is not needful
that original sin should be covered with the holiness of his humanity, lest
it appear in the sight of God.

Quest. 66.67.70.72.74.67.80. it is often repeated, that we have remission of
sins, justice, and life eternal, for the only sacrifice, blood, and death of
Christ. Therefore, in all these, there is neither taught, nor can be imagined
such a partition of merit; as if by the imputation of Christ's death, we did
only obtain remission of sins, and, as some lately phrase it, only privative
benefits; but by the imputation of actual obedience we obtain justice, and
positive benefits. The Catechism ascribes all together to Christ's death, as
the Scripture also does, John 3. He gave his only begotten Son, (to wit, to
death) that whosoever believes, (to wit, that the Son was given, and died for
him) may not perish, but have life eternal, etc. But you will say, Quest.
60.61. That imputative justice is expressly divided into three, to wit, perfect
satisfaction, justice, and sanctity, which it says, are imputed to us. And,
Quest. 36. it says, That the Mediator, by his innocence, and perfect
sanctity, has covered our sins in which we are conceived, that they may not
appear in the sight of God.

As for the first, either we must confess, that these fight against the
former, which charity, and Christian candor will not allow; or the partition
must be denied, and a convenient interpretation, and a reconciliation of them
must be found. Without wronging other men's judgments, I will tell my mind
here, and how I am wont to excuse the Catechism: I say then, that the
Catechism joins these three together, but does not (as we said) divide them
expressly as three: it joins, I say, these three, not as if it divided
imputative justice into these three, as into diverse parts, as if the imputed
satisfaction did make us not unjust, the justice just, the sanctity holy; for
it taught the contrary before: but either because the Compilers of the
Catechism did retain this phrase, out of Mr. Beza's Confession, (whose it is
properly known to be) not fearing there would be cavilling about it; they
themselves in the mean while neither intending, nor observing any partition:
or, because they would more emphatically note by these phrases, as Synonymous,
the whole course of his obedience, and humiliation till death: for, Christ's
humiliation and death is our satisfaction; because by it satisfaction is made
to divine justice for us: It is also justice; because it is the fulfilling of
the Law by suffering: It is lastly holiness, John 17.
because it is a holy Sacrifice; of which it is said, Father, I sanctify my
self for them: And, By one oblation he has consecrated all who are justified.
This I conjecture, because, in the first edition of the Fundamentals of the
Lords Supper, (...)

A piece of a Speech, concerning that Question; To whom properly do the
benefits of Christ's sufferings and death belong? And, How Christ is said to die
for all. IN The famous University of HEIDELBERGE, declaimed by JOSUA ZEVELIUS
of Colen, the day before Easter, An. 1590.
D. DAVID PARY being Author.
SIRS,
I Think I have spoken sufficiently of the history and benefits of our Lords
Resurrection: it now remains, that what we had reserved for the last place, be
now explained; to wit, to whom these benefits belong. Therefore, that we may
direct our course by the Cynosure, or by the Pole Star of holy Writ; we
affirm, that, according to the same Scripture, these precious fruits do belong
to all the Elect, and to them alone: but, as for the incredulous and impious,
so long as they remain such, we exclude them from these benefits. For, all the
believers, and they only, taste the sweetness of these fruits; to wit, of
free justification before God, of vivification from the death of sin, and of
the body; and, at last, they all, and they alone, feel the sweetness of
immortality and glory; because they alone apply to themselves these fruits:
John 3. and 5. Romans 6.4. and 5.1. 1. Pet. 1.3. Acts 15.9. 1 These. 4.14.
They are those who hear the word of Christ, who receive it with a good and an
honest heart, who believe it, and have life eternal, and shall not come into
condemnation: these are justified by faith, are reconciled to God, and have
peace through our Lord Jesus Christ: These being regenerated by the holy Ghost,
are raised unto a new life with Christ, whose hearts are purified by faith:
These at last are they, who, sleeping in Jesus, shall be raised by God from the
dead, whom God will bring with him, that they may for ever enjoy the glory of
eternal life.

As for the wicked, and such as want justifying faith, 1 Cor. 10.5. Heb. 11.6.
Gal. 4.30. John 3.18, 36. Romans 8.9. Mat. 7.22. Mat. 21.41.
why should they partake so much happiness, who please not God? (and, Without
faith it is impossible to please God) Who belong not to Christ, who are not
heirs, neither have right to, or in that life, how can Christ or his benefits
belong to them? They are rather by the voice of the Gospel debarred from these
treasures, and are judged to eternal death and malediction. He that believes
not is judged already, and the wrath of God remains on him. And, Who ha^h not
the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. Which place of the Apostle, I suppose is
thus meant. For, if Insidels belong not to Christ, they are none of Christ's: We
conclude strongly from the correlative, that Christ and his benefits belong not
to the wicked: and as they are not Christ's, so neither is Christ theirs. And
how, I pray, should Christ belong to them whom he will, in the last judgment,
pronounce before all the world, to be strangers from himself, from his
benefits, from his Kingdom? who, he will testify, were never known to him?
whom finally, as accutsed workers of iniquity, he will cast into hell fire?

But, you will say, Christ died for all, therefore rose again for all. The
Answer is double: One is, As often as the Gospel extends the fruits of the
works and benefits of Christ to all, this is to be understood of all those that
believe in Christ: for, this is the perpetual and constant voice of the
Gospel, He that believes shall be saved; he shall not come into judgment:
who believes not, is already condemned, and the wrath of God remains upon
him. Therefore, the Gospel debarres from the benefits of Christ, all Infidels;
not only by a plain exclusion, but also by that condition of faith and
repentance, under which, either expressly or tacitly, God promises to men the
benefits of Christ, and which is never to be found in those that persevere in
sin. So then, Christ is said to die for all, to wit, all that do or shall
believe in him; for whom alone he prayed, and in whom alone he finds the faith
of his death: but as for Infidels and Reprobates, for whom Christ prayed not,
whom he never acknowledged for his own, upon whom the wrath of God abides for
ever; John 17.9. Mat. 7.23. John 3.36. Mat. 7.6.
to extend, I say on these, the benefits of Christ, what is it else, but
ag^^nst his own command, To give that which is holy unto dogs, and to cast
pearls before swine? These we could solidly defend by authority of Scripture,
and orthodox Fathers; and they mainely concern Christian consolation.

There is an other Answer usual in the Schools, by which we may gratify the
contentious; that Christ absolutely died for all, if you consider the amplitude
and sufficiency of his price and merit; for, it is out of controversy, that
the death of the Son of God is of that value, that it suffices to expiate the
sins, not only of one, but of millions of worlds, if so be they had faith to
apply this Physic to their sins. But the Question is properly of the efficacy
and participation it self of these fruits, when we demand if Christ died for
all: Because, to die for another, is properly to die in the stead and place of
another, so that he is freed from death, and saved alive; as when David
weeping, cried out, I wish I had died for thee. O Absalom; that is, I wish I
had died in thy stead, that thou might have lived. But we utterly deny, that
this participation of Christ's merits is common to all unbeleevers, as well as
to those that believe; or, that this is promised, or exhibited in the Gospel:
for, in this regard, we conclude, that Christ did not die properly for all,
even for unbeleevers and reprobates.

But here, some unluckie patrons of Infidels, taking it ill that we do not
divide the pearls equally amongst sheep and swine, cry out, that we deny the
blood of Christ, and that we produce a Saracenicall Mahumeticall, and more then
an Heathenish blasphemy, which utterly overthrows Christian Religion.

But, Sirs, it is not our purpose to encounter or contend with such railing
pratlers. But first, we protest against such bitter calumnies, making our
appeal to the unanimous consent of the orthodoxall Church, and the perpetual
voice of the Gospel, that we deny not, but honor the blood of Christ, when we
say, it is poured out, not for those that slight it, and tread Christ under
their feet; but for those who by faith are justified through it, as the Apostle
says, Whom God has given to be an atonement by faith in his blood, Heb.
10.29. Romans 3.25. Rev. 1.5. 1 John 1.7.
to declare his righteousness by the remission of sins, that went before: for,
this is not the voice of Infidels; Who has washed us in his blood from our
sins: and that, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Out of
Gods word we know and believe, that this is no Saracenicall, Mahumeticall, and
more then Heathenish blasphemy, as this calumny does impudently blaspheme; but
that it is the genuine, true, and saving doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; and this we are ready at all times ^o demonstrate before the whole
Church. Besides, we hold it worth the while, and necessary, with as much
brevity as may be, to pull off from these Wolves the Sheeps-skins with which
they are clothed, and to paint out in its own colors this their prodigious
doctrine, which cunningly lurks under the calumny, (...).
which under this they go about to bring into the Church.

They contend, That Christ dyed for all. Who denies this? for this is the
Scripture phrase. They add, That he dyed for all and singular. Neither do we
simply deny this; to wit, in that sense which we showed a little before:
although we do not find the Scripture speak so. They go on: That he dyed for
all and singular alike; for the elect and reprobate, for Cain and David, for
Judas and Peter, for the damned, as well as for those that are saved, without
any respect of faith, or infidelity. This is hard. They proceed, finally, That
he dyed for all and singular, not only in respect of sufficiency, but also in
regard of the efficacy of the price. But what is this? to wit, That Christ by
his death has truly delivered from death, purged from sin, sanctified, and
reconciled to God all absolutely, even those who are not saved, but have been
damned ever since Cain, and are damned, and furthermore, are to be damned; all
those, they say, he has received into his favor. This is that impious
monster, by which they conclude another, no lesle impious and false; to wit,
That wicked men, whosoever have perished, do, or shall perish, that they have
perished, do, and shall perish not for their sins (for they were expiated by
the blood of Christ,) but only for their incredulity. They who have read their
Books and Disputations, will confess, that this is no fiction of ours: But how
monstrous are these to Christian ears?

These brave patrons of wicked men teach, that all wicked and impure dogs,
before and after the death of Christ, are received into the bosom and favor
of God. But we say, first, That this is a false and impious doctrine; because
it plainly opposes Scripture, which continually cries out, that wicked men, so
long as they remain without faith and repentance, are not in the favor of
God; but that they remain the sons of wrath, and of eternal malediction: That
they are not delivered from sin and death, but are held captives by the snares
of the Devil, and are strongly deluded; yea, that they are already condemned,
and are under the wrath of God. Again, we affirm, that this is a most absurd
monster, which overthrowes many principles of Christian faith, and it self
also. For now let us set down and examine their Position, All men, without
exception, faithful and unfaithful, before, and since the death of Christ,
are truly and undoubtedly, by the blood of Christ, received into the grace and
favor of God. What will from hence follow? surely, a world of absurdities.

1. So original sin shall be taken away, neither shall there be any guilt
thereof; and so it will be false to say, That all men are born the sons of
wrath; because all shall be born in the grace and favor of God: But the
Scripture pronounces, that all men, by nature, are the sons of wrath.

2. All the children of Turks, Saracens, Centaures, and Canibals, which are
out of the Covenant and Church of God, shall be borne in the favor and grace
of God; and so salvation shall be found without the Covenant, and out of the
Church of God. O men, as cruel as Briareus! who doubt not to place the infants
of Turks, born out of the Church, in the favor of God; but as for Christian
infants before baptism, cruelly they fling them headlong into hell.

3. This monster overthrowes another Tenet of theirs, concerning the infants of
faith full men, who are borne out of grace: yea, who are before baptism
possessed with the Devil, and damned; for, they place them all in the grace
and favor of God.

4. All wicked men, who before Christ's death were damned to hell, by Christ's
death are again redeemed from hell, and brought into Gods favor. How then
could they again fall from thence, who, being dead, were received, when they
could not any more sin by incredulity? Therefore wicked men either must remain
in the favor of God, and be saved without faith; or else, without
incredulity, they must be cast headlong from thence: both which have a kind of
madness in them.

5. Either incredulity is no sin; or, if it be, all sins were not expiated by
Christ's death: or, if all be, this will at least be more effectual then
Christ's death. But all this is false and impious: for, infidelity is both a
sin, and the mother of other sins, and in the regenerate now and then it
appears with other sins, notwithstanding by the blood of Christ it is most
effectually expiated and pardoned.

6. It is an impudent lie, that wicked men are not condemned for sin, but for
incredulity only: for what is that, 1 Cor. 6.10. Thieves, covetous persons,
drunkards, etc. shall not inherit the Kingdom, of God? and which Christ in his
last Judgment shall say to the wicked, Go into hell fire, because you fed me
not, etc? Is not incredulity the chief of all sins? Yea, we conclude on the
contrary, that they are condemned for sin, because they are condemned for
incredulity: for, scarce is there any sin more grievous then infidelity. But
the Apostate trifles too much with his exception, saying, That incredulity is
not to be considered as a sin in it self, but as it rejects the means of
salvation. Is not (I pray) the rejecting of the means of salvation, the
contempt of Gods calling, a most grievous sin? For this cause then incredulity
is a sin, in that it rejects salvation, and the means thereof.

7. This prodigious doctrine gives to the wicked, that, notwithstanding the
doctrine of the Church concerning original sin, and the guilt of wicked men;
yet, that this is at no time in them, nor can truly be pronounced of them. Let
us take a Turkish infant, or a Barbarian man of years, who never heard of
Christ's death, and therefore never rejected him by incredulity. Now, let these
Disputers tell us, what moment of time will they give them to be in the grace
and favor of God, justified, and sanctified, and reconciled to him? Will they,
whilst they are Embryons, or newly borne, or children, or young men, or old
men, or lastly, living, or dead? Yea, let them tell, if they be received, how
they fell away, when neither sin, nor actual incredulity could drive them
thence? for these do not besall them; but were expiated by the death of
Christ. Whatsoever they say, we shall hear, that either without faith some
do please God; or, that without actual incredulity, some are debarred from
the favor of God: which are false and impious prodigies, overthrowing one the
other.

Lastly, what greater blasphemy can be spoken, then that God receives into his
grace and favor all infidels and wicked men? Cain, Saul, Judas, Herod,
Caligula, and finally, all flagitious men, yea, Hogs? What comfort can be more
like to mockery, then that thou should be redeemed by the death of Christ,
restored into the grace and favor of God; whereas many thousands of them, who
have been thus restored, notwithstanding perish eternally? I tremble to relate
more of this monster; therefore who will doubt, but that so false, impious,
absurd, blasphemous tenets, are to be banished from the confines of the Church?

But here, me thinks, I hear them cry out, that the promises of the Gospel are
universal, and belong to all. But first, we ask how this will follow? The
promises are universal: Ergo, reprobates, impure dogs, and hogs are received
into the favor of God. Besides, so long as they urge their All, all, so long
will we our Believers, believers: For, the promises are universal; but with
respect to penitents and believers of the Gospel. And here, before all the
world, we appeal to the literal promises: Come to me all (says Christ;)
but he adds, that are weary, and heavy laden; that is, who faint and groan
under the burden of sin, which they do who repent. Romans 3.22. G^l 3.22. John
3.36. Act. 10.43.
And elsewhere, So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes, should not perish, but have life eternal. So Paul,
The righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ, upon all, and over all that
believe. And elsewhere, The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise, by faith in Christ Jesus, should be given to all believers. So Christ,
He that believes in the Son, has life eternal. And Peter, To him bare all
the Prophets witness, that all who believe in him, shall receive remission of
sins through his Name. There is the like reason of all other Evangelicall
promises: for, they have annexed expressly or tacitly the condition of faith
and repentance; nor can they, without blasphemy, be understood, but of the
universalitie of the faithful. But they will except, that so the promises will
be but particular. L^b. 1.^.3.
Let Prosper answer for us, de vocat. Gent. The people of God have their
plenitude; and although a great part of men either neglect, or reject the grace
of salvation: yet, in the elect, and those that are foreseen, and separated,
there is a special kind of universality, that out of all the world, the world
may seem to be delivered; and, out of all men, all men may seem to be redeemed:
Therefore the promises of the Gospel remain universal to the faithful;
although they belong not to dogs and swine. The Major also of the practical
Syllogism remains universal: thus, The promises belong to all believers; I
believe: Ergo, they belong to me. Again, Christ dyed, and prayed for all
believers; I believe: Ergo, he dyed and prayed for me. But they are too cold
comforters, who teach afflicted consciences thus to reason: Christ dyed for all
men; I am a man: Ergo, he dyed for me. Why may not a Turk, a dog, or a hog
wallowing in the mire, conclude so? O brave comforters and Preachers of Gods
word for, the maine^inew of Christian comfort is, not to be a man, but to be
ingraffed into Christ.

Again, they object out of the Apostle, That all are made alive in Christ, 1
Cor. 15.22.
as all dyed in Adam: But if they will absolutely say, that all are made alive
in Christ, Scripture and experience will refell them. This is it then the
Apostle says, that Christ gives life to all his own, as Adam brought death
upon all his own: And he, indeed, by grace, which is more; but this by
natural propagation, which is easier. This sense of the Apostle is proved by
the subsequent words: for, when he had said, that all were made alive in
Christ, he presently subjoynes, Every one in his own order: Christ, as the
first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's; that is, believers, who are
given to him by the Father, and for whom he earnestly prayed to the Father.
Neither is Austins interpretation different from this: De civit. Dei, l. 13. c.
33.
therefore it is said, that all are alive in Christ; not, as if all that die in
Adam, were members of Christ: but because, as no man, except in his natural
body, dies in Adam; so no man in the spiritual body is quickened, but in
Christ. Neither have they cause to object, that by these means Adam is made
stronger then Christ, if he destroy more by death, then Christ preserves by
his death and life. They know not what they bark against. Be it so, that all,
who are lost in Adam, are saved by Christ: But this way grace shall not abound,
but will be only equal to sin. The power of both is not to be measured by the
number of those who die or live, but by the manner, by which perdition and
vivification are obtained; or else, by the greatnesle of the benefits received,
or lost. Its an easy matter to wound, but hard to cure; according to the
Proverb, You shall sooner, and with more ease destroy 600 men, then save one:
You shall sooner tumble down many men from off the bridge into the water, then
you can preserve one from drowning: So it was more easy to undo all mankind,
then to restore one man from destruction. That Satan could do, Adam could do;
but this none can effect, except Christ. Beasts or afflictions can hurt,
offend, and kill men; but it is in no man's power, save only in his, who is the
Creator of all things, ^o restore salvation and life eternal: Therefore
Christ's death had been stronger then Adams, though he had restored but one man
to life. Besides, it is certain, and out of question, that the good things we
have by Christ, do as far excel those things which we lost by Adam, as heaven
and eternity exceed terrene and transient blessings: For, Adam was earthly
(says the Apostle) Christ heavenly; he was natural, this spiritual: he
ejected us out of an earthly Paradise, this has introduced us into an heavenly
Mansion, and has crowned us with eternity of happiness.

Thus, I suppose, we have sufficiently demonstrated and defended, that the
fruit of Christ's death and resurrection does appertain to all, and only to
them who repent, and by faith adhere to Christ.

A brief Introduction to the Controversy of the Eucharist, explaining the
chief Questions that are controverted, or not controverted among the
Protestants: By D. DAVID PARIE.
Four general Remembrances.

1.LEt the younger sort remember to discriminate between the questions that
concern the ceremonies and rites of the Supper, and questions of doctrine,
which is the Evangelicall promise annexed to the ceremony-

2. Let them learn also to put difference between questions controverted, and
not controverted, whether of doctrine, or of ceremony.

3. Let them know, that the controversies about the ceremony are of less
consequence, and may, for the most part, yea should with moderation be decided,
or agreed upon, according to the circumstances of time, place, and people: but
always to edification.

4. Let them know, that there are three chief questions of the doctrine of the
Supper not controverted, and so many controverted, to which all others may be
easily reduced: Of both I will briefly give some hints to young Divines.

Three uncontroverted Questions concerning the doctrine of the Supper.

1. What the Supper of the Lord is.

All Protestants agree in this, that the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of the New
Testament, instituted by Christ; in which, bread and wine being taken, the true
body and blood of Christ is also received: so that there is sealed to the
faithful the communion of Christ, and of his benefits.

2. What be the ends and uses of the Supper instituted by Christ.

All Protestants consent in this, that this receiving confirms the faith of
the promises of grace; both because this is the common use of Sacraments: as
also because Christ said of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.26.
Do this in remembrance of me: And, This cup is the new covenant in my blood:
Therefore they consent in this, that the holy Supper is the commemoration of
our Lords death, until he come, according to the Apostles admonition.

3. What is exhibited and received in the Lords Supper.

In this also the Protestants agree, that bread and wine is received by the
mouth and body; the body and blood of our Lord, with all his benefits, are
taken by a faithful heart: I say, the Protestant Divines agree in these; but,
as for contentious pratlers, they neither agree in these, nor in any thing
else: whose brawlings should not measure men's judgments, concerning the
consent or controversies of the Protestant Churches.

The three controverted Questions be these:

Quest. 1. What the union of the sign, and thing signified is in the Lords
Supper? Whether transubstantiation, or consubstantiation: or else, a mystical
relation?
To these the answer shall be in three Propositions: two whereof shall be
negative, and one affirmative.

Proposition 1. The sign and the thing are not united by transubstantiation;
that is, by such a mutation, which turns the substance of the signs, into the
substance of the things, the bare accidents remaining.

Reason 1. From Christ's words, This is my body. He said not, Be this, or, Let
this be made my body. Reas. 2. Bread in the Scripture, is called bread in the
action, before, and after the action, Reas. 3. The orthodox Fathers retain
bread in the Supper, and when they speak hyperbolically of changing of the
bread, they will be understood sacramentally: as Theodoret, Dial. 1. Christ
would have those, (...), causa est sacramentis (...),
who receive the Sacraments, not to be intent upon the nature of the things,
which are seen; but by the changing of names, to believe that change, which is
made of grace. Here Theodoret himself in the same Dialogue teaches, that a
sacramental change is to be understood, thus speaking, He honored the visible
signs by the name of Christ's body and blood, not changing nature, but adding
grace to nature.

Propos. 2. The signs and things signified are not united by
consubstantiation; that is, in the real existence of two bodies, in the same
place, under the same accidents, or under the lurking of the one within the
other: such as is that of oats in the sack, of money in the purse, of the
infant in the cradle, or of wine in the pot, which are like to things
consubstantiated.

Reason 1. Because the words of Christ, This is my body, show to us, not where
the body of Christ is, nor what it is in, with, or under the bread, but what
the bread it self is, and should be to godly men in this Sacrament; to wit,
his body. Reas. 2. The body of Christ is a true, organicall, finite, and
visible body, not present, or everywhere upon earth, since the Ascension; but
existing and remaining in heaven, even till his last return: As the Apostle
tells us, Declare the Lords death, until his coming again. Reas. 3. The
orthodox Fathers teach, that the body and blood of Christ are in the bread and
wine; not, as in lurking places: but, as in a mystical, or in a mystery.
Chrysostom, in that imperfect work, Matthew. Hom. 11. In the consecrated
vessels, not the true body of Christ, but the mystery of Christ's body is
contained.

Propos. 3. In the sacramental Supper, the signs and things are united, by a
sacramental union. This is it which is common to the whole kind of Sacraments:
otherwise, this union were not sacramental, or of a Sacrament, but of a
Supper. Now, in all other Sacraments, there is a relative union; that is, a
mystical signification, obsignation, exhibition and reception of the thing
signified by external symbols in the right use, which is not without faith and
repentance in the receivers.

Reason 1. From the genus in all Sacraments, there is such an union: therefore
in this Supper also. The Antecedent is manifest out of the definition and
chief end of Sacraments. Reas. 2. The bread is the body of Christ, either in
the truth of the thing (as Austin speaks in the sentence of Prosper) or in a
signifying mystery: not in the truth of the thing, or essentially; because
there is no transubstantiation: therefore in a signifying mystery. Reas. 3.
Hither belong all the Arguments, by which a sacramental phrase is proved to be
in the words of the Supper: for, a sacramental union begets sacramental
phrases. Reas. 4. The testimonies of Fathers, that the bread is a sign, a
figure, a sacrament of Christ's body, August. contra Adim. c. 12. The Lord
doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body.

The Objection of Papists for Transubstantiation, out of the words of the
Supper.
That which Christ gave, and the Priest consecrates, is Christ's body; Ergo it
is not bread: It follows, because these are disparata; As, this thing is a
man; Ergo it is not an ox. I answer, by denying that this argument is grounded
upon the position of one species, to the removing of the disparate species of
the same genus; because it is vicious proceeding, from the position of a
sacramental relation, to the negation of the subject, or fundamental: Such,
as if I would say, This man is a father; Ergo he is not a man. This man is
Caesar; Ergo he is not a man: So they, This bread is Christ's body; Ergo it is
not bread. It is therefore fallacia accidentis, no less absurd, then if you
should reason from the position of the form, to the negation of the matter:
This thing is a table; Ergo it is not wood: For, though Christ's body is not
the form, or accident of bread; yet the relation, which the bread, by virtue
of the promise, has to Christ's body, is the form of the Sacrament. So it
does not follow, The Dove is the holy Ghost; Ergo this is not a Dove.
Circumcision is the covenant; Ergo it is not circumcision. The cup is the New
Testament: Ergo, it is not the cup.

As for the testimonies of the Fathers, which the Papists object, concerning
the changing of the symboles, the common answer is, That they are to be
understood of a sacramental, not of an essential change; which is manifest
out of the orthodoxall consent of the Fathers on this Sacrament.

Quest. 2. How, as well the symboles, as the celestial things signified in the
Supper, are exhibited and received.
About this question, we are at controversy both with the Pontificians and
Ubiquitarians; because both of them will have the things signified to be
secretly and miraculously present in the signs, or species of the signs, and
to be carried in, and handled by the Ministers hands, and to be received into
the mouths of the communicants. We teach on the contrary, that the things are
exhibited with the signs, and are received together with them, in the lawful
use of the Supper, but in a different manner: The symboles are touched by the
hands of the Minister, and received by the mouths of the communicants; but the
things themselves are exhibited by Christ himself our High Priest, and by
faith are received of us. Which also may be explained in three Propositions;
two negative, and one affirmative.

Propos. 1. The body and blood of Christ, which are the things signified, are
neither handled, nor exhibited by the hand of the Ministers, to the end, that
they should, in these symboles, be corporally received.

Reas. 1. Is negative from the whole kind of Sacraments: In no Sacrament does
the Minister handle, or give spiritual things signified: therefore neither in
the Supper. The antecedent is proved both by induction, which is also plain by
the Adversaries confession; as also, by the analogy of Sacraments, and of the
Word, Mark 1. I am the voice of a crier. John 1. I baptize with water: He that
comes after me, shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. 1 Corinthians. 3.7. Neither is he that waters, nor he that planteth any thing; but
God, who gives the increase: Therefore it is so in the Sacraments, which are
the visible word. Reas. 2. The things signified are not in, with, or under the
symboles, being there corporally present, as was showed, Quest. 1. Propos. 2.
therefore they are not handled by the Ministers fingers, nor distributed. Reas.
3. The things signified in the Supper are spiritual, which are offered to the
faithful, in the promise of grace annexed to the symboles; but the promise of
grace is not touched by the hand, etc. Reas. 4. The testimonies of Fathers: as,
Chrysoft. sermon. de Euch. in encaen. Do not think, you that come to these
mysteries, that you receive from man the divine body; that is, from the
Minister; and many such like.

Propos. 2. The body and blood of Christ, which are the things signified, are
not received with, in, or under the bread and wine, with the mouth of the body.

Reas. 1. Because they are not corporally present with, in, or under the
symboles, as was showed, Quest. 1. Prepos. 2. Reas. 2. Because they go not
into the belly, which is appointed for corporal food, 1 Cor. 6.13. but
whatsoever enters into the mouth, goes down into the belly, Matthew. 15. Reas.
3. Because the promise, by which the things are offered, is not received by the
mouth, but by faith.

Propos. 3. The things signified, to wit, the body and blood of Christ, are
received by faith spiritually.

Reas. 1. From the genus, because in all Sacraments the things signified are
received by faith; by which alone as we are justified, so we receive all the
benefits of the New Testament; by which faith Christ dwells in our hearts,
Ephesians. 3.17. Reas. 2. Because the promise of grace is not received but by
faith; but the communion of the body and blood of Christ, is that of the
promise of grace. See the first volume of Vrsine. page 103.

The Arguments of a certain famous Disputer, for the orall manducation.
To whatsoever organ the eating of one thing in the Lords Supper does agree, to
that same it is needful, that the eating of another thing should agree: but to
the mouth of the body, the eating of one thing; that is, of the bread in the
Supper, does agree: and therefore of another thing; that is, of Christ's body.
Answ. The Major is true of foods that are naturally conjoined, or contain each
other: as meat, or flesh-pies; but the bread and Christ's body are not thus
conjoined: and therefore of these the Major is false. But he proves the Major:
Whosoever includes, under the same word of eating, bread and wine, the body and
blood of Christ, he also affirms, that both are received by the same
instrument; but Christ includes bread and wine, his body and blood, within the
same word of eating: Therefore Christ affirms also, that both are received by
the same instrument of eating. Answ. 1. The Disputer does not conclude the
Major that is denied, which he should conclude by an universal Syllogism in
Barbara: therefore his proof is idle. Answ. 2. The Major is a petition of the
thing in question, and is denied. The falsehood also is plain out of John 3.
where Christ, under the same word of birth, includes the spirit and flesh: and
yet it follows not, that both are borne after the same manner, or by the same
instrument. Answ. 3. The Minor is also false: For, the word Eat is referred to
the consecrated bread, and not to the body, but only by consequence or
analogy: for properly it belongs to that which Christ took with his hands, and
broke; which was bread, and not his body. This reason is worth the noting;
because, according to the Papists, and the simple Consubstantiators, the body
of Christ is not present, till the words of consecration be uttered: but in the
last instant of uttering these syllables, For this is my body, it begins to be
present. But according to the Ubiquitaries, who are (as it were) chymicall
Consubstantiators, it is present, as in any other bread; but is not eatable,
till after the consecration. Christ then did not command us to eat that in the
bread, which as yet was not there, or not as yet eatable. We say briefly, that
by the word of eating, is only commanded the orall manducation of the outward
Sacrament, or the bread: but by the word of promise, This is my body, which is
given for you; which promise agrees with that, John 6.52. The bread which I
will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world, is required
faith, spiritually eating Christ's body given for us, and drinking Christ's
blood, powered out for us, for the remission of sins.

Yet, again, the Grammarian goes about to prove the Major of the
Prosyllogisme: The word that has but one signification is to be understood in
that one: But Manducation, as well of the bread, as of Christ's body, has but
one signification; Ergo that one is to be understood of both. Answ. 1. He
fails again in the proof of his Major, because he concludes the Major
neither of the Sy^logisme nor Prosyllogisme, by any universal Syllogism in
Barbara, as he should have done. 2. The Minor is a demand of the thing in
question; for, he takes it for granted, that eat ye is meant as well of the
body, as of the bread, which is the thing he should prove: and that this is
false, the story of the Institution tells us; for, Christ bodily did not lurk
within the bread, but sat at table, when of the bread which he received,
broke, and gave to his Disciples, he said, Eat ye.

Question 3. To whom the things signified are offered, and by whom received.
To this we answer in two Propositions, both being affirmative.

Propos. 1. The things signified in the Sacrament; to wit, the body and blood
of Christ, though they be offered to all, yet are received by the faithful
only.

Reas. 1. Because the faithful only by faith receive the promise by which the
things signified are offered. Reas. 2. Because the believers alone have the
Spirit of Christ, from which his living flesh cannot be separated. Reas. 3.
Because Christ dwells only in the faithful, and they in him by faith, Ephesians.
3.17. Reas. 4. Because the believers alone receive and have life eternal, John
3. and 6.

Propos. 2. Impious or incredulous men coming without faith, receive the signs
without the thing signified; but, the things themselves being proferred, they
reject, because of their infidelity.

For the Reasons, see Explicat. Catechet. q. 81. Titulo, What the wicked
receive in the Lords Supper. As for the Objections concerning wicked men's
eating in the Supper, see ibid.

D. DAVID PARIE'S Epitome of Arminianisme: OR, The Examination of the five
Articles of the Remonstrants, in the Netherlands.
ARTICLE I.
GOD, by an eternal and immutable Decree, in his Son Christ Jesus, before the
foundation of the world, did decree, out of the lapsed race of mankind,
subject to sin, to save such in, for, and by Christ, as by the grace of the
holy Spirit do believe in the same Son, and persevere in that obedience of
Faith to the end, by the same grace. On the other side, he decreed to
relinquish and condemn, as strangers from Christ, such as are not converted,
but continue in infidelity, subject to sin and wrath; according to that of the
Gospel, John 3.36. He that believes in the Son, has life eternal; but he
that believes not, shall not see life eternal, but the wrath of God abides
on him.

The Examination.
AT first sight, this Article seems to have no question or inconvenience in
it, but to deliver the sum of the Gospel, what sort of men, by what means
God decreed from eternity to save; to wit, believers in the Son of God, and
perseveres to the end in faith, and in the obedience of faith, by the grace of
the holy Ghost. On the other side, what sort of men he has appointed to
condemn; to wit, such as are not converted, Infidels, strangers from Christ:
both which is taught in the Gospel.

So many good men, chiefly Politicians, judge of this Article: neither do they
think it fitting to wade deeper into this Controversy; especially, seeing it
seems to ascribe all the means of salvation fully to God, to Christ, and to
grace. And truly, here should be no question, if the Authors meant only this,
that by this Article is explained the popular doctrine of the qualities of
those that shall be saved or damned. But, because in the Conference they
profess, Coll. Hag. p. 84.
That this Article contains the doctrine of predestination to salvation; but
deny, that the qualities of those that shall be saved, to wit, faith and
perseverance, proceed from predestination, as from their fountain: but
contend, that these are in order before predestination or election, and not
obscurely, they make them depend upon man's will: whence necessarily, God must
be robbed of the full glory of our salvation, man must be puffed up with pride,
our Christian comfort in life and death must be undermined, free justification,
and the assurance of salvation must be denied, whatsoever they pretend in their
garnished speeches to the contrary. Therefore, this Article cannot be simply
approved of: and it is full of equivocations, and dangerous swelling phrases;
under which, Pelagianisme is underhand brought into the Church: which fraud,
that it might appear the less, they purposely abstain from the word
predestination.

Now, in Austines time, the Pelagian Heresy was thus: 1. That Adams sin hutted
no man but himself; and, that man is not borne now in a worse condition then
he was created. 2. That Christ was seen, and died to expiate all sins
committed by imitation of Adam. 3. That salvation in Christ is so proposed to
all men, that whosoever will believe and be baptized, may be saved. 4. That God
fore-knew before the foundation of the world, who were to believe and do good
works, and who were to continue in the Faith, being assisted by grace; and that
he predestined for his kingdom whom he foresaw, being freely called, would
believe above others, and would be worthy of their calling, and should die an
happy ^eath. 5. That the grace of God was given to all men, according to their
merit, for the better using of their free will. 6. And that in this life so
much is given, that man may, if he will, be free from all sin.

Against this Heresy Hierome and Austine disputed at large; and Austine
retracted three whole Chapters, Tom. 7. in opusculis: 1. Concerning original
sin. 2. Of grace, and the cause of predestination. 3. Of the perfection of
righteousness. Pelagius in the Synod of Palestina, being condemned, did so
far revoke his error, that he wished Anathema to him that thinks or says,
Apud Augustine. de great, Christi cap. 2.
that the grace of God, by which Christ came into this world to save sinners,
is not necessary, not only every hour, or every moment, but also, to every
one of our actions; and who go about to take this away, they shall be punished
eternally. Who would not clear Pelagius in this case? but under the buskin of
this word grace, he deluded the Palestine Bishops, as Austine shows: he left
behind him two disciples, Caelestius and Julianus, young men, of a sharp wit,
and with whom Austine in Africa had much ado. At last, this infection flew
over the Mediterrane-sea, into Sicilie, and Marsiles in France; not all of it,
but only so much as concerned the point of grace and predestination, and the
death of Christ; the Asserters of which were called Semi-pelagians, and the
remainders of the Pelagians; of which points there are extant the Epistles of
Prosper Aquitanicus, and of Hilarious Arelatensis to Austine; whose learned
Answer, contained in two Books, of the predestination of the Saints, and of the
good of perseverance; and in a third, concerning correction and grace. To which
Answer, if the Authors of these Articles at this day, would stand as they may
and should stand, (for, it is altogether S. Paul's doctrine) the matter had
been decided ere this. For, indeed, Arminius, with his followers, have at this
day reassumed the cause of the Marsilians and Syracusians, but somewhat more
handsomely dressed: Neither could he be ignorant of this, and therefore he used
but little ingenuity in his tergiversation, when he wrote in the Articles, That
he acknowledges neither Semi-pelagianisme objected against him, nor nine, nor
five, nor four inches of it. But, to return to the Article; in it there be
diverse equivocations, as shall appear.

1. The first lofty phrase lies hid in Gods immutable Decree. According to
Scripture, that is Gods immutable Decree, which absolutely is not changed, nor
by the creatures can be changed; for, so God pronounces himself immutable,
and his counsel immutable: Mal. 3.6. Isaiah 46.10.
I am God and change not. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all that I
have decreed. But they understand, that God by an immutable Decree indeed, has
decreed to save believers, in regard of the species; that is, none but
believers, but not by a decree altogether immutable, in respect of the
individuals: to wit, of this or that believer; but under a condition, if this
or that believer do not cause a change. For, they think (as appears by the
fifth Article) that they who believe to day, may be unbeleevers to morrow; and
again, of unbeleevers, may come to believe: consequently therefore, they
think that God to day may decree not to save, which yesterday by his immutable
decree he appointed to save; and that again he can decree to save them, still
changing their condition. If this be to give to God an immutable decree, let
themselves judge: sure, Jam. 1.17.
no shadow can be more changeable then such a decree, which the Scripture
denies.

The Authors Decreti Holland. page 5. place such a decree in God, Mat. 11.21.
and 23.37.
denying That any by God are invited to salvation, to whom he has not
altogether decreed to give salvation; for, this being granted, we must say,
that God had altogether decreed to give salvation to the Cities of Judea and
Galilee, whom Christ by preaching invited to salvation; but seeing they
believed not, they were not saved: therefore, either he before did ^ot decree
to save them, or afterward he changed his decree.

2. The second ^^^^ing phrase, and that the chiefest, the foundation of the
rest, containing the ^^^^^e of the whole cause, and difference of both parts,
is in the word appointed. This, according to the Scripture, signifies to us,
that God not only from eternity appo^^^ed to save them who in time believe and
persevere, and are saved; but also, to elect them in Christ, and to
predestinate them to salvation, and decreed to bestow on them qualities
requisite to salvation; to wit, faith, Ephesians. 1.5.
conversion, and perseverance, by the word, and grace of the holy Ghost, that
they may be infallibly saved; and that to declare the praise of his glorious
grace: On the contrary, that he has from eternity decreed not to save those,
who in time neither believe, nor persevere, nor are saved; and that he has not
appointed to elect them in Christ, nor to ordain them to life eternal, Romans
9.22.
nor to give them faith and perseverance, but to leave them in their original
blindness and infidelity, and to condemn them for their sins; and that to
declare his wrath, and make known his power upon them.

Both parts of this divine Decree are manifest, both by Scripture, experience,
and the continued Story of the world. The first part; to wit, the election and
predestination of the Saints to glory, is delivered, Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.3.
Acts 13.48. Phil. 2.13. 1 These. 1.4. 2 These. 2.13. Mat. 24.24. etc. The other
part, Fulgentius l. 1. ad Monim.
which by Divines is called reprobation, and predestination of wicked men to
punishment, Mat. 11.25. John 10.26. Romans 9.21, 22. Prove. 16.4. 1 Pet. 2.8. Jude
ver. 4. etc.

The continued History of the world also, and experience do witness, that God
sometimes did so discriminate people, that on some he vouchsafed to bestow the
grace of his Covenant, and vocation by the word, on others not; that he also
differenced the individuals of those he calls, that upon the one he conferres
effectual grace, faith, conversion, perseverance, and salvation; but, on the
other not, and that without any merit of people, or individuals, or without any
regard had to the excellency of their natures and dispositions; for, he found
all alike averse from heavenly things, and he might have drawn and directed
all to himself equally, had he pleased; this difference then proceeded merely
from his will and goodness. So he chose the Israelites for his peculiar
people, other Nations being rejected. Psalm. 147.19. His judgments he declares
to Israel, he has not done so to any other Nation* Jer. 41.9. I have chosen
thee, and have not reprobated thee. But why? Deuteronomy. 7.7. Not because you were
greater, or more then other people, did the Lord love and choose you, but
because he loved you, etc. Again, of these Israelites that were called, some
he elected, others he reprobated. Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, Romans
9.11.
etc. And that not of works, but that the purpose of election might remain
firm, etc. And in this Age he vouchsafes to call us Christians, by the word of
the Gospel; which favor he shows not to Turks, Pagans, etc. And of these
Christians, whom he calls, to some he gives true faith, conversion,
perseverance, and eternal salvation; to others he gives not, but leaves them
in ignorance and hypocrisy.

Neither can this discrimination of people and persons be derogated from divine
providence, and ascribed to men's dispositions, without blasphemy: otherwise,
for choosing us by vocation and adoption above others, there should be no need
of prayers to God, nor should we give thanks to God; nor should that of the
Apostle stand, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Who has separated thee? What have thou, which thou have not received? but if
thou have received, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it?
Then Atheism must stand, which the Pelagian Heresy brought in: I have
separated my self, I have that which I have not received; which is the gulf
of hell.

But, Acts 15.18. Ephesians. 1.3. etc.
in Divinity there is an undoubted Rule, depending on the authority of the holy
Scripture; Whatsoever God did in time, he decreed to do it from eternity,
seeing in God there is no change. Therefore among Christians it ought to be out
of doubt, why God from eternity made this difference of the elect and not
elect, but reprobate; of those that shall be saved, and not saved, but for sin
condemned; which we see God has done, De servo arbitrio. c. 143.
and does in time, and therefore decreed to do it before time. For, God being
spoiled of his power and wisdom in choosing, (says Luther) what will he be
else but the Idol of Fortune, by whose Deity all things were done
temerariously? And at last it will come to this, that men shall be saved and
damned without Gods knowledge, as who did not by any certain election
discriminate who should be saved, who damned: but offering to all a general
lenity, tolerating and obdurating, then a mercy correcting and punishing, has
left to men's choice, whether they will be saved or damned; he himself perhaps
being gone to the Ethiopian feast, as Homer speaks. And this is the sum of
the orthodoxall doctrine of predestination; and so the word appointed in the
Article, is to be understood altogether according to experience and Scripture.
But to them it signifies far otherwise; to wit, that God from eternity
appointed to save those, who in time believe and persevere, under this
condition, that they believe and persevere: otherwise, that he has no more
ordained them to salvation, then all other men; nor has elected them in
Christ, but only casually, so far as they above others would believe in Christ
and persevere, (for, they make faith and perseverance antecedent to election:)
but that these rather then others should believe and persevere, God did not
decree to effect this in them by any singular grace; but decreed to offer unto
all men, a certain universal exciting and preventing grace, but indifferent
and resistible; to which, they who make no resistance, but, by using well their
free will, do assent and cooperate, for the begetting of faith, and performing
of perseverance to the end; they, I say, are elected and predestined in
Christ; and therefore God, from eternity has casually, and out of their
foreseen faith and perseverance elected them in Christ, and has
predestined them to salvation, or has appointed to save them: but who resist
the same, or will not cooperate with faith and perseverance, these are not
elected and predestined in Christ; and therefore, God from eternity, casually
also of their foreseen infidelity, has predestined them to damnation, or
has decreed to condemn them. That this is their proper meaning, all their
Declarations show; and, that this was the opinion of the Semi-pelagians,
Marsilians, and Syracusians, he that will not believe, let him read in
Austine, in the places formerly alleged. And, it is manifest, that, according
to this opinion, neither faith, nor perseverance, nor conversion, nor
salvation, nor our separation from others, are due to Gods grace alone, but to
our will and cooperation. For example, when in one City, of many that hear the
same Sermon, and have the same exciting grace, the one believes, the other does
not; the one perseveres, the other fails: if the Apostle Paul should demand of
the believer and perseverer, Who separated thee? What have thou which thou have
not received? He will answer, I separated my self, because I was willing to
cooperate with exciting grace, I had a will to cooperate, I received it not.
By which blasphemous lie, shall not man cast himself headlong with Satan into
hell? But if faith, and perseverance, and our salvation shall be built upon our
will, how can free justification stand? And whereas nothing is more mutable
then man's will, shall not our whole salvation stand upon the sand, and all the
assurance and comfort of a Christian be reduced to nothing? And so much of this
other high phrase.

3. There is also an equivocation in the words, Out of the lapsed and sinful
race of mankind. By the lapsed race of mankind, the Scripture and Catechize
do understand man as he is lost in original sin by Adams fall; that is, not
only dead in sin, but also so viciated and corrupted, that he is altogether
unfit to do any good thing, and b^nt to all evil, till he be regenerated by
the holy Ghost: as God decreed to propagate, and, as in time, he gathered for
himself; so, from eternity, he appointed to gather for himself: that is, he
has elected an eternal Church in Christ. They understand, indeed, that man is
fallen, and subject to original sin, (of which they have not yet declared
themselves) as likewise to actual transgressions; yet, that he is not so
depraved, but that he can freely both will and choose good and evil; hear
God, calling on him; open to him, knocking; either resist, or assent, or
cooperate with exciting grace: which interpretation is repugnant to Scripture
and truth; Who has separated thee? We are not fit of our selves, 1 Cor. 4.7. 2
Cor. 3.5. Romans 8.7.
etc. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God.

4. There is also a notable Cothurne in the relative them, which we, with the
Apostle, Romans 8.30. understand of certain individual men: as, of Peter, of
Paul. etc. predestined by God, not only to salvation and glory; but also to
the antecedent means of salvation, and to the qualities required in those that
shall be saved; to outward and inward calling, to faith and justification, to
conversion and perseverance to the end, according to the Apostles saying, Whom
he predestined, them he called: whom he called, them he justified: whom he
justified, them he has also glorified: Whose number (says Austin) is so
certain, there can be none added to it, De correp. and great. c. 13. Act.
13.48. Hom. 30. Phil. 1.6. Mat. 24.24.
nor diminished from it. To whom alone it is given infallibly, that they
believe and persevere, and that they cannot perish: as it is said, They
believed, so many as were ordained to life eternal; that is, as Chrysostom
expounds it, They that were predestined by God: And, Who has begun a good
work in you, will perfect it, against the day of Jesus Christ. It is impossible
that the elect shall be seduced. Now, they understand not certain men, but
whosoever casually will believe; or, certain men, but in the species only,
not in the individual: believers, before their election, predestinate not to
faith and perseverance; but after faith to salvation casually, if they
persevere. More briefly, we understand them, whom election and predestination
makes believers and perseverers; but they mean those, whom election finds
believing and persevering. Romans 11.7.
Most briefly thus, We understand those that were to believe, or believers
consequently, or after election; they, such as were to believe, or believers
antecedently, or in order before election; to wit, after the same manner that
the chariot draws the horse: for, if faith cannot be before vocation, which is
after election and predestination, how can it be before election? But the
Apostle on the contrary, He has chosen us, that we might be holy; not, when
we were holy: Ephesians. 1.3.
But faith is the beginning of our sanctification, Act. 15.9.

5. Much like is that Cothurne in the words, In Christ: We understand with the
Apostle, that God, before the foundation of the world elected us in Christ
consequently; that is, that by Faith and the Spirit we might be engraffed in
Christ, as members in the head; and, that we might be in Christ after election:
for, the Apostle declares shortly after ver. 4. He has predestined us into
adoption by Jesus Christ: But adoption is by faith, John 1.12. But they
understand, that God elected us in Christ antecedently; that is, existing in
Christ before election, by foreseen faith; but how could the elect have faith,
in order before the election? Had they it by Gods grace? No surely: for, the
Apostle makes grace posteriour to election and predestination, saying, He
elected and predestined us, to the praise of the glory of his grace: Is it
not then of free will? This of necessity they must hold with Pelagius. See
August. de praedest. Sanct. c. 19.

6. In the words, By Christ, and for Christ, it may be doubted, whether a
cothurnall phrase lies not hid. We, simply in and for Christ's satisfactorie
ransom; but they think and speak otherwise of Christ's satisfaction: For, it is
known, that Vorstius, with whom they draw the same cord, disputed long since
scandalously many things out of Socinus the Samosatenian, of Christ's
satisfaction; as if it had been either none, or half full, or not necessary.

7. A notable high strain is couched up in the word Grace: which, though
elsewhere it has diverse significations; yet, in the question, concerning the
cause of faith, of conversion, perseverance, and of our salvation, grace
properly is an effectual motion and drawing of Gods mercy in the minds and
hearts of the elect, working, by an unspeakable way, faith, perseverance, and
conversion: Of which Christ says, John 6.44. De gratia Christi cap. 24.
No man can come to me, except the Father, who sent me, draw him. And Austin,
Let the Pelagians read and understand, behold and confess, that not by the
law and doctrine, sounding from without; but, by an internal and occult, a
mavelous and ineffable power God works in the hearts of men, not only new
revelations, but good wills also. But they understand the grace of outward
calling by the Word, and of inward moral persuasion by the Spirit, but
indifferent, which is in the power of man's free will to determine well or ill,
to receive or refuse: therefore they call it Resistible, as shall appear,
Artic. 5. which opinion derogates from Gods glory, and makes man proudly
sacrifice to his own net; that is, grow proud against God and shakes the
certainty of salvation, and our comfort in life and death: as was showed,
cothurno 2.

8. Likewise in the word Believe, and in the Noune Faith, they (doubtless)
delude us: for, to believe, with us, is not only to assent to the whole word
of God, but chiefly and properly to be confident in the promise of the Gospel,
concerning grace and remission of sins, by the blood of Christ, Mar. 5.26.
Only believe, for confide. And it has this meaning chiefly in the phrase, to
believe in God, in Christ, John 14.1. John 9.36.
etc. If you believe in God, believe also in me; for, be you confident: For,
there he comforts the Apostles, Lord, who is he, that I may believe in him?
for, that I may confide in him. Saving faith with us, is joined with confidence
of the promise of the Gospel, or of the promised mercy of God, concerning
remission of sins, through the blood of Christ: Rom 3.28.
As, when we are said to be justified by faith, there faith signifies
confidence; and, to be justified by faith, is, in the confidence of Christ's
merits to be absolved from sin; which sense the Apostle delivers, when he
says, Whom God set forth as an atonement by faith in his blood, to declare his
justice, by the remission of sins past: Where faith in his blood can signify
nothing else, but confidence in Christ's blood. But with them, faith is assent
only; and, to believe, is to give an assent: this appears, because in the
Article the words, John 3.36. (...), are rendered by them thus, But who
assenteth not to the Son, for, who believes not the Son: then their slippery
disputes, concerning faith, teach the same: In which, for the most part, they
require not confidence in faith; and they will have faith to justify, or to be
imputed for justice, not because it applies to it self Christ's merits; but,
because the very act of faith is reputed a fulfilling of the Law: which was the
opinion of Alberius Triuncurianus, a pitiful man. Therefore, seeing this
Article does deprave the true doctrine of Predestination with so many
equivocations, and conceales the false, it cannot be simply allowed,

Whether this Article be sufficient, or may be tolerated, setting
Predestination aside.
But you will say, What need we dispute so much about Predestination? Is it not
sufficient to salvation, to hold the sum of the Gospel delivered in this
Article, Who believes in the Son of God, has life eternal: Who believes
not, the wrath of God remains on him? And may not this Article hitherto be
tolerated?

I know some judge so: yea, some men, otherwise learned and pious, have
written, that we ought not to dispute of Predestination now under the Gospel,
but only preach upon the universal promises of grace. But these good men
observe not, that by writing thus, they contradict the holy Ghost, who, in the
Gospel, has delivered the doctrine of Predestination; as above, cothurn. 2. in
the alleged places may be seen. These unwise men seem, under this pretext,
either to overthrow the foundations of our faith and comfort; or else, not to
take notice, that they are overthrown by others: therefore that religious
speech, whether of Ambrose or Prosper, Lib. 1. de vocat. Gent. c. 7.
is to be held concerning Predestination, These things are not to be searched
into, what God will have concealed; and what are manifest, are not to be
denied: lest in them we be found unlawfully curious; and in these, damnably
ungrateful. As it is then unlawful curiosity, to search into the mysteries
of Predestination, not revealed in the Gospel; so it is damnable ingratitude to
deny, or suppress what God has revealed concerning Predestination in the
Gospel. But to the Quere thus we answer:

For Sufficiency, you may as well ask in the Church, If the doctrine of the
Catechism be sufficient to salvation, concerning man's misery, and deliverance
by Christ, and concerning gratitude: Why then should we read the Bible, or
higher points of divinity? In Logic is it not sufficient to hold, that there
are so many Figures of Syllogisms, and so many Moods? then what need is there
of Aristotle's Organum in the Schools? In the Politics, is not the popular
knowledge of right and equity sufficient to guide a State? what need is there
then of such a number of laws, and so great toil, as the study of the law
requires? In the Mathematics, is it not sufficient to know, that a triangle
has three angles equal to two? etc. that the diameter, to the circumference,
is in a subtriple proportion, etc? what need is there then of Euclyd's hard and
intricate demonstrations?

To these any man may answer with facility, that to some the first rudiments
of these sciences, or the knowledge of the quid sit, is sufficient; but not to
all.

To the Catechumeni, or Novices in the Church, the catecheticall Rudiments of
salvation may suffice; as milk is sufficient nutriment for infants: but to
those that are adult in faith, who require more solid meat, this is not
sufficient: Not to School-Doctors, not to the Pastors of the Church, whose
office and conscience require of necessity a fuller measure of Theological
knowledge. To young Logicians, the knowledge of so many Moods and Figures is
enough for their syllogizing; but Philosophers must have the science propter
quid, delivered in Aristotle's Organum: to wit, whence, and why there are so
many, and why there can be no more. To an inferior or pedant Judge, the
elements of law and justice are sufficient; but to a Doctor of the law, to an
Advocate or Chancellor, the fountains of the law must necessarily be known.
For a Mechanic, the (...) of a triangle and circle is sufficient to work by;
but a Mathematick Doctor, who is studious of demonstrations, requires the
science of (...).

After the same manner we may say, that this Article (putting now aside all
equivocations) is sufficient for salvation to the Catechumeni and private
vulgar men, which are not capable of sublimer mysteries; and this (...) is
enough, what they must be, and what means they must use to attain salvation:
to wit, that they must believe in Christ, that they must persevere in faith,
and obedience of faith to the end; by the ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, and by grace, cooperating with these: But to those that are more
adult in faith, especially to the Doctors of Schools and Churches, whosoever will
say, that there is nothing besides this needful, his judgment will be
accounted very weak and jejune: yea, rather it is necessary, that they should
search the Scriptures, and more exactly know the very (...) of the foresaid
doctrine; that is, the fountain and prime cause revealed in the Scriptures,
whence these qualities and means of salvation, with grace and salvation it
self, may originally descend on us; from whence also may proceed that
difference, which we see, of people, and particular persons, which are to be
saved from the multitude of those that perish: lest, perhaps (which by
ignorance, or by forsaking the fountain, must need^ come to pass) we dig to
our selves broken cisternes, Jerem. 2.13.
which will hold no water; that is, lest we ascribe vocation, faith,
perseverance, and our salvation, either to the wit, strength, or merit of men:
or else to grace, which is indifferent, and to our own free will in part, or
in whole, not without dishonor to God, and destruction to our selves.

Now, this fountain, this prime and supreme cause, is Gods eternal
predestination; that is, his eternal counsel, in saving us before others:
for, from this fountain flows the outward calling, and inward also to faith
in Christ, of all those who shall be saved. Hence flow faith and repentance,
justification, obedience, and perseverance in faith; yea, our whole salvation
and glorification: which the Scripture perspicuously teaches, and confirms in
these and such like sayings, Whom he predestined, Romans 8.30. Romans 11.7. Act.
13.46. Ephesians. 1.3. etc.
them he called; whom he called, them he justified; whom he justified, them
also he glorified. Also, Election has obtained, the rest waxed hard. Also, So
many as were ordained to salvation, believed. Also, He elected us in Christ,
before the foundations of the world, that we might be holy and blameless
before him in love: whom he has predestimated unto adoption by Jesus Christ,
De bono persev. c. 14. Praesat. ad Romans
to the praise of his glorious grace, etc. Austin confirms the same, saying,
This predestination of the Saints is nothing else, but a preparation of Gods
bounties, by which they are most assuredly freed, who are freed. Luther also
very emphatically confirms the same, in these words, Both flow, and have their
original from Gods eternal predestination; to wit, who shall believe, who
shall not believe: who shall be absolved from sin, who not: that all this may
be out of our power, and only in the hand of God, that we are justified.

That this fountain therefore must chiefly be known by Divines, and by all,
who will be strengthened in faith and comfort, and that it is to be
perspicuously and soberly taught in Schools and Churches, who will doubt? and
that specially for two causes: 1. For the glory of God; that, knowing the
means and causes of salvation, and the qualities of those that are to be
saved, and salvation it self not to depend from us, but from Gods good pleasure
alone; we may ascribe our salvation not to our selves, but wholly to Gods
mercy. 2. For our consolation; that being assured, that our faith,
perseverance, and salvation depend not from our own strength, or free will,
but that they are grounded on Gods eternal and immutable counsel, we may be
confident, that the same is certain and immovable: and, in this confidence, 2
Pet. 1.9.
we may study to make our election and vocation sure to us, by continuali
prayers and good works, ordained by God for this end.

But this Article does altogether foul and obstruct this most clear
fountain, with the dirt of equivocation: for it denies (see the Conference)
that our faith and perseverance proceed from the fountain of eternal election,
as the effect from the first cause: and it ascribes both these in show to Gods
grace; but, indeed, to man's will; because it makes man's will the mistress of
Gods resistible grace, it makes man's free will stronger, and more powerful
then Gods grace, which can be resisted; and makes the whole difference of those
that are to be damned and saved, depend on men's wills: by which means it is
plain, that the glory of man's salvation cannot be wholly ascribed to God, but
he is of necessity robbed of it.

Hence it utterly overthrowes both the certainty of faith, grace,
justification, perseverance, and, indeed, of our whole salvation; and
consequently, of our only comfort in life and death: For, who does not
understand, that the assurance of grace, justification, perseverance,
salvation, and our whole comfort in life and death, can no ways consist with
resistible grace, and with man's will resisting, or able to resist: as it were
with two principles, either repuguant to each other, or changing every hour?

Hence it is apparent, what we are to judge of tolerance: for, who can say,
that an Article so equivocall, and so captious with dangerous high tragical
strains, is tolerable? Who wittingly and willingly would buy or eat sugar mixed
with poison? Who will account that a benefit, (...).
to have the apple of contentions flung into our Churches, which will afford
matter of perpetual strife? Will Physicians endure in their Schools, that
Empericks adulterate or deny their doctrine of diseases? Can Mathematicians
endure the false delineations of Mechanics, introducing (for example) into a
quadrangle, a false sine for a true one, and so overthrowing the grounds of
their science.

Much less should equivocall doctrines be tolerated in the Church, which,
using the pretext of grace, Prosper. Epist. ad August.
deny grace; by which, the original of salvation is placed in man: man's will
is preferred to Gods will: and therefore one is helped, because he wills it; but
does not will, because he is helped. Men are made believe, that they, who are
originally evil, receive the beginning of their goodness, not from God, but
from themselves: and it is taught, that God is pleased by other means, then by
those which he himself has given. And so much of the equivocations of the
first Article: but how that is rightly to be understood, filled up, and formed,
is explained Cothurno 2o
above.

ARTICLE II.
Therefore Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, dyed for all and singular,
and so far, that he has obtained reconciliation and remission of sins for all
by his death: but on this condition, that no man can really enjoy the said
remission of sins, except the faithful man; and this is according to the
Gospel, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son;
that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have life eternal. And,
1 John 2.2. And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours alone,
but for the sins of the whole world.

The Examination.
THis is no new matter, which the Remonstrants handle in this Article: for, of
old the Semipelagians in Marsiles, and Syracusa held the same, in these words,
Our Lord Jesus Christ dyed for all mankind, Prosper Epist. ad August.
and no man at all is exempted from the redemption of his blood, although his
mind has been quite averse all his life from him; because the mystery of
mercy belongs to all men: by which therefore many are not renewed, because they
are fore-knowne, that they account it needless to be renewed: Therefore, so
far as concerns God, life eternal is prepared for all; but, as for man's
liberty of will, it is received by them, who, of their own accord, shall
believe God, and shall receive the help of grace, by the merit of their faith.

By this Article, although in show they amplified Gods grace, and man's
redemption; yet, in effect, they minced both: giving to God an indifferent
grace, to Christ the merit of redemption, but to free will the efficacy of
both. And while they would overthrow the doctrine of Predestination, which
Austin did maintain out of the Apostle, they did, indeed, shake the whole
Gospel, in ascribing the cause of faith and perseverance; and consequently, of
man's salvation, to God and Christ indifferently, but to man's wit and free will
determinately: which, what it is, they that are taught by God do understand:
For, where is that of the Apostle? Who has separated thee? What have thou,
which thou have not received? But, 1 Cor. 4.7. Jerem. 17.5.
if thou have received, why do thou brag, as if thou had not received it?
Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm.

So they in this Article, concerning a general obtaining of reconciliation of
all men with God by Christ's death, make show of enlarging the grace of Christ's
death; indeed, they do the very same that the former did. And while they think
to overthrow the Apostolical Predestination, which discriminates those that
shall be saved, from them that shall not be saved; they go about to bring in
their own eventuall predestination, of those that spontaneously believe and
persevere, or who determine themselves to faith and perseverance, after faith
and perseverance; which, indeed, is rather to be called Postdestination, then
Predestination. And while they endeavor to make men's will the mistress of
resistible grace, and expose to man's will reconciliation by Christ's death, they
evacuate the faith of grace, and weaken that comfort which we have by Christ's
death.

Now they think, as the former did, that Predestination is hence everted, thus:
If God gave his Son to the world, and would have him dye not only for some,
but equally for all men; and Christ, according to his Fathers will, did dye for
all men alike: God therefore has not by his predestination elected some only
to life eternal, and rejected others: neither can Christ be said to dye only
for some, or for the elect alone. But eternal Predestination is not hence
prejudiced: for, notwithstanding it, God would have his Son dye, whom he gave
to the world; and Christ did dye, according to his Fathers counsel: otherwise
indeed, or in another sense, for all men alike, whether they be elected and
faithful, or reprobate and infidels; but otherwise, or in another sense, for
the elect only and faithful.

That this may be the better understood and demonstrated, the Article is to be
examined more accurately; and it has four parts: 1. A proposition, that
Christ dyed for all and singular, which is ambiguous. 2. A Gloss, that he
has obtained for all reconciliation and remission of sins, which is
equivocall, and false. 3. A Condition, that none but the faithful enjoy really
this reconciliation, which is true: it limiteth the Proposition, and
overthrowes the Gloss. 4. A Proof, by the two alleged places of Scripture,
which directly do not concern the Proposition: for, in neither of the
alleged places is there any mention made of Christ's death for all and
singular; so that I wonder how the Authors could not call to mind fitter
places: yea, the later member of the first compells them to limit the
Proposition, and refells their Gloss; therefore some true passages are mixed
with ambiguities and falsehoods. I say, it is true, That no man really enjoyes
the remission of sins, but the faithful man: For, he that believes not, the
wrath of God abides on him, not remission or reconciliation; except that under
these words, really enjoy, there seems to lie hid the buskin of the twofold
fruition of remission of sins, or reconciliation: The one real by faith,
proper only to the faithful, which only is true: The other not real,
without faith, common to all, even to Infidels, which is fictitious and
nothing. Hence is gathered, that Christ properly dyed for all, and only the
faithful, for none of the unfaithful; and so he dyed not absolutely for all
and singular: for, to dye for one, is properly by death to free one from death,
or, to dye in the stead of another, that he may live; as is plain, 2 Samuel
18.33. Would to God I had dyed for thee; that is, in thy stead, that thou
might live. And of Christ, Romans 5.6, 8. He dyed for us, when we were wicked,
and sinners; that is, in our stead, that we, being delivered from sin and
death, may live to righteousness, or, may have life eternal. So 1 Cor. 5.15.
1 John 3.16. and 4.9. John 15.13. etc.

The Proposition is ambiguous, because imperfect: Our Savior Jesus Christ dyed
for all and singular. If you add, For believers, the Proposition will be
clear and true. If, For men, it will remain ambiguous: for, it may be
understood, either of the greatness of the merit of Christ's death, sufficient
to all men for reconciliation; or, of the efficacy thereof, in reconciling all
men. In the former sense, the Proposition is true: for, Christ's death, in
respect of its greatness and power, is a most sufficient remedy, to expiate
the sins of all and of every one; neither is any thing wanting for a real
reconciliation to all, and every one that receives it by faith. In this sense
Christ may be said to dye for all and every one: as (for example) the
Physician, when the whole City is infected, preparing a sufficient antidote
for all the sick, may be said to prepare it for all; and in this sense, these
sayings in Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebt. 2.2. 1 John 2.2.
where Christ is said to dye for all, To have tasted death for all, To be a
propitiation for the sins of all the world, are commonly not unfitly
understood, although they may be taken more strictly.

In the later sense, concerning the fruit or efficacy of that most sufficient
remedy, which is a real reconciliation with God, and a restitution from death
to life, the Proposition is false: for, to say, that Christ dyed so for all and
singular, that he has reconci^ed to God all and singular promiscuously,
faithful and faithless, who either know not Christ, or oppose him, is to
contradict the Gospel; which, with great consent, challenges the efficacy of
Christ's death for all believers only: For proving of which, that one saying of
our Savior Christ alleged in the Article, John 3.16. That all, etc. is
sufficient: for, he faith not, that all and singular men may have life
eternal; but, That all who believe in him may not perish, but may have life
eternal, according as the real fruition of the remission of sins is limited
in the Article. Whence, in the fore-alledged sayings, 1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9. 1
John 2.2. etc. when they are understood of the efficacy of Christ's death, the
universal All is necessarily to be restrained to the universalitie of
believers, and of the elect; of which universality, Prosper writes finely: Lib.
1. de vocat. Gent. c. 3.
In the elect (says he) and in them that are separated out of the generality
of all men, there is accounted a special kind of universality, that, out of
all the world, all the world may seem to be delivered: and, out of all mankind,
all men may seem to be assumed.

With these two truths the Remonstrants are evidently held: 1. That Christ, in
respect of the sufficiency of his price and merit, dyed for all and singular,
and would dye, and according to his Fathers counsel should dye. 2. In respect
of the fruit and efficacy of his death; that is, of a real reconciliation and
restitution with God, that he did not dye for all and singular, but for all and
only the believers he would and should dye, as his Father had decreed. The
first truth they are not sound anywhere in the conference plainly to prove, nor
openly to deny; nor can they deny it, unless they will make his merit
insufficient. The later truth they grant, in respect of the event: that all men
are not really renewed in Christ, nor restored into the state of grace; but
they deny it in respect of our Saviors intention, or the counsel of his
Father, then which, what can be more absurd and false? For, whom God, by the
death of his son, does not indeed restore in time, them he never intended or
decreed from eternity really to restore: For, surely, Psalm. 115.3.
our God has done whatsoever he pleased. What then he has not done, nor
does in time, neither did he will it from eternity: And whom Christ, by his
death, has not really restored, them he did not will to restore, nor by his
Fathers counsel should he. But, by their own confession, Christ did not really
restore all men into the state of grace; therefore they must needs confess,
that Christ has not really willed their restitution, nor should he, according
to his Fathers counsel: Otherwise they must say, that Christ did not
something, which every way he was willing to do, and so let them deny his
omnipotency; or, what by his Fathers counsel he should have done, so let
them deny his obedience. If they object, that Christ would have gathered the
sons of Jerusalem, but that he did not; let them also say, that God by all
means would have gathered them; not only by outward calling, and invitation
to repentance, by his Prophets, his own, and his Apostles preaching; but also
by the drawing of his inward grace and power: and that for all that he
prevailed not. Now let them see how they do not accuse Gods omnipotent Son of
impotencie, and attach themselves of blasphemy.

Being then, nill they, will they, forced by both these truths, they must needs
give their ingenuous consent with the orthodoxall Church, or not: If they
acknowledge a consent, how do they not condemn themselves of perfidiousnesse,
for tearing the united Churches with vain verbal digladiations, and disturb
the quietness of the Commonwealth? If they deny a consent in the former, how
do they not blaspheme the death of the Son of God, as an insufficient ransom?
If in the later, how do they not entangle themselves in a contradiction? For,
if they deny, that Christ, in respect of the efficacy and fruit of his death,
did not dye for all and singular, but only for the believers; they must needs
affirm to the contrary, that Christ, in respect of the fruit and efficacy of
his death, dyed for all and every man, and not for the believers alone; that
is, that he has reconciled all, and every one to God, and not the believers
alone: or, which is all one, that he has made all and every particular man
enjoy really remission of sins; but they plainly deny this affirmation, in the
limitation of their Article, when they say, That no man does really enjoy
remission of sins, except the faithful man. And more plainly in the
conserence, That all men are not really renewed by Christ, and restored into
the state of grace. Col. p. 497.
They are held fast then by this contradiction, That all are really restored
and reconciled; and, That all are not really reconciled.

But here they will retreat to the gloss of their Proposition, That Christ
dyed for all and singular so, that he has impetrated by his death to all men,
reconciliation and remission of sins: As if this were the third sense, in which
Christ may be said to dye for all, besides the respect of the sufficiency and
efficacy of his death: and so the former distinction is made void; because he
has impetrated for all men reconciliation by his death. But I desire, that
they would tell us, what the meaning of this high-strained phrase is, by which
they have eluded above ten times the answers of their brethren at the
conference. The Scripture speaks nowhere thus, That Christ impetrated for all
men reconciliation; but speaks openly, Col. 1.10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.19.
That God in Christ did reconcile to himself all things in heaven and in
earth: That he reconciled the world to himself: That Christ reconciled all
things by his blood; signifying, that Christ really did restore into the state
of grace the world, synecdochically; that is, all believers in the world: John
12.47. John 17.21.
as in these words, I came not to condemn the world, but to save it. That the
world may know that I am sent by thee: where the world cannot be understood,
but of the world of the Elect. Again, all things; that is, all that are
justified by faith, as is plain, Romans 5.11.

If in this sense they will, that Christ impetrated reconciliation for all,
for, that he really reconciled all; why do not they speak plainly? and why
do they not express to which all he impetrated this? If to all believers,
what need they wrangle? If to all men promiscuously, let them tell how he
impetrated: whether by the greatness of his merit, or also by its efficacy? If
by the greatness of his merit, again why do they wrangle? If by efficacy
also, let them speak, whether absolutely and without faith, or under condition
of faith? If absolutely to all, even without faith, how do they not again
entangle themselves in a contradiction, by their limited condition, That no man
really does enjoy reconciliation, except the faithful man? If under condition
of faith, how are they not tied with another knot of contradiction? for, if he
has obtained to all under condition of faith; therefore, the condition of
faith failing, he has not obtained: but many are destitute of this condition
of faith; that is, many are Infidels: therefore to these many he has not
obtained. But, again, are not these contradictory sayings, He has impetrated
for all, He has not impetrated for many? Which way soever then they turn
their cothurne, they will be found either disturbers of peace by their
Logomachie, or else entangled in a contradiction.

But this their cothurne or buskin must be somewhat more exactly discussed,
that it may appear, how fit it is for both feet; that is, that it may appear
out of the signification of the words, how it hides the true and false meaning.
Reconciliation is a restitution or rendering of disagreeing parties into favor:
actively it is attributed to God and Christ; passively to us. The word
impetrate is equivocall, signifying diverse things; sometimes to entreat,
sometime to prepare, procure, merit, acquire, obtain, confer, etc. therefore
this phrase, Christ obtained reconciliation for all, must needs be very
equivocall: but, to play with equivocations is not for Divines, but for
Sophisters, who would deceive. Yet, this phrase cannot have above three
meanings; Either that Christ by his death obtained reconciliation for all, by a
certain Metalepsis, by meriting or pro-meriting matter sufficient enough of
reconciliation to all men: as for example, The Physician (of whom before)
preparing a most sufficient cure for all sick people, or obtaining it
elsewhere, may be said to have prepared or obtained health for all: Or, that
he has properly obtained reconciliation for all, conferring the same upon all;
that is, has really reconciled all: and that, either absolutely without
condition; as for example, Joab, 2 Samuel 14.21, 33. Esther 7.2, 13.
by the intercession of the woman of Tekoa, did absolutely obtain
reconciliation from David for the paricide Absalom; that, without any
condition, he should be brought into the Kings sight, and that the father
should kiss his son: As also Esther is said to have obtained for the Jews
security, absolutely without condition: Or under condition of faith to be
required in all, that if all believe in the Son, they may indeed be reconciled;
if they believe not, they may be debarred from reconciliation: as for example,
Impunity was obtained from Solomon to seditious Adomiah upon condition of his
innocence, 1 King. 1.52.
If he be a worthy man, a hair shall not fall from his head, but if evil be
found in him, he shall die.

I will speak more briefly; Christ has procured reconciliation for all men,
either in respect of the amplitude of his merit, being most sufficient for the
reconciliation of all; or over and above, in respect of the efficacy of
reconciling all men; and that either absolutely, whether they believe or not;
or conditionally, if all believe. Neither can there be a fourth sense given of
this phrase; which, when the Remonstrants allege in their Conference, That
Christ has procured reconciliation for all; that is, has caused, that God
should open again the gate of his grace to sinful man, although no man shall
enter into that communion of his grace, but by faith; either this is a new
buskin, or an equivocall Scheme or Livery-cloak, by a limitation taking that
away, which before it had set down: (for, how has he really obtained
reconciliation, who has caused the Prince to open the gate of his Castle to
seditious people, through which, notwithstanding, no man must pass, but by
paying of a thousand Crowns, then which, the condition of faith is far
better?) or, if it is to be called the obtaining of reconciliation, it belongs
to the third conditional way of impetration. There remains then only three
ways of obtained reconciliation, with one of which they must say, that Christ
obtained reconciliation for all.

If the first way, they agree with the orthodox Church: what then do they
trouble the Church and State? If the second way, they contradict themselves;
affirming, that Christ did obtain for all absolute reconciliation; that is,
that he did restore all men really into the state of grace; as, Joab did
absolutely reconcile Absalom to his Father; that is, restored him to his
Fathers favor. But, contrarily, they plainly deny, in limiting of the Article
in their Conference, That all are really repaired in Christ, and restored to
the state of grace; which contradiction is no less apparent, then if they
should say, That Joab made Absalom absolutely obtain his Fathers favor, and
not absolutely; or, he restored him really into his Fathers favor, and did not
absolutely restore him. If the third way, they are again dashed upon the rock
of contradiction: for, if Christ by his intention obtained reconciliation for
all men, upon condition of faith to be required in all men; then he obtained it
to none without the condition of faith, or to none that want faith; or,
Infidels, in whom it ought not to be: nor is it put casually, either by God,
who does not give faith to all men, but to whom he pleases; nor by free will,
which is dead in sin, till God quicken it. Now, there have been always
faithless men, and yet are many; is not here then a manifest conflict? He has
procured for all, and he has not procured for all. Which way soever then they
use this buskin, either they mean the same thing with their equivocations,
which orthodoxall men do; and so by their verbosity, they disturb the Church
and State: or else, they are entangled with manifest contradictions: or,
lastly, (how strange soever they seem to make the matter) they are forced to
betake themselves unto the tents of the Massilian Semi-pelagians, maintaining
an universal reconciliation, even of those that live and die without the faith
and knowledge of Christ: which Heresy was lately renewed in Germany, by
Huberus.

And hither, truly, do almost all their Arguments, borrowed from the Huberians,
Coll. page 141, 142, 143.213.
aim. Hence they call Christ the reconciler, not only of the faithful, but
also of the whole world; that is, of Infidels too. From this Hypothesis, are
their Classical absurdities, which they cast upon the orthodox Protestants;
That otherwise, the unbeleevers, if Christ did not obtain for them
reconciliation, should have nothing to believe: or, if they did believe, they
should believe a lie; which are most false: for, though Christ died not for
all, in respect of the efficacy of his death; yet, he died for all, in respect
of the sufficiency of his merit. This all Infidels have, which they may believe
in the Gospel, that Christ suffered sufficiently for the sins of all the
world, and paid a full ransom, and reconciled all to God that believe in him;
and therefore, shall be partakers of this merit and reconciliation, if of
faithless they will become believers: Now, in affirming and believing this,
they do no ways believe a lie. But Infidels should believe a lie, if they
should conclude, or were taught, that while they remain in infidelity,
reconciliation is obtained for them in Christ. For, this is a lie, and not
truth, that Christ has obtained reconciliation for all, even for Infidels as
they are, and remain such.

They suppose also, that many for whom Christ died, are damned; but the Apostle
cries out against this as false, Who shall condemn? it is Christ that is dead:
for, Romans 8.34.
this Apostolical consolation were in vain, if this universal were not
supposed; to wit, That no man is condemned, for whom Christ died. For, to this
godly minds may firmly subsume; Christ died for me, and conclude; I shall not
then be condemned. This is the Christians comfort, from Christ's death. But they
destroy this, putting a particular instead of an universal; Some for whom
Christ died shall not be condemned: for, what consequence can arise of pure
praticulars? or what comfort? And, in vain do they allege the words of the
Catechism to cover their buskin and Massilianisme, saying, If one will have
obtaining to be altogether the same that restoring to the state of grace, Coll.
p. 172.
what will be done to the Catechism, which, Answ. 37. uses the same word?
But, 1. this is false, that the Catechism uses the same words; for, it does
not say, That he might obtain the grace of God, justice, and life eternal;
but that he might acquire it. Then, if it should use the same word obtained,
this would help nothing the cothurne: for, it does not say, for all; but, that
to us; to wit, believers; of whom the question is, What beleevest thou when
thou say, he suffered? Grace etc. he might acquire: But the Catechism
evidently tieth them with a contradiction. For, it speaks of the real
acquisition of grace, or restitution into the state of grace, Acts 20.28.
with which Christ is said, to have purchased the Church of God with his own
blood; that is, to have restored her into the state of grace. If then, he
purchased, be all one with he obtained; it follows, that to obtain, is all one
with, to restore into the state of grace; which they deny: and, to obtain
reconciliation for all, is the same that, to restore into the state of grace;
by denying of which in the Conference, they tie themselves again with the knot
of contradiction. Coll. p. 497.


Nor can they free themselves of this knot, by objecting that in the same
Answer, Christ is said to have sustained the wrath of God against the sins of
all mankind: for, these words will not suffer themselves to be thus glossed
upon and wrested, That Christ by his death has reconciled all mankind, or
has impetrated reconciliation and remission of sins to all mankind: for, to
whom he purchased this, or, as they speak, has impetrated, the subsequent
words teach, that by his passion, etc. But they declare and amplify the cause
and matter of his passion to have been this; to wit, The sense and enduring of
Gods wrath, kindled against the sins, not of some men, but of all mankind;
from whence is made an universality of sin, and of Gods wrath suffered by
Christ against sin: but no ways an universality of reconciliation obtained or
restored to all; for, the impetration or restitution of reconciliation declares
the end and fruit of the passion; but these words speak not of the end and
fruit, but of the efficiency and matter of the passion. The knot then remains,
and in vain do they seek a pretext for their buskin in the Catechism.

Lastly, Coll. p. 171.
I find in the Conference one cunning trick, devised to elude the
contradiction; where they write, That the passion and death of Christ does in
order precede both faith and infidelity; and therefore, the Remonstrants think
it an absurdity, that Christ died for the faithful and Infidels, as Infidels;
and that they assented he did die for all men, of whom afterward some became
Infidels, some believers: for they discerned between the state of a sinner
before his infidelity, and in it; and so they think they have sufficiently
salved this contradiction; Christ died for all and singular; and, Christ died
not for Infidels, whereof there be many: but indeed, they loose not the knot
with these subtleties, and new tragical phrases; but they lay open the hidden
ulcer of their minds, and the mystery of the new prophesies: Therefore let us
examine the particulars.

1. Though we grant that Christ's death and passion do in order precede faith,
yet it is false that it goes before infidelity in order; for, infidelity in
order goes before man's sin and his enmity against God, as in order the cause
precedes the effect: but sin and man's enmity against God in order precede the
passion and death of Christ, as the Apostle witnesses, For Christ, when as yet
we were without strength, in his own time he died for the wicked: Romans 5.6, 8,
9.
also, When as yet we were sinners and enemies, we were reconciled by the death
of his Son; therefore, infidelity in order precedes the passion and death of
Christ.

Again, there is no consequence: Christ's death in order precedes faith and
infidelity; therefore, it is absurd to say, that Christ died for the faithful,
and unfaithful, as they were such: for, they delude us under the fallacy of
non causa; for, whatsoever becomes of the order of faith, and infidelity to
Christ's death, it is most true that Christ died for believers and unbeleevers
as they were such, removing the hidden equivocations.

Of unbeleevers, we have showed out of the Apostle testimony: for, if it be
most true, that Christ died for sinners and enemies, as they were such; to wit,
antecedently; that is, who in order were sinners and enemies before Christ's
death; then it is most true, that Christ died for Infidels as they were such;
to wit, antecedently; that is, who in order before Christ's death were Infidels,
after ceased to be wicked, unbeleevers, enemies, by reason of their faith: The
same is also most true of believers, and that whether Christ's death be
absolutely considered in it self, or in relation to Christ's intention, and the
Fathers counsel.

If we absolutely consider Christ's death, as in order it goes before faith, we
conclude, that it is absurd to say, that Christ died for the faithful as such
antecedently; that is, whose faith in order went before Christ's death; for so
belief must go before the thing believed, which is absurd; whereas, in such
relatives, belief is posterior to the thing believed, as knowledge to the
thing known; the sensitive act, to the sensible object, according to
Aristotle. But, it is no absurdity if we say, In Categ. c. 8.
that Christ died for the faithful as such consequently; that is, whose faith,
looking on Christ's death, and applying it to themselves, might attain the
fruit and efficacy thereof; for, in this sense our Savior Christ plainly
says, Joh. 17.19, 20. John 15.13. John 10.51.
that he prays and sanctifies himself for those that should believe in him:
that he lays down his life for his friends, and sheep; to wit consequently,
who in order after the belief of Christ's death, should be believers, friends,
and sheep.

But relatively to our Saviors intention, and his Fathers counsel, if we
speak of Christ's death, as in this Question we ought to speak, and understand
the phrase, to die for another, is the most proper signification, as was said
above: it is most true that Christ died, and that he would and should die,
only for the faithful as they are such; that is, for such as should make his
death by faith their own: not for Infidels as they are such; that is, for such
as by infidelity should neglect and contemn his death. On the contrary, it is
absurd to say, that Christ in that most proper sense did not die, nor would,
nor should die only for the faithful; but also, that he died, and that he
should, and would have died for Infidels, as they are such: For, that this is
not only repugnant to holy Writ, and to the event (by which we ought to judge
what our Saviors will, and his Fathers counsel was) but that it implies also
a manifest contradiction, the Remonstrants own conscience will tell them.

3. In that they assent, that Christ died for all men, it is well, if they
mean of the greatness of the price of Christ's death, which was most
sufficient for all men; but if they mean the fruit and efficacy impetrated or
purchased for all men, although both in life and death they be strangers to
Christ, they do not assent to Scripture, and to the event, but to the Massilian
Semi-pelagianisme.

4. It is true, that of all men, some in order after Christ's death become
faithful: but it is false, that in order after Christ's death some become
unfaithful; for, Christ being to die in order found all men in impiety, sin,
and enmity, Romans 5. v. 6.8, 9. therefore he found all in infidelity.

5. In that they know how to discriminate, between the state of a sinner in
his infidelity, and before it; they doubtless had not this knowledge in
Scripture, which knows not the state of sin or of sinners before infidelity,
or without it, Romans 11.31. Ephesians. 2.2. and 5.6. Col. 3.6.
but testifies, that all men are borne the sons of wrath, of infidelity, and
of disobedience. This then is that corrupt lurking sort of mystery of the new
Prophecy, and the first lie upon which the five Articles, and diverse other,
both manifest and occult, are built; to wit, that man is borne without
infidelity, and that there is no infidelity, till man be grown up, and rejects
the Gospel: and from hence, that original sin, if any such be, is a
punishment, not a fault; and hence is it, that the natural man has free will
to good and evil; otherwise, wrongfully is faith demanded of him, who has not
the faculty of believing: hence are predestination and election of foreseen
faith: hence an universal impetration of reconciliation by Christ's death:
hence is resistible grace or indifferent: hence is the apostasy of the Saints,
uncertain perseverance, doubtful faith, and other hid matters which time will
reveal.

Out of all this, two things we have to observe: One is, that by this cunning
shift, of the order of faith to Christ's death, the contradiction is not
unfolded or avoided, by which they are forced to entangle themselves in this
Article: That Christ died absolutely for all and singular, and obtained
reconciliation for all; and yet that he died not for Infidels, whereof there be
many; nor obtained reconciliation for them, which is an evident argument of an
evil cause: For, when the Adversary is driven to admit of contradictions, he
is gone. The other, because this Article troubles the Church with
contradictions and equivocations, and overthrowes it self, that it is not to
be suffered in the Church.

ARTICLE III.
Man has not saving faith from himself, nor by force of his free will; seeing
that in the state of defection and sin, he cannot of himself either think or
do any good, which is good indeed, such as saving faith is; but, it is
necessary that he be borne over again by God in Christ through his holy
Spirit, and that he be renewed in his mind, will, affections, and all his
faculties; that he might think, understand, will, and perform that which is
good, according to that of Christ, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing.

ARTICLE IV.
This grace of God is the beginning, progress, and perfection of all
goodness, and that so far, that the regenerate man himself, without this
first, or adventitious exciting, consequent, and cooperating grace, can
neither will, think, or do any good, nor resist any evil tentation; so that
all the good works which we can imagine, are to be ascribed to the grace of
God in Christ. As for the true manner how that grace works, that is not
irresistible; for, it is said of many, They resisted the holy Ghost, Act. 7.
and elsewhere in many other places.

The Examination.
ALthough these two Articles in some sort differ; for the third is, concerning
the operating cause of faith and conversion in an unregenerate man: the fourth
in the former part is, concerning the operating cause of the progress,
increment, and perfection of all good in the regenerate man; the other part is,
concerning the manner by which that cause produces both faith and conversion
in the unregenerate, and the progress, increment, and perfection in the
regenerate; notwithstanding, they do altogether cohere; and therefore, in the
Conference, were conjoined by the parties that conferred; yea, and the fifth,
which is concerning the perseverance of the Saints, Coll. p. 206. 225. 237. 268.
is knit to the fourth, because the way of operating grace has relation as
well to that perfection which is obtained by perseverance, as to its beginning
and progress.

The third needs not much examination: if we follow the natural sense of the
words, in both parts it is consentaneous to holy Writ. 1. That the procreating
cause of saving faith in man, is not man himself, or his free will; because,
in the state of sin, man is not fit to think or do any good thing of himself,
according to Scripture, Ephesians. 2.9. 2 Cor. 3.5. etc. 2. That man necessarily
must be by God in Christ, through the grace of the holy Ghost, regenerated or
illuminated in his mind, renewed in his will, affections, etc. to understand,
think, will, and perfect that which is good, according to the place alleged,
John 15.6.

The fourth also in the former part, if you look upon the words, is true, and
gives glory to God, because it ascribes the beginning, progress, and
perfection of all goodness in the regenerate man, to God, or to grace,
according to these sayings, Jam. 1.7. Ephesians. 2.9. Phil. 1.6. etc. Neither would
the orthodox men in the Conference, reprehend any of these, if they be
understood according to the meaning of holy Scripture. But there is poison in
the tail. The closure, concerning the way of the operation of that grace,
takes away what before was granted. They deny this way of operation to be
irresistible; in the Conference they call it resistible: These words, in their
very sound are horrid and barbarous, and not without a Solecisme: they are
barbarous, because not known to Latin Writers, for ought I know, nor to the
holy Scriptures; unheard also in the Schools of orthodox Protestants, and
perhaps of the Jesuits too. I have not read all the Jesuits, but Bellarmine,
the chiefest of them, an exact Disputer of general and special assistance, or
indifferent, and not indifferent motion and grace, in his Books of Grace and
Free Will, has it no where, as I remember. It seems, that Arminius his party
has devised this high buskin of irresistible grace, to the great benefit of
their cause, to make the truth the more envied: As if, forsooth, the
orthodoxall party did teach, that grace were irresistible, that is, coactive,
or coaction.

Even in sense and signification the terms are barbarous: for, that is
irresistible, which cannot be resisted; resistible, which may be resisted. By
what Author will they prove this to be spoken passively? Why may not rather
actively irresistible signify that which cannot resist; resistible, which can
resist? Many verbals, indeed, in bilis, drawn from actives, signify passively:
as, amabilis, placabilis, etc. but not a few also descending from neutralls,
are not of the passive, but of the neuter signification: as, rationabilis,
risibilis, etc. for him who can reason and laugh, etc. So the word Stabilis,
which (doubtless) the word Resistibilis does follow, from resisto; that is,
gradum sisto, to stand, or else, to resist. As then stabilis, so instabilis,
repugnabilis, are not passives, as if they signified to be stood, to be
unstood, to be resisted; but neutralls, which signify to stand long, not to
stand, and able to resist: So he is called resistible, not who can be
resisted, but who can resist: So contrarily, resistible will be very resisting:
as, Echo resonabilis in Sabinus, is an Echo much resounding; which meaning,
when the clause wanted in both Articles, this was not according to the
Remonstrants mind: therefore they should have first consulted with Grammarians
about the use of such a barbarous word, before they had troubled the Church
with it.

But let this barbarous word be Latin, and of the passive signification; let,
I say, the operation of resistible and irresistible grace be that which may be
resisted by man's will, or may not, or which may be hindered or not hindered by
free will: the question is, what must be determined of this? Whether this
grace, which produces all these things, ascribed to it in both Articles, be
resistible, or irresistible?

The Remonstrants affirm the former, but deny the later. Our orthodox men, in
the Conference, acknowledge not this barbarous and ambiguous term; but as for
the matter it self, the former they deny, the later they affirm: If, Col. p.
217, 238, 239.
(say they) by this word Resist, be understood to hinder altogether, and to
master Gods working, we confess, that in man's conversion, such a working of
grace is placed by us, which in this sense is irresistible; that is, which
cannot be hindered nor mastered by man's resisting will: the reason is, because
the grace of God in Christ does overcome, hinder, and take away this
opposition. And this their opinion they prove strongly by ten Arguments out of
Scripture. On the contarie, the Remonstrants endeavor to show by nine Reasons,
that their grace is resistible, the most of them being equivocall, Col. p. 218.
because of the ambiguitie of the word Grace, Col. p. 226.
upon which chiefly depends the whole company of their sayings and arguments.
To unfold therefore this ambiguitie, and the better to perceive the state of
the question, we must use the distinction of a threefold state of man's will.

For we must consider what man's will can do, or does, before its conversion;
what in conversion it self, and what after it. So there is a threefold grace:
the first is, calling grace, or, that of vocation external, answering the
first state of the will: the other is operating grace, or, that of inward
motion, answering the second state: the third is cooperating, or, of internal
motion too, fit for the third state.

Calling grace, or, of external vocation, is that, by which God is pleased
outwardly to call, or invite to faith, obedience, and salvation, by the voice
of the Law, men not yet regenerate. Hear, O Israel, etc. Walk in my precepts,
etc. Do this, Mat. 11.28. Marc. 1.5.
etc. And by Evangelicall Sermons, Come to me all, etc. Repent, and believe
the Gospel. This grace (which is usually called preventing, precedaneous,
exciting, inviting, persuading) God did not bestow, in the Old Testament upon
every nation, but on Israel only, according to that, He has declared his
Statutes to Israel, he has not done so to any other nation. So in the New
Testament, God confers not this grace on all people, but on Christians alone.
Now, concerning this grace, we answer to the Question, that it is not
irresistible, Col. p. 217. Romans 8.6.
but too much resistible: yea, that the will before conversion can do nothing,
but resist this calling grace; seeing the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against
God, and is not subject to the Law of God, neither, indeed, can be. Hence are
those complaints of God, of Christ, of the Prophets and Apostles in both
Testaments, concerning the resistance and contumacie of those who are called:
Jer. 7.13. Psalm. 80.14. Mat. 23.37. Act. 7.51.
I spoke to you, rising early in the morning, and calling, and you heard not; I
called you, and you did not answer. O, if my people had hearkened to me! If
Israel had walked in my ways. How often would I have gathered thee, and thou
would not? You always resist the holy Ghost, etc. The Remonstrants in their
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Arguments, prove only
this, and no other resistibilitie of grace. What do they then with all these
pains, but thresh husks, as they say? For, of the resistibilitie of this
grace, there is no doubt, or question.

Cooperating grace (for, of this we will speak first) or subsequent, by them
called consequent, is that, by which God inwardly co-operates with the good
will of the regenerate man; and, by which, the regenerate man is corroborated
in the state of grace. Psalm. 23.6. Jer. 32.40. Psalm. 143.10. 1 Cor. 1.8. 2
These. 3.18.
Of this it is said, The mercy of the Lord shall follow me all the days of my
life. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
Thy right Spirit shall lead me in the way of righteousness. God will strengthen
you unblameable, even to the end. This is it which Paul wishes to all Churches
in the end of all his Epistles. And of this also there is no question: For,
though God does never totally nor finally withdraw this from the regenerate
(according to his own promises, and their prayers;) yet in his wisdom he so
moderates it, that now and then he leaves a wrestling of the spirit and flesh
in them; either to free, or humble, or excite, or chastise them. In which
sometimes the spirit is mastered by the flesh, sometime the flesh by the
spirit: as the fallings, and groanings, and complaints of the Saints witness,
and the Apostle confirms, The flesh covets against the spirit, Gal. 5.17.
and the spirit against the flesh. This also we are content should be called
resistible; yet not simply, but in some respect: For this resistibilitie or
resistance is not (as the former) between grace and the will, but between
sensuality, or that remainder of the flesh in the Saints, and between grace*
as the Apostle witnesses, That which I would, Romans 7.15, 19.
I do not; but what I would not, that I do: For, I do not the good, which I
would; but the evil, which I would not, that do I. And so, that the flesh at
last is overcome by the spirit, sensuality by the regenerate will, and
concupiscence by grace.

Lastly, Operating grace (which by them is confounded with the two former) is
the motion of Gods mercy (as Austin calls it) by which he works inwardly in
the minds, wills, and hearts of the unregenerate these things which belong to
man's conversion. This grace or motion is Gods peculiar work, and this is
questioned, but not all: for, Scripture and experience witness, that there are
three distinct degrees of this grace: For, some God pities so much, that he
bestows the gift of illumination and historical faith on them; on others, the
gift of temporary faith, and some measure of joy: Lastly, on some, the gift of
saving faith and regeneration. This first degree the Remonstrants themselves
deny not to be irresistible: Col. p. 273.
For, when (say they) God reveals his will, we acknowledge the irresistible
virtue of the holy Spirit in our mind; because our mind cannot avoid ipsum
scire, or the knowledge it self, and in our soul, when he knocks: because,
nill we, will we, we are forced to feel it. Concerning the resistibilitie of
the second degree, we will not trouble our selves: for, they deny not the
illumination of them to be irresistible also. But for the motion to assent, and
some measure of joy, they may, for us, think what they please. If they say it
is resistible, because the motion does not so effectually work upon the will,
this is nothing to the question. But, for a final resistance, both Scripture
and example prove, They receive the word with joy; Luke 8.17. John 6.66. 1 Timothy
1.19. and 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.1, 21.
but have no root, who believe for a while, and in time of tentation fail.
After that, many of his disciples departed from him. Some have made shipwreck
of their faith. Some depart from the faith, denying the Lord that bought them;
they forsake the holy doctrine delivered to them.

The whole question is, concerning the operation of the third degree (which is
called inward vocation;) that this is the irresistible motion of God, the
orthodox Doctors have firmly proved.

1. Because, as God does irresistibly illuminate those, whom he does
effectually intend to convert; so likewise he does irresistibly bestow on them,
not only the power, but the act also of believing, Phil. 1.29. and 2.13.
therefore, by his effectual moving, he does not only take away resistance,
but resistibilitie also from them. Whereas they object, To you it is given to
suffer for Christ: Col. p. 218.
this belongs not to the operating, but to the cooperating grace. Of which
wrestling we said already: Col. p. 229.
therefore it is nothing to the purpose. 2. Because God, by converting us, gives
us a new heart, and a new spirit: he removes the heart of stone, and gives
flesh, Col. p. 218. and p. 281.
and makes us walk in his ways. But it is absurd, to imagine a new heart, a
new spirit, and the act of walking in Gods laws, with resistance or
resistibilitie, Jer. 31.18. Deuteronomy. 29.4. Ezekiel. 36.26. against which no solid
thing is alleged, though much is said. 3. Because the quickening, regeneration,
conversion, new creation of the natural man, Col. p. 219.
dead in sin, with resistibilitie, is no less an absurdity, Col. d page 295.
ad 309.
then to feign or imagine such a resistance in man's first creation, or daily
generation, or last resuscitation, John 3.3. and 5.25. Ephesians. 2.5. etc. which
reason will never be refuted with verbositie. Col. p. 220.
4. Because grace, working conversion with resistibilitie, Col. p. 309.
differs not from Rhetorical persuasion, or a moral enticing to faith; such
an one as is impossible for man to be quickened, who is dead in sin. What are
alleged to the contrary, are nothing to the purpose. 5. Because grace,
working faith and conversion, by its efficacy, overcomes all the strength of
men, or other creatures: and therefore cannot be mastered by man's corrupted
will, Ephesians. 1.18, 19. Col. 2.12, 13. 2 These. 1.11. 2 Pet. 1.3. The Major of
which reason is not weak, as they say: for that power, Col. p. 312.
which is insuperable by man's depraved will, is also irresistible to the same.
6. Because, if the grace of regeneration were resistible, Col. p. 220.
it were common to many unregenerate men; but the Scripture makes it peculiar
to Gods sons only, Romans 8.14, 30. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. Joh. 14.17. and 6.36, 45. 1
John. 4.17. which reason does not conclude only for irresistance, Col. p. 317.
as is pretended, but also for irresistibilitie. 7. Because the Fathers
drawing, without which none can come to Christ, Col p. 221.
Joh. 6.44. supposes an irresistibilitie of grace; otherwise, no man would
come, being drawn: Col. p. 322.
and yet for all this, we are not drawn against our will by the Father (which
is objected) no more then against our will we are illuminated. 8. Because the
gift of faith and repentance is said to be given by Gods Spirit, not only,
Col. p. 222.
because it is offered to the will irresistibly, but because it is put into the
heart, or infused irresistibly, Col. p. 327.
Joh. 6.63. Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.19. 2 Timothy 2.25. Romans 5.5. The contrary cavills
are altogether Atheologicall, or inconsistent with Divinity. 9. Because the
resistibilitie of grace, if there ought to be a conversion, supposes in the
unregenerate will, Col. p. 331.
a power of (...) resisting; but this the Scripture generally denies. The
Remonstrants will at length consider, whether this reason concludes not
against them. 10. Because, if we yield a resistibilitie of grace, the work
chiefly necessary for our salvation; to wit, faith and repentance, should be
placed in man's arbitrament, as in the proximate cause. And the reason of this
difference, why of two unregenerate, the one in hearing the Gospel believes,
the other believes not, should proceed from man: because one would resist
grace, the other would not; against that place, Who separated thee? 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that thou have not received? Which is spoken, not only in
respect of Infidels (as they think) but likewise in respect of grace: For, if
in two Infidels we put grace equally resistible, surely, he that resists not
grace, but receives it, and believes, he may answer not only to him that
resists and believes not, but even to grace, Col. p. 336.
and God himself, I separated my self; which lie is approved by the
Remonstrants blasphemously. 11. To these add another reason out of Joh. 15.5.
Without me you can do nothing. For, if converting grace be resistible, he that
does not resist grace, may refute Christ, and say, Behold without thee I have
not resisted grace. Neither can he say, It Is by thee that I have not resisted:
But whereas, by supposition, the same grace is placed in the resistent, he
ought also to say, It is by thee that he has resisted; which is blasphemy. 12.
Let Austins reason be added, De correp. and great. c. 14.
He that has a most omnipotent power over men's hearts, to incline them which
way he will (and he does with the very wills of men what he pleases; and he
has a greater power over men's wills, De great. Christ. cap. 24.
then they have over their own) and who, by an internal and occult,
miraculous and ineffable power, works in men's hearts, not only new
revelations, but also good wills; and this he does not, but by the wills of men
themselves. He, by his grace, works faith and conversion in men's hearts, not
by a resistible operation, but altogether irresistible, and yet not by
coaction. But God has a most omnipotent power over men's wills, etc. and he
works upon the same, as he said: Ergo, etc. The Major has a most evident
truth, out of the knitting of the proper cause with its effect, that it cannot
be any wise denied. The Assumption Austin teaches by two examples: the first
is out of 1 Samuel 10.26. concerning Saul, to whom, when God would give the
kingdom, and the Israelites had power either to resist him, or to submit
themselves to him, God touched their hearts, that they neither could, nor would
resist: and this he did, by working on their wills. The other is out of 1 Chro.
11. and 12. of David, whom, when God decreed to settle him in the kingdom with
better success, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Abisai, a prince among
thirty, that he said, We are thine, O David, and will be with thee, thou son of
Jesse. Can he (says Austin) resist the will of God, and not rather do his
will, who in his heart did work by his Spirit, which came upon him, that he
should will, say, and do this? And by them Almighty God, who was with him
brought them to make him king. What? did he bind him with any corporeal bands?
He wrought within, he held the heart, he moved the heart, and drew them by
their wills, which wills he wrought in them.

At length he premises the Conclusion, in these words, No man's free will
resists God, when he is willing to save a man: for, to will and nill is so in
the power of the willer and niller, that, as it cannot hinder the divine will,
so it cannot hinder the divine power. But, lest any should except, that God
takes away resistance, but not resistibility, he adds further, It is therefore
out of doubt, that men's wills cannot resist the will of God, who has done in
heaven and earth whatsoever he pleased, and who has also done these things
that are to come; he cannot, I say, resist or hinder him from doing that which
he pleases, seeing that even upon men's wills he works what he pleases. It
is therefore most clear, that this holy Father does strongly assever the
irresistible operation of divine grace, not only in man's conversion and
salvation, but also in directing of other difficult actions: such as is the
election of Kings, and this for the glory of God. And that he also refutes the
vain pretexts of resistibility and coaction. 13. If the grace, that works
faith and conversion, is not irresistible, after the manner we speak of, but
resistible, that it may, or may not be hindered by men's wills; it follows, that
all is vain verbal smoke, what they ascribe so magnifically to Gods grace in
the third and fourth Article: and, that these effects, which they speak of, are
not to be attributed to Gods grace only indifferently and remotely, but to men's
unresisting wills specifically and proximately, which appears thus:

The effect of that cause, which works resistibly; that is, so that its
production or inhibition, may depend from another resisting, or not resisting
cause: if it be produced, the production thereof is to be ascribed
indifferently and remotely to the worker, specifically and proximately to him
who resists not, but admits it: On the contrary, if it be hindered, the
inhibition thereof is to be attributed specifically and proximately to the
resister, or him that will not admit it: For example, A Prince proposes a
reward to many of his subjects resistibly, that he who will fight may have it,
he that will not, may not have it: The Princes action is indifferent to these
many: he that will fight, does well specificate the Princes action, because he
is to receive the reward; but he that will not fight, does not specificate it
well; because he is to want the reward. Who sees not, that as well the one as
the other action is specifically and proximately to be ascribed to him that
will fight, or not fight; but to the Prince indifferently, and remotely? I will
add another, by which, in my hearing once resistible grace was declared: A
father sets down on the table a dish of meat equally to his children, but
resistibly, that he who will may have meat, who will not, may not have it. Here
the fathers operation is indifferent to all: they that will take the meat, do
specificate it well; but they that will not, specificate it ill. Who now again
does not see, that the meat is to be ascribed specifically and proximately to
the takers, but to the father indifferently and remotely? Such is the
resistibilitie of grace, which these men teach.

But if this be so, all the effects of grace must needs be deluding and false,
which they rehearse: deluding or false, because man has not faith from
himself, or by force of his free will: but he shall have from himself the
specification of the working of grace, because, by being unwilling to resist
grace, he has severed himself from others; because of himself he cannot think,
will, or do good: for, of ones self to specificate well, a resistible,
indifferent operation is a good thing; because God, by his holy Spirit, does
regenerate and renew us, etc. For, God does not by his Spirit renew and
regenerate us, but indifferently, remotely, resistibly, and therefore
improperly: but we regenerate and renew our selves specifically, proximately,
and properly; because this grace is the beginning (for of the progress and
perfection of this grace, the question is not) of all good: for, the beginning
of a good specification of a resistible and indifferent operation of grace, is
good, from our not resisting, etc.

What besides? We must ask of God only such an operation of grace as is
resistible and indifferent: and only for this grace must we thank God; the not
resistance and good specification of grace, shall be in our will and power. Is
not God here robbed of his glory? Has not man reason to sacrifice to his own
net, that he may be puffed up with pride against God, and that he may say, I
have separated my self? This is to be cast headlong with Satan into hell fire:
but, if of our selves we do not resist resistible grace, if we receive that
grace which is offered, and specificate that which is indifferent (which, with
the closure of the fourth Article, do necessarily cohere) is not this to
establish the idol of free will? Original sin is by this denied, and the
natural man's native impotencie, corruption, and pravitie, of which God so
often complains in Scripture; and so do the Prophets, and Apostles, and the
Saints themselves. What will become of our Catechism, which says, That by
nature we are propense to hate God and our neighbor, that we are so corrupt,
that to do well we are altogether unapt. This sure is it which resistible
grace goe^h about to abolish.

Out of all this it is manifest, that the Remonstrants in both Articles, Art.
1. coth. 7.
especially in the closure of the fourth, either abuse the equivocation of the
word grace explained above, affirming, that the operation of calling,
persuading, exciting grace (which they call adventitious and precedaneous) is
resistible, which orthodoxall men deny not; and so, with vain debates, they
trouble the Church and State: or, by understanding the operation of grace,
producing faith and conversion, they dangerously corrupt the doctrine of grace
with Pelagius: or lastly, they do entangle themselves again with the knot of
contradiction, in ascribing to operating grace alone faith and conversion, and
making the same resistible; that is, indifferently depending from the will of
man. Again, while they profess, that faith is the mere gift of God, and yet
make the same to depend resistibly from the assent of man's will, they fall into
such contradictions, that no Sophistry can reconcile. But, Col. p. 502.
when the Adversary (as we said before) is forced to contradict himself, it is
known, that he is subdued.

They deny, that grace (whether resistible, Col. p. 226.
or not) proceeds from Gods absolute decree; for this they hate worse then dog
or snake. But it is sufficient, that the Apostle witnesses this, where he
conjoynes vocation, not external only, Romans 8.30.
but most properly internal justification, the producer of faith, immediately
with predestination, as the effect with the first cause. But whatever this is,
it will no wise help their turn. Suppose there were no predestination in
heaven, no election; yet this most firm principle of Scripture remains asserted
by Austin in the fore-alledged places, That Almighty God has a most omnipotent
power over the wills of men; and, that he can, according to his pleasure,
either leave the wills themselves in their sins, or incline them to good: i.e.
make them irresistible to his grace. With which principle, if resistibilitie of
grace could stand, which they feign; i.e. the imbecillitie and indifferency
for effecting of faith, and that power of men's wills in rebelling against grace,
and God himself, working in man; I say, if these could stand, God could not be
Almighty, nor would there ever be any conversion of man to God, nor
regeneration; which is so evident, that no Sophistry can elude it. And this is
sufficient concerning the 3d. and 4th. Article. And how tolerable these are,
every man may see.

ARTICLE V.
Who are by true faith ingraffed into Jesus Christ, and therefore partakers of
his quickening Spirit; they have power sufficient to fight against Satan, sin,
the world, and their own flesh, and to obtain the victory: but, by the help of
the grace of the holy Spirit. So Jesus Christ is present by his spirit to them
in all tentations, stretching out his hand, and confirming them, if they be
ready for the combat, if they require his help, nor be wanting to themselves;
and this so much, Hebr. 3.6, 14. 2 Pet. 1.10. Jude 3. 1 Timothy 1.14. Heb. 11.15.
that by no cunning of Satan, or strength, can they be seduced, or taken out of
Christ's hands, according to that of John 10. No man can take them out of mine
hand. But whether these same may not, by their negligence, desert their
beginning in Christ, and embrace again this present world; and, whether they
may not fall off from the holy doctrine, once delivered to them, make shipwreck
of their consciences, and fall away from grace, ought to be weighed fully out
of holy Scriptures, before they can be taught with full tranquillity of mind,
and plenitude of confidence.

The Examination.
WHereas the Remonstrants in this Article profess, that they deliver in their
Conference the doctrine of the Saints perseverance in faith, we may justly
wonder why they are so wary, in expressing the word perseverance, or
persevering: and much more, why they are afraid once to name God; except it be,
because they betray in the adversative clause, that they would have both the
name and the thing quite extermined out of the Church. But their consciences
did so dictate to them, that God would never bless so wicked a design, that
they cannot endure perseverance should be called the gift of God: Col. p. 407.
and are not ashamed to write, that it is ill done to call it so. But, if we
must speak the truth, by this means they do too much bewray their perverseness
and ignorance: For, is it not perverseness to say, that is not rightly called
the gift of God, which God has so often in Scripture promised to bestow upon
the faithful; and which the Saints so earnestly desire God to bestow on them?
Is it not ignorance to deny perseverance to be a gift, and that infused; and
not to think, that perseverance is nothing else, but faith it self persevering
to the end? But, is not faith the gift of God infused? Col. p. 502.
Do not they themselves confess, that it is the mere gift of God?

But they cannot be ignorant, that Austin, in a book by it self, asserted the
gift of perseverance against the remainders of the Pelagians, to which book he
gave the title, Of the good of perseverance: the argument thereof is nothing
else but the same; to wit, That perseverance in faith to the end, is the gift
of God, is to be sought of God, and is given truly to all that are called and
predestinate, according to the purpose of God. This is Austins opinion. These
men, throughout all their Conference, as appears, can well enough endure the
perseverance of the Saints: but no ways that it should proceed from
predestination, as the effect from the cause; or, that it should be held
certain, seeing all the engines of these five Articles are devised and
directed, to overthrow the counsel of Gods discretive predestination: And, on
the contrary, to erect the idol of self-power in us. But let us weigh the
words of this fifth Article.

The fifth answers the fourth: For, whereas the fourth, with the third, is
very bountiful, in extolling of grace; but what it gave, in the last clause it
took away: so this very carefully provides for the means and security of
salvation in the faithful, in the three former parts; for, it is
quadripartite, as it seems: 1. That they have means sufficient to resist Satan
and sin, by the help of grace. 2. That Jesus Christ in all tentations is
present with them, and reaches out his hands to them. 3. That he so confirms
them, that they cannot be seduced, or taken out of Christ's hands by any deceit
or violence of Satan. With such large privileges they have sufficiently
provided for perseverance.

But, as before, so here, there is poison in the tail: for, what they granted
in the adversative appendix, they call it in question: in their Conference they
plainly take it away; yet, nor without buskin-phrases, but such, as bring in
the same inconveniences, which before they did: so that either they betray
themselves to be equivocating disturbers, or entangle themselves with
contradictions; which thus appear.

In the appendix or addition they say, But whether they, who by true faith are
inserted into Jesus Christ, and therefore partakers of his quickening Spirit,
may not forsake the beginning of their being in Christ, fall away from faith,
lose grace, is to be more exactly considered out of Scripture, before they can
teach it with confidence; that is, they doubt whether it be true. But, if
before they speak the truth, they cannot doubt of this: For, if they, who by
true faith are inserted into Christ, have sufficient strength to obtain the
victory over sin, Satan, etc. and Christ in all tentations is present with
them, and reaches out his hand, that they cannot be seduced or taken out of
Christ's hand, by any cunning or strength of Satan; how, I pray, can it be
doubted, but that such, by reason of the helps given to them by Christ, and by
reason of his assistance, and of his confirming and aiding of them in all
tentations; but chiefly of defection, can never forsake the beginning of their
being in Christ, can never fall away from faith, and can never be robbed of
their grace? In questioning then that which before they asserted, and that,
indeed, most truly, do not they fight against themselves?

They except, that their assertion is not categoricall, but conditional, that
Christ, by his Spirit, is present with them, that he stretches out his hand
to them, and confirms them that are inserted into him by true faith, if so be
they are ready for the fight, and beg his help, nor be wanting in performance
of their duty, etc. But that this condition is not placed or performed by many,
and that therefore no conflict follows. But, I pray, what kind of God do they
feign here, (whom secretly they exclude?) What kind of Christ? What kind of
Spirit? To wit, such an one, who, indeed, furnishes those who by true faith
are engraffed into Christ, with the means of resistible grace; but does not
fit them for the combat in their tentations, suffers them so to snort, that
they seek not for his help, that they are wanting in the performance of their
duty; but Gods promises and asseverations do teach far otherwise: for, albeit
the condition of the combat, of prayers and vigilancie, which they require, be
altogether necessary for perseverance; yet, that this is not so much proposed
by the faithful (which is all these men would have) as effected by the Spirit
of God in the faithful, is clear by these and such like testimonies: Deuteronomy.
30.6. Jer. 32.40. De bono persev. c. 2. Ezech. 36.27. Isa. 59.21.
The Lord thy God shall circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, that
thou may love the Lord thy God with all thine heart. I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Which words Austin citing,
for the good of perseverance, thus explaines, So great shall my fear be, which
I will put in their hearts, that they shall adhere to me continually. I will
put my Spirit in the midst of you, and I will make, that you shall walk in my
precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them. This shall be my covenant with
them, says the Lord: My Spirit, which is in thee, and my words, which I have
put in thee, shall not depart from thy mouth. I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Zach. 13.10. 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil.
1.6. 1 Pet. 1.5.
the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look on me whom they
have pierced etc. God will strengthen you even to the end. He that has begun
in you a good work, will perfect it, until the day of the Lord Jesus, who, by
the power of God, are kept by faith to salvation, etc. Either these are vain
promises, which God forbid, or the assumption is false, that the condition is
not proposed or performed by many, who are not engraffed into Christ by true
faith.

Cavilling to the contrary will not avail, That these promises are not
absolute, but to be understood with a condition, to be performed by the
faithful: that being strictly understood, they exclude the least offenses of
the Saints: that a condition is commanded, not promised, etc. which are vain
shifts: For, the promises speak plainly concerning the very condition of faith,
prayers, perseverance in the faithful to be wrought by the holy Ghost. Nor
will it follow, that the working of perseverance is not promised, because it is
commanded, and required of the faithful: For, it is commanded also, that they
fear God, that they walk in the commandments of God, etc. and yet God
promises, I will put my fear, etc. I will make them to walk in my precepts.
Now, this is commanded, not because they can, but because they should do what
is required; and, De great. and lib. arb. c. 16.
For this cause (says Austin) God commands some things, which we cannot do,
that we may know what to beg of him. Hearing then the command, they ask for
that which is commanded, saying with Austin, Give me what thou command, and
command what thou will. De d^no* persev. c. 20.
Which words of mine (says he) Pelagius at Rome could not endure, when they
were rehearsed by a certain brother, a fellow Bishop of mine, in his presence,
and in an angry way contradicting him, he had almost fallen foul with him that
did repeat them: The orthodox men at this day are in the like condition with
them; and yet these promises do not exclude the faillings of the Saints,
whether their sins be great or small, but they lift up those that are fallen
from their fall: for these promises are sometimes also directed to just men
that fall; Psalm. 37.24. Psalm. 89.34.
If the righteous fall, he shall not be bruised, because the Lord supporteth
him. If his sons shall forsake my Law* etc. I will visit with the rod their
transgressions, but my mercy I will not take from him.

If then this Article in the three former members is true and certain, as it
is most true and certain, it cannot by the condition inserted be excused from
this manifest conflict, and contradiction of the adversative addition, thus:
All ingraffed into Christ by true faith, and therefore partakers of his
quickening Spirit, are so confirmed by Christ, that by no deceit of Satan, or by
any force can they be seduced, or taken out of Christ's hand: this is true and
certain: and, All ingraffed into Christ by true faith are so confirmed, that
they cannot be seduced nor taken from Christ: this is not true and certain,
but doubtful and uncertain, and more exactly to be weighed according to
Scripture. This conflict again is a manifest argument of an evil cause, and a
bad conscience; neither do they elude the conflict, but tie the knot, while
they say, That they question not the doctrinall point of perseverance, Coll. p.
401.
but desire only to be further instructed: But they dispute so through all
their Conference of the perseverance of the Saints, and they desire to be
instructed, that among their diverse tergiversations, they may prove the very
same to be plainly false and impious, which in the former members of the
Article they did assever to be true and certain.

Furthermore, in the same Conference everywhere, whether it be to avoid this
conflict, or to draw envy upon orthodox men, sophistically changing the subject
of the Article, they write, that our orthodox Divines teach, That they who once
believed, can never again fall, Coll. p. 403, 404.353.354, 355.372.
nor shall fall; but are persuaded, that, let them sin as often as they will,
they can never lose their faith, nor fall from grace, but inevitably shall
persevere, and shall be saved: And it is but only this opinion of perseverance
(as they say,) or manner of it, which they call in question, Coll. p. 353.
or dislike: For the refuting then, and overthrowing of which, the engines of
seven Arguments are properly directed to overthrow the orthodox doctrine: page
356.
1. Because of it self it is repugnant to true piety and good works; page 359.
or, because the preaching of it is scandalous, page 360.
and the belief of it licentious. 2. Because it takes away the means of
exhortations, page 361.
promises, page 362.
and threatenings, etc. 3. Because it makes the warnings and caveats which the
holy Ghost gives us against Satan's trecheries ineffectuall. page 363.
4. Because examples testify, that many who have believed, have totally and
finally fallen from the faith. 5. Because many faithful men are recorded to
have fallen grievously, and that they have committed the works of the flesh,
and heinous wickedness, with which filthy deeds faith could not consist. 6.
Because, this being granted, all baptized Infants, that are borne of faithful
Parents* should be saved. 7. Because many faithful men do so defile themselves
with wickedness, that they are to be excommunicated, and are excommunicated by
the Ministers of the Church.

But truly, if this be all, and only this, which they question and oppose,
they show themselves to be vain wranglers; I will not say, rash disturbers of
the Church and State, who make such stir about an opinion, which the
orthodox, no less then themselves, would have, not only to be examined
according to Scripture; but also, as a scandalous doctrine, and manifestly
false, they oppose it, reprove it, and judge it fitting to be thrust out of the
Church: or surely, they fasten a notable calumny upon orthodox men, fathering
an opinion upon them, which they do no ways acknowledge to be theirs. And
therefore these seven engines of Arguments beat upon that false opinion only,
and no ways hurt the orthodoxall Tenet, as is showed in the Conference. Now
the Calumnies appear thus: Coll. p. 368. to. 398.


The first is in the Subject, who once believe: For the Orthodox do not
affirm, that all such persevere, whereas, hypocrites also, and temporary
believers, not perseverers are said equivocally to believe: but of these only
they speak, who by true faith are inserted into Christ, Coll. p. 341.
and are partakers of his quickening spirit.

The other Calumny is in the first Attribute, That they can never, nor ever
shall fall; for, both Scripture and experience testify, and the Orthodox think
and teach, that the Saints, or such as are ingraffed into Christ, being they
are men, and subject to humane infirmities, may not only fall, but have
oftentimes fallen through the infirmities of their flesh, into small and great
sins. The third is in the other Attribute, Let faithful men sin never so much,
yet they may and ought to be persuaded of their perseverance; and this is that
absurd doctrine of the Saints perseverance. But this is as foolish and plain a
piece of Sophistry or fallacy of the accident, as if they had said, Because
sound men may and ought to run and labor; so sick men, who are in a Fever, or
in a fit of the Gout, may and should run and labor: but as sickly dispositions
accidentally hinder the vital actions of the body, so the infirmities of the
flesh accidentally hinder the spiritual operations of faith and of the Spirit.

The fourth Calumny is in the third Attribute, The faithful can never lose
their faith, nor fall from grace. This sounds to them as an absolute
impossibility; but the Orthodox use a limitation thus; The faithful cannot
fall, if you look upon Gods gracious promises: for, the holy Ghost is a
faithful keeper, and the counsel of God, concerning the salvation of such as
are predestined is unchangeable; and that out of the mouth of our Savior,
Mat. 24.24. John 10.28. But if we look upon the treacheries and strength of
Satan, and the infirmities of the faithful, when they are left to themselves,
then they are too part, and that every moment to be supplanted by Satan and
their own flesh: Coll. p. 36.
and they openly profess, that in that respect they may fall away and perish.

The fifth is in the same Attribute; To lose faith, to fall from grace: which
these men understand absolutely; but the Orthodox understand a limitation; That
they cannot lose faith, nor fall from grace altogether or totally; to wit so,
as to become of faithful men Infidels, and enemies to God, as they that sin
before regeneration: which is false, both by testimony of Scripture and
experience.

The sixth is in the fourth Attribute, But shall persevere inevitably. They
think that we mean any sort of men, even such as are carnally secure, as if
they should persevere, nill they will they: which is far from the mind and
candor of orthodox Divines. And so, having unfolded their buskins, and removed
the calumnies, that the orthodoxall doctrine, concerning the perseverance of
the Saints in faith, is true and sound, is showed by ten Arguments, taken out
of the Scripture in the Conference.

1. Because God in his word has promised to the faithful in Christ, Coll. p.
147.
a total and final perseverance, Jer. 32.40. Psalm. 125.1. John 10.28. etc.
Therefore he performs it, because he cannot lie. This is Austines first
Argument for the good of perseverance. De bono persev. c. 2. Coll. p. 343.
2. Because the Apostles witness, that God does, and will faithfully perform
his promises, concerning their preservation in the faith. 1 Cor. 1.8. and
10.13. Phil. 1.6. 1 These. 5.23. etc. 3. Because, out of the Apostles doctrine,
Coll. p. 344. Lib. 3. De justif. c. 12.
Romans 8.30. the perseverance of those that are called according to Gods Decree,
is the proper effect of predestination; so that Bellarmine himself, a great
Patron of indifferent or resistible grace, does plainly confess, That
perseverance is the most proper effect of predestination, so that without
perseverance, predestination cannot be fulfilled. 4. Because Christ prayed,
Coll. p. 344.
and does pray for the perseverance not of Peter alone, but of all who were to
believe by the Apostles preaching; but the Father always hears the Son, Luke
22.32. Joh. 17.20. John 11.42. etc. 5. Because they that are ingraffed into
Christ by true faith, Coll. p. 344.
pray incessantly for their own perseverance; but whatsoever they ask of God
by faith, they obtain it. And this was Austines second Argument, for the good
of perseverance. 6. Because they that are ingraffed by faith into Christ truly,
Coll. p. 345.
are by the power of God faithfully preserved in faith persevering to the end,
Coll. p. 345.
1 Pet. 1.5. 7. Because they that are by true faith ingraffed into Christ, have
their salvation sealed in their hearts by the earnest of the holy Ghost, and
consequently, their faith and perseverance are sealed too, Coll. p. 346.
2 Cor. 1.21. Ephesians. 1.13. etc. 8. Because true believers are like a tree that
does not wither, the wise man that built upon the rock, the seed cast into the
good ground, etc. according to Scripture. Coll. p. 346.
9. Because true believers are distinguished from temporary back-sliders by
reason the faith of those is rooted in their hearts, but the faith of these
has no root. 10. Because the Scripture expressly confirms, Coll. p. 347.
that the true believers can or shall never utterly fall away. Romans 6.2, 8, 9,
10, 11. 1 John 3.9. 1 John 5.4.

Against these points, all that with much verbosity are handled by the
Novelists in the Conference, from page 414. to page 459. come to this one point
of the condition required in the faithful, which exception we have already
showed both to be weak, and also to be overthrown by the promises themselves;
now all are reduced to this one solid and unanswerable demonstration, from the
position of sufficient causes, to the position of the effect, thus:

To whom God has promised to give certainly perseverance in faith, and who are
kept by the power of God in faith to the end, and for whose perseverance Christ
has prayed, and does pray; and who pray themselves incessantly for the same;
and whose perseverance is grounded in Gods eternal predestination: their
perseverance in true faith unto the end is not doubtful, but sure, according
to the Scripture: All ingraffed into Christ by true faith are such, to whom God
has promised to give perseverance, Jer. 32.40. Psalm. 25.1. etc. and who by the
power of God are preserved by faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. and for whose
perseverance Christ did and does pray, John 17.20. Romans 8.34. and who daily in
the Lords Prayer call upon God for the same: whose perseverance at length is
founded in Gods eternal predestination, Mat. 24.24. Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.11,
14. 1 These. 2.13, 14. etc. Therefore the perseverance of all those who are
inserted by true faith into Christ, is not doubtful, but certain, according
to Scripture.

No less firm a demonstration does the proximate cause yield which begets
true faith, always remaining in the Elect, out of two sayings in Scripture
joined together, 1 Pet. 1.23. You are renewed not of mortal seed, but of
immortal, by the word of God which abides foe ever: And, 1 John 3.9. He that
is borne of God sins not, because the seed of God remains in him: nor can
he sin, because he is borne of God. Hence we reason thus:

They who are borne of the immortal seed of Gods word, and in whom this
immortal seed (notwithstanding their infirmities) does remain, in them also
faith abides; nor does it finally fail, and consequently perseverance, which
is faith it self not failing, but remaining and persevering: the reason of
this, is the individual knitting of the cause and the effect, because the
immortal seed of Gods word remains not (in whom it does remain) but by
faith: All that are ingraffed into Christ by true faith, are borne again of
the immortal seed of Gods word, as Peter the Apostle witnesses; and in them
abides this immortal seed (not withstanding their infirmities) witness John
the Apostle: In all then that are by true faith ingraffed into Christ, faith
remains, neither does it ever utterly fail, and consequently perseverance,
etc.

What need many words; If the perseverance of the Saints be doubtful, then is
it not given certainly by God to all them that ask it daily, praying with all
their heart, Hallowed by thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on
earth, as it is in heaven: Lead us not into tentation, Cyp. de Orat. Aug. de
bono persev. c. 2.3.6.
but deliver us from evil, etc. In which Petitions, Cyprian and Austine
learnedly and religiously teach, that perseverance is begged of God: then 2.
this promise of God, besides others, will be vain, Hear, O house of Jacob,
who have been carried by me from the womb, even to your old age I am with
you, and till you be hairy I will carry you: Isaiah 46.3. Phil. 1.6.
I have made, I will bear, I will also carry, and will deliver. 3. In vain
will the Apostles most hearty persuasion, confidence and promise be, I am
persuaded that he who has begun a good work in you will perfect it, Romans
8.33. 1 Cor. 1.8.
until the day of Jesus Christ. For I am persuaded, that neither life nor
death, etc. can separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. God will
confirm you to the end unblamable, until the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4.
In vain will be the prayer and confidence of the Saints, praying with David, O
God, forsake me not in mine old age, and when my head grows gray. Thou have
showed me many and great afflictions, but thou have returned and quickened me.
5. Justifying faith will be in vain, or the assurance of the remission of sins
for the time present: for, he that doubts of Gods promise for the time to
come, feignes that he believes the promise of the time present; Isai. 46.3.
Isai. 43.25.
for, these are conjoined, I did bear you, I will bear you till your old age.
I, I am he who blot out thine iniquities, etc. and will not remember thy sins
any more. 6. In vain, finally, is the faith of eternal life and salvation:
because, he that doubts of his perseverance in faith, without which life
eternal is not obtained, how can he be confident of life eternal? for, he
that doubts if he shall live till the morrow, how can he be assured he shall
live eternally? so, instead of faith, a fallacious opinion shall take place; in
men's consciences, hesitation, doubting, fear, anxiety, undermining and
overthrowing all Christian comfort and confidence, will domineere. These are
the fruits which the denial of perseverance will bring forth; all which are
false, impious, blasphemous; against which the perseverance of the Saints
stands as a strong bulwark.

Now, the cavil about the condition annexed to the promises, does nothing
hinder our Arguments, as was showed. Neither is the perseverance of the Saints
prejudiced by that calumny of scandalous preaching, and licentious belief of
perseverance. For, otherwise the Apostles preaching of this doctrine had been
scandalous, and the Churches believing thereof at that time had been
licentious. De bono persev. c. 18.
I (says Austine) will not exaggerate this matter with my words, but will
rather leave it to them to consider, that they may see what this is which they
have persuaded themselves, to wit, that the preaching of perseverance does
rather wrong the hearers by desperation, then help them by exhortation: for,
this were as much as if you would say, that then man despaires of his own
salvation, when he has learned to put his trust, not in himself, but in God.
Neither does the Paralogisme non causae, concerning the neglect or nullifying
of the means, and fore-warnings, etc. hinder us; for, by these same means the
holy Ghost does work and support the certainty of perseverance in the hearts
of the Saints, nor are we moved with the examples of hypocrites and Apostates
in their fourth Engine, of whom also the five marginals of the Article speak.
For, these men had nothing common with the true faithful, but the bare name
only of faith, of all which it is therefore said, 1 John 2.1.
They went out from us, because they were not of us; for, if they had been of
us, they had remained with us, but that is might be known they were not of us,
therefore they went out. See Austine, De bono perseverantiae, c. 8. The great
and grievous falls of Moses, Aaron, David, Solomon, Peter, Judas, and of
others, trouble not us; for, if they did any thing prejudice perseverance, it
was in the totality, not in the finality thereof: for, it may be easily proved,
that all those, whom the enemies of perseverance do object, either were not
true believers, but hypocrites; or repented in the end. But neither can their
total perseverance be overthrown from hence, except withal Gods promises be
overthrown too, which is impossible should be overthrown by the exception of
a pretended condition.

But the failings of the Saints (that I may speak this by the way) must not
too peevishly be canvased by those who will be accounted among the number of
Saints: but prudently, according to the rule of Charity, are to be deplored,
(...).
rather then censured; considering, God is a Father, who is to judge his own
sons when they offend; and the Saints are his children, who are to give an
account of their actions to their Father.

Oftentimes, in a family, the son and the servant commit the same offense, and
the son offends more hainously then the servant; yet an earthly father thrusts
the servant out of doors, whereas, he will not dis-inherit the son, but
chastise him only for his good: therefore, the offense of a Son, committed in
the folly of his youth, as it does not induce him to hate his father, so it
does not extinguish the fathers affection to his son. David trecherously killed
Vriah, Joab, Amasa: Peter three times perfidiously denied his Master, Judas
once betrayed him; put aside the event, and Peter's sin will seem greater then
that of Judas; yet Christ looked with pity upon him, not upon this. Now let our
Censors come and prove, that Peter utterly lost that faith for which Christ
prayed that it might not fail.

Now for their faults: As in sharp diseases man's life is endangered, till the
Physicians help come, yet it is not presently extinguished; even so, in great
sins the Saints faith is shaken and weakened, but it is not therefore
presently lost or dead, because the heavenly Physician, by his unspeakeable
grace, sustaines in their hearts that immortal seed of God from which their
faith proceeds, and supports them with his hand, that, when they fall, they may
not be bruised, 1 John 3.9. Psalm. 37.24. This doctrine humane equity, not to
speak of Christian charity, cannot upon any pretense subvert.

Lastly, the two last foolish Paralogismes do not hurt the Saints perseverance,
if they be even scholastically examined; for, though both of them should
directly conclude, (as they ought to do) the contradictory to perseverance, to
wit, That some truly and actually believing and regenerate, do lose their faith
and spirit of regeneration; they must necessarily conclude (lest either of the
Premises be false) out of pure particulars; and the first of them thus: Some
baptized children of faithful parents, do utterly lose faith, and the Spirit
of regeneration; the reason is, because otherwise all, without exception,
should be saved: which to them seems an absurdity, but by us is to be wished
in charity. But some baptized children of faithful parents do truly and
actually believe and are regenerated; Therefore some, truly and actually
believing and regenerate, do utterly lose faith and the Spirit of regeneration:
but the latter concludes thus, Some excommunicate for their wickedness, do
utterly lose their faith: Some excommunicate for their wickedness, are truly
faithful and regenerate; Ergo, Some truly faithful and regenerate do utterly
lose their faith, or else of necessity, (seeing these are childish and foolish)
that the consequences may be mended, the former Paralogisme most assume the
Minor universally false, and the latter must suppose the Major universally
false also: so that the former must be thus made in Disamis (otherwise they
cannot conclude, except they had rather have a Major universally false;) Some
baptized children of faithful parents, utterly lose their faith and
regeneration; All the baptized children of faithful parents, truly and
actually believe and are regenerate; Therefore, same truly and actually
believing and regenerate, utterly lose their faith and regeneration. Here the
Remonstrants themselves cannot deny, but that the universal Assumption is
false, except they understand it sacramentally; and so again, the consequence
should be faulty. For, Austines doctrine (which the orthodox Churches follow)
is this, As in Isaac, who was circumcised the eighth day, the sign of the
righteousness of faith went before; and because he imitated his fathers faith,
there followed in him, as he grew in years, the righteousness it self, the
seal whereof went before in the Infant: even so, in baptized Infants, the
Sacrament of regeneration goes before, and if they have Christian piety,
conversion follows after; the mystery whereof goes before in the body.
Neither do the words of the Catechism, page 74. any thing avail to the
proof of the Assumption universally false.

The latter from an universal Major in Datisi, or a Minor converted in Darii,
(otherwise they cannot conclude) will be thus, All excommunicated for
wickedness, do utterly lose true faith, and the holy Ghost: Some excommunicate
for their wickedness are truly faithful and regenerate; Ergo, Some truly
faithful and regenerate, do utterly lose faith and the holy Ghost. That here
the Major is universally false, was rightly answered by the Orthodox in the
Conference, and not refuted by the others: For, they may be excluded out of the
Church and kingdom of Christ, who never were truly in the state of grace, but
were always hypocrites, being destitute of true faith, and Gods Spirit. And so
we have demonstrated, that the orthodox truth, concerning the perseverance of
the Saints in faith, does subsist altogether unhurt by their Engines; and let
these suffice concerning the fifth Article.

FINIS.

