EPISCOPAL AND Presbyterial Government CONJOINED: Proposed as an Expedient for
the compremising of the Differences, and preventing of those Troubles about the
matter of CHURCH GOVERNMENT.

Written in the Late times by the late Learned and Famous Ja. Usher,
Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. And now published, seriously to
be considered by all sober conscientious Persons, and tendered to all the Sons
of Peace and Truth in the three Nations, for recovering the Peace of the
Church, and settling its Government.

Toll jano nominis crimen, and nihil restat nisi criminis nomen,

Tert. Apol. Contra rationem nemo sobritis; contra Scripturam nemo Christianus;
contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit.

Aug. de Trin. London, Printed in the Year 1679.

THE PREFACE.
IF any one ask, who is He presumes to Publish the Papers of that Learned,
Pious, and peacable Prelate (worthy of eternal Memory,) without approbation
first had, of such as hold the Chair in the several Parts of controverted
Discipline? I Answer, The Learned men of each Party are not yet agreed, nor do
I know when they will be: and the times require that some means be used to
advance the Peace of the Church, and preserve the Nation. That Peace I mean,
whereby the minds of men may be disposed to lay aside all old animosities, and
upon a common Principle of Union, become charitable, and so perpetual Friends.

The Faithful and true Ministers of the Gospel of Peace, will (I hope,) give
their allowance to this attempt, Pious and Charitable in its intention. For the
contrary minded who would have Fire come from Heaven to consume all those, who
receive not their Dictates, I shall only rebuke them with that of our Savior
to his Disciples, ye know not of what manner of Spirit ye are? Luke 9. 55.


Peace therefore and Christian Concord, is not the matter these men seek, but
perpetual Parties and Sidings, wherein perhaps they hope to appear Somebody;
which temper (even in the minds where it ought least to be,) has embroiled the
world in miserable Feuds. And this being perceived by men experienced in
Public business, has produced variety of complaints. Sir Edwyn Sandys
discoursing of the division of Protestants Europae speculum 172.
abroad into Lutherans and Calvinists, complains. That the Ministers of each
side have so far bestirred themselves, that the Coal which a wise man, with a
little moisture of his mouth would soon have quenched, they with the wind of
their breath have contrariwise so enflamed, that it threatens a great ruin
and Calamity on both sides. And a little after, reprehending the heat and
extremity of contention. They make more account (says he) of some empty
Syllogism than of the Peace of the Church, and happiness of the World. The most
Learned and Pious Hugo Grotius, bemoaning the Discords of Christian Votum pro
pace 62.
Leaders, Says, Si in eorum Bellorum quibus tam diu vastatur Europa causas
inquirimus, inveniemus hoc incendium, maxim ab ijs quos pacis praecones esse
debuerunt excitatum. And Mr. Dury, after all his Travells in the matter of
Ecclesiastical Peace, found at last the difficulty to lie at home, among those
of his own Profession: which caused him to lay down this Maxim. That Disc.
tending to Eccles. Peace page 2. 3.
neither can a Civil Confederation be truly framed among Protestants, nor when
it is framed can it be faithfully maintained, except the foundation thereof be
laid in the minds of the Clergy.

The expedient here proposed by this Learned and Pious Prelate, for Composing
the Controversies and contentions about Ecclesiastical Government, will not
make the wounds wider I hope, I do not see how it can. And if it bring with it
a healing virtue to unite and consolidate Parties discontinued, in any measure,
I shall not repent me of acting the Empyrick in applying this Sovereign
Receipt, (which came fortunately to my hands) to the curing all those fretting
ailments have so long troubled the Church.

Nor will this attempt of mine be insecure, if the Learned and Pious Guides of
either Party be consulted. It is Dr. Hammond's judgment, That a moderate
Episcopacy, with a standing Pref. to the power of the Keys.
assistant Presbytery, as it will certainly satisfy the desires of those whose
pretensions are regular and moderate, (craving nothing more, and in some things
less than the Laws of the Land,) so it will appear to be that, which all
Parties can best Tolerate: and which next himself, both Presbyterian,
Independent and Erastian, will make no question to choose and prefer, before
any of the other Pretenders. And Mr. Baxter, (no friend to modern Episcopacy)
earnestly incultating Gildas Salv. 338.
the Pastoral care and oversight of Souls: I speak not this, says he, against
any Bishops, that acknowledge the Presbyters to be true Pastors to Rule and
Teach the Flock, and take themselves only to be the Chief, and Presidents among
Presbyters, yea, or the Rulers of Presbyters that are Rulers of the Flock. But
of them that Null the Presbyters Office, and the Churches Government and
Discipline, by undertaking it alone as their sole Prerogative. Me thinks, (as
Agrippa said Act. 26. 28.
to Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian,) I might here step in,
and tell these Learned and Pious Controvertists, That, almost they may be
persuaded to be Friends.

But the Principal defense I intend my self against the censures of my
Publishing those Papers, Is, the sense of the late King himself, in his
Posthumous admired Book. Not (says he) page 144.
that I am against the managing of this Presidency and Authority in one man by
the joint Counsel and Consent of many Presbyters; I have offered to restore
that. And again, I was page 173.
willing to grant or restore to Presbytery, what with reason or discretion it
can pretend to; in a conjuncture with Episcopacy. So that, the purpose the late
King had, of uniting his divided People, (If God had so permitted, whose
judgments Romans 11. 33.
are wonderful, and his ways past finding out,) was upon Grounds agreeable to
the design of this Paper. And therefore what was by Him so Piously and
Prudently intended, for restoring Peace and Unity to the Church, is so much the
more necessary now, by how much we understand That intention of the said King:
and that the same Parties remain still estranged in conuntenance and
conversation.

And yet it would not be so, if some instrument or medium could be used to
bring them to debate (with an humble Christian Spirit,) on terms of
reconcilement and uni^ty. Which, whenever it shall, by Gods gracious
Dispensation and Providence over us be granted: so much of our passions and
interest must be laid aside, as not to think it imaginable, in the traverse of
such long and sharp disputes and diffirences, That one Party should be totally
guilty, and the other altogether innocent.

When I consider a Presbyterian, will it be well to fetch a Character, from all
the frailties and failings of men of that Persuasion? If one Preached, It would
never be well till twice Char. 1. large declar. 403.
7. Prelates be hanged up, as the 7. Sons of Saul were hanged up in Gibeon. And
another, That the bloodiest and sharpest War was to be endured, rather than the
least error in Doctrine and Discipline. And another, Wishing that all the
Prelates in the Kingdom and himself were together in a bottomless Boat at Sea,
for he would be content to loose his life, so the Bishops might loose theirs.

Will not all these seem strong and tearing winds, rending the rocks of all
Order and good Government, in which God was 1 King. 19. 11. 12. Genesis 3. 8.
not. Rather than the small and still voice, which walked in the Garden in the
cool of the day, when God came to enquire calmly after Adams sin? Or will they
not seem rather so many Predictions, which we have seen fulfilled sadly upon
that place, and those persons, whoyet were as ignorant of the Prophetic import
of their own expressions, as Caiphas was of Christ's offering himself for the
world, when he counseled the Jews, That it was Joh. 18. 14.
expedient that one man should die for the People, And yet knew not the import
of Christ dying for the People.

When men pass sentence upon themselves, God often sees it executed: The
Israelites no sooner wish they had died in the Land of Egypt, or in the
Wilderness: But the Answer is returned, Number. 14. 2.
As I live says the Lord, as you have spoken in mine v. 28.
Ears, so will I do to you. And the Heathen Poet could teach us the same
lesson. Evertere domos totas optantibus ipsis, Juven. Sat. 10.
Dii faciles. I do not like raking Fire out of Embers, by searching for the
faults of men, who Perished in their own Flames, and are objects of our Pity
more than Passion. Otherwise no Nation under Heaven could afford examples equal
to that of Scotland, for the proof of rigid Presbyterian Discipline. Of which
how much is settled after more then 100 years are run out since the Nobles,
Gentry and People, have been vehemently. solicited to kill and slay each
other, or any body else rather than be, without it, the present state of
Affairs there may bear us witness.

Would it be a good course of judging of Episcopal Government, to rake into the
Records and Histories of 1600. Years, for the errors of all Bishops, whom
worldly Interest, or Passion, or other human frailties have carried beyond the
gravity, austerity, humility and Apostolical Piety of their Primitive
institution. And will this serve to level imparity, the principle of all Order
and Government? and secure the modern Presbytery from the like irregularities
or excesses? Certainly those accusations and calumnies, which Politicians say
secure other States, subvert the foundations of the Churches peace: which are
laid in Charity, the Characteristick note of a Christian. By this ye know if ye
be my Disciples, (says Christ) If ye love one another. And Joh. 13. 35.
in ancient times the common saying was, Ecce quam diligunt Christiani? That
execrable delight and joy, which any one takes to accuse, or to find faults in
others, he has from the Devil, Who is the great accuser of the Brethren. Rev.
12. 14.


It is evident to what a miserable extremity the divisions about
Church Government, had brought a great Nation. From disputing and fighting for
this and that Form, we at last knew no Form at all: Every one doing what seemed
good in his own eyes. God having justly taken away from Both, what was so
intemperately desired, and contended for on either side.

Both Episcopacy and Presbytery that strive for it, Do it surely for this
common end, That the people, being taught to know God aright, might glorify
him in their Lives and Conversations. The People, I say, who are more easily
disposed to Innovations and Disobedience many times, by the artifice and
insinuations of a few; than can be reclaimed again by the Authority, Eloquence
and Wisdom of many. They are therefore a commiserable body, and being commonly
the Masters of error (the weakest part of whom being their mind and mere
servants to the Ambition of others) How much does it most truly import the
Sacred Function, to be wholly employed in saving the Souls of these men, from
perishing in a Famine of Spiritual food and nourishment.

But while both strive for the Rule and Form of doing this (without imputation
of Ambition or Usurpation) Is it not pity to think the matter should ever come
to that pass that one half of the Nation must be first destroyed. And instead
of settling Christ's Discipline, that no body at this rate, should be left to
become Christ's Disciples, whom Error or the Sword had not devoured.

That both may Rule and yet not strive, is proposed here by our Pious and
Learned Prelate. By which Charity and Brotherly Love may be restored, (almost
wholly extingushed out of the hearts of men,) and the grain of evil Seed sown
in place thereof destroyed; which has brought forth ungodliness to this 2
Esdr. 4. 30.
very time.

In the mean time it is a work worth propounding, and worthy of the Office and
industry of all men, in whom is the true fear of God, (the principle of honor
as well as wisdom) who Eccles. 10. 24. Prove. 1. 7.
are followers of either Party: That they soften the minds of the tenacious and
refractory, and sweeten the Spirits of the sour and morose, That they may say
one to another as Abraham did to Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee
between me and thee, and between my Herdmen and thy Herdmen, for we be Genesis 13.
8.
Brethren. And let every Pious, Humble and peaceable Overseer and Bishop,
Presbyter and Ruler of Christ's Flock, and Watchman over the precious Souls of
men, so labor at the Throne of Grace for this weatherbeaten Ship of Gods
Church, (hardly escaping yet the waves of confusion and disorder,) that she may
at last hear an Angel from God speaking to her as once to St. Paul. Fear not
beloved, Thou must be brought before Caesar, Act. 27. 24.
and God has given thee all those that Sail with thee.

Episcopal and Presbyterial Government conjoined.
BY Order of the Church of England all Presbyters are charged The form of
Ordaining of Ministers.
to Minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the
Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same; and that they
might the better understand what the Lord has commanded therein Ibid. ex Act.
20. 17, 28.
, the Exhortation of St. Paul to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus is
appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination; Take heed uunto
your selves, and to all the flock, among whom the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers; to (...), so taken in Mat. 2. 6. and Apoc. 12. 5. and 19. 15.
Rule the Congregation of God, which he has purchased with his Blood.

Of the many Elders, who in common thus ruled the Church of Ephesus, there was
one President; Whom our Savior in his Epistle to that Church in a peculiar
manner styles Rev. 2. 1.
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; and Ignatius, in another Epistle written
about twelve years after unto the same Church, calls the Bishop thereof,
betwixt which Bishop and the Presbytery of that Church, what an harmonious
consent there was in the ordering of the Church-Goverment, the same Ignatius
does fully there declare, by Presbytery with 1 Timothy 4. 14.
St. Paul understanding the Company of the rest of the Presbyters or Elders,
who then had a hand not only in the delivery of the Doctrine and Sacraments,
but also in the administration of the Discipline of Christ; for further proof
whereof, we have that known Testimony of Tertullian in his Apology for
Christians Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes and censura divina; nam
and judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, summumque
futuri judicii praeindicium est, si quis ita deliquirit, ut a communicatione
orationis and conventus and omnis sancti commercii relege^ur: praesident
probars quique seniores, honorem istum non pretiosed. Testimonio adepti.
Tertul. Apologet. cap. 39.
.

In the Church are used exhortations, chastisements, and divine censure. For
judgment is given with great advice as among those who are certain they are in
the sight of God; and it is the chiefest foreshewing of the judgment which is
to come, if any man have so offended that he be banished from the Communion of
Prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all holy Fellowship. The Presidents that
bear Rule therein, are certain approved Elders, who have obtained this honor,
not by reward, but by a good report; who were no other (as he himself elsewhere
intimates) but those Nec de aliorum manibus quampraesidentium sumimus, Id. de
corona militis, cap. 3.
from whose hands they used to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For with
the Bishop who was the chief President (and therefore styled by the same
Tertullian in another place Dandiquidem Baptismi habet jus summus sacerdos, qui
est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi. Id. de Bapt. cap. 17.
Summus Sacerdos for distinction sake) the rest of the Dispensers of the Word
and Sacraments joined in the common government of the Church; and therefore,
where in matters of Ecclesiastical judicature, Cornelius Bishop of Rome used
the received form of Omni actu ad me perlato placuit contrahi Presbyterium,
Cornel apud Cypr. ep, 46.
gathering together the Presbyters, of what persons that did consist, Cyprian
sufficiently declares, when he wishes him to read his letters Florentissimo
illic clero te cum praesidenti. Cyp. ep. 55. ad Cornel.
to the flourishing Clergy which there did preside or rule with him, the
presence of the Clergy being thought to be so requisite in matters of Episcopal
audience, that in the fourth Council of Carthage, it was concluded, Ut
Episcopus nullus causam audiat absque praesentia Clericorum suorum alioquin
irrita erit sententia Episcopi nisi clericorum praesenti a confirmetur, Conc.
Car. thag. cap. 23.
That the Bishop might hear no man's cause without the presence of his Clergy,
and that otherwise the Bishops sentence should be void, unless it were
confirmed by the presence of the Clergy, which we find also to be inserted into
the Cannons of Excirption. Egberti cap 43.
Egbert, who was Archbishop of Tork in the Saxons times, and afterward into
the Body of the 15 q. 7. cap. Nullus.
Canon Law it self.

True it is, that in our Church this kind of Presbyterial government has been
long disused, yet seeing it still professes, that every Pastor has a right to
rule the Church from whence the name of Rector also was given at first unto
him) and to administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the restraint of the exercise of that right
proceeds only from the custom now received in this Realm, no man can doubt
but by another Law of the Land this Hindrance may be well removed: and how
easily this ancient form of government by the united Suffrages of the Clergy
might be revived again, and with what little show of alteration, the Synodical
conventions of the Pastors of every Parish might be accorded with the
presidency of the Bishops of each Diocese and Province; the indifferent Reader
may quickly perceive by the perusal of the ensuing Propositions.

I.
In every Parish the Rector or incumbent Pastor, together with the
Churchwardens and Sidesmen may The Parochial government answerable to the
Church Session in Scotland.
every week take notice of such as live scandalously in that Congregation, who
are to receive such several admonitions and reproofs, as the quality of their
offense shall deserve; and if by this means they cannot be reclaimed, they may
be presented unto the next monthly Synod; and in the mean time debarred by the
Pastor from access to the Lords Table.

II.
Whereas by a Statute in the 26th year of King Henry the eight (revived in the
first of Queen Elizabeth) The Presbyterial monthly Synods, answer to the
Scottish Presbyteries or Ecclesiastical meetings.
Suffiagans are appointed to be erected in twenty six several places of this
Kingdom, the number of them might very well be conformed unto the number of the
several rural Deanries into which every Diocese is subdivided; which being
done, the Suffragan (supplying the place of those who in the ancient Church
were called Chorepiscopi) might every month assemble a Synod of all the
Rectors, or Incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and according to the Major
part of their voices conclude all matters that should be brought into debate
before them.

To this Synod the Rector and Churchwardens might present such impenitent
persons, as by admonition and suspension from the Sacrament, would not be
reformed; who if they should still remain contumacious and incorrigible, the
sentence of Excommunication might be decreed against them by the Synod, and
accordingly be executed in the Parish where they lived.

Hitherto also all things that concerned the Parochial Ministers might be
referred, whether they did touch their Doctrine or their Conversation; as also
the censure of all new Opinions, Heresies, or Schisms, which did arise within
that Circuit; with liberty of Appeal, if need so require, unto the Diocesan
Synod.

III.
The Diocesan Synod might be held once or twice in the year, as it should be
thought most convenient: Diocesan Synods answerable to the Provincial Synods in
Scotland.
Therein all the Suffragans and the rest of the Rectors or Incumbent Pastors
(or a certain select number) of every Deanery within that Diocese might meet,
with whose consent, or the Major part of them, all things might be concluded by
the Bishop or Superintendent (call him whither you will) or in his absence by
one of the Suffragans whom he shall depute in his stead to be Moderator of that
Assembly.

Here all matters of greater moment might be taken into consideration, and the
Orders of the Monthly Synods revised, and (if need be) Reformed: And if here
also any matters of difficulty could not receive a full determination; it might
be referred to the next Provincial or National Synod.

IV.
The Provincial Synod might consist of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such
other of the Clergy as should be elected out of every Diocese within the
Province; The Primate of either Province might be Moderator of this meeting (or
in his room some one of the Bishops appointed by him) and all matters be
ordered therein by common consent as in the former Assembly.

This Synod might be held every third year, and The Provincial and National
Synodanswerable to the General Assembly in Scotland.
if the Parliament do then sit (according to the Act for a Triennial
Parliament) both the Primates and Provincial Synods of the Land might join
together, and make up a National Counsel: Wherein all Appeals from inferior
Synods might be received, all their Acts examined, and all Ecclesiastical
constitutions which concern the state of the Church of the whole Nation
established.

FINIS
THe Form of Government here proposed, is not in any point repugnant to the
Scripture, and that the Suffragans mentioned in the second Proposition, may
lawfully use the Power both of Jurisdiction and Ordination, according to the
Word of God, and the Practice of the Ancient Church.


