THE REDUCTION OF EPISCOPACY Unto the Form of Synodical Government, Received in
the ANCIENT CHURCH: By the most Reverend and learned Father of our Church Dr.
JAMES USHER, late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland.

Proposed in the year 1641. as an Expedient for the prevention of those
Troubles, which afterward did arise about the matter of Church Government.

Published by NICHOLAS BERNARD. D. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of
Grayes-Inne, London.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini, 1658.

TO THE READER.
THE Original of this was given me by the most Reverend Primate, some few
years before his death, wrote throughout with his own hand, and of late I have
found it subscribed by himself, and Doctor Holseworth, and with a Marginal Note
at the first Proposition, which I have also added. If it may now answer the
expectation of many pious, and prudent Persons, who have desired the publishing
of it, as a seasonable preparative to some moderation in the midst of those
extremes, which this Age abounds with, it will attain the end intended by the
Author: And it is likely to be more operative, by the great reputation he had,
and has in the hearts of all good men, being far from the least suspicion to
be biased by any privivate ends, but only aiming at the reducing of Order,
Peace, and Unity, which God is the Author of, and not of confusion. For the
recovery of which, it were to be wished, that such as do consent in
Substantials, for matter of Doctrine, would consider of some conjunction in
point of Discipline, that private interest and circumstantials, might not keep
them thus far asunder.

Grayes-Inne, October. 13. 1657. N. BERNARD.

The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government, received in
the ancient Church; proposed in the year 1641, as an Expedidient for the
prevention of those troubles, which afterward did arise about the matter of
Church Government.
Episcopal and Presbyterial Government conjoined.
BY Order of the Church of England, all Presbyters are charged The book of
Ordination.
to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same; And that
they might the better understand what the Lord had commanded therein, ^^id, ex
Act. 20, 27, 28.
the exhortation of Saint Paul, to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus is
appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination; Take heed unto
your selves, and to all the flock among whom the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers to (...). So taken in Mat. 2. 6. and Rev. 12. 5. and 19. 15.
Rule the Congregation of God, which he has purchased with his blood.

Of the many Elders, who in common thus ruled the Church of Ephesus, there was
one President, whom our Savior in his Epistle unto this Church in a peculiar
manner styles Rev. 2. 1.
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: and Ignatius in another Epistle written
about twelve years after unto the same Church, calls the Bishop thereof.
Betwixt the Bishop and the Presbytery of that Church, what an harmonius consent
there was in the ordering of the Church Government, the same Ignatius does
fully there declare, by the Presbytery, with 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Saint Paul, understanding the Community of the rest of the Presbyters, or
Elders, who then had a hand not only in the delivery of the Doctrine and
Sacraments, but also in the Administration of the Discipline of Christ: for
further proof of which, we have that known testimony of Tertullian in his
general Apology for Christians. Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes and
censura divina; nam and judicatur magno cum p^^dere ut apud cert^s de Dei
conspectu, summu nque futuri judicii p^aeiudicium est. si quis ita deli(...),
ut a commu^^catione. o^ationis and conventus, and omnis sancti commecii
relegetur president proba^^ quique seniores, honorem istum non pretio, sed
Testimonio adepti. T^^tul. Apologet. cap. 39.
In the Church are used exhortations, chastisements, and divine censure; for
judgment is given with great advice as among those, who are certain they are
in the sight of God, and in it is the chiefest foreshewing of the judgment
which is to come, if any man have so offended, that he be banished from the
communion of prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all holy fellowship. The
Presidents that bear rule therein are certain approved Elders, who have
obtained this honor not by reward, but by good report, who were no other (as
he himself intimates) elsewhere but (...) de (...) manibus (...) praesidentium
s^m^mus, (...) de coro^^ (...), cap. 3.
those from whose hands they used to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

For with the Bishop, who was the chief President (and therefore styled by the
same Tertullia^ in another place, Dan^^ quidem (...) hab^ (...) sum(...) (...);
qui (...) Episcopus: (...) Pres^y^^i and (...)* (...) de Bapt, cap. 17.
Summus Sacerdos for distinction sake) the rest of the dispensers of the Word
and Sacraments joined in the common Government of the Church; and therefore,
where in matters of Ecclesiastical Judicature, Cornetius Bishop of Rome used
the received form of Omni actu ad (...) perlate ^la(...) contra(...) ^, (...)
apud (...) epi^^. 46.
gathering together the Presbytery; of what persons that did consist, Cyprian
sufficiently declares, when he wishes him to read his Letters Florenti(...)
(...) (...)cum (...) Cy(...) epist. (...). (...) Cornel.
to the flourishing Clergy: which there did preside, or rule with him: The
presence of the Clergy being thought to be so requisite in matters of
Episcopal audience, that in the fourth Counc^ll of C(...)ge it was concluded,
Ut Episcopu^ nullius causam audiet absque praesentia Clericorum suoram,
alioquin irrita erit sententia Episcopi nise Clericorum praesentia confirmetur,
Council. Carthag. IV. cap. 23.
That the Bishop might hear no man's cause without the presence of (...) Clergy:
and that otherwise the (...)ops sentence should be void, unless it were
confirmed by the presence of the Clergy: which we find also to be inserted into
the Canons of Excerption. Egberti, c. 43.
Egbert, who was Archbishop of York in the Saxon times, and afterward into
the body of the 15. q. 7. cap. Nullus.
Cannon Law it self.

True it is, that in our Church this kind of Presbyterial Government has been
long disused, yet seeing it still professes that every Pastor has a right to
rule the Church (from whence the mame of Rector also was given at first unto
him) and to administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the restraint of the exercise of that right
proceeds only from the custom now received in this Realm; no man can doubt,
but by another Law of the Land, this hinderance may be well removed. And how
easily this ancient form of Government by the united suffrages of the Clergy
might be (...)ved again, and with what lit(...) (...)ew of alteration the
Synodical conventions of the Pasters of every Parish might be accorded with the
Presidency of the Bishops of each Diocese and Province, the indifferent Reader
may quickly perceive by the perusal of the ensuing Propositions.

I.
In every Parish the Rector, or Incumbent Pastor, together with the How the
Church might Syn^dically be Governed, Archbishops and ^ish^ps being still
retained,
Churchwardens and Sides-men, may every week take notice of such as live
scandalously in that Cougregation, who are to receive such several admonitions
and reproofs, as the quality of their offense shall deserve* And if by this
means they cannot be reclaimed, they may be presented to the next monthly
Synod; and in the mean time debarred by the Pastor from access unto the Lords
Table.

II.
Whereas by a Statute in the six and twentieth year of King Henry the eighth
(revived in the first year of Queen Elizabeth) Suffragans are appointed to be
erected in 26 several places of this Kingdom; the number of them might very
well be conformed unto the number of the several Rural Deanries into which
every Diocese is subdivided; which being done, the Suffragan supplying the
place of those, who in the ancient Church were called Chorepiscopi, might every
month assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or Incumbent Pastors within the
Precinct, and according to the major part of their voices, conclude all matters
that shall be brought into debate before them.

To this Synod the Rector and Churchwardens might present such impenitent
persons, as by admonitions and suspension from the Sacrament would not be
reformed; who if they should still remain contumacious and incorrigible, the
sentence of Excommunication might be decreed against them by the Synod, and
accordingly be executed in the Parish where they lived. Hitherto also all
things that concerned the Parochial Ministers might be referred, whether they
did touch their Doctrine, or their conversation 'as also the censure of all new
Opiuions, Heresies, and Schisms, which did arise within that Circuit; with
liberty of Appeal, if need so require, unto the Diocesan Synod.

III.
The Diocesan Synod might be held, once, or twice in the year, as it should be
thought most convenient: Therein all the Suffragans, and the rest of the
Rectors, or Incumbent Pasters (or a certain select number of of every Deanery)
within the Dio^ese might meet, with whose consent, or the major part of them,
all things might be concluded by the Bishop, or (...), id est,
superintendentes; unde and nomen Episcopi trastum est, Hi^ron, epist. 86. ad
Evagrium.
Saperintendent (call him whether you will) or in his absence, by one of the
Suffragans; whom he shall depute in his stead to be Moderator of that Assembly.

Here all matters of greater moment might be taken into consideration, and the
Orders of the monthly Synodes revised, and (if need be) reformed: and if here
also any ma^ter of difficulty could not receive a full determination: it might
be referred to the next Provincial, or National Synod.

IV.
The Provincial Synod might consist of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such
other of the Clergy as should be elected out of every Diocese within the
Province, the Archbishop of either Province, might be the Moderator of this
meeting, (or in his room some one of the Bishops appointed by him) and all
mat^ers be ordered therein by common consent as in the former Assemblies.

This Synod might be held every third year, and if the Parliament do then sit
(according to the Act of a Triennial Parliament) both the Archbishops and
Provincial Synods of the Land might join together, and make up a National
Council: wherein all Appeals from infer(...)ur Synods might be received, all
their Acts examined, and all Ecclesiastical Constitutions which concern the
state of the Church of the whole Nation established.

WE are of the judgment That the form of Government here proposed is not in
any point repugnant to the Scripture; and that the Suffragans mentioned in the
second Proposition, may lawfully use the power both of Jurisdiction and
Ordination, according to the Word of God, and the practice of the ancient
Church.

Ja. Armachanus. Rich. Holdsworth.


AFter the proposal of this, An. 1641. Many Quaeries were made, and doubts in
point of conscience resolved by the Primate, diverse passages of which he heth
left under his own hand, showing his pious endeavors to peace and unity, which
how far it then prevailed, is out of season now to relate, only I wish it might
yet be thought of to the repairing of the breach, which this division has
made, and that those, who are by their Office Messengers of Peace, and whose
first word to cach house should be peace, would earnestly promote it, within
the walls of their Mother Church, wherein they were educated, and not thus by
contending about circumstantials lose the substance, and make our selves a prey
to the adversary of both, who rejoice in their hearts, saying, So would we have
it.

Which are the Primates works, and which not.
A Catalogue of the Works already printed of Doctor James Usher, late
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland, which are owned by him.
In Latin.
DE Ecclesiarum Christianarum successione and Statu. Quarto, Londini, 1613.
Epistolarum Hibernicarum Sylloge, 4o. Dublinii 1630. Historia Goteschalci, 4o.
Dublinii 1631. De Primordiis Ecclesiarum Britanicarum, 4o. Dublinii 1639.
Ignatii Epistolae cum annotationibus, 4o. Oxoniae 1645. De Anno Solari
Macedonum, 8o. Londini 1648. Annals Veteris Testamenti, Fol. Londini 1650.
Annals Novi Testamenti usque ad extremum Templi and Reipublicae Judaicae
excidium, etc. Fol. Londini 2654. Epistola ad Capellum de Variantibus textus
Hebraici Lectionibus, 4o. Londinii 1652. De Graeca Septuaginta Interpretum
versione Syntagma 4o. Londini 1655. These four last are sold by John Crook, at
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
In English.
AN Answer to a challenge made by the Jesuit Malone in Ireland, Anno 1631. A
Sermon preached before the House of Commons, Febr. 18. 1618. A Declaration of
the visibility of the Church, preached in a Sermon before King James, June 20.
1624. A Speech delivered in the Castle-Chamber in Dublin, the 22. of November,
1622. The Religion professed by the ancient Irish and Britains, 4o. 1631. These
five are bound together in Quarto. Immanuel, or the Incarnation of the Son of
God, 4o. Dublin. 1639. A Geographical Description of the Lesser Asia, 4o.
Oxford, 1644. The judgment of Doctor Reynolds, touching the Original of
Episcopacy more largely confirmed out of Antiquity, An. 1641. His Discourse of
the Original of Bishops and Metropolitanes, in 4o. Oxford, 1644. His small
Catechism re-viewed, 12o. London, 1654. His aforesaid Annals of the Old and
New Testament; with the Synchronismus of Heathen Story to the destruction of
Jerusalem, translated out of Latin into English now at the Press, Fol. to be
sold by John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
In regard there have been, and are diverse books printed, which go under the
name of the late Archbishop of Armagh, but are not his, and more may be
obtruded to the injury of him, I have thought fit, at the request of the
Printer, to give the Reader this advertisement following.

IN Anno^ 1640. There was a book printed, entitled the Bishop of Armaghs
direction to the house of Parliament, concerning the Liturgy and Episcopal
Government, and Anno 1641. Another book entitled Vox Hiberniae, being some
pretended notes of his, at a public fas^. Both these at his Petition were
suppressed by order from the House of Lords and Commons, 11. Feb. 1641. and I
hope will not be revived.

In Anno 1651. A book called (A Method for Meditation, or a manual of Divine
duties, which most injuriously is printed in his name, but is none of his,
which he directed me then to declare publicly as from him, yet in 1657. It is
again reprinted to his great dishonor.

For his small Catechism the Reader is to take notice, that there was a false
one Printed without his knowledge, and is still sold for his. The injury he
received by it compelled him to review it, with an Epistle of his own before
it, which is the mark to know the right Edition, though being framed for his
private use in his younger years, (about 23.) he had no intention of it for
the public.

If any Sermon-Notes taken from him have been Printed in his lifetime under his
name, or shall be hereafter) which diverse have of late attempted) The Reader is
to take notice that it was against his mind, and that they are disowned, by
him, which as he endeavored to his utmost to suppress, while he was living,
so it was his fear to be injured in it after his death.

For a further confirmation of which, I shall give you part of a Letter of his,
while he was Bishop of Mead, (upon the like intention of a Printer, who had
gotten into his hands some Notes of his Sermons, said to be preached by him in
London, and was about to publish them) which he wrote to Doctor Featly,
Chaplain to the then Archbishop of Canterbury for the stopping of them, in
these words.

I beseech you to use all your power to save me from that disgrace, which
undiscreet and covetons men go about to fasten upon me, or else I must be
driven to protest against their injurious dealings with me, and say as Donatus
once did, Mala illis sit, qui me^ festinant edere ante me.

But I repose cenfidence in you, that you will take order that so great a wrong
as this may not be done unto me. Remember me to worthy Doctor Goad, and forget
not in your prayers.

Dublin, Sept. 16. 1622. Your most assured loving friend, and fellow labourer
JA. MEDENSIS.


THat book entitled the sum and substance of Christian religion, some of the
materials with the Method are his, collected by him in his younger years, for
his own private use: but, being so unpolished, defective, and full of mistakes,
he was much displeased at the publishing of it in his name. And though it be
much commended at home, and by Ludovicus Crocius abroad, yet that he did disown
it as it is now set forth, this Letter following, wrote to Mr. John Downham,
(who caused it to be printed) does sufficiently confirm, as follows.

SIR,
YOu may be pleased to take notice, that the Catechism you write of is none of
mine, but transcribed out of Mr, Cartwrights Catechism, and Mr. Crooks, and
some other English Divines, but drawn together in one Method, as a kind of
Common-place-book, where other men's judgments and reasons are simply laid
down, though not approved in all points by the Collector; besides that the
Collection (such as it is) being lent abroad to diverse in scattered sheets,
has for a great part of it miscarried, the one half of it as I suppose (well
nigh) being no way to be recovered, so that so imperfect a thing Copied
verbatim out of others, and in diverse places dissonant from mine own judgment,
may not by any means be owned by me; But if it shall seem good to any
industrious person to cut off what is weak and superfluous therein, and supply
the wants thereof, and cast it into a new mould of his own framing, I shall be
very well content that he make what use he pleases of any the materials
therein, and set out the whole in his own name: and this is the resolution of

May 13. 1645. Your most assured loving friend JA. ARMACHANUS.


A Book entitled Confessions and Proofs of Protestant Divines of Reformed
Churches for Episcopacy, etc. though it be a very Learned one, yet it is not
his; Only that of the Original of Bishops and Metropolitans (Frequently bound
up with the former) is owned by him. unto which he was earnestly moved by a
Letter from Doctor Hall, the late Reverend and Learned Bishop of Norwich, then
Bishop of Exeter; which, showing the great esteem he had of him, is annexed as
follows.

To the most Reverend Father in God, and my most Honored Lord, the Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland.
Most Reverend, and my most worthily Honored, Lord.
THat which fell from me yesterday, suddenly and transcursively, has since
taken up my after-midnight thoughts, and I must crave leave, what I then moved,
to importune, that your Grace would be pleased to bestow one sheet of paper
upon these distracted times, in the subject of Episcopacy, showing the
Apostolical Original of it, and the grounds of it from Scripture, and the
immediately succeeding antiquity; Every line of it coming from your Graces
hand, would be super rotas suas: as Solomon's expression is, very Apples of
Gold, with Pictures of Silver, and more worth than volumes from us: Think, that
I stand before you like the Man of Macedon, and that you hear me say, Come and
help us: And as your Grace is wholly given up to the common good of the Church,
say, whether you can deny it? and if please your Grace to take your rise from
my humble motion to express your self in this question, wherein I am publicly
interested, or otherwise, to profess your voluntary resolutions for the
settling of many, either misled, or doubting Souls, it will be the most
acceptable, and (I hope) the most successful work that your Grace has ever
undertaken; It was my earnest motion long ago to ((...)) to entreat this labor
from your Grace; which now comes from my meannesse; your Gracious humility will
not even from so low hands disregard it; with my zealous suit, and hopeful
expectation of a yiedling answer, I humbly take leave, and am

Your Graces humbly, and heartily devoted JOS. EXON.

FINIS*

