EPIGRAMS: DIVINE AND MORAL.

BY Sir THOMAS VRCHARD, Knight.

LONDON: Printed by BARNARD ALSOP. and THOMAS FAUCET, in the Year, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE* JAMES LORD MARQVIS OF Hamilton, Earl of Arren, and
Cambridge, Lord Baron of Even, and Innerdale, Lord Master of his Majesty's
Horses, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable privy Counsel in both Kingdoms, etc.
MY LORD,
BEing confident, that your gracious disposition will hold in greater account
the ingenuous meaning of who gives, then the sufficiency of the present: I here
tender to the favor of your Honors acceptance a bundle of Epigrams; Which
though they be but flashes of wit, and such, as may with advantage receive
point from your ordinary conceptions: yet for that nothing does better
recommend them, then vivacitie of conce^t, I cannot figure to my fancy a
fitter Patron to protect the sublimest Poems of this Nature, then your own
Noble self; of whose valor, and prudence, even from your infancy, both this,
and foreign Nations will afford an approbation so Authentic, that by the
universal consent of all, that ever knew your Lordship, the depth of
experience since the memory of man was never seen wedded to fewer years: nor
the splendour of heroicke virtue to the astonishment of whole Armies, and
Princes Palaces, more evidently apparent, then in the magnanimity of your
generous carriage.

What formerly, by the most virtuous, and pregnant wits, could not be acquired
without a long continuance of time: and was esteemed to be incompatible with
youth (and much more extraordinary in young gallants, then gray hairs, or the
Gout) has been still in your Lordship, a quality concomitant to the source of
all your actions: coaevall with the gentile powers of your mind: and no less
natural, then to speak, or think.

And what others, not being able to reach into (have therefore admired in the
Legend of the Worthies) has, since the years of discretion, bin the constant
Object of your daily exercise, and complied with your very most neglected
cogitations: Which glorious, and rare endowments, out-reaching the extent of
vulgar goodness, and seeming the more wonderful, that it is not long since by
your birth, you did grace the World with the honor of your presence, do
possess the faculties of my soul with a steadfast resolution, so unfainedly to
acknowledge the absolute right, your Lordship has over me, and the
inclinations of my mind: that, as I cannot impart that portion of the fruits
thereof to any, which by a prior disposition is not already yours: so may not I
(though the matter be but small) without breach of duty, devote this Dedication
to another.

Therefore (my Lord) you may be pleased, according to your accustomed manner,
to vouchsafe a courteous entertainment to this testimony of my regard: till
Fortune be so favorable, as to bless me with the opportunity, one day to make
known my designments more effectually yours; for the best of my affections,
being touched with the Magnetic virtue of your good parts, are fixed on you,
as on their Pol-estar which serves to direct the course of my life in a
continual progress of embracing all the occasions, whereby I may testify,
how earnest I am, and always shall be, deservingly to obtain the title

Of Yours My Lord in all humility of sincere respect, to serve your Lordship.
Thomas Vrchard*

EPIGRAMS THE FIRST BOOK.
TO the KING*
GReat Monarch, since the worlds nativity,
No mind, nor body had so divine parts
To grace the State of Sov'rain Majesty,
As has your Royal person, whose deserts
Soar higher 'bove the reach of other Kings,
Then the bright Sun transcends terrestrial things.
2. That those of a solid wit, cannot be puffed up with applause; nor incensed
by contumely.
WHat vulgar people speak (if we be wise)
Will neither joy, nor miscontentment breed us;
For we ought men's opinions so to prise:
As that they may attend us, and not lead us,
It not being fit their praise should rule our actions:
Or that we shun what is good for their detractions.
3 A brave spirit disdaineth the threats of Fortune.
NO man of resolution, will endure
His liberty in Fortunes hands to thrall;
For he is not free, o'r whom she has least power:
But over whom she has no power at all,
Nor has she any chain, wherewith to bind,
The inclination of a noble mind.
4. How to become wise.
WHo would be truly wise, must in all haste
His mind of perturbations dispossess;
For wisdom is a large, and spacious guhest:
And can not dwell, but in an empty place,
Therefore to harbor her, we must not grudge,
To make both vice, and passion to dislodge.
5. The wise, and noble resolution of a truly courageous, and devout spirit,
toward the absolute danting of those irregular affections, and inward
perturbations, which readily might happen to impede the current of his
sanctified designs: and oppose his already initiated progress, in the
divinely proposed course of a virtuous, and holy life.
MY soul shall rule my body, reign o'r it:
And curb the Pentarchie of sensual charms;
For though they live together, it is not fit,
They be compagnons upon equal terms:
But in my mind J'l harbor such a reason,
As strongly may o'rmaster each temptation
Can be suggested to it: and choke the Treason
Of all, and every will-betraying passion:
In this judicious order the Realm,
Or little world of mine own self to guide,
It is my whole intent, till J make calm,
Rebellious motions, and suppress the pride
Of flesh: then, while J breath, maintain that right,
In spite of Satan, and all worldly might.
6. That the fellowship of virtuous, or vicious people, contributes much to the
bettering, or depraving of the mind.
THat he must needs be bad, there is some likeness,
Who to lewd company is much affected;
For it is the beginning of a sickness
T'associat with him, that is infected:
Would you be good then, haunt the conversation
Of them, whose actions merit estimation.
7. Riches without further, can make no man happy.
AS he, whose body is not well in health,
To search for ease, from bed to bed will rise:
So to a mind, that is diseased, wealth
Is not the end: but change of miseries;
And that, which made his poverty to vex him,
Will make his riches likewise to perplexe him.
8. What man it is, that is truly wealthy.
WHo measures poverty by Natures rules,
And frames his mind to what he has, is rich;
For we can never do, but vex our souls,
So long's we strain them to a higher pitch:
And he, whose heart is discontented, is
But a poor wretch, though all the world were his.
9. How a valiant was ought to behave himself toward those, that basely offer
to offend him.
HE is beyond the reach of common men,
Who can despise an injury; for as
The billows of the Sea insult in vain,
Against a Rock: a stout breast finds no cause,
Of being commov'd at wrongs, whereof the Dart,
Resiles from him, as from a brazen Wall,
On the offender, while his mighty heart,
And noble mind, far more sublime, then all
The Regions of the Air, most bravely scorn
The Inferior dangers of a boystrous storm.
10 Why the world is at variance.
EAch man has his own sense, and apprehension,
And faith wherein he lives* but from this ill,
That each has his own will, springs all dissension;
For that all men agree, their lackes but will:
Wars never raging in so shrewd a case:
But that, if men were pleased, would turn to peace.
11. How to be always in repose.
SO that desire, and fear may never jarre
Within your soul: no loss of means, nor riot
Of cruel foes, no sickness, harm by War,
Nor chance whats'ever will disturb your quiet;
For in a settled, and well tempered mind,
None can the meanest perturbation find.
12. A wise man only may properly be said to enjoy life.
HIs life is short, who present times neglects,
Fears times to come, and has past-times forgot:
Or rather, while he breaths his Age, he makes
A base abode in time, but lives not;
For only he leads, in judicious eyes,
The longest life, who lives, till he be wise.
13. Who is not satisfied with his own fortune, how great soever it be, is
miserable.
THough the Septemvirat of Dutch Electors
Jnaugurat him Caesar: and each one
Extol his valor above that of Hectors:
In wit, and wealth surpassing Solomon;
Yet if he proudly soar a higher pitch:
He Is neither mighty, valiant, wise, nor rich.
14. A certain old man's expression before his death, to his Son.
THat J am at the period of mine age:
Nor you, nor J, have any cause to mourn;
For life is nothing, but a Pilgrimage;
When we have traveled long, we must return:
Let us be glad then, that my spirit goes,
After so many toiles, to his repose.
15. To one of a great memory, but depraved life.
THough many things your memory contain:
Jf by your mind, to matters it be led,
Which are less profitable to retain,
Then to commit t'oblivion, it is bad:
And whatsoever arts it comprehend:
If it remember not on piety:
Repentance for enormous sins: the end
Of life, God jndgements, and his clemency;
Those necessary precepts while you lake,
You but forget your self: and it is weak.
16. how a man should oppose adversity.
Against misadventure being resolved to fight,
My mind shall be the bow, whence J'l apace
Shoot back the arrows, Fortune out of spite,
Assaults me with; and break them in her face:
For all her soverain'ties I abjure:
Her harms I dread not: and defye her power.
17. The expression of a contented mind in poverty.
THat I Am not covetous, is all my land,
From whence my thoughts new treasours daily bring:
And the best moveable, which I command
Is, I buy no unnecessary thing:
By these, I of true wealth possess such store,
That all the Kings on earth can have no more.
18. Not time, but our actions, are the true measure of our life.
THat life is short, which measured by the span
Of time has been of virtuous actions scant:
And one day's longer in a learned man,
Then twenty Lusters of an ignorant;
For life is good, and it is the quality
Of goodness, that extends its quantity.
19. Ingratitude is such a common vice, that even those who exclame most
against it, are not freest of it.
IT would not be an universal case,
Nor could each man have so true cause to fall
In railing against ingratitude; unless
There were some reason to complain of all:
Thus, who have with unthankfulness been met,
May from such dealing this instruction draw,
That if themselves did ever prove ingrate,
They get but justice from the Talion-Law,
To the end they may from those their faults refrain,
Which they so ugly see in other men.
20 Of Negative, and Positive good.
NOT only are they good, who virtuously,
Employ their time (now virtue being so rare)
But likewise those, whom no necessity,
Nor force can in the meanest vice ensnare;
For sin's so mainly furthered by the Devil,
That it is a sort of good, to do no evil.
21. To one bewailing the death of another.
YOU have no cause to think it strange, that he
Has yielded up his last, and fatal breath;
For it is no wonder for a man to dye,
Whose life is but a journey into Death:
Nor is there any man of life deprived
For age, or sickness: but because he lived.
22. Why covetous, and too ambitious men prove not so thankful, as others for
received favors.
WHose mind with pride, and avarice does flow,
Remember seldom of a courtesy,
So well, as humbler spirits do; for who
Lean's most on hope, yields least to memory:
Their thoughts so far on future aims being set,
That bypast things they purposely forget.
23. A counsel not to use severity, where gentle dealing may prevail.
STrive, never by constraint to cross his will,
Whose best affection fairly may be had;
The noble mind of man being such, as still
Fallows more heartily, then it is led:
For there was never power, charm, nor Art,
That could without consent, obtain the heart.
24. That they may be alike rich, who are not alike abundantly stored with
worldly commodities.
I have of Lands, nor moneys no large portion:
Yet, if I be content, to think, that J^
Am not as rich, as any, were great dullness;
For wealth not being in plenty, but proportion,
Though vessels have not like capacity:
They may be all of them alike in fullness.
25. Virtue, and goodness are very much opposed by the self-conceit, that
many men have of their own sufficiency.
There Is nothing hinders virtue more, then the
Opinion of our own perfection;
For none endeavors to do that, which he
Imagines he has already done:
And some by thinking to have what they have not,
Neglect the wisdom, which they might have got.
26. How to support the contumely of defamatorie speeches.
IF men deservedly speak ill of you,
Be angry not at them: but at the cause,
Which you to them did furnish so to do:
But if they still continue against the Laws
Of truth, and modesty their bad report
(While with a valiant heart, and testimony
Of a good conscience, you your self comfort)
Contemn those rascals, that insult upon ye;
For a reproach, by honest means obtained,
Does full of glory to the heavens ascend.
27. Of Lust, and Anger.
LUst taking pleasure in its own delight,
Communicats it self to two together:
But far more base is anger, whose despite
Rejoices at the sorrow of another;
For the one is kindly, the other sows debate;
Lust has a smack of love: but wrath of hate.
28. An encouragement to an impatient man in an Ague.
WHy should you in your sickness thus enrage;
Seeing patience does a generous mind befit?
You may be sure, it will not last an Age;
For if it leave not you: you must leave it:
Take courage then, faint not: but bravel endure
Whats'e^ to kill the soul has not the power.
29 The firm, and determinate resolution of a courageous spirit, in the
deepest calamities, inflicted by sinister fate.
SEeing crosses cannot be evited, I Will
Expose my self to Fortune, as a Rock
Within the midst of a tempestuous Ocean:
So to gainstand the batt'ry of her spite,
That though jaile, sickness, poverty, exile
Assault me all, with each a grievous stroke
Of several misery, at the devotion
Of misadventure, every day, and night:
Yet with a mind, undanted all the while,
I will resist her blows, till they be broke
Jn the rebounding, and without commotion,
Till all her rage be spent, sustain the fight:
So that she shall not b'able to subdue
One thought of mine, with all that she can do;
For when sh'hath tried her worst, I will not yield,
Nor let her think, that she has gained the field.
30. That wise men, to speak properly, are the most powerful men in the world.
THe greatest power is to wise men due:
The power of all men else to theirs being naught;
For wise men only, what they will, can do;
Because they will not do; but, what they ought:
Such being their carriage, that their reason still
Directs their power: and informs their will.
31. To a rich man, become poor.
YOur poverty should be the more esteemed,
That by the means thereof you are exeemed
From stubborn servants, lying Sycophants,
And feigned friends: in lieu whereof, it grants
These three of a more virtuous company,
Ease, humble carriage, and sobriety.
32. That if we strove not more for superfluities, then for what is needful,
we would not be so much troubled, is we are.
IF by the necessary use of things,
The ornaments we measure of our honor,
And not by that, which fancy does suggest us:
We will not need those wares, the Merchant brings
From foreign Countries: and withal exoner
Our minds of what might otherwise molest us.
33. The only true progress to a blessed life.
Who has of conscience a profound remorse
For sins committed: and to keep his senses
From all sinister practice, does divorce
His thoughts from their accustomed offenses,
Is in the way of virtue, which will tend
(It being continued) to a happy end.
34. That we ought not to be excessively grieved at the loss of any thing,
that is in the power of Fortune.
ALL those external ornaments of health,
Strength, honor, children, beauty, friends, and wealth
Are for a while concredited to men,
To deck the Theater, whereon the scene
Of their frail life is to be acted: some
Of which must (without further) be brought home
To day, and some to morrow; the use of them
Being only theirs, till new occasions claim
A restitution of them all again,
As time thinks fit, to whom they appertain;
Though such like things therefore be taken from us,
We should not suffer grief to overcome us:
But rather render thanks, they have been lent us
So long a space, and never discontent us.
35. Wherein true Wealth consists.
Who's truly rich, we ought not to esteem
By Lands, nor goods, but by the mind; the title
Of a poor man, being far more due to him,
That covets much, then that possesses little;
For he is richer, does the world neglect:
Then who possessing all, complains for lack.
36. How difficult a thing it is, to tread in the paths of virtue.
THe way to virtue's hard, uneasy, bends
Aloft, being full of steep, and rugged Alleys;
For never one to a high place ascends,
That always keeps the plain, and pleasant Valleys:
And reason in each humane breast ordaines,
That precious things be purchased with pains.
37. A counsel to one oppressed with bondage, and cruel disasters.
VVHats'ever be your fortune, let your deeds
With your affection always jump; for by
Desiring to do that, which you must needs:
You Will blunt the sharpness of necessity:
And making of constraint a willingness,
Be glad in spite of crosses, and distress.
38. How Fortune oftentimes most praeposterously pond'ring the aections of men,
with a great deal of injustice bestows her favors.
FOrtune with wealth, and honor at her feet:
And holding in her hand a balance, sits
Weighing human desert, as she thinks fit:
One of the scales whereof the learn'dest wits,
Most virtuous, and of choicest parts contains:
The other being appointed for such, as
Are vicious, light, and destitute of Brains.
The light are mounted up into the place,
Where riches, and preferment lie exposed
To those, can reach them: while the other scale,
By the only weight of worth, therein enclosed
Is more submissively deprest, then all
That hangs on Fortunes balance: and the higher,
That hair-brained heads b'advanc'd above the states
Of others in this world: so much the higher
To want, and bondage are the wiser pates;
Of such things then, as to the disposition
Of Fortune do pertain, let no man wonder,
While the most wicked gain the acquisition,
That by their means, the good be brought at under;
For wheresoever vice is most respected:
The greatest virtues are the more rejected.
39. When a true friend may be best known.
AS the glow-worme shines brightest in the dark,
And frankincense smells sweetest in the fire:
So cross adventures make us best remarke
A sincere friend from a dissembled Liar;
For some being friends to our prosperity,
And not to us: when it fails, they decay.
40. The duty of a husband to his wife.
THough he be head, he must not tyrannize
Over his mate in sacred bonds of Marriage;
For in the head the wit, and judgment is:
And therefore he, with a judicious carriage,
Should toward her behave himself, respect her,
Instruct her, love her, and from harm protect her.
41. Concerning those, who marry for beauty, and wealth without regard of
virtue.
HOw can such wedded people lead their lives,
With a respect unfainedly entire,
Where husbands are not married to their wives:
But money to the covetous desire:
Where men in little estimation hold
Women's discretion, wit, and chastity:
But merely aim at handsomnesse, and gold,
To serve their avarice, and Leacherie:
Which fashion lately is become so common,
That first, w'espouse the money: then, the woman.
42. The speech of a noble spirit to his adversary, whom after he had defeated,
he acknowledges to be nothing inferior to himself in worth, wit, or valor,
thereby insinuating that a wise man cannot properly be subdued: though he be
orthrown in body, and worldly commodities.
I Will not of this victory be glorious:
Nor ought you for being vanquished to repine,
You not being overcome: nor J victorious;
Your fortune only is o'rcome by mine;
For by the force of judgment, grace, and will:
You have a mind, that is invincible.
43. In how far men are inferior to many other living creatures, in the
faculties of the exterior senses.
IN touching, Spiders are the subtillest:
The Bores, in hearing: vulturs, in the smell:
In seeing, Eagles, and the Apes in taste:
Thus beasts in all the senses men excel;
So that, if men were not judicious creatures:
Some brutes would be of more acco^plish'd natures.
44. To one, who was heavily cast down in Spirit, by reason of some scandalous
speeches, blased forth to his disadvantage.
BE not discouraged at calumnies,
Which are not (at the worst) but loads of wind;
And therefore, with a strong and patient mind*
Most easy to support, if you be wise;
For nat'rally such burdens are but light:
Unless the Bearers weakness give them weight.
Thus ends the first Book, of Sir THOMAS VRCHARDS Epigrams.
EPIGRAMS: The second Book.
1. No cross adventure should hinder us from being good; though we be
frustrate of the reward thereof.
BY any means, with all your might endeavor
For honesty, whats'ever be the event:
Although sinister fortune should dissever
Virtue from honor, be not discontent;
For if you be deprived of your due,
The fault is in the time: and not in you.
2. Those that have greatest estates are not always the wealthiest men.
They Are richer, who diminish their desires:
Though their possessions be not amplified,
Then Monarchs: who in owning large Empires,
Have minds, that never will be satisfied;
For he is poor, that wants what he would have:
And rich, who having naught, does nothing crave.
3. The courageous resolution of a valiant man.
SEeing Nature entered me on this condition
Jnto the world, that J must leav't, I vow,
A noble death shall be my chief ambition;
To dye being the end of all J ought to do:
And rather gain, by a prime virtue, death:
Then to protract with common ones my breath.
4. How abject a thing it is, for a man to have bin long in the world without
giving any proof either by virtue, or learning, that he has been at all.
THat aged man, we should (without all doubt)
Of all men else the most disgraceful hold:
Who can produce no testimony, but
The number of his years, that he is old;
For of such men what can be testified,
But that being borne, they lived long, then dyed.
5. That a virtuous mind in a deformed body makes one more beautiful, then a
handsome body can do, endowed with a vicious mind.
EXternal comeliness few have obtained
Without their hurt; it never made one chaste*
But many'adulterers: and is sustained
By qualities, which age, and sickness waste*
But that, whose luster does the mind adorn,
Surpasses far the beauty of the body;
For that, we make our selves: to this, we are borne*
This, only comes by chance: but that by study;
It is by virtue then, that we enjoy
Deservedly the style of beautiful,
Which neither time, nor Fortune can destroy;
And the deformed body, a fair soul
From dust to glory everlasting caries:
While vicious souls in handsome bodies perish.
6. To one, whom poverty was to be wished for, in so far, as he could hardly
otherwise be restrained from excessive riot, and feasting.
YOu should not be a whit the more dejected,
That (as in former times) not being sustained,
Your fare, and diet daily do decrease;
For want doing what your modesty neglected:
It is a happy thing to be constrained
To that, which willingly you ought to embrace.
7. That men are not destitute of remedies, within themselves against the
shrewdest accidents, that can befall them.
IF you expect to be of toil, and care
Sometime exeem'd, hope may your grief diminish:
And patience comfort you, ere you despair,
Though both those fail, Death will your troubles finish;
Thus are you fitly served with reliefes,
Against Fortunes most elaboured mischiefs.
8. What sort of benefits one ought to bestow.
Would you oblige to you a friend, by giving,
Most cheerfully your favors to acquit:
Give that, which gives content in the receiving:
And when it is received yields delight;
For if it fail in either of those two,
It will impair his thankfulness to you.
9. To one, who did glory too much in the fair, and durable fabric of a
gorgious Palace, which he had caused lately to be built.
BOast never of the permanence of that,
Which neither can prolong your days, nor hours;
For that your house is stately, strong, and great:
The praise is the artificers, not yours:
Death cares not for your Palace, who can climb,
Without a ladder to the tops of Towers:
And shortly with a visage pale, and grim
Will come, and turn you naked out of doors:
But make your body (like a Church of Marbre)
A Castle fit, a virtuous mind to harbor.
10 That a contented man is rich, how little wealth soever he have.
He Is rich who craving nothing else, does find
Content in the possession of his own;
For in so much as does concern the mind:
Not to desire, and have is all, but one;
For if the thoughts thereof be rich, we 're sure;
Fortune has not the skill to make us poor.
6. How dangerous it is, to write, or speak of modern times.
THough all, some errors do commit: yet few.
Having committed them, would have them told:
That talk then being displeasing which is true,
Who cannot flatter, he his peace must hold:
So hand a thing it is, to say or pen,
Without offense, the truth of living men.
12. That the most solid gain of any, is in the action of virtue, all other
emoluments, how lucrative they so ever appear to the covetous mind, being the
chiefest precipitating pushes of humane frailty to an inevitable loss.
SUch is the thin, and ragged mask of vice,
That whosoe'r to peevish thoughts are pronest,
Will know some time b'experience, that there is
No profitable thing, which is not honest:
Nor can there be to God a man more odious,
Then he who leaves the good, for what is commodious.
13. What the subject of your conference ought to be with men of judgment, and
account.
LEt the discourse be serious, you impart,
To the grave audience of judicious ears:
Being either of the commonwealth, some art,
Or science, on your own, or friends affairs;
For if it can to none of those pertain:
It must be idle, frivolous, and vain.
14. That a truly generous mind, had rather give a courtesy, then be resting
one, after the presented opportunity to repay it.
AS still a greater care does men possess,
To keep things well, then freely to bestow them:
So to a noble spirit it is less
Laborious to give benefits, then owe them:
In whom brave actions are more natural,
Then to the flame to mount, or earth to fall.
15 To a certain Lady of a most exquisit feature, and comely presentation: but
who gloried too much in the deceitful excellency of these fading, and
perishable qualities.
THough you be very handsome, do but stay
A little while, and you will see a change;
For beauty flies with the time away,
Wherewith it comes: nor must you think it strange,
That hardly being skin deep in the most fair,
And but a separable accident
Of bodies, which, but living shadows are;
(And therefore frail) it is not permanent;
Be then not proud of that, which at the best,
Decrepit age will spoil: or sickness wast.
16 Who is truly rich, and who poor.
BY the contempt, not value of the matter
Of worldly goods, true riches are possessed;
For our desire by seeking grows greater:
And by desiring, povertie's increass'd:
So that on earth there can be none so poor
As he, whose mind in plenty longs for more.
17 How generous a thing it is, not to succumbe to pleasure, and sensuality.
NO great exploit can be expected from
That man, who being profoundly plunged in his
Own sense, permits himself to be o'rcome
B' a foe s'effeminat, as pleasure is;
For mighty minds most pleasures do conceive,
When pleasures over them no power have.
18 That we ought not to be sorry at the loss of worldly goods.
THose things, which are to us by fortune lent,
We Should sequestrat, and to such a place,
From whence she may, without our discontent,
Fetch them away again before our face;
For if we grudge thereat by any means:
We do but vex our selves, and lose our pains.
19. What is not virtuously acquired, if acquired by us, is not properly ours.
WHos'ever by sinister means is come
To places of preferment, and to walk
Within the bounds of virtue takes no pleasure:
Provideth only titles for his tomb,
And for the baser people prattling talk:
But nothing for himself in any measure;
For fortune does with all things us befit,
Save the sole mind of ours: and Vice kills it.
20. Riches afford to virtue more matter to work upon, then poverty can do.
FOr Temperance, and other qualities
Of greater moment, men have been respected
In riches: but in poverty there is
This only goodness, not to be dejected;
Whence shunning want, we means embrace, which yield,
To virtue a more large, and spacious field.
21. Death makes us all alike in so far, as her power can reach.
Amongst all the rites, that Nature can pretend
In Justice, this is chiefest, and a sequel,
Which does on Mortal principles depend:
That drawing near to death, we are all equal;
Therefore we otherwise, then by the sense
Should betwixt man, and man make difference.
22 A very ready way to goodness, and true Wisdom.
Who virtuously would settle his endeavors,
To mortify his passions, and be wise:
Must still remember on received favors,
Forgetting always bypast injuries;
For that a friend should prove ingrate, is strange:
And mercy is more Noble, then revenge.
23. We ought not to regard the contumelies, and calumnies of Liars, and
profane men.
ASpersions, which base people viciously
Inflict upon men's credits, I contemn;
That sentence having small authority,
Where he, that is condemned, does condemn:
And to be hated by a wicked spirit,
Does argue oftentimes the greater merit.
24. No man should glory too much in the flourishing verdure of his Youth.
LEt none be proud of life: nor think, that longer
He then another will, because he is younger,
Enjoy his pleasures; for though old age stand
A great way off, death always is at hand;
Who (without taking heed to time, or years)
No Living creature spares, when she appears.
25. That virtue is of greater worth, then knowledge. to a speculative
Philosopher.
WHy do you study Morals, if you take
No pains t'abate your avarice, and lust?
For how can virtues definition make
You valiant, prudent, temperate, or just:
Jf you industriously purge not your mind
Of any vice, to which you are inclined?
26 Consolation to a poor man.
THat you are poor, it should not much disheart you;
For poverty securely keeps your house
From thieves, and Robbers: and makes room to virtue,
By banishing of pride, and the abuse
Of riches: the loss thereof, and fear of loss,
Surfets, and vices, that prejudge the health:
Which being shut out of doors, strive to compose
Your mind to quietness, more worth, then wealth;
For without wealth you may have happiness:
But not without tranquillity, and ease.
27 The bad returns of ingrate men should not deter us from being liberal.
THough you ingrate receivers daily find,
Let not their faults make you less Noble prove;
It not being, th'action of a generous mind
To give and lose so, as to lose, and give;
For that, a churl may do, in hope of gain:
But this partakes of a heroic strain.
28 That riches is a sickness to those, that do not possess the good
thereof, so much as they are possessed thereby.
Some peoples senses wealth does so bereave,
That they to nothingelse their minds can frame:
So have they wealth, as men are said to have
The Ague, when it is th'ague, that has them;
For it afflicts them with the maladies
Of covetous desire, and avarice.
29. A truly liberal man never bestows his gifts, in hope of recompense.
A Hearty giver, will conceive such pleasure
In the only action of his good intent:
That though he be not met in the like measure,
It never breeds him any discontent;
For when he does bestow a benefit,
He merely looks to the receivers profit:
And in the instant, that he guides it,
Reapes all the use, that he exspected of it:
Virtue no other recompense allowing;
The price of honest deeds being in the doing.
30 That the settled quiet of our mind ought not to be moved at sinister
accidents.
MAn should for no unfortunate event
Deprive himself of that, which fortune is
Unable to restore him: the content
Of mind, ease, and tranquilsity of his
Reposed spirit; for who lacks those,
Can nothing else possess, that is worth to lose.
31. As it was a precept of antiquity, to lean more to virtue, then Parentage:
so is it a tenet of Christianity, to repose more trust on the blood of Christ,
then our own merits.
Virtue, not blood was thought of anciently;
Yet blood, more then our virtue ought to please us:
For we on blood, not virtue should rely;
Not on our virtue: but the blood of Jesus,
His blood being able to make heavenly Kings;
Of men, plagued here for lack of Earthly things.
32 Our inclination is so depraved, that it is apt enough of it self to run
to sin, without any instigation, whereby to drive it forward.
OUr mind's so prone to vice, it needs a bridle
To hold it rather, then a spur, to prick it;
For left unto it self, it hardly stands:
But if perverse enticements find it idle,
And push it, then, it (running on a wicked,
And headlong course) no reason understands,
While at the windows of the ears, and eyes
Temptations enter, which the soul surprise,
33 That there is no true riches, but of necessary things.
THe use of money, is to have the means,
Whereby all needful things may be possessed,
Which are, but few, and small, and got with ease:
What we have more then that, 'snot wealth, but chains,
Or Fetters of the mind: and at the best,
But heaps of labor, fear, and carfulness.
34. The misery of such, as are doubtful, and suspicious of their Wives
chastity
CLose Jealous men make not so evident
In any thing the madness of their brains:
As that, the more that they are diligent,
They have the greater hope to lose their pains;
For their whole care, to search that, is employed,
Which not to find, they would be overjoyed.
35. How deplorable the condition of most men is, who, though they attain to
the fruition of their praeterit projects, by covering nevertheless the
possession of future pleasures, honors, and commodities, never receive
contentment (is they ought) in the present time.
IN things, to fortune Subject, when we get
What we did long for, we anew desire
To have wherewith t'uphold the former state:
Which likewise, we obtaining, more require;
For business engenders business:
And hope, being th'usher of another hope,
Our enjoyd' wishes serve but to make place
To after aims, whose purchase to the top
Of our ambition never reaches; thus
By still aspiring higher we can find
No end in miseries, that trouble us:
Turmoyle the body: and perplex our mind,
Although we change with great variety
The matter, which procures our misery.
36. The different fruits of idleness, and virtue in young men.
AS singing Grasshoppers, a fond Youth revels
In Summer blinks: and starves when tempests rage:
But wise men (Pismire like) enjoy the travels
Of their young years, in th'winter of their age:
These by their Providence have wealth in treasure:
While those are pained for their bygone pleasure.
37. To a generously disposed Gentleman, who was maine sorry, that he had not
wherewith to remunerat the favors, by the which he was obliged to the courtesy
of a friend.
YOu have restored his kindness, if you owe
It willingly, and does not prove forgetful;
For with all Mankind it would hardly go:
If no man could with empty hands be grateful:
And in what may concern a benefit,
It Is the only mind refounds, and makes it.
38. The truest wealth, man has it from himself.
IF you from discontents have a desire
To live exeem'd, the way is never t'importune
Your friends with suits: but always to require
Your riches from your self: and not from fortune;
For your dislike, affection, and opinion
Are things still subject to your own dominion.
39. That the impudicity of a Lascivious Woman stains but her own, and not
her husbands honor.
THough of her sacred Matrimonial Oath
Your wife make no account: if what be due
To a wise Husband you perform: she does
Bring to her self discredit: not to you;
For others faults can no disgrace impart you:
(Though to your loss they tend, and make you sorry)
No more then you can by another virtue,
(Though it breed joy, and gain) reap any glory:
It Is our own vertu', and vice must praise or blame u(...)
And either make us glorious, or infamous.
40. Who really are rich, and who poor.
HE, that agrees with his poverty,
Is truly rich: while (on the other part)
He Is poor, who 'midst the superfluity
Of wealth, in new desires consumes his heart;
For it is an empty mind inflicts the curse
Of poverty: and not an empty purse.
41. How to oppose sinister fate.
IF of misfortune you suppose t'exoner
By any other means, then those of virtue,
Your troubled spirit: you bestow upon her
Both your own skll, and weapons to subvert you;
For that, wherewith you 'magine to resist
Her fury, is already in her hand:
And which she holds extended to your breast,
To make you pliable to her command:
It is not then great friends, Nobility,
Health, beauty, strength, nor store of worldly treasure,
That can preserve you from her blows; for the
Of all those things disposes at her pleasure:
But you, your self must furnish with such arms,
As may defend you against vice, and sin:
And so you shall not need to fear her harms:
For being so warded, you are happy in
The tumults of the world: and she unable
With all her might, to make you miserable.
42. The deserved mutability in the condition of too ambitious men.
AS is the Tortoise used by the Eagle:
So fortune does vainglorious men inveagle;
Who carries them upon the wings of honor
The higher up, that they may break the sooner.
43. That inconveniences ought to be regarded to before hand.
TO wait for crosses, that may happen, is
The mean* whereby to bear them easily;
They not being much unlike the Cockatrice,
Which, if foreseen by us, dies instantly:
While unexpected misadventures kill
Joy in the breed, and tyrannize the will.
44. Concerning those, who disdain to walk on their own feet, when, at any
rate* they may have the convenience to be carried.
WE will not see with others eyes: nor hear (so
With borrowed ears; yet has fond custom
Prevailed, that we take especial care,
Upon the feet of others still to go:
Although our own be nere so strong, to bear
The burden of our bodies? I am sure,
That no man came into this world in chair,
On horseback, or in Coach; our birth was poor,
And we must dye in no less poor estate:
But 'twixt those abject ends such pride there is,
And in so short a course of life, so great
Forgetfulness of both extremities,
As if enjoying an immortal breath,
We could not have been borne: nor taste of death.
Thus ends the second Book of Sir THOMAS VRCHARDS Epigrams,
EPIGRAMS: The Third Book,
1. How to behave ones self in all occasions.
NO kind of trouble to your self procure:
And shun as many crosses, as you can:
Stoutly support, what you must needs endure:
And with the resolution of a man,
Whose spirit is affliction-proofe, possess
A joyful heart in all occurrences.
2 That no man, to speak properly, lives, but he, that is Wise, and virtuous.
IF we lack virtue, and good deeds to hold
Our life (...)
True life affords not* though it make us old;
Nor lived he that lives not after death
For in good minds, the lives of men consist:
And they alone mortality resist*
3 We ought always to think upon what we are to say, before we utter any
thing; the speeches and talk of solid wits, being still premeditated, and never
using to forerunne the mind.
OUr tongu's the hearts interpreter, and still
In wise discourse has but the second place*
The heart* should end, ere th'tongue begin; for while
The Legate speaks, the Truch-man holds his peace.
Which order being inverted, we abuse
The hearers patience: and our selves confuse.
4 That Lust, and drunkenness are odious vices.
Wrath makes a man to sin courageously,
And pride does swell with fair appearances:
But drunkenesse, and too much Leacherie
Are sloven, filthy, villainous, and base;
For by the one Gods image being exiled,
His Temple by the other is defiled.
5. A certain ancient philosopher did hereby insinuate, how necessary a thing
the administration of Justice was: and to be always vigilant in the judicious
distribution of punishment, and recompense.
SEeing by the multitude of those offend,
The shame of sin's diminished now in such
A measure, that a common crime, in end
Will cease to be accounted a reproach:
I am affrayd, that (if iniquity
Be suffered thus to propagate) it will
With bad example safer be to stray,
Then to prove singular in doing well:
Nor is this grievous inconvenience (tho
Pernicious to the state) to be withstood,
If any the least care be wanting to
Chastise the wicked, and reward the good:
Which Law each Prince should in his bosom nourish;
That Vice may be suppressed: and virtue flourish.
6. That overweening impedeth oftentimes the perfectioning of the very same
quality, we are proudest of.
FOnd self-conceit likes never to permit
Ones mind, to see it self with upright eyes;
Whence many men might have attained to wit,
Had they not thought themselves already wise:
To boast of wisdom then, is foolishness;
For while we think, we are wise: we are nothing less.
7. To one, who seemed to be grievously discontented with his poverty.
LEt never want of money vex your brain;
Seeing all contentment is in the only mind,
To the which money does no more pertain,
Then to the Hierarchies of Angel-kind:
Thus Gold being Earthly, and the mind sublime:
T'abase your spirit, is a sort of crime.
8. The resolution of a proficient in virtue.
I Hope so little to transgress the Law,
My conscience will endite me, or be proud
Of wealth, and pomp: as not to care a straw
For Fortunes frowns: so that my deeds be good,
Which eternize my bliss, while she makes Kings.
To Enjoy at best, but transitory things.
9. That a courtesy ought to be conferred soon, and with a good will.
NO man will from his heart owe that, which was
Extorted by mere importunity,
Without regard of true desert; because
It seems to have been given unwillingly:
Who distributes his benefits that way,
Needs not then wait for a gratification
From him, whom he has dulled with delay,
And tortured with grievous expectation;
For we acknowledge gifts according to
The Intent of him, who does the same bestow.
10. The best wits, once depraved, become the most impious.
THe whitest Lawne receives the deepest moale:
The purest Chrysolit is soonest stained:
So without grace, the most ingenious soul,
Is with the greatest wickedness profaned:
And the more edge it have, applied to sin,
Where it should spare, it cuts the deeper in.
11. That those employ not their occasions well, who spend the most part of
their life in providing for the Instruments of living.
SOme wasting all their life with pain, and sorrow,
To seek the means of life no leisure give
Their thoughts, from aiming always at to morrow;
Whereby they live not, but are still to live;
In their whole age the fruits, that issue from
Their labors, being but hopes of times to come.
12. An uprightly zealous, and truly devout man is strong enough against all
temptations.
THat man, in whom the grace of God begins,
His soul with divine comfort to refresh,
May the whole heptarchie of deadly sins,
In spite of all, the Devil, the World, the flesh
Are able to suggest, enforce to yield;
Christ, being his guide: and Christian faith, his shield.
13. That to employ our thoughts on the study of mortality, and frailty of our
nature, is a very necessary, and profitable speculation.
BE not from death (by any means) a stranger:
But make her your familiar friend; that if
The cause require, it, vilipending danger,
You may step forth to embrace her, without grief;
For the more boldly you intend to meet her:
The relish of your life will prove the sweeter.
14. The Generous speech of a Noble Cavallier, after he had disarmed his
adversary at the single Combat.
THough with my Raper, for the guerdon,
Your fault deserves, I may pierce ye:
Your penitence, in craving pardon
Transpassions my revenge in mercy;
And wills me both to end this present strife,
And give you leave in peace to enjoy your life.
15. To one, who was excessively cheerful, for being recovered of a Fever,
wherewith he had been for a time extreme sorely shaken.
THat to your health you are restored, you
May in some sort be joyful: and yet pleased
To know your dying day is nearer now,
Then when you were most heavily diseased;
For to its Journeyes end your life still goes,
Which cannot stay, nor slow it is pace: nor has
It any Inn, to rest in; toil, repose,
Sickness, and health being alike steps to death:
Let this thought then your gladness mortify,
That once again you must fall sick, and dye.
16. That the most of our contentment, while we are upon the Earth, consists
rather in Negatives, as not to be perplexed with meant all perturbations,
outward diseases, and other such like life-tormenting crosses, then in the
real fruition of any positive delight, that can befall us.
THere being no possibility, that men
Can here enjoy a greater delectation,
Then to possess a body without pain,
And mind untroubled by the meanest passion:
Without desire of further pleasure, health,
And a good conscience should be our chief wealth.
17. Why we must all dye.
IT being the law of Nations to restore
What we have borrowed, there is no remedy:
But being engaged to a Creditor,
Who will not lose his debt: we must needs dye:
Nor can we plead one half a terms delay;
For when Death craves it, we are forced to pay.
18. Of the covetous, and perverse inclination of the greatest part of Mankind.
WHen profit goes with virtue, we respect her,
So that her very footsteps we adore:
But if she walk alone, then we neglect her,
And will not wait upon her any more:
So basely against their consciences, most men
Descend from honor, to attend on gain.
19. The Parallel of Nature, and Fortune.
A Fly, which is a despicable creature
Obtaines, beside her wings, six feet from Nature:
Yet four feet only, she is pleased to grant
To the huge body of an Elephant:
So Fortune does withdraw her gifts from some,
Whose real worth surpasses theirs, on whom
She has bestowed them, as forcibly,
As Elephants in strenth exceed a fly.
20. How we should enjoy the delights, we have: and contemn such, as we have
not.
LEt not the want of pleasures be unpleasant
To your remembrance: and with moderation
Make use of those contentments, which are present:
If you would never be grieved with expectation;
For to our own, things absent to prefer,
Frustrates our hope, when it has bred us fear.
21 To one, who did confide too much in the sound temperament, and goodly
constitution of his bodily complexion.
Boast not of outward health: but have a care
Your soul be not distemperd; for we find
The case of them most dangerous, who are
In wholesome bodies of a sickly mind,
Vice tyrannizing over flesh, and blood
In those, whose will, and judgment are not good.
22. A Counsel to be provident, and circumspect in all our actions, without
either cowardice, or temeritie.
Do nothing tim'rously, and yet b'aware,
You be not rash: let prudence therefore guard
Your words, and deeds; for he needs not to fear
What Is to be shunned, that shuns what is to be feared;
Nor in the present time be vex't, who from
Things past, discern of what is like to come.
23. Of four things, in an epalleled way vanquished each by other.
AS Death o'rthroweth man, and cuts his breath:
And fame most gloriously subdueth Death:
So gourmandizing time does fame or'come:
And to eternity time must succumbe.
24. A consolation to those, that are of a little stature not to be sorry
thereat.
None of a little burden should complain;
You're clothed with flesh, and bones, and not suppressed:
A little house a Giant may contain:
And little bulks great spirits often invest;
For virtue has not such desire to find
The stature of the body, as the mind.
25. That too much bewailing, and grief is to be avoided at Funerals, to one
lamenting the decease of a friend.
IT were more fit, that you relinquished orrow,
Then that you should be left by it; that may,
What ever may be done, be done to morrow:
And what to morrow may be done to day;
We should therefore, as soon's we can desist
From that, wherein we cannot long insist.
26. The virtuous speech of a diseased man, most patient in his sickness.
MY flesh still having been an enemy
Unto my spirit, it should glad my heart,
That pains, which seize now on my body, may
Be profitable to my better part;
For though Diseases seem at first unpleasant,
They point us out the way, we ought to go:
Admonish us exactly of our present
Estate: and t'us at last this favor show,
That they enlarge us from that ruinous,
Close, and dark prison, which confined us.
27. We should not be sorry, to be destitute of any thing: so long as we have
judgments to persuade us, that we may minister to our selves, what we have not,
by not longing for it.
TO want, what J should have, shall never make
My heart less cheerful; reason still requiring,
That J be pleased, whats' ever things J lack,
To furnish to my self, by not desiring;
For not to wish for things, against the grief
Of fear, and frustrate hopes provides relief.
28. That virtue is better, and more powerful then Fortune.
Virtue denies naught, but what to grant
Hurts the receiver, and is good to want:
Nor takes she ought away, which would not cross
The owner: and is lucrative to loss;
She no man can deceive: she looks not strange:
Nor is she subject to the meanest change:
Embrace her then; for she can give that, which
Will (without gold, or silver) make you rich.
29. How magnanimous a thing it is, in adversity, patiently to endure, what
cannot be evited.
What grievous weight so ever be allowed
By misadventrous fate, wherewith to load ye,
Shrink not thereat, but yield your shoulder to it,
And with a steadfast mind support your body;
For valiant spirits can not be o'rcome:
Though Fortune force their bodies to succumbe.
30. That nothing more opposes the tranquillity of life, which is proper, and
peculiar to Wisemen, then to be tied to a generality of public example in
all our actions.
AMongst the causes of our evils, this
Is one of the most ordinary, that
We live b'example: things which are amiss
Supplying oftentimes the place of what
Is rightest, and most virtuous: for there is no man
(Scarce) holds that error, which is done in common.
31. A temperate Diet, is the best Physic.
TO keep a moderation in our Diet,
Is the chief mean, to be of health assured;
For nothing sickens so, as too much riot:
And Feasts kill more, then Galen ever cured,
Nor is there Physic, should so fully please us;
Others expel: but this prveens Diseases.
32. That all our life, is but a continual course, and vicissitude of sinning,
and being sorry for sin.
WE sin with joy: and having fined, we mourn,
Then kindle, after tears, new sinful fires;
There being a turn perpetual, and return
'Twixt our repentance, and profane desires;
For senses to delights are wedded wholly,
Which purchased, reason does bewail their folly.
33. Why our thoughts, all the while we are in this transitory world, from the
hour of our nativity, to the laying down of our bodies in the grave, should
not at any time exspaciat themselves in the broad way of destruction.
SEeing the strait lodging of your mothers womb,
Brought you to life, from whence you must depart
To the dark entry of a little tomb:
Betwixt your birth, and Burial let your heart
Tread virtues narrow path: till you contract
To so strict bounds the pleasures of this wide,
And spacious world, as that you may draw back
The reins of covetous desire, hate, lust, and pride;
For by so doing, you will make your death
A blessed passage to eternal breath.
34. It is the safest course to entertain poverty in our greatest riches.
YOur thoughts in greatest plenty moderate,
Lest with superfluous things you be ensnared:
Let poverty be your familiar Mate,
That Fortune may not find you unprepared;
For so it will not lie into her power,
T'inflict that cross, which you cannot endure.
35. To a Gentleman, who was extremely offended at the defamatory speeches of a
base detractor.
AT his reproachful words do not conceive
The meanest grudge; for curs will still be barking
Nor take you notice of him, seeing a knave
Is like a scabbed sheep, not worth the marking;
And this your setting him at naught will make him
Swell, as a Toad, till his own poison break him.
36. Of Death, and Sin.
Bodies, which lack the souls, did them inform,
Turned to corruption, lose their former grace:
And out of hearts corrupted breeds a worm
Still gnawing upon guilty Consciences.
As from deceased bodies, Death withdrawes
The living souls, another life to enjoy:
So sin, contrary to the divine Laws,
In living bodies does the soul destroy.
Death is not vanquished till the Resurrection
Of bodies, testify the souls conjunction
And by Regeneration, sin's infection
Is buried in a mortified compunction;
Less then is death, then sin: the tomb, then hell:
The more that souls the bodies do excel.
37. The advantages of Poverty.
IF you have poverty, you have no sumptuous,
But a most easy ghuest, secure, and quiet:
Who will preserve your mind from being presumptuous,
From prodigality, excessive riot:
From vicious pleasures, Robbers, and the stealth
Of thieves, which ills befall to those, have wealth.
38. How to make all the world peaceable.
IF so in every man the flesh would dwell
At concord with the spirit, that it cease
Against its soverainty to rebel,
The universal world would be at peace;
For if there were no avarice, no hate:
No pride, nor lust, there could be no debate.
39. One, who did extremely regret, his bestowing of a great benefit upon an
ingrate man.
BY giving moneys to a thanklesse man,
You lost the matter of your benefit:
But the best part thereof does still remain,
Which was your willingness in giving it;
For his repaying of your grateful action,
Had made you gain all, that you had received
And getting naught, you lack not satisfaction;
It only being, to give it, that you gave it;
Else in your gifts, a bargain we should find:
And not the noble acts of a free mind.
40. Of wisdom, in speech, in action* in reality, and reputation.
WIsely to talk deserves much respect:
Yet to live wisely (without doubt) is better:
To be accounted wise is a great matter:
But it is most to be it in effect;
Such as would follow wisdom then, let them
Strive more for deeds, then words: for life, then fame.
41. To one, who was grieved within himself, that he was not endewed with such
force, and vigor of body, as many others were.
THough you be not so strong, as other men,
Jf you have health, the matter is but small;
You being reserved for tasks, more noble, then
The labors of the body: therefore all
You can complain of, is not of defect,
But of imparitie: Nature did grant
Milo great strength, in whose regard you're weak:
So was he weaker then an Elephant:
His strength decayed: but Solons lasted longer,
And wise men love not, what is not durable:
Care not for strength; seeing sickness will be stronger:
But with your soul, as with a Sword of steel,
Within a sheath of Wool, subdue temptations;
For the true strength of Man, being in the mind,
He is much stronger, overcomes his passions,
Then who can with main force a Lion bind;
And who himself thus in subjection brings,
Surmounts the power of all Earthly Kings.
42. An encouragement to those of mean Parentage, not to be hindered by the
Obscurity of their extraction, from the undertaking of glorious enterprises.
THe baser, that your Parents are, the greater
Renown, and honor will to you redound;
Jf all your actions be on virtue grounded:
To give being more, then to receive, and better
To have a noble life, then birth: to found
A new Nobility, then find it founded
43. We should not be troubled at the accidents of Fortune: nor those things,
which cannot be eschewed.
Let Us take in patience, sickness, banishments,
Pain, loss of goods, death, and enforced strife;
For none of those are so much punishments,
As Tributes, which we pay unto this life;
From the whole tract whereof we cannot borrow
One dram of Joy, that is not mixed with sorrow.
44. Age merely depending on the continual Flux of time, we have very small
reason to boast of a long life, already obtained: or be proud of the hope,
hereafter to attain unto it.
THe present time does fly away so fast,
That one can hardly follow't with his mind:
The Praeterit's a time already past:
And seeing the futur's still to come, we find,
Both those being absent, that they are not ours:
Although they breed to us no mean vexation,
The One with the slip'ry thought of ill-spent hours:
And the other, with a careful expectation:
Thus life is almost nothing, in effect,
Whereof two parcels never are our own:
The third being such, as ever we can reflect
Upon th'enjoying of it, is quite gone;
The longest time not having bounds to measure
A real, permanent, and solid pleasure.
Here end the first three Books of Sir THOMAS VRCHARDS Epigrams.
Laud to the Father, with the Son, and Ghost TRIUN, as fore,
And still has been since times begun, be now, and evermore.
The Errata's.
Page 2. line 6. for, place a: p. 4. l. 14. at Dart, blot out, l. 22. for.
place a: p. 5. l. 7. for find, read find. p. 7. l. 3. for misadventure, read
misadventures l. 6. at with place a: and at face a; p. 8. l. 11. at law* place
a; p. 12. l. 25. at do, place a: and at ought, a; p. 13. l. 6. and 7. must be
indented, p. 21. l. 7. at estates, place a, l. 19. before, at all, read lived,
p. 31. l. 1. for guides read gives, l. 22 for* place a; line 23, blot out
the; p. 35. line 16. for u, read us, and place there a: page 36. l. 5. for skll
reed skill page 40. line 6, at death place a; l. 17. for. place a:

THE Printers to the Reader.
THough in none of the printed Copies, be all those above collected faults, yet
(the Form, in several sheets happening to pass diverse times the Press,
before an exact Revise was made) many of the Books are found to contain some,
as the whole impression them all: therefore, thought we fit, for the ease of
the more curious, in every penult page to subjoyne them as they are here sum'd
up; willing rather to insert the total, where the parts are wanting in their
distinguished places, then by omitting any thing of the due count, to let an
error slip uncorrected.

What else has escaped our animadversion, we heartily entreat the courteous,
and judicious Readers to excuse, and amend: and humbly beg their favors, they
may be pleased to vouchsafe an acceptance of these our endeavors with the same
intention, we have offered rhem; the furtherance of the common good, and
satisfaction of every one in particular, being all we aim at, our chief
ambition, and the most approved Testimony, which our consciences afford us in
the discharge of our calling.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

JOHANNES HANSLEY.
March 15. 1640.

