THE MOUNT of OLIVES: OR, SOLITARY DEVOTIONS.

By HENRY VAVGHAN Silurist.

With An excellent Discourse of the blessed state of MAN in GLORY, written by
the most Reverend and holy Father ANSELM Archbishop of Canterbury, and now
done into English.

LUKE 21. v. 39, 37. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of Man.

And in the day time he was teaching in the Temple, and at night he went out,
and abode in the Mount that is called the Mount of Olives.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEAKE at the Crown in Fleet Street between the two
Temple-Gates. 1652.

TO THE Truly Noble and Religious Sr. CHARLES Egerton KNIGHT.
SIR,
THough I should have no other defense, that near relation by which my dearest
friend lays claim to your person, might in some measure excuse this otherwise
unhansome adventure of publishing these weak productions under the shelter of
your name. But I was not so much induced to it by that Tie, though very dear
unto me, as by your love to Religion and Learning, and the respects due from my
self to your person, and those reverend years, which by a fair and virtuous
disposal of your time you have happily attained to, and wherein you safely are,
-- Coelo dignus canente senecta Consilioque deum, -- I know, Sir, you will be
pleased to accept of this poor Olive-leafe presented to you, so that I shall
not be driven to put forth my hand to take in my Dove again. And indeed
(considering how fast and how soon men degenerate), It must be counted for a
great blessing, that there is yet any left which dares look upon, and
commiserate distressed Religion. Good men in bad times are very scarce; They
are like the standing ears of Corn escaped out of the Reapers hands, or the
Vine-dressers last gleanings after the first ripe fruits have been gathered.
Such a precious generation are the Just in the day of trouble, and their names
are like to afflicted truth, like the shadow of a great rock in a weary land,
or a wayfaring man's lodge in the waste and howling Wilderness. The Son of
God himself (when he was here,) had no place to put his head in; And his
Servants must not think the present measure too hard, seeing their Master
himself took up his nights-lodging in the cold Mount of Olives.

By this time, Sir, you may see the reason which moved me to take Sanctuary at
your name, and now I will acquaint you with my design. To be short, Sir, It is
no other, but that your name (like the royal stamp) may make current and
commend this poor mite to posterity: And that the unfeigned lover of your
Person may in these few and transitory sheets wait upon your memory in the
ages to come; when your immortal and precious soul shall be bound up in the
bundle of the living, in the ever-lasting book of life; which is devoutly
desired by

Sir, Your very affectionate and faithful Servant VAVGHAN.
Newton by Vsk this first of October. 1651.
TO THE Peaceful, humble, and pious READER.
I Know the world abounds with these Manuals, and triumphs over them. It is not
then their scarsity that called this forth, nor yet a desire to cross the age,
nor any in it. I envy not their frequent Ecstasies, and raptures to the third
heaven; I only wish them real, and that their actions did not tell the world,
they are rapt into some other place. Nor should they, who assume to themselves
the glorious style of Saints, be uncharitably moved, if we that are yet in the
body, and carry our treasure in earthen vessels, have need of these helps.

It is for thy good, and for his glory, who in the days of his flesh prayed
here himself, and both taught and commanded us to pray, that I have published
this. Thou have here sound directions and wholesome words, and if thou will
enquire of the Lord and say, If the Lord will, I shall live, and do this or
that, thou may. Here are Morning and Evening sacrifices, with holy and
apposite Ejaculations for most times and occasions. And lastly, here are very
faithful and necessary Precepts and Meditations before we come to the Lords
Table. To which last part I have added a short and plain Discourse of Death,
with a Prayer in the hour thereof. And for thy comfort after thou have past
through that Golgotha, I have annexed a Dissertation of the blessed state of
the righteous after this life, written originally by holy Anselme sometimes
Archbishop of Canterbury.

I have purposely avoided to lead thee into this little Book with a large
discourse of Devotion, what it is, with the several Heads, Divisions, and
sub-divisions of it, all these being but so many fruitless curiosities of
Schoole-Divinity, Cui fumus est pro fundamento. Neither did I think it
necessary that the ordinary Instructions for a regular life (of which theere
are infinite Volumes already extant) should be inserted into this small
Manual, lest instead of Devotion, I should trouble thee with a piece of
Ethies. Besides, thou have them already as briefly delivered as possibly I
could, in my Sacred Poems.

And thus, Christian Reader, do I commend it to thy practice, and the benefit
thou shall find thereby. Only I shall add this short Exhortation: That thou
would not be discouraged in this way, because very many are gone out of it.
Think not that thou art alone upon this Hill, there is an innumerable company
both before and behind thee. Those with their Palms in their hands, and these
expecting them. If therefore the dust of this world chance to prick thine eyes,
suffer it not to blind them; but runniug thy race with patience, look to JESUS
the Author and finisher of thy faith, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again. Press thou toward the mark, and let the people and their Seducers
rage; be faithful unto the death, and he will give thee a Crown of life. Look
not upon transitory, visible things, but upon him that is etern^l, and
invisible. Choose the better part, yea, that part with Saint Hierome, who
preferred the poor Coat of Paul the Hermit to the purple and pride of the
world. Thus with my simple Advise unto thee, I bid thee farewell.

Thy Christian friend Henry Vaughan.

THE Table.
ADmonitions for Morning Prayer. page 1 A Prayer when thou do awake. p. 3 --
When thou do arise. p. 5 -- As soon as thou art dressed. p. 6 Preparations for
a Journey. p. 9 -- When thou go from home. p. 11 -- Another for the same. p.
12 How to carry thy self in the Church. p. 14 A Prayer before thou go to
Church. p 18 -- When thou art come home; or in the way if thou be alone. p.
20 Admonitions for Evening Prayer. p. 22 A Meditation at the setting of the
Sun. p. 23 A Prayer for the Evening. p. 26 -- When thou art going into bed.
p. 28 Particular Ejaculations for all occasions. p. 31 Admonitions with Prayers
and Meditations before receiving the Lords Supper. p. 36 A Prayer for the Grace
of Repentance, with a Confession of sins. p. 47 A particular Meditation before
receiving the holy Communion. p. 51 A Prayer when thou art upon going to the
Lords Table. p. 59 An Ejaculation immediately before the receiving. p. 60
Admonitions after receiving the holy Communion. p. 61 A Prayer after you have
received. p. 63 -- In time of Persecution and Heresy. p. 66 -- In Troubles
occasioned by our Enemies. p. 68 MAN in DARKNESS, or a Discourse of Death. p.
71 A Prayer in time of sickness. p. 127 A Prayer in the hour of Death. p. 130
MAN in GLORY; or, a Discourse of the blessed estate of the Saints in Heaven. p.
133
FINIS.
ADMONITIONS FOR Morning-Prayer.
THe night (says Chrysostom) was not therefore made, that either we should
sleep it out, or pass it away idly; and Chiefly because we see many worldly
persons to watch out whole nights for the Commodities of this life. In the
Primitive Church also the Saints of God used to rise at midnight to praise the
Rock of their salvation with Hymns and Spiritual Songs. In the same manner
should thou do now, and Contemplate the Order of the Stars, and how they all
in their several stations praise their Creator. When all the world is asleep,
thou should watch, weep and pray and propose unto thy self that Practice of
the Psalmist, I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed, and water
my Couch with my tears; for as the Dew which falls by night is most
fructifying, and tempers the heat of the Sun; so the tears we shed in the
night, make the soul fruitful, quench all Concupiscence, and supple the
hardness we got in the day. Christ himself in the daytime taught and
preached, but continued all night in prayer, sometimes in a Mountain apart,
sometimes amongst the wild beasts, and sometimes in solitary places.

They, whose Age or Infirmity will not give them way to do thus, should use all
Convenient means to be up before the Sunrising, for we must prevent the Sun
to give God thanks, and at the dayspring pray unto him. Wisd. 16. It was in
the morning that the Children of Israel gathered the Manna; and of the Just man
it is said, That He will give his heart to resort early to the Lord that made
him, and will pray before the most high, Eccl. 39. So soon therefore as thou
do awake, shut thy door against all profane and worldly thoughts, and before
all things let thy God be first admitted, offer unto him thy first fruits for
that day, and commune with him after this manner.

When thou do awake.
O God the Father! who said in the beginning, Let there be light, and it was
so; Inlighten my Eyes that I never sleep in death: lest at any time my Enemy
should say, I have prevailed against him.

O God the Son! light of light; the most true and perfect light, from whom
this light of the Sun, and the day had their beginning; thou, that art the
light shining in darkness, Inlightning every one that comes into this world,
expel from me all Clouds of Ignorance, and give me true understanding, that in
thee, and by thee I may know the Father; whom to know is to live, and to serve
is to reign.

O God the Holy Ghost! the fire that inlightens, and warms our hearts, shed
into me thy most sacred light, that I may know the true Joys of Heaven, and
see to escape the illusions of this world. Ray thy self into my soul that I
may see what an Exceeding weight of glory my Enemy would bereave me of for the
mere shadows and painting of this world. Grant that I may know those things
which belong unto thee, and nothing else; Inflame me with thy divine love that
with a true Christian Contempt I may tread upon all transitory Pleasures, and
seek only those things which are eternal.

Most blessed Trinity! and one eternal God! as thou have this day awaked me
from this bodily sleep, so awake my soul from the sleep of sin, and as thou
have given me strength after sleep, now again to watch, so after death give me
life, for what is death to me, is but sleep with thee, to whom be ascribed all
glory, wisdom, majesty, dominion and praise now and for Ever, Amen.

When thou do arise.
ARise O my soul that sleep, arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. Arise O daughter of Sion, O my soul redeemed with the blood of Christ!
sit no more in the dust of thy sins, but arise, and rest in that peace which is
purchased by thy Saviors merits.

Christ Jesus! my most merciful and dear Redeemer! as it is thy mere goodness
that lifts up this mortal and burdensome body, so let thy grace lift up my
soul to the true knowledge and love of thee; grant also that my body may this
day be a helper and servant to my soul in all good works, that both body and
soul may be partakers of those Endless Joys, where thou live and reignest
with the Faher and the Holy Ghost, one true God world without End, Amen.

As soon as thou art dressed, before thou come forth from thy Chamber, kneel
down in some convenient place, and in this, or the like Prayer commend thy self
for that day unto thy Creator's Protection.
ALmighty, eternal God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I bless and
praise thy holy name, and with my whole heart give thee all possible thanks,
that out of thine infinite goodness thou were pleased to watch over me this
night, to resist my adversary, and to keep me from all perils of body and soul;
O thou! that never slumbrest nor sleep, how careful have thou been of me!
how have thou protected me, and with thy holy angels, thy ministering spirits
sent forth to minister for the heirs of salvation, incompast me about! yea,
with what unmeasurable love have thou restored unto me the light of the day,
and raised me from sleep and the shadow of death, to look up to thy holy hill;
Justly mighst thou, O God, have shut the gates of death upon me, and laid me
for ever under the bars of the Earth, but thou have redeemed me from
Corruption, and with thy Everlasting arms enlarged my time of Repentance.

And now O Father of mercies, and God of all Consolation, hear the voice of thy
Supplicant, and let my cry be heard in thy highest heavens: As I do sincerely
love thee, and beg for thy Protection, so receive thou me under the shadow of
thy wings, watch over me with the Eyes of thy mercy, direct me in the ways of
thy Law, and enrich me with the gifts of thy Spirit, that I may pass through
this day, to the glory of thy great name, the good of others, and the comfort
of my own soul. Keep me, O my God, from the great offense; quench in me all
vain Imaginations, and sensual desires; sanctify and supple my heart with the
dew of thy divine Spirit, refresh it with the streams of thy grace, that I may
bring forth fruit in due season, and not cumber the ground, nor be cut off in
thy anger. And to this end I do here resign my body and my soul, with all the
faculties thou have bestowed upon both, into thy Almighty hands; Guide thou
them in the works of thy Law, turn my eyes from all transitory objects, to the
things which are eternal, and from the Cares and Pride of this world to the
fowls of the air; and the Lillies of the field And now, O my God, seeing I am
but Dust and Ashes, and my Righteousness a filthy Rag, having no deserts in my
self but what should draw Everlasting vengeance, and the Vials of thy bitter
wrath upon my body and soul; behold, I have brought with me thy firstborn and
only begotten, the propitiation for my sins, the Incense I offer up with my
prayers, Rev. 8.3. my Redeemer and Mediator in whom thou art well-pleased,
hear thou him. O look not upon my Leprosy, but on his beauty and perfection!
and for the righteousness of thy Son, forgive the sins of thy Servant. Grant
this for his sake, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all glory and
majesty, Dominion and power now and for ever. Amen.

Admonitions when we prepare for any far Journey.
WHen thou art to go from home, remember that thou art to come forth into the
World, and to Converse with an Enemy; And what else is the World but a
Wilderness? A darksome, intricate wood full of Ambushes and dangers; A Forest
where spiritual hunters, principalities and powers spread their nets, and
compass it about; would thou then escape these ghostly snares; this
wickedness in high places, and return home if not better and holier, yet not
worse then at thy setting out? Would thou with Jacob pass over these Waters
with thy staff only, and in thy return become two bands? Genesis 32.10. Why
then, do as he did, begin thy Journey with prayer, and say, If God will be with
me, and keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace: then
shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28.20, 21. This was his practice, and the
practice of his fathers; The Lord God of heaven (says Abraham) who took me
from my fathers house, and from the land of my kindred, etc. he shall send his
Angel before thee. Nor must thou pray only at thy setting forth, but all the
way, and at all times; Thus Eliezer prayed at the Well, Isaac in the field, and
Elias (in his journey to Mount Horeb) under a Juniper tree in the Wilderness.
This also (if thou will imitate these holy men) thou may do, and for that
pious purpose thou have here these following Prayers. When we go from home.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who art the Way, the Life and the Truth; look
down from heaven, and behold me now betwixt the Assaults of the Devil, the
allurements of the World, and my own inclinations; I cannot look abroad, but
these flock about me; But O thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep, thou most
faithful and Almighty guide, lend me thy hand, open mine Eyes, direct my steps,
and cause me to walk in thy fear; Thou that did go out with Jacob from
Beershe-ba unto Padan-aran, guiding him in the waste plains, and watching over
him on his Pillow of stones, be not now far from me; Lead me, O Lord, in thy
righteousness, make my paths straight, and strengthen my goings, that having
finished my Course here, I may sit down in thy Kingdom, an Inheritance
undefiled, purchased for me with the blood of my Savior, and thy beloved Son
Jesus Christ, Amen.

II.
O Thou, that art every where! Thou that sit upon the Circle of the Earth,
and all the Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers before thee! Whose Eyes
discover the deep things of the night, before whom Hell is naked, and all the
Devices of my spiritual Enemies! Thou that did lead Abraham thy chosen from
Vr of the Chaldees into a land flowing with milk and honey, favor I beseech
thee the present harmless Enterprise and innocent purpose of thy servant, be
unto me in my Journey a Comfort, in the heat a shadow, in storms a shelter,
and in adversity my protection; That having finished my intended course, I may
return in peace full of thy praises, who art near to all those that call upon
thee; Grant this for Christ Jesus his sake, Amen.



Meditate in the way upon the sojournings and travels of the Patriarchs and
Prophets, the many weary journeys of Jesus Christ in the flesh, the travels of
his Apostles by sea and land, with the pilgrimage and peregrinations of many
other precious Saints that wandered in Deserts and Mountains, of whom the world
was not worthy.

Admonitions how to carry thy self in the Church.
Holiness (says the Royal Prophet) becomes thy house for ever. When thou
art going thither then, carry not the world with thee. Let vain or busy
thoughts have there no part,
Bring not thy Plough, thy Plots, thy Pleasures thither,
Christ purged his Temple; so must thou thy heart.
All worldly thoughts are but Thieves met together
To Cousin thee. Look to thy actions well,
For Churches are either our Heaven or Hell.


These reverend and sacred buildings (however now vilified and shut up) have
ever been, and amongst true Christians still are the solemn and public places
of meeting for Divine Worship: There the flocks feed at noonday, there the
great Shepherd and Bishop of their souls is in the midst of them, and where he
is, that Ground is holy; Put off thy shoes then, thy worldly and carnal
affections, and when thou beginnest to enter in, say with Jacob, How dreadful
is this place! sure this is none other then the house of God, and this is the
gate of heaven! Such reverence and religious affection has in all ages been
showed toward these places, that the holy men of God detained either by
Captivity, or other necessary occasions, when they could not remedy the
distance, yet to testify their desire and longing for the Courts of the Lord,
Psalm. 84. they would always worship toward them. Thus Daniel upon the
Idolatrous Decree signed by Darius, goes into his house, and his windows being
open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees, and prayed
and gave thanks before his God as he did afore-time, Dan. 6.10. which fully
proves it to have been his Constant manner of Devotion. And of Judith we read
that about the time that the Incense of that Evening was offered up in
Jerusalem, she cried unto the Lord, Iud. 9.1. But above all, most pathetical
and earnest is that cry of King David in the 85. Psalm.

How amiable are thy Tabernables O Lord of Hosts!

My soul longs, yea even faints for the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries
out for the living God.

Yea the Sparrow has found an house, and the Swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my God and my
King!

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still praising thee.

For one day in thy Courts is better than a thousand; I had rather be a
doore-keeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

Let it be thy Care then, when thou art there present to carry thy self like a
true worshipper; Give none offense, neither outwardly to thy Brethren, nor the
Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10. Nor inwardly to thy God, whose Eyes shine within thee,
and discern thy reins and thy heart. Look seriously about thee, and Consider
with thy self how many beauteous, witty, and hopeful personages in their time
lie now under thy feet; thou can not tell but thy turn may be next. Humble
thy self in this dust, and all vain Imaginations will fly from thee. Consider
that thou art now in the Cave of Macpelah, in a sacred Repositorie where the
Bodies of Saints are asleep, expecting that hour, when those that are in the
grave shall hear his voice. Do not then stop thy ears against the Charmer, but
give diligent attention, and hear him while it is yet to day, that in the day
of thy death thou may rest there in the same hope When thy vessel is filled
with this Manna, and thy soul satisfied, go not off without Thanksgiving; Be
not like those nine Leapers who never returned to give glory to God; but come
back with the thankful Samaritane, and receive another blessing, Go in peace.
Saint Luke in the Acts of the Apostles making mention of the Ethiopian Eunuch,
who came up to Jerusalem for to worship, tells us, that in his return he was
reading in Isaiah the Prophet; This blessed Convert I would have thee to
imitate: When thou have filled thy Hin with this living water, leave it not
behind thee at the Fountain; spill not thy Milk and thy Wine, because thou
have it without money and without price, but carry it home and use it. Thou
may have need of it in six days, and perhaps shall not come to draw again,
until thou drinkest it anew with thy Savior in his Fathers Kingdom.

A Prayer before thou go to Church.
LOrd Jesus Christ, who out of thy Fathers bosom were sent into this world to
reveal his will unto sinners, and to instruct them in the way of salvation;
behold, I am now going to hear thy blessed word, and these many years have so
done, expecting still thy good pleasure and the Consummation of thy sacred will
in me. I have come unto the bread of life, and yet am hungry; into the light,
and yet am blind; unto the great Physician, and yet my Issue runs: The former
and the later rain of thy heavenly Doctrine falls still without intermission
upon my heart, but this bad ground yields nothing but Thorns and Briers. Many
days, many months, and many years have thou expected fruit, and found nothing
but leaves. It is thy Infinite mercy, O Lord, that thou have left unto us the
seed of thy word, and sendest into thy harvest such upright and faithful
laborers; but in vain, O Lord, shall they cry in our Ears, unless thou
openest and renewest our hearts. Open then, I beseech thee (O blessed Jesu!)
the ears of my heart, that not only the outward hearing, but the inward also
may be stirred up in me, and what I hear with the ear, I may understand with
the spirit* O thou most mild and merciful Lamb of God! the only, and the
Almighty sower! grant, I beseech thee, that the seed which falls this day upon
my heart, may never be choked with the Cares of this world, nor be devoured by
the fowls of the air, nor wither away in these times of persecution and
trial: but so Cherish it with the Dew of thy divine spirit, that (as in a good
and faithful ground) it may bring forth fruit unto eternal life, to the glory
of thy great name, and the Comfort of my poor soul, which thou have bought with
thy most precious and saving blood. Amen.

Another when thou art come home, or in the way if thou be alone.
LOrd Jesus Christ, my ever merciful, and most loving Redeemer! I give unto
thee most hearty thanks for this thy heavenly, spiritual provision wherewith
thou have fed and refreshed my soul. Grant I beseech thee that this Celestial
seed may take root in me, and be effectual to my salvation; Watch over my
heart, O Lord, and hedge it in with thy grace, that the fowls which descend in
the shadows of the Evening may not pick it out; But so prepare and fit me for
thy love, that I may never forget thy gracious words, thy blessed and saving
advice, but may know in this my day what belongs unto my peace. It is thy
promise by thy holy Prophet, That as the rain comes down, and the snow from
heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So
thy word that goes forth out of thy mouth, shall not return unto thee void,
but shall accomplish that which thou please, and prosper in the thing whereto
thou sendest it, Isai. 55. 10, 11. Even so, Lord Jesus, let it be as thou have
promised. Let the words I have heard this day out of the mouth of thy servant,
the Dispenser, and Steward of thy Mysteries prosper in me, and make my life
answerable to his Doctrine; that I may not only know what thy blessed will is,
but perform also and fulfill it; so that at last by thy mediation and mercies
I may attain to thy eternal and most glorious Kingdom. Amen.

Admonitions for Evening-Prayer.
REmember that in the Levitical Law there is a frequent Commemoration and
Charge given of the two daily Sacrifices, the one to be offered up in the
morning and the other in the Evening, Exodus 30.7, 8. These offerings by
Incense, our holy, harmless and undefiled High Priest has taken away, and
instead of them every devout Christian is at the appointed times to offer up a
Spiritual Sacrifice, namely that of Prayer; for God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth, John 4.24. At these
prescribed times (if thou will have thy Prayers to ascend up before God) thou
must withdraw from all outward occupations to prepare for the inward and
divine. To which end thou have here this following Meditation, that thou may
therewith season and invite thy soul from thy worldly employments to her
proper vocation, and so come not altogether undrest into the presence of the
King of glory. A Meditation at the setting of the Sun, or the Souls Elevation
to the true light.
THe path of the Just (O my God) is as the shining light, that shines more and
more unto a perfect day of eternity, Prove. 4. But the wicked neither know, nor
understand, they walk in darkness, and from the inward darkness of their
minds pass at last into the outward, eternal darkness. O most miserable and
undone soul! to whom thy Sun is set; that everlasting glorious Sun! which in
thy holy Elects never sets, but is always at the height, full of
brightness and Consolation. A heavy night sits in the noonday upon those
souls that have forsaken thee; They look for light, and behold darkness; for
brightness, and they walk in obscurity. They grope for the wall like the
blind, as if they had no Eyes; They stumble at noonday as in the night, they
are in desolate places as dead men. But on those that walk with thee an
everlasting day shines; This Sun of the firmament has his Course; it rises,
sets, comes up again, and again goes down: But thou Lord, know no
vicissitudes, thou art the Ancient of days, thou art the Rock of ages from
Everlasting to Everlasting. O thou, the same to day and yesterday, and for
evermore! Thou bright and morning Star springing from on high, illuminate me,
who am now sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death. O light of light,
the brightness of thy Fathers glory, inlighten all inward obscurities in me,
that after this life I may never be cast into the outward darkness. O most
blessed, most merciful, and Almighty Jesus! abide I beseech thee with me, for it
is toward Evening, and the day is far spent, Luke 24. As long as thou art
present with me, I am in the light, but when thou art gone, I am in the shadows
of death, and amongst the stones of emptiness. When thou art present, all is
brightness, all is sweetness, I am in my Gods bosom, I discourse with him,
watch with him, walk with him, live with him, and lie down with him. All these
most dear and unmeasurable blessings I have with thee, and want them without
thee. Abide then with me, O thou whom my soul loves! Thou Sun of
righteousness with healing under thy wings arise in my heart; refine, quicken,
and cherish it; make thy light there to shine in darkness, and a perfect day
in the dead of night.

A Prayer for the Evening.
MOst gracious, Almighty God! full of loving kindness, and long-suffering,
whose mercy is above all thy works, and thy glory above the heavens, whose
truth reaches unto the Clouds, and whose words shall never pass away, forgive
me, I beseech thee, my transgressions this day, my vain thoughts, idle words,
and loose conversation; my exceeding neglect and forgetfulness of thee, my
headlong inclinations and lusting after the world, preferring this land of
Cabul before the snow of Lebanon, and a broken Cistern before the Well of life.
Justly, O Lord, might thou have showed me thy back this day, and cut me off
from amongst thy people, Ier. 18.17. but thou have had mercy, and not
sacrifice; thou have shed upon me the light of thy Countenance, and removed my
sins far out of thy sight. I know, O my God, it is not in man to establish
his own ways, it is thy Almighty arm must do it; It is thou alone that have
led me through this day, and kept me both from doing and from suffering evil.
And now, O thou preserver of men! What shall I do unto thee? What shall I
render unto my Lord for all the mercies and loving kindnesses showed unto thy
servant this day, and all the days of my life hitherto? I will offer unto thee
the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will ever
love thee, fear thee, praise thee, and trust in thee; My song shall be of thee
in the night season, and in the day time I will be speaking of thy wondrous
works, thy most merciful and liberal arm; I will make thee my Delight in the
house of my pilgrim^ge, and I shall always with all my strength, with all my
heart, and with all my soul ascribe unto thee, all glory, wisdom, majesty,
dominion, and honor this day and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer when thou art going into bed.
MOst glorious, and only wise God! to whom the light and the darkness are the
same, whose dwellings are eternal, and in whose Kingdom there is no need of
Candles, nor of the light of the Sun; look, I beseech thee, upon thy servant,
who tarries in this place all night, Genesis 28.11. And forasmuch as thou (out of
thy tender love and Compassion on thy Creatures) have ordained this time for
their repose and refreshing, that having past through the Cares and dangers of
the day, they might under the shadow of thy wings find rest and security; keep
me, I most humbly beseech thee, from the hours and the powers of darkness;
watch over me this night in thy Almighty providence, and scatter all the
rebellions and devices of my Adversaries. Inlighten my soul, sanctify my body,
govern my affections, and guide my thoughts, that in the fastest closures of my
eyelids my spirit may see thee, and in the depth of sleep be Conversant with
thee. Suffer me not, O my God, to forget thee in the dark, or to say, The Lord
sees me not, The Lord has forsaken the earth, Ezekiel. 8.12. but so keep me in
thy fear, and sanctify me with thy grace, that all the words of my mouth, and
the meditations of my heart may be always of thee. Make my soul to thirst for
thee, and my flesh also to long after thee. And at what time soever thou shall
awake me from this bodily sleep, awake also my soul in me, make thy
morning star to arise in my heart, and let thy spirit blow upon my garden, that
the spices thereof may flow out. Quicken me O Lord, according to thy wonted
kindness, so shall I seek thee early, and make my prayer unto thee with joyful
lips. And now O my most loving and faithful Creator, take me, I beseech thee,
into thy Almighty protection, stretch over me the Arm of thy mercy, let thine
Eye be toward the work of thine own hands, and the purchased possession of thy
only begotten, and my most merciful Redeemer Jesus Christ, Amen.



As often as thou do awake in the night, be sure to lift up thy heart unto
God in this or the like short Ejaculation. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Sabbath! heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory. By resorting
thus unto God, thou shall find a great furtherance and cheerfulness in thy
spiritual exercises, and besides it will keep always about thee the savor of
life. And because thou shall not be unfurnished upon any incident occasions, I
have strowed here this handful of savoury herbs, which thou may take up as
thou find them in thy way.

EIACULATIONS.
When the Clock strikes.
BLessed be the hour in which my Lord Jesus was borne, and the hour in which
he died! O Lord Remember me in the hour of death!

When thou intendest any business, or Journey.
O do well unto thy servant! that I may live and keep thy Word.

When thou art persecuted.
Haste thee, O God, to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord!

Upon some sudden fear.
O set me upon the Rock that is higher then I, for thou art my hope, and a
strong tower for me against my enemy.

Upon any disorderly thoughts.
Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Upon any occasions of sadness.
Thy rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness, but thou, O Lord
shall lift me up again.

Upon any Diffidence.
Thou art my hope, O Lord, even from my youth, through thee have I been holden
up ever since I was borne; though thou should kill me, yet will I trust in
thee.

When thou do any good work.
Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but unto thy name give the praise.

When thou art provoked to anger.
Give thy peace unto thy servant, O God, let no man take away my Crown; In
patience, O Lord, let me possess my soul.

For thine Enemies.
Lord, lay not this sin to their Charge; they know not what they do.

Upon any gracious deliverance, or other mercies conferred upon thee.
The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. He makes me to lie down in green
pastures, he leads me besides the still waters. He has prevented me with the
blessings of goodness, he has granted me my hearts desire, and not
withheld the request of my lips. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
all the days of my life: And I will dwell in the house of my God for ever.

Upon any losses, or other adversities.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

When thou hear that any is dead.
Teach me, O Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

Upon thought of thy sins.
Turn away thy face from my sins, O Lord, and blot out all mine offenses.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all
thy sins, and heals all thine Infirmities.

When thou art weary of the cares and vanities of this world.
Like as the Heart brayeth for the waterbrooks, so thirsts my soul after thee
O God.

O who will give me the wings of a Dove, that I may sly, and be at rest.

Admonitions, with Meditations and Prayers to be used before we come to the
Lords Supper.
ALl the Sacraments of the New Testament, in those that come to participate
them, require a most Exquisite and sincere preparation. But this Sacrament of
the Lords Table, because in Institution and Effect it is the highest of all,
requires the most perfect and purest Accomplishments. Our preparation to this
Sacrament is not perfected by Contrition only and Confession of sins, (both
which are unavoidably requisite) but if we will be worthy receivers and partake
of those graces which are exhibited unto us in this heavenly banquet, there are
many other duties we must necessarily perform, for this Sacrament is of an
infinite virtue, having in it the Wel-spring of all graces, even Jesus Christ
with all the merits of his most bitter passion, which admit neither number nor
measure. Wherefore such as our pre-disposition is, such also shall our
proportion be of this spiritual Manna; for as he that comes to a Well to draw
water, takes no more thence, then what his vessel contains; which yet he cannot
impute unto the Well, but unto his Pitcher which could hold no more; so they
that come unto this glorious Sacrament, receive only so much grace as their
preparation and holiness makes them capable of. Now there are required of us,
before we presume to lay hands upon this bread of life, three things.

1. Purity of Conscience. 2. Purity of Intention. 3. Fervent and effectual
Devotion.
We must (as far as it lies in us) refrain from all actual sins in thought,
word, and deed. Secondly, We must do it to a good end, not for any private
benefit; not by compulsion, or for fear of Censure, or any other Ecclesiastical
correction; not out of Custom, nor for any sensual devotion or joy because of
the confluence and company at these love feasts. Thirdly and lastly, we must
watch over our own souls, and take heed that no wind blows upon our garden but
the spiritual and eternal; we must labor for an heavenly setlednesse,
sanctified affections, holy hopes, new garments, a clean heart, and a right
spirit. Cant. 2. The soul must be sick of love, she must long for the
banqueting house, nothing now must appear but flowers, nothing must be heard
but the singing of birds, and the voice of the Turtle. Lord God (says S.
Ambrose) with what contrition of heart, with what fountains of tears, with what
reverence and fear, with what chastity of body and purity of mind should this
divin mystery be celebrated! where thy flesh is the meat, where thy blood is
the drink, where the creature feeds upon the Creator, and the Creator is
united unto the creature, where Angels are spectators, and God himself both the
Priest and the Sacrifice, what holiness and humility should we bring thither?
O what pure things,, most pure, must those hands be which bring my God to me!

As therefore some rich, odoriferous water is distilled out of many and several
sorts of fragrant herbs and flowers, so our devotion at this sovereign
Sacrament should be composed of many spiritual, acceptable affections with God,
as (amongst others) are profound humility, unmeasurable reverence, ardent love,
firm faith, actual charity, impatient hunger, and an intolerable longing
after this heavenly banquet.

And because we may not touch these white robes with dirty hands, nor come near
the Rose of Sharon with ill sents and offensive fumes, it has been ever the
Custom of Gods Church to enjoin and set apart a certain limited time of
purification before this mysterious solemnity, wherein all religious and worthy
Communicants addressed and prepared themselves in some measure for this
unmeasurable mercy. Such was in our Church, that more strict and holy season,
called Lent, and such still are the preparation-dayes before this glorious
Sabbath in all true Churches. Two days were given the Israelites to sanctify
themselves, and to wash their clothes, that they might be ready against the
third day, upon which the Lord was to come down (in the sight of all the
people) upon Mount Sinai; And this only at the reception of the Law which was
given by Angels; much more then ought we to wash and cleanse our vessels from
all vain affections, idle words and actions, and to separate our selves from
the world for three days at least, that we may be ready against that great and
blessed day, wherein we are to come, not to a mountain that might not be
touched, nor to the sound of a Trumpet, nor to the voice of words spoken to us
out of the midst of fire, but to the general assembly, and Church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to ^he blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that
of Abel. See then that thou refuse not to come to this great marriage of the
Kings Son with thy soul, and see withal, that thou come not without a
wedding garment, that is to say, unprepared. For, whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworth^ly, shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord; But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that b^ead, and drink of that cup of the Lord, for he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
body, 1 Cor, 11.27, 28, 29. These are the words of a faithful witness, and
thou may believe them.

When therefore thou do intend to be a partaker of this merciful and
mysterious Sacrament, be sure for three days at least not to intermeddle with
any worldly business, but all that time redeem those many days which were
vainly spent by thee; enter into thine own bosom, examine what thou have
there, and if thou find any sons of darkness lurking under those
fig leaves, conceal them not, but turn them out of doors, and wash their Couch
with thy tears; have a care that in the Bridegroomes bed, instead of myrrh
and flowers, thou strowest not thorns and thistles. The Evening before thou
art to communicate, feed but moderately, and after supper use no corrupt
communication, but converse inwardly with thine own heart, and meditate what an
Almighty guest thou art to entertain there next day. Consider seriously thine
own unworthiness, and desire of him that he would sanctify and furnish the
room where he is to eat the Passover with thee. Entreat him to defend thee
that night from all sinful Illusions and temptations, and to keep the house
clean and garnished for himself. When thou have thus commended thy self into
his hands, let thy sleep that night be shorter then usual, be up with the day,
or rather with thy Savior, who rose up early, while it was yet dark. Meditate
with thy self what miracles of mercy he has done for thee. Consider how he
left his Fathers bosom to be lodged in a manger, and laid by his robes of
glory to take upon him the seed of Abraham, that he might cloth thee with
Immortality. Call to mind his wearisome journeys, continual afflictions, the
malice and scorn he underwent, the persecutions and reproaches laid upon him,
his strong cries and tears in the days of his flesh, his spiritual agony and
sweating of blood, with the Implacable fury of his Enemies, and his own
unspeakable humility, humbling himself to the death of the Cross, a death
accursed by Gods own mouth. Consider again (if thou can) of what
unmeasurable love was he possessed, who having designed and spent his time of
life here for thy salvation, did not only leave thee those divine Oracles and
Instructions to be guided by, but to seal up the sum and make heaven sure
unto thee, did by his last Testament give himself with all the merits of his
life and death to be wholly thine, and instead of them took upon him all thy
transgressions, bore all thine iniquities, and to appease the anger, and
satisfy the Justice of his Father, became the holy, harmless, and undefiled
sacrifice and perfect satisfaction for the sins of the world, reconciling all
things unto his Father, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.

When thou have thus considered him in his acts of love and humility, consider
him again in his glory, take thine Eyes off from Bethlehem and Golgotha, and
look up to the mount of Olives, yea, to heaven where he sits now upon the right
hand of his Father, Angels, principalities and powers being made subject unto
him. Call to mind his Joyful resurrection, his most accomplished conquest, and
triumph over the world, death and hell; his most gracious and familiar
conversation with his Apostles before his Ascension, with his most loving and
comfortable carriage toward them at his departure, leading them out as far
as Bethanie, and lifting up his hands, and blessing them. Lastly, close up
these thoughts with a serious and awful meditation of that great and joyful,
though dreadful day of his second coming to judg^ment, promised by himself, and
affirmed at the time of his Ascension by the two men in white apparel. Yemen of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven.

Behold! he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him.
Amen! even so, come quickly, Lord Jesus!

These are the duties req^ired of thee, and which thou must faithfully and
punctually perform, if thou would be a worthy Communicant, and receive those
sacred and mystical Elements to that blessed end for which they were ordained.
But when I speak of three days preparation, I do not impose that proportion of
time, nor conclude it sufficient, as if it were enough for thee to recede from
thy corrupt inclinations, and the mire of thy sins for such a term, with an
intention to return and wallow in it again, when that holy season is over, for
our whole life (had we the purity of Angels, and the innocence of infants,)
bears no proportion at all, nor can it (without an immediate sanctification
from God himself) any way qualify, or make us fit for the reception of this
unmeasurable mercy. But when I spoke of such a proportion of time, I did only
propose it to my Readers for the performing of those holy and necessary duties,
which have particular relation to this solemn Feast, and which (indeed) are
required then from every Christian. And as for a regular, sober, and holy life;
we should in all places, and at all times labor for it, for without holiness
no man shall see the face of God, much less be partaker of his merits, and by
this spiritual eating and drinking become a member of that body, whose life and
head he is.

A Prayer for the grace of repentance, together with a Confession of sins.
O Holy, blessed and glorious Trinity! three persons, and one eternal God, have
mercy upon me a miserable sinner.

O who will give mine head waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears! that I
may weep night and day for my infinite transgressions, ingratitude and
rebellion against my most mild and merciful Creator! O God my God be not
far from me! hide not thy face from the work of thine hands, reject not my
sighing and mournful spirit, nor the earnest endeavors and desires of mine
undone and miserable soul! O thou that breakest not the bruised Reed, nor
quenchest the smoking Flax, quench not in me these weak sparks, this dawne and
beginnings of the promised earnest. Take away, O my God! this heart of stone,
and give me a heart of flesh, renew a right spirit within me; cloth me with
white raiment, and anoint mine Eyes with Eye Salve, that I may know and see how
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked I am and may be
zealous therefore and repent! O thou that did cause the waters to flow out of
the stony rock, and gave to Magdalen such store of tears that she washed
thy feet with them, give to me true remorse, and such a measure of repentance
as may become a most miserable sinner! I confess dear God, that I am not
worthy of the least of thy mercies, much less to appear at this great and
solemn Feast, this Feast of mercy and miracles, where none but with holy
hands, pure intentions, crucified affections, and renewed spirits should
presume to enter. But as for me I am all uncleanness, a polluted, vile
creature, and nothing belongs unto me at this great day, but confusion of face,
and an utter separation from this glorions and saving Communion. I have wasted
thy stock, consumed thy talents, and destroyed thy goods. I was restless, and
unquiet till I had found out ways to offend thee. I have broken thy
Commandments, laid open thine Enclosures, and most grievously trespassed
against thy truth, and against the light of mine own Conscience. I have
preferred rottenness and dust to the treasure of thy word, and mine own
voluptuousness to thy revealed will. And now O thou preserver of men! What
shall I do unto thee? Against thee only have I sinned, and my transgressions
are ever in thy sight. Lord God! I lay me down at thy footstool, and if thou will be extreme to mark what is amiss, I shall from my very heart acknowledge
and adore thy Justice. But O my dear Creator, for Christ Jesus his sake have
mercy upon me! look not on my deserts, but on thy glory; O Lord do not refuse
me, but reform and restore me! O Lord hearken, and do, and defer not, but
speak peace to my troubled soul, and send thy loving spirit to strengthen and
confirm me in the way of holiness, bring me home, O Lord, and lead me now
unto these living waters, incorporate me into the saving vine, and purge me,
that I may bear more fruit. O cast me not away like an abominable and withered
branch, but make me to flourish in the Courts of thy house, where thy Children
are like Olive-branches round about thy table! O Lord hear, and have mercy, and
forgive me, and be reconciled unto me for Christ Jesus his sake! To whom with
thee and the holy Ghost be glory in the Church through all ages world without
end, Amen.

A Meditation before the receiving of the holy Communion.
HOly, holy, holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his
glory! Behold to the Moon, and it shines not, and the Stars are darkness
in his sight. The Pillars of heaven do tremble, and are astonished at his
reproof* O who then am I, that I should appear before thee, or what is man that
thou should regard him? O light of light, the all-seeing light that shines
in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, what will become of me,
when I shall appear before thy glorious and searching Eye! What an habitation
of darkness and death will thou find within me? What abominable desolations
and emptiness? What barrenesse and disorders will thou see there? Many a time
have thou knocked, and I have shut the doors against thee, thou have often
called, and I would not answer. Sleeping and waking, early and late, day and
night have I refused instruction, and would not be healed. And now, O my God,
after all this rebellion and uncleanness, will thou come and lodge with me? O
Lord, where shall I prepare, and make ready for thee? What communion can there
be betwixt light and darkness, purity and pollution, perfection and deformity?
O Rose of Sharon! thou undefiled and everlasting flower, the glory of the
fields, and the first fruits of the dead, shall the wild Asses and the beasts
of the wilderness feed now upon thee? Will thou give the bread of life unto
dogs, and cast thy pearls before swine? O Jesus Christ, the lover and the
redeemer of all humble and penitent souls! Thou that feedest among the Lilies
until the day breaks and the shadows flee, what is there in my heart where
only tares and thistles grow, that thou can feed upon? Thy blessed body was
wrapped in fine and white linen, (which is the righteousness of the Saints.) It
was laid in a new and undefiled grave, hewn out of a rock, wherein never man
was laid before. But all my righteousness is a filthy rag, my heart neither
new nor undefiled, but a nest of unclean birds, where they have not only
lain, but hatched and brought forth their viperous young ones.

I confess, dear God, I confess with all my heart mine own extrem
unworthyness, my most shameful and deplorable condition. But with thee, O Lord,
there is mercy and plenteous redemption. Thou do not use to reject and cast
off those that unfeignedly repent and return unto thee; the great design and
end of thine Incarnation was to save sinners: Thou had never come into this
world, but for thy love to thy lost sheep, and those thou did then love, thou
do love still unto the end. Thou did not come unto the whole, but to the
sick. The first (had there been any such,) had no need of a Physician, and the
last (had not thou come to restore them,) had perished for ever. It was thy
gracious pleasure (while thou were here in the world) to receive Publicans and
sinners, and though thou art now ascended to thy Father, yet have not thou
changed thy nature. Thou art the same yesterday, to day, and for evermore. Thy
life here was nothing else but a pilgrimage and laborious search after sinners,
that thou might find them out and make them whole. And how willingly (O
blessed Jesus!) did thou lay down thy robes of glory, and cloth thy self
with flesh, that thou might afterward lay down thy life a propitiation for
our sins! How many scorching and wearisome journeys did thou undergo for our
sakes! How many cold and tedious nights did thou watch and spend abroad in
prayer, when the birds of the air lay warm in their nests, and thou had not
a place to put thy head in! In the day time I find thee preaching in the
Temple, and all night praying in the Mount of Olives; a little after on thine
own Sabbath traveling for me in the corne-field; Another time (wearied with
thy journey) sitting on the Well of Jacob, and begging a draught of that cold
water from the woman of Samaria; Now again I meet thee on the Ass, made
infinitely happy by so glorious a rider, by the God of Ieshurun who rides on
the heavens, and in his excellency on the skies. Sure, it was his simplicity
and ordinary contempt with man, that made him so acceptable in thy sight. But
(Oh!) with what language shall I attempt thy passion? thy bloody sweat, thy
deep and bitter agony, thy lingering peece-mealed death, with all the lively
anguishments, and afflictions of thy martyred Spirit? O my most loving and
merciful Savior! It is only thy own Spirit, that can fully character thy own
sufferings.

These miracles of love and most comfortable circumstances encourage me (O my
God) to draw near unto thee: for it is not probable that thou would have
subjected thy self to such bitter reproaches, blasphemies, and torments, had
not thy love to man (for whose redemption thou did suffer them,) been as
infinite as thy self; And greater love then this has no man, that a man lay
down his life for his friends. And lay it down thou did, for no man could
take it from thee. Thou could have commanded twelve legions of Angels from
thy Father, and when thou wentest forth to meet thy murderers, they went
backwards and fell to the ground, and without thy permission (in whose hand
their breath was) they could have done nothing. These merciful passages,
together with thy own voice and frequent invitation much encourage me to draw
near unto thee. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Matthew. 11.28.

If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink, John 7.37*



These, with many more, are thy loving Invitations: This is the voice of the
great Shepherd, and thy sheep hear thy voice. Thus thou did cry, and these
were the words thou did speak while thou were here upon earth, and shall I
then turn away from thee, that speak now from heaven? Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech, and thy preaching and Intercession shall
last until the heavens be no more, and woe unto them that refuse to hear thee.

Wherefore, most holy Jesus, seeing thou do invite sinners to thee, and did
die to redeem them, and art able to save them to the uttermost, that come to
God by thee, and do live for ever to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25,
26. I the most wretched and the worst of sinners in full assurance of thy
mercies, and that thou art touched with the feeling of mine infirmities, Heb.
4.15. and wilt have compassion upon my penitent soul, draw near to thy throne
of grace, that I may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

O Lord be merciful unto me, forgive all my sins, and heal all mine
infirmities. Cleanse my heart, sanctify my affections, renew my spirit, and
strengthen my faith, that I may at this great Feast discern thy blessed body,
and eat and drink salvation to my self, to the glory of thy great name, and
the comfort of my poor and sorrowful soul, Amen.

Now unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,
and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and
dominion for ever, and ever. Amen.

A Prayer when thou art upon going to the Lords Table.
IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and the holy Ghost, Amen!

Jesus Christ, the Lamb, the Branch, the bright and morning-Starre, the bread
of life that came down from heaven, have mercy upon me! It is thy promise, that
whosoever eats thy flesh, and drinks thy blood, he shall have eternal life
in him, and thou will raise him up at the last day. Behold, O God, I am now
coming to thee; O thou fountain of purgation! thou Well of living waters wash
me clean! be unto me the bread of life to strengthen me in my pilgrimage
toward heaven! grant that I may suck salvation from thy Cyprian de caena
domini, Crucihaeremus, sanguinem, sugimus, and inter ipsa redemptoris nostri
vulnera figimus linguam.
heart, that spring of the blood of God, which flows into all believers. Thy
flesh is meat indeed, and thy blood is drink Indeed. O give me grace to receive
both worthily, that I may never incur thy anger, and eternal condemnation!
Lord Jesus Christ! I believe all that thou have said, and all that thou have
promised, help thou mine unbelief; thou art the Author, be thou the finisher
of my faith; And for thy glories sake, for thine own names sake, lead me in
the right way to this great mercy and mystery, Amen!

Immediately before the receiving, say,
O Lord! I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth
which thou have showed unto thy servant, all my life long unto this very day;
much less am I worthy thou should come now under my roof but seeing it is
thy institution and free mercy that will have it so, be jealous, O God, of the
place of thine honor, cause me to remember whose Temple I am, and suffer not
my last state to be worse then the first. Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly,
Amen!

Admonitions after receiving the holy Communion.
WHen you have received the Sacred Elements, you should not presently after
spit, nor eat and drink, but refrain until they are perfectly digested and
resolved. You must lay aside all worldly communication, and humane discourses,
though never so serious; for judge of your self, what an uncivil part it will
be in you, when you have received so great a guest as Jesus Christ with all his
merits, to turn your back upon him presently, and neither to meditate of him,
nor to discourse with him, and keep him company. Wherefore you should all that
day be instant in prayer, meditations, thanksgiving, and good works; you should
consider and think upon the love of God, who so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son to redeem it. You should meditate upon his birth, life,
doctrine and passion, his death and burial, resurrection and ascension, and
his second coming to judgment. You should pray, that you may be found
blameless and without spot of him, and so much the more, because you see the
day approaching. Tread not under foot the Son of God, and his precious blood
wherewith you are sanctified and saved, by returning again to your former sins,
like the dog to his vomit, but be sure that you walk warily, and fall not
wilfully into the mire. Be not regular and holy for a day or two, but all the
days of thy life, and number thy days, that thou may apply thy heart unto
wisdom. Cast thy bread upon the waters, (be merciful to the poor) and remember
thy Creator, for the days of darkness are many, but the outward darkness is
eternal, and from it there is no redemption.

Instead of printed Meditations which are usually prescribed after
communicating, I would advise the pious receiver to read over all these
following parcels of Scripture, John 6.22* to the end, John 17. Romans 8.2 Cor.
5. Ephesians. 1. and 4. Heb. 10.1 Pet. 1. Rev. 5.

A Prayer after you have received.
LOrd Jesus Christ, very God, and very man, made in all things like unto us,
sin only excepted; I bless and praise thy holy name, and with all my heart,
with all my strength, and with all my soul give thee all possible thanks for
thy infinite love and pity toward lost man. Blessed be the hour in which thou
were born, and the hour in which thou did die! Blessed and for ever hallowed
be thy most comfortable and glorious name, the name JESUS CHRIST, at which
every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth; for thy name is above every name, and there is no other name
by which we can be saved. O most holy, most humble and harmless Lamb! how
did thou make thy self of no reputation, and becamest obedient to the death
of the Cross for my sake! And when thou were to drink the cup of thy Fathers
anger due to my sins, did instead of it ordain and bequeath to me the cup of
life and everlasting salvation! O Lord give me a heart to understand, and eyes
to see what thou have done for me; O never suffer me to crucify thee again by
returning to my former iniquities and pollutions, but write thy sufferings and
the price of my redemption in the tables of my heart, set them for a signet
upon mine hand, and for a bracelet upon mine arm, that by a continual and
careful remembrance of them, I may in the strength of this bread received to
day at thy table travel to thy holy mountain, and that this drink which I drank
out of the spiritual rock may become a Well of living waters, springing up in
me to eternal life. Grant this, G God, for thy glories sake, and for that love
and mercies sake which brought thee hither out of thy Fathers bosom to suffer
so many things for his Elects sake, Amen!

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing; for he has redeemed us to
God by his blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and
has made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead my Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,

Make me perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in me that which
is well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen!

A Prayer in time of persecution and Heresy.
MOst glorious and Immortal God, the Prince of peace, unity and order, which
make men to be of one mind in a house, heal I beseech thee these present sad
breaches and distractions! Consider, O Lord, the tears of thy Spouse which are
daily upon her cheeks, whose adversaries are grown mighty, and her enemies
prosper. The ways of Zion do mourn, our beautiful gates are shut up, and the
Comforter that should relieve our souls is gone far from us. Thy Service and
thy Sabbaths, thy own sacred Institutions and the pledges of thy love are
denied unto us; Thy Ministers are trodden down, and the basest of the people
are set up in thy holy place. O Lord holy and just! behold and consider, and
have mercy upon us, for thy own names sake, for thy promise sake suffer not the
gates of hell to prevail against us; but return and restore us, that joy and
gladness may be heard in our dwellings, and the voice of the Turtle in all our
land. Arise O God, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let those that hate
thee flee before thee. Behold, the robbers are come into thy Sanctuary, and the
persecuters are within thy walls. We drink our own waters for money, and our
wood is sold unto us. Our necks are under persecution, we labor and have no
rest. Yea, thine own Inheritance is given to strangers, and thine own portion
unto aliens. Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us for so long
a time? Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, renew our
days as of old. O Lord hear, and have mercy, and be jealous for the beloved of
thine own bosom, for thy truth, and for the words of thine own mouth. Help us,
O God of our salvation, and for thine own honors sake deal Comfortably with
us, Amen, Amen.

A Prayer in adversity, and troubles occasioned by our Enemies.
O Holy and almighty God, full of goodness and compassion, look I beseech thee
with thine Eye of mercy upon my present sad sufferings and most bitter
afflctions! Behold, O God, I put my mouth in the dust, and confess I have
deserved them. I despise not thy Chastenings, but beg grace of thee that I
may not faint, and that they may yield the fruits of righteousness unto me,
who am now exercised by them. Thou see, O God, how furious and Implacable
mine Enemies are, they have not only robbed me of that portion and provision
which thou had graciously given me, but they have also washed their hands in
the blood of my friends, my dearest and nearest relatives. I know, O my God,
and I am daily taught by that disciple whom thou did love, that no murderer
has eternal life abiding in him. Keep me therefore, O my God, from the guilt
of blood, and suffer me not to stain my soul with the thoughts of recompense
and vengeance, which is a branch of thy great prerogative, and belongs wholly
unto thee. Though they persecute me unto death, and pant after the very dust
upon the heads of thy poor, though they have taken the bread out of the
childrens mouth, and have made me a desolation, yet Lord, give me thy grace,
and such a measure of charity as may fully forgive them. Suffer me not to open
my mouth in Curses, but give me the spirit of my Savior, who reviled not
again, but was dumb like a Lamb before his shearers. O Lord, sanctify all
these afflictions unto thy servant, and let no man take away my crown. Remember
those that are in troubles for thy truth, and put their tears into thy bottle.
Grant this, O merciful Father, for my dear Saviors sake, and bring me quickly
into thy Kingdom, where I shall have all these tears wiped away from mine eyes,
Amen, Amen!

MAN IN Darkness, OR, A DISCOURSE OF DEATH.
Eccles. 11.7, 8, 9, and 10. TRuly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it
is to behold the Sun. But if a man live many days and rejoice in them all,
yet, let him remember the days of darkness, for they are many.

Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes, but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment.

Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh, for
childhood and youth are vanity.


Draw near, fond man, and dress thee by this glass,
Mark how thy bravery and big looks must pass
Into corruption, rottenness and dust;
The frail Supporters which betrayed thy trust.
O weigh in time thy last and loathsome state,
To purchase heaven for tears is no hard rate.
Our glory, greatness, wisdom, all we have,
If misimploy'd, but add hell to the grave:
Only a fair redemption of evil Times
Finds life in death, and buryes all our Crimes.

IT is an observation of some spirits, that A Proverb in Italy, La notte e
madre de pensieri.
the night is the mother of thoughts. And I shall add, that those thoughts are
Stars, the Scintillations and lightnings of the soul struggling with darkness.
This Antipathy in her is radical, for being descended from the house of light,
she hates a contrary principle, and being at that time a prisoner in some
measure to an enemy, she becomes pensive, and full of thoughts. Two great
extremes there are, which she equally abhors, Darkness and Death. And it is
observable, that in the second death, when she shall be wholly mancipated to
her enemies, those two are united. For those furious and unquenchable burnings
of hell (which the Scripture calls the lake of fire, etc.) though they be of
such an insuperable intense heat, as to work upon spirits, and the most subtle
Essences, yet do they give no light at all, but burn blacker then pitch,
Cremationem habet, lumen vero non habet. (Greg. Mor. c. 46.) The Contemplatio^
of death is an obscure, melancholy walk an Expatiation in shadows and solitude,
but it leads unto life, and he that sets forth at midnight, will sooner meet
the Sun, then he that sleeps it out betwixt his curtains. Truly, when I
consider, how I came first into this world, and in what condition I must once
again go out of it, and compare my appointed time here with the portion
preceding it, and the eternity to follow, I can conclude my present being or
state (in respect of the time) to be nothing else but an apparition. The first
man that appeared thus, came from the East, and the breath of life was received
there. Though then we travel Westward, though we embrace thorns and swet for
thistles, yet the business of a Pilgrim is to seek his Country. But the land
of darkness lies in our way, and how few are they that study this region, that
like holy Macarius walk into the wilderness, and discourse with the skull of a
dead man? We run all after the present world, and the Primitive Angelical life
is quite lost.

It is a sad perverseness of man, to prefer war to peace, cares to rest,
grief to joy, and the vanities of this narrow Stage to the true and solid
comforts in heaven. The friends of this world (says a holy father) are so
fearful to be separated from it, -- Contempsit mori Qui non concupiscit --
that nothing can be so grievous to them as to think of death. They put far
away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near; They lie upon
beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches; they eat the lambs
out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; They chant to
the sound of the viol, they drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments; they account the life of the righteous to be madness, and his
end to be without honor, Amos 6. In this desperate and senseless state they
cast away their precious souls, and make their brightest days but days of
darkness and gloominesse, days of clouds and of thick mists. They consider
not the day that shall burn like an Oven, when the heavens being on fire shall
be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with a fervent heat; when the wicked
shall be stubble, and all the workers of iniquity shall be burnt up. Miserable
men! that knowing their masters pleasure, will not do it, that refuse Oil and
balsame to make way for poison and corrasives. And why will they call him
Master, Master, whose precepts they trample on, and whose members they
crucify? It is a sad observation for true Christians to see these men who
would seem to be Pillars, to prove but reeds and specious dissemblers. For what
manner of livers should such professors be, seeing they expect and believe the
dissolution of all things? With what constant holiness, humility and devotion
should they watch for it? How should they pass the time of their sojourning
here in fear, and be diligent that they may be found of him in peace, without
spot, and blameless? What preparation should they make against the evil day?
What comforts and treasures should they lay up for that long voyage? For what a
day of terrors and indignation is the day of death to the unprepared? How will
they lie on their last beds, like wild Bulls in a net, full of the fury of the
Lord? When their desolation shall come like a flood, and their destruction like
a whirlwind; How will they say in the morning, would God it were Even, and at
night, would God it were Morning! for the fear of their heart wherewith they
shall fear, and for the sight of their Eyes wherewith they shall see? This is a
truth they will not believe, until death tells it them, and then it will be
too late; It is therefore much to be wished, that they would yet, while it is
lifetime with them, remember their last ends, and seriously question with
themselves, what is there under the Sun, that can so justly challenge their
thoughts as the contemplation of their own mortality? We could not have lived
in an age of more instruction, had we been left to our own choice. We have seen
such vicissitudes and examples of humane frailty, as the former world (had they
happened in those ages) would have judged prodigies. We have seen Princes
brought to their graves by a new way, and the highest order of humane honors
trampled upon by the lowest. We have seen Judgment beginning at Gods Church,
and (what has been never heard of, since it was redeemed and established by
his blessed Son,) There is extant a little book called Speculum Visionis
printed at Norimberge 1508, wherein this fearful desolation and destruction of
the Church by Laymen is expressly foretold.
we have seen his Ministers cast out of the Sanctuary, and barbarous persons
without light or perfection, usurping holy offices. A day, an hour, a minute
(says Causabone) is sufficient to over-turn and extirpate the most settled
Governments, which seemed to have been founded and rooted in Adamant. Suddenly
do the high things of this world come to an end, and their delectable things
pass away, for when they seem to be in their flowers and full strength, they
perish to astonishment; And sure the ruin of the most goodly pieces seems to
tell, that the dissolution of the whole is not far off. It is the observation
of a known Statesman, (Sir Water Rawleigh) That to all dominions God has set
their periods, who though he has given to man the knowlededge of those ways,
by which Kingdoms rise and fall, yet he has left him subject unto the N.
Marcellus de doctorum indagine. Potest fatum morum mutabilitate converti, ut
exiis celerius vel tardius aut bonum fiat, aut pessimum.
affections which draw on these fatal mutations in their appointed time. Vain
therefore and deceitful is all the pomp of this world, which though it flatters
us with a seeming permanency, will be sure to leave us even then, when we are
most in chase of it. And what comfort then, or what security can poor man
promise to himself? whose breath is in the hand of another, and whose few days
are most commonly outlived by every creature, and sometimes by a flower of his
own setting. Or what benefit can these Non est, salleris, haec beata non est,
Quam vos creditis esse, vita non est.
Fulgentes manibus videre gemmas,
Aut auro bibere, and cubare cocco:
Qui vultus Acherontis atri,
Qui Styga tristem non tristis videt,
Audetque vitae ponere sinem,
Parille regi, par superis erit.

humane delights though blessed with success, and a large time of fruition,
afford him at his death? for satisfaction in this point, let us but have
recourse to the ages that are past, let us ask the Fathers, and they will tell
us. If we insist upon eminent persons, the rulers of this world, and the
Counselors of the earth who built sumptuous Palaces for themselves and filled
their houses with silver: we shall have no better account from them, then if we
enquired of the prisoners and the oppressed. They are gone all the same way,
their pomp and the noise of their viols is brought down to the grave, the worms
cover them, and the worms are spread under them. Riches and power travel not
beyond this life; they are like Jobs friends, deceitful as a brook, and as the
stream of brooks they pass away, which vanish when it is hot, and are consumed
out of their place. Have thou found riches (says one) then, thou have lost thy
rest. Distractions and cares come along with them, and they are seldom gotten
without the worm of conscience. It was an act of Anacreon becoming the royalty
of a Poets spirit: Policrates rewards him with five talents; but he, after he
had been troubled with the keeping of them for two nights, carries them back to
the owner, telling him, that, if he had been accustomed to such companions he
had never made any verses. Certainly there is so much of Mammon and darkness
in them, as suffices to show their parentage is low, and not very far from
hell. Some such thing we may gather from that exclamation of S. James against
the rich men; Your gold and your silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall
be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, you have
heaped treasure together for the last days. But to return thither from whence
we are digrest: What is become now of these great Merchants of the earth, and
where is the fruit of all their labors under the Sun? Why, truly they are
taken out of the way as all others, and they are cut off as the tops of the
ears of corn. Their dwelling is in the dust, and as for their place here, it
lies wast, and is not known: Nettles and Brambles come up in it, and the Owl
and the Raven dwell in it. But if you will visit them at their long homes, and
knock at those desolate doors, you shall find some remains of them, a heap of
loathsomness and corruption. O miserable and sad mutations! ( Petrarch. de otio
Rel.) Where is now their pompous and shining train? Where are their triumphs,
fireworks, and feasts, with all the ridiculous, tumults of a popular,
predigious pride? Where is their purple and fine linen, their chains of massy
gold, and sparkling ornaments of pearls? Where are their Cooks and Carvers,
their Ingeniosa gula est: siculo scarus a quore mersus
Ad mensam vivus perducitur, inde lucrinis
Eruta littoribus vendunt conchylia caenas
Ut renovent per damna famem. Jam Phasides unda,
Orbata est avibus; mutoque in littore tantu^.
Solae desettis aspirant frondibus aurae.

fowlers and fishers? Where are their curious Vtensils, their Cups of Agate,
Crystal, and China-earth? Where are their sumptuous Chambers, where they
enclosed themselves in Cedar, Ivory, and Ebeny? Where is their Music, their
soft and delicate dressings, pleasing motions, and excellency of looks? Where
are their rich perfumes, costly Conserves, with their precious and various
store of foreign and domestic wines? Where are their sons and their daughters
fair as the flowers, strait as the Palm Trees, and polished as the corners of
the Temple? O pitiful and astonishing transformations! all is gone, all is
dust, -- mors sola fatetur Quantula sunt hominu^ corpuscula. --
deformity, and desolation. Their bones are scattered in the pit, and instead
of well-set hair, there is baldness, and loathsomeness instead of beauty. This
is the state of their of their bodies, and (O blessed Jesus!) who knows the
state of their souls? To have a sad guess at this, it will not be much out of
our way, if we step and visit a Roman Emperor upon his deathbed. If you
desire his name, it is Hadrianus, the most ingenious and learned that ever sat
upon the throne of Caesar. You may believe, he was royally accommodated, and
wanted nothing which this world could afford; but how far he was from
receiving any comfort in his death from that pompous and fruitless abundance,
you shall learn from his own mouth, consider (I pray) what he speaks, for they
are the words of a dying man, and spoken by him to his departing soul, Animula
vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, querula, nudula,
Nec, ut soles, dabis jocos.
My soul, my pleasant soul and witty,
The guest and consort of my body,
Into what place now all alone
Naked and sad will thou be gone?
No mirth, no wit, as heretofore,
Nor Jests will thou afford me more.


Certainly, this is the saddest poetry, that ever I met with; and what he
thought of his soul in that last agony, when the pangs of death came thick
upon him, is enough to draw tears and commiseration from a heart of flint. O
happy then, yea Infinitely happy is that religious liver, who is ever meditating
upon the hour of death before it comes, that when it is come, he may pass
through it with joy, and speak to his soul in the language of old Hilarion,
Egredere, quid times? egredere anima mea; Septuaginta prope annis Christo
servisti, and mortem times? Hieron. in vita Hilar.
Go forth, O my soul, go forth; what is it that thou art afraid of? Seventy
years almost have thou served Christ, and art thou now afraid of death?

Alas! what is life if truly and thoroughly considered, that we should trust to
it, and promise to our selves a multitude of years, as if we held time by the
wings, and had the spirit of life in our own hands? Our present life (says
Chrystostome) is a mere apparition, and differs but very little from a dream;
therefore that mind which is proud of a shadow, and relies upon a dream, is
very idle and childish. Natural histories tell us of a bird called Hemerovios
by the river Hypanis, which rceives his life in the morning, sings at noon, and
dies at night. This bird may very well signify our life, and by the river we
may understand time, upon whose brink we are always pearching. Time runs faster
then any stream, and our life is swifter than any bird, and oft-times all the
pomp of it comes to an end in one day, yea sometimes in an hour. There is no
object we can look upon, but will do us the kindness to put us in mind of our
mortality, if we would be so wise as to make use of it. The day dies into
night, the spring into winter, flowers have their roots ever in their graves,
leaves loose their greenenesse, and drop under our feet where they fly about
and whisper unto us. The beasts run the Common lot with us and when they dye
by our hands to give us nourishment, they are so kind as to give us
Instruction also. And if from these frailer objects we turn our Eyes to things
that are more permanent, we may by the doctrine of contrarieties make them as
useful as any of the former; And this is elegantly done by the poet, who was
then serious and stayed enough, though somewhat passionate. Nam mihi quid
prodest quod longo flumina cursu
Semper inexhaustis prona feruntur aquis?
Ista manent: nostri sed non mansere parents,
Exigui vitam temporis hospes ago,
What is it to me that spacious rivers run
Whole ages, and their streams are never done?
Those still remain: but all my fathers di'd,
And I my self but for few days abide.


Thus he of the watercourse, which he saw would outrun him, and will do so
with all that come after him. But the quick tide of man's life, when it is once
turned and begin to ebb, will never flow again. The Spring comes constantly
once a year, and flowers, when the frosts are past, keep house no longer under
ground, but feel the Sun, and come abroad. The leaves come again to whisper
over our heads, and are as green and as gay as ever, but mau^dieth and wastesh
away, yea man gives up the ghost, and where is he? In these sad contemplations
was the British Bard, when he broke out into this Eloquent complaint. Mis
mawrddh rhyddhig Adar,
Pob peth y ddhaw trwr ddhayar,
And y marw maur vy garchar.
In March birds couple, a new birth
Of herbs and flowers breaks through the earth,
But in the grave none stirs his head;
Long is the Impris'ment of the dead.


The days of darkness are many, and he that goes down to the grave shall not
come up, his place shall not know him, nor shall he return to his house; he
shall not be awaked nor raised out of his sleep, until the heavens be no more.
These last words were put in for our comfort, and imply the resurrection or the
time of restoring all things. This was manifested to Ezekiel by the vision of
dry bones with a noise and a shaking amongst them, and they came together bone
to bone, and were clothed with sinews, flesh and skin, and the breath of life
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet an exceeding great army. We
have it also confirmed out of the mouth of Jesus Christ himself, John 5.28, 29.
his words are these, Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the grave shall hear his voice; And they shall come forth that
have done good unto the resurrection of life; but they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of condemnation. The Scripture is every where full of
these proofs: But I shall insist only upon three.

1. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the later
day upon the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold
and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. Job 19 25, 26, 27.

2. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise; Awake
and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the
earth shall cast out the dead. Isa 26.19.

3. Behold (O my people) I will open your graves; and cause you to come up out
of your graves; And ye shall know that I am the Lord when I have opened your
graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, and shall put my
spirit in you, and ye shall live. Ezekiel. 37.12, 13, 14.

And thus have we most full and absolute promises from the divine spirit, and
from Jesus Christ, who is the life of the world, for the redemption of our
bodies. Nor are we left destitute of very clear and inexcusable demonstrations
of it in nature. We see mortal men when the body and substance of vegetables is
consumed in the fire, out of their very ashes to make glass, which is a very
bright and noble body, how much more shall the Immortal and Almighty God (who
created all things of nothing) out of dust and corruption, raise us up
incorrupt and glorions bodies? Thou fool, (says St. Paul) that which thou
sowest is not quickened, except it die first; and that which thou sowest, thou
sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain; but God gives it a body
as he pleases. There are in nature many creatures which at certain seasons,
that their spirit is inconsistent with, fall into a dormition, or dead sleep
which differs little from death, and convey themselves into secret places, as
hollow trees, or some desolate ruins, where they may rest in safety during
that season, as being taught by some secret informant that they shall awake
again. Here have we a clear type of the resurrection, for what else is death
but sleep, as the Apostle calls it? A great Philosopher and Secretary to nature
discoursing of the resurrection of the dead, tells us, that he oftentimes
lighted upon some of those creatures in that dark state of dormition, and did
dissect some of them, and cut off the limbs of others, and yet (says he) could
I perceive no sign of life at all in them, their arteries and flesh being as
hard and as dry as a stick, but casting them into a pot of seething water, they
would soften by degrees, and shortly after stir about, and those very parts
which were dissected, would give very clear and satisfactory Indications of
life. This is so strong a Symboll of the resurrection, that I think it
needless to make any application. Only this I shall add, that the curious
observers of nature reckon these creatures amongst those of the lunar order;
And indeed if we consider well the nature of that planet (whose sphere is the
veil or Omne quod est supra lunam aeternumque bonumque.
Esse scias nec triste aliquid coelestia tangit.
Quippe ultra fines lunae illcetabile nil est;
Cuncta mala in terris posuit Deus, illaque clausit
In medio, and vetuit sacrum contingere coelum.
Supra autem lunam lucis sunt omnia plena
Nec non laetitiae and pacis; non tempus and error
Et senium and mors est illic, nec inutile quicquam. Mar. Pal.

partition drawn betwixt us and Immortality) and whose relation to this lower
world is more intimate, and of a greater tie then any of the other six, we
shall find that she exactly typifies and demonstrates unto us those two famous
states of terrestrial bodies, viz. their state of darkness and their state of
glory, their dissolution and restoration; for she does agonizare, and suffers a
monthly recession of light, and in a short time becomes full again. And I
pray, are not light and life compatriots? What else is death but the recession
and absence of life? or darkness but the absence of light? Sic nostros casus
solatur mundus in astris.
So our decays God comforts by
The Stars concurrent state on high.


Do not we see divets birds of this regiment such as are commonly known to us,
with other meaner Creatures as silkworms and the humble-bee, which yet are not
so contemptible, but they may serve us for noble instances in this point,
seeing there is in them a living spirit, and that creatures of the same rank
with them are recorded in Gods own word, yea, and are owned by him as memorable
and select Instruments of his service, as Joshuah Cap. 24. ver. 12. And I sent
the hornet before you, which drove them out from before you, even the two kings
of the Amorites, but not with thy sword, nor with thy bow. And Isaiah Chap. 6
ver. 18, 19. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss
for the fly that is in the uttermost parts of the river of Egypt, and for the
Be that is in the land of Assyria; And they shall come, and shall rest all of
them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all
thorns, and upon all bushes. I say then, do not we see that these birds and
inferior creatures which in the spring and summer continue here very merry and
musical, do on a sudden leave us, and all winter-long suffer a kind of death,
and with the Suns warmth in the youth of the year awake again, and refresh the
world with their revived notes? For the singing of birds is naturalis musica
mundi, to which all arted strains are but discord and hardness; How much more
then shall Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness rising with healing under his
wings, awake those that sleep in him, and bring them again with a joyful
resurrection?

Having then these prolusions and strong proofs of our restoration laid out in
nature, besides the promise of the God of nature, who cannot fail, let us so
dispose of this short time of our sojourning here, that we may with joy and
sure comforts expect that day of refreshing. Let us number our days, and apply
our hearts unto wisdom. What ever happens here under our feet, let it not draw
down our eyes, from the hill, whence comes our help. Let not these sudden and
prodigious mutations (like violent earthquakes) shake our foundation; let us
hold fast the faith, and press toward the mark, that whether absent or
present we may be accepted of him; for many are already gone astray, and have
slipped into the same damnable estate with those wretches, whom a very Heathen
could reprove, Sunt qui in fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt,
Et nullo credunt mundum rectore moveri,
Natura volvente vices and lucis and anni.
There are that do believe all things succeed
By chance or fortune, and that nought's decreed
By a divine, wise will; but blindly call
Old time and nature rulers over all.


Let us consider him that is invisible, and those that are righteous, let them
be righteous still; let them have respect unto the recompense of the reward,
for he comes quickly, and his reward is with him. Let us endure unto ehe end,
and overcome, that we may have right unto the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the City: for, Ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas. Upon
our little inch of time in this life, depends the length and breadth, the
height and depth of Immortality in the world to come: even two eternities, the
one infinitely accursed, the other infinitely blessed. I remember (says a
reverend Author) that I have read (and not without admiration) of some
Primitive Christian, that considered with himself the eternity of the torments
to be endured in hell, after this manner. What man living ( said he) that were
in his right mind and reason, if he were offered the most spacious and
flourishing Kingdoms of France, Spain and Polonia, only for lying continually
upon any one part of his body in a bed of roses for the space of forty years,
would accept of them upon that condition? And though perhaps such a mad man
could be found, as would accept of the offer, yet, it is a thing most certain,
that before three pe^rs would come about, he would get him up, and beg to have
the conditions cancelled. And what madness then is it, for the enjoying of one
minutes pleasure, for the satisfaction of our sensual, corrupt appetite, to lie
for ever in a bed of burning brass* in the lake of eternal and unquenchable
fire? Suppose (says the same Writer) that this whole Globe of earth were
nothing else but a huge mass, or mountain of sand, and that a little Wren came
but once in every thousand years to fetch away but one grain of that huge heap;
what an innumerable number of years would be spent, before that world of sand
could be so fetched away? And yet (alas!) when the damned have lain in that
siery lake so many years as all those would amount to, they are no nearer
coming out, then the first hour they entered in. To the same purpose is this
Hymn of the Ancients. Ex quo poli sunt perfecti
Audet numero complecti
Stellas coeli, still as roris,
Vndas aquei fluoris,
Guttas imbris pluvialis,
Floccos vellerisni valis.
Quot sunt vere novo flores,
Quot odores, quot colores,
Quot vinacios Autumnus,
Poma legit and vertumnus;
Quot jam grana iulit aestas,
Frondes hyemis tempestas,
T^tus orbis animantes,
Aer atomos volantes,
Pilos ferae, pecus villos,
Vertex hominum capillos;
Add littoris arenas,
Add graminis verbenas,
Tot myriades Annorum,
Quot momenta saeculorum:
Heus adhuc aeternitatis
Portus fugit a damnatis!
AEternum, aeternum! quanta haec duratio, quanta!
Quam speranda bonis, quamque tremenda malis!
From the first hour the heaven's were made
Unto the last, when all shall fade,
Count (if thou can) the drops of dew,
The stars of heaven and streams that flow;
The falling snow, the dropping showers,
And in the month of May the flowers,
Their sents and colors, and what store
Of grapes and apples Autumn bore;
How many grains the Summer bears,
What leaves the wind in Winter tears;
Count all the creatures in the world,
The motes which in the air are hurled,
The hairs of beasts and mankind, and
The shores innumerable sand,
The blades of grass, and to these last
Add all the years which now are past,
With those whose course is yet to come,
And all their minutes in one sum.
When all is done, the damneds state
Out-runs them still, and knows no date.
O Eternity, eternity (says a holy Father) whose strength is able to bear out
thy torments! And the smoke of their torments asce^deth up for ever and ever!
and they have no rest day nor night! O what is this same for ever and ever!
Gladly would I speak something of it, but I know not what to speak. All that I
know, is this; That it is that, which only the infiniteness of the Almighty
God does compass about and comprehend. Seeing then it is so, that eternal
pleasures or eternal pains do inavoidably and immediately overtake us after our
dissolution, with what unwearied care and watchfulness should we continue in
well-doing, and work out our salvation with fear and trembling? How should we
as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fl^shly lusts, which war against the
soul? What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness? With what Christian thrift and diligence should we dispose of every
minute of our time that we might make our calling and election sure? It is a
fearful thing to die without reconciliation; And with what confusion of face
and horror of spirit (if we die in that state,) shall we appear before the
Judge of all the world? when he shall come in the Clouds of heaven with his
holy Angels, and all mankind from the first man created, unto the last that
shall be borne upon the earth shall appear before his Judgement-seate. Me
thinks I see the remiss, lukewarm professor, and the hypocritical, factious
pretender of sanctity looking up to the Clouds, and crying out, O that throne!
that flaming, white, and glorious throne! and he that sits thereon, with the
sharp sickle in his hand and the crown of pure gold upon his head! Revel.
14.14, from whose face the heaven and the earth fly away, and the foundations
of the world are brought to nothing. Oh! is he the Lamb that was slain whose
blood was poured out like water upon the earth to save his people from their
sins? Is he the Prince of life that was crowned with thorns, scourged, spit
upon, crucified, pierced through, and murdered, and comes he now to judge the
world? Oh! It is he! It is he! miserable wretch that I am! What shall I do, or
whither shall I go?

Such will be the dreadful agonies and concertations in that day betwixt the
Hypocrite and his conscience, betwixt the enemies of Gods truth and their
gasping undone souls. When the people that forget God shall go down quick into
hell, and the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed and laid open before
Angels and men; For in that day all their dark and private lusts, their
closet-sins, bosome-councels, specious pretenses, and bloody machinations,
which now (like so many foul spirits) lurk in their gloomy breasts, shall be
forced out, and will appear as visible to all mankind, as if they were written
with the beams of the Sun upon the pure and unclouded firmament. In the Est
poena praesens consciae mentis pavor,
Animusque culpa plenus, and semet timens.
Scelusal quis tutum, nullus securum tulit.

mean while the very fowls of the air, and their own horrid guilt either in
time of distraction (which they are always subject to) or in their sleep
(which is always fraught with penal visions and spiritual tumults) may make a
full discovery of their most secret villainies before the appointed time.

It was a blessed and a glorious age the Primitive Christians lived in, when
the wilderness and the solitary places were glad for them, and the desert
rejoiced and blossomed as the rose. When the blood of Christ was yet warm, and
the memory of his miracles and live fresh and vigorous; what Zeal, what
powerful faith, what perfect charity, hearty humility, and true holiness was
then to be found upon the earth? If we compare the shining and servent piety of
those Saints, with the painted and illuding appearance of it in these of our
times, we shall have just cause to fear that our Candlestick (which has been
now of a long time under a Cloud) is at this very instant upon removing. But I
had rather you should be informed of their true holiness and love to Christ,
by an Eyewitness that was conversant with them, and went in and out amongst
them, then by a bare relation from my pen. Hear therefore what he says.
Hieron. in vit. Pat.
Vidi ego, and vere vidi the saurum Christi in humanis absconditum vasculis,
etc. vidi enim apud eos multos Patres in terra positos coelestem vitam agentes,
and novos quosdam Prophetas tam virtut, bus animi, quam vaticinandi officio
imbutos, etc. Nonnullos namque ^orum ita ab omni malitia, cogitatione and
suspicione vidimus alienos, ut nec si aliquid mali adhuc in seculo gereretur,
meminissent, tanta in eis erat tranquillitas animi, tantusque in eis inoleverat
bonitatis affectus, etc. Commanent autem per cremum dispersi and separati
cellulis, sed charitatis vinculo connexi. Ob huc autem dirimuntur habitaculis,
ut silentii sui quietem and intentionem mentis nec vox aliqua, nec occursus
ullus, aut sermo aliquis otiosus obturbet. Intentis ergo in suo quisque loco
animis velut fideles servi adventantem dominum expectant. Omnes hi nullam cibi,
aut indumenti, aut ullius horum sollicitudinem gerunt. Iustitiam and regnum Dei
requirunt, armis orationum pugnant, and scuto fidei ab inimico insidiante
protecti patriam sibi coelestem conquirunt. I have seen (says he,) and I was
not deceived, the treasure of Christ laid up in earthen vessels; for amongst
those Christians in Egypt I have seen many Fathers who had here upon earth
already begun the heavenly life; and regenerate Prophets who were endued not
only with holy habits, but had received therewith the Spirit of promise: for I
have known many of them that were so free from malice, perverse thoughtfulness
and suspicion, as if they had never known that there were such evil ways to
be followed in the world* Such a great tranquillity of mind, and such a
powerful love or longing after goodness had wholly possessed them. They lived
dispersed up and down the wilderness, and separated from one another in
several Cells or Cots, but knit all together in the perfect bond of Charity.
The reason of their distinct and distant habitations, was, because they would
not have the silence of their retirements disturbed, nor their minds diverted
from the contemplation of heavenly things by any noise, sudden occurrence, or
idle discourse; for this cause they have every one their particular mansion,
where with intentive or earnest minds they do (like faithful servants) expect
and look for the coming of their Master. They take no thought for meat and
drink and clothing, nor for any such accommodations; they seek only the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, they fight with the weapons of
prayer, and being guarded with the shield of faith from the devices of their
spiritual enemies, so travel on toward their heavenly country. This was the
old way, and whether we are in it, or out of it, is not hard to be decided. A
pretended sanctity from the teeth outward, with the frequent mention of the
Spirit, and a presumptuous assuming to our selves of the style of Saints, when
we are within full of subtilty, malice, oppression, lewd opinions, and diverse
lusts, is (I am sure) a convincing argument that we are not only out of it,
but that we have no mind to return into it. The way to heaven is wet and
slippery, but it is made so with tears and not with blood; it is through the
vale of miseries, and the rain fills the pooles, Psalm. 85. There is no voice
in those shades of Palm, but the voice of the Turtle, which is always
groaning, and Naturalists say, she has no gall. It is ill coming to the Lamb of
God in a Wolfes skin; They that do so, must be taught that he has another
attribute, and they shall find him a Lion. It is strange that (after the
experience of almost six thousand years) men will hazard so highly, as to
purchase a few days false honors, with the loss of eternal and true glory.
In what a horrid darkness and agony will the pleasures of this world leave us,
after we have cast away our bodies and souls in the acquisition of them? how
suddenly must the rich man leave his barnes, and the oppressor his ill-gotten
power? how do they labor under the load of their private guilt, and feel the
flames of hell while they are yet alive? With what gloomy and despairing looks
do they pass from hence, as if that eternal darkness they are going into,
were already in their faces? It was a sad and a dark reply that Henry the
fourth made to his hasty son, when he had taken away the Crown; God knows
(said he and sighed) what right I had unto it. Tyrants and oppressors may very
well be compared to the Hyaena; while they prosper, and devour the prey, there
is nothing to be seen amongst them but mirth and triumphs; but when they have
drank blood enough, when they are full and cloyed, Sins are not felt, till
they are acted.
then they weep. The only difference is this, that the Hyaena's tears are
deceitful, but the tears of Tyrants springing from their inward guilt and
horror, are woefully true, though (like storms in harvest) they are
unprofitable and prodigious.

The difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked is to be seen in their
death. The good man goes hence like the Sun in the summers evening cheerful
and unclouded, his memory is precious here with men, and his spirit is received
into the joy of his Master. This Saint Hierome saw in the death of Paul the
Heremite, whose coat of Palm-leaves he preferred to the purple robes of the
proud. Let me now (says he) ask the great men of this world, whose
possessions, are numberless, and whose dwellings are of marble, what was it,
that was ever wanting to this poor old man? They drink rich wines out of gold,
and he drank clean water out of the fountains. They have silk and gold weaved
into their coats, and he had not so much as the coursest wool. But then is he
out of that simple habit carried into Paradise, and they out of their silk and
gold into hell. Paul the Heremite has no covering but the Coelo tegitur, qui
non habeturnam.
common earth; Their karkasses are laid up in Jam ruet and bustum, titulusque
in marmore sectus,
-- tumulis autem morientibus, ipse
Occumbes etiam, sic mors tibi tertia restat.

costly Sepulchers of marble and brass; but Paul shall be raised to glory, and
they to condemnation. And presently after directing his speech to the Reader,
he concludes thus: Who ever thou art, that shall read this Book, I beseech
thee to remember Hieronymus the Non sanctum dixit, sed peccatorem.
sinner, who (if God would grant him his desire) had rather be master of Paul
the Heremites coat with his rewards, then of the purple robes of Princes with
their punishments. -- O quantum bonum est obstare nulli, carpere securas dapes!
A dinner of herbs with a good conscience is heavenly fare, Humi
ejacentemselera non intrant casam.
and godliness is great gain, if we would be contented therewith. I do not so
much admire Apitius his feasts, and Cleopatra's banquets of dissolved pearls,
as I do the Raven of Elias, and Hilarion's Crow. Neither can I in this place
pass by that old Cilician and Countryman to Saint Paul, who (I verily
believe,) for a reward of his contented and harmless life, had the honor and
the happiness to have it described and left for ever upon record to posterity,
by that inimitable Prince and Patriarch of Poets; Virg. lib. 4. Georgie.
Namque sub Oebaliae memini me turribus altis
Corycium vidisse senem: cui pauca relicti
Jugera ruris erant, nec fertilis illa juvencis,
Nec pecori opportuna seges, nec commoda Baccho.
Hic rarum tamen in dumis holus, albaque circum
Lilia, verbenasque premens, vescumque papaver,
Regum aequabat opes animo, seraque revertens
Nocte domum, dapibus mensas onerabat inemptis.
Primus vere rosam, atque Autumno carpere poma:
Et cum tristis hyems etiamnum frigore saxa
Rumperet, and glacie cursus fraenaret aquarum,
Ille comam mollis jam tum tondebat Acanthi
AEstatem increpitans seram, Zephirosque morantes.
Englished thus.
I saw beneath Tarentum's stately towers
An old Cilician spend his peaceful hours:
Some few bad acres in a waste, wild field,
Which neither Grass, nor Corn, nor Vines would yield,
He did possess; There (amongst thorns and weeds)
Cheap Herbs and Coleworts, with the common Seeds
Of Chesboule or tame poppeys he did sow,
And Verveyne with white Lilies caused to grow.
Content he was, as are successeful Kings,
And late at night come home ( for long work brings
The night still home,) with unbought messes laid
On his low table, he his hunger stayed.
Roses he gathered in the youthful Spring;
And Apples in the Autumn home did bring;
And when the sad, cold winter burst with frost
The stones, and the still streams in Ice were lost,
He would soft leaves of Beares-foot crop, and chide
The slow West-winds, and lingering Summer-tyde!


Saint Hierome in the life of Antonius, (who was nobly borne and as tenderly
bred) tells us, that about the age of eighteen (his parents being then dead,)
he gave away all his possessions, and resolving upon a strict, religious life
betook himself to the wilderness; where having erected for himself a poor
narrow Cottage, he dug hard by it, and found a well, with whose streams he
watered a small piece of ground, which he did sow and set with some ordinary
herbs for his own provision. To this place thus furnished by his industry, the
wild asses would in great numbers very often resort, and not contented to
borrow of his water, they would some times trespass upon his garden, and make
bold with his sallads. But he upon a time coming amongst them, commanded the
leader of them, which he had observed to guide the rest, to stand still, and
beating him upon the sides with his hand, reproved him in these words, What is
the reason that thou come to eat that which thou have not sown? Et exinde
(says my Author) acceptis aquis ad quas potandas ventitabant, nec arbusculam,
nec holera unquam contigebant. We see by these Examples how safe it is to rely
upon our Masters promise, and how needless and superfluous in the Christian
state this worldly abundance is. This our Savior himself has admonished us
of, and upraids our dffidence with the examples of the birds and the lilies of
the field. Certainly it is dangerous meddling with the world; It is like the A
fish that (as soon as ever he is struck,) so benums the Anglet, that he dies.

Arcanas hyemes and caeca papavera ponti Aldo sinu, and celerem frigida vincla
necem.


Torpedo, he that catches it, comes to lose his life by the bargain. Love not
the world (says St. John) neither the things that are in the world, if any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. We should therefore be
very cautious how we deal with it, or with the followers and favorites of it.
Condescend to men of low estate, says the chosen vessel; This is good counsel,
but it lies so low that most men tread upon it, and very few are they that will
stoop to take it up. There is nothing can bring us sooner to it then the
serious consideration of our own frailty. This is the Catharma that turns away
the plague; and as Physicians say of fasting, that it cures almost all bodily
diseases: So may I say of this, that it prevents (if timely applied) all the
depravations and diseases of the mind. It will bring down every high thought
and set us upon even ground, Qui jacet in terra, non habet unde cadat.
where we shall be in no danger of soul or body. Our Savior was buried in a
Rock, and he that builds upon his grave, he that mortifies his affections, and
hides his life in him, needs fear no storms. What beauty is there in a
deaths-head crowned with roses? If we carry the one about us, we shall be safe
enough from the temptations of the other. Let sensual natures judge as they
please, but for my part, I shall hold it no Paradoxe to affirm, there are no
pleasures in this world. Some colored griefs and blushing woes there are,
which look so clear as if they were true complexions; but it is a very sad and
a tried truth that they are but painted. To draw then to an end, let us look
always upon this Day-Lilie of life, Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
as if the Sun were already set. Though we blossom and open many mornings, we
shall not do so always, Soles occidere and redire possunt; but man cannot. He
has his time appointed him upon earth, which he shall not pass, and his days
are like the days of an hireling. Let us then so husband our time, that when
the flower falls, the seed may be preserved. We have had many blessed Patterns
of a holy life in the British Church, though now trodden under foot, and
branded with the title of Antichristian. I shall propose but Mr. George Herbert
of blessed memory; See his incomparable prophetic Poems, and particularly
these, Church-musick, Church-rents, and schisms. The Church militant.
one to you, the most obedient Son that ever his Mother had, and yet a most
glorious true Saint and a Seer. Hark how like a busy Be he hymns it to the
flowers, while in a handful of blossoms gathered by himself, he foresees his
own dissolution. I made a Posie while the day ran by:
Here will I smell my remnant out, and tie
My life within this band,
But time did becken to the flowers, and they
By noon most cunningly did steal away,
And withered in my hand.
My hand was next to them, and then my heart*
I took, without more thinking, in good part
Times gentle admonition;
Who did so sweetly death's sad taste convey,
Making my mind to smell my fatal day;
Yet sugring the suspicion.
Farewell dear flowers! sweetly your time ye spent,
Fit, while ye lived, for smell or ornament,
And after death for cures.
I follow strait without complaint or grief,
Since if my sent be good, I care not if
It be as short as yours.


As often therefore as thou see the full and ripe corn, to succeed the
tender and flowery Spring, Petrar. de Contem mund^.
the Autumn again to succeed the Summer, Immortalia ne speres monet annus, and
almum Quae rapit hora diem.
and the cold and snowie Winter to succeed the Autumn, Frigora mitescunt
Zephyris, ver proterit aestas Interitura simul.
say with thy self, Pomifer Autumnus fruges effuderit, and mox Bruma recurrit
in^^s.
These seasons pass away, but will return again: but when I go, I shall
return no more.

When thou see the Sun to set, and the melancholy shadows to prevail and
increase, meditate with thy self, Thus when my life is done, will the shadows
of death be stretched over me; And yet this Sun which now leaves me, will be
here again to morrow: but when the Sun of my life sets, it shall not return
to me, until the heavens be no more.

When the night is drawn over thee, and the whole world lies slumbring under
it, do not thou sleep it out; for as it is a portion of time much abused by
wicked livers, so is it of all others the most powerful to excite thee to
devotion; be stirring therefore, and make special use of that deepest and
smoothest current of time, like that vigilunt Pilot who always mistrusted the
greatest calms,

Sydera cuncta notat tacito labentia coelo. And rising at midnight the Stars
espied
All posting Westward in a silent glide.



When thou also see those various numberles, and beautiful luminaries of the
night to move on in their watches, and some of them to vanish and set, while
all the rest do follow after, consider that thou art carried on with them in
the same motion, and that there is no hope of subsisting for thee, but in him
who never moves, and never sets.

Consider thy own posterity (if thou have any) or those that are younger then
thy self, and say, These are traveling up the hill of life, but I am going
headlong down. Consider thy own habitation, how many have been there before
thy time, whom that place must never know again, and that there is no help, but
thou must follow. Consider the works of thine own hands, the flowers, trees and
arbours of thine own planting, for all those must survive thee; Nay, who knows
but thou may be gone, before thou can enjoy those pleasures thou do
expect from them; for the Poet in that point proves oftentimes a Prophet, The
trees, we set, grow slowly, and their shade
Stays for our sons, while (we the Planters) fade.


Virg. Georg. Tarda venit, sorisque futura nepotibus umbra.

To be short, acquit thee wisely and innocently in all thy Actions, live a
Christian, and die a Saint. Let not the plurality of days, with the numerous
distinctions and mincings of thy time into months, weeks, hours and minutes
deceive thee, nor be a means to make thee misspend the smallest portion of it;
let not the empty honors and pompous nothing of this world keep thee back from
the grapes of the brook of Eshcol. Remember that we must account for every idle
word, much more for our actions. If thou have lost any dear friends, have them
always before thine eyes, visit their graves often, and be not unkind to a
Jonathan though in the dust. Give ear to heaven, and forget not what is spoken
to thee from thence. Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. The time of
life is short, and God (when he comes to see us) comes without a bell. Let us
therefore gird up the loins of our minds, and be sober, and hope to the end.
Let us keep our selves in the love of God as obedient children, not grieving
his holy Spirit, by which we are sealed unto the day of redemption. And let us
not give place to the devil, nor be weary of well-doing; but let us be renewed
daily in the spirit of our mind that when he comes (who will not tarry) we may
be found faithful, and about our masters business.

Let us fear God, and forgive men, bless those that persecute us, and lay up
treasure for our selves in heaven, that where our treasures is, there our
hearts may be also, and this (if God permits) will we do, and then -- We can go
die as sleep, and trust
Half that we have
Unto an honest, faithful grave
Making our pillows either down or dust.


Now unto him, who shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself, even unto Jesus Christ the Prince of the Kings
of the earth, and the first begotten of the dead, be glory and dominion for
ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer when thou find thy self sickly, or when thou art visited with any
Disease.
MOst merciful, and wise God, who bring light out of darkness, and true
comforts out of the greatest afflictions, I do in all humility and with all my
soul resign my self unto thy divine pleasure, and give thee most hearty and
unfeined thanks for this thy present visitation, an infallible argument of thy
fatherly love, and that tender care which thou have of my salvation. Thou
gave me health, and I took no notice of thy gift, and but very little of the
Giver: Thou gave me days of gladness and I numberd them not. Wherefore with
most true sorrow for my unthankfulness, and with all the sad Resentments of a
most penitent hear I do acknowledge thy justice, adore thy providence, and beg
thy mercy. O righteous Father! Though I have gone astray, do not thou cast me
off: though I am no more worthy to be called thy son, yet have thou a mind to
the work of thine own hands. Confirm my faith, sanctify my affections, give
me a lively and enduring hope, with an unwearied patience; And strengthen me in
all my Agonies with the celestial assistance and inexpressible refreshments of
thy overcoming spirit. Thou that did give to thy blessed and faithful Martyrs
such a glorious measure of thy Almighty spirit, as encouraged them for thy sake
to be sawed asunder, to be burnt, stoned and beheaded, give unto me now such a
gracious portion of the same Comforter as may lead me through death unto life.
Or if thou will in mercy restore me again, and enlarge my time, give me, I
beseech thee, a thankful heart, holy resolutions, and a steadfast spirit to
perform them; And for Jesus Christ his sake never suffer me to forget thy
tender and fatherly compassion, or to fall again into my old sins, and heap up
for my self thy eternal anger and most just indignation.

For what end soever thou have sent this present sickness, whether for my
dissolution, or for a temporal correction of my sinful life, grant I beseech
thee, that both may be for thy glory, and the salvation of my poor soul,
purchased with the precious blood of thine only Son and my dear Redeemer, to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost be ascribed by Angels and men, all wisdom,
dominion and majesty for ever and ever, Amen!

A Prayer in the hour of Death.
O My most blessed and glorious Creator that have fed me all my life long, and
redeemed me from all evil, seeing it is thy merciful pleasure to take me out of
this frail body, and to wipe away all tears from mine eyes, and all sorrows
from my heart, I do with all humility and willingness consent and submit my
self wholly unto thy sacred will. I desire to be dissolved and to be with my
Savior. I bless and praise thy holy name for all thy great mercies conferred
upon me, from the first day of my life unto this present hour. I give thee all
possible thanks for this gracious and kind visitation, in which thou art
mercifully pleased to order this last act of thy poor creature to thy glory,
and the fruition of those heavenly comforts which have already swallowed up my
whole spirit. O let all that come after me speak of thy wondrous mercies, and
the generations which are yet unborn give praise unto thy name.

Lord Jesus Christ my most loving Redeemer, into thy saving and everlasting
Arms I commend my spirit, I am ready my dear Lord, and earnestly expect and
long for thy good pleasure; Come quickly, and receive the soul of thy servant
which trusts in thee.

Blessing, and honor, and glory and power be unto him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb and to the holy Ghost for ever and ever Amen.

Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace, good will toward men!
Blessed be God alone!
Thrice blessed three in one!
MAN IN Glory: OR, A Discourse of the blessed state of the Saints in the New
JERUSALEM.

Written in Latin by the most Reverend and holy Father ANSELMUS Archbishop of
Canterbury, and now done into English.

Printed Anno Dom. 1652.

To the Reader.
Reader,
ANSELMUS Archbishop of Canterbury lived here in Britain, in the reign of
Rufus, and striving to keep entire the Immunities of the Church, (which the
spirit of Covetousness and Sacrilege did then begin to encroach upon,) he was
twice banished, first by William the second called Rufus or red-hair'd, and
after by Henry the first his youngest brother and successor. Men of fierce and
unmanagable spirits they were, and by so much the fitter for the throne. The
first was such an infamous lover of money, that the Neophyte-Iews were at a
constant fee with him, for renouncing Christianity; and the later (like a true
son of Ottoman,) caused his eldest Robert Duke of Normandy.
brothers eyes to be pulled out, who was then his prisoner in the Castle of
Cardiffe. To avoid the fury of Rufus (who had thus banished him,) our Author
here retired into France, and sheltered himself in the Abbey of Clunie, where
by way of discourse with that reverend family, he shed forth this Dissertation,
which (at the same time it proceeded from him,) was exactly taken, and put into
writing by Eadinerus, a Canon regular of the Church of Canterbury, and his
Amanuensis in his banishment. Some brokages and disorderly parcels of it, are
to be found in his book De similitud, but the entire and genuine discourse was
first made public at Paris 1639. where it took so well, that it was presently
translated into French. This much I thought fit to acquaint thee with; and so I
shall leave thee to thy own affairs, which I wish to be such as may bring
thee to the fruition of those joys, which are shown thee here through a
glass darkly, and but in part; until that which is perfect shall come, and
this which is in part shall be done away.

Thy Friend HEN. VAUGHAN.

Here holy Anselme lives in every page,
And sits Archbishop still, to vex the age.
Had he foreseen (and who knows but he did?)
This fatal wrack, which deep in time lay hid,
Had never (like Elias) driven him hence,
A sad retirer for a slight offense.
It Is but just to believe, that little hand
Which clouded him, but now benights our land,
For were he now, like the returning year,
Restored to view these desolations here,
He would do penance for his old complaint,
And (weeping) say, That Rufus was a Saint.
Revel. Chap. 7. 1. ANd after this I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no
man could number, of all nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood
before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in
their hands.

2. And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

3. And one of the Elders answered saying unto me, Who are these which are
arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

4. And I said unto him, Sir, thou know. And he said unto me, These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb.

5. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in
his Temple: and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them.

6. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any heat.

7. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.


MAny men, when a holy conversation and good works are proposed unto them, and
when they are advised to exercise themselves therein, and not to follow after
the vanities of this world, are wont to question for what end, reward, or
retribution shall they do so? The answer to these men must be this: Because it
is written, that Eye has not seen, not ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1
Cor. 2. Which words, because they cannot plainly understand what is meant by
them, must be expounded to them by other circumstances, and it must be told
them, that the reward which in the life to come shall be given unto those that
serve God in this life, is, everlasting life, eternal happiness, never-ending
pleasures, and a fullness and sufficiency of all accommodations to their own
desires without any scarcity, or want at all. When these things are thus told
them, they seem to be (as they are indeed) very great, and very good. But
because, that neither by this expression they do perfectly apprehend, what
those things are which they shall receive in the life to come; nor can they of
a sudden rightly perceive what is meant by a sufficiency of all accommodations
without any want at all, they continue still in a doubtful mind, and are not
effectually drawn to take any relish or delight in the things so told them.
What course then shall we take to render these eternal rewards more relishing
and delightful to them? I hold that the best way is, to feed them as Nurses
feed their little children; who, (if at any time they give them a large fair
apple, which for the tenderness of their teeth, and the narrowness of their
mouths they cannot feed upon) cut it (according to the capacity of the child)
into several bits or parts, and so give it them to eat by peece-meales.

We shall therefore divide this great sufficiency of all accommodations in the
life to come, into several parts or portions, that (by so doing) they may with
those things we shall deliver be fed to eternal life. And because they may
appear more plainly to them, we shall consider what those things are, which the
mind of man most affects in this life; and by those, (as far as we may) we
shall make it evident that they shall enjoy them after a more excellent manner
in the life to come: if being placed here in the midst of dangers and worldly
temptations, they stick fast to the precepts of Christ; and when they have kept
them, they will of themselves quickly perceive, that by no means they shall
lose, nor be deceived of the utmost of their desires. This Course we shall take
in the Explication of this Doctrine, and beginning with the least, pass on to
our desired end.

That we may then in the first place briefly sum up all those things which
have reference to the body, I suppose them to be such things as are (indeed)
desirable of themselves, and for whose service or use all other things are
desired of men, and those are Beauty, Activity, Strength, Liberty, Health,
Pleasure, and Long Life. But if amongst these we have reckoned, there are some
things, which the servants of God have no respect to, but take special care to
neglect and avoid them, as (for instance sake) beauty and pleasure are; yet do
they not therefore despise them, because that naturally they affect them not,
but because they would not offend God in them; for if they certainly knew that
by caring for such things, they could not offend God, nor have their affections
withdrawn from heavenly things, without doubt they would take more delight in
the fruition of them, then in a contrary state. These things being now thus
premised, I shall as briefly as I may treat of every one of them distinctly, or
by it self, and labor to demonstrate unto you (as God shall enable me) after
what manner they shall be enjoyed by us after the resurrection of the body.

To begin then, Beauty is a certain good, which all men naturally desire to
have. But in the life to come the beauty of the righteous shall shine equally
with the Sun, this the sacred Scripture testifies, Matthew. 13. Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Add to this,
that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ (which none I hope will deny) shall
outshine the brightness of the Sun. But by the testimony of the Apostle we
shall be made like unto him, for he says, He shall change our vile bodies,
that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and this is the
confession of that authority, which to contradict, is blasphemy. Now if any man
would have this proved to him by reason, I believe it ought not to seem
incredible to any, that the righteous in that life which is to come, when this
mortality shall be swallowed up of life, shall shine as bright as the Sun,
seeing they are truly called, and truly are the temple and the seat of God
himself, which (as I remember) is no where in sacred Scripture spoken of this
visible Sun.

As for Activity, which is every way as desirable as Beauty, we shall be endued
with such a measure of it, as shall render us equal for swiftness to the very
Angels of God, which in a moment pass from the highest heaven unto the earth,
and from the earth again into heaven; which swiftness, if it were necessary to
prove it so in the Angels, we might for instance produce that place of
Scripture, where it is written, that the Angel of the Lord took Habakkuk the
Prophet by the hair of the head, and carried him through the vehemence of his
spirit (when he was yet in the flesh) from Jury into Babylon, and having
delivered the dinner unto Daniel, brought him again immediately to his own
place. Therefore I say again, that a swiftness every way equal to that which
is in them, shall be given to those, who labor in their lives here to be like
unto them. The Apostle also, who affirms that our bodies shall in the twinkling
of an eye be perfectly raised, notwithstanding that our limbs be separated or
dispersed one from another, and the distance of place never so great, has
thereby sufficiently proved, that our very bodies which in that day shall be
raised incorruptible, shall be gifted with the very lame swiftness; for he
testifies that this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. An instance or demonstration of this
swiftness we have in the beams of the Sun, which as soon as ever the body
of that Planet appears above the earth in the East, pass in a moment to the
utmost West. By this consideration we may conclude that what has been spoken
touching our velocity in the life to come, is not impossible, especially
because that animated bodies have in them a greater agility, then those which
are inanimate. To this instance of the Sunbeams we may add another of the
like nature, which we have in our selves; for the beams or ray of the Eye, when
we open our eyelids passes immediately to the utmost point of the Horizon or
visible part of the sky, and when we shut them returns wholly and unimpaired
into it self. Again, it is a thing certainly known, that the souls of the Elect
which are in the hand of the Lord, have not yet enjoyed the fullness of
felicity, until their bodies shall be restored unto them incorruptible; which
when they shall enjoy, there will be nothing more left for them to wait for and
desire. But these bodies whose redemption they long and groan for if they would
retard of hinder their swiftness, they would rather abhor their fellowship,
then long for it; therefore it is certain that such a swiftness or agility as
we have spoken of shall be given us of God in the life to come.

The next thing we are to treat of: is Fortitude or Strength, which most men
affect, as it is opposite to imbecility and faint-heartednesse. But they who
shall be worthy to walk with the Citizens of the new Jerusalem, shall excel so
much in strength, that nothing can have power to resist them: whether their
desire be to remove, or over-turn any thing out of its station, or by any other
way to divert it, nothing can hinder them; nor shall they in compassing their
desire be put to any more trouble or pains, then we are put to at present when
we move an Eye, or turn it toward any object we desire to look upon. But let
us not in this place forget to instance in the Angels, to whom we labor in
this life to assimilate our selves; for if in this branch, or in any of the
rest which we are to handle, we can find no other example or demonstration, we
must apply to them. I suppose there is none will deny, but that the Angels
excel so much in strength, as to be able to effect whatsoever shall be enjoined
them. But here some body may ask, of what use shall this fortitude or strength
be unto us in that life; when all things shall be put in such perfect order,
that there cannot be a better; when there shall be no need of mutations,
eversions, or reformation wherein this fortitude or strength may be employed?
Whoever shall ask this question, let him attend a little to me, and consider
what use we make at present of the faculties given us in this life; and he
shall find that we do not always employ some of those abilities with which we
are now gifted in the body; as the faculty of seeing, our utmost strength, and
our knowledge of some select things, with many more; In the like manner shall
it be then with this fortitude we are now speaking of, for the only possession
of it will be an incredible pleasure and joy unto us, though we shall have no
use for it, all things being (as it is said before) in the state of perfection.
If this objection be made concerning velocity, or any of the other branches
which are to follow in this discourse; I hold this solution (if we find not a
better) satisfactory enough.

We are now come to the fourth branch, which is Liberty, and is no less
desired then any of the former. Whoever then shall lead and Angelical life
here upon earth, shall without doubt be admitted into an equal liberty with the
Angels in heaven. Therefore as nothing can resist, hinder, or confine the
Angels, but that they may pass freely through all things according to their
own desires; so shall there be no obstacle or restraint of the Elects: there
shall be no enclosure that can hold us, nor any Element which shall not be
pervious or passable for us, when, and how we please. An eminent and most
certain example of this we have left us in the body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to which blessed body (Saint Paul affirms) that our vile bodies shall be
fashioned and made like, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue
all things unto himself. Now the Scripture bears record that he rose from the
dead after the Sepulcher was made sure and sealed, and that he came in to his
Disciples, the doors being shut upon them, and at the same time caused Thomas
to thrust his hand into his side; all which (without doubt) was laid down for a
strong and comfortable demonstration to us of the glorious liberty of the
children of God, Romans 8.

In this fifth place comes Health, which of all temporal blessings is the
principal, and the most to be desired. And of this what can be better said,
then that which has been already spoken by the Psalmist, The salvation of the
righteous comes from the Lord, Psalm. 37. What infirmity then can lay hold upon
those, whose health or salvation is from the Lord? But what example or
similitude to introduce, whereby you may perceive what manner of health that
shall be which we are to enjoy in the world to come, I do not know; for neither
I in my own body, nor the holiest man that ever lived in the flesh, can find
in himself any state of health which may be compared or liken'd to this eternal
and incorruptible health. For in this life (when we find our bodies without
any pain or disturbance) we conclude that we are in health, and yet are we
therein oftentimes deceived. For it happens very frequently that we are infirm
or sickly in some particular member, which yet we can by no means discover, but
by motion of the said member, or by touching the place affected. But to come to
those that are not thus affected, but seem to themselves to be in perfect
health, what shall we judge of them, that they are in health, or that they are
not? Propose to thy self some one of a most healthful constitution, and that
thou should enquire of him concerning the state of his body: he will tell
thee, that in his own judgment he finds himself in perfect health. But let his
body be examined and felt with a little rigidnesse more then ordinary, or wring
him hard in any part of it, he will presently cry out, forbear, you hurt me.
What is this? Did not he a little before affirm himself found, and being now
but moderately touched, does he cry out of pain? Is this man think thou in
health? Truly I think not. It is not then such a health as this (which is but a
mere remission) that they shall receive in the life to come, whose salvation
is expressly promised to proceed from the Lord, Rev. 21. For God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, and there shall he no more death, neither sorrow
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are
past away, Rev. 7. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, nor
shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat, for God shall cover them with his
right hand, and with his holy arm shall be defend them. What then shall be
able to hurt them whose covering and enclosure shall be the arm of God? But
what manner of health that shall be, I know for a certain, that neither I, nor
any man else, (either by my own or another apprehension or experiment) can
possibly express. If any man desires to know the qualities of Fevers and
diverse other diseases, I can quickly satisfy him, as well by the experience I
have had of them in my own body, as by relation from others; but that which
neither by my own understanding nor sensation I have never perceived, nor
received any knowledge of it from another, how can I say any thing of it? Only
this I shall absolutely assert (and I do verily believe it) that this health of
the life to come shall fill the whole man with such an immutable, inviolable,
and inexpressible sweetness and solace, as shall utterly repel and for ever
drive away all thoughts of infirmities, their accessions, or revolutions. And
let this suffice to have been spoken of our health in the world to come.

The next branch that comes in order to be now spoken of, is Pleasure, which by
another name, or definition rather, we shall call the Delectation of the
corporeal senses. And this (truly) most men are very much taken with, because
the corporeal senses in every man delight in those things which are adjudged
proper or peculiar to them, and withal beneficial or helpful. For (to instance
in a few) the sense of smelling is much recreated or pleased with the variety
of sweet and comfortable odours; the sense of tasting with the different
relishes or gust of several meats, confections, and drinks. And all the rest
(as every man's natural appetite carries him) have their several and different
delights. But these delectations are not always pleasing; na^, they prove
oftentimes distastful and troublesome to their greatest lovers, for they are
(indeed) but transitory and bestial. But those delectations or pleasures which
in the world to come shall be poured out upon the righteous are everlasting and
rational. And for this cause I do not see how it is possible to express them
so, as to make them intelligible, or subject to our understanding in this life,
especially because we cannot find in the pleasures of this life; any example or
similitude which has in it any collation with them, or can give us the least
light or manifestation of them; for those heavenly delights, the more we enjoy
them, will be the more dear and acceptable to us, for the fullness of those
joys breeds no surfeit. And such delights as these are, I believe no man ever
in this world did so far perceive or taste, as to be able to describe unto
others the true state or favor of them. Two blessed and two miserable states
of man we know to be, the greater and the lesser. His great or perfect state of
bliss is in the Kingdom of God; his lesser is that which Adam forfeited, the
joy of Paradise. As for his states of misery, his great and endless one is in
the lake of fire and brimstone; and his lesser in the continual travels and
afflictions of this present life. Now it is clear, that no man in this life
(after Adam) did ever taste of either of those two states of bliss. But if we
had tried or tasted of (only) that lesser state of bliss which Adam enjoyed
in Paradise, we might then perhaps by the mediation or means of the lesser
conjucture or guess at the greater. As now being borne and bred up in the
lesser state of misery, we can give many plain and convincing demonstrations of
our deplorable condition in the greater. Wherefore seeing the pleasure we speak
of, is a branch or portion of that greater state of bliss, I cannot conceive
of any possibility to express it, unless we may do it by some similitudes
that are quite contrary to the greater state of misery, and drawn from the
lesser. For example, or instance, let us suppose that there stood before us a
naked man with hot and flaming irons thrust into the very apples of his eyes,
and into every part and member of his body, his veins, nerves and muscles, so
that neither his marrow, nor his entrails, nor any the most inward and tender
parts were free from the anguish and immanity of the torment, and that he were
as sensible of the pain in every member, as he must needs be in the very balls
of his eyes. What shall I say now of this man? is he not miserably tormented?
And who amongst these dispersed and ubiquitary pains thus inflicted will be so
irrational as to think that he can have any ease or pleasure? In the same
manner, but by a quite contrary consideration may we conjecture or guess at
the delectations and pleasures of the life to come; for as this man is filled
and pained all over with torments, so shall ineffable and endless pleasures be
poured upon, and overflow the righteous. Their eyes, their ears, and their
hearts, yea their very bones (as the Prophet David says) shall be glad and
rejoice; every part and every member of them shall be crowned and replenished
with the fullness and the life of pleasures. Yea their whole man shall be truly
and abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Gods house, and he shall make
them drink of the river of his pleasures; for with him is the fountain of life,
and in his light shall we see light. Whosoever then is the happy man that shall
be counted worthy to enjoy these heavenly pleasures, I cannot see (as to the
comforts of the body) what more he can desire. The only thing that (in order
to what we are to treat of) shall be added to him, is long life. And this shall
not be wanting there, for our Savior testifies, that the wicked shall go into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal, Matthew. 25.

Having done now with these blessings bestowed upon the body, there remain
other more excellent gifts, which are every way as desirable, but these belong
to the soul as the former did to the body. We shall reduce them all into seven
principal heads, and here they follow, 1. Wisdom. 2. Friendship. 3. Peace. 4.
Power. 5. Honor. 6. Security, and 7. Joy. Our wisdom then, which in this life
all men desire, and worthily too, shall be so great in the life to come, that
nothing shall be hidden from us, that we have a mind to know; for we shall
know all things, which God ordained to be known of man, as well those things
which are past, as those which (in this world) are yet to come. There all men
shall be known by every man, and every man shall be known by all men. Neither
shall any one there be ignorant of what Country, Nation, stock or lineage every
one is descended; nay, he shall know all that ever we did in our lifetime.
Here some body perhaps may say, how is this? shall all men know the secret sins
that I have committed? Is my confession of them come to this? Is it thus that
they are blotted out, forgotten, and never more discovered? Well, this is thy
objection. But when thou in that state of glory shall stand in the presence of
God, purged from all thy sins, can thou be unthankful to him for that great
mercy showed thee in the remission of all thy offenses? And how can thou be
thankful, if none of those sins for whose forgiveness thou do owe those
thanks unto him, will be left in thy memory? That therefore thou may for
ever take delight in the singing of his praises, thou will (I believe) have
always in thy mind those great transgressions and eternal miseries from which
he delivered thee. Seeing then that the consciences of all men shall (in that
state) remain entire to them, I dare affirm that those sins for whose
remission thou do then give thanks, shall likewise be openly known, not to
thy confusion, but to the glory of God, and the mutual rejoicing of the Saints,
for thou shall be no more troubled then with the remembrance of thy sins, nor
be any more ashamed of thy most secret transgressions, then any one is in this
life with the memory of some dangerous wounds or loathsome disease that he is
perfectly cured of; or then we are in the state of men of those inconveniences
we were subject to when we were little infants in our cradles and
swadling-bands; for in that life when we shall be blessed with inviolable
health, perfect purity, a full remission and most certain impunity of all our
sins, why should the memory or public knowledge of them be any more grievous
to us then his denying of Jesus Christ is now to Peter, or his persecution of
him to Paul, or her sins which were many to that blessed Convert Mary Magdalen,
with diverse others whose sins and infirmities are already in this world
publicly known of all men? And besides all this, by this public manifestation
of sins, as of thy enormous and loathsome infirmities, the power and wisdom of
the great Physician will by all the Elect be so much the more admired, praised
and magnified; and the praise and magnificence of the divine glory (if rightly
considered by thee) is thy glory. But thou will say, I consent indeed that the
praise of God is my glory, but when from all parts of the earth such an
exceeding number of innocent and righteous persons (if compared to me) shall
appear there, who considering the odious obscenity of my life, will (as it is
most fit) abhor me as a most abominable creature, what shall I say then,
seeing there is a reward as well for unrighteousness as for righteousness?
Thy fear in these circumstances is needless, for it will be otherwise there
with thee then thou do suppose; for thou shall find, that those Elects which
(in comparison of thee) thou do hold righteous and innocent, will have no
such thoughts of thee, as thou at present do suspect. For they upon the first
sight of thee, will presently know and consider, that by committing those
obscenities thou did not sin against them, but against God. And when they see
that God has freely and fully forgiven thee, they will not so much as have a
thought of abhorring, or judging thee in the smallest matter; for they know,
that if they should any way contemn or censure thee in that state, What God
has cleansed, call not thou common, Acts 10.15.
wherein thou shall be perfectly reconciled to the Father and all thy
transgressions blotted out, they would thereby sin grievously against the Lord.
They will therefore be the more thankful, and have in greater admiration the
infinite mercy of God both toward thee, and toward themselves. Toward thee,
because he brought thee up out of hell, and saved thee from thy grievous and
crying sins. Toward themselves, because it was his free grace that saved and
held them up from falling into the like enormities. By praising God thus they
will magnify and admire in thee after Gods goodness, his power and
Constantiam.
sure mercies by relying on which thou did escape and get out of the pit of
perdition; into which pit (had they been left to themselves) they would have
fallen as well as thou did; and here they will consider, that had they been
in that dangerous state, they should (perhaps) have been utterly cast away, and
not break the snare as thou did. Thou see now that a public manifestation
of thy sins will in the state of glory be no disgrace nor prejudice at all to
thee, and how great a furtherance of divine praise and thanksgiving the known
remission of them will prove. Yea, if the very Angels should reprove and
censure thee (for the heynousnesse of thy sins) to be altogether unworthy of
their society, yet have thou left thee very just reasons wherewith to vindicate
and defend thy self. And here perhaps thou will ask me, how this may be done?
do but give attention, and I will tell thee. Suppose that any one of the Angels
should rebuke, or upbraid thee in these words: This is only proposed, not
asserted, nor (indeed) can it be, for our Savior himself tells us, That there
is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents,
Luke 15.10. and their song is, good will toward men.
do thou a frail and mortal creature, made of the dust of the earth, and
whose doom was to return into dust again, after thou have rebelled against
thy Maker, and wallowed in all manner of sins and pollutions, seek now to be
like one of us, who never in any thing resisted the divine will? To this Charge
thou may answer thus. If I (as you say) have been formed out of the dust, it
is no wonder then that (being driven up and down by every wind of temptation) I
fell at last into the mire of sin; but afterward (having first acknowledged,
and then believed in the mercies of Jesus Christ,) I did renounce and cast off
all those courses which I knew to be contrary to his will, and exercised my
self in all those ways which I understood to be well-pleasing unto him. I
fainted not, nor refused to under-go and suffer for his glory diverse
tribulations and distresses, in hunger, in thirst, in watchings, persecutions,
reproaches and manifold afflictions; And having utterly cast off and contemned
all the pleasures of the world, I strongly endeavored, and earnestly desired
to be perfectly reconciled unto my Savior. But you never suffered any of these
things for his sake, you dwelt always in glory, and the joys of heaven; The
arm of God always sustained and defended you from being assaulted by any
sin, so that you were never stained with the least spot of it. Wherefore it
is his own free gift, whose hand withheld you from it, that has kept you
from falling away from his will. But because this way of reasoning may be only
used by those who have forcibly resisted their own damnation, and taken the
kingdom of heaven by violence; they that shall enter into it upon other
conditions, must find another reason by which they may claim a parity, or
equal degree of glory with the Angels: And if they desire to know what manner
of reason that is, it may be this which follows: They may tell them that the
ground upon which they lay their just claim to an equality of bliss with them
in the kingdom of God, is the free mercy and donation of Jesus Christ; who for
that very end vouchsafed to be made man, and to suffer death upon the Cross,
that being saved from our sins, and justified through his blood, we might be
with him where he is, and be partakers of his kingdom; consider you therefore,
if the blood of Jesus Christ which was shed for us is not a sufficient price
for our salvation, and for an equality of glory with you. What reply now can
the Angels (who because they are good of themselves, will be therefore the
sooner won with reason) make unto this? truly none at all, unless by way of
Confession, that men redeemed with so high a price may justly claim and
partake with them an equal glorification. When therefore both Angels and men,
whom thou did judge more righteous then thy self shall consent unto thy
glory, and hold thee worthy in all things of those true and eternal honors
conferred upon thee, consider (if thou can) how acceptable and pleasing such
a knowledge will be to thee, which shall make thee known to all men, and all
men to be known of thee.

And shall not consequently out of that mutual and perfect knowledge arise a
certain inestimable and inviolable friendship? which shall so warm the hearts
of every one toward another, that the love which every one shall have for
another, shall be eviedent and convincing in the knowledge of all. Neither do I
see how it can be otherwise, seeing that all in that kingdom are but one body,
and Christ himself (who is very peace,) the head thereof; neither will they
with less affection embrace one anothtr, then the members of one natural body
are united to one another. Thou will therefore in that state love all men as
thy self, and every one will love thee as dearly as himself. O (now, think
thou,) how full of love shall I be toward all men, if I were in that happy
state? But pass by that Meditation, and consider him, by whose mediation and
grievous sufferings all these blessings were purchased for thee; and thou will
then perceive that he will love thee incomparably more then any others; yea,
more then thou can love thy self; and so will thou with a certain inward,
inexpressible delight come to love him more then any others, yea infinitely
more then thou can love thy self.

But seeing it falls out very frequently amongst men, that those persons who
continue in a reciprocal and unanimous love, do not in all circumstances accord
and consist, but differ in opinion, and sometimes also in their passions, while
that which seems right to the one, appears clean contrary to the other, and the
one may affect something which the other has no appetite at all unto; It
follows of necessity that to this perfect friendship in the state of glory, we
must add perfect concord or agreement. There will be therefore such perfect
agreement and unity there betwixt all, that none shall dissent from that which
another desires. As many as shall be counted worthy of that kingdom, shall be
one body, one Church, and one Spouse of Jesus Christ; and there shall be no
more discord betwixt them, then there is betwixt the members now in the natural
body. But as you see in the motion of the Eyes, that which way soever the one
is turned, the other immediately follows, so whatsoever any one in that state
shall delight in, he shall find all the rest to consent to it. Here the
Translatour omitted some passages which he conceived not necessary, and perhaps
they might be spurious.
Seeing then that God himself with all the Angels and Saints will be propitious
and favorable to thy desires, it is clear that thou will desire nothing which
thou may not obtain. So that in a modest sense it may be said, thou shall be
Almighty in respect of thy will, because the Almighty God will in all things
consent to it, for thy will shall be then his will, and his will shall be thine.

Seeing then that they shall excel so much in power, there is no doubt to be
made, but that an honor proportionable to that power shall be given unto them.
Now what manner of honor that shall be, we shall labor to demonstrate by this
following similitude. Let us suppose there were laid before our eyes, some
poor beggar destitute of all comfort, and smitten in every part with ulcerous
biles, corrupt sores, and all manner of infirmities, and having not so much as
a rag to cover or defend him from the cold: If some mighty and merciful King
passing by, should look upon this beggar lying in so miserable a condition, and
having compassion on him, should give command to heal his infirmities, and
being afterward recovered, should give order to have him clothed with his own
royal apparel, and being brought before him in that habit, should adopt him for
his son, and give strict command that he should be received and acknowledged by
all men for his son, and that he should be contradicted in nothing by any of
his subjects, he having adopted him for his son, and made him coheire with his
only begotten, and calling him after his own name: You would easily grant that
this were a great honor to be conferred upon so despicable and loathsome a
beggar. But all this and more will the merciful God most certainly confer upon
his faithful servants; for of his own free mercy will he receive us, who being
born of the corruption of the flesh are surrounded with many miseries; in which
we are estated as it were, and destitute of all comforts, but always subject
to, and overcome by many noxious passions, which fill us up with foul and
ulcerous sins, and most odious corruptions, from all which he will purge and
heal us, and being restored to perfect health, he will cloth us with the
ornaments of true righteousness and incorruption, and adopt us for his sons,
making us his Consorts in his own kingdom, and coheires with his only begotten
Son who is in every thing coequal with himself, changing our vile bodies, that
they may be like unto his glorious body, and commanding every creature to be
subject unto us in all things, calling us also by his own name, and making us
gods; for he says in the Scripture, I have said you are all gods, and the sons
of the most high. But he himself is the God deifying, and we are but deified,
or gods made by him. But perhaps thou will say, This reason of mine may stand
good in the Apostles and other holy Martyrs, but with thee who art a wretched
sinner, and desire only to be the least in the kingdom of heaven, thou
can not see how it can consist. Give ear and understand, for God in that
recited Scripture, I have said you are all gods, etc. excepts none. But that
thou may more clearly perceive, Consider the nature of fire and of all things
that are put therein; if happily thou can imagine with thy self after what
manner, (in the degree appointed for thee) thou shall be glorified. The fire
(thou see) is but one, and of nature hot; put into it either wood, or lead,
or iron, or all these together; when the wood is turned into embers, so that
nothing appears unto thee but fire, and the lead so melted, that it cannot
admit of a greater degree of heat, yet can neither of them be equal to Iron
for an intense burning heat, which perhaps has not yet grown red with the
fire. Now although every one of these does exceed the other, and is of a more
suparlative heat, yet every one of them (as we commonly say) is fire. So shall
it be in that glorious society of the Elect, which we now speak of; For as
those, who are nearer to the Divine Majesty, and therefore better then others,
shall be called gods: So even those, who are inferior to them, because they
participate according to their capacity of the same Deity with those that are
superior, shall be likewise honored with the same title of gods.

When therefore together with so much happiness, thou have attained to so much
honor, I do not see with what reason thou can desire a greater Preferment.
Whiles then thou art blessed with the possession of those high Benefits, which
we have mentioned, will thou not think thy self sufficiently happy? Yes
verily, thou will say, well then! but if thou could really enjoy all those
things as we have described them, but for one short day, would thou not
rejoice? No question, but thou would. But if thou should enjoy them for a
month, or one whole year thou would rejoice exceedingly: neither indeed do
I think it possible to express thy manner of joy. Suppose then if thou
should possess this happiness all thy lifetime, what thou would do. What
price would thou give for so great a Blessing? Even willingly all that ever
thou had: nay, thy very own self, if thou could purchase it at no other
Rate.

But if besides all this Fruition, thou were certain also of a perpetual
security, and that all thy life long no accident whatsoever could rob thee of
thy happiness, I will not determine, whether it were possible for thee to
imagine, how great thy joy would be. Seeing then that in the life to come, thou
shall live for ever, and together with the possession of all these things, thou
shall also be eternally secured from all danger of losing them, I beseech thee,
how do thou think it will go with thee? I believe truly, that at the very
name of security, there springs in thee a certain joy of heart, and thou do
greedily desire to know, whether thou may with safety, and for ever enjoy
such great and extraordinary Blessings? I tell thee then, if thou art like to
lose these things, thou must either voluntarily, and of thy own accord
relinquish them, or God must take them from thee whether thou will or no; or
else another, who is more powerful then God, must rob thee of them in spite of
God, and thy self. But certainly, neither will thou reject so great a
Blessing, and relapse into those miseries from which thou have been graciously
delivered; neither will God at any time take that away which his large and
merciful goodness has bestowed upon thee; nor is there any stronger then
God, who should be able to make thee miserablee against thy will, as long as
God is thy Protector. Thou shall therefore securely, and for ever enjoy all
these Benefits, nor shall thou fear the attempts of any, who would willingly
deprive thee of them.

What do thou think then will thy condition be, when thou shall eternally
enjoy all these things; namely, Beauty, Strength, Swiftness of motion,
Liberty, Health, Pleasure, Length of life, Wisdom, Love, Peace, Power,
Honor, and a Security of all, as we have described them: nay, above all humane
Description or Conception, in a more glorious, and a more stately manner, then
we can possibly express. Will not thy condition be all Joy, which is the End
and Effect of these Blessings? Verily I cannot see how that man should not
abound with inestimable Joy, who is compast about with all the riches of
eternal happiness. Thou shall therefore most certainly attain to such a Joy,
because nothing can happen to thee, that should minister occasion of Grief. For
if thou had any Friend, whom thou did love as well as thy self, and in
whose good thou would rejoice as in thy own, and should see this friend
admitted to the same Heaven, and happiness with thy self; would thou not
extremely rejoice in his Felicity? But if thou had two or three, or more such
friends, and should see them all glorified with a state equal to thy own,
would not thy joys also exceed, and increase together with their number? And
as formerly, when we discoursed of Love, we did there show how all the
Inhabitants of the world to come, should love thee as well as themselves, and
thou on the contrary should love them as thy own soul: How is it therefore
possible for any man to apprehend the manner of that mutual Joy, seeing there
are there above a thousand thousands and ten thousand times hundreds of
thousands: nay, an innumerable compapany, and all of them enjoying the same
Beatitude; nor is there any one of them, who does not as much rejoice in the
happiness of another, as he does in his own. Moreover, they seeing God love
them in a more excellent way then they love themselves, and again perceiving
themselves (after some inexpressible manner) to love God better then
themselves, they do infinitely triumph in his Glory, and in his wonderful and
inexpressible Joys. They have Joy therefore within, and Joy without: Joy from
above, and Joy beneath: In the Compass, and Circuit of them there is Joy, and
in a word every where.

And this (as we think, and as we have expressed our selves in the beginning of
this Book) is that thing which God has prepared for those that love him,
namely Joy. Therefore in my opinion, eternal Beatitude, or eternal felicity is
nothing else but a sufficiency, or fullness of all good things, according to
our own desire, and without any indigency, which felicity all the friends of
God shall fully enjoy in the life which is to come. For when we speak of good
things, we do not say but that life eternal is far more great and glorious
then this temporal life, which we have mentioned only by way of Manuduction.
Seeing then that the Just shall be rewarded with so great a Felicity, it
remains on the contrary, that the unjust shall be visited with some
extraordinary Infelicity. For as we have described the Elect according to those
abilities which God gave us: namely that their Beauty, Swiftness, and
Strength, their Liberty, Health and Pleasure should render them Cheerful and
Triumphant: So on the other side a certain horrible, inestimable deformity, a
dullness of motion and spirit, together with their Impotencie, and Captivity in
Chains of Darkness, as also their Melancholy, and pain shall make the
Reprobate to mourn and howl. Verily that Length of Life, which the just shall
most joyfully embrace, because it conduces to their fruition of eternal
happiness, will be very odious, and a mere Curse to the unjust, because it
exposes them to an endless sense of ever-lasting tortures. If I look on their
Wisdom, I know not what to speak of it, unless I say, that as to the just it
will be great joy and honor, so in the unjust knowledge shall be turned into
sadness and distraction of spirit. As for Love, whereby the Saints of God
shall be linked together with joy unspeakable: It shall be a mere Affliction to
the Impious, for by how much the more they love one another, by so much will
they be the more troubled one at another punishment. If it be questioned
whether they may enjoy any peace or concord? It is answered, they will be at
discord with every creature, and every creature with them. Hence in opposition
to the power of the Saints, the wicked shall be deprived of all power: They
shall never be able to attain to any thing they would have, and what they can
have, even that is it which they would not have. The wicked then instead of the
honor and eternal happiness of the Saints shall receive to their portion
eternal shame, and now what more shall we say for a Conclusion to these things?
Truly, that as the friends of God shall always triumph in the security of
their everlasting Beatitude, so the Enemies and Adversaries of God shall
utterly despair of any redemption from their endless Miseries: But in lieu of
the eternal ineffable joys of the Blessed, they shall inherit unspeakable
everlasting woes; especially such, who because of their impenitency for their
sins, shall be condemned to pass into the society of Devils.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.
Books Printed or sold by William Leake at the sign of the Crown in
Fleet Street between the two Temple gates
A Bible of a very (...) Roman letter in 4o A Tragedy written by the most
learned Hugo. Grotius, called CHRISTVS PATIENS, and Translated into English by
George Sandys in 8o. Man become Guilty, or the Corruption of Nature by Sin,
By John Francis Senault: and Englished by Henry Earl of Monmouth, in 4o. The
Fort Royal of holy Scriptures, or a new Concordance of the chief heads of
Scripture, Common-Placed for such as would suddenly command all the Rarities in
the Book of God, by I. H. in 8o. The Idyot, in 8o. by Cardinal Cusanus in four
Books, the 1 and 2 of Wisdom, the third of the Mind, the fourth of Statick
Experiments, or Experiments of the Balance; and Englished by Dr Everard. Nosce
te ipsum, in 8o. this Oracle Expounded in two Elegies, the first of Humane
Knowledge, the second of the Soul of Man and the Immortality thereof, by Sir
John Davies. Mayers Catechism, in 8o. Bishop Halls Old Religion. Book of
Martyrs in folio, Bishop Andrews Sermons in folio. Bishop Babingtons works in
folio. Adams on Peter in folio, Marburies Commentary on Habakkuk, 4o. Pagets
Christianography in 4o. Boultons works in 4o. Lattymers Sermons in 4o. Speculum
Mundi, or a discourse of the sixe-dayes Creation, in 4o. King on the Lords
Prayer, in 4o. Sir Richard Baker on the Lords Prayer, 4o. Barker on the
Commandments. Via Tuta, and Via Devia. in 12o. written by Sir Humphrey Lynde.
Catechistical Doctrine. Dents Pathway to Heaven, in 8o. David's Blessed man.
Poesy of godly Prayers. Gerards Meditations. Croms of Comfort. Hookers Souls
preparation for Christ.

