A SERMON PREACHED AT THE PUBLIC FAST, MARCH the Eight in the afternoon, At
St MARY'S OXFORD, BEFORE THE MEMBERS OF THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS There
Assembled;

By HENRY VAUGHAN, Mr. in Arts, and Fellow of Jesus College. And Printed by
their Order.

PROVE. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation: but sin is a reproach to any
People. OXFORD, Printed by LEONORD LICHI^^^^, Printer to the University, 1644.

Die Sabbati nono Martij. 1643.
ORdered that Master Bodvill and Master Watkins give Master Vaughan Thanks,
and desire him to Print his Sermon.

Noah Bridges.

MATTHEW. 5. V. 20. Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.
THe Law in the beginning was given by God to perfect and regulate the Actions
of Man. Now to the end it might be the better accommodated to the nature of
this creature, the Law, like man, was made up (as it were) of two parts, 2 Body
and a Spirit. The bodily Law served as a curb to the inordinate motions of the
outward members of the Body, restraining the licentious tongue, and the violent
hand, by working in the transgressors a fear of the severest punishments.
Every disobedience being to receive a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2. v. 2.
This therefore is styled by the Apostle, The law of the carnal commandment,
Heb. 7. 16.

The spiritual and more purely divine part of the Law respected the soul of
man, purifying it from all the stains and pollutions of thought. For the law of
the Lord is an undefiled law converting the soul, Psalm. 19. v. 17. This part
was the very soul and spirit of the law, and in this sense Saint Paul terms
it, the spirisnall, Romans 7. 14. and Clemens of Alexandria, (...) str. 2. (...).
the elivened, animated law.

Now the Phatisees, and generally the whole Leviticall Priesthood, though they
seemed accurate both in the knowledge and practice of that Corpus Iuris of
theirs, even unto supersticion, yet could not they out of their besotted
dullness reach or pierce ininto the spirit and soul, thereof, their fight
terminating in the outward (...); and though they bragged of acquaintance with
its most abstruse and involved mysteries, yet kn^w they indeed no more of it,
then as it respected the outward acts and carriage of the hand or tongue. For
by their Divinity the most deliberately vicious of thoughts carried no guilt
with it. (...) even this carnal law they had strangely deformed; here they
(...) it on the rack by glosles so restrictive of the precept, and so
indulgent, that they even contradicted the Canon, so forced and unnatural,
that their deductions (...) that, which should have been the measure and rule
of all their actions (...) the Philosophers (...), a crooked rule; there they
daube it so 1. Rhet. (...).
with the Traditions of their Fathers and their own, that it had even lost the
face and visage which it received from God in the beginning. For the Priests
said not, where is the Lord, and they that handled the Law knew him (...). ler.
2. v. 8. Thus the express image of Gods will, which at the first had its exact
proportion, consormity and resemblance, like that picture which Polycletes
exposed to the censure and correction of the vulgar, became (...), the true
lines defaced, the proportions by unnatural and unseemly additions marred, and
indeed all over (...) and mangled. Full time was it then that another Priest
should rise from (...), who was made not after the law of a carnal (...) mem,
but after the power of an endless life, Heb. 7. v. 16. This was he (spoken of
by Malachy. 3. v. 3.) who was to sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, who
should purify the sons of (...) and (...) them as (...) and silver, that they
may offer into the Lord an offering in right eousnesse. And here he (...) to
lay Judgment to the line and righteousness to the plummet in this Chapter,
and part cularly in these words. If. (...). 17.
I say unto you, Except your righteousness shall (...) the (...), etc.

Herein you may be pleased to observe with me two general parts.

1. The Condition, wherein you have these particulars. 1. The matter of it,
righteousness. 2. The Subject, your righteousness. 3. Both the quality and
latitude thereof, it must exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees.

2. The Commination or Penalty upon the not performance of the Condition, Non
intrabitis, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I shall begin with
the first particular in the Condition, namely the matter of it, righteousness.

God who created the World and hung every moving creature in its proper
Sphere, requires as from (...) Natural Agents, a peremptory uniforme course
of operation without swerving or desisting, so likewise from the Voluntary a
constant and exact obedience to his will. Though these two sorts of causes
differ much in their manner of working, in that the former is urged and driven
by some secret swinge and blind instinct; the latter guided by the free
unforced motions of its own will, yet in respect of the regularity and
constancy in operation, there ought to be a near agreement; so that look how
necessary it is for the (...) to shine, so necessary is it for thy light to
shine before men; for that Planet to walk under the line without the least
deviation, for thee to run the way of Gods Com^mandements without error acd
deflection. What the Philosopher (...). 4. de (...) (...). (...). 4.
terms (...), or prodigy in nature, namely (...), the same is the term of
Transgression in thee; so that thy preduction of sin is but the generation
and birth of a Monster. For other creatures to intermit their native
operations, is but (...) in Nature, for thee to desist from duty, absurdity in
Reason.

Man by nature is as active and (...) as the Heavens themselves; (...). de
Natura hominis. (...). 1.
his soul being (...), an ever-moving substance, which neither sleep nor death
it self can fetter; his life is but (...), (as the Pythagorean) a collection
of actions; it Hippodamus (...). de (...). c. 1.
consists in action, with Aristetle, which was the sole end, not only of his
first, but also of his second Creation. For we are his (...).
workmanship created in Christ (...) for good works, Ephesians. 2. l. 1. (...). c 3.
v 10. They that have looked narrowly into the composition and texture of his
body, have sound that there is not the least (...) there, but is (...) for
forty several employments; not a (...), but is entwisted with its artery to
conveigh the (...), those Instruments of action, into each joint and particle.

A Ship hastening toward Heaven was an excellent Emblem of a Christian, who
must not lie hulling in the harbor of some (...) sin fixed upon an Anchor of
security, but in St. Paul's expression (drawn hence as it is conceived) must
(...) be carried with full expansive sail to the (...) where he would be. He
must be in continual motion and progress, without the least pause and
intermission, ever walking in the law of God, and casting his meditations
thereon (...) in the morning, at noonday, and even at midnight. Our stays and
refreshments must set forward our spiritual as our natural life. Caesar could
(...). vita
sleep in a moving chariot, (...), Cas.
ordering his very rest for action. As there is a running of the way of Gods
commandments in the Psalm, so Romans 2. v. 17. there is an (...) a resting in
the law. The Stars move, govern, and impart influence when they seem most
fixed. A constant motion, as it is the strongest evidence, so likewise the
firmest preserver of liveliness and vigor. Those members which are most
frequently exercised, are most sound and firm; whereas the palsyed limbs,
which do not so much move as are pushed forward, prove but burdens to
themselves. What is it that keeps the stream in its native crystal
pureness, but a constant course; whereas standing waters breed but serpents and
corruption? When rust seizes upon the wheels of a curious Watch, we look upon
it as upon an artificial well wrought piece of disorder and confusion: and he
that contemplateth upon the fallow unmanured Soul, must apprehend it as the
decays and ruins of the glorious image of its Creator, a distracted (...).
wilderness, a perplexed maze of iniquity, a Theater where one rude passion
encountereth with another, one extreme of virtue assaulteth its opposite, with
much hurry, confusion and distraction. Hence it is that (...) Alexand. and St.
Ambrose Strom. 4.
make righteousness to be a Harmony and Symphony in the Harmoniam and (...)
(...) operum. (...). (...).
Soul, a right tuning of its faculties with admirable consent, and perpetual
subordination to the will of God, so that the want of it occasioneth jarring
and discomposure (as what impious man is there, whose heart is not sometimes
grated with the harsh closes of a self-convincing conscience?) Nor is this all.
The desect of righteousness does not only (...) and distract the soul in it is
faculties, but even in a sort annihilateth it in it is essence. For if sin
which is the absence of righteousness be likewise a privation of life, as the
Scripture (...), the (...) man, like the voluptuous Widow, is dead while he
lives, 1 Timothy 5, 6. For the spirit is life because of (...), Romans 8. 10. If
then I cannot produce those flowing rivers of living water, a stream of good
and pious works (...) from the spring of graces within. I am but (...) (...), a
dead Sea and (...) (...) est ex (...) (...) exire antequam (...) aris. (...).
Tranquil. c. 3.
it is (...) malorum, with the Stoic, the last and greatest of evils to dye
before I be departed. Of material substances there is none that bears a
nearer resemblance to the mind of man then the flame, whose motion when ever
you repress, you plainly extinguish. Even the grossest of Bodies by want of
Agitation, become only heaps and masses of their own corruption.

And since there is not a Power or Habit in the Soul but (...) its
extrinsecall perfection from the actions whereunto they are designed, there is
not a faculty, not a grace, be it never so rich and noble in the soul, which
receives not it is proportionable perfection according as it is more or less
exercised. And if you please let us cast our eye upon (...), which a great part
of men are used to set in that opposition to good works, even this excellent
and so much magnified virtue without the work of Faith, and labor of love, is
but a Carcass. For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without
works is 1 These. 1. 3.
dead also, James 2. 26. You see here what is the Soul as it were that
quickneth it, viz. this righteousness in the Text or good works. (...) says
Pelusio. Though l. 4. (...).
I cannot affirm (...) to be form of Faith, yet I find them ever inseparable,
and so closely linked together in that straight nearenes, that they often
exchange names, and in a sort mix natures also. The word (...) which usually
implies Faith, (...). Romans 1. 5. 16, 16.
4. 2. expresses obedience. The Ninevites belief, Ion. 3. is described by
their ready performance of the works of humiliation at the Prophers summons.
Our Savior is most express; This is the workc of God that we believe on him
whom he has sent, Ioh. 6. 26. We read Romans 3. of a Law of Faith, now every law
has its (...) (...), a directive virtue, and prescribes obedience by a rule.
What Saint Paul, Gal. 5 v. 6. calls Faith. 1 Cor. 7. 19. he terms the
keeping of the Commandments of God. For with the heart man beleiveth unto
righteousness, as the same Apostle Romans 10. 10. For if Faith resideth in the
heart, it must needs discover it self by the even tenor of the pulses beat in
the arms, it cannot but break forth into action. The scattered grains on the
surface will betray the hidden Oar.

Doubtless the life of all virtue (and to we call Faith) consists (...)
(...) (...) (...).
in the Pythagorean, (...), in the right inclination and election of the Will,
joined with a stirring vehement (...) to act and execute her commands. If any
virtue could be content to lurk in the soul, and not impart it self by
action, it would better become a Melancholicke Anachorite in a Cell, then a
(...) in a Common wealth. It is incident to the nature of all more refined
effences to betray themselves by their operations, God in the Production and
Administration of the world, the Soul by her reasening, and Faith by her
effects. Even the dullcst and most unactive of substances have their Emanation
of Spirits and Transient acts, if the speculations of some more retired
Naturalists misinsorme us not. Who is Christ's faithful servent, but he whom
his Master when he comes shall find doing, who with a serious case (...)
(...) acts and executes what was enjoined him? (...) (...) (...) the Enge in
the Gospel, and (...) admission to his (...).

If then this heavenly virtue has such a stirring, (...) power to obedience
and righteousness, it is not enough (...) believing men like Melancholic
Fantastickes, to (...) themselves Princes to dream of Crowns, (...) and
glory. The Beatificall Vision comes not with such Dreams. A fond fancying of
Heaven, and a groundless contemplation of what (...) thy bare presumption
shall suggest, can transport naught of thee (...), save a deluded thought. It
is not the highest part of impudence for a man to extend his hopes as far as
his wishes, and these as far as his fond fancy and imagination, But perhaps
thou (...) persuaded thy self thou art even from eternity enrolled in the Book
of life, and fear no sponge to wipe thee thence. That is a strong faith
indeed. But make it appear thou art so by thy righteousness, make that
election sure. In Dan. 12.
Iacchiades tells us there is no man written there, but (...) for his
righteousness sake. He spoke like a Jew or a Jesuit: none I believe without
it, though not for it. There is certainly a (...) in Heaven, a scroll wherein
all our actions good and (...). (...). (...).
evil are written down. Nazianzen is very express. We shall be all inscribed
[in that Book] (...), but according to the quality of our works past hit
herto. Thou need not trouble thy doubting soul with an overcurious search
into Decrees and Mysteries, but fix thine eye upon the lower rounds of the
ladder, and assure thy self with much confidence, that if thy good works here
below be (...) at all, thou art wiped out of the book of the living, thou art
not written among the righteous.

It has been always observable that the most earthy souls have with greatest
presumption and confidence ever pretended to the more raised and highest
agitations of the mind, even unto rapture and ecstasy, as the Gnostickes and
Valentinians of old, who though they were of men the most brutishly carnal,
yet conceited themselves to be (...) spiritual, so far exalted (...) Epiph.
Haeref. 31.
above the ordinary sphere of mortals, that they disdained to make use of the
body for any virtuous action, fancying themselves saved by the refined
speculation of some hidden mysteries; not much unlike the Antinomians and
Euthusiasts of our times, who building merely upon the whisperings of their
private spirit, and their skill in the many scores of abused Texts, with so
little scruple break through all the bars of Law and Gospel, and yet
profess themselves the only Christians. It seems it was Christ's business
to ease our shoulders not only from that (...) the insupportable burden of
Ceremonies, and Iud. 16.
the Malediction of the Law, but to disengage us like wise from the observance
of the Moral precepts; not to fulfill but disanull the Law; to introduce and
authorize not a sober liberty, but mere humane licentiousness. There is with
the Apostle a Wisdom Romans 8. 6.
of the flesh, and a (...), a kind of flesh, and fleshines 1 Cor. 1. 26.
in the very mind and spirit. This is the Godly wisdom, and the 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Spirit the Men vaunt of. These be they which separate themselves, sensual,
having not the spirit, Jude v. 19.

The curious Affectation of knowledge, joined with a neglect of righteousness
spreads it self farther, and is indeed the Epidemicall disease of this age.
For whereas Religion is the knowledge of the truth which is after Godliness,
we are so much (...). 1. 1.
for the knowledge and the ever learning, that we have lost the godliness: we
know not what is to visit the fatherles and Widows in their afflictions, to
cloth the naked, and to feed the hungry, to do good and distribute, which
makeup the better half of Religion. Therefore Nazianz. well defines it by
(...) a right (...). 1.
obedience, and (...), which is to be religious, is (...), with the Etymologist
the reaching forth of the hand, to put ones life in his hands, as Job puts his
(...). 13. 14. that is in S. Gregory's Allegory, Cordis intentione^ in opere
ostendere, to show forth Greg. in (...).
the intention of the heart in the work. Now it is our common malady, that the
vital spirits are not naturally dispensed from the heart into the hands and
feet, but fly upwards to the brain. The Vines in the Naturalist are perfect
emblems of us, which (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), etc (...). (...). (...).
(...). 14. (...) 2.
were more fruitful above, more barren beneath. The Platonists among their
many excellent discourses that the Soul ought to be purified; that this
purgation was to be wrought according to its principles (so they term
faculties) (...), the reason understanding and will, not them without this. The
Scripture faith the same Act. 15. God purifying their hearts by faith; by
faith, a divine virtue affecting and seated in both the faculties of the Soul,
purifying both. Thus 2 Cor. 4. 6. God has shined in our hearts, there is the
will, to give the light of knowledge, there is the understanding purged. For
this, like some transparent body, transmitteth the beams when once they have
chased away those, its gross mists of dullness and ignorance into the Will,
where they unite and concentring produce heat, which strongly works out the
corruptions thence, and disposes it thus purified, chafed, and suppled with
charity, for good works. Consider now what a worthless thing is light without
heat, it is but the splendour of a putrid Gloworme, or the blaze of an empty
Meteor. The wisdom of the Prudent is to `H (...) Anton. 1. 4.
understand his way, says the wisest of men, Prove. 14. 8. This is that (...),
the wisdom of the Just, Luc. 1. 17. and that which is seated in the very
heart-roots, (...). 38. 36. The Philosopher (...) apud (...). de (...) te (...).
that defined Science by Prudence, which is a Practick habit, was not much
mistaken. Iamblicus describes true Wisdom by righteousness, nor was that
known in Plato's school, whereby men were assimilated to the divine nature,
but (...) (...).
(...), to become righteous and holy. The knowledge of God is to judgment and
righteousness, as appears out of I (...). de rat.
Ierem. 22. v. 15, 16. Thus Hos. 6. 3. where it is ut cognoscamus Imp. Vid.
Plat.
Dominum, that we may know the Lord, the Hebrew Scholiacs in (...). apud Drusum.
read it that we may worship and serve God. Mere speculation without practice,
be it never so clear and refined, is but vain and fruitless; it is but like
the wearing of a glazen eye, which though it be resplendent, yet is it
altogether unserviceable for the guidance of our motions. The Pharisees here
were knowledge and broad Phylacteries of Law from their foreheads down to the
very skirts and frienges of their garments, and yet our Savior terms them
Fools and Blind. For what greater argument (...). 23. 17.
could there be of ignorance, either exceeding gross or (...). 9. 41.
most pernitiously wilful in them, then to offend with so much conjoined
light, and like Charon in Lucian, therefore to stumble In 'E (...) dial.
because arrived from the darkness of Hell in sight of the Sun.

I told you out of S. Paul of a Wisdom (or rather prudence) of the flesh, a
great bane of Piety, S. Austin expounds it of an unrighteous Ep. 26.
Civil Prudence. And because I am told by some learned Interpreters, that the
Scribes and Pharisees here, had they joined righteousness and prudence
together, might have sat in Moses his chair uncontrolled, and have escaped
the sharp (...)
reproof of my Text, I shall speak something of the necessary conjunction of
these two.

Inevery laudable Counsel and Resolve as there must be Prudence Aristot. l. 6.
to choose the Subject, and means with their Proportion, so Eth. 12.
likewise Justice and Righteousness to level and direct these means to a due
end. The prudent man is always the good (...)
man in Aristotle. For how is it possible that a Soul troubled 1 Ibid.
and clouded with the fumes and mists of vicious affections can 2
discover ought aright through that even glass of corrupt passion, which
presents things unto us with the same Obliquities and Deformities as it self
is affected with; how can it fix it self on the steady consideration of those
infinite accidents, consequences, conjectures, oppositions, those intricacies
and perplexities, those small particularities and circumstances that occur in
public affairs? Saint Paul, Romans 1. speaking of the Gentiles who withheld
the Truth ( i. e.) the light of nature and conscience in unrighteousness,
says, v. 21. That they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened. Vid. (...). ut (...). item (...). 5.
Thus does vice pervert and deprave the habit of Practick-Principles in us, yea
and in a sort destroys even Rational Nature it self, which (as the
Schoolmen rightly) does illuminate Aquin. 1. (...) ae. q. 5 1. a. 1. (...)
(...) p
that Habit and informs us in the test Expedients for the (...) age of War,
the recovery of Peace, for the regulating and Plut. de A (...)
preserving of humane societies. The Lacedemonian Magistrates rejected wholesome
advice, because it proceeded from a loose Liver. It cannot be denied indeed but
an impious man may at sometimes produce good Counsel; but it is likely to a
perverse unjust end. Who is it but admireth the subtilty of Achitophel? but it
was for the deposing of a good King; or the cunning of leroboam to keep the
People from going to lerusalem to worship? but it was to make the breach more
wide and desperate, and to establish his usurped Throne. There is a Prudence of
Serpents, which as Basil observes, preserve and benefit themselves, (...). 5.
(...) (...). (...).
but themselves only: such as is to be seen in those Plut. (...) (...). (...).
who were about Stratocles and Demiclides who invite one another to
State-Employments as to a golden Harvest, where you shall reap that man's
honors, the second's Mannours, and the thirds great Office. The wise man's eyes
are in his head, says the Preacher, c. 2. 14. where are the fools then, says
Nyssen. are they in his heels? yes, or as Solomon, in the ends of the earth,
Prove. 17. 24. to regard the enlargement of his own worldly profits, pleasures,
and terrene happiness; whereas the wise man casts one Eye upon the Helm,
and lifts the other to the Star in Heaven, by which he steereth his course
in the midst of the Billows.

There is besides the Municipall Law and Statutes, a Law and Testimony, whereby
Men should direct their Determinations. For we cannot pronounce a right
judgment of actions and affairs, but by considering their dependence, and
relation with the prime Cause and rule of all our (...), namely the Will of
God. Whatsoever recedeth from that rule is unjust, what is unjust is founded
not upon equity but violence; and because such Constitutions and Mandates are
not imposed on Men without Tyranny, they are never happily executed. Have we
then a recourse to the Law and will of God, and we shall not need those
unnatuall Instruments of the Machiavellians, Perjury, Lying, Deceit,
Dissimulation, Injustice and the like. It was in the Porch of the Temple, that
those two maine Pillars of a State, lachin and Boaz, Stability and Strength
were erected. The 1. Kings. 7.
Jews deliver that their supreme Court of Judicature was in the South part of
the Temple; and that their Kings Palace joined with it. For Religion must be
(...), the foundation Plut.
of Law-giving; and ought to be, says (...), the first of 7. Pol. c. 11.
public cares. The Christian Emperors therefore were wont to advise with the
Governors of the Church, that nothing might be done contrary to the precepts
of Religion, or to to the prudence of Gods Church: as the Romans like wise with
their Foeciales. The Scepter of Minos in Homer, is but (...), In Minoe.
in Plato, the Doctrine and Discipline of God. Hence was it that the Ancients
clothed God and Prudence with the same Armor; now the Armor of God in Is.
59. is the Helmet of Salvation and the Breast Plate of righteousness.

When a Nation manageth its affairs by the Dictates of private spirits and
desires contrary to the known rules of Piety, Virtue, and Obedience, it
becomes like the lsraelites, (...) Nation void of Council, neither is there
any understanding in them. Deuteronomy. 32. 28. (...) their meek Leader Characters
them. Then through the wrath of the Lord of (...) is the Land darkened, and the
people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother. Is.
9. 19. darkened with clouds of Iealousies and vain fears which their own
guilt shall suggest unto them; and will straight gush into a storm. And when
their paths are made dark and slippery enough, they proceed, like the Heathen
Boxhorn.
of old, in performance of their ridiculous rites to Consus the God Quest.
of Counsels, Equos and Asinos Coronare; or like blinded Samson Romans 39.
to lay hold on the goodly Pillars, them of Church or State; and in Iud. 16.
stead of strengthening and confirming to overthrow the whole House. But
sometimes, that they may the more certainly arrive at their deserved perdition,
the Devil, he hangs forth a light, such a one as I have seen in a Lamp
burning and fed with a sophisticated and strangely tempered Oil, which
presented the Beholders with uncouth Serpents, Beasts, Antic shapes, and
newfangled Forms: or like him in the Gospel, they begin to see men walking
like Trees (i. e.) with the head, which bears Mark. 8. 24.
analogy with the root in the Tree, downwards; the King below the People.

S. Ambrose evinceth the necessary conjunction of civil 2. Offic. c. 8.
Prudence and Righteousness from what is delivered of Solomon. That the
wisdom of God was in him to do judgment. 1. King. 3. 28. no gift from God
descends upon an impious soul. The rays of the Sun, though they kindle
stars and enlighten the air, yet require some preexistent light in those
Stars and in that air; and ere the beam of Wisdom be shot into men from
the Father of Lights, there is necessary in them a Light, even that of good
works and piety to shine before men. Indeed true righteousness has much of
that quality of light with it, that it must needs discover its glory to others
benefit, it cannot be dammed up and smothered: it is that (...) another man's
good, yea, and more another Aristot. 5. Eth.
then its owner, and therefore aptly resembled ty Oil, which does the outward
parts of the party anointed more good, then the inward. And though it has this
diffusive imparting nature with it, yet has it this common too with every
other more particular virtue, that it is (...), every man's own possession, and
claims a Seat in each Soul. And so I come unto the Subject, your
righteousness.

No quality can perfect or adorn the mind, save what is seated and inhereth
therein. For he that glories in another rich endowments, betrayeth but his
own poverty in them. It is the most silly pride and ostentation to brag of
borrowed plumes. For nothing certainly can place us in the least degree of
happiness, but what we can call our own; Felicity being (...) 1. Eth. (...).
5.
something we our selves possess. Therefore as the just shall live by his
faith, Habac. 2. 4. so by his own righteousness too: for every man shall
receive his own reward according to his own labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8. We are
placed in this world, as in S. Chrysostomes (...), in a Taske-roome. Every man's
work (...)
shall be made (...) -- and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it
is, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 11. The allusion here, T. 7. Savil. vid.
according to S. (...), is unto severe Mint-masters, who required De lo is
(...) ae i (...).
a strict account from their Refiners, and took an exact survey and trial of
each man's performance, to see whether the gold was brought to its just strain
of purity or no. God requires no less a care from us in that great work of
our sanctification, and purging out the corruptions of the Old man. Therefore
let every man prove his own work, and then he shall have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6. 4.

And since there is not a Soul, but must give an account to God for it self,
not to be essoin'd or excused by a Dedimus potestatem, Job. 19. 27.
relation, dependence or pretense whatsoever, not to answer by other Proxy
then its own convicted conscience; think not to be covered under the supposed
Mountains of others merits (those Mountains will melt in the presence of God)
or a supply from the Saints and Martyrs righteousness. This were contrary to
course for thee to graffe thy slip of wild Olive on the good Olives stock.
There is an inestimable disproportion betwixt the afflictions of the severest
Penitentiarie and celestial bliss. For, non sunt condignae passiones, The
Sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. v. 18. Look what pressures soever the
Saints endured in this life, they were in respect of themselves necessary, to
consummate their own virtue, and to prepare them for a greater weight of
glory. That Cloth which is to receive the more illustrious Die, as that of
Purple, must be steeped in the foulest colors; it requires more wringing and
stretching then what was intended for an obscurer hue. Out of our afflictions
we weave those Crowns of righteousness; and the most adorned is most thorny,
they are Crowns of Equity and Goodness, as the Syriacke Text reads it in 2.
Tim. 4. 8. for in exact equality the least grain of (...) overballanceth the
most Transeendent and heaviest Passions. How should man be just with God? says
Job. 9. 2. and if not just himself, his bankrupt Store cannot supply my wants.
The wise Virgins in the Gospel gave good reason for their denial of Oil to
the foolish; Not so (say they) least there be not enough for us and you, Mat.
25. 9.

It must be then Vestrajustitia, your righteousness, yet, there was a fear,
you see, in the wise Virgins, that there was not enough of this Oil; the Lamps
in the Sanctuary had no secret spring in the bottom, but were replenished from
abroad, with that which distilled from the Olive Branch. Our own inherent
righteousness is too narrow a garment to cover nakedness, it is but (...) a
clothing of Figge-leaves, as Macarius, Homil. 20.
like that of our first Parents, which betrayeth the Sin and Shame together.
When we view those which proceed from our own natural strength and arm of
flesh, we find the best of them to be but the Prophets sour grapes and evil
figgs; Ezekiel. 18.
yea, our most religious Actions, which are crowned with an (...). 24.
influence of grace as they issue from depraved Principles, and mingle with
that (...) in Epiphanius, that stream Haeres. 64.
of Brimstone, which runs through the channells of the Soul, must needs
contract if not an inherent stain and tincture thence, at leastwise much
imperfection. It appears by the Law, that the Lame and Blind were not to be
offered in sacrifice; Deuteronomy. 15:
now if werespect our own inherent righteousness; as it Levit. 22.
proceeds from a seduced Reason there, it is blind; as it is the issue of a
perverted destorted Will, there it is Lame. This then cannot be the sacrifice
of righteousness wherewith God is pleased, Psalm. 51. 19. it is but the
Sacrifice of the corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14. For God who cannot behold iniquity,
requires a righteousness as untainted as his own justice, as straight as his
own will without the least obi^quity. To whom shall we have recourse for that?
Who eve^ arrived at such perfection? Only the Lamb without spot and blemish,
our blesse^ Savior, who on the Cross bore our iniq^ities, yea and our virtues
to, like Aaron taking away the in ^n^qu^^y of the Holy things. Thus was he made
Exodus 23 (...).
unto us righteousn^sse, 1C (...). 30. In him are men blessed, (...). 72. 17.
that (...), says the ^haldes (...) (...) (...) in the Messiahs
righte^ousn^sse. But, what need then (...) V^stra^ust (...) a the the text, if
his sa^isfactions sufficiently absolve us from gui^t and punishment? Much every
way. For to this end were we redeemed, that we might be a people zealous of
good works The Sc^p^goate (...). 2. (...).
say the Jews, made atonement (...) (...) (...) n, (...). de (...). c. (...).
of the Law, but still upon c^n^^tion of repentance. (...) never yet did a true
faith in Christ's merits exclude penitenti^^l and charitable works. Beside the
propit^^to^y Sacrifices, which shadowed ^orth Christ's (...) of himself, the
La^^ ordained also Peace offerings, or offerings, of Holiness, as the C^aldee
on Levit. 3 calls them; these are to be off red by us in our good works.
Therefore Revel 1. 5. 6. is Christ said to have washed us in his blood, there
is his pr^pi^iation: and to have made in Priests, there he impose^h on us a
sacrifice, namely, to present our bodies a living sacrifice holy and acceptable
un o him. He indeed is our Rom 12. 1.
High Priest, who like him in the Law s^ts a value on our oblations.
sanctifies and accepts them though they be but a pair of Turtle Doves and
two young Pigeons, the poor woman's offe^ing be they never so mean and
contemptible. He stampeth our Brass and Copper money, and makes the (...)
(...). He crowns our righteousness with mercy and loving kindness. We which
were before those Empty Vine, Hos. 10. 1. by the virtue, s^ccou^, and
^nfl^ence, communicated from Christ's suffe ings prove laden with fu^l clusters
and fruitful in good works. His grace adds life and color to the (...)
^^eament of our moral actions, which are (...) (...) (...) with so much
darkness and those me^struous raggges n (...) 64. 6. become that fine Linen
clean and w^^te, which (...) righteousness of the Saints. Rev. 19. 8. However
we are, (...) by Faith of our Saviors obedience, we are sanctified certainly
by our own good works, which deriving an expiatory nature from his blood, wash
off the deepest stains of concupiscence, and cure all lamenesse and
imperfection in us. The withered hand is restored by a discreet cheerful
liberality; the rash by a repressive lenity; the loose emissions and glances of
the eye stayed by a grave (...); the crooked foot rectified by prudence. Thus
do our virtues mitigate and abate our excesses, supply our defects, correct
and qualify the malignancy in our affections, exalting the whole man both in
body and soul, to that strain of perfection, that the grossness of his
nature will admit. To keep the Commandments, this is the whole man, Eccl. 12.
13. For righteousness is not a coloring of the skin and painting of the
outward, but if true and sincere, must issue from the heart and purify the
soul likewise. And so I pass to the quality of our Righteousness.

It must exceed that of the Scribes and Pharesees.

Not to (...) time about the Original distinction, (which was not great)
Rites, and Institutes of lives of the Scribes and Pharisees, whereof the
Historians and Critics give you just account, give me leave to glance at some
few particular Vices and Practices of theirs which more concern us, as being
taken up in our times; though even herein I find my self prevented by the
accurate labors of a late (...) in this Church; yet I shall Bishop (...) (...).
gleane somewhat after his harvest. The Pharisees were not confined to one Age
or Nation. Nazian. orat. 34. has his. (...) they were as rife in his as in the
former age, in respect of Conditions and manners, though not of Profession and
Discipline.

To begin with the name: I should incline to Epiphanius (...). 16.
his opinion, who interprets the word Pharisee by Separatist. For thus St.
Paul, Romans 1. 1. who received his education in that Sect, being now called to
be an Apostle, says, with allusion to his former condition, that he was (...)
separated for the Gospel. For they were such as the Prophet Esaias speaks of,
c. 65. v. 5. who were used to say, Stand by thy self, come not (...) to me,
for I am holier then thou. It was part of their Vow to withdraw from the Sons
of the Earth, who were but Scabellum pedum Pharisaeorum (as the Proverb ran)
and the contagion of common breath, and fancying themselves Men of that
transcendent Holiness, by way of eminency entitled themselves the
Holy-Congregation; a style familiarly abused by each profane Conventicle, and
in this part of the World first usurped by the intemperate Reformer of the
Neighbor Kingdom and his seditious rabble. It was an Argument of a low sordid
spirit with them to stoop to received Customs, and therefore were singular in
each gesture, insomuch that to pray with a bended knee (which yet l conceive
the light of Nature instructs us to do) was a sign of a crest-(...) and over
guilty soul; we find him in the Gospel standing, as judging Prayer to be a
familiar salute and compellation, rather then a duty.

If you look upon them as interessed in public affairs, they of all others
were the most active and prevalent men in the Great Court of Sanhedrim; the
Gospel makes them still the leading men, as who had gained such an opinion of
Sanctity with the People, that they only bore the sway in matters of Civil and
even of mere Ecclesiastical cognizance. They call the Council against Christ,
John 11. still dispute his Doctrine, and (...) him even to his Consummatumest.
Saint Paula Ben (...), and therefore neither Priest nor Levite, and before his
Conversion a (...); he the (...) persecutor of the Saints. If we but consider
them in reference to the Civil government. History mentions not more turbulent
and seditious dispositions, nor greater opposers of the Regal Dignity; Men so
obstinarely resolved to disobedience, that they could by no means be induced to
swear Allegiance to the Roman Emperor, to whose Scepter Conquest had long
before subjected the Nation. Here, I must confess, the comparison falls short.
They will (...) in judgment one day against those Christians that have sworn
Allegiance to their Sovereign, and yet so often violated that sacred Oath. To
go on. They (...) men skilled in all the Mysteries of exciting the ignorant to
(...), as Methodicall in this work as the (...) himself, and like him in his
first stratagem on Mankind, first insiuuated themselves into the minds of
(...) Women, as appears by their practice to supplant Herod, (...) (...). 7. c.
3.
having with no (...) (...) and malice endeavored the deposing of (...)
before. Nor wanted they their Scribes and Instruments among that Sex, such as
was Huldah the Woman Scribe. I need not tell you of their exquisite
Dissimulation and artificial (...) of the most impious designs under the most
specious color, who could (...) Christ in the Gospel, and St. Paul in the
Acts, out of pure zeal to the Law of God, and his (...). 14 58. Acts 24 6
Temple. I could wish they were not imitated, by such as can render the most
impious practices smooth and (...), who can pull down the Church with Gospel
in their (...); as (...). in (...). (...).
the Vine-(...) wrap themselves in the leaves of the Vine, when they goeabout
to devour the fruit. Here the comparison comes infinitely short again: the
Pharisee (having ignorance for his excuse) will be one day justified before
such Christians, who malign none for destroying, but for edifying the Temple
for rearing it out of its dust and Cobwebs, into the beauty of holiness. It
were endless to trace them through all their crooked paths. The Sum of what
I have delivered of them, and somewhat more, you may be pleased to receive in a
short and pithy Character, from the pen of the industrious Annalist. They were
(says he) Regibus (...) and infesti, (...), (...), perfidi, etc. Faithless
and malicious to Kings, factious, restlest; perfidious, immoderate, ambitious,
all which vices they palliated with a Mercenary Sanctity.

But to consider them with something a nearer relation to this Text, they are
(in the judgment of most men) under the iash here for these two respects. 1.
For their Hypocritical and merely external righteousness. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, seven times in the Gospel for this day. 2.
For their superstitious Will Worship, grounded either upon Math. 23.
their own new (...) fancyes, or the unwarranted Traditions of the Elders. The
word in the Arabic Text for (...) seems to touch upon both these defects of
their (...), which signifies, says Kirstenius, excellere (...) and copia, to
exceed in goodness, there is the quality, in plenty, there is the extent and
latitude.

To begin with the quality: ours must not be (...) Vide (...) (...) (...) apud
(...). (...). 1.
a Pharisaicall Miniature, a cleansing of the outside of the cup, the
specious outward of a whited (...), but sincere in the mind, heart, and
affections. If we first search into the ground of their Hypocrisy, we shall
find it to be that, which I mentioned in the beginning, the corrupt
Interpretation of the Precept to a mere carnal sense, though there wanted not
the common outward motives, as to gain the reputation of Pious and Just with
the People: and the like.

This was the pure Jewish piety, even the bereaving of Religion of its very
life and essence, which is the purifying of the soul, as Justin Martyr in his
Dialogue with Trypho fully (...)
charge them; Thus had they sunk into a dullness more gross than ever
clouded Pagans eyes; For the Heathen Lawgivers though it was impossible for
them to impose a penalty on vicious thoughts which by the advantage neither of
Art, nor rack, they could look into, yet every where prescribe most wholesome
Vid Plat. 4.
rules and admonitions, tending to the uprightness of the mind Legum.
and intentions; it being the end and scope of all Laws whatsoever, not so
much to punish the offender, as to make men unwilling to oftend. Though it be
not a difficult matter to impose upon the sense and judgment of men, with whom
Tynne may Elench. 2.
pass for silver (as the Philosopher) or a baser Metal dipped in gall for
Gold; it is not so with the Judge and Searcher of the Heart; he soon discovers
our adulterate coin, and (...) by the severe Touchstone of his Law. He who as
the Prophet Esaias c. 45. v. 7. (...), creates the light and darkness, must
needs Psalm. 139. (...)
know both; The darkness and light to him are both alike; He sees the
exterior Acts, thy light before men, he vieweth the hidden vaults and recesses
of the mind, the darkness of thy heart; yea he looks beyond that secret
spring of thy irregular actions, for even when our heart cannot condemn us, he
can. Therefore is his Law Spiritual, Romans 7. a Law of fire, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. He
pleads in flames, Is. 66. By these he examineth thy dissembled humiliation
and repentance, thy solemn Devotions, the stubble and trash of thy
Performances. His word is a Discerner of the Thoughts, privy to out most
retired motions, yea our very Heb. 4. 12.
first suggestions. He hates, says Justin Martyr, that (...), ad Zonom and
(...) (...).
the first fumes and (...) of the appetite;he loathes our whole progress in
sin; our first conceptions of it, when it is a Cockatuce in the Egg, our
Articulation of it, when the Will rests and delights in the unlawful fancied
pleasures; in the consummation of it by the act of consent, and lastly in the
production when it is hatched a d brought (...). In Amos, we find the word
(...) Working used for thinking, the Thought and Fact being equally (...) and
guilty with God. In this Chapter we are bid to cut our right eye, and hand off,
if they offend us; that is, the rising affections of the Concupiscible, and the
rash bublings of the Irascible faculty. Do thou then bridle thy angry
thought? do thou cast off thy offencive hand? stay the locle evibrations and
glances of the eye? thou (...) it out from thee for thy lascivious fight,
though thou go no farther, (...). 5. (...).
has its condemnation. How strict a Covenant ought we then to make with our
eyes, (...) Job did, and with (...) care should Job (...). 8.
we shut up the windows of the senses, that no alluring object shoot through
with its gilded beams into the soul? It is a famous saying among the Jews
(...) Thou Nazarite whom opud (...). in (...).
a religious vow has abridged of wine, depart, look not thou on any side upon
the Vine.

As we must with the best diligence repel the assaults of those rude beasts
from without, that would come and trouble the waters, so especially let us
remove those poisoned rods from within the fountain, and the stream will run
pure and clear. Now the sourse and fountain of all our actions is the Heart.
It is Solomon's Counsel that we keep this with all diligence, or as Prove. 4. v.
3.
the Original, above all keeping, for out of it are the issues of life.
Therefore has nature fenced it with certain swords, to protect it from the
gentle (...) and smoothed violence of enticeing delights. The heart in the
midst of the body is like the Spring in a watch, so that we must diligently
preserve it from that (...) pulvere in Gregory, from the smallest dust of Mor.
1.
wickedness, else the motions will be irregular. And if the (...) Theoreme be
true, that (...), the heart wounded will dye, and the least pinch there be
(...), how inevitably killing is that which the Schoolmen term Aberratio
cordis in peccato, which is not the bare admission of a vicious thought, but
the recalling ofit and the reflecting on that thought anew with fresh delight?
This like their percussion of the ill spirits in the blood (according to late
observation) breeds a serpent in the heart.

Besides, seeing our actions are in themselves but mere agitations of the body
or mind, or both, signifying nothing (...) the intentions of the Heart stamp
and distinguish them, confer life and difference on them; should (...) not be
our first and chiefest care to set the heart aright? This is that the Law
requires, that Cubit of the Sanctuary which measures out judgments or
rewards, not according to the pomp, show, event and substance, but the (...)
the manner, intention and the Scope of our works.

A form and visage of Godliness serves not the turn, it would better become
one of those Pagan Mimicks in time of persecution to act and personate the
Christian, then a devout worshipper, which serves his God in Spirit and in
Truth. And yet not in spirit only, as some would deduce from those words in S.
John 4. 23. as if their bodies before the Resurrection were become spiritual.
God who gave us both body and soul does in justice expect worship from both.
He will not be pleased with a half service and lame Sacrifice.

Again, not in spirit only, but in all outward conversation. For as in Plato,
so in Saint Paul, we read of an inner and outward man; and the heathens rule
holds good in our worship of God it must be (...) both with the outward and
inward; for besides that hidden man of the Heart, he must have thee in all
outward relations and capacities, as Master of a family, as member of the
Church or state. As there was Thummim, integrity on (...) breast, (...) Vrim
Light to display it forth, and Sanctitas (...) written in his forehead, The
(...) of life (as it is well observed) is described in the old Testament for the
most part by (...) (...) sound and straight, Metaphors (...) Timber, which must
be sound not hollow, and that is to be (...) in the sight of God: then straight
not crooked, and that is to be (...) (...). unblameable before Men. Our
clothing of (...) like the (...) of the Law (...) of Vest: mentum and Stola an
upper and nether garment. The (...) of God was overla'd with Gold within and
without. Our glory and (...) must be like that of the Kings daughter, which
(...) all glorious within yet had her clothing of (...) (...), (...) (...) of
(...) ke (...) (...) with a ve sc colors, Psalm. 45.. Moses had glory inhis
face and (...) ce coming down from the Mount. The (...) is (...); (...) od in
you body and (...) spirit which a e God, 1 (...) 6. 28. but with the (...)
(...), because it is the more noble (...) of man, and (...) the judgment of
some Philosophers, the whole man. Gregor. Nazi (...). (...) of his Father, that
he was (...), Orat. 8.
That he was great in appearance but the (...) of him was the richer. The
Temple we Math. 23. 17.
(...) was overlaid with Gold, and that Gold was (...) ated by the Temple under
it. Therefore say some, it is said, that the Kingdom of Heaven must begin
within us, Luc. 17. The Heart indeed is Primum Vivens in the method of Grace as
well as nature. That light which now sheddeth (...) its glories, was (...) like
that of the Eagles in the Revelat. 4 8. hidden within, else were it but as the
shining of a Marble (...) over the Tomb of corruption and (...). (...) it is
observable that Religion which b idleth the thought, (...) many hundreds of
(...) before Laws and Civil (...) which are only (...) to (...) the (...).
As in the (...) (...), Col. 3. 5. (...) uncleannes etc. are our (...) upon
earth, So in St. Gregory's, (...) est (...) (...), (...) is a (...) (...) that
goes to the very (...) (...) of the Mind; there I am (...), it is originally
fixed and seated, and thencc sends forth its beams through the Body as through
a (...) cloud, Hence is it that the Syriack usually (...) (...) Righteousness by
(...) sincerity of Mind. He worshippeth God aright; that brings himself the
sacrifice, and (...) his own soul into a Temple. The Persian sacrificed the
soul, conceiving that God wanted no other (...). Strabo l. 16
And indeed what gift more proper, which more befitting the spiritual Essence
of God; then our most immateriall (...), (...) cap. 2.
part? A Philosopher gives you the reason; it is (...) it is that which alone
can be united to the Divine (...)
Nature. Scripture affords not a precept or Testimony for the Divine
Institution of the oblation either of Beast or Grain at the first; such
sacrifices being merely taken up by the Patriarchs as sensible
acknowledgements of homage to the great Lord of the Earth, though in succeeding
times these and other rituals were enjoined the Israelites as Types or (...)
avocations Dialog. cum (...).
from Idolatry, ( as Justin Martyr and Mannonie conceive) they being as prone
to the Egyptians Idols as to their Fleshpots. De (...).
The Heathens well saw that Oblations (...) without the Intentions of the mind
were ineffectuall, but a needless Butchery, but (...) Fuel not Sacrifice: nor
could it be Hierocles.
imagined that men of their knowledge should conceive their Gods to be like
Flies taken merely with the steame of flesh or as dead carcasses, whose ill
sent you keep off with a precious ointment or a rich persume. The sacrifices
of God are a troubled P (...) 51, 17.
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God, will thou not despise. It must
be contrite, sor if we offer aright and according to the rule, Exodus 30. We
must conterere bruise our spices that we may Greg. moral.
examine subtly the soundness and savor of them withinLooke l. r. c. 19.
we then to the Inside of our gifts, that we present not our God mith the
Philistines Trespasse-offerings, Mice and Emrods 1 Samuel 6. 41.
set forth in Gold.

The sacrifice of the body by Abstinence and Mortification is best performed,
when we seriously asflict the Soul, and rent the heart. It is such a Fast that
I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his Soul, it is to bow down his
head as a bulrush to spread sackcloth and ashes under him, will thou call
this a Fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is. 58. v 5. Godly sorrow
consists not in a Phatisaicall disfiguring and sad composing of the
Countenance, but must affect each faculty and affection as Saint Paul
describes that of the (...), 2. Cor. 7. 11. which Apud V. Cl. Ioh Seldenum. de
Iure Not. and Gent. etc.
produced that general change, which wrought that (...), that fear, that
vehement desire, that zeal, etc. and through renovation of the mind. The
Conversion of a Proselyte according 1. (...)
to the Jews was to be wrought by the admission of a New Soul, that of a
Sinner, certainly by the Creation of a clear heart. Tell me not then of those
(...) and contingent Symptoms of Penitence and Devotion as of thy flowing
tears; there is not an Hypocrite or Actour but has more command over his
eyes; or of a Macerated Countenance: occasioned perhaps by thy frequent
furseits; of thy abstinence for a whole day; it may be it is with them in
Basil; (...), to be revenged of this day at Supper, and so not lose, but shist
a Meal by making two together. Do thou keep down a lust to day? is it not
to give it some pause and intermission, that it may become more vigorous the
day following? is it not to pen it in, that it may burst forth with greater
flame? But admit thy rigor over thy lusts greater, it is but for one day in a
whole month, and then only when miseries or commands of Authority cast thee
upon thy knees; the Pharisee fasted two days every week at night contented
himself with a few Sallets, and these to enable him to endure more fasting and
(...); his rest was either upon the bare ground, or else on Thorns, a Bed of
languishing, that he might take no rest. Does thy righteousness exceed his?
Had they exercised this severity to elevate the Mind for pious Contemplations,
and for to give wing to their prayers as well as for the humbling of their
bodies, and not for vain pomp and (...), it had been extreme laudable in them.
But with us since the choice of Meats, the whip and haireloth are laid aside,
to avoid Iudaisme and Popery, are not we wisely become (...)? Bodily Exercise
profit eth 1 Timothy 4. 8.
though little, little in respect of the godly end inward contrition of the
Heart; for unless this be piously affected with humiliation and penitence, a
bed of Ivory would do better then Zach. 13. 4.
thy ashes, and thy robes of Purple then the rough garment, seeing in thy (...)
mournful guise without the (...) weed thou art but a contradiction to thy
self; thou art but possessed like those in Matthew 8. out of whose mouth the
Divolls confessed Christ, but still they were Devils within. Thou do war
with Virtue against Virtue, with Devotion against Devotion, and fallest even by
those Vices and Lusts thou would seem to (...). Are we Temples of the
living God? 2. Cor. 6. 6. there shall in no wise enter into that Temple, any
thing that is (...) Rev elat. 21. 27. and shall we make them like (...) the
Egyptians Temple, which within a specious magnificent Structure contained a
Crocodile, or some such venomous Creature? what sin can God more detest,
which more injurious to his Omniscience then this selfe-obscuting, which more
contrary to the simplicity of his Essence, then the having of a heart Psalm. 12.
and a heart, this dcubling and simulation? Is it not the extremest folly thus
to become a ridiculous Pageant before the Eyes of God, who sees not as man
sees, the eyes of Angels, yea and of men? The wisest of these can soon
distinguish betwixt a strained, and an even unforced Piety. The counterfeit Cow
of Myron could deceive other Cattle only, but not Men. The Apes were never
more Apes, then, when as Lucian speaks, (...)
(...), they adventured to put on the Persons of Noblemen. There is nothing
sooner betrays thee, then thy exquisite art of imposing, as the deep Tincture
does soon manifest the false Metal. Consider what vanity is it to (...) (...)
bestow so much pains to manage the outward, whereas less by fatre would
serve to rule the Mind and Conscience, But would thou appear in the Saints
innocent raiments, survey thy selse first with eyes, like the windows of
Solomon's Temple, (...) l 1. Exodus 4.
broad inwards; put (...) y hand with Moses (...) thy bosom, it will return
thence perhaps like his (...) even as snow, but yet Leprous. That Leprosy was
most unclean and pernicious which was most white. If, I say thou desircst that
clothing of brightness and glory from the Crown of the Head, to the Soale of
of the Foot, see thou be thoroughly sanctified with good works not in body only,
but in Spirit also, else thou have but the Scribes long clothing on still. The
quantity and latitude whereof I come now to examine in the next particular.

To inveigh in this Age against Pharisaicall superstition and will worship, I
conceive would be but to humor and flatter; the times are so averse from both,
insomuch that the poor Christians humbling of his dust and ashes before the
presence of his great God is as if he had kneeled and bowed in the Temple of
Rimmon, and to view the blessed Virgin in Wood or Stone, as if he had paid
devotion at Diana's shrine. For mine own part. I should prefer the grossest
superstition, before the accustomed profanation, as conceiving (...) the
flattery of the Gods as Plato defines the former, to be more tolerable, then
the irreligious contempt of so great a Majesty. That is but a luxurious branch
shot forth through the strength and heat of Devotion and may deserve our
charity: This is an effect of Atheistical pride, and therefore calls for our
hate or contempt.

But if there be any filth to be washed away from the daughters of Sion, I
could wish it were to be done as well by the spirit of Judgment as that of
fire. For the Lord (...) both, I say. 4. v. 4. He requires a fire indeed, but
to air and cleanse the Church, and not to burn it as a leprous House. There
is a wide difference between washing with Soape, and with Nitre, Pro. 30. 33:
which vexes, teareth and consumes. The wringing of the Nose brings forth
blood, says Solomon, Experience has confirmed this Truth in part.

Certainly, if injuries done to the Temples even of Devils Lactant.
have not escaped unpunished; Providence has a judgment in l. 2. (...) 8.
store for the Sacrilegious attempts and irreverence of these times; I pray God
it be not this in the Text; (...)


Ye shall not enter into the, etc.

The Commination and the heaviest of any, even an Exclusion from the joys of
Heaven I am as unable to express the height of such a loss, as I am to
corceive or utter the joys themselves. It was but Non intrabitis Terrans, ye
shall not enter into the Chrysostom. (...). ad Olym. (...) missiones legis sunt
obscure, Evangelii sale meridiano clariores.
Land, in the time of the Law. God who is the weigher of the spirits, was
esteemed of then for the most part but as Judge of the Earth. For the Actions
of the Old Testament being more material and bodily as (...) to the Genius of
a Carnal People the Jews, had their recompense proportioned to their nature
and Kursus Piomissio (...) est possessio (...) Chanaan, (...) Evangelii est
vita beata in coelis drgenda Cameran, in (...). ad (...). s. v. 6.
quality, namely Terrene and sensible Benefits. But the New Covenant which was
to be written in the Heart, Ier. 31. v. 31. seq. and did (...) as Pelusiot
speaks, requiring a more abstracted, immateriall worship, proposes rewards
of a far greater perfection, as being a better hope. Heb. 7. a better
Covenant, and established upon better promises, Heb. 8. v.. 6. And certainly if
the Old Covenant contains in it any promises of eternal life, they are wrapped
up in some obscure shadows and dark Characters, which yet I confess, men of
greater Illumination have bin able to read, as the Patriark who looked for a
City which has foundations, Heb. 11. v. 10, or which is probable, received
some glimps of it by a rude Landscape of tradition. For had Moses plainly
propounded the Kingdom of Heaven as a reward, how was it possible that those
grand Textuaries the Sadduces should deny a resurection? The latter Jews
though they are used to flatter themselves with hopes and elisian discourses of
the Messiah his Kingdom with the joys thereof, yet confess this opinion
grounded more upon tradition then text. S. Jerome has rightly observed,
perspicuum est, says he Regnum Caelorum primum in Evangelio Diolog. (...)
contra Pelagium.
praedicari per Iohannem Baptistam, (...) Salvatorem and Apostolos. Thefirst
news of a kingdom of Heaven is in the Gospel.

In the next place, we are to reflect on the condition to which this promise is
made unto us, this righteousness or good works; a condition to this new
Covenant of grace so essentially requisite, that it is altogether indispensable
in all those, who having been blessed with the means and opportunity, have yet
nglected the performance thereof. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
says S. Paul. Heb. 12. 14. Our blessed Savior is as express, if thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments. Mat. 19. v. 17. Yea I am persuaded,
that the thief on the Cross, who made but one step from belief to sight
entered not Paradise without the benefit of Righteousness. For though there
were no odds between his Conversion and Translation and might want time for the
production of any outward act and the bringing forth of fruit; he could not
want it to budde in. For after the contemplative Assent of Faith to divine
verities, there arises immediately an active one together with charity in the
will. As soon as Sion traveled she brought Children, Is. 66. 8. This young
convert then, since become a true Believer, must have had of necessity that root
and groundwork of love a most firm resolve of obedience, that (...) as S.
Chrysostom, the virtue of the mind and sanctified intentions, which are good
effects, only not blown out and disclosed, and therefore have their reward, the
Kingdom of Heaven. A reward of that transcendent value indeed, that our
maturest fruit and compleatest labors are infinitely disproportioned thereto in
that they carry no merit and condignity of glory. with them (as the Jesuits
would evince hence) but a vast inequality. The reward being reckoned Romans 4.
of Grace, and the work of debt, a debt to God who created (...) (...) to
(...) him by our good works; a debt to human nature that binds us to walk
according to Season, and requires from us that Reasonable service to our
Maker. (...) is rather a gift upon condition of obedience, then a deserved
purchase, or exact compensation. The Scripture indeed and the Ancients are used
to style the Kingdom of Heaven a reward, and (...), though in something a wide
exception even as the Hellenists do in the old Testament, as Ezech. 27. v. 15.
they render (...) usually implying a gift, by (...) a reward and elsew here
frequently express Mercy and Bounty, by words that import Recompense and
Justice. We may content our selves with this; That as God out of his mere grace
and goodness was pleased to promise sor our endeavors and performances such
liberal rewards of joy and Bliss, so we may be confident, he will be just in
observing his promises. He is not (...) to forget your work and labor of
love. Heb, 6. 10.

As the harshnes of this commination should awaken unto righteousness the most
sleeping benumbed soul so should the Mention and promise of a Kingdom here,
excite and allure to it the most edged ambitious Appetite as being the only
object, which can at once both provoke and fully satisfy without glutting. Give
me leave to add one motive (...) tighteousnesse more; it shall be that of
(...). the Baptist Mat. 3. v. 10. Now the Axe is laid to the root of the Tree,
therefore every tree which (...) not forth good fruit, is (...) down, and cast
into the fire. Every Tree, The tallest Cedars, those Princes of the Forest as
well as the shrubs and underwoods, The day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of Hosts (by Malach. c. 4.) that it shall leave them neither
Root nor Branch. By the Law of Moses, when War was to be made on a City, the
Tree which Deuteronomy. 20. 20.
bare wholesome fruit and like that in the Vision grew, whose Dan. 4. 11.
height reached unto Heaven, the leaves fair, the fruit much, and in which was
meat for all, was not to be cut down: but the Trees which were not for wholesome
fruit and meat were to be felled. There is nothing, you see that can avert
these Judgments of War, Flame and final destruction but only a fructisying
Righteousness. Sodom might have slourished yet, had there bin but five
righteous persons in it. When the Land overfloweth with sin and trespasseth
grievously; Noah, Job, and Daniel, were they in it, should deliver at least
their own Souls by their Righteousness, Ezech 14. v 14. Now then that the
(...) of confusion is stretched out, that the Axe is listed up not to lop off
Boughs, or cut down (...), as in Is. 10. but to hew down at the very root;
when we are encompassed on al sides with calamities and miseries, on each hand
with perils, and already involved welnigh in all them of the Apostles, in (...)
of Robbers, in perils by our Countrymen in perils in the City, in perils in
the Sea in perils among our very false Brethren; 2 Cor. 11. 26.
is it not time, think you as we tender the general good of our Country, and
the Salvation of our own souls, that we bring (...) 2. 12.
forth fruit worthy of repentance, that we turn unto the Lord our God with all
our Hearts, with fasting, and with weeping, and with Din. 4. 27.
mourning, that we break off our sins by righteousuesse, that habit of
profaning Gods holy Name with bloody execrable oaths, Riot, all manner of
Luxury, pride, rapin, oppression, incontinence, and c? These are our greatest
enemies. The Civil War is in our own Bosoms. There is not a better or more
certain Stratagem whereby to defeat the Enemy abroad, then by rendering our lives
as righteous as is our cause. Then shall we like that Roman leader dazzle and
confound the eyes of the adversaty with the light reflecting from our brighter
armor, that Breast plate of righteousness.

Righteousness, says Solomon, exalts a: Nation, Pro. 14. especially that
part of it which consists in humiliation and forrow for fin. For when we are
rightly affected with this, we (...) up the foundations of many generatious,
we become Repairers of the Breaches, and (...) of the paths to dwell in. Is.
58. 12. Such a Fast resembles the Coin of that zealous Patriot (...), which
(as the Jews report) was stamped on one side Seldom de Iure Not. and Gent.
with Sackecloath and Ashes, on the other with a Crown of lib. 2. c. 6.
gold. Such is the blessed effect of Humiliation, especially when attended with
Acts of charity, which are the Seals of the Covenant we make with God after
our Fast; which binds us to a new Obedience as you may see in Nehem. 9. and 10.
c. and among these Acts none so necessary as them of Mercy, when we 22 q.
(...). art.
offer our goods to the poor, which is the third Holocaust of 3. ad 2.
a Christian, as Aquinas. The Fast unto God is desctibed. 7. by executing true
Judgment, showing Mercy and Compassion every man unto his Brother. This is the
Fast that makes thy light Is. 58. 8.
break forth as the morning, and thy righteousness to go before thee. Quod
ventri subtrahitur addatur pauperibus, was a good Canon, Vid. Council.
elle what do we but fast for our selves, and save the expense of a Trib. can.
35.
Meal? Consider what Alms does, and how righteousness does deliver (to wit
from the snares of death) was the last speech of dying Tobit c. 14. So great is
the affinity betwixt almesgiving and and righteousness, that the former in
Daniel is expressed by (...) righteousness. Where it is Mat. 6. 2. When you
do Alms, the Oriental translations have it, when thou do righteousness.
And now I am to commend the poor, naked, and Maimed Soldiers as Objects for
the best of your mercies and charity, so for your Justice. For stands it not
with all reason and equity, that we should relieve them who with so much
alacrity have hazarded their (...) (and it is their misery that a more speedy
death has not quite dispatched them) to preserve ours to whose valor and
magnanimity we owe in part that the breath of true Religion is not quite
exhaled? Owe we not to them these faint shadows (and even (...) most dear
unto us) of our Liberties and Proprieties, yea and (for ought I know) the life
of our Pious Prince, with the defense of what ever can be precious either to
good Christian or good Man; And therefore do, if not Alms yet Justice to these
(...) Souls. But to conclude: If you desire that Plenteousnesse should once
more visit your Palaces, and Peace your borders, with all the sweets that
Blessed name carries with it bring forth that (...) of Righteousness, which
is sown in Peace I am. 2. 18, If you Es. 32. 17.
covet lastly all the fatness, the clouds can drop, and all the Blessings that
Heaven can power upon a Land, even the whole Catalogue in Lev. 26. then as you
are required in that Chapter, Walk in Gods Statutes, keep his Commandments,
and do them. Then certainly will God withdraw his heavy arm, and deliver us
from the hands of our enemies, that we may serve him without fear, in
Holiness and in Righteousness before him all the dayos of our Life.

AMEN.

FINIS.

