Hugh Peters's PASSING BELL Rung out in a LETTER To Him, from One that has
been an Accurate Observer of Hugh Peter's and Oliver Cromwells Bloody Actions.

Justice has leaden feet, but Iron Hands. T. V LONDON, Printed in the First
Year of his Majesty's Restoration and his Kingdoms Liberty from Tyranny and
Oppression. 1660.

A Letter to Mr. Hugh Peter's now in the Tower.
Mr. Peter's,
THE English proverb is now proved true, Frost and Fraud always come to foul
ends: The Pot goe's often to the water, but at last com's broken home. If God
shall in this your day give you Grace to repent, it is his great mercy to your
Soul that you have yet space to call on God for mercy, though your Body suffer
by the hand of Justice. You are like to come to a better market, than you were
like to do, except you leave drinking Sack and Tobacco, whereby you endeavor
to smother, and drown your conscience: O consider seriously how fatal an
instrument you have been to the late King, to the State and Ministry: you will
find very few men, since the creation of the World, so deeply engaged in
murder, blood, destruction of Church and State, Parliament, Priest and People,
as you have been. You have made the Pulpit a Players stage, a Drum of Treason
and Rebellion: You have paun'd your Soul to the Devil, and sold your self,
with Ahab, to do wickedly: you have been a bloody Traitor, and a ravening Wolf.
You have murdered your King in a vizard, you have broken all laws against God
and Man: you have been a shifter, jugler, and a notorious dissembler* No Oath,
Covenant, Law, Protestation could bind you: Your principles have varied more
often than the Moon you have made a bankrupt of Conscience, and all Solemn
Obligations to God and Man.

Surely, you cannot now, in this condition you are in, the Tower, but appear to
your self, the most outlawed notorious, perfidious Traitor that ever was in
this Kingdom, having wholly given up your self to your lusts of all sorts,
Atheism, Murder, Adultery, Simony, Sorcery, Gluttony, and, it is to be feared,
the Sin against the holy Ghost: your sins being like Absalom's incestuous and
noonday rapes: your vileness acted in the sight of the Sun, and before all
the World, having surpassed the cunning and cruelty of the most Jesuited Heads,
as much as you come short of them in learning.

I leave it to all the World to judge, whether your Treasons have not far
surpassed the Gunpowder Treason: they but plotted secretly; but your hellish
Treason you have acted openly: you by your Sorcery and Witchcraft frighted the
late glorious King from Hampton Court to the Isle of Wight; Ushered and came
before his Coach, when he was brought Prisoner to St. James's from Hurst.
Castle, and slashing your whip, told some of your fellow-Traitors, that you had
at length brought the King to be whipped: and not many days after his Head was
whip't off by you, and such vizzarded Devils as you are: you have been the
murderer of our Royal King, the destroyer of all true Religion: Guy Fauks was
a very honest man compared to Hugh Peter's: Cataline never conceived what you
have acted: you have besmeared Church, State, and Commonwealth, with the
lifeblood of our King, even the best of Kings, by your Murder, Treason,
Perjury, and Regal Parricide.

And now behold God's judgments have overtaken you, you are taken in the Net of
your own inventions, being made a byword, scorn, and contempt of all people:
You are become like Cain, afraid of all men: like Judas, cursed to posterity:
excommunicated by all good Christians, as a murderer of your Father, a
King-killer; you are now in your Conscience haunted with the Ghost and Blood of
that glorious King you have traitorously butchered: and the exemplary vengeance
of God is now fallen upon you: and all men see, and say, There is a just God in
Heaven that rewards Traitors according to their demerits, leaving Hugh Peter's
to posterity for the bloodiest Traitor that ever History recorded.

With what face of brass could thou deny thy name, when thou wast apprehended
in Southwark, and when thou wast brought to the Lieutenant of the Tower: I am
credibly informed, that thou said thy name was Thompson, and said, Thou
would not be such a Villain as Hugh Peter's for a thousand pound: Whereupon
those that took thee, knowing how to answer so impudent a Traitor as thy self,
replied, If thou were not Hugh Peter's, they would be hanged for Hugh Peter's;
but, if thou were Hugh Peter's, thou should be hanged for thy self.

At Worcester fight, thou made use of a Cart, instead of a Pulpit, to rail
Treason against our Royal King, calling it a Sermon. Be admonished from me to
study a Text for thy farewell -- preachment at Tiburn: and let it be all of
immethodicall nonsense, and undigested railings, justification of thy felf, and
vindicating of thy baudy life and conversation, that all the Spectators may see
thou art right Hugh Peter's to the end, without grace, common sense and honesty;
and such a dissembling Traitor, Atheist, and Villain, as no tongue or pen can
utter, nor represent thy wicked baseness, knavery, impudence, and Atheism.

You have, according to your own preachment, brought your Hogs to a fair
market; every man expecting by the next wind to see you drawn on a Sledg to
Tiburn, your Quarters set up for Crowe's-meat on the City Gates, and thy
traitorous Head stand Sentinel on London Bridge, for the fouls of the Air to
pick out thy accursed eyes for the murder and treason against our late Lord
and Sovereign King, whose wisdom, piety, faith and patience, God has crowned
with a glorious Crown of immortallity, whose memory will be ever honored in all
succeeding ages, as England's most Noble Patron, and the most patient Martyr
for her Laws and Liberties.

Hugh Peter's! Thou usest in thy Pulpit to break Jests on thy houre-glass: let
me tell thee a serious one concerning the glass of thy life: Thy sands are
almost run out: the thread of thy life in a few days will be cut off: how can
such a Shimei, who has so traitorously slain such a King, ever hope to have
peace, either in this or another world, since divine vengeance suffered not any
of the Murderers of Julius Caesar, who was but an Usurper, to die any other
then a violent death: neither can any of thy fellow-murtherers die in peace,
but shall fall from one wickedness to another, till eternal vengeance seize
upon you all, for murdering the most royallest, and most illustrious Exemplar
of Virtue and Piety, that ever sat on a Christian Throne: the most unspotted
person, the justest and wisest Prince, the most charitable Christian that ever
wore a Crown. This was CHARLES the First, the Wise, the Just. This, this was
the man; this the Christian King, the Saint, the Martyr, whom thou Judas (alias
Hugh Peter's) and thy fellow-Traitors destroyed, and like Cannibals devoured.

Never has any History of humane affairs recorded any such excels of riot,
superfluity of wickedness, flowing from the hearts of any men parallel to your:
never any combination of wickedmen was more filled with the quintessence of all
wickedness, which exceeds the names of ^l vice and infamy; or ever more
deserved to be made a public curse, and universal execration to all mankind;
to have their persons cut off from the face of the earth, and buried with the
burial of an Ass, to have their posterity as a pestilent progeny (as Raviliac
in France) spewed out of the Land, their Houses plucked down and made a Jakes,
their Memories blotted out from under heaven, or, if remembered, with perpetual
scorn, cursing, and infamy, as being men, whose paths lead to the chambers of
death, and their steps to the pit of hell. To conclude, I wish you, whatever
becomes of your body, to repent, and earnestly to cry to God day and night, for
mercy on your soul, that little time you are to stay here, and be no more.

T. V.
POSTSCRIPT.
This is presented unto you by one that for nine hundred twenty eight days was
kept close Prisoner in the Tower, for bringing up from Oxford to London 1643.
his late Majesty's Letter for Peace, and was robbed, sequestered and plundered
for doing the same, of eleven thousand pounds, to his damage at this day,
twenty thousand pounds.

Sept. 23. 1600. T.V.

FINIS.



