LUMEN DE LUMINE: OR A new Magical Light discovered, and Communicated to the
WORLD

By Eugenius Philalethes.

GENESIS 1. 3. And God said, Let there be Light. JOHN 1. Chap: Ver. 5. And the
Light shines in the Darkness.

Pythag. Ne loquaris Deo absque Lumine.

LONDON, Printed for H. BLUNDEN at the Castle in Corne-Hil. 1651.

To my Dear mother, the most famous Universitie of Oxford.
I HAVE observed ( most dear Mother) and that in most of thy Sons, a
Complexion of Fame, and Ingratuitie. Learning indeed they have, but they forget
the Breasts that gave it. Thy Good works meet not with one Samaritan, but Many
have thou cured of the Leprosy of Ignorance. This is the spot, that soyls our
perfections: we have all drunk of thy Fountain, but we sacrifice not the Water
to the Well. For my own part, I can present thee with nothing that is
Voluminous, but here is a Mustardseed, which may grow to be the Greatest
amongst Herbs. Mat. 13. 32.
The Draught it self has nothing of nature, but what is under the Veil: I
wish indeed thou may see her sine Flammeo, but her face like that of the
Annun^iata expects the Pencil of an Angel. I cannot say this Composure
deserves thy Patronage, but give me leave to make it my Opportunity, that I
may return the Acknowledgement, where I received the Benefit. I intend not my
Address for the Banks of Isis; Thou have no Portion there, unless thy Stones
require my Inscription. It is thy Dispersed Body I have known, and That only I
remember. Take it then wheresoever Thou art, in thy sad Removes and
Visitations. It is neither Sadducee nor Pharisee, but the Test of an Israelite,
and

Thy Legitimat Child. 1650. E. P.

In Summum Virum Thomam Bodleium Equitem Auratum, Bibliothecae Oxoniensis
Structorem Magnificum.
SAncta Anima! and tam Sancta simul salveta Favilla^
Sitque semel Cineris fas meminuisse tu^^
Instructor Caeli, and Stellarum Plenior O^do,
Qui Sporadas per Tc, non sinis Astra sore.
Quippe Lares Lib^is vel rite vagantibus addis,
Et Caelum, quo sint Sydera fixa, cluis.
Nos Vitam ut Patres, largimur Faetibus: at T^^
Quo Vitam hanc poss^^ vive^e, Sol^^ habes.
Hospitium agnoscunt Arts: Hic Qua^libe^ intr^^
Post Ob^etrices, nec Pereg^ina, Manus.
Scaena Togae, Doctique capax Panegyris Orbis,
Et Mare, vel Potius Plen^or Unda Mari.
Concursus Goniorum, and Meta Extrema Lyeaei,
Qu^ nullum nisi sit Sanctius, iret Opus.
Syllabus Heroum, Mentisque Omniscia Proles,
Est baec and Sensu Theca animata suo.
Bodleii Laus ampla, and Fusior Urna Sepulti,
Qu^ Vitam invenit Mors sua, Morsque Necem.
Hinc se fracta Fugae dedit, absumptisque sagittis
Impievit Vacuas sola pharetra Manus.
Par Tibi Vox nulla est: Satagis dum Condere Musam,
^^cisti, Quod non noverit Illa loqui.
Pium est Agnoscere, per Quos profecisti.
To the Reader.
I Have had some Contest with my self in the Disposal of this Piece, the
Subject being cross to the Genius of the Times, which is both Corrupt, and
Splenetic. It was my Desire to keep it within Doors, but the Relation it bears
to my former Discourses has forced it to the Press. It is ^he last Glass of
my thoughts, and their first Reflex being not complete, ^ have added this to
perfect their Image, and Symmetrie. I must confess I have no Reason for it,
but what my Adversaries supply me withal: I would advance the Truth, because
they would suppress it. Indeed I have been scurvily rewarded, but the success
of this Art grows from its Opposition, and this I believe, our late Libellers
have observed, for they quit the Science, to quash the Professors.

It is not enough to abuse and misinterpret our writings: with studied
Calumnies do they disparage our persons, whom they never saw, and perhaps
never will see. They force us to a Bitterness beyond our own Dispositions, and
provoke men to sin, as if they did drive the same Design with the Devil.

For my own part, I will no more hazard my soul by such uncivil Disputes,
Mat. 12. ^6.
I know I must give an Account for every idle word. This Theme has reduced my
passions to a Diet, I have resolved for the future to suffer: for this I am
sure of, God will condemn no man for his patience.

The World indeed may think the truth overthrown, because she is attended with
her Peace, for in the judgment of most men, where there is no Noise, there is
no Victory. This I shall look upon as no Disadvantage. The Estimat of such
Censors will but lighten the Scales, and I dare suppose them very weak Brains,
who conceive the Truth sinks, because it outweighs them.

As for tempestuous Outcries, when they want their Motives, they discover an
irreligious spirit, one that has more of the Hurry-cano, than of Christ Jesus.
God was not in the wind, that rent the Rocks to pieces, nor in the Earthquake,
and Fire at Horeb: He was in Aura tenui, in the still, small voice. 1 Kings 19.


My Advise is, that no Man should resent the common spleen. Who writes the
Truth of God, has the same Patron with the Truth it self, and when the world
shall submit to the general Tribunal, he will find his Advocate, where they
shall find their Judge. There is a mutual Testimony between God and his
Servants, if the Baptist did bear witness of Christ, Christ also did as much
for the Baptist: He was a burning, and a shining Light. John 5. 35.


This, Reader, I thought fit to Preface, that if any Discourse of mine be
traduced hereafter, thou may not expect my Vindication. I have referred my
Quarrel to the God of Nature, it is involved in the Concernments of his Truth.
I am satisfied with the Peace and Test of a good Conscience: I have written
nothing but what God has verified before my Eyes in particular, and is able to
justify before the world in general. I have known his secret Light, his
Candle is my Schoolmaster; I testify those things, which I have seen under
his very Beams, in the bright Circumference of his Glory.

When I did first put my Thoughts to paper, God can bear me witness, it was
not for any private ends. I was drawn, and forced to it by a strong Admiration
of the Mystery and Majesty of Nature. It was my D^sign to glorisie the Truth,
and in some measure to serve the Age, had they been capable of it. But the
barbarous Insults I have met withal, and without any Deserts of mine, have
forced my Charity to keep at Home. Truly, had not I been robbed of my Peace, I
had imparted some things, which I am confident this Generation will not receive
from another Pen. But the Times in this Respect fall not even with providence,
for the Years of Discovery are not yet come. This Truth, like the Dove in the
Deluge, must hover in winds and Tempests, overlooke the Surges and Billows, and
find no place for the Sole of her Foot. But the wise God provides for her: on
all these waves and Waters she has a little Ark to return to. Me thinks I see
her in the window all wet, and weather-beaten. She has been rejected abroad,
and now I will take her Home. Come in with thy Branch of Olive!

To conclude, this Discourse is my last, and the only Clavis to my First. What
I have written formerly, is like the Arabian's Halicali: it is Domus signata, a
House shut up, but here I give you the Key to the Lock. If you enter, seal up
what you see in your Hearts: Trust it not to the Tongue, for that is a Flying
Scroul. Thus I deliver my Light to your Hands, but what Returns you will give
me, I know not. If you are for Peace, Peace be with you: if for War, I have
been so too, but Let not him that girds on his Armor, boast like him, that
puts it off. 1 Kings 20. 11.
Do well, and Farewell.

1651. E. P.

LUMEN DE LUMINE.
NOw had the Night spent her black stage, and all
Her beauteous, twinkling flames grew sick, and pale.
Her Scene of shades, and silence fled; and Day
Dressed the young East in Roses: where each Ray
Falling on Sables, made the Sun and Night
Kiss in a Checquer of mixed Clouds, and Light.

I Think it were more plain, and to some Capacities more pleasing, if I should
express my self in this popular, low Dialect. It was about the Dawning or
Day-breake, when tired with a tedious solitude, and those pensive Thoughts
which attend it, after much Loss and more Labor, I suddenly fell a sleep^
Here then the Day was no sooner borne, but strangled; I was reduced to a night
of a more deep tincture than that which I had formerly spent. My fancy placed
me in a Region of inexpressible Obscurity, and as I thought more than
Natural; but without any Terrors. I was in a firm even Temper, and though
without encouragements, not only resolute, but well-pleased. I moved every way
for Discoveries, but was still entertained with Darkness and silence, and I
thought my self translated to the Land of Desolation. Being thus troubled to no
purpose, and wearied with long Endeavors, I resolved to reft my self, and
seeing I could find nothing, I expected if any thing could find me. I had not
long continued in this humor, but I could hear the whispers of a soft wind,
that travailed toward me, and suddenly it was in the Leaves of the Trees, so
that I concluded my self to be in some Wood, or Wilderness. With this gentle
Breath came a most heavenly, odorous Air, much like that of sweet Briars, but
not so rank and full. This perfume being blown over, there succeeded a pleasant
Humming of Bees amongst Flowers, and this did somewhat discompose me, for I
judged it not suitable with the Complexion of the place, which was dark and
like Midnight. Now was I somewhat troubled with these unexpected Occurrences,
when a new Appearance diverted my Apprehensions. Not far off on my right hand,
I could discover a white weak Light, not so clear as that of a Candle, but
mystie, and much resembling an Atmospheare. Toward the Center it was of a
purple color like the Elysian Sunshine, but in the Dilatation of the
Circumference, Milkie: and if we consider the joint Tincture of the parts, it
was a painted Vesper, a Figure of that Splendour, which the old Romans called
Boxhort^ falsely interprets this Notion.
Sol Mortuorum. Whiles I was taken up with this strange Scene, there appeared
in the middle purple Colors, a sudden Commotion, and out of their very Center
did sprout a certain flowrie Light, as it were the flame of a Taper. Very
bright it was, sparkling, and twinkling like the Day Star. The Beams of this
new Planet issuing forth in small Skeins and Rivulets, looked like Threads of
Silver, which being reflected against the Trees, discovered a Curious, green
Vmbrage, and I found my self in a Grove of Bays. The Texture of the Branches
was so even, the Leaves so thick, and in that conspiring order, it was not a
wood, but a Building. I conceived it indeed to be the Temple of Nature, where
she had joined Discipline to her Doctrine. Under this shade and skreen did
lodge a number of Nightingals, which I discovered by their whitish Breasts.
These peeping thorough their leavie Cabinets, rejoiced at this strange Light,
and having first plumed themselves, stirred the still Air with their Music.
This I thought was very pretty, for the silence of the Night, suiting with the
solitude of the place, made me judge it heavenly. The Ground both near and far
of, presented a pleasing kind of C^ecquer, for this new star meeting with some
drops of Dew, made a M^ltitude of bright Refractions, as if the Earth had been
paved with Diamonds. These rare, and various Accidents kept my soul busied, but
to interrupt my Thoughts, as if it had been unlawful to examine what I had
seen, another more admirable Object interposed. I could see between me and the
Light, a most exquisit, divine Beauty. Her frame neither long, nor short, but a
mean decent Stature. Attired she was in thin loose silks, but so green, that I
never saw the like, for the Color was not Earthly. In some places it was
fansied with white and Silver Ribbands, which looked like Lilies in a field of
Grass. Her head was overcast with a thin floating Tiffanie, which she held up
with one of her hands, and looked as it were from under it. Her Eyes were quick,
fresh, and Celestial, but had something of a start, as if she had been puzzled
with a sudden Occurrence. From her black Veil did her Locks break out, like
Sunbeams from a Mist; they ran dishevelled to her Breasts, and then returned to
her Cheeks in Curls and Rings of Gold. Her Hair behind her was rolled to a
curious Globe, with a small short spir^ flowr'd with purple, and skie-colour'd
Knots. Her Rings were pure, entire Emeralds, for she valued no metal, and her
Pendants of burning Carbuncles. To be short, her whole Habit was youthful and
flowrie, it smelt like the East, and was thoroughly ayr'd with rich Arabian
Diapasms. This and no other, was her appearance at that Time: but whiles I
admired her perfections, and prepared to make my Addresses, she prevents me
with a voluntary Approach. Here indeed I expected some Discourse from her, but
she looking very seriously and silently in my face, takes me by the hand, and
softly whispers, I should follow her. This I confess sounded strange, but I
thought it not amiss to obey so sweet a Command, and especially one that
promised very much, but was able in my Opinion to perform more. The Light
which I had formerly admired, proved now at last to be her Attendant, for it
moved like an Usher before her. This Service added much to her Glory, and it
was my only care to observe her, who though she wandr'd not, yet verily she
followed no known path. Her walk was green, being furred with a fine small
Grass, which felt like plush, for it was very soft; and purl'd all the way
with Daysies and Primrose. When we came out of our Arboret and Court of Bays,
I could perceive a strange Clearness in the Air, not like that of Day, neither
can I affirm it was night. The stars indeed perched over us, and stood
glimmering, as it were on the Tops of high Hills, for we were in a most deep
Bottom, and the Earth overlooked us, so that I conceived we were near the
Center. We had not walked very far, when I discovered cerraine thick, white
Clouds, for such they seemed to me, which filled all that part of the Valley,
that was before us. This indeed was an Error of mine, but it continued not
long, for coming nearer, I found them to be firm solid Rocks, but shining and
sparkling like Diamonds. This rare and goodly sight did not a litttle encourage
me, and great desire I had to hear my Mistress speak (for so I judged her now)
that if possible, I might receive some Information. How to bring this about, I
did not well know, for she seemed averse from Discourse; but having resolved
with my self to disturb her, I ^sk'd her if she would favor me with her Name.
To this she replied very familiarly, ^s if she had kown me long before.
Euge^ius (said she) I have many Names, but my best and dearest is Thalia: for I
am always green, and I shall never wither. Thou do ^here behold the
mountains of the Moon, and I will show thee the Original of Nilus, for she
springs from these Invisible Rocks. Look up and peruse the very Tops of these
pillars and Clifts of Salt, for they are the true, Philosophical, Lunar
Mountains. Did thou ever see such a Miraculous, incredible thing? This speech
made me quickly look up to those glittering Turrets of Salt, where I could see
a stupendous Cataract, or Waterfall. The stream was more large than any River
in her full Channel, but notwithstanding the Height, and Violence of its Fall,
it descended without any Noise. The Waters were dashed, and their Current
distracted by those Saltish Rocks, but for all this they came down with a dead
silence, like the still, soft Air. Some of this Liquor (for it ran by me) I
took up, to see what strange woollen substance it was, that did thus steal down
like Snow. When I had ^it in my hands it was no Common water, but a certain
kind of Oil of a Waterie Complex on. A viscous, fat, mineral nature it was,
bright like Pearls, and transparent like Crystal. When I had viewd and
searched it well, it appeared somewhat spermatic, and in very Truth it was
obscene to the sight, but much more to the Touch. Hereupon Thalia told me, it
was the first Matter, and the very Natural, true Sperm of the great World. It
is (said she) invisible, and therefore few are they that find it; but many
believe it is not to be found. They believe indeed that the world is a dead
Figure, like a Body which has been sometimes made, and fashioned by that
spirit, which dwelt in it, but retains that very shape and fashion, for some
short time, after that the Spirit has forsaken it. They should rather
consider, that every Frame when the Soul has left it, does discompose, and
can no longer retain its former figure, for the Agent that held and kept the
parts together is gone. Most excellent then is that speech, which I heard
sometimes from one of my own Pupils. Mundus hic ex tam diversis contrariisque
partibus in unam formam minime conven^sset, nisi unus esset, qui tam Diversa
conjungeret; Conjuncta vero Naturarum ipsa Diversitas invicem discors,
dissociaret, atque divelleret, nisi unus esset, qui quod nexuit, contineret,
Non tam vero certus naturae ordo procederet, nec tam dispositosmotus Locis,
temporibus, efficientia, Qualitatibus explicaret, nisi unus esset, qui has
Mutationum varietates manens ipse disponeret. Hoc quicquid est, quo Condita
manent, atque gubernantur, usitato cunctis Vocabulo Deum nomino. This world
(says he) of such diverse and contrary parts had never been made one thing,
Had not there been one, who did join together such contrary things. But being
joined together, the very Diversity of the Natures joined, fighting one with
another, had Discomposed and separated them, unless there had been one to hold
and keep those parts together, which he at first did join. Verily the order of
Nature could not proceed with such certainty, neither could she move so
regularly in several places, times, effects and qualities, unless there were
some one, who disposed, and ordered these Varieties of Motions. This,
whatsoever it is, by which the world is preserved and governed, I call by that
usual name, God. Thou most therefore Eugenius (said she) understand, that all
Compositionsare made by an active, intelligent life; for what was done in the
Composure of the great world in general, the same is performed in the
Generation of every creature, and its sperm in particular. I suppose thou do
know, that water cannot be contained but in some Vessel. The natural Vessel
which God has appointed for it, is Earth. In Earth water may be thickened; and
brought to a figure, but of it self, and without Earth, it has an indefinit
flux, and is subject to no certain figure whatsoever, Air also is a fleeting
indeterminat substance, but water is his Vessel: for water being figured by
means of Earth, the Air also is thickened, and figured in the Water. To ascend
higher, the Air coagulats the liquid fire, and fire incorporated involves and
confines the thin Light. These are the Means by which God unites, and compounds
the Elements into a Sperm, for the Earth alters the Complexion of the water,
and makes it viscous and slimie. Such a water must they look, who would produce
any Magical extraordinary Effects; for this Spermatic water coagulats with the
least heat, so that nature concocts, and hardens it into metals. Thou see the
whites of Eggs will thicken as soon as they feel the fire, for their moisture is
tempered with a pure subtle Earth, and this subtle, animated Earth, is that
which binds their water. Take water then my Eugenius, from the Mountains of the
Moon, which is water, and no water: Boil it in the fire of Nature, to a two
fold Earth, white and red, then feed those Earths with Air of Fire, and Fire of
Air, and thou have the two Magical Luminaries. But because thou have been a
servant of mine for a long time and that thy patience has manifested the Truth
of thy Love, I will bring thee to my School, and there will I show thee what
the world is not capable of. This was no sooner spoken, but she past by those
Diamond-like, rockie salts, and brought me to a Rock of Adamant figured to a
just, entire Cube: It was the Basis to a fiery Pyramid, a Trigon of pure
Pyrope, whose imprisoned flames did stretch, and strive for Heaven. To the
Fore-square or Frontlet of this Rock was annexed a little portall. and in that
hung a Tablet. It was a painted Hedgehog, so rolled and wrapped up in his Bag,
he could not easily be discomposed. Over this stood a Dog snarling, and hard by
him this Instruction.

Suaviter aut Pungit. IN we went, and having entered the Rock, the interior
parts were of a heavenly Smaragdine Color. Somewhere they shined like Leaves
of pure Gold, and then appeared a third inexpressible purple tincture. We had
not gone very far, but we came to an Ancient Majestic Altar; On the Offertorie,
or very top of it, was figured the Trunck of an old rotten tree, plucked up by
the Roots. Out of this crept a Snake, of color white and Green, Slow of Motion
like a Snayle, and very weak, having but newly felt the Sun, that overlooked
her. Toward the Foot, or Basis of this Altar was an Inscription in old
Egyptian Hieroglyphics, which Thalia expounded, and this is it.

Diis Beatis.
In Caelo Subterraneo.
N. L.
(...)
FRom this place we moved straight forward, till we came to a Cave of Earth. It
was very obscure, and withal dankish, giving a heavy odor like that of
graves. Here we stayed not long, but passing this Churchyard, we came at last
to the Sanctuary, where Thalia turning to me, made this her short, and last
speech.

Eugenius! This is the place, which many have desired to see, but saw it not.
The Praeparatives to their Admission here, were wanting: They did not love Me,
but Mine. They coveted indeed the Riches of Nature, but Nature her self they
did both neglect, and corrupt. Some Advantages they had in point of Assault, had
they but studied their Opportunities. I was exposed to their hands, but they
knew me not. I was subject in some measure to their Violence, but He that made
me, would not suffer me to be rifi'd. In a word, the Ruin of these men was
built on their Disposition. In their Addresses to me, they resembl'd those
pitiful things, which some call Courtiers. These have their Antics and Raunts,
as if they had been trained amongst Apes. They scrape (as one has well expressed
it) proportions Mathematical: make strange Legs and faces, and in that phrase
of the same Poet; Vary their Mouths as 'twere by Magic spell,
To figures ovall, square, and Triangle.


So these impudent Sophisters assaulted me with Vainglorious Humors. When I
looked into their hearts, there was no Room for me; they were full of proud
Thoughts, and dreamed of a certain Riotous Happiness, which must be maintained
by my Expenses, and Treasures. In the interim they did not consider that I was
plam and simple, One that did not love Noise, but a private, Sweet Content. I
have Eugenius found thee much of my own Humor. I have withal found thy
Expectations patient, thou can easily believe, where thou have Reason to thy
Faith. Thou have all this while served without Wages, now is the time com to
reward Thee. My love, I freely give Thee, and with it these tokens, my Key, and
Seal. The one opens, the other shutts, be sure to use both with Discretion.
As for the Mysteries of this my School, thou have the Liberty to peruse them
all, there is not any thing here, but I will gladly reveal it to thee. I have
one Praecept I shall commend to thee, and this it is, You must be Silent. You
shall not in your writings exceed my Allowances: Remember that I am your Love,
and you will not make me a Prostitute. But because I wish you Serviceable to
those of your own Disposition, I here give you an Emblematicall Type of my
Sanctuary, with a full Privilege to publish it. Iliad 8.
This is all, and now I am going to that Invisible Region,(...). Let not that
Proverb take place with you, Out of Sight, out of Mind: Remember me, and be
Happy.

These were her Instructions, which were no sooner delivered, but she brought
me to a clear, large Light, and here I saw those Things, which I must not
speak of. Having thus discovered all the parts of that glorious Labyri^th, she
did lead me out again with her Clew of Sunbeam ^ her Light that went Shining
before us. When we were past the Rocks of Nilus, she showed me a Secret
Staire-Case, by which we ascended from that deep and flowrie Vale, to the face
of this our Common Earth. Here Thalia stopped in a mute Ceremony, for I was to
be left all alone. She looked upon me in silent smiles, mixed with a pretty
kind of Sadness, for we were unwilling to part. But her Hour of ^ra^lation
was come, and taking (as I thought) our last leave, she past before my
Eyes,(...), into the Ether of Nature.

Now verily was I much troubled, and somewhat disordered, but composing my self
as well as I could I came to a Cop of M^rtles, where resting my self on a
Flowrie Bank. I began to consider those Things which I had seen. This Solitude,
and Melancholy, study continued not long, for it met with a very grateful
Interruption. I could see Thalia as it were at the end of a Landscape, somewhat
far off, as we see stars newly risen: but in a moment she was in the Myrtles,
where seating her self hard by me, I received from her this Discourse. I would
not Eugenius, have thee ignorant of the Unity, and Concentration of Sciences.
In the past, and more Knowing years of the world, when Magic was better, and
more generally understood, the Professors of this Art divided it into three
parts, Elementall, Celestial, and Spiritual. The Elementall part contained
all the Secrets of Physic, the Celestial those of Astrology, and the
Spiritual those of Divinity. Every one of these by it self was but a Branch
or Lim, but being united all Three, ^hey were the Pandects of the Science. Now
in these thy days there is no man can show thee any real Physic, or
Astrology, neither have they any more, than a Tong-and-Book Divinity. The
reason of it is this; In Process of time these three Sciences (which work no
wonders without a mutual essential Union) were by mis-interpretation
dismembered, and set apart, so that every one of them was held to be a Faculty
by it self. Now God had united these Three in one Natural Subject, but man be
separated them, and placed them in no Subject, but in his own Brain, there they
remained in words and fancy, not in Substantial Elements, and Verity. In
this state the Sciences were dead and Ineffectuall: they ^eelded nothing but
Noise, for they were separated; As if thou should dismember a Man, and then
expect some one part of him should perform those Actions, which the whole did,
when he was alive. Thou do know by very natural Experience, that out of one
Specificall Root there grow several different Substances, as Leaves, Flowers,
Fruit, and Seed; So out of one Universal Root, namely the Chaos, grow all
Specificall Natures, and their Individualls. Now there is no true Science or
Knowledge, but what is grounded upon Sensible, particular Substances, or upon
that Sensible Universal Substance, out of which all Particulars are made. As
for Universals in the Abstract, there are no such things, they are empty
imaginary Whymzies, for Abstractions are but so many Phantastic Suppositions.
Consider now Eugenius, that all Individuals, even Man himself, has nothing in
him Ma^erially, but what he received from the material Universal Nature.
Consider again, that the same Individuals are Reducible to their first
Physical Universal Matter, and by Consequence this Universal matter has in
it self the Secrets and Mysteries of all Particulars; for whatsoever includes
the Subject it self, includes also the Science of that subject. To conclude: In
the first Matter, the Divine Wisdom is collected in a General Chaodicall
Center, but in the particulars made of the first Matter it is dispersed, and
spread out as it were to a Circumference. It remains the^ that the Chaos is the
Center of all Sciences, to which they may, and ought to be reduced, for it is
the sensible natural Mysterium Magnum, and under God the Secondary Temple of
Wisdom. Search therefore, and examine the parts of this Chaos, by the Rules
and Instructions received, when I was with thee in the mineral Region. Dwell
not altogether on the practice, for that is not the way to improve it: be sure
to add reason to thy Experience, and to employ thy mind as well as thy hands.
Labor to know all Causes and their Effects^ do not only study the Receipt,
like that broyling frying Company, who call themselves Chimists, but are indeed
no Philosophers. This is all which I think fit to add to my former
Prescriptions, but that which made me return, was something else, and now thou
shall receive it. Thou have heard sometimes I suppose of the Beryllistic part
of Magic: have a care to apprehend me, and I will show the^ the Foundation.
Thou must know the stars can impresse no new Influx in perfect complete Bodies,
they only dispose, and in some measure stir up that influence, which has been
formerly impressed. It is most certain Eugenius, that no Astrobolism takes
place without some previous Corruption, and Alteration in the Patient, for
Nature works not but in loose, moist, discomposed Elements. This Distemper
proceeds not from the stars, but from the Contrariety of the Elements amongst
themselves: whenever they fall out, and work their own Dissolution, then the
Celestial Fire puts in to reconcile them again, and generats some new Form,
seeing the old one could consist no longer. Observe then that the Genuine Time
of Impressions is, when the Principles are Spermatic and callow, but being once
coagulated to a perfect Body, the Time of Stellification is past. Now the
Ancient Magi in their Books speak of strange Astrologicall Lamps, Images,
Rings, and Plates, which being used at certain Hours, would produce
incredible, extraordinary Effects. The common Astrologer, he takes a stone, or
some piece of Metal, figures it with ridiculous Characters, and then exposes
it to the Planets, not in an Alkemusi, but as he dreams himself, he knows not
how. When this is done, all is to no purpose, but though they fail in their
practice, you they believe they understand the Books of the Magi well enough.
Now Eugenius that thou may know what to do, I will teach thee by Example.
Take a ^ipe grain of Corn, that is hard, and dry, expose it to the Sunbeams
in a Glass, or any other vessel, and it will be a dry grain for ever. But
if thou do bury it in the Earth, that the nitrous Saltish moisture of that
Element may dissolve it, then the Sun will work upon it, and make it spring
and sprout to a new Body. It is just thus with the common Astrologer, he
exposes to the Planets a perfect compacted Body, and by this means thinks to
perform the Magician's Gamaaea, and marry the Inferior and Superior Worlds. It
must be a Body reduced into Sperm, that the Heavenly Feminine moisture, which
receives and retains the Impresse of the Astrall Agent, may be at Liberty, and
immediately exposed to the Masculine Fire of Nature. This is the ground of the
Beryl, but you must remember that nothing can be stellified without the joint
Magnetism of three Heavens; what they are I have told you elsewhere, and I will
not trouble you with Repetitions. When she had thus said, she took out of her
Bosom, two miraculous Medals, not Metalline, but such as I had never seen,
neither did I conceive there was in Nature ^ch pure, and glorious Substances.
In my judgment they were two Magical Astro^asms, but she called them
Saphirics of the Sun and Moon. These Miracles she com^ended to my perusal,
excusing her self as ^eing sleepie, otherwise she had expounded them for me. I
looked admired, and wea^ied my self in their Contemplation. Their Complexion
was so heavenly, their contri^ance so mysterious, I did not well know, what to
make of them. I turned aside to see ^f she was still a sleep, but she was gone,
and ^his did not a little trouble me. I expected ^er Return, till the Day was
quite spent, but ^he did not appear. At last fixing my Eyes on that place,
where she sometimes rested. I ^iscover'd certain pieces of Gold, which she ^ad
left behind her, and hard by a paper ^^lded like a Letter. These I took up, and
^ow the Night approaching, the Evening-^^ar tinned in the West, when taking my
last ^rvey of her flowrie pillow, I parted from it ^^ this Verse.

PRetty green Bank farewell! and may thou we are
Sun beams, and Rose, and Lilies all the year!
She slept on Thee: but needed not to shed
^^ Gold, 'twas pay enough to be her Bed.
^^ Flowers are Favorits: for this loved Day
^^ey were my Rivals, and with Her did play.
They found their Heaven at hand, and in her Eyes
Enjoyed a Copy of their absent skies.
Their weaker paint did with true Glories trade,
And mingled with her Cheeks, one Posie made.
And did not her soft skin confine their pride,
And with a skreen of Silk both Flowr's divide,
They had sucked life from thence, and from her Heat
Borrowed a Soul to make themselves complete.
O happy Pillow! Though thou art laid even
With Dust, she made thee up almost a Heaven.
Her Breath rained Spices, and each Amber ring
Of her bright locks strewn Bracelets o'r thy spring.
That Earth's not poor, did such a Treasure hold,
But thrice enriched, with Amber, Spice, and Gold.
SCHOLAE MAGICAE TYPVS.


THis is that Emblematicall Magical Type, which Thalia delivered to me in the
invisible Guiana. The first and Superior part of it represents the Mountains of
the Moon. The Philosophers commonly call them the Mountains of India, on whose
Tops grows their secret and famous Lunaria. It is an Herb easy to be found but
that men are blind, for it discovers it self, and shines after night like
Pearl. The Earth of these Mountains is very red and s^ft beyond all
Expression. It is full of Chrystalline Rocks, which the Phil^^^phers call their
Glase, and their Stone: Birds and Fish (say they) bring it to them. Of these
Mountains speaks Hali the Arabian, a most excellent judicious Author. Vade fili
ad Montes Indiae, and ad Cavernas suas, and accipe ex eis lapides honoratos qui
liqu^fiunt in Aqua, quando commiscentur ei. Go my son to the Mountains of
India, and to their Quarries or Caverns and take thence our precious stones,
which dissolve or melt in water, when they are mingled therewith. Much indeed
might be spoken concerning these Mountains, if it were lawful to publish their
Mysteries, but one thing I shall not forbear to tell you. They are very
dangerous places after Night, for they are haunted with Fires, and other
strange Apparitions, occasioned (as I am told by the Magi) by certain spirits,
which dabble lasciviously with the sperm of the world, and imprint their
Imaginations in it, producing many times fantastic, and monstrous Generations.
The Access and Pilgrimage to this place, with the Difficulties which attend
them, are faithfully, and magisterially described by the Brothers of R. C.
Their Language indeed is very simple, and with most men perhaps contemptible:
But to speak finely was no part of their Design, their Learning lies not in
the Phrase, but in the Sense, and that is it, which I propose to the
Consideration of the Reader.

A Letter from the Brothers of R. C. Concerning the Invisible, Magical
MOUNTAIN, And the Treasure therein Contained.
UNusquisque natura desyderat esse Dux: habere Aureos and Argenteos Thesauros
and magnus videri coram Mundo. Deus autem haec omnia Creavit, ut Homo iis
utatur, Eorumque sit Dominus, and agnoscat in illis singularem ejus Bonitatem
and Omnipotentiam, Ipsi gratias agat, Eum honoret, and lauder. Nemo autem vult
haec omnia nisi otiosis diebus, and nullo labor, and periculo praecunte
conquirere, neque ex loco eo consequi, in quo Deus illa posuerit: etiamque vult
ut quaerantur, and Quaerentibus dabit. Nemo vero vult sedem sibi in illo loco
quaerere, and propterea etiam non inveniuntur. Siquidem a longo tempore Via,
and locus ad Haec incognitus est, and maximae parti absconditus. Etiamsi vero
Locum and Viam difficile and laboriosum sit invenire, locus tamen est
investigandus. Cum vero Deus coram snis nihil absconditum velit, ideo in hoc
ultimo saeculo antequam Judicium extremum veniat, Dignis haec omnia sunt
revelanda: uti (obscure tamen satis, ne manifesta fiant Indignis) in quodam
loco inquit; Nihil est Absconditum, quod non reveletur. Mat. 10. 26.
Nos igitur a Spiritu Dei acti, hanc Dei Voluntatem M^ndo annunciamus, uti
etiam in Diversis linguis a Nobis factum, and publicatum est. Istam vero
publicationem aut major pars calumniatur, aut contemnit, aut sine Deo promissa
ejus penes nos quaerit existimans nos illos statim Docturos, quo modo Aurum
Chimicum fit praeparandum, aut illis afferre magnos Thesauros, quibus possint
coram mundo pompose vivere, supetbire, Bella gerere, Lucra exercere, helluari,
potare, incontinenter vivere, and in aliis peccatis vitam commaculare, Quae
tamen omnia contraria sunt voluntati ipsius Dei. Hi exempla capere debebant a
december virginibus illis (quarum quinque Stolidae a prudentibus Oi^um pe^ebant)
esse multum aliam rationem, dum nimirum opus sit, ut quiliber proprio labor
and studio in Deo id consequatur. Nos tamen illorum sociorum A^^mos ex
singulari Dei gratia and Revelatione, etiam ex ipsorum scriptis agnoscimus,
aures nostras obturamus, and quasi nutibus nos obducimus, ne Ipsorum Boatus,
and Ejulatus audiamus, qui in vanum aurum clamant. Atque hinc fit etiam quod
multum Calumniarum and Convitiorum contra nos effundunt, quae non curamus, sed
Deus suo tempore judicabit.

Postquam vero Nos Vestrum Duorum Diligentiam, and sedulitatem, quam in vera
Cognitione Dei, and Lectione sacrorum Bibliorum impenditis, jampridem (quamvis
vobis inscientibus) been scivimus, etiam ex vestro agnovimus scripto, Nos etiam
vos prae multis aliis millibus responso aliquo dignari voluimus, and vobis hoc
significare ex permissu Dei, and Spiritus Sancti Admonitione.

Est MONS situs in medio Terrae, vel Centro orbis, qui est parvus and magnus;
est mollis, etiam supra modum durus and Saxosus; est unicuique propinquus, and
longinquus, sed ex Consilio Dei Invisibilis. In eo sunt maximi Thesauri
absconditi, quos Mundus numerare non potest; Qui mons ex Invidia Diaboli (qui
omni tempore Dei Gloriam, and Faelicitatem Hominis impedit) multum trucibus
Animalibus, and aliis Avibus rapacibus circumdatus est, quae viam Homini
reddunt difficilem, and periculosam, and propterea huc u^que etiam (quia Tempus
nondum est) ea via nec dum ab Omnibus quaeri potuit, aut inveniri. Nunc vero a
Dignis (interim proprio cujusque labor) Via invenienda est. Ad hunc Montem ite
Nocte quadam (cum ea sit) longissima, and obscurissima, and praeparate
vosmetipsos per fideles precationes. Insistite in viam ubi Mons sit
inveniendus, Quaerite autem ex Nemine ubi via sit invenienda, sed sequimini
fideliter vestrum Ductorem, qui se vobis siftet, and in itinere vos offendet,
vos vero illum non agnoscetis. Hic media nocte, cum omnia tranquilla and
obscura sunt, vos ad Montem adducet, sed necesse est ut vos praemuniatis animo
magno and heroico, ne reformidetis ea, quae vobis occurrent and recedatis.
Nullo gladio Corporali indigetis, nec aliis Armis, sed Deum solummodo invocate
Sincere, and ex Animo. Postquam vidistis Montem, primum Miraculum quod
procedet, hoc est. Vehementissimus and maximus Ventus, qui Montem commovebit,
and Rupes discutiet. Tunc vobis se offerent Leones and Dracones, and alia
Terribilia Animalia, sed nihil haec reformidate; Estote stabiles, and cavete ne
recedatis, Nam vester Conductor qui vos conduxit, non permittet ut aliquid Mali
vobis fiat. Verum Thesaurus nondum est detectus, sed valde propinquus. Hunc
Ventum sequitur Terraemotus, qui absolvet ea quae Ventus reliquit, and aequabit
ea, Cavete tamen ne recedatis, Post Terraemotum sequetur Ignis maximus, qui
omnem Terrestrem Materiam consumet, and Thesaurum deteget, vos vero eum videre
nequitis. Verum post haec omnia, and ferme circa Tempus Matutinum erit
Tranquillitas magna, and amica and videbitis stel am Matutinam ascendere, and
Auroram assurgere, and magnum Thesaurum animadvertetis: penes quem praecipuum
and exactissimum est summa quaedam Tinctura, qua Mundus (si Deo placeret, and
tantis donis dignus esset) posset tingi, and in summum Aurum Coverti.

Hac Tinctura utentes uti vos docuerit vester Conductor, vos quamvis senes,
reddet Juvenes, and in nullo membro animadvertetis ullum morbum. Penes hanc
Tincturam invenietis, etiam Margaritas, quas ne quidem licet excogitare. Vos
vero nihil ^^pietis pro Autoritate vestra, sed s^^is contenti cum eo quod vobis
Conductor communicabit. Deo semper gratias agite pro Hoc, and summam curam
intendite, ne coram mundo superbiatis, sed Dono hoc recte utimini, and in ea
impendite, quae Mundo sunt contraria, and ita possidete, quasi non haberetis.
Ducite vitam Temperatam, and cavete ab omni genere peccati, alioqui hic vester
Conductor a vobis se divertet, and privabimini hac faelicitate. Scitote enim
hoc fideliter, Qui Tinctura hac abutitur, and non vivit exemplariter, pure, and
Sincere coram Hominibus, Beneficium hoc amittet, and parum spei restabit, quo
iterum id Recipere possit, etc.


Thus have they described unto us the Mount of God, the mystical
Philosophical Horeb: which is nothing else but the highest and purest part of
the Earth. For the superior secret portion of this Element is Holy ground, and
Aristotle tells his Peripatetics, Locus quo Excelsior, eo Divinior. It is the
Seed-plot of the Eternal Nature, the immediate Vessel, and Recipient of
Heaven, where all Minerals and Vegetables have their Roots, and by which the
Animal Monarchy is maintained. This Philosophical, Black Saturn mortifies and
coagulats the Invisible Mercury of the stars, and on the contrary the Mercury
kills and dissolves the Saturn, and out of the Corruption of Both the Central
and Circumferentiall Suns generat a new Body. Hence the Philosophers describing
their stone, tell us it is Lapis niger, vilis, and faetens, and dicitur Origo
Mundi, and oritur sicut Germinantia. As for the Epistle of the Fraternity, I
shall for satisfaction of the ordinary Reader, put it into English. I know some
Doctors will think it no Advantage, but then they confess their Ignorance: I
can assure them, The Subject is no where so clearly discovered, and for the
first abstruse preparation, there is no private Author has mentioned it but
here we have it entirely, and withal most faithfully described. I confess
indeed their Instruction wears a Mask, it speaks in Tropes, but very plain and
pervious, and the English of it is This.

Every Man naturally desires a Superiority, to have Treasures of Gold and
Silver, and to seem Great in the Eyes of the World. God indeed created all
things for the use of Man, that he might rule over them, and acknowledge
therein the singular Goodness, and Omnipotency of God, give him Thanks for
his Benefits, honor him and praise him. But there is no man looks after these
Things, otherwise than by spending his days idely, they would enjoy them
without any previous labor, and Danger, neither do they look them out of that
place, where God has treasured them ^p, who expects also that man should seek
for them there, and to those that seek, will he give them. But there is not any
that labors ^or a possession in that place, and therefore these ^iehes are not
found: For the way to this ^lace, and the place it self has been unknown for ^
long time, and it is hidden from the greatest ^art of the World. But
notwithstanding it be ^ifficult, and laborious to find out this way and ^lace,
yet the place should be sought after. But it ^ not the will of God to conceal
any thing from ^ose that are his, and therefore in this last Age, before the
Final Judgment comes, all ^ese things shall be manifested to those that ^^e
worthy: As he Himself (though ^scurely, lest it should be manifested to the
^nworthy) has spoken in a certain place ^here is Nothing covered that shall
not be ^^ealed, and hidden that shall not be known. ^e therefore being moved by
the spirit of God, ^e declare the will of God to the World, which ^e have also
already performed, Fama and Confessio Fratrum R. C.
and pub^^shed in several Languages. But most men ^her revile, or contemn
that our Manifesto; ^else waving the spirit of God, they expect the proposals
thereof from us, supposing we will straightway teach them how to make Gold by
Art, or furnish them with ample Treasures whereby they may live pompously in
the fac^ of the World, Swagger, and make Wars, tur^ Usurers, Gluttons, and
Drunkards, live un^ chastely, and defile their whole life with several other
sins, all which Things are contrar^ to the Blessed will of God. These Men
should have learnt from those Ten Virgins (where^ Five that were foolish
demanded Oil for their Lamps, from those Five that were wise) ho^^ that the
Case is much otherwise. It is expe^dient, that every man should labor for thi^
Treasure by the Assistance of God, and ^^^ own particular Search and Industry.
But the perverse Intentions of these Fellows we understand out of their own
writings, by the singular Grace and Revelation of God; w^^ do stop our Ears,
and wrap our selves as ^ were in Clouds, to avoid the Bellowings an^ Howlings
of those men, who in vain cry on^ for Gold. And hence indeed it comes to pa^^
that they brand us with infinite Calumni^^ and Slanders, which notwithstanding
we d^^ not resent, but God in his good Time will jud^^ them for it. But after
that we had well kno^ (though unknown to you) and perceived al^ by your
writing, how diligently you are to per^^ ^^ Holy Scripture, and seek the true
knowledge of God: we have also above many Thousands, thought you worthy of some
Answer. ^^nd we signify this much to you by the will of God, and the
Admonition of the Holy ^host.

There is a Mountain situated in the Midst of the Earth, or Center of the
world, which is ^^oth small, and Great. It is soft, also above ^easure Hard and
Stony. It is far off, and ^^eer at hand, but by the providence of God,
^visible. In it are hidden most ample Trea^res, which the world is not able to
value. This Mountain by Envy of the Devil, who always ^poseth the Glory of
God, and the Happiness ^ Man, is compassed about with very cruel ^easts and
other Ravenous Birds, which make ^e way thither both difficult, and dangerous:
^^d therefore hitherto, because the Time is ^^ yet come, the way thither could
not be sought after, nor found out. But now at last the way to be found by
those that are worthy, but notwithstanding by every man's self-labour, and
^ndeavours.

To this Mountain you shall go in a cer^^ne Night (when it comes) most long,
and ^ost dark, and see that you prepare your selves ^ prayer. Insist upon the
way that leads to ^^ Mountain, but ask not of any man where the way lies:
only follow your Guide, who will offer himself to you, and will meet you in the
way, but you shall not know him. This Guide will bring you to the Mountain at
Midnight, when all things are silent and Dark. It is necessary that you arm
your selves with a resolute heroic courage, least you fear those things that
will happen, and so fall back. You need n^ Sword, nor any other Bodily weapons,
only cal^ upon God sincerely, and heartily. When you have discovered the
Mountain, the first Miracle that will appear, is this. A most ve^^hement, and
very great wind, that will shak^ the Mountain, and shatter the Rocks to
pieces. Ton shall be incounter'd also by Lions and Dragons, and other Terrible
Beasts, but fear^ not any of these things. Be resolute, and tak^ heed that you
return not, for your Guide wh^ brought you thither, will not suffer any Evil^
to befall you. As for the Treasure, it is n^^ yet discovered, but it is very
near. After thi^ wind will come an Earthquake, that will overthrow those
things, which the wind hat^ left, and make all Flat. But be sure, that yo^ fall
not off. The Earthquake being past, ther^ shall follow a Fire, that will
consume the Earth^^ly Rubbish, and discover the Treasure, b^ as yet you cannot
see it. After all these things and near the Daybreak, there shall be a gre^^
Calm, and you shall see the Day Star arise, and ^^he Dawning will appear, and
you shall per^eive a great Treasure. The Chiefest thing in ^t, and the most
perfect, is a certain exalted Tincture, with which the world (if it served God,
and were worthy of such Gifts) might be ^inged, and turned into most pure Gold.

This Tincture being used, as your Guide shall teach you, will make you young
when your ^e old, and you shall perceive no Disease in any part of your Bodies.
By means of this Tincture also, you shall find pearls of that Excel^ency, which
cannot be imagined. But do not ^ou arrogat any thing to your selves because of
^our present power, but be contented with that which your Guide shall
communicate to you. Praise God perpetually for this his Gift, and ^^ave a
special care that you use it not for ^orldly pride, but employ it in such
works, which are contrary to the world. Use it right^^ and enjoy it so, as if
you had it not. Live a ^emperat life, and beware of all sin, otherwise ^ur
Guide will for sake you, and you shall be de^ived of this Happiness. For know
this of a truth, whosoever abuses this Tincture, and ^ves not exemplarly,
purely, and devoutly be^re men, he shall lose this Benefit, and scarce ^ry hope
will there be left, ever to recover it ^terwards.

This much we have from these famous and most Christian Philosophers: Men
que^stionlesse, that have suffered much by their own discreet silence, and
Solitude. Every Sophiste^ contemns them, because they appear not t^ the World,
and concludes there is no such Society, because he is not a member of it^
There is scarce a Reader so just, as to conside^ upon what Grounds they
conceal themselves and come not to the Stage, when every For cries, Enter. No
man looks after them but for worldly Ends, and truly if the Art it self di^ not
promise Gold, I am confident it would fin^ but few followers. How many are
there in the world, that study Nature to know God? Certainly they study a
Receipt for their purses, no^ for their souls, nor in any good sense for the^
Bodies. It is fit then they should be left t^ their Ignorance, as to their
Cure: It may b^ the Nullitie of their Expectations will reform them, but as
long as they continue in the Humor, neither God nor Good men will assist them.

The Inferior part of this Type presents ^ Dark Circle, charged with many
strange Ch^maera's, and Aristotle's(...)that M^^taphysicall Beast of the
Schoolmen. It signify the innumerous conceited Whimzies, and a^ rye roving
Imaginations of Man. For, befo^ we attain to the Truth, we are subject to a
Thousand Fancies, Fictions, and Apprehensi^ns, which we falsely suppose, and
many Times ^ublickly propose for the Truth it self. This Phantastic Region is
the true Original Semi^arie of all Sects and their Dissentions. Hence ^ame the
despayring Skeptic, the loose Epicure, ^he Hypocritical Stoic, and the Atheous
Peri^atetic. Hence also their several Digladiati^ns about Nature: Whether the
first Matter ^e Fire, Air, Earth, or Water, or a Fry of ^maginarie Atoms, all
which are false and ^abulous Suppositions. If we look on Religi^n, and the
Diversities thereof; whence pro^eeded the present Heresies and Schisms, but
from the Different, erroneous Apprehensions of Men? Indeed whiles we follow
our own ^ansies, and build on bottomless unsettl'd Imaginations, we must needs
Wander, and grope ^n the Dark, like those that are Blindfolded. On the
Contrary, if we lay the Line to our Thoughts, and examine them by Experience,
we are in the way to be Infallible, for we ^ake hold of that Rule, which God
has pro^os'd for our Direction. In vain has he made Nature if we dwell on
our own Conceptions, and make no use of her Principles. It were a happy
Necessity, if our thoughts could not va^^ from her ways: but Certainly for us
to think, that we can find the Truth by mere Contemplation without Experience,
is as great a madness, as if a Man should shutt his Eyes from the Sun, and then
believe he can travail directly from London to Grand Cairo, by fansying
himself in the right way, without the Assistance of the Light. It is true, that
no man enters the Magical School, but he wanders first in this Region of
Chimaera's: for the Inquiries which we make before we attain to Experimental
Truths, are most of them Erroneous. Howsoever we should be so rational, and
patient in our Disquisitions, as not imperiously to obtrude and force them upon
the world, before we are able to Verify them.

I ever approved that regular and solid speech of Basil Valentine: Disce igitur
Disputator mi, and inquire primum Fundamentum ipsis oculis and mann, quod
Natura secum fert absconditum: Sic demum prudenter, and cum judicio de Rebus
disserere, and supra inexpugna^^lem Petrum aedificare poteris. Sine hoc a^tem
vanus and phantasticus Nugator manebis, cujus Sermones absque ulla Experientia
supra Arenam solum fundati sunt. Qui autem sermocinationibus suis and Nugis me
aliquid docere vult, is me verbis tantum nudis non pascat, sed Experientiae
factum Documentum simul sit praesto oportet, sine quo non teneor Verbis locum
dare, fidemque its adhibere. And in another place, Nugatorem haud moror (says
he) qui non per Experientiam propriam loquitur: Nam ejus Sermones perinde
fundati sunt, ac Caeci Judicum de Coloribus. Questionless all this was the
Breath of a true Philosopher, one that studied not the Names, but the Natures
of Things. I oppose it as Battery to the Schoolmen, if they will needs muster
their Syllogisms, I expect also they should confirm their Noise by their
Experience.

Within this Phantastic Circle stands a Lamp, and it typifies the Light of
Nature. This is the secret Candle of God, which he has tinned in the
Elements, it burns and is not seen, for it shines in a dark place. Every
natural Body is a kind of Black Lantern, it carries this Candle within it,
but the Light appears not, it is Eclipsed with the Grossnesse of the matter.
The Effects of this Light are apparent in all things, but the Light it self is
denied, or else not followed. The great world has the Sun for his Life and
Candle; according to the Absence and presence of this Fire, all things in the
world flourish or wither. We know by Experience, and this in our own Bodies,
that as long as life lasts, there is a continual Coction, a certain seething
or Boiling within us. This makes us sweat, and expire in perpetual Defluxions
at the pores, and if we lay our hands to our skin, we can feel our own Heat,
which must needs proceed from an enclosed Fire, or Light. All Vegetables grow,
and augment themselves, they put forth their fruits and Flowers, which could
not be, if some Heat did not stir up and alter the Matter; we see moreover
that in Vegetables, this Light is sometimes discovered to the Eye, as it
appears in rotten wood, where the star-fire shines after Night. As for
Minerals, their first matter is coagulated by this fir^e spirit, and altered
from one Complexion to Another. To which may be added this Truth for
Manifestation: if the Mineral Principles be artificially dissolved, that their
fire and spirit may be at Liberty, even Metals themselves may be made
Vegetable. This Fire or Light is no where to be found in such abundance and
purity, as in that subject, which the Arabians call Halicali, from Hali
summum, and Calop Bonum: but the Latin Authors corruptly write it Sal Alkali.
This substance is the Catholic Receptacle of spirits, it is blessed and
impregnated with Light from above, and was therefore styled by the Magicians,
Domus signata, plena Luminis and Divinitatis.

But to procced in the Exposition of our Type; not far from this Lamp you may
observe the Angel or Genius of the place. In one hand he bears a sword, to keep
off the Contentious and unworthy: in the other a Clew of Thread to lead in the
Humble, and Harmless. Under the Altar lies the Green Dragon, or the Magician's
Mercury, involving in it self a Treasure of Gold and Pearl. This is neither
Dream nor Fancy, but a known, Demonstrable, practical Truth. The Treasure is
there to be found, infinitely Rich and Real: Indeed we must confess it is
enchanted, and that by the very Art and Magic of the Almighty God. It can
neither be seen nor felt, but the Cabinet that holds it, is every Day under our
Fect. On this Treasure sits a ^ttle Child, with this Inscription, Non nisi
Parvulis. It tells us, how they should be ^ualified who desire to be admitted
to this ^lace. They must be Innocent, and very Hum^le: not impudent proud
Raunters, nor Co^etous uncharitable Misers. They must be ^ffable, not
Contentious: They must love the truth, and (to speak in a homely Phrase) ^ey
must also like Children and Fools tell the Truth. In a word, they must be as
our Savi^r himself has said, Like one of these little.

This is the Sum of that Magical Emblem which Thalia communicated to me in
the Mineral Region. More I cannot say of it, for I was not trusted with more
in Relation to a public and popular use. I will now proceed to a Discovery of
some other Mysteries, which I received from her, and those such, as are not
commonly sought after. The Basis of them all, is the visible, tangible
Quintessence, or the first created unity, out of which the Physical Tetractys
did spring. I shall speak of them not in a cast artificial Discourse and
Method, but in their own Natural Harmonicall Order, and First of all of the
First Matter.

The First Matter.
WHen I seriously consider the System or Fabric of this world, I find i^ to be
a certain Series, a Link o^ Chain, which is extended a non Gradu ad no^
Gradum, From that which is beneath all Apprehension, to that which is above all
Apprehension. That which is Beneath all Degree of Sense, is a certain Horrible
Inexpressible Darkness. The Magicians call it Tenebr^ Activae, and the Effect
of it in Nature i^ Cold, etc. For Darkness is vultus Frigoris the Complexion,
Body, and Matrix of Cold as Light is the Face, Principle, and Fountain of
Heat. That which is above all Degree of Intelligence, is a certain Infinite
Inaccessible Fire or Light. Dionysius calls it Caligo Divina, because it is
Invisible, and Incomprehensible. The Jew styles it(...) Ein, that is Nihil or
Nothing: but in a Relative sense, or as the Schoolmen express it, Quo ad nos.
In plain terms it is Deitas nuda sine Indumento. The middle Substances, or
Chain between these Two, is That which we Commonly call Nature. This is the
Scala of the great Chaldee, which does reach a Tartaro ad primum Ignem, from
the Subternaturall Darkness to the supernatural Fire. These Middle Natures
came out of a certain water, which was the Sperm, or First Matter of the Great
world, and now we will begin to describe it: Capiat, qui Capere potest.

It is in plain Terms,(...): Or rather it is(...), that is(...); an
exceedingly soft, moist, fusible, ^flowing Earth: An Earth of wax, that is
ca^able of all Forms and Impressions. It is (...), Terrae-Filius Aqua mixtus,
and to speak as the Nature of the Thing requires, (...). The learned
Ar^chimist defines it,(...). It is a Divine animated Mass, of Complexion
somewhat like Silver, the Union of Masculine and Feminine spirits, The
Quintessence of Four, the Ternarie of Two, and the Tetract of One. These are
his Generations Physical, and Metaphysicall. The Thing it self is a world
without Form, neither mcer power, nor perfect Action: but a weak virgin
Substance, a certain soft prolific Venus, the very Love and Seed, the Mixture
and Moisture of Heaven and Earth. This Moisture is the Mother of all things in
the world, and the Masculine Sulphurous Fire of the Earth is their Father. Now
the Jews, who without Controversy were the wisest of Nations, when they
discourse of the Generation of Metals, tell us it is performed in this manner
The Mercury, or Mineral liquor (say they) is altogether cold and passive, and
it lies in certain earthy Subterraneous Caverns: But when the Sun ascends in
the East, his Beams and Heat falling on this Hemisphere, stir up and fortify
the inward Heat of the Earth. Thus we see in winter weather that the outward
Heat of the Sun excites the inward natural Warmth of our Bodies, and
cheerisheth the Blood when it is almost cold and frozen. Now then the Central
heat of the Earth being st^rr'd and seconded by the Circumferentiall Heat of
the Sun, works upon the Mercury, and sublimes it in a thin vapor to the Top of
it is Cell or Cavern. But toward Night when the Sun sets in the West, the Heat
of the Earth because of the Absence of that great Luminarie, grows weak, and
the Cold prevails, so that the vapors of the Mercury which were formerly
sublimed, are now condensed, and distill in Drops to the Bottom of their
Cavern. But the Night being spent, the Sun again comes about to the East, and
Sublimes the Moisture as formerly: This Sublimation and Condensation continue
so long till the Mercury takes up the Subtle Sulphurous parts of the Earth,
and is incorporated therewith, so that this sulphur coagulats the Mercury, and
sixeth him at last that he will not sublime, but lies still in a ponderous
Lump, and is concocted to a perfect Metal. Take notice then that our Mercury
cannot be coagulated without our Sulphur, for Draco non moritur sine suo
Compare: it is water that dissolves and putrifies Earth, and Earth that
thickens and putrifies Water. You must therefore take two principles to produce
a Third Agent, according to that dark Receipt of Hali the Arabian. Accipe Canem
Masculum Corascenum, and Catellam Armeniae, Conjunge, and parient tibi Catulum
coloris Coeli. Take (says he) the Corasee^ Dog, and the Bitch of Armenia, put
them both together, and they will bring thee a sky colored Whelp. This sky
colored whelp is that Sovereign, admired, and famous Mercury, known by the
Name of the Philosophers Mercury. Now for my part I advise thee to take two
living Mercuries, plant them in a purified Mineral Saturn, wash them and feed
them with water of Salt Vegetable, and thou shall see that speech of the
Adeptus verified: Pariet Matter Florem germinalem, quem ubere suo viscoso
nutriet, and se totam ei in Cibum vert^t, fovente Patre. But the Process or
Receipt is no part of my Design, wherefore I will return to the first Matter,
and I say it is no kind of water whatsoever. Reader if it be thy Desire to
attain to the Truth, rely upon my words, for I speak the truth, and I am no
Deceiver. The Mother or first Matter of Metals is a certain watery Substance,
neither very water, nor very Earth, but a Third thing compounded of Both and
retaining the Complexion of neither. To this agrees the learned Valentine in
his appo^t and genuine Description of our Sperm. Materia Prima (says he) est
Aquosa Substantia, Sicca reperta, and nulli Materiae comparabilis. The first
Matter is a waterish Substance found Dry, or of such a Complexion that wets
not the Hand, and nothing like to any other Matter whatsoever. Another
excellent, and well experienced Philosopher defines it thus. Est Terrena Aqua,
and Aquosa Terra in Terrae ventre Terrae commixta, cum Qua se commiscet
Spiritus, and Caelestis Influxus. It is (says he) an Earthy water, and a
watery Earth, mingled with Earth in the Belly of the Earth, and the spirit and
Influences of Heaven commix themselves therewith. Indeed it cannot be denied
but some Authors have named this Substance by the names of all ordinary waters,
not to deceive the simple, but to hide it from the Ranting, ill-disposed Crew.
On the contrary some have expressly and faithfully Informed us it is no Common
water, and especially the reverend Turba. Ignari (says Agadmon) cum audiunt
nomen Aquae, putant Aquam Nubis esse, quod si libros nostros intelligerent,
scirent esse Aquam permanentem, quae absque suo Compari cum quo facta est unum,
permanens esse non possit. The ignorant (says he) when they hear us name
water, think it is water of the Clouds but if they understood our Books, they
should know it to be a permanent or fixed water, which without its Sulphur to
which it has been united, cannot be permanent. The noble and knowing
Sendivogius tells us the very same Thing: Aqua nostra est Aqua Coelestis non
madefaciens minus, non vulgi, sed fere pluvialis. Our water is a heavenly
water, which wets not the hand, not that of the common Man, but almost or as it
were Pluvial. We must therefore consider the several Analogies and similitudes
of Things, or we shall never be able to understand the Philosophers. This Water
then wets not the Hand, which is notion enough to persuade us it can be no
common water. It is a M^talline bitter, Saltish liquor. It has a true mineral
Complexion: Habet (says Raymund Lullie) speciem solis and Lunae and in tali
Aqu^ nobis apparuit, non in Aqua Fontis, aut pluviae. But in an other place he
describes it more fully, Est Aqua sicca (says he) non aqua Nubis, aut
phlegmatica, sed aqua Cholerica, igne Calidior. It is a dry water, not water
of the Clouds, or phlegmatic water, but a Choleric water, more hot than Fire.
It is moreover Greenish to the sight, and the same Lullie tells you so: habet
colorem lacertae Viridis, it looks says he, like a green lizard. But the most
prevalent Color in it, is a certain inexpressible Azure, like the Body of
Heaven in a clear Day. It ^ooks in Truth like the Belly of a Snake, especially
near the Neck, where the Scales have a deep Blew Tincture, and this is the
reason, why the Philosophers called it their serpent, and their Dragon. The
predominant Element in it, is a certain Fiery subtle Earth, and from this
prevalent part the Best Philosophers have denominated the whole Compound.
Paracelsus names it openly but in one place, and he calls it Viscum Terrae, The
Slime, or Viscous part of the Earth. Raymund Lullie describes the Crisis, or
Constitution of it in these words. Substantia lapidis nostri est tota pinguis,
and Igne impregnata. The Substance of our stone (says he) is altogether fat,
or viscous, and impregnated with fire; In which respect he calls it elsewhere
not water, but Earth. Capias Terram nostram (says he) impregnatam a Sole, quia
lapis est honoratus, repertus in Hospitus desertis, and est intus inclusum
velut magnum Secretum, and Thesaurus incantatus. Take our Earth, which is
impregnated, or with Child by the Sun, for it is our precious stone, which is
found in desolat Houses, and there is shut up in it a great secret, and a
Treasure enchanted. And again in a certain place he delivers himself thus.
Prima materiae Fili, est Terra subtilis sulphurea, and haec nobilis Terra
dictum est Subjectum Mercuriale. My son (says he) the first, Matter is a
subtle, Sulphurous Earth, and this noble Earth is called the Mercurial
subject. Know then for certain that this Slimie moist Sperm, or Earth, must be
dissolved into water, and this is the Water of the Philosophers, not any common
water whasoever. This is the grand secret of the Art, and Lullie discovers it,
with a great deal of Honesty, and Charity. Argentum vivum nostrum (says he)
non est Argentum vivum Vulgar: Imo Argentum vivum nostrum est Aqua alterius
Naturae, quae reperiri non potest supra Terram, cum in actionem venire non
possit per Nat^ram, absque ad^utorio Ingenii. and Humanarum manuum
operationibus. Our Mercury is not common Mercury, or Quicksilver: but our
Mercury is a water, which cannot be found upon Earth, for it is not made, or
manifested by the ordinary course of Nature, but by the Art, and manual
Operations of Man. Seek not then for that in nature, which is an Effect beyond
her ordinary process: you must help her, that she may exceed her common
course, or all is to no purpose. In a word, you must make this water, before
you can find it. In the interim you must permit the Philosophers to call their
subject, or Chaos, a Water, for there is no proper name for it, unless we call
it a Sperm, which is a watery Substance, but certainly no Water. Let it
suffice, that you are not cheated, for they tell you what it is, and what it is
not, which is all that Man can do. If I ask you, by what name you call the
Sperm of a Chick, you will tell me it is the white of an Egg, and truly so is
the shell as well as the Sperm that is within it: But if you call it Earth or
water, you know well enough it is neither, and yet you cannot find a third
name. Judge then as you would be judged, for this is the very case of the
Philosophers: Certainly you must be very unreasonable, if you expect that
language from Men, which God has not given them. Now that we may confirm this
our Theorie and Discourse of the Sperm not only by Experience but by Reason, it
is necessary that we consider the Qualities and Temperament of the Sperm. It is
then a slimie slippery, Diffusive Moisture. But if we consider any perfect
products they are firm, compacted, figurated Bodies, and hence it follows they
must be made of something that is not firm, not compacted, not figurated, but
a weak, quivering, altering substance. Questionless thus it must be, unless
we make the Sperm to be of the same Complexion with the Body, and then it must
follow that Generation is no Alteration. Again: it is evident to all the
world, that nothing is so passive as Moisture. The least heat turns Water to a
Vapor, and the least cold turns that Vapor to Water. Now let us consider what
Degree of Heat it is, that acts in all Generations, for by the Agent we may
guess at the Nature of the patient. We know the Sun is so remote from us, that
the Heat of it (as daily Experience tells us) is very faint, and remiss. I
desire then to know, what Subject is there in all Nature, that can be altered
with such a weak Heat, but Moisture? Certainly none at all: for all hard
Bodies, as Salts, Stones, and Metals, preserve, and retain their Complexions
in the most violent, excessive Fires. How then can we expect they should be
altered by a gentle, and almost insensible Warmth? It is plain then, and that
by infallible inference from the proportion and power of the Agent, that
Moisture must needs be the patient: For that Degree of Heat, which Nature makes
use of in her Generations, is so remiss and weak, it is impossible for it to
alter any thing but what is moist, and waterish. This truth appears in the
Animal Family, where we know well enough the Sperms are moist: indeed in
Vegetables the Seeds are Dry, but then Nature generats nothing out of them,
till they are first macerated, or moystned with Water. And here my Peripatetic,
thou art quite gone, and with thee thy pura potentia, that fanatic Chaos of the
Son of Nichomachus. But I must advise my Chimists to beware of any Common
Moisture, for that will never be altered otherwise then to a Vapor. See
therefore that thy moisture be well tempered with Earth, otherwise thou have
nothing to dissolve, and nothing to Coagulat. Remember the practice, and Magic
of the A mig^ti^ God in his Creation, as it is manifested to thee by Moses. In
principio (says he) creavit Deus Coelum and Terram: But the Original i^ it be
truly, and rationally renderd, speaks thus, In principio Deus miscuit Rarum,
and Densum; In the Beginning God mingled or tempered together the Thin and the
Thick: for Heaven and Earth in this Text (as we have told you in our Anima
Magica) signify the Virgin Mercury, and the Virgin Sulphur. This I will prove
out of the text it self, and that by the vulgar received Translation, which
runs thus: In the Beginning God created the Heaven, and the Earth: And the
Earth was without form and void, and there was darkness upon the face of the
abyss, and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. In the first
part of this text Moses mentions two created principles, not a perfect world as
we shall prove hereafter, and this he does in these General terms, Heaven and
Earth. In the latter part of it he describes each of these principles by it
self in more particular terms, and he begins with the Earth. And the Earth
(says he) was without form, and void. Hence I infer that the Earth he speaks
of was a mere Rudiment or principle of this Earth which I now see, for this
present Earth is neither void, nor without form. I conclude then that the
Mosaycall earth was the Virgin Sulphur, which is an earth without form, for it
has no determinated Figure. It is a Laxative instable incomposed substance, of
a porous empty Crasis like Sponge, or Soote. In a word^ I have seen it, but it
is impossible to describe it. After this he proceeds to the Description of his
Heaven, or second principle, in these subsequent words: And their was Darkness
upon the face of the abyss, and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters. Here he calls that an abyss and Waters, which he formerly called
Heaven. It was indeed the Heavenly Moisture or Water of the Chaos out of which
the separated Heaven, or Habitation of the stars was afterward made^ This is
clear out of the Original, for(...) Hamaim and(...) Hashamaim are the same
words, like Aqua and Ibi Aqua, and they signify one and the same substance,
namely Water. The text then being rendered according to the primitive natural
truth, and the undoubted sense of the Author, speaks thus; In the beginning (or
according to the Jerusalem Thargum) In wisdom God made the water and the
earth: And the earth was without form and void, and there was Darkness upon
the Face of the Deep, and the spirit of God moved upon the Face of the waters.
Here you should observe that God created two principles, Earth and Water, and
of these two he compounded a third, namely the Sperm or Chaos. Upon the water,
or moist part of this Sperm, the spirit of God did move, and (says the
Scripture) there was Darkness upon the face of the Deep. This is a very great
secret, neither is it lawful to publish it expressly, and as the Nature of the
thing requires, but in the Magical work, it is to be seen, and I have been an
eye witness of it my self.

To conclude: Remember that our subject is no common water, but a thick,
slimie, fat earth. This earth must be dissolved into water, and that water must
be coagulated again into earth. This is done by a certain Natural Agent,
which the Philosophers call their secret fire: for if you work with common
fire, it will dry your Sperm, and bring it to an unprofitable red Dust, of the
Color of wild poppie. Their fire then is the Key of the Art, for it is a
Natural Agent, but acts not Naturally without the Sun. I must confess it is a
knottie Mystery, but we shall make it plain, if you be not very Dim and Dull.
It requires indeed a quick, clear Apprehension, and therefore Readers, Snuff
your Candles.

The Philosophical Fire.
FIre, notwithstanding the Diversities of it in this Sublunarie Kitchen of the
Elements, is but one Thing, from one Root. The Effects of it are various
according to the Distance, and Nature of the subject wherein it resides, for
that makes it Vital, or Violent. It sleeps in most things as in Flints, where
it is silent and Invisible. It is a kind of perdue: lys close like a Spider in
the Cabinet of his Web, to surprise all that comes within his lines. He never
appears without his prey in his Foot, where he finds ought that is Combustible
there he discovers himself, for if we speak, properly, he is not generated,
but manifested. Some Men are of Opinion that he breeds nothing, but devoures
all things, and is therefore called Ignis quasi Ingignens: This is a
Grammticall Whim, for there is nothing in the world generated without Fire.
What a fine Philosopher then was Aristotle, who tells us this Agent breeds
nothing but his Pyrausta, a certain Fly which he found in his Candle, but could
never be seen afterward? Indeed too much Heat burns and destroys, and if we
descend to other Natures, too much water drowns, too much earth buries and
choaks the seed that it cannot come up: And verily at this Rate there is
nothing in the world that generats. What an Owl was he then, that could not
distinguish with all his Logic between Excess and Measure, between Violent and
Vital Degrees of Heat, but concluded the Fire did Breed nothing, because it
consumed something? But let the Mule pass, for so Plato called him, and let us
prosecute our secret fire. This fire is at the Root, and about the Root (I mean
about the Center) of all things both Visible, and Invisible. It is in water,
earth, and air; It is in Minerals, Herbs, and Beasts; It is in Men, Stars, and
Angels; but Originally it is in God himself, for he is the Fountain of Heat and
fire, and from Him it is derived to the rest of the Creatures in a certain
stream, or Sunshine. Now the Magicians afford us but two Notions, whereby we
may know their fire: it is as they describe it. Moist and Invisible. Hence have
they called it Venture Equi, and Fimus Equinus: but this only by way of
Analogy, for there is in Horse-dung a moist Heat, but no fire that is visible.
Now then let us compare the common Vulcan with this Philosophical Vesta, that
we may see wherein they are different. First of all then the Philosopher's fire
is moist, and truly so is that of the Kitchen too. We see that flames contract
and extend themselves, now they are short, now they are long, which cannot be
without moisture to maintain the flux, and Continuitie of their parts. I know
Aristotle makes the fire to be simply dry, perhaps because the effects of it
are so; he did not indeed consider that in all Complexions there are other
Qualities besides the praedominant one. Sure then this dry stuff is that
element of his, wherein he found his Pyrausta; but if our natural fire were
simply dry, the flames of it could not flow, and diffuse themselves as they
do they would rather fall to Dust, or turn like their fuel to ashes. But
that I may return to my former Discourse, I say the Common fire is excessively
hot, but moist in a far inferior degree, and therefore destructive, for it
preyes on the moisture of other things. On the contrary the warmth and moisture
of the Magical Agent are equal, the one temperates, and satisfies the other:
it is a humid tepid fire, or as we commonly express our selves, Bloud-warme.
This is their first, and greaeest Difference in Relation to our desired effect,
we will now consider their second. The Kitchen fire (as we all know) is
visible, but the Philosophers fire is Invisible, and therefore no Kitchen fire.
This Almadir expressly tells us in these words, Solos radios Invisibiles ignis
nostri sufficere. Our work (says he) can be performed by nothing, but by the
Invisible Beams of our fire. And again, Ignis noster Corrosivus est Ignis, qui
supra nostrum vas Nubem obducit, in qua nube radii hujus ignis occulti sunt.
Our Fire is a Corrosive fire, which brings a cloud about our glass or vessel,
in which Cloud the Beams of our fire are hidden. To be short, the Philosophers
call this Agent their Bath, because it is moist as Baths are: but in very truth
it is no kind of Bath, neither Maris, nor Roris, but a most subtle fire, and
purely Natural, but the Excitation of it is Artificial. This Excitation, or
preparation (as I have told thee in my Coelum Terrae) is a very trivial,
slight, ridiculous thing: nevertheless all the secrets of Corruption and
Generation are therein contained. Lastly, I think it just to inform thee, that
many Authors have falfly described this fire, and that of purpose to seduce
their Readers. For my ownpart, I have neither added, nor diminished, thou have
here the true entire secret, and in which all the Eastern sages agree: Alfid,
Almadir, Belen, Gieberim, Hali, Salmanazar, and Zadich: with the three famous
Jews Abraham Artefius, and Kalid. If thou do not by this time apprehend it,
thou are past my Cure, for I may tell thee no more of it, I may only reach thee
how to use it.

Take our two Serpents, which are to be found every where on the Face of the
Earth. They are a living Male, and a living Female. Tie them Both in a
Love-knot, and shut them up in the Arabian CARAHA. This is thy first labor,
but thy next is more difficult. Thou must incamp against them with the fire of
Nature, and be sure thou do bring thy Line round about. Circle them in, and
stop all Avenues, that they find no Relief. Continue this siege patiently, and
they will turn to an ugly, flabbie, venomous, black Toad, which will be
transformed to a horrible, devowring Dragon, creeping and weltring in the
Bottom of her Cave without wings. Touch her not by any means, not so much as
with thy Hands, for there is not upon earth such a violent, transcendent
poison. As have begun, so proceed, and this Dragon will turn to a Swan, but
more white than the hovering, Virgin Snow, when it is not yet sullied with the
Earth. Henceforth I will allow thee to fortify thy fire, till the Phaenix
appears. It is a red Bird of a most deep Color, with a shining Fiery Hue. Feed
this Bird with the Fire of his Father, and the Ether of his Mother, for the
first is meat, the second is Drink, and without this last he attains not to his
full Glory. Be sure to understand this secret, for fire feeds not well, unless
it be first fed. It is of it self dry and Choleric, but a proper moisture
tempers it, gives it a heavenly Complexion, and brings it to the Desired
Exaltation. Feed thy Bird then as I have told thee, and he will move in his
Nest, and rise like a star of the Firmament. Do this, and thou have placed
Nature in Horizonte AEternitatis: Thou have performed that Command of the
Cabalist, Fige finem in Principio, sicut Flammam prunae Conjunctam: quia
Dominus SUPERLATIVE unus, and non tenet secundum. Unite the End to the
Beginning, like a Flame to a Coal: for God (says he) is superlatively one,
and he has no second. Consider then what you seek: you seek an Indissoluble,
miraculous, transmuting, uniting union, but such a tie cannot be without the
first unity; Creare enim (says one) atque intrinsecus transmutare absque
violentia, Munus est proprium duntaxat Primae Potentiae, Primae sapientiae,
Primi amoris. To Create, and Transmute essentially, and naturally or without
any violence, is the only proper office of the first power, the first Wisdom,
and the first love. Without this love the Elements will never be married, they
will never inwardly and essentially unite, which is the end and perfection of
Magic. Study then to understand this, and when thou have performed, I will
allow thee that Test of the Mekkubalim: Intellexisti in sapientia, and sapuisti
in Intelligentia, statuisti Rem super Puritates suas, and Creatorem in Throno
suo collocasti.

For a Close to this Section, I say it is impossible to generat in the patient,
without a vital generating Agent. This Agent is the Philosophical fire, a
certain moist, heavenly, invisible Heat; but let us hear Raymund Lullie
describe it, Quando dicimus (says he) quod lapis per ignem generatur, non
vident alium ignem, nec alium ignem credunt, nisi ignem communem: nec aliud
Sulphur, nec aliud argentum vivum, nisi sit vulgar. Ideo manent decepti per
little caecas estimationes, inferentes quod causa sumus suae Deceptionis, and
quod dedimus illis intelligere rem unam pro alia. Sed non est verum salva eorum
pace, sicut probabimus per illa, quae Philosophi posuerunt in scriptis. Solemn
enim appellamus ignem, and vicarium suum vocamus Calorem naturalem. Nam illud
quod agit Calor Solis in Mineris Metallorunt per mill annos, ^pse Calor
naturalis facit in una hora supra Terram. Nos vero, and multi alii, vocamus
^^um Filium solis, nam primo per solis influentiam fuit generatus per naturam,
sine adju^orio Scientiae, velartis. When we say the stone is generated by
fire, Men neither see, neither do they believe there is any other fire, but
the common fire: nor any other Sulphur ^or ^^ Mercury, but the common Sulphur
and ^^ Mercury. Thus are they deceived by their own opinions, saying that we
are the Cause of their Error, having made them to mistake ^nc thing for
another. But by their leave it is not so, as we shall prove by the Doctrine of
the Philosophers. For we call the Sun a fire, and the natural Heat we call his
Substitute, ^or Deputy; for that which the heat of the Sun performs in a
thousand years in the Mines, the Heat of Nature performs it above the earth in
one hour. But we, and many other Philosophers have called this Heat, the
Child of the Sun, for at first it was generated naturally by the influence of
the Sun, without the Help of our Art or Knowledge. Thus Luilie: But one thing I
must tell thee, and be sure, Reader, thou do remember it. This very
natural Heat must be applied in the just `Degree, and not too much fortified,
for the Sun it self does not generat, but burn and scorch where it is too hot.
Si cum igne magno operatus fueris (says the same Lullie) proprietas nostri
spiritus, quae inter vitam and mortem participiat, separabit se, and Anima
recedet in Regionem sphaerae suae. If thou shall work with too strong a fire,
the propriety of our spirit, which is indifferent as yet to life or death,
will separate it self from the Body, and the Soul will depart to the Region of
her own sphere: Take therefore along with thee this short, but wholesome advise
of the same Author. Facias ergo Fili, quod in loco Generationis aut
Conversionis sit talis potentia Caelestis, quae possio transformare Humidum ex
natura terrestris, in formam and speciem transparentem, and finissimam. My Son
(says he) let the Heavenly power, or Agent be such in the place of Generation
or Mutation, that it may alter the spermatic Humiditie from its Earthly
Complexion, to a most fine transparent form, or species. See here now the
solution of the slimie, fat Earth, to a transparent glorious Mercury! This
Mercury Gentlemen, is the water which we look after, but not any common water
whatsoever. There is nothing now behind but that which the Philosophers call
secretum Artis: a thing that was never published, and without which you will
never perform, though you know both Fire and Matter. An Instance hereof we
have in Flammel, who knew the Matter well enough and had both fire and Furnace
painted to him by Abraham the Jew: but notwithstanding he erred for three
years, because he knew not the third secret. Henry Madathan a most noble
Philosopher practiced upon the subject for five years together, but knew not
the right method, and therefore found nothing; at last says he, Post sextum
annum Clavis Potentiae per arcanam Revelationem ab omnipotente Deo mihi
concreditaest: After the sixth year, I was entrusted with the Key of power by
secret Revelation, from the Almighty God. This Key of power, or third secret
was never put to paper by any Philosopher whatsoever. Paracelsus indeed has
touched upon it, but so obscurely it is no more to the purpose then if he had
said nothing. And now I suppose I have done enough for the Discovery, and
Regiment of the fire; if you think it too little, I must tell you it is much
more then any one Author has performed. Search it than, for he that finds this
fire, will attain to the true temper ament, he will make a noble deserving
Philosopher, and to speak in the phrase of our Spaniard, Dignus erit poni ad
Mensam Duodecim parium.

The River of Pearl.
IT is a Decompounded Substance, extreme heavy and moist, but wets not the
Hand. It shines after Night like a star, and will inlighten any Dark room. It
is full of small eyes sparkling like Pearls or Aglets. It is the whole
Demogorgon, but now actually animated by manifestation of his own Inward Light.
The Father of it is a certain inviolable Mass, for the parts of it are so
firmly united, you can neither pound them into Dust, nor separat them by
violence of Fire. This is the stone of the Philosophers, Qui ab omni part
(says one) circumdatus est Tenebris, Nebulis, Caligine: Habitat in mediis
Terrae visceribus, Qui ubi natus fuerit, vestitur quodam viride Pallio,
humiditate quadam aspersus, and non prognatus ab aliquo, sed aeternus, and
parens omnium Rerum. It is compassed about (says he) with Darkness, Clouds,
and Blackness. It dwells in the inmost Bowels of the Earth: but when he is
borne, he is clothed with a certain Green Mantle, and sprinckl'd over with a
certain Moisture. He is not properly generated by any Natural thing, but he
is eternal, and the Father of all things. This Description is very true and
apposit, but AEnigmaticall: howsoever forget not the Green Mantle. This is that
substance, which Gieberim Eben-Haen, or as the Rabble writes him, Geber, calls
Lapis in Capitulis notus: a very subtle Expression, but if well examined, it is
the Key to his whole Book, and to the writings of the old Philosophers in
General. But let us return to our River of Pearl, and for our further
information let us hear it described by a most excellent Adeptus, and that in
the very(...), before the full moon appears. Hoo opus est (says he) quod mihi
aliquando ob oculos posuit unicus Exechedistes, magnas quippe fornaces, atque
vitro easdem Varico redimitas ostendens. Vasa erant singula, in suis sedilibus
habentia sedimenta, atque interius dispari dicatum, sacrumque Munus. Quid vero
Rem tam Divinam celeni diutius? Erat intus circumacta Moles quaedam, Mundi prae
seferens imaginem ipsissimi. Quippe ibi Terra videbatur in medio omnium
consistens, aquisque circumfusa Limpidissimis, in varios colles, salebrosasuque
rupes assnrgebat, fructum ferens multiplicem, tanquam humentis Aeris imbribus
irrigua. Vini etiam videbatur and olei, and lactis, atque pretiosorum omne
genus lapidum, and Metallorum esse apprime ferax. Tum Aquae ipsae instar
AEquoris, sale quodam pellucido, albo interdum, interdum quoque rubeo and
fulvo, and rubro, multisque praeterea variegato coloribus inlitae, inque
superficiem ipsam aestuabant. Igne autem haec omnia suo, sed impercepto quidem,
atque aethereo movebantur. Id vero unum prae caeteris incredibibilem me
rapiebat in admirationem, Rem haec tam multa unicam, tam diversa, tamque in suo
genere integra singula, parvo etiam imbecillique adminiculo pro ducere: quo
facto paulatim robustiore, redirent tandem, atque coalescerent in unum omnia,
confidenter aesseverabat. Hic equidem observavi fusilis illam salis fpeciem
nihil ab Aphrolitho degenerantem, atque argentum illud vivum, cui Mercurii
nomen ab hujusce Disciplinae priscis authoribus inditum est, illam ipsam
referens Lullianam Lunariam, adversa scandens aqua, noctuque relucens, atque
interdiu glutinandi praeditum facultate. Here we have portrayed unto us the
whole Philosophical Laboratorie, Furnace, fire, and Matter, with the
Mysterious Germinations thereof. But because the Terms are difficult, and not
to be understood by any, but such as have seen the thing it self, I will for
the Readers Benefit, I cannot say satisfaction, put them into English. This is
the work (says he) which I have sometimes seen with a singular, and a most
dear friend: who showed to me certain large Furnaces, and those crowned with
Cornues of Glass. The Vessels were several, having besides their Triptods
their sediments, or Caskets, and within them was a Holy Oblation, or present
dedicated to the Ternarie. But why should I any longer conceal so divine a
thing? within this Fabric was a certain Mass moving Circularly, or driven
round about, and representing the very Figure of the great world. For here the
Earth was to be seen standing of it self in the midst of all, compassed about
with most clear waters, rising up to several Hillocks, and craggie Rocks, and
bearing many sorts of Fruit, as if it had been watr'd with showers from the
moist Air. It seemed also to be very fruitful for wine, oil, and milk, with
all kind of precious stones, and Metals. The waters themselves like those of
the Sea, were full of a certain transparent Salt, now white, now Red, then
Yellow and purpl'd, and as it were chamletted with various Colors, which did
swell up to the face of the waters. All these things were actuated or stirred
with their own appropriat fire, but in very truth imperceptible, and ethereall.
But one thing above the rest forced me to an incredible admiration Namely, that
so many things, such diverse and in their kind such perfect particular should
proceed from one only thing, and that with very small assistance, which being
furthered and strengthened by degrees, the Artist faithfully affirmed to me that
all those Diversities would settle at last to one Body Here I observed that
fusilkind of Salt to be nothing different from a pumice-stone, and that
Quicksilver which the ancient Authors of this Art called Mercury, to be the
same with Lullies Lunaria, whose water gets up against the fire of Nature, and
shines by night but by day has a glutinous, viscous faculty^ This is the sense
of our learned Adeptus, and for his Analogy of the Philosophic Salt, and a
pumice-stone, it cannot be well conceived without the Light of Experience. It
is then a porous, hollow, froth-like, spongious Salt^ The Consistency of it is
pumice-like, but neither hard, nor opacous. It is a thin, slippery oily
substance in appearance like Mouth glue, but much more clear. Sometimes it
looks like Rosials and Rubies: Sometimes it is violet Blew, sometimes white as
Lilies, and again more green than Grass, but with a Smaragdine transparencie:
and sometimes it looks like burnisht Gold and Silver. The River of Pearl has
her Name from it, for there it stands like the Sperm of Frogs in common waters.
Sometimes it will move, and swim to the face of his Bath in thin leaves like
wafers, but with a thousand miraculous Colors This is enough and too much, for
I hold it not my Duty to insist upon secrets, which are so far from the Readers
Inquiry, that I dare say they are beyond his Expectation.

The Ether, or the Air of Paradise.
HItherto I have discoursed of the first Matter, and the fire of Nature: Terms
indeed commonly known, but the things signified are seldom understood. I shall
now descend to more abstruse particular principles, Things of that secrecy and
subtlety, they are not so much as thought of much less inquired after. The
common Chimist dreams of Gold and Transmutations, most noble and Heavenly
Effects, but the Means whereby he would compass them, are worme-eaten,
dustie, mustie papers. His Study and his Noddle are stuffed with old Receipts,
he can tell us a hundred Stories of Brimstone and Quicksilver, with many
miraculous Legends of Arsenic and Antimonie, Sal gemmae, Sal prunae, Sal
Petrae, and other stupendous Alkalies, as he loves to call them; with such
strange Notions and Charms does he amaze, and silence his Auditors, as Bats are
killed with Thunder at the Ear. Indeed if this Noise will carry it, let him
alone, he can want no Artillery. But if you bring him to the field, and force
him to his Polemics, if you demand his Reason, and reject his Recipe, you have
laid him as flat as a Flounder. A rational, methodicall Dispute will undo
him, for he studies not the whole Body of Philosophy: a Receipt he would find
in an old Box, or an old Book, as if the knowledge of God and Nature were a
thing of Chance, not of Reason. This idle Humor has not only surprised the
common illiterat Broyler, where in truth there is some Necessity for it, but
even great Doctor: and Physicians: Bate me the impostume of their Titles, and
their Learning is not Considerable. Hence it comes to pass that so many men
are undone in the prosecution of this Art: They are so wedded to old
scriblings, they will not submit them to their judgment, but presently bring
them to the fire. Certainly they believe such ridiculous Impossibilities, that
even brute Beasts if they could speak, would reprove them. Sometimes they
mistake their own Excrements for that Matter out of which Heaven and Earth
were made. Hence they drudge, and labor in Urine, and such filthy dirty
stuff which is not fit to be named. But when all comes to all, and their
Custard fails them, they quit their filthiness, but not their error. They
think of something that's more Tractable, and dream perhaps that God made the
world of Egge-shels or Flint-stones. Truly these Opinions proceed not only from
simple people, but from Doctors forsooth, and Philosophers. It is therefore my
Design to discover some Excellencies of this Art, and make it appear to the
Student that what is Glorious, is withal Difficult. This I suppose may remove
that Blind, sluggish Credulity, which prevents all Ingenious Disquisitions, and
cause men perhaps to exercise that Reason, which God has given them for
Discoveries. I shall not dwell long on any one particular, I am drawing off the
stage in all Haste, and returning to my first solitudes. My Discourse shall be
very short, and like the Echo's laft Syllables, Imperfect. I intend it only for
Hint and suggestion to the Reader: it is no full Light but a Glance, and he
must improve it to his better satisfaction.

We are now to speak of the Ether of the little world, which is the very same
in Nature and substance with the outward Ether of the great world. That you
may the better understand what it is, we will examine the Notion, before we
state the thing. Aristotle in his Book de Mundo derives this word(...), a
semper currendo, because the Heavens are in perpetual Motion. This is a
general irregular whymzie, for the stars also as well as the Ether move
perpetually: The Sea is subject to a continual Flux and Reflux, and the Blood
of all Animals to a restless unwearied Pulse. The more ancient Philosophers
whose Books this Enemy burnt, derived it from(...) ardeo: but especially
Anaxagoras, who was better acquainted with Heaven than Aristotle, as it appears
by his miraculous praediction, and the opinion he had of that place, namely
that it was his Country, and that he was to return thither after death. Indeed
this last Etymology comes near the nature of the thing, for it is a Heating
cheerishing spirit, but in its genuine Complexion it burns not. I cannot then
approve of this latter Derivation no more than of the former, I rather believe
that Ether is a Compound of(...)and(...), this substance being called
(...)from its effect and office,(...), a semper Calefaciendo. Supposing this to
be the true Interpretation, let us now see whether it relates more strictly and
properly to this principle, than to any other Nature whatsoever. The Ether is
a most thin liquid substance, and the Region of it is above the stars, in the
Circumference of the Divine Light. This is the true, and famous(...), which
receives the Influent Heat of God, and conveys it to the visible Heaven, and
all the Inferior Creatures. It is a pure Essence, a thing not tainted with any
Material Contagion, in which sense it is styled of Pythagoras (...), the free
Ether. Quoniam (says Reuclin) a materiae potentia segregatus, and
praeservatus in Liberate, calescit D^i Ardore, ac insensibili motu Inferiora
calefacit. Because it is freed from the prison of the Matter, and being
preserved in its liberty, it is warm with the fire of God, and by an
insensible motion heats all the Inferior Natures. In a word, because of it is
purity it is placed next to that Divine Fire, which the Jews call Lumen
Vestimenti, and it is the very first Receptacle of the Influences and
Derivations of the Supernatural World, which sufficiently confirms our
Etymology. In the Beginning it was generated by Reflection of the first unity
upon the Caelestial Cube, for the Bright Emanations of God did flow like a
stream into the Passive(...)and in this Analogy the Samian styles Him(...)
Fontem perpetuae Naturae. You shall understand that the Ether is not one. but
manifold, and the Reasons of it we shall give you hereafter. By this I mind
not a variety of Substances, but a Chain of Complexions. There are other
Moystures, and those too aethereall: They are Females also of the Masculine
Divine Fire, and these are the Fountains of the Chaldee, which the Oracle
styles(...), Summitates Fontanas, the Invisible upper springs of Nature. Of all
substances that come to our hands, this Ether is the first that brings us News
of another World, and tells us we live in a corrupt place. S^ndivogius called it
the Urine of Saturn, and with this did he water his Lunar and Solar Plants. Ex
Marimeo (said the Jew) oriuntur Nebulae, quae ferunt Aquas Benedictas, and
ipsae irrigant Terras, and educunt Herbas and Flores. In a word this Moisture
is animated with a Vegetable blessed divine Fire, which made one describe the
Mystery thus. Ex Natura, and ex Divino factum est: Divinum enim est, quiae cum
Divinitate conjunctum Divinas substantias facit. To conclude, the Ether is to
be found in the lower spring or(...), namely in that substance, which the
Arabians call Flos salis albi, the Flower of white Salt. It is indeed borne of
Salt, for Salt is the Root of it, and it is found withal in locis salsosis, in
certain Saltish places. The best Discovery of it is this: The Philosophers
call it their Mineral Tree, for it grows as all Vegetables do, and has Leaves
and Fruits in the very Hour of its Nativity. This is enough, and now I pass
to another principle.

The Heavenly Luna.
THis Luna is the Moon of the Mine, a very strange stupifying substance. It is
not simple, but mixed. The Ether, and a subtle white Earth are its Components,
and this makes it grosser than the Ether it self. It appears in the form of
an exceeding white oil, but is in very truth a certain vegetant flowing,
smooth, soft salt, etc.

The star-soule.
THis is the true Astrum Solis, the Mineral spiritual Sun. It is compounded of
the Ether, and a Bloody, fiery, spirited Earth. It appears in a gummie
Consistency, but with a fierce, hot, glowing Complexion. It is Substantially a
certain purple, animated, Divine Salt, etc.

The Prester of Zoroaster.
IT is a Miracle to consider, how the Earth, which is a Body of inexpressible
weight and Heaviness, can be supported in the Air a fleeting yielding
substance, and thorough which even froth and Feathers will sink, and make their
way. I hope there is no man so mad as to think it is poys'd there by some
Geometrical Knack, for that were Artificial, but the work of God is Vital,
and Natural. Certainly if the Animation of the world be denied, there must
needs follow a precipitation of this Element by its own Corpulency and Gravity.
We see that our own Bodies are supported by that Essence, by which they are
actuated and animated, but when when that Essence leaves them, they fall to the
ground, till the spirit returns at the Resurrection. I conclude then that the
Earth has in her a Fire-soule, a most powerful strong spirit, that bears her
up, as the spirit of Man bears up man. To this agrees Raymund Lullie in the
seventy sixth Chapter of his Theorie. Tota Terra plena est Intelligentia ad
operationem Naturae inclinata, quae Intelligentia movetur a natura superiore:
Ita quod natura Intellectiva inferior assimilatur naturae Superiori. The whole
Earth (says he) is full of Intelligence, inclined to the Discipline or
Operation of Nature, which Intelligence is moved by the Superior Nature: so
that the Inferior Intelligence is like to the Superior. This spirit or
Intelligence is the (...), a Notion of the admirable Zoroaester, as I find him
rendered by Julian the Chaldaean. It comes from(...) uro, and signifies
Lightning, or a certain burning Turbo, or whirlwind, but in the sense of our
Chaldee it is the Fire-spirit of Life. It is an Influence of the Almighty God,
and it comes from Terra Viventium, namely the second person, whom the Cabalists
style the Supernatural East. For as the Natural Light of the Sun is first
manifested to us in the East, so the Supernatural Light was first manifested in
the second person, for he is Principium Alterationis, the Beginning of the
ways of God, or the first Manifestation of his Father's Light in the
Supernatural Generation. From this Terra Viventium, or Land of the Living comes
all Life or spirit, according to that position of the M^^kubalim: Omnis anima
bona est anima nova, veniens ab Orient.

Every good soul is a new soul, coming from the East: that is from (...)
Cocmah, or the second Sephiroth, which is the Son of God.

Now for the better understanding of this Descent of the soul, we must refer
our selves to another placet of the Cabalists, and this is it.

Animae a Tertio Lumine ad Quartam Diem, inde ad Quintam descendunt: inde
exeuntes, Corporis Noctem subintrant.



The souls (say they) descend from the Third Light to the fourth Day. thence to
the fifth, whence they pass out, and enter the Night of the Body, To
understand this Maxim, you must know there are three supreme Lights or
Sephiroths, which the Cabalist calls, Seeds una, in qua sedet Sanctus, Sanctus
Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath. This third Light from whence the souls descend,
is(...) Binah, the last of the three sephiroths, and it signifies the Holy
Ghost. Now that you may know in what sense this Descent proceeds from that
Blessed spirit, I will somewhat enlarge my Discourse, for the Cabalists are
very obscure in the point. Spirare (say the Jews) Spiritus Sancti proprium est,
to Breath is the propriety of the Holy Ghost. Now we read that God breathed
into Adam the Breath of Life, and he became a living soul. Genesis
Here you must understand that the third Person is the last of the three, not
that there is any Inequality in them, but it is so in order of Operation, for
he applies first to the Creature, and therefore works last. The meaning of it
is this: The Holy Ghost could not breath a soul into Adam, but he must either
receive it, or have it of himself. Now the truth is he receives it, and what
he receives, that he breaths into Nature. Hence this most holy spirit is
styled by the Cabalists Fluvius egrediens e Paradiso, because he breaths as a
River streams. He is called also Matter Filiorum, because by this Breathing he
is as it were delivered of those souls, which have been conceived Ideally in
the second Person. Now that the Holy Ghost receives all things from the second
Person, is confirmed by Christ himself. When the spirit of truth is come, John
16. 13
he will guide you into all truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but what
soever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to
come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you. All things that the Father has, are mine; Therefore said I, that he
shall take of mine. Here we plainly see, there is a certain subsequent order
or Method in the operations of the blessed Trinity, for Christ tells us, that he
receives from his Father, and the Holy Ghost receives from Him. Again that all
things are conceived Ideally (or as we commonly express it) created by the
second person, is confirmed by the word of God. The World was made by him
(says the Scripture) and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his
own received him not. This may suffice for such as Love the Truth, and as for
that which the Cabalist speaks of the fourth and fifth Days, it suits not with
my present design, and therefore I must wave it. It is clear then that Terra
viventium, or the Eternal Fire-Earth buds and sprouts, has her fiery
spiritual Flowers, which we call souls, as this natural Earth has her
natural Vegetables. In this mysterious sense is the Prester defined in the
Oracles(...), the Flower of thin Fire. But that we may come at last to the
thing intended, I think it not amiss to instruct you by this Manuduction. You
know that no Artificer can build, but the Earth must be the Foundation to his
Building, for without this Groundwork. his Brick and Mortar cannot stand. In
the Creation when God did build, there was no such place to build upon. I ask
then where did he rest his Matter, and upon what? Certainly he built, and
founded Nature upon his own Supernatural Center. He is in her, and thorough
her, and with his eternal spirit does he support Heaven and Earth, as our
bodies are supported with our spirits. This is confirmed by that oracle of the
Apostle, Omnia portat verbo virtutis suae, He bears up all things with the word
of his power; from this power is he justly styled (...): The infinitely
powerful, and the Allpowerfull power-making power. I say then that Fire and
spirit are the Pillars of Nature; the props on which her whole Fabric rests,
and without which it could not stand one minute. This Fire or Prester is the
Throne of the Quintessentiall Light, from whence he dilates himself to
Generation, as we see in the effussion of the Sunbeams in the great world. In
this Dilatation of the Light consists the joy or pleasure of the passive
spirit, and in its Contraction his Melancholy or sorrow. We see in the great
Body of Nature, that in Turbulent weather when the Sun is shut up, and clouded,
the Air is thick and dull, and our own spirits by secret Compassion with the
spirit of the Air are dull too. On the contrary in clear strong Sun-shines the
Air is Quick and Thin, and the spirits of all Animals are of the same
rarefied, active Temper. It is plain then that our joys and sorrows proceed
from the Dilatation and Contraction of our inward Quintessentiall Light. This
is apparent in despayring Lovers, who are subject to a certain violent,
extraordinary panting of the Heart, a timorous trembling pulse which proceeds
from the Apprehension and Fear of the spirit in relation to his Miscarriage.
Notwithstanding he desires to be dilated, as it appears by his pulse or Sallie,
wherein he does discharge himself; but his Despair checks him again, and
brings him to a sudden Retreat, or Contraction. Hence it comes to pass that
we are subject to sighs. which are occasioned by the sudden pause of the
spirit: for when he stops, the Breath stops, but when he loses himself to an
outward Motion, we deliver two or three Breaths that have been formerly
omitted, in one long E^piration, and this we call a sigh. This ^^sion has
carried many brave men to very ^^^ Extremities. It is originally occasioned ^^
the spirit of the Mistress, or affected ^irty: for her spirit ferments or
leavens the ^^^t of the Lover, so that it desires an union ^^ far as Nature
will permit. This makes us ^^sent even smiles and frowns, like Fortunes and
Misfortunes; Our Thoughts are never ^t Home according to that well-grounded
Observation, Anima est ubi amat, non ubi ^^^^^t: the soul dwells not where she
lives, out where she loves. We are employed in a ^erpetuall Contemplation of
the absent Beau^^; Our very Joys and Woes are in her power: ^he can set us to
what Humor she will, as ^ampian was altered by the Music of his Mistress.

When to her Lu^e Corinna sings,
Her Voice inlives the Leaden strings:
But when of sorrows she does speak,
Even with her sighs the strings do break.
And as her Lure does Live or Die,
Lea'd by her Passions: So do I.
This, and many more miraculous sympa^hies proceed from the Attractive nature
of the Prester: it is a spirit that can wonders, and now let us see if there
be any possibility to come at him. Suppose then we should dilapidat or
discompose some Artificial Building, stone by stone: There is no question but
we should come at last to the Earth whereupon it is founded. It is just so in
Magic: if we open any Natural Body, and separat all the parts thereof one from
another, we shall come at last to the Prester, which is the Candle, and secret
Light of God. We shall know the hidden Intelligence, and see that
inexpressible Face, which gives the outward Figure to the Body. This is the
S^^lagism we should look after, for he that ^ath once past the Aquaster, enters
the Fire-world, and sees what is both Invisible and Incredible to the common
Man. He shall discover to the Eye the miraculous Conspiracy that is between the
Prester and the Sun. He shall know the secret Love of Heaven and Earth, and
the sense of that deep Cabalism, Non est planta hic inferius cui non est stella
in Firmamento superius, and ferit eam stella, and dicit ei Cresce. There is not
an Herb here below, but he has a star in Heaven above and the star strikes him
with her Beam. and says to him, Grow. He shall know, how the Fire-spirit has
his Root in the Spiritual FireEarth, and receives from it a secret Influx upon
which he feeds, as Herbs feed on that Juice and Liquor, which they receive at
their Roots from this Common Earth. This is it, which our Savior tells us, Math.
Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every word that comes out of the Mouth of
God. He meant not by Ink and P^pyr or the dead Letter: it is a Mystery, and
St. Paul has partly expounded it. He tells the Athenians, that God made Man, to
the end, That he should seek the Lord, if happily he might feel after him and
find him. Here is a strange Expression, you will say, that a Man should feel
after God, or seek Him with his Hands. But he goes on, and tells you where you
shall find him. He is not far (says he) from every one of us; for in Him we
live, and move, and have our Being. For the better understanding of this place,
I wish you to read Paracelsus his Philosophia ad Athenienses, a glorious
Incomparable Discourse, but you will shortly find it in English. Again: He
that enters the Center, shall know why all Influx of fire descends against the
Nature of fire, and comes from Heaven downwards: He shall know also why the
same fire having found a Body, ascends again toward Heaven, and gows upwards.

To conclude: I say the grand Supreme Mystery of Magic, is to multiply the
Prester, and place him in the moist serene Ether, which God has purposely
created to qualify the fire. For I would have thee know, that this spirit may
be so chafed, and that in the most temperat Bodies, as to undo thee upon a
sudden. This thou may guess thy self by the(...), or thundering Gold, as
the Chemist calls it. Place him then as God has placed the stars, in the
condensed Ether of his Chaos, for there he will shine, not burn, he will be
vital and Calm, not furious and Choleric. This secret I confess, transcends
the Common process, and I dare tell thee no more of it. It must remain then
as a Light in a Dark place, but how it may be discovered, do thou Consider.

The Green salt.
IT is a Tincture of the Saphiric Mine, and to define'it substantially, it is
the Air of our little Invisible Fire-world. It produces two noble effects,
youth, and Hope; wheresoever it appears, it is an infallible sign of life, as
you see in the springtime, when all things are Green. The sight of it is
cheerful, and refreshing beyond all imagination. It comes out of the Heavenly
Earth, for the Saphir does spermatize, and injects her Tinctures into the
Ether, where they are carried, and manifested to the Eye. This Saphir is
equal of her self to the whole Compound, for she is threefold, or has in her
three several essences. I have seen them all, not in Ayrie imaginary
suppositions but really with my bodily eyes. And here we have Apollodorous his
Mathematical Problem resolved: namely that Pythagoras should sacrifice a
hundred Oxen, when he found out.(...), That the Subtendent of a right angl'd
Triangle was equivalent to those parts which contained it, etc.

The Diapasm, or Magical Perfume.
IT is compounded of the Saphiric Earth and the Ether. If it be brought to its
full Exaltation, it will shine like the Day Star in her fresh Eastern Glories.
It has a fascinating attractive faculty, for if you expose it to the open
Air, it will draw to it Birds and Beasts, etc.

The Regeneration, Ascent, and Glorification.
I Have now sufficiently, and fully discovered the principles of our Chaos, In
the next place I will show you how you are to use them. You must unite them to
a new life, and they will be regenerated by Water and the Spirit. These two are
in all things, they are placed there by God himself, according to that speech
of Trismegistus, Vnumquodque habet in se^semen su^ Regenerationis. Proceed then
patiently, but not manually. The work is performed by an invisible Artist, for
there is a secret Incubation of the Spirit of God upon Nature you must only see
that the outward Heat fails not, but with the subject it self you have no more
to do, than the Mother has with the Child that is in her womb. The two former
principles perform all, the Spirit makes use of the Water to purge and wash
his Body, and he will bring it at last to a Celestial, immortal
Constitution. Do not you think this Impossible. Remember that in the
Incarnation of Christ Jesus the Quaternarius or four Elements as men call them,
were united to their eternal Unity and Ternarius Three and Four make Seven:
This S^ptenarie is the true S^b^^th, the Rest of God into which the Creature
shall enter. This is the best and greatest Man^duction that I can give you. In
a word. Salvation it self is nothing else but transmutation. Behold (says the
Apostle) ^^ show you a MYSTERY: we shall not all die, but we shall be all
CHANGED, in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, at the sound of the last
Trumpt. Corinth.
God of his great Mercy prepare us for it^ That from hard stubborn Flints of
this world we may prove ^^^soliths and Jaspers in the new eternal foundation.
That we may ascend from this present distressed Church which is in Captivity
with her Children, to the free Jerusalem from above, which is the Mother of us
all.

The Descent, and Metempsychosis.
THere is in the world a scribbling, ill-disposed Generation: they write only to
gain an Opinion of Knowledge, and this by amazing their Readers with whimzies
and Fancies of their own. These commonly call themselves Chimists, and abuse
the great Mystery of Nature with the Name and Nonsense of Lapis Chemicus. I
find not one of them, but has mistaken this Descent for the Ascent or
Fermentation. I think it Necessary therefore to inform the Reader there is a
two fold Fermentation, a spiritual and a Bodily one. The spiritual
Fermentation is performed by multiplying the Tinctures, which is not done with
common Gold and Silver, for they are not Tinctures, but gross compacted Bodies,
The Gold and Silver of the Philosophers are a soul and spirit: they are living
Ferments and principles of Bodies, but the two common Metals whether you take
them in their gross Composition, or after a Philosophical preparation, are no
way pertinent to our purpose. The Bodily Fermentation, is that which I properly
call the Descent, and now we will speak of it. When thou have made the stone,
or Magical Medicine, it is a liquid fiery, spiritual substance, shining like
the Sun. In this Complexion if you would project, you could hardly find the
just proportion, the virtue of the Medicine is so intensive and powerful. The
Philosophers therefore took one part of their stone, and did cast it upon ten
parts of pure molten gold. This single small grain did bring all to the gold a
bloody powder, and on the contrary the gross Body of the gold did abate the
spiritual strength of the projected grain. This Descent or Incorporation some
wise Authors have called a Bodily Fermentation, but the Philosophers did not
use common Gold to make their stone as some scriblers have written, they used
it only to qualify the intensive power of it, when it is made, that they might
the more easily find what Quantity of base Metal, they should project upon.
By this means they reduced their Medicine to a dust, and this dust is the
Arabian-Elixir. This Elixir the Philosophers could carry about them, but the
Medicine it self not so, for it is such a subtle moist Fire, there is nothing
but glass that will hold it. Now for their Metempsychosis, it has indeed
occasioned many Errors concerning the soul, but Pythagoras applied it only to
the secret performances of Magic. It signifies their last Transmutation, which
is done with the Elixir, or Qualified Medicine. Take therefore one part of it,
cast it on a Millenarie proportion of Quicksilver, and it will be all pure
gold, that shall pass the Test Royal without any Diminution.

Now Reader I have done, and for a farewell I will give thee a most noble,
secret, sacred truth. The Chaos it self in the very first Analysis is
threefold, the S^p^ir of the Chaos is likewise threefold. Here thou have six
parts, which is the Pythagoricall Senarius or Numerus Conjugii. In these six
the Influx of the Met^physicall Unity is sole Monarch, and makes up the
seventh Number, or Sabbath, in which at last by the Assistance of God the Body
shall rest. Again, every one of these six parts is two fold, and these
Duplicities are Contrarieties. Here then thou have twelve, six against six in a
desperate Division, and the Unity of peace amongst them. These Duplicities
consist of contrary Natures; One part is good, one bad: one corrupt, one
incorrupt: and in the Terms of Zoroaster, one rational, one irrational.
These bad, corrupt, irrational ^^eds are the Tares and sequels of the Cur^. Now
Reader I have unriddl'd for thee the grand mysterious problem of the ^abalist.
Septem par^^bus (says he) insunt Duo ^ernari^ and in Medio stat u^um.
Duodecim stunt in Bello: Tres Amic^, Tres mimici: Tres Viri vivisic^nt, Tres
etiam occidunt: and Deus Rex fidelis ex suae Sanctitatis Atrio dominatur
Omnibus. Vnus super Tres, and Tres super Septem, and Septem super Duodecim, and
sunt omnes stipati, Alius cum Alio.

This and no other is the truth of that Science, which I have prosecuted a long
time with frequent and serious endeavors. It is my firm decreed Resolution to
write no more of it, and if any will abuse what is written, let him. He cannot
so injure me, but I am already satisfied: I have to my Reward a Light that will
not leave me.

Nescit SOL Comitis non memor esse Sui.

I will now cloze up all with the Doxologie of a most excellent, renowned
Philocryphus.

Soli Deo Laus, and Potentia!
Amen in MERCURIO, qui pedibus licet carens decurrit
AQ^A, et metallice universaliter operatur.
FINIS.
APHORISMI MAGICI EUGENIANI.
Veritas Prima est Haec:
Haec etiam Ultima.

1. ANte Qmnia Punctum extitit: non(...), aut Mathematicum, sed Diffusivum.
Monas erat Explicit: Implicit Myrias. Lux erat, erat and Nox: Principium, and
Finis Principii: Omnia, and Nihil: Est, and Non.

2. Commovit se Monas in Dyade: and per Triadem egressae sunt Facies Luminis
secundi.

3. Exivit Ignis simplex, increatus: and sub Aquis induit se Tegumento Ignis
multiplicis, Creati.

4. Respexit ad Fontem superiorem: and Inferiorem deducto Typo, Triplici vultu
sigillavit.

5. Creavit unum unitas: and in Tria distinxit Trinitas. Est and Quaternarius,
Nexus and Medium Reductionis.

6. Ex visibilibus primum effulsit Aqua: Faemina Incubantis Ignis, and
Figurabilium gravida Matter.

7. Porosa erat Interius, and Corticibus varia: Cujus venture habuit Coelos
convolutos, and Astra indiscreta.

8. Separator Artifex divisit hanc in amplas Regiones: and apparente Faetu,
disparuit Matter.

9. Peperit tamen Matter Filios Lucidos, Influentes in Terram Chai.

10. Hi generant Matrem in Novissimis: Cujus Fons cantat in Luco miraculoso.

11. Sapientiae Condus est Hic: esto qui potes, Promus.

12. Pater est Totius Creati: and ex Filio Creato per vivam Filii Analysin,
Pater generatur. Habes summum Generantis Circuli Mysterium: Filii Filius est,
qui Filii Pater fuit.

Soli Deo Gloria.

