SEVERAL REASONS AND MOTIVES, For the speedy passing of the ACT Against
Transporting of Treasure, and the Preventing of other Abuses practiced on the
Coyns and Bullion of the NATION.

printer's or publisher's device DEUS EST NOBIS SOL ET SCUTUM



Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, Anno Domini MDCL.

SEVERAL REASONS AND MOTIVES, For the speedy passing of the ACT against
Transporting of Treasure, and the Preventing other Abuses practiced on the
Coyns and Bullion of the NATION.
IT has been daily practiced by some particular Merchants, both Native and
Strangers, to Transport the Treasure of this Nation, to the great prejudice of
the State; who for their own private gain, have not spared to damnifie the
Commonwealth (so highly) that their Persons and Estates cannot give a full
satissaction for the great mischief done and practiced by them to this
Commonwealth, and without a strict Examination, and exemplarie punishment of
the offenders, or some of the chief of them, these mischiefs will never be
prevented, (and the Commonwealth be still undermined by those Moles, to the
unspeakable damage thereof) and for that some, through ignorance, do not
understand and conceave the great damage which may come to the Commonwealth,
by the suffering these abovesaid abuses to continue, and others more crafty
and subtle, both Goldsmiths and Merchants, that are Transporters of Gold and
Silver, and practizers of several high frauds and abuses upon Coin and Bullion,
have the confidence (or impudence) to make arguments for defending the
Transgressors. Now for the information of some in their judgments, that have
desired a true account, what Laws are now in force in this Nation, for
prevention of these mischiefs; what Order and Laws in France, Holland, and
Flanders, for the regulating of their Mints, Money, and Bollion; what
punishments and restriction upon the offenders,

I have procured the Ordinance, and Placcaets of France, Holland, and Flanders
to be translated; have breviated them for your information; and coated some
Laws of this Nation now in force, as hereafter follow.

And if you please to make the Law, now presented to the House, stricter than
it is now drawn, I humbly conceave you will do the Commonwealth the greater
benefit, considering the present condition of the Commonwealth.

Transporting of Treasure has been Felony, 4. Henry 7. cap. 13. and 17.
Edward 4. this Statute to endure for twenty years. I humbly conceive the
Commonwealth has now as much reason to look to keep the Treasures in the
Nation as they had then, considering all things.

That you would be pleased to give one Moyetie at the least to any person or
persons that will or can discover the Offenders: that so by this reward, all
persons may be invited to discover the Offenders all over the Nation, and the
same rule followed which was in 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. where Commissions by Act
of Parliament, were granted throughout the Realm, to inquire of such as had
conveyed the Money of England out of the Nation; in doing whereof great sums
throughout the Nation will come to the State, and the Offenders will remember
the Proverb, Sweet meat must have sower sance: when they shall be enforced to
pay back to the State that which they have defrauded them of, and will prevent
them and all others hereafter for to take the boldness to get themselves
fortunes by any of the aforesaid indirect courses, which so highly tend to the
damage of this Commonwealth.

By these deceits, Commerce is spoiled, Traffic decays, those things that
are needful for man's preservation grow dear, the handle-craftswork seaceth,
the workmen betake themselves to some other places, and the Commonaltie, to
speak all in a word, is brought to Poverty, (as is Gravely observed by the
Master General and Council of the Mint in Flanders, 2. October 1647. with
their Decleration, clearly demonstrating, That the careful and punctual
keeping of the Placcaet of the Mint, is very necessary, and withal profitable
to all persons of what state, quality, or condition soever; showing, that if
the Placaet be not observed, but that money should be paid out above the true
value through these disorders, they shall never be able to keep their Treasure
within their Country.

And in their Declaration showing, most judicially, the great mischiefs that
befall a Nation by enhauncing and raising there Money, being no real cure for
the Commonwealth, but utterly destructive to all sorts of people, even from
the Prince to the poor Labourer, to any Free State or Commonwealth, to all
Merchandise and Commodities: all which considerations, although very potent, yet
do not oftentimes come into the minds and comprehensions, not only of the
Common people, but also of those to whom the employment of Public Office, have
given more judgment and credit in managing of affairs themselves, and who dare
to spread it abroad, that there is no harm nor evil in enhauncing the Coin
above its true value and worth, because they can put it away at the same price
as they receive it; not taking notice by the way, that by raising and
augmenting the price of money, does or must by consequence, augment and
increase the price of all merchandises and provisions proportionable, whereby
of necessity must follow, that if the Moneys be augmented and heightened, the
Landlords and Creditours receive so much less; the merchandise, victuals and
all other wares grow presently dearer; the Public Treasure either Excise or
Customs are abated, by so much as you enhaunce or lessen your Moneys, for it is
not the Denomination of a high price of Gold or Silver sets the value, but it
must have weight and fineness proportionable to what you call it, or else you
go upon a wrong ground; As for example, in Scotland they call Thirteen pence
halspenie, A Mark; and Twenty pence, they call Twenty shillings; this
denomination of a great value gives not the intrinsicate value.

Placcaet and Ordinance.
Concerning the general course and regulating of the Mints and Moneys, as also
concerning the Exchange and Exchangers, Refiners, Goldsmiths, and others in
the United Provinces 1586.

ARTIC. xi.
ANd as for the Gold and Silver-Monies whose value is valued by this Ordinance,
We forbid every one to present pay away or receive the same at a higher rate
than is here Ordered, upon the forfeiture of such Moneys or the worth of it in
case the fact be not presently discovered, and besides upon penalty of ten
golden Angelots the first time; for the second time twenty golden Angelots; and
for the third four times as much; and besides Arbitrary punishment according to
the hainousness of the fact: and We understand the same forfeitures and
penalties to take place as well upon the Receiver as the Payer away, unless one
of them presently after the Receiving or Paying away do present himself to an
Officer, in which case the denu^ntiator either Receiver or Payer away shall be
freed or quitted of the abovesaid penalty and forfeiture, and besides to enjoy
the third part of the same forfeit and penalty.

ARTIC. xiv.
So that We expressly forbid and interdict every one to over-buy or over-sell,
Change or Chop any Species of Moneys rated by these presents, either in taking
or giving upon the same any profit, gain, or advantage after what manner
soever, upon the same pain and penalty as above said, against those who shall
Receive or Pay away the same at a higher rate than that of the Ordinance.

ARTIC. xv.
We forbid also every one to Cull any Gold or Silver-Monies, and so by this
means to sort the weighty and good ones from the light and bad ones, to Pay
away the light ones and make their profit of the weighty upon penalty as
abovesaid.

ARTIC. xvi.
And as for the Stuff and Materials of Gold and Silver being in Mass or
sweepings, We forbid to buy or sell them at a higher rate than according to
the rule of this Ordinance, upon penalty of confiscation of the abovesaid
Materials, and moreover to forfeit double the worth of them at the charge as
well of the buyer as of the seller for the first time; for the second time
twice as much; and for the third time four times as much; and afterward
Arbitrary punishment.

ARTIC. xvii.
We expressly forbid henceforth to Transport or cause to be Transported out of
the abovesaid Province toward any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver-Monies,
and also any Materials in Mass or Moneys, also any Materials in Mass or Ingots
fit to Coin Moneys of them, upon fofeit of confiscation of the abovesaid Moneys
and Materials, or the worth of them in case they were already transported; and
besides this upon penalty of one hundred Golden Angelots for every Mark of
Gold, and twenty Angelots for every Mark of Silver, and of more or less
proportionably for the first time; for the second time upon the same forfeit
and penalty; and moreover to undergo bodily punishment and if they have not
wherewithal to Pay the abovesaid forfeits and amendments, they shall be
bodily punished according to the manner of the fact, under which penalty and
amendments We understand are comprehended all those who had assisted, and had
a hand in the abovesaid transportation or conveying them away, although the
Moneys or Materials did not belong unto them.

ARTIC. xx.
Moreover, We forbid every one to File, Cut, or Wash with strong Water or
Sement or any otherwise any Gold, or Silver-Monies, nor to Saulder, Gild, Piece
or Nail the same, or any way to make the same lighter or heavier, upon the
forfeit of life and goods, where confiscation takes place.

ARTIC. xxii.
We forbid henceforth every one to melt any God or Silver-Monies of her
Majesty's of Englands stamp, valued by these presents upon penalty of life and
goods, where confiscation takes place: And the Moneys of Gold which are found
to be too light by three grains, or otherwise Clipped, Washed, Nailed or
Saudered, shall be brought to the Exchange after the old custom.

Placcaet and Ordinance for Flanders at Antwerp the fourth of October 1585.
ARTIC. xiii.
ANd to hinder the transporting of the good and true Moneys, We forbid all and
every one henceforth to buy or sell any Species of Gold and Silver-Monies, to
give any profit or gain for it, upon penalty of the seller to forfeit the
Pieces which are sold, or shall be sold, and besides the buyer as the seller to
forfeit threescore Pounds of the abovesaid good Moneys for the first time;
and twice as much for the second time; and for the third time four times as
much; and besides they are to be Arbitrarily punished.

ARTIC. xiv.
We also forbid all and every one to Weigh, Clip, File, or make choice of any
Species of Gold and Silver, for to make any profit with Melting or Transporting
of them, upon penalty of Criminal punishment, besides the loss of the
abovesaid Pieces.

ARTIC. xv.
Furthermore, We forbid and interdict well Expressly; that no one of what
quality, degree or condition soever, shall henceforth endeavor to transport or
carry into any strange Mints, or into any other than our own, any Gold, or
Silver-Monies of our Stamp, or others tolerated by this our Ordinance, nor
also any other Moneys being Clipped or declared Bullion melted or in Mass or
otherwise, nor also any other stuff fit to Coin Moneys of them, upon forfeit of
the abovesaid Gold and Silver, and besides of two hundred Golden-Reals for
every Mark of Gold, and twenty Golden-Reals for every Mark of Silver, and of
more or less in proportion for the first time that this shall happen; and for
the second time, besides the abovesaid forfeit, to be bodily punished, and
otherwise as occasion shall serve. And if so be that any person have
transported any some of Moneys without being taken in the fact, we will
nevertheless that whenever it shall be perceived and discovered, they shall
proceed against the transgressors by execution of the said penalties, even as
if they were taken in the same fact, well understanding that instead of
confiscation of the Species, they shall be bound to pay the price and
estimation of the transported Moneys; and besides, the double worth of them,
and besides to be Criminally punished.

We will and Command also, that those who shall have helped to pack, or
secretly convey and transport the abovesaid Moneys, either in Mass or Species,
although the abovesaid Moneys did not belong unto them, they shall be bodily
or Arbitrarily punished according to the quality of the fact and Persons.

The Policy and Laws of this Realm have always aimed at, and intended the
Increase and Augmentation of Money, especially that of Silver and this diverse
ways.
I. 9. E. 3. c. 1.38. E. 3. c. 2.17. E. 3.21.5. R. 2. c. 2. 2. H. 4. c. 5. 2.
H. 6. c. 6.17. E. 4. c. 1. Made Feonie 19. H. 7. c. 5. 3. H. 8. c. 1.
By providing against Exportation of it.

II. 9. E. 3. c. 3.17. R. 2. c. 1.17. E. 4. c. 1.2. H. 6. c. 13.
By proving against the Melting it down to make Plate or other Manifactures of
it.

III. E. 1. Statute de monet parvam Rastall Tit. Money.
By providing that if any Moneys through time or other practice became
uncurrant, then the same to be converted into Money again, and not be diverted
from Coin.

IV. 2. H. 6. c. 13. 25. E. 3. c. 12. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 19.
By providing that none should give a price for Bullion or Coined Money above
the rate of the Mint, or what the same is current for: for it is not to be
expected that any Bullion either of Gold or Silver shall ever be brought to the
Mint, when the Owner may have a greater Price than at the Mint, either to be
transported or to be converted to make Plate, or other things: of this agrees
likewise with the Policy of Spain, which though it be the Spring and Fountain
from whence the greatest Streams of Silver have been derived into other parts,
yet Silver there, will always yield the seller six pence, or one Real more upon
the Mark at the Mint, than to be sold to any other for any purpose whatsoever,
concurring likewise with the practice of other States.

That all ^^^se Acts are defective and not effectual to the ends abovesaid,
for the reasons following.
The Acts against Transportation, some extend not to Gold as 9. E. 3. c. 1.
others have effect only upon the Money that is transported, and that comes too
late, and is seldom or never known as, 38. E. 3. c. 2.5. R. 2. c. 2.2. H. 6. c.
6.17. E. 4. c. 1. being now discontinued.

Those that extend to the shipping of it, etc. viz. 2. H. 4. c. 5.19. H. 7. c.
5. and 3. H. 8. c. 1. Give the whole forfeiture to the King and no part to the
Informer, whereby they are not at all made use of, no man being willing to be
at charge to prosecute another, doing no good to himself.

None of those Acts do give sufficient forfeitures to restrain the Offenses as
has been manifested by experience.

Lastly, they have not given any means for discovery thereof, without which the
Offenders will not be deterred from finding out close and secret ways to
adventure and practice against them, when oppertunity of great gain and hope of
concealment shall invite and encourage them thereunto.

And for the Act now drawn and propounded to be passed.
BEsides the frame and body of it comprehending and fully extending to all the
ways and means of the abuses, the same for the forfeitures. Is drawn by the
example and president of 18. Eliz. c. 9. against transportation of Leather,
Tallow, and Raw-Hides, and others in the Queens time, and the late Ordinance
1647. Against transportation of Wool, Fullers-Earth, etc.

The Clauses touching the proceeding by Information, etc. are the same with the
like Clauses of the said Ordinance for Wool 1647.

And the Clauses to encourage the Instrument and others to discover the
Offenses, wherein themselves are liable to the penalties, are framed in
Imitation and by the President of the said Act of 18. Eliz. and other
Ordinances and Edicts of other Kingdoms and Estates that give like Exemptions
and Encouragements, to such, as though guilty themselves in the second degree,
shall reveal and discover others more principal Offenders, taking likewise
from them the confidence they would have, that the persons they employed should
conceal their Offenses, whereby they will be much deterred from hazarding and
adventuring upon the practice.

And the Clause touching the Commission and Examination of Witnesses for
discovery, etc. And to commit them in case of their refusal to be Examined, is
Exampled by 13. Eliz. c. 7. The Act against Banckrupts and discovery of their
Estates; There being greater Reason and Equity for the discovery of fraud
concerning the Commonwealth, than concerning any private person.

In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the general Regulating of the MINT, published
at Brussel the 18 of March 1633, is inserted.
ARTIC. xxv.
WE declare, That although any of our Subjects or others, who shall have acted
any thing contrary to this Ordinance, and were not taken in the fact, yet
notwithstanding, after they shall be convinced of the said transgression, they
shall be proceeded against with condemnation of the said penalties and
amendments; well understanding, that instead of forfeiting the said moneys and
materials, they shall be condemned to pay the worth of them.

ARTIC. xxvi.
And if it happens that the just quality and quantity of the said Species,
Bullion or materials cannot be precisely known or verified, We will, that such
transgressors be punished according to the hainousness of the fact, being left
to the discretion of the Judges.

ARTIC. xxvii.
Which we intend shall take place, in regard of those who shall be convinced,
to have paid away, presented, or received any forbidden Moneys, or at a higher
price than by this present Ordinance is declared, although the said quality
and quantity of the same could not be precisely verified.

ARTIC. xxviii.
We have Authorized and Authorize by these, all Officers, for to cease upon and
break open the packs, letters, and portmantles of the Messengers, or of others
whom they shall know or suspect, to bring in any of the forbidden Species or
Materials, or to transport and convey out of our said Lands, any of our
Species, and that in the presence of those to whom the said packets are sent to
or do belong, if so be they are residing in that place; as also in the presence
of one of the Magistrates of the said place, only to know the name of those
who caused the said Gold and Silver to be transported, and to no other end.

ARTIC. xxxvii.
We also order, that all those that shall be found to have counterfeited,
coined, stamped, pressed, or cast in the sand, any moneys of what manner stuff or
metal soever, shall be executed, as false Moniers, in a kettle with boiling
oil and water, and with confiscation of all their goods.

ARTIC. lv.
If so be any one be convinced, that he had picked or chosen out, or caused to
be chosen out any of the said valued Species, for to keep the heavy ones for
his profit, and to pay away the light ones to the damage of the Commonaltie,
We will that he, besides the said Forfeits and Amendments, shall be banished
out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years.

ARTIC lvi.
In case that any of the particular Masters of our Mints, or Exchangers were
convinced of the said abuse, or that they should have presented or paid away,
or cause to be presented or paid away any of the said clipped or other forbidden
Species, after that they had received the same for Bullion or not current, then
shall they be banished for ever out of Our said Lands, and their goods
confiscated.

ARTIC. lvii.
And because the price of the Species is commonly regulated according to the
price of the Gold and Silver materials, therefore We have forbidden, and forbid
every one of what quality or condition soever, to by or sell any Gold or
Silver materials, or Species declared for Bullion or not current, at a
higher-price than the Ordinance of Our said Mint permits, upon penalty of
confiscation of the said Materials and the worth of them, at the charge as well
of the Buyer as Seller for the first time; for the second time four times as
much, besides the confiscation and forfeit, and of other arbitral correction.

ARTIC. lxiii.
We order also, that the Brokers, who did assist and help to conclude or treat
upon such parsels, either in regard of money given upon exchange, upon Use or
Obligation, either in payment of the sold merchandises, or otherwise, shall be
publicly whipped and banished out of our said Lands for the space of ten years.

ARTIC. lvi.
And as we have understood, and are truly informed, that a great part of the
irregularitie concerning the said Placcaets, is risen and occasioned, by reason
that many Merchants and Factours will not buy the works and manufactures of the
workmen and handiecrafts-men, unless they will receive the Gold and Silver at
such a price as they will give it them; or when they have almost bought the
goods, they give the merchandises back again to the sellers, if they will be
paid according to the price ordered in our Placcaet: Therefore We will, that
such oppressors of the poor Commonaltie, shall be rigorously proceeded against
and punished, by apprehension of their persons, and that they, their Process
being summarily and criminally formed, and found guilty of what is abovesaid,
shall be banished for ever, and their goods confiscated, or instead hereof to
be condemned in a great sum of money, according to the hainousness of the fact;
of which confiscation and amendment, the half shall be given to the Plaintiff or
discoverer.

ARTIC. lxx.
In like manner shall be punished those with the same forfeits and amendments,
who shall have received, paid away, or presented any clipped Moneys, or declared
for Bullion, with Protestation or declaration, that it is for to deliver them
into our Mints, or to the Exchangers, unless they had presently cut them in
pieces or deformed them, or caused the same to be done by others.

ARTIC. xci
We declare, that although it be that any of the Transgressors do obtain
favor and pardon from Us or from Our Council. We do not intend, nor we will
not, that therefore they should be quitted, and discharged from the parts of
the said forfeits and amendments, granted by Us to the Officers, Callers in
question, and Plaintifs, or Discoverers respectively; but such favor and
pardon only to take place for as much as belongs unto Us.

ARTIC. cv.
We order well expressly, all Our Fiscals and Officers, to take their
conclusions, and all our Counselors, Magistrates, and other Judges, to give
their sentences in conformity of this Our present Placaet, without using any
moderation of the penalties and amendments therein contained, under what
pretext soever, nor also any compensation of Charges, to the prejudice of the
Officer founded in the principal, upon penalty of our indignation, and for to
answer for it in their own persons, without that they shall plead any
ignorance, or the general transgression. Which excuses, We do not intend shall
avail or help them in any manner of way: but our intention is, that they shall
be punished because of their negligence and connivence.

This Ordinance and Placcact of the 18 of March 1633, is again confirmed; and
all Magistrates and Officers are required to do their utmost endeavors to see
it strictly observed in all points. Published at Brussels the 26 of August
1643.
In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the Regulating of the Mint; Published in
Brussels the last day of May, 1644. is inserted.
ARTIC. xi.
WE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents, every one of what
quality or condition soever; as well our Subjects as others, to Transport any
Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, directly or indirectly, or
cause the same to be Transported, either Minted or Unminted; or also in Mass,
Ingots, or Bullion; without having obtained of us beforehand express leave and
consent for to do the same, upon penalty of forfeiting the Gold, Silver, and
Bullion, and to pay besides the double of their worth, and upon forfeit of the
merchandises, if so be the abovesaid Gold, Silver, or Bullion shall be found
to be packt in them; as also of the horses and wagons of those who shall
willingly and wittingly have brought and conveyed the same.

ARTIC. xv.
And if any one be found and taken to have Transported or caused to be
Transported out of our Lands, any Moneys by Us valued, or other declared
Bullion, or any materials of Gold and Silver, and have delivered or caused to
be delivered the same into any strange Mints; We will that such persons shall
be proceeded against, sharply and vigorously by imprisonment of their persons,
and that they, besides, the forfeits of the said Species and materials, and
four times the worth of them, for the first time shall be banished out of our
abovesaid Lands, for the space of five years; and for the second time for ever.

ARTIC. xvi.
And those who willingly and wittingly have assisted for to pack and Transport
the abovesaid Moneys or Materials, shall be punished according to pleasures,
or banished according to the quality of the person.

Other Countries you may see strictly provide against these offenses; and it
will never be mended here, if you make not as strict Laws as they.

In a Declaration of the King of France, for the Regularing of the new price
set upon the Light and Clipped Species of Money: likewise for the observation of
the prices of Gold and Silver employed for the Goldsmiths work. It is also
well expressly forbidden to melt the Money, and to Trasport them or other
materials of Gold and Silver out of the said Kingdom. Printed at Paris 30 of
October. 1640.
FOLIO 8, 9.
WE expressly forbid, that all materials of Gold and Silver, either coined or
uncoyned, shall not be bought or sold at a higher rate than is exprefly set
down in this Placcaet, which does contain the true value that must be paid for
the Mark of Gold and Silver.

FOLIO 13.
We expressly forbid every one, of what codition or quality soever, to
Transport out of our Kingdom, any Gold and Silver coined or uncoyned, nor any
other Gold-smithswork, upon penalty of forfeiting the materials and
merchandises, and other things wherein they shall be found to be packt up in;
besides the penalty of fifty pounds and bodily punishment.

Whereas this Parliament, by their Ordinance 6. of Sept. 1647. did decrie all
Clipped, Fyled, or diminished Money (by means whereof great quantities were
sold to some Goldsmiths) who have made it a Trade to deal with Receivers of
Public Cashes, Graishers, and several other Persons (and instead of melting
of these Moneys down) some Goldsmiths have Ishewed these Moneys out again in
payment, whereas at the Tower thse Clipped Moneys would make but five shillings
the Ounce-Troy, these men have vented out these Clipped Moneys to diverse
Il-affected people at five shillings six pence, and five shillings eight pence,
and six shillings the Ounce, who have dispersed the said Clipped Moneys so
bought from Goldsmiths up and down the Nation again, to the great Enriching of
themselves, and defrauding of the good people of this Nation, by buying up this
Clipped Money since the Ordinance 1647. at the least twenty times over, and
venting it for current again (which had been helped, if there had been but six
words put into the Ordinance (which was to have required all persons exchanging
any Clipped or uncurrant English Money with any Goldsmiths or others, upon
forfeiture of duble the value, to see it cut in two pieces or so defaced that
it should not be passable after.) I humbly present this defect of that
Ordinance, that it may be looked after and amended, and I humbly desire that
the Act against transporting Treasure now committed, may be enacted with such
vigor, that the Commonwealth may have the real benefit, and the offenders
brought to exemplarie Justice.

There has been twenty Millions of Money Coined within this twenty five years
as will appear by the Mint-Boooks, and almost all of it transported out of the
Nation, the Gold all gone, the current silver culled out, the weightiest melted
and transported: and that Silver-Monies which remains is but little, and all
culled, Gold is made as precious in this Commonwealth as Diamonds. What
inconveniences will arise by the indirect dealing of private men in this
particular to the Commonwealth, I shall humbly leave it to you to consider.

In the year 1643. It was humbly offered to this Parliament, to have the
offenders discovered and to bring them to Justice, and this mischief stopped;
but by the great Interest of the offenders, that had then power in this
Nation, the Proposition was slighted, and these mischiefs ever since daily
practiced, to the unspeakable damage of this Commonwealth: for it is far
easier to keep the Treasure in the Nation by making strict Laws against
transportation, than when it is gone to bring it back, as too late experience
will make this Commonwealth feel: but you have the power to call these
offenders to a strict account, if you pass the Act fully to enable all people
to make their discoveries, how, and in what manner other Nations do punish
these offenders, you have already presented out of their Placcaets, This evil
is grown to such a height that both our own Laws put in the strictest
execution, and the Customs and Laws of other Countries added to them for this
particular, with the greatest diligence of expert men, to make the search for
what is past, and to prevent these mischiefs for the time to come, will be
little enough: and to make this discovery is a service of more Importance to
the Commonwealth than at first sight can be apprehended.

This is a certain rule, no great action in any Commonwealth or State can be
done but by Money, which all ages have held to be the Sinews of War, and
Garland of Peace; and what occasions we have to use it both for commerce and
safety, is humbly left to you to consider; and in all well regulated States it
has ever been accounted a great service to discover the offenders and abuses
practiced upon the Treasure of their Nation: and to prevent the growth of these
mischiefs is the work of every faithful lover of his Country; And here they
that shall be against the discovery of these offenses and offenders, may
amongst judicious men be justly suspected to be Parties themselves.

And though some Merchants and other Interested Persons (may for their own
Interest, either for their profit (or fear of Punishment for what they have
done) speak themselves, or get others, to oppose the Act against transporting
Treasure to pass the House, or procure it to be so altered as it shall not be
effectual to give a full cure to the Commonwealth, of the great
inconveniences it is now under, by several abuses practiced under Coin and
Bullion.

To give a cure to the Commonwealth of these great inconveniences, and also to
take away the great obstructions of your Mint; which will never be done till
this Act pass, and if it were more stricter, it would be more benificiall to
the Commonwealth, especially in these times when you have so many occasions of
Money, by bringing in presently very great sums of Money to the State by the
Punishment of the Offenders.

You have here, with all humility, set down to you, the ways and means whereby
your neighbour-Countreys use to prevent these mischiefs, and to punish the
Offenders for what is past, with several old Statutes of this Nation: out of
which if you exstract the quintisence, and make a sharp and vigorous Law, and
require all your Officers and others to put it in full execution, you may in a
short time cure this Commonwealth of these dangerous diseases, which if you
let it go on, will prove a Gangrene.

I humbly beseech you to take notice, there has been within seven years Coined
in ten days, more money in the Tower of London, than has been Coined near
upon this three last years: now if you suffer Treasure to go out of the Nation
every day for want of a Law, to give all people power to discover and examine
the Offenders, in a short time you will not have any Money left in the
Commonwealth (for experience in all ages show, that little and slight
penalties can never stop some Merchants from their profit, so they get to their
private) they care not what mischiefs the Commonwealth suffers: (for a
Commonwealth without plenty of Money, looks like a great House unfurnisht, and
bare Walls is no hansome sight) and you will find there will not be Money left
to pay your just Taxes, Customs and Exsice, and to maintain Trade and commerce
if you clear not the obstruction of the Mint, and take some effectual course
to set it a work: and this Act is but a preparation and groundwork to cause
your Mint to go: and till it pass, you will never see your Mint flourish: for
to allow any man to outgive the Mint for Bullion is, to shut up the Mint: for
all men will vent their Treasure where they can have the greatest price, and
not to make a way for the opening of the Mint at this time, especially when you
have such occasions of Money,

I shall humbly leave it to you to consider the consequence and inconvenience,
what is here said, is with all humility presented to the Parliament for the
service of the Commonwealth, by a faithful lover of his Country, being
desired to state my Reasons by some in Authority for passing the aforesaid Act;
I have humbly obeyed it and humbly conceive (if it were made stricter than it
is) it were far better for the Commonwealth: for transporting Treasure
heretofore has been made Feloney, when the Commonwealth, I humbly conceive,
had not so much occation to see to keep their Treasure in the Nation, and their
Mint going as now they have.

T. V.

FINIS.

