A HERMETICALL BANQVET, DRESSED By a Spagiricall Cook: for the better
Preservation of the Microcosme.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ISACKE WAKE KNIGHT, EMBASSADOVR EXTRAORDINARY IN SAVOY
AND PIEMONTE, ORDINARY FOR ITALY HELVETIA AND RHETIA, SELECT FOR FRANCE, FOR
HIS Majesty OF GREAT BRITAIN, etc.
Right Honorable,
It Is our Custom in England, on the birth Day of every Year, for the Tenant to
lay down his Offering at the Altar of his Landlord; as an Oblation of his
grateful Servitude.

I, your Lordships Tenant, or rather, as the Anagram tells me, Natent,
(confessing my self by your Lordships Solar Influence, Renated, and of a
Vegetable, made Vital) not to abrogate Custom, do here present my Offering, to
manifest a strong desire of Gratitude, in the weakness of my Expressions.

Our first Wishes upon this Day, is, for a merry new Year. What better Prologue
to Mirth, than a Feast? That my Offering therefore may be the Emblem of my
Wishes, I have here presented your Lordship with an Hermeticall Banquet;
wherein are such plenty of Cordialls, that I doubt not but it will make you
heartily Merry.

I have caused it to be dressed by Spagiricall Cooks; partly to preserve your
more Delicate Palate from the Epidemicall Nausea of Galenicall Potions, with
these our Hermeticall and Bezoartick Delicacies. And partly, because I have
always observed, in the Universalities of your Lordships Studies, a particular
Genius much reflecting upon this Art, as the Key of Natures Cabinet.

Expect not much Honey in your Dishes; since like a Be, shut up in the Winter
Hive of my Quarantena, and unable to fly abroad and rob other Men's Gardens, was
constrained to make use of such as I had collected in the Summer of my Youth:
where I fear your Lordship will find more Wax, than Honey. I dance little after
Method, because no Methodist. Neither do I labor to oppress your Stomach with
Dogmaticall Gravity.

No, I consider we are at a Feast, and therefore prefer a Jest before an
Aphorism.

How my Mirth will take, I know not, believe me it was meant well: though for
want of other Music I confess it is somewhat extravagant.

I subscribe therefore to your Lordships more mature Judgment; which, like a
Celestial Influence, penetrates even the Center of Inferior Actions.

If it pass that Magellan, it may boldly, and with a full Sail plow through the
Tempestuous Ocean of the Universe.

It Is your Lordships approbation then that must protect our weak B^rk. Your
Colors only displayed, ban^sh all fears of Assaults, and make it (...).

Under which Banner, I desire to serve but as a Common-Souldier: that so
hereafter by some bolder Attempt, I may manifest unto the World, how little I
respect superficial Wounds, in the achievement of some better Title, thereby
to be judged worthy of so Honorable a calling, as your Lordship has
graciously favored me with, in making me

Your Lordships Physician and most humbly Devoted Servant.

Symposiates to his Sympotae.
GEntlemen, I here place my self at the portall to bid you Welcome to an
Hermeticall Banquet. Who comes by the common road of invitation, to me is ^east
welcome. And those resolute ^parks which boldly open the Door with ^
complement, teaching good manners ^ow to temporise, believe me they shall ^e
exalted two Ceremonies above the ^alt. Such Guest are always least
trou^lesome; they never put their Host to ^he expense of a Prologue; raw, or
roasted, ^hey fall to their business; hunger brought them to the Duel, and when
that is overcome they leave the Field. I could hear^ily wish that all my Guest
were thus Courtlike. For so I also might have time to eat, whilst they bid
themselves welcome. I dare not invite many Women, lest I quarrel with their
lean manners before the second Course enter. Yet some I must have of necessity
to help away with the sweetmeats. My Servant told me he had invited a knot of
merry Gossips in the City, whose apern-strings itch'd to be here: but they sent
me word that their Husbands told them it was to public a meeting, and
therefore desired me to excuse them, and for my sake they would be merry at
Home in private.

The other Day, making use of an Apothecaryes ^hop for a breathing, place, In
comes an old Galenist, sweating, and in choler ca^ls for some Rose vinegar: I
out of charity, (fearing he might have been arrested by some (...)) began to
fortify him with my younger arms, and asked him if he were not well. He saw I
was a stranger, and therefore repai'd my courtesy with a God reward ^ou Sir:
and then told me he was a little distempred with the Sulphurious in^olencies of
certain Infernal Spirits which seized upon him, passing by the Hell Door of a
Spagiricall Cooks Shop, who, quoth he, has infected the Air ^ven to the middle
Region round about ^im, with those pharmakouticall Mine^alls, Paracelsian
Fopperies which he is ^ow preparing to adorn a great Feast which his Master,
Iatrochimicus, cele^rates to morrow, calling it his Herme^icall Banquet. Here I
suspected his quick sense would have seized upon me; my pockets at that infant
being full of those Bugbears: but as it happened he neither conceived me to be
either an Hermetick, Galenist, or indeed Physi^ian. With the better armed
confidence therefore I told him, that the (...) of that Feast was a cardiacall
friend of mine; and had enjoined me upon the ^reach of Friendship not to be
absent: ^ut to fill up his Feast with me and my friends: Therefore Sir, quoth
I, tha^ your nose may have satisfaction, you shall oblige me beyond the force
of Ceremony, to make your self my friend and (...), and accompany me thither to
morrow, where, I can assure you, mirth shall supply the defect of a better
welcome: the good old man more curious than hungry* assured me he would be
there, were it but to taste of our new Cookery. If he come, Gentlemen, I shall
entreat you to give him license to abuse himself: for I know he will be very
unmannerly, smelling to every Dish, like an Ape in a Hucksters Basket: nay,
twenty to nothing but he so far loses himself in this strange Land, that he
forgets where he is, and in that Laethargy may dissuade you from eating. Which
if he do, deprive him not of Ages attribute, which is, (...), Talkative: but
let his tongue runne-on, whilst your teeth follow. Your Palates shall here
exercise in the variety of four Courses. And because I find how strong an
Ascendent Curiosity gets houerly upon every man's Fantasy, I dare not dull your
choice ears with those vulgar lowde-scraping motions which Time calls Music;
but in place thereof I have thought upon some merry Table talk, which may be
more acceptable, in reguard it is both extravagant, and ridiculous. Extravagant
when ^oiz'd in the Balance of our more seri^us Wits: and ridiculous, to those
whose infirm judgments cannot digest ^t. The Judicious I know will not censure
me, because we are here at a Feast, and not in the Schools.

Inter pocula non est disputandum. I fear none so much as the Women I have
invited: who perchance will cry, Fie upon him, he speaks bawdy. If they ^e
reasonable, They will pardon that, because I am a Physician. But if there ^e
any amongst them unreasonable, I know no sweeter course, than to stop their
mouths with Comfits.

EPIGRAMMA AENIGMATICA TETRASTICHON MICROCOSMI AVCTORIS BENEVOLO LECTORI.
To please a World I never can,
It being a Task too hard for Man.
I Would please but One. So shall you see
A World there will Contented be.
A Hermeticall Banquet, etc. An anthropogeographicall Grace before meat,
wherein the Microcosme is Hermetically Analogiz'd to the Sublunary and
Elementary Globes.
MAn was never better Baptized than by the name (...): for whatsoever the
greater World contains, the like shall you find exquisitely expressed in this
little World Man. So that Man is Natures (...) or Mirror, wherein the Eye of
Reason may compendiously contemplate on the great (...) his six Days Labor.
There may you see the Original of Miniature, where God (as his (...) or
Masterpiece) has limbed the Worlds Pourtraict in small.

There may you read an Epitomy of his greater Volumes. So that, as one
elegantly writes,

Hominem a Deo post reliqua factum fuisse, ut Deus in ipso exprimeret, sub
brevi quodam compendio, quicquid diffuse ante fecerat. So far do these two
Worlds symbolize, that a double (...) cannot separate their Analogy.

For the Hermeticks (whose Doctrine I follow) bring them both under this
Duplicate, Celestial and Elementary.

The Celestial part, as it has reference to the Soul, I recommend to
Theologists.

M^dicus, non Sacerdos sum.
The Elementary World by his proximity and contiguity embraces a more near
Sympathy with Man and therefore more agreeable and Symbolicall to our present
Anatomy

If any more Critical, than Judicial carpe at my Dissection, let them know
it is my first Manual Operation: and perchance for want of Instruments
answerable to my work* I may now and then cut a vein. Well, hit or miss, (
Aud^ces Fortuna juv^t,) as I am none of those (...), so will I not proceed in
their Method, who make their first Incision in the Abdomen, and so orderly
penetrate the Membranes Investing the parts dedicated to nutrition. But to show
that I am a Pupil to Paracelsus, who they call (...), I will make a
Paraphrontick (...) and with his (...) I strike first at the Elementary World,
the which I cut, alla reverso, into two parts, Superior and Inferior: allowing
the Superior part, the Elements of Fire and Aer for his Portion: to the
Inferior I allot the remnant, Water and Earth.

That this separation may connect our Analogy, I strike again at this little
World Man: where laying aside all Humane respect, I divide the Head from the
Shoulders (not coming near the Bowels, lest I should raise some (...) which
might inanimate my Spectators to a future Audience) and the Head I Symbolize
with the Elementary upper Regions, Exhalatio sterquilina.
Fire and Aer: where we see far more Prodigious lights than any the Elementary
Regions could ever produce. What Heart is not sensible of two blazing Stars,
whose Influences present us hourly with multitudes of amazing varieties? Those
when they appear in a Serene and Clowdlesse Aer, do they not penetrate with
their Astrophorus Rays the Center of this Earth Man, accending therein a
Vestall Fire in that ^ittle point, the Heart?

Do they not ( sicut radius ille fulmineus, ^orio non laeso dissolvit in eo
metallum) often melt the Heart, leaving the skin unschorch'd?

Do they not with their motion, like the Sun, cause Spring and Fall in this
little World Man?

Do they not, when in a bad Aspect, make their Catoblepick Rays instruments of
Murder?

Do they not in their Exaltations, like some prodigious Comet, threaten strong
Insurrections, Amorous Phrensies, Philogynies, Mutual embraces, Ecstasies,
Cardialgies, Syncopens, Symptomaticall sweats, (...), and the like* What
Diogenes? what Socrates? what (...) can resist those (...), when like (...),
they appear in their Zenith?

Mark how, like Straws, every Heart leaps to their Amber Influence!

How* with the North Star, they make every man's Vertical Needle dance after
their Magneticall Influence.

In this Superior Region likewise, the Head, have we not that Ignem Fatuam,
Opinion, which leads so many men a wooll-gathering* in the dark Night of
Philautia: until being over fooled and mislead by that false light,
Confidence, they tumble at last into a (...) Ditch?

Have we not here those erratick Spirits* Hobgoblins, (...), which fright so
many out of their wits?

Are not here those Platonicall Genii, good and bad, which govern every Man's
affairs, giving him either a grateful applause in his public actions, or a
neglected scorn in all his proceedings?

To the Inferior Regions of the Elementary World, the Vital, and parts are
serviceable to Nutrition, are (by the Hermeticks) analogiz'd.

For as in the Entrals of the Earth (partly the exhaling virtue of the Suns
rays, partly by Astrall Influences, as also by a proper and inbread heat of the
Earth) many variable Species of Exhalations and vapors are excited which are
the Essence of so many mixed and imperfect Bodies there generated, such as are
those diversities of Sulphurs, Mineral salts, Bitumens, Mercuriall humidities,
etc.

So likewise in this Terrene Globe Man, we find no less variety generated:
Here being Saccharine salts* Nutritive.

Nitrous, Amare, and Acute salts, Purgative, and Abstersive.

Salts Marine, which are Balsamicall, and Conservative.

Aluminous and Pontick, which are Stegnoticall, Stypticall, and Corroborating
the Retentive faculties.

And lastly Acide, Vitriolate and Esurine Salts, which Concoct, Distribute, and
excite Apetite.

There is likewise found in this Microcosme as many Species of Bitumens,
Napthae, Resinarum, Pinguedinarum, Lachrymarum, Gummi, and such like sorts of
Sulphurs, as there are of the forementioned Salts: and those likewise produce
effects answerable unto their qualities.

For there is one sort of Sulphur which is Odoriferous and Fragrant; Recreating
and Renovative.

An other Faetide, Narcoticall, and Stupefactive.

A third Hypnoticall, Papaverine, and Somniferous.

A fourth Anodinous.

A fifth Septicall, Arsenicall, and Pestiferous.

And the sixth Cardiacall, Vital, and Salutiferous.

Here to Illuminate these two Worlds Analogies, with more eminent
Demonstrations: the Veins and Arteries, are they not so many Rivers, dispersed
through the whole Continent, lending in their motion, to every part their
proper Aliment and desired Moisture? and do they not likewise Imboak and
evacuate their superabounding Humidities into the Ocean of the Bladder? Which
Bladder Ocean has it not his Flux and Reflux, observing his Tides for high and
low Water? And do you not see his Channels often so obstructed with the Sands
and Gravel of this Sea* that the Water is denied his Natural passage? Is not
this Seawater, Salt and brakish? whose Virtus lapidescens, does it not hourly
produce innumerable species of Stones and Lapidary Vegetables whose Forms and
Colors are no less variable than their number^ some being red and Coralline.
Others less compact whose Rare and Spungy bodies emulate the Pumice; Others
again so vast, solid ragged, and mis-shappen that they appear so many Rocks
threatening wrack to Man's weak Back.

To give yet a greater light to these our Analogicall Instances, it is requisite
that I run over my first draught with more lively and per^picuous shadows lest
that some of my Guests to ease their Doubts* should consult with some
Dogmatist, and he abuse truth, by the strength of his Methodicall Ignorance.

The chief point therefore which will oppose your Common sense (at having long
since staggered Galenicall Philosophy and made them almost reele out of their
Method) is those Sulphurs, Bitumens, Vitriolated Salts, Mercuriall Liquors,
Muscilaginous Tartars, and such like, which Hermeticks so rationally
demonstrate to be generated in our Microcosme.

Here you must expect but a lean satisfaction, if you take Counsel of a
Galenist. For they will allow man to be (...), an Epitomy of the greater World:
but the symbolizations which must add perfection to the Analogy they
invidiously renege.

Ask them why? and they answer, that they are dissonant to Galen's Principles:
and that they never found more in Man than the four humors Blood, Choler,
Phlegma, and Melancholia.

This is just an answer given in Method. Good Methodist, why do you not as well
blot out Cassia, Tamarindi, Mechiocan, Gutta Gamandra Zalappa, and many other
Neotericall and Exotic Catharticks, forth from your Modern Dispensatories,
since your two great Masters, Hipocrates and Galen never knew any of them?

Obstinacy joynd with Ignorance makes your errors impardonable. Lay aside but
a while those Immense Volumes and (...) on Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen, Rhasi;
Averrhoes, Aetius, etc. Cast away your Nauseous Potions, Infusions, Decocts,
Apozemes, and such like Antistomatica: then put on an Aperne and enter into our
Spagiricall Kitchen: blush not to be Ignorant, but let your patience view our
Fermentations, Putrifactions, Distillations, Rectifications, Cohobations,
Circulations, Calcinations, Sublimations, Reverberations, Solutions,
Precipitations, Coagulations, Filtrations, and such like enucleating
Preparations: there you shall see Nature out of her smock, and in that
nakedness, her secrets so far laid open, that you will admire her modesty
blusheth not.

There shall you see the soul of every Vegetable separated from its
Terrestriety.

You shall see opium open it self against you all, and declare his Innocence of
that excessive coldness, which you falsely attach him withal: protesting he
was never yet guilty of any cold distemper, but always sleeping in the
fulginious Cradle of a hot Narcotick Sulphur.

Their you shall find that (...) have their Prerogatives from a Nitious and
Cathartick Salt.

That medicamenta adstringentia and (...) receive their qualities from a
Stegnotick, Pontick, and Aluminous Salt.

Attenuantia Incidentia. Aperientia.
That (...) operate by virtue of their Tartareous and Vitriolated Salts.

That Dolorem sedantia, are such by reason of their Anodynous and Paregoricall
S^lphurs with which they abound. That (...), and (...), do renovate and
reunite s^lutionem unitatis, from the benignity of their Balsamicall Sulphurs
and Sarcotick Mumm^'s.

And l^stl^ that (...), and (...)* do but execute the Tyranny of their Septick
and Arsenicall Salts.

Here you shall quickly learn to correct your Father Galen's Error, where
speaking de Sopore, Apoplexia, and Epilepsia, he a little too confidently says,

Galen. lib. 4 de loc. affect.
Horum trium morborum, frigiditas, ac crassus aut omnino viscidus humor causa
est.

Which positive assertion* he makes more erroneous by an Apoplecticall
instance, where he opposes both modern experience, and violates all
Peripateticall Philosophy laboring to prove all Apoplexies to be generated ex
crasso and viscido humore.

Quod cito generentur, and solvantur. Quod cito generetur, that argues rather
the cause to be ex vaporibus and exhalationibus spirituosis: Humor enim Crassus
non potest non aliquo temporis intervallo in Cerebro a^gregari.

Then, that Apoplexia nunquam confestim solvitur, sed aegerrime potius, I
subscribe to the experience of any Apothecary's Boy.

No: when you have learnd perfectly to Anatomize and enucleare the Humors in
our Microcosme, then you will tell Galen that ejusmodi vapores aut halitus, qui
vertiginem inducunt, ex Resinosis, Tartareis, aut Sulphureis, in Ventriculo,
aliove viscere contentis: vel ex unctuosiore magis Sulphurea Sanguinis
substantia* promanare: quae secum Tincturam, aliquando, nigrae Fuliginis,
admodum ad tingendum and denigrandum efficacem, convehunt, citra tamen
acrimoniam ullam; unde Scotomia oritur.

That Paralysis, and Apoplexia, do not proceed ex simplici frigiditate and
crassitic, sed ex acerbitate, stipticitate, and acetositate Spiritus Vitrioli,
Sulphuris, vel Salis in Cerebro conglaciato. And from the constriction and
coarctation of those Acide and Vitriolated spirits, arises those monentary and
precipitate Apoplecticall Paroxysms. And when that Vitriolated Ice, either by
force of nature, or help of art, dissolveth, and falls by the Spondyls into the
Spinall marrow (nervorum propago) there, by its Acidity, Stipticity, Mordacity,
and Acrimony, vellicating, stupifying and consopiating those tender-feeling
parts, are procreated those Paralyticall Symptoms, (stupores and indormitiones
membrorum) as infallible (...) to a future Palsy. And lastly you shall find
that Epilepticall Paroxysms are not produced ex humore simpliciter frigido and
crasso, qualis creditur esse Pituita. For by this argument all Hydrocephali,
and by consequence all Children, whose Brains swim in the Deluge of
Phlegmaticall humidities, should inherit this Disease as Hereditary.

It Is true, that Children are most proclive to this Evil (whence Avicenna
calls it morbum Puerilem) yet not all; though none are free from that
superfluity of Pituitous excrements. But it is when the Mother or (...) have ill
disposed Milk; or when the Infant is infirm and cannot digest the Milk
received, where it corrupts and sowres in the Ventricle; which corruption
degenerats into an eruginous, virid, and Vitriolated virulency (ut ex eorum
rejectionibus ac vomitibus hujusce coloris videre est) whence are rendered those
fearful accidents of that more horrid Malady. And this Hipocrates makes more
authentic, where his Oracle Prognosticats your Galenicall error in this
Aphorism.

Comitiales Melancholici facile fiant and Melancholici Comitiales.

Though I presume he never suspected such complexions to abound with acide and
Vitriolated humors.

Come! let us to work then: and let not your Lady hands make any conscience in
picking the Colliars Purse. Off with arts Epidemicall delicacies, and learn
first to make Glass malleable with the Fat of your Mothers Entrals. And then
our Freshmans first operation (the Sublimation of Wine) shall be my instance,
to prove that the veins of Man's little Earth do flow with Minerals and
Semiminerals, no less than those of the greater worlds Earth.

Whilst our Coals are kindling therefore let us sit down, and rub up our
Sophistry a little, that the World may see, per Artem Spagiricam, we can
rectify errors, by the Circulation of reason, and the Cohobation of
Experience.

Reason therefore thus disputes.

Si magna est ejusmodi Vitriolarum, Mercurialium, Sulphuriarum, Salium copia in
multis Vegetabilibus quibus nutrimur, and ex quibus elaboratur Sanguis:
sequitur ut similibus inquinatur Sanguis.

Sed in Vino, Cerevisia, Pomatio, Pyratio, etc. ejusmodi Sulphura and Salia
reperiuntur. Ergo.

Your tutor Galen I know has taught you to say nego minorem. Your own
experience too perchance (in the Sublimation of so many Qua^t Pots) can confute
me who in none of those l^quors could ever see or taste any such imaginary Salts.

Yet me thinks I over-heare a secret confession acknowledge that in many Wines
which have past a trial of Fire, you have often found store of Saccharine Salts

Sweet Sir be not then so glucupricontically obstinate: but let us to work, and
make the Alembick our moderator. I will give you an instance in a cup of
Claret, to excite alacrity in our operations, and to extract your errors out
of your own Element. In this distillation your dullest sense shall feel the
truth of our argument and you shall see in this enucleation of Wine both
Vitriolated, Nitrosulphureous, and Tartareous Salts; which demonstrated,
Consequence shall force your belief to acknowledge the same in our blood.

By the way I desire you to be patient and stir not, lest we break Glasses: for
this operation is very phlegmatic; and your Choler may alter our degree of
heat, and so produce an Empyreuma in our Aquavitae. Stand quietly therefore
with expectation (like a Spaniard at the siege of a Piazz^) and presently your
error shall evaporate, and both our opinions shall dance together in a
Limbeck. Mark therefore how true an Analogy there is between Wine and Man's
blood and then tell me whether Hermeticks nurse any Opinions but what are
legitimate to reason.

From Wine, therefore, we first Sublimate the Aquavitae, by a temperat heat in
Balneo.

From Blood, by the same soft natural heat of the heart, is separated the
Aquavitae also, Spiritus vitalis.

Again from Aquavitae, by Rectification and Circulation, we extract the
Spirits of Wine, a part more aethereall and essential than Aquavitae, a drop
whereof let fall, ^stius in auram evanescat, quam in terram delabatur. So from
the Aquavitae or Vital Spirits of the Blood, by Rectification and Circulation
in the natural Balneo Maris of the Brain are produced the Animal Spirits, the
which likewise in subtility and pureness do infinitely excel the Vital.

In these preparations, remain great quantity of unprofitable Phlegm.

And is not the same in Blood?

After the Separation of the spirits and Phlegma from Wine, there remains store
of dregs which abound with Sulphur, Niter, and Tartar.

The like shall you discover in the distillation of Blood, where Choler does
aptly Symbolize with those Faeces, that being Nitrosulphureous.

Of the Dregs of Wine is made Vinegar, whose Pontick and Acide Taste does wholly
resemble natural Melancholy, which subsides in the Blood, and from whence
nature supplys the Kitchen of her Stomach with Vinegar, her Cook using no other
Sauce to excite appetite.

In the distillation of Vinegar likewise their remains a Tartareous Sediment,
so sharp, black, and acrimonious, (the major part being a Vitriolated Salt)
that dissolve the least quantity of it in a competent part of Water, and it
instantly inquinats the whole mass, making it Acide like Vinegar.

And this is likewise seen in the Blood; for those black dregs of Vinegar,
correspond unto black Choler or Melancholy Adust as you falsely call it: for it
is not such, from any Adustion, as you dream; but from the separation of the
Mercuriall, from their Sulphurous parts; by whose permixtion, before it was
made temperate, those Corrosive Salts being as it were lulled asleep in
Mercuriall Humidityes: which is evidently seen in Culinary Vinegar, whose
Mercuriall Phlegma not separated is edible and useful: but those humidityes by
ebullition once evaporated, his Salts like drowned Flies sensible of heat,
begin to actuate, as your Tongue may taste and testify.

It Is evident therefore, Adustion cannot produce such Acrimonies: for give
Common Water, or the Phlegma of Wine, all the ebullitions and re ebullitions
you can, they shall never be brought to this Acrimony which you call Adustion,
because they are destitute of those Vitriolated and Nitrosulphureous Salts.

What you find in this Anatomy of Wine, the very same is likewise in Cider,
Perry, and Beer: and not our Drinks only, but all our nourishment, be it of
Vegetables or Animals, abounds with those Sulphurs and Salts.

How then shall the Blood escape from their infection? your own Master tells
you talem esse Sanguinem, quale Nutrimentum.

Let an ingenuous confession then coutch ^his erroneous Cataract; and so
without ^ading your Nose with Ages glasen Optics, you may perspicuously
discover the grosnesse of your Methodicall Errors, which envidious Ignorance
would never yet suffer to be brought to the Copella of Examination.

Then armed with Truth, you may boldly bring hither many a ridiculous Page of
Galens to supply the defect of charta Emporetica.

I will not here discover any, lest Imitating the Sons of Noah, I detect
Paternall nakedness.

No! but rather with reverence I adore the Divine Oracle of Hipocrates:
acknowledg^ing Galen to be our (...)! and admiring their sedulity and Infinite
labors in laying the first Foundation of (...) his Temple; tha^ future Ages by
their examples might dayl^ add a Stone to their Architecture, tha^ so with
time it might glory in Perfe^ction.

Those good old men are not to be co^^temned, or neglected, because their first
Prin^ciples have past the Alembick of so man Brains, that now all
excrementitious hypo^stasis is separated, and they truly rectifie^ But as
Hipocrates answers for all, sa^^ing,

Medicinam non ^am assecutam esse pe^^fectionem, cui nihil addi possit: sed in
qua semper, vel aliquid modo reprenhendi, modo corrigi, modo addisci queat.

So to his ingenuous confession, I adjoyn this Absolution.

Facilius est inventis addere, quam ea primum excogitare.

Here me thinks I see some Vitriolated Stomachs, look sharply one upon another,
and with a whispering murmur invite a Departure, saying that neither the Feasts
of Apicius, Vitellius, or Heliogabalus, were thus long in preparation.

Have Patience Sirs, and know that I have invited a World: whom I purpose to
entertain with a banquet, not to satiate as those of Vitellius and
Heliogabalus, who ex sacrorum ^iscium jecinoribus, Muraenarum lacte,
Phasianorum ac Pavonum cerebellis, Phaenicopterorum, Pavonum and Lusciniarum
linguis, atque ^d genus inauditis ac inusitatis, maximorumque sumptuum eduliis
parata atque confecta, illorum Mensae replebantur.

No! to those Feasts I recommend Cleonenes, Lacydes, Q. Ennius, Dionysius
Minor, Mycerinus, Timocreon, Rhodius, Bonosus, Val. Aurelianus Imp. Mutonius,
Philoxenes, Meanthus, and the like Gluttonous Idolaters of ^^at loathsome
Goddess Intemperance.

Here you must enter i^to the Athenian and Lacedemonian schools of Temperance,
where Zeno, Aristippus, Socrates, Epaminondas, Cato, Cicero, and such like
sober guest, shall persuade you to a temperate Diet.

Yet will I not confine you to the strict Laws of Solon and Licurgus, and so
present you only with Galenicall Sallads.

No, your Temperance shall here consist in Delicacyes: We will be Prodigal,
yet Sparing: Your Stomachs shall be Italionated with puoco^e buona* little
dishes but great nourishers: famish the Eye* but satisfy Nature.

For here every Dish shall be so Spagirically dressed, and Essentially ordered,
that every man shall depart hungry, yet fully satisfied.

My Cooks do not like Galens set all boiling as soon as the Pot is over the
Fire; So we might Operam and Oleum perdere, all our Fat might be quickly in the
Fire.

No, as our Physic, so are our Fires, Na^turall and Temperate, the which must
be served with Time and Phlegm.

I here therefore follow the old Custom o^ England: when Guests are invited and
the Cook somewhat tedious, the Symposiastes o^ Patron of the Feast, with merry
Tales an^ winning discourse labors to beguile time, an^ ease the expectation
of his hungry Guest.

As near as I could therefore I have given you exercise before meat, proper for
the Aliment provided for you in my Banquet: and between every Course I shall
interlard your lean Dishes with wholesome though ridicuculous Mirth.

And my chiefest care shall be not to present any Dish that shall either be
nauseous or unsavory: but all such as may answer the Delicacy of your most
delicate Palates.

My Anthropogeographicall Mapp, dividing our Microcosme into four parts, I
allow every Part his preservative, and from thence make four Courses.

The first Course is Stomaticall, the second Cephalicall, the third Hepaticall,
and the last Cardiacall.

Now then as soon as you please, wash and fall to: and to imitate mine Host, be
merry, for you are wel-come Gentlemen.

THE FIRST COURSE STOMATICALL.
THe reason why I begin with the Stomaticall part of the Microcosme, is,
because we are at a Feast. And indeed such a Feast where every one shall find
Appetite in his Dish.

This Part being likewise our Cooks judgment Hall (where Pallatus sits
aloft as Judge, and Appetitus his Baylieff under him, summoning every Dish to
his trial) it is requisite that we here first make our Examination before we
fall to Execution.

Besides as it is the Microcosmes Kitchen, it must of necessity be first
supplied, since the whole World is nourisht by his Alms.

The Stomach also is the Physicians best Almanac by which he Prognosticats
what weather is likely to ensue, and what alterations are to be expected from
the middle Region of the Microcosme. It Is necessary therefore that we first
look into that: for when we have discovered his indispositions and distempers,
we shall the better learn how to preserve the whole Microcosme.

Every one therefore which is careful of his best Treasure, Health, must first
reflect upon this Part, as the little Worlds Nurse, which duly sends her Milk
by the Meseraicks, unto every Part.

If this our Nurse therefore have by disorder, or bad Diet, her Milk or Chylus
inquinated, how can the other Parts her Children expect health from such
corruptible Nourishment?

Primae enim concoctionis error, in Secundo non corrigitur.

Such as the Devil is, such is his Broth: and from sour Cream we must not
expect sweet Butter.

That my Guests therefore may not sit picking their Teeth for want of Apetite,
I will here give you a Catalogue of those Principles which Nature presented unto
that great Monarck of the Microcosme (when she first established him in his
Dominions) to the end he might enjoy a peaceable and quiet Reign.

And as near as I can I will deliver them verbally as I found them (in my
Travells through the Stomaticall Territories) ingrav'd in every Portall of the
Prime Governers, and Prophylacticks of those Parts. And they are these, 1.
Never oppress the Stomach with such Satiety, that it may produce either
nauseam, or Crudityes. 2. Oblige not the Stomach to any determinate hours of
eating or drinking: for your worldly affairs will often give a Diversion to
those Puntilii, misplacing the Gnomon of your Appetites Horologe either more
backward, or more forward. 3. But if possible, Famem cibus, sitim potus
expectet. When Hunger begs* be Charitable and feed her. And if thirst put a dry
jest upon you, answer her as Inns of Court Gentlemen do Scholars, and drink to
her. 4. Nitrosulphureous Stomachs, let their drink exceed their meat: as of
Mercuriall and Tartareous, the Contrary.

Let all overmoist, unctuous* and viscous Aliments, which by relaxation
debilitate, be reserved for Watermen as a nourishment suitable to their
Exercise.

5. Do not challenge Nature to the Duel of hard Digestions: lest finding you
raw Spirited* and no great Stomach to the Quarrel, She, unable to digest such
affronts, make you confess your own weakness, and so leave you. 6. All
Flatulent meats you shall recommend to Mariners and Ship-boyes, whose windy
re^uctancies may help in a Calm to fill the main Sheet. From my Banquet
likewise I banish all such meats, as Guest too turbulent and rebellious: since
we here desire Mirth and not Blows. 7. Let not Judge Pallatus be corrupted with
rich Presents of Fish or Fruits; and advertise your Baylieff Appetitus, not to
be bribed by the delicacy of their tastes, and bid the great Porter your Mouth
that he stand not gaping on the Dishes whilst the Fish leap in: for believe me
this may ruin the whole Republic. 8. If any one have a sweet-Tooth, let him
lick it with a sour Tongue: for, meats exactly sweet, must always be allayed
with some Acide Corrective, and made dolce picanti, otherwise they are not
edible. 9. Let the Body have his Exercise, before the Stomach his Collation:
and let Nature evacuate her Superfluities before either. 10. At Table, be sure
that your Teeth labor like so many Gally slaves, keeping true stroke with the
Hand. For Mastication is of many esteemed the first Concoction: and none will
deny but that it is Natural-heats best Agent; for meats well masticated, are
half digested. 11. Of Drinks, Claret (whose ruby Tincture, emulating the blush
of Aurora, allures more Souls to the courts of Bacchus, than he has stools to
entertain them) is the Stomachs best Favorite. 12. Be not fearful at any time
of a second Deluge, and so make your Stomach Noah's Ark* tumbling in at one Past
promiscuously all sorts of creatures, as Beef, Mutton, Lamb, Pigs, Capons,
Chicken, Pheasants, Larks, etc. Why the confusion of Babel was not greater. Do
but Imagine what a horrid encounter this is to weak Nature, when she finds a
Chaos of Imperfect Bodies brought into her Operatory, there to be digested,
united, made homogeniall, and assimulated into a perfect Body. Why hoc contra
naturam Opus est! Nature must prepare new Vessels for this Operation; for she
fears the Old will crack and the Fire go out.


Me thinks I see her so puzzled in this work, that faint sweats water her
Temples; and her Lungs, with overblowing to preserve so weak a heat under her
overcharged Alembick, begin to double their motion: she grows dull and febrish*
so that at last, with a drowsy Lassitude, her Lamps being almost out, not able
to hold up any longer, lets fall her Tongs, commits all to Fortune, and sleeps.
Believe me in these disorders you scrue Nature to the Zenith of ^er Patience.
And who ever makes his Teeth guilty of such Massakers, violates her Laws so
far* that at last she will give him over as an Arch Heretic. When occasion
therefore shall tempt you with such varieties, let them serve only as a
Perspective to the Optics: let your Eyes feed on all; but let Appetite
satisfy it self with some one Dish most Sympaticall to your Stomach and
obedient to Digestion. For in one Dish fear it not, but you shall meet variety
enough to keep all Natures Cooks in Exercise.

Yet if any one have a Caprizzious Palate, that will dance after his own Pipe
and contemnes the Regular Music of Dieteticall Method, Yet at least let him
keep some Homogenity in his choice, nam dissimilia quae sunt seditionem movent:
and withal let him be sure to take Temperantia for his Maid Marrian to make up
the Dance.

This Lady Intemperantia is Prologue to all Maladies; who with the sweet
Oratory of her bewitching Delicacies, winns our Audience to an ensuing Tragedy.

She is like Adams Apple, pleasant, and though the Devil were Cook down it must.

She labors to make every Man sell Natures Portion for a Mess of Pottage.
Health, as our good Genius, is vigilant in our preservation; but she negligent
of her Graces, has invented that loathsome Rack of Gluttony to Martyr us.

It Is now a Vice too general: and no Man but is ambitious to hear his Table
groan under the burden of Plenty.

But stay! I have almost leapt out of a Limbeck into a Pulpit. Pardon me Sirs:
for if I preach, it is not for a Benefice: a fat Goose will content me. Neither
do I rail at Intemperance to make you partial to my Dishes: No, fall to on
Gods name, and spare nothing that either Palate or Appetite shall point at. For
here you have license to embrace Variety, it being all Homogeniall. Eat
therefore and wel-come; remembering that your last Morsel be as a Ligature
whose Stegnotick* and Styptick Virtue may incatenate Natural Heat within the
purse of the Stomach, by an exact closure of his upper Orifice.

For which effect, I recommend a Box of Marmalade to your use. Or this,.
Conser. rosar. Diacydon. an. j.ss. Sem. Coriand. prae.j. Salis perlar. Salis
corallor. an.j. Spir. rosar. gut. vj. Fiat Electuar. s.a.. Rob de Ribes. j.
Sal. Coral. prae. j. essentiar. masticis. Cinamomi an. g. iij. Cum Sir.
Corallor. q.s. misce.


Or which excells all, after meals you may eat a piece of our Spagir^call
Sugar of Roses (for the preparation thereof I recommend you to our Spagiricall
Kitchen) whose corroborating Virtue, (which is no less Cephalicall and
Cardiacall, as Stomaticall) I will deferr to the Encomium of your Future
Experience.

The Vulgar may in these necessities content themselves with a roasted Pear or
a Medlar: It were a Sin to cast Pearls amongst Swine.

Least my Banquet should seem a Vision or Dream, out of which you remain little
satisfied, I have here dish'd out in Catalogues, as well what is grateful as
offensive to the Stomach: that every man may the better avoid the abortive
meats of Ignorance. I desire you therefore to put them up in your Hankerchers
in place of Comfits, and carry them home to your Children.

Things corroborating and acceptable to a weak Stomach distempred by Heat.

Marmalade. Cons. of red Ros. Currants. Cichory roots condit. Coral. Medlars.
Strawberryes. Sorrel.
Pomegranates. Pears baked, or roasted. Melons. Mulberryes. Ribes. Barberryes.
Sour Cherryes. Orenges. Lemons.
Compounds.
Elect. de Sorbis. Elect. de bac. Myrt. Diarrhod. Ab. Diatrion. Santal.
And all such things whose acide and stiptick tastes are united by a temperate
mixture.

Things corroborating and acceptable to a weak stomach distempered by access of
Cold and Moisture. Call. arom.

Mastick Mints. Sage Capers Sampire Wormwood. Fennel. Cinamomum. Rad. Cyper.
Nepita. Rosemary Iunip. ber. Caroway. Anise. Fennell-seed. Wood of Aloes.
Galingall. Zedoaria, Thymus. Calamint. Cubeb^. Synap. Zinzib. Nuc. mosc.
Maceres. Garyoph. Piper. Cardamom. Satureia. Serpillum.
Composita.
Aromat. rosat. Dianisum. Diacyminum. Diazinzib. Elect. de Citr. Rosat. nou.
Diagalanga. Diaxylaloes. Diacynamom. Diatrionpip. Elec. ex bac. lau.
Diaspoliticum.
The Stomach has many particular enemies, whom he abhorrs with that detested
Nauseo, that when he finds them in his kitchen, he is never well till he has
frighted them out with hot Water. And those are Galenicall potions. Raw Onions.
Radishes. Old Nuts. Rochetts. Garlic. Cucumbers. Fat meats. All cold things.
Green sour fruits Brains. Much use of Oil. Pompions. Blites. Orage.
Cole-worts. Hellebor. Lap. lazul. Aloes unwash'd. Scamon. ill praep. Salt Fish.
Butter. Cream. Legumin. non excort.


But stay! me thinks there is a Crust of Galens brown bread leapt into your
Broth Gentlemen! Pray let it lie since it is in; for it must (like an
artificial Velvet mole in fair Faces) give our Bread the greater luster

Good Galen! was there never a Searce maker in your days* to teach you how to
separate the unprofitable Bran from the Flower, but you must needs choke your
Patients with brown Bread-Cawdles. What Policy drew you into the Method of
making Remedies more malign then the Disease.

But alas good old Man, he is no whit culpable since nihil perfectionem in
principio gaudet. He left the Embryo of his Labors for future Ages to perfect
and preserve from abortment. He gave us the first, and true Design of Health,
and left us the Scizza. Hermeticks they have wrought it to Life, adorning it
with the natural Colors, Tinctures, and Spirits themselves: so that their
Industry has made them so excellent in this Art of Painting, that had they but
such a copy of the Soul, I think they would ease Nature, and make her
Creatures for her.

I would gladly understand then why our Neotericall Dogmatists do not endeavor
to perfect this Design of their Masters: or at least why they will not take a
Coal in Hand, and add a shadow to the perfection of his Scizza.

No, by no means their hands shall not be guilty of our Venomous Mineralls.

They dare not enter into the Hell of our Laboratory for fear the Spirits fly
about their Fars. They say we preach new Doctrine, and labor to silence us;
Mineralls they all disclaim as Venomous yet all their principal Antidotes are
infected with them.

Who doubts of this let him examine Merepsus his Book de Antidotis (where he
has selected the choicest and most authentic compositions of all the select
Band of Galenists) there you shall find more than a hundred Antidotes whose
Basis and principal ingredients are either Mineralls or Semi mineralls, and
those crude and unprepared. There in Antidoto persicae Pauli, you shall see
both crude Sulphur, and five dragmes of unpraepar'd Arsenick, which I suppose
he intended for an (...). In Antidoto. cap. 303. Musae Apollionio adscripta the
same Arsenick is embraced as a principal Ingredient. Dioscorides likewise, does
he not prescribe a dragme of raw Vitrioll mixed with Honey as a prime Secret
against those Ascarides, and for such whose wanton Palate has oppressed Nature
with Venomous Fungi? In that Divine Panacea, that so admired Chaos of Druggs,
Theriaca, is not Calcitis an Ingredient? In Mirepsus his Mithridate is not
calcined Lead called in as one of the Jury? Are not Lapis Lazulus and Lap.
Armenus, two of your Familiar Spirits against Melancholy.

Again they say Mineralls are too violent in their Operations. Let them look
well into their Vegetables, and then tell me if Tithimalus, Thapsia, Helleb.
alb. and nig. Pityusa, Elatorium, Colocynthis, Turpetum, Bryonia, Scammonium,
Thymelaea, Chamelaea, Cyclaminus, etc. Do not emulate the violence of the most
Tyrannical Mineral, torturing every Nerve on the Rack of Convulsions.

Here I lose my self in admiration to see so many famous Physicians of our
Times lie puzzling in the Dust of Ignorance; where losing their Eyes they lie
groaping in the Dunghill of their Drugs, whilst the Hermeticks pick out the
Pearls.

They see that every Man's Stomach rises against their Physic; and yet they
will still persecute poor Nature, ^oftner frighting then curing Diseases.

Go to a Methodist, tell him your Stomach is debillitated by a cold distemper,
and he will presently prescribe you the Decoction of Anise, Rue, and Parsely
Seed, with Diatrion-Piperion, Diacalamint. Theriaca and the like.

If your weakness proceed from heat and choleric humors, he bids you purge
with Hiera Picra (Galenae Stomaticall Panacaea) and to drink Endive and Succory
Waters, mixed with Vinegar. Why this is pure Judaical Physic imitating the Cure
they used to our Savior, when he suffered Thirst on the Cross.

Me thinks as the Old Law is, so their Physic likewise should be abrogated.

Be not dismayed at these Relations good Guest! for here He promises your
entertainment shall be more Christian like. And when your Microcosme shall
discover any such distempers, retire to our Spagiricall Kitchen, over whose
Door you shall find written, Sapores palato ingrati procul absint. There you
shall not be allured to give Christian buryall to a Jewish Potion, by
persuasive Apologies: but believe me, the sweetness of your cure, shall bring
a pleasant recompense to the bitterness of your Malady.

Whosoever therefore is subject to any debilitation of the Stomach: proceeding
from a mixed distemper of Humors, be they Tartarius, Vitriolate,
Nitrosulphureous or Mercuriall: let him before he taste of our Preservatives,
first secure the Stomach from all such false Usurpers, by taking one, two, or
three grains of our Hermeticall Panchymagogon. For Ladies and such delicate
Tempers, one grain renders a complete Operation. You may mix it with any
Dissolvent your Stomach most approves of; as Wine, Bear, Broth, Posset Drink,
or any liquidity. Or you may lend it the form of a Pill by addition of some
Conserve, Marmalade, Quidiny Geladine or the like. It Is not guilty either of
Taste or smell, neither does it seek by Violence to put any man out of his
humor. No, you shall find it as good a Fellow as may be; and one that will
dance after the Caprizzio of every ones humor. For if they be Choleric, and
will at the first Dash con la Furia Francese, give a Scalado by the upper
Orifice; he straight Consents, helps, and follows. Or if they abound with
Spanish Phlegma, and desire rather to entrench themselves first, and so make a
long Seidge; why, he plays the Pyoner, there too, and flings out as fast as the
stoutest. Believe me the Operation hereof is miraculous, and the little
Experience which I have made would consume Volumes in the Description; but as
from my purpose I defer it to some better Occasion. Here I labor only to
preserve, not to Cure. If Nature therefore suspect any Summer Assault, by Acute
and malignant Fevers, Tertians, Plurisies, or the like; this taken in the
Spring breaks their Designs. If she fear any Autumnall Skirmish or Winter
Seidge, by some Cronicall Disease do but scowre the Enemies Trenches with this
Artillery and (under God) I dare promise her Peace.

The preparation of this Panchymagogon is thus. You must first rob our
Hermetticall Curier when he rides Post to Caelum Christallinum, and take from
him two ounces of his false Diamonds.

Then open a Vein in your Mothers Belly, and from her Coagulated Blood you
shall pick out ij. of the bones of the 7. Planets great Grandmother these you
shall charm into Butter, and then Season it for your Winter Service.

But if any of you fear a Vomit by reason of a straight Chest, I recommend him
to our Tetrapharmacon Panchymagogon, whose Operation is expressed in an easy and
low Style, never ambitiously reaching at those high streins.

Having thus scowr'd your Ditches, and cast up your Parapetts, that your Fort
may be strong for Battery, now you must begin to fortify your Walls, and look
to your Outworks; renew your weak Flanks, and let Nature, your Inginier, search
where and what Part is most subject to the Mine and there prepare her
Counter-Mines: For by strengthing and preserving this Piazza, you need not fear
the whole World.

If therefore the Winter of your Complexion produce a weakness to the Stomach,
by the Ice of his violent and cold distemper you shall disgeal it with this
Ensuing Elixir, which is the Stomachs proper Balsamum.

. Cinamomi. Zedoariae. Cardamom. Maceris an.j. Garyophyl. Nuc. Mosch. Cubeb.
an.j.ss. Galanoae.iij. Piper. long.vj. Garyoph. hortens. Ros. Rub. Flor.
Buglos. Flor. Menthae Romans an. M. j. Folior. Menth. Romans Absinthii. an. M.ss.
Bruise them small in a Mortar, and add thereto ten ounces of the Crum of white
Bread. Put all into a Glass Cucurbita, and power thereto of the best Sack as
much as they can drink, with two fingers depth advantage: close your Glass
according to art, then give it 8. days Fermentation: which done adjoyn this
Emulsion.

. Amygd. dulc. excort. lb. ss. Aqu. Rosar. Buglos. an. lb. ij. Sacchar.
albis.iij. Fiat emulsio.
Then destill all in Balneo secund. attem.

The Dose is two spoonfulls an hour before and after, meat.

Here follows an other more excellent.

. Spir. Vini, cum Spirito. Sem. Anisii animato. lb.j. Theriacae.j. Confect.
Alcher.ss. Specier. Diarrhod. Ab. Zinzib. Maceris. Cinamom. an.j. Cort.
Citri.iij.
The Ginger, Mace, Cinnamon and Citron-peeles, being all grossly beaten, mix all
together, and in Balneo by a gentle heat, extract the Tincture. To which you
shall add these, Tinctur. Succini. Tinctur. Corallor. an.j. Tinctur. Auri.
Essent. Perlar. an. gut. xx. Spir. Menthar. Spir. Faenic. Spir. Melissae an.ss.
Spir. Rosar.j. Essentiae Sacci.ij. Tinctur. Croci gut.xij.


Who please may proceed farther in this Preparation, by separating the Spirits
from the first Theriacall Tincture* in Balneo vaporoso, which Spirits being
Sublimated, he shall find at the bottom of his Cucu^bita an Extract or
coagulated Tincture, admirable in Corroborating the Principle Parts, specially
the Heart and Stomach and far surpassing the Common Theriaca against all
pestilential and infectious Aer.

Then to those Spirits thus separated from their Tinctures you may add the
other forementioned Tinctures. And who ever can attain to this, believe me he
enjoyes a Treasure worthy of a Princes Cabinet: whose virtues are so infinite*
that they would lose themselves in Expression. It asswageth all inward dolours
of the Stomach, Heart, Liver, Bowels, etc. And that on an Instant. It Is a
Panacaea, in all Pestilentiall Fevers, both Prophylactick and Therapeutick. It
corroborates all the Vital Parts, and renovates the Oil of Ages decaying Lamp.
To conclude, it recalls a departing Soul by rendering the Annual Tribute which
weak Natures exhausted Treasury could no longer disburse.

Hippocras and Artificial Aromaticall Wines are much in use with us in
England: and not without Cause, since they have a peculiar Efficacy in
repairing Cold, weak, and decaying Stomachs.

That those therefore which honor my Feast, may at all hours, and on any
occasion, prepare a Quart of Hippocras for their Friends in an Instant: I will
favor them with this ensuing Hippocraticall Extract.

. Cinamom. ij. vel iij. Garyophyl. ss. Zinzib. Macropip. Cardamom. Gran. Parad.
Galaneae an. ij. Nuc. Mosch. j.ss.
Being all grossly powdered, put them into a Glass Violl, and power thereon of
the Spir. of Wine to the eminence of 4. fingers, Stop your Glass close, and set
it in Balneo, or in Summer in the Sun, for the Space of three or four Days,
until the Spirits have robbed the Aromaticks of their Tinctures: this done,
separate it from the Faeces, and reserve it for your use.

When any of you therefore desire a Cup of Hippocras, mix but.ss. of this
Tincture with a Pint or more of Sack, adding what Quantity of Sugar you please,
or which is better the Essence of Sugar, and your desire is answered: a Glass
of which with a Toast, before meat, gives no small Check to a cold distemper.

Here likewise I present a Taste of Spagiricall Cla^et to your weak Stomachs, by
the often use of which, neither Crudities or Ventosities shall impair your
Digestion.

. Cinamom. ij. Maceris. ss. Dactyllor. number. 20. Myccbal. number. 4. Uvar. passul.
v. vel. 6. Sem. Anisi. Coriand. prae. an. j. Faenicul. ss.
With the Spirits of Wine and Canary Sack of each lb iij. being mixed set them
in some cool Cellar to ferment the space of four or five Days. Of this you may
take one or two spoonfulls in a morning.

If I mistake not I heard some of you call for a glass of Wormwood Wine.

I have none ready prepared: but here is a little Violl of the Spirits of
Wormwood with which who please to make a Trial and put ^ut some few drops in a
glass of ordinary white Wine, he shall find his desire satisfied with a Cup of
exquisite Wormwood Wine, far more effectual then any Galenicall macerati^n or
Infusion,

And that your defect may be supplied when this small quantity shall be
exhausted, I ^ere lend you the receipt, whereby you may ^ereafter furnish your
self, and pleasure a friend.

. Summitat. Absint. q.s. affunde aq. com. s.q. stent in digestione per dies
aliquot: potest and quid ad fermentandum adjici. Destilletur per Vesicam:
exibit. aquam, oleum quippiam continens. Oleum per Seperatorium separetur. Aqua
tota Cucurbitae vitreae indatur atque in Balneo semel atque iterum
rectificetur, and saltem pars spirituosior absirahatur, quae odorem and saporem
Absinthit retinet.

This has a singlar Virtue in corrobora^ing both Stomach and Liver, it resists
putri^action, and deopilates obstructions, and is a ^pecifical Preservative
against all Stomattical and Intestinall Vermin. Spirit of Mints is ^ikewise an
excellent and peculiar prophylactick of a Weak and cold Stomach, some few drops
thereof put into a Cup of Sac^ with a Toast, adjoining a drop of the Essence of
Cinnamon, and taken an hour before meat.

To think to please every Man's Palate may well enlarge the List of
Impossibilities: yet Despair shall not interrupt my Carving: and where one Dish
likes not, variety shall presently bring in another. So that at length ^^
presume the major part shall satisfy the variability of Fancy, and give
Appetite a Delight, in the Stomachs preservation.

Who then please may taste of this Spagiricall Stomaticall Syrup, which in
delicacy and Virtue excels all your ordinary Cinamon-Waters.

. Cinam. gros. mod. pulv. iiij. Vini Hispam^. lb. ij.

Let them infuse in Balneo three days: then separate the Tincture from his
Faeces and adding thereto lb^.ss. of pure white Sugar, put all into a Glass
Cucurbita and with a boiling Balneo distill it until it remain at the Bottom
in consistence of a Syrup. So in one Operation you enjoy both a Syrup and an
excellent Cinnamon Water both of which for Corroborating a Weak Stomach and
expelling Melancholy from a pensive Heart, may take possessi^n among your
Secrets. But to make it more perfect, in place of Sack you shall use Spir. of
Wine.

In the same manner you shall make Syrup of Nutmegs, the which is a little more
Spe^ificall for the Stomach.

For windiness of the Stomach and Bowels you may compose the like Waters and
Syrups of Annise and Caraway seeds.

But there are many whose Natures so Antipathize with Wine, that both smell and
taste ^hereof is offensive to them. Such persons may make the above said Syrups
as follows,

. Cinam. pulveriz. iij. vel. iiij. aqu. commun. q.s.

Set them in some cold place the space of three or four Days: then distill it.
Then take of that distild water, lb j. Sugar lb.ss. Fiat Syrrup. s.a.

This retains the fragant Odor of Cinnamon: and this for the Summer is more
proper, to which you may add an ounce or two of Rose Water.

Gentlemen you are too modest* Because my Cook* to follow Court Fashion, sends
in his Dishes in Duplicates* every man expects that I should make the Discovery.

This Lady-like nicety, had almost let a good Dish here escape for the serving
men. It Is a meat which you have already tasted of: the difference is only in
the dressing, the which is rare and exquisite.

Take the above mentioned Spirits separated from the first Cinnamon Syrup: add
to it iij. or iiij. of gross beaten Cinnamon, then being exquisitely stopped, set
in a cold place until the water have the perfect Tincture of the Cinnamon: the
which you shall separate, and to every x. add iij. or 4. of Sugar. Then in
Balneo separate those Spirits from the Tincture, and you have the best sort of
Cinnamon Water* together with an admirable Syrup. If you will make one yet more
excellent, it is but adding fresh Cinnamon to these last rectified Spirits,
proceeding as before: and reiterating this Operation three or four times, so
that the last will render you an Essence of Cinnamon whose Virtues will repay
your Labor with Interest.

We have in our Spagiricall Kitchen certain Stomatticall Balsams, whose
descriptions I must here forbear as Frutta nova, and not yet for every man's
Table. Such as are Balsamum Iunip. Balsamum. Nuc. mosc. Bals. Cinamom. Balsam.
Rosmar. etc.


These as they are rare and Princely, so are they Singular in Corroborating
both the Stomach and the rest of the Vital Parts, either Intrinsicall or
Extrinsically applied.

And for such over-nice and delicate Persons which either through Coyness will
not, or through Weakners cannot receive any Internal remedy, let them morning
and evening Externally anoint the Stomach with this Hermeticall Balsam.

. Butyr. Gelsomini. j. Essent. Rosmar..ss. Essent. Cinamom. Essent. Nuc. mosc.
an..j. Essent. Masticis. j. Moschi. Ambrae an. g. iiij. Zibet. g. ij.
Cum Cero virgin. decies in aq. Rosar. lavat. q.s. fiat Balsam. s.a.

That no man may complain for want of Bread to his Meat, you shall taste of our
Spa^iricall Biscuit, which I recommend to all weak and moist Stomachs,
especially to those who after some Chronicall Disease cannot digest ordinary
Bread.

Take lb. j. of the purest Wheat Flour, of the best refined Sugar xvj. Fresh
Eggs numb. xij. The Cream of Almonds extracted with the best Rosewater, iiij.
Essence of Annise, Cinnamon, and Nutmeggs, an. j. more or less according to the
humor of your Palate: Spirit of Roses q.s. mix them according to Art* and
thereof make your Biscuits.

There are many other sorts of Biscuits which every good Wife knows how to
prepare, as Regal^ Biscuit, S^anish Biscuit, French Biscuit, Lorain Biscuit,
Italian Biscuit, etc. Therefore as too Vulgar for our Table I omit them: Yet if
any one desire a Taste, let them call to our Cook.

Now presuming upon the Phlegm of your Cold Distempers, I will call in for a
Dish or two to refocillate our younger and more Sulphurous Stomachs, whose
extra vagant disorders has brought the Stomach so far in Choler with the
Microcosme, that he refuses to supply it with his expected Nourishment: This
Quarrel must not grow too hot: but it is necessary a speedy reconciliation be
made, before the Stomach grow too Obstinate in his Humor.

In this Case I know no better Aparater tha^ our Panchymagogon: let him bring
him up to the Court of Conscience, there he will be so qualified, that you may
turn him to any conditions of Peace.

When you have him at this Advantage, enjoin him for Penance every morning to
take three drops of the Spirits of Sulphur, or Vitriol, with as many of the
Spirit of Roses mixed with a glass of Spring Water, edulcorated with the Essence
of Sugar. Or this. Sal. Christalli..ss. Spir. Vitrioli gut. iij. Spir. Rosar.
gut. 5. Essent. Sacch. q.s. Aq. fontan. distillat. iiij. Misce.


Before meat half an hour or an hour let him use this,. Rob. de Ribes. Rob. de
Berber. an. j. Spir. {sulphur} g. iij. Salis perlar..j. Misce.


After Meals, this,. Conser. Corneol. Diacydon. simp. an. ij. Salis coralor. j.
Spir. Salis gut. vj. Spir. Rosar. gut. x. Misce.


You which are thus distemperd, I desire you to entertain Appetite with
Patience until the Third Course enter, where you may pick out Variety of
Hepaticall Dishes proper to your Indisposition. In the mean time if any
Insolent Stomack-Worms quarrel for a breakfast before their Master be served,
you shall do well to cut off their allowance, and then turn them out of your
Doors with a Powder.

. Corn. Cer. praep. Coral. rub. praep. an. j. Aquilae Celestis.j.ss. Verm.
terrest. prae. Cinamom. an..j. Scammon. cum {sulphur}. praep. j. Misce. Dos..j.
The Furyes of Appetite being laid, now your Patience may dispense with a
little Idle Table Talk, to renovate the dulled edge of your Apetites, that they
may be the livelier at the Second encounter.

THE SECOND COURSE CEPHALICALL.
HEre Dogmaticall Discipline bids me be more Compendious, and collect my Method
unto Heads.

But we are Travelers, and must not be limited: We are now landed on the
Coast of the Cephalic Peninsula, a place whose Fame elevates it above all
other parts of the World; and where both Tongue and Eyes of all Men sleep in
Admiration. Here that great Monarck of the Microcosme has his residence, Who
is an Imperial King, and full of Divinity: his Head being always Crowned, as
a Type of his absolute and peaceable reign even to the Worlds end.

That his more Celestial Thoughts may not be interrupted with State Affairs he
has resigned the government of his Microcosme, (which he has divided into
three Monarchies) unto three of his ablest Subjects, Spiritus Vitalis, Spiritus
Animalis, and Spiritus Naturalis. To Spiritus Animalis, he has given the
Cephalic Peninsula, placing him near unto himself, as his Wisest Counselor:
for which consideration he has made him likewise (...), Lord Secretary.

To Spiritus Vitalis, and Spiritus Naturalis, he has resigned the Government
of Terra firma: an equal Division being made, the one taking the Cardiacall,
the other the Hepaticall Parts.

Spiritus Vitalis likewise being his Lord Treasurer; and Spiritus Naturalis
Lord of the Cinque Ports.

Other Information of this King (the Soul) I dare not enter into.

De sacris in praesentia mysteriis non est loquendum. Yet I will show you a
reflection of his greatness in the glass of his Nobility and Court, which I
will here Carve into Descriptions which may serve you as Picktooth's and Table
Talk, until our Cook shall stop our Mouths with the second Course.

Know then that this King is retired into the Cephalic Peninsula, where his
Highness is lodged in an Imperial Palace, whose Fabrics are all of pure Ivory.

There the Architect, Emblematically expressing Perfection (and that the
Microcosme might not want his Epitomy) has united all in a Sphaericall Figure.

The walls of his Court are environed with a pleasant Forest: the natural
plantation of whose Trees make so intricate a Laborinth, that it is a delightful
pastime for the Ladies of Honor, every morning for exercise, to lose themselves
an hour or two in the Crispie twirles of those Aromatic Thickets. There
likewise they sport themselves with young Hearts, which they find often so
entangled, that unable to resist, they rely on the mercy of those weak Females,
suffering themselves to be fooled withal, until pity shall send them
Liberty. Sometimes more aged Hearts (whose Actaeon plumes calculate their
Nativity) are secretly ensnared, and locked so fast, that their relief is
desperate, insomuch that they lie and pine away in the Jealousy of their own
weakness.

The Ladies of this Court are so particularly delighted with the pleasant chase
of the Hare, that Day and Night the poor Creatures take little rest; hourly new
engines being invented to entangle them. So that every day there falls more
than all the court Dogs can eat and escape choking.

As you approach this Regal Palace, your Heart is Planet-stroke by two
Celestial lights fixed in the Frontispiece: Whose Magic Fires captivate the
souls of young Courtiers, making their Noble servitude seem an Imperial liberty.

Those are the Lights which lead Men into Fools Paradise, where they study
Idolatry in a Looking-glass. If you can pass the Influence of those Stars; you
may enter the Great Gate (the Mouth) which at a word speaking is opened.

This is strongly fortifyed with Ivory Percullises set in Mosaic. Here you are
presently incountred by that wanton Portress Lingua, who cannot speak to a man
without wagging of her Tail, she recommends you to her Lady and Mistress
Eloquentia, who with sweet complements, and Court Ceremonies, invites you
presently to a view of this Imperial Palace: and so shows you first the
out-Chambers of the five Lady Senses: then leads you up to the Lodgings of the
Princes Phantasia, which is the prime side of the Court for good fellowship.

There you shall find this Princess, with the nine Virgin Muses dancing a
Fantastical Brando to the melody of the Lady Musica.

Here she shows you the Chambers of all the seven liberal Sciences, whom
Phantasia has honored with several Offices. Geometria is her Carver,
Arithmetica keeps her Accounts. Rhetorica is Mistress of the Ceremonies.
Grammatica governes the Pages. Astrologia serves in place of a Ieaster, and
tells Fortunes to provoke mirth. Musica, all the World knows her Charge. Poeta
is her Minion, to whom she resignes the whole government of her Family. She
makes Hay whilst the Sun shines; and prefers all her poor kindred to several
Places in the Court.

Ovid she makes Major-domo. Homer because a merry Greek Master of the
Wine-Cellars. Aretine (for his skill in Postures) growing old, is made Pander.
Shack-spear, Butler. Ben Johnson, Clark of the Kitchen, Fenner his Turn-spit,
And Tailor his Scullion.

All these have their chamber-doors pestered with sharking Players, Fiddlers,
Ballad-singers, and such like hangers on.

Next, she carries you to the middle Lodg^ngs, where the Viceroy of the
Cephalic Pe^insula is Lodged, next door unto the Great King Animus.

This Viceroy atten^s wholly unto his King and Master: putting over all
Public affairs into the hands of the Lord Intellectus, his Favorite, who
governes all.

Yet Spiritus Animalis, having found him often corrupted by inferior Members,
dares not trust him too far, but for the better security of the Peninsula, he
has Five fair Ladies, as secret spies to inform him daily how every part is
governed.

The Lady Visus has her commission to have an Eye on both sides, and to look
to every part, specially the more Noble, and to observe their Humor and
Disposition toward Intellectus, and whether they render freely their Tribute.

The Lady Auditus is commanded to lend an Ear to Chamber Discourses of those
Court Gossips, Lingua, Rhetorica, etc. Who make every Festival Day, a Day of
Parliament.

Lady Tactus is bid now and then to handle them somewhat ruffly: So to try who
is most touchy, and if in their choler they be subject to Rebellion, and
disobedient to the Laws published by Intellectus.

Lady Gustus is enjoined to be always at his Table as Tastress; to prevent the
Malice of some treacherous Humor, which by casting some Soporiferous mixture
into his Dish, he might be deposed by an Apoplexy.

Lady Olfactus she smells to every ones chollar: and like an Ape suffers
nothing to pass the Court Gate, but she must have a Nose in it.

Here you shall see that Fountain Somnus (the true Helicon) where Orpheus sits
and plays sweet Requiems to the Nine Lady Muses, Memoria, and the five
Sensual Ladies, who refresh their defatigated Limms with the hypnoticall dew
of this Anodynous Bath: And whilst they rest, the Princess Phantasia, who never
enters that Fountain, she sports her self with the Juggling tricks of that
Artifex simulator que figurae, Morpheus, his Phobetur and Phantasus.

Here if Eloquentia forget not her self, she will show you Memoria, and her
Lodging.

But now I remember my self, I have heard our Cook and his Hatch twice at
knocks, because none will ease him of his second Course.

And I fear some of my more serious Guest could do the like with me, who
perchance expected grave Apothegmes, and sententious Aphorisms for their Table
Talk.

No, you both abuse your expectations, and break the Rules of Physic, if you
gape for Sentences here. Ever whilst you live be merry at meat. It Is to excite
your Mirth that I play the Fool: Laetitia Coelum vos creavit sua; Laetitia
Coelum vos servabit vestra. Why then be merry! and with Democritus Jeere
Melancholy out of his Humor, nam fata sinunt dum securi vivitis.

And believe me, Mirth is the main Spring of your Lives Horologe: it is that
maintains the Clapper your Tongue in motion.

It Is Healths chief Panacaea, and absque hac una tanquam medicinarum omnium
vita medicinae omnes ad vitam producendam adhibitae moriuntur.

Laugh and be fat therefore: and let Doctor Merryman always make up your Mess.

But soft! here comes the Second Course! Gentlemen pray have a Care you commit
no Capital Crime in your Table Talk. For whosoever makes Gravity his Salt, and
Contemplation his Sauce, gives so great an Affront to Intellectus, the
Favorite, that he may chance hang his Head for it. For thus you corrupt the
Ambassadors and Agents which Spiritus Naturalis imployes in the Stomaticall
Territories, by diverting them from their Function, whereby their charge is
rawly executed. Next, you give a false Alarm throughout the whole Microcosme,
making Spiritus Animalis retire his Forces to the Cephalic Peninsu^a, when
there is more necessity of their succor ^n terra firma. Lastly, you rob the
Treasury, ^rawing from the Exchequer of the Heart ^ood Angel-Gold, pure vital
Spirits, and and back false, indigested Metal, all Mercu^iall, falsified by a
weak external Tincture ^nly: but brought to Natures test alla Copella, and
after dissolved in her rectified Spirits* you shall scarce draw from a Pound,
one scruple ^f perfect Aurum potabile.

Thus likewise you cause fearful Inundati^ns in this Peninsula, making his
Fluxes and ^efluxes so Violent, that they drown the very ^arrow and Heart of
the Soil, bringing with ^a Marine Saltness, whose Corrosive heat con^^mes the
true Balsamicall moisture, leaving ^^ose Parts where it runs so impregnable
that ^^thing prospers there but Tussilago.

Nor is this all the Danger! for by eating ^^icks in the Neck-land, it
threatens the ^^ole Continent.

Here in the Chamber of Memoria, I found Book in Manuscript, full of Political
Max^es and Matchavilian Principles, for the bet(...) Government of the
Sephalick State. The ^^^ef whereof were these,

^. How ever the World go, Vigil^^ ^vitand.
be not too Vi^^^ant in your Affairs: le^t by over greediness of Gain you lose
your Interest in the Public Treasury, and at last abandoned by Intellectus,
you grow out of Memory amongst your Friends, and so pass for a Man of small
Judgment.

Alvi excrement. Quotidie expurgan.
2. Be careful that the Inland Inhabitants suffer not their Culinary Excrements
to lie putrefying in their Channells* but daily to evacuate them by the Port
Esculine.

For believe me, the Contagious exhalations which ascend from those faetid^
neglects will quickly breed the Sickness in the Cephalic Land.

Somnum fuge Meridianum.
3. This Peninsula being barren, and receiving all his Provisions from the
Continent it is necessary that you keep an Eye open upon the Stomaticall
Magazin, and see that Memory forget not her self to charge all the Lady Senses
to be vigilant in this action, and not so much as to Dream of any other
negotiation until they have seen a full and perfect distribution. For if you
let those Ministers sleep you may be supplied with a corrupt Munition
sufficient to morbifie all your Inhabitants.

4. Here Intellectus must answer the advi^^ of his Physician Sensus Communis,
Somnus sit moderatus.
with obe^dience, and moderate his hours of Recreat^^on in the Helicon; lest he
grow dull wit^ those stupid Vapors* and so unapt to nego^ciate, be at last put
out of his Office by the Princess Phantasia.

5. As far as Possibility permits, this Peninsula must be defended from those
injurious Sea Winds, especially from that Pincerna pluviae the South, whose
humid Gusts, supported on the wings of noisome Foggs, lend a new body to the
investing Aer; increasing the Violence of his Fluxes, and sending a Repletion
even into the Cranyes of that Earth.

6. Here is allowed, to Intellectus, his particular Recreations, for the
preservation of his Vigor and Health: and those he shall borrow from the Lady
Senses.

For sometime Visus shall divert his too serious and retired meditations, with
the reviving Aspect of some actuating Beauty: whose presence will give such a
charge to his defatigated Spirits, that in a Point of Time, by the strong
refraction of those Rays, all his forces shall be inflamed with a renovating
Fire.

Tactus, yet more audacious, shall bring him on to touch this Beauty* making
him embrace Corporality, to add a greater feeling to his Delights. And there
the Intellect might die in E^^tasy, did not Auditus presently by some Syrene
voice or Orphean Instrument relieve his melting Soul from the Abyss of Pleasure.

And lastly Gustus shall salute him with her Arms full of restoring Dishes,
making the Lady Lingua invite him to a Sack Posset, as the most proper
N^penthes for his Lassitude, and of all approved for an Authentic settle-brain.

In this my Cephalicall M^pp, you may discover the Head to be the most noble
part of the Microcosme! the little Worlds Britania! Wisdoms Cabinet! The Muses
Parnassus! Apollo's Oracle! Minerva's Temple! and which crowns all* the Souls
Imperial terrestiall Tribunal whose Foundation is the Body: which if once
impaired his fair buildings fall* and kiss their Mother Earth for a second
admission into her Bowels.

Who then so desperate of sense* as to neglect the preservation of so Principal
a Part? Believe me 'twere Madness in the abstract: and such might well pass for
Hair-brained humorists.

This my second Course therefore shall consist wholly of Cephalicall
Preservatives. Look from one end of my Table to the other and you shall not see
either gross, flatulent, unctuous, vaporous nauseous, or crude and indigestible
meats, such as are, Old Beef Milk, Fat Broths, strong Wines, Butter, Black
Olives, Nuts, Onions, Cabbage, raw Sallads, Beans, Pease, Rochet, or any such
Cephalic Enemy.

No! I sent my Spenditore to Galens Market, where he bought me these
Ingredients.

Betonica Majoran. Salvia Hyssopus Melissa Rosmarin. Fol. laur. Satureia Ruta.
Ocymum. Call. arom. Melilotus Paeonia Sem. Faenic. Coriandri Anisi Rad freos
Caryophyllata. Visc. Querc. Flor. Tiliae. Bac. Iunip. Acorus. Pulegium. Nepita.
Euphrasia Calaminta Serpillum Spica Lavendul. Origanum. Horb. paraly. Lil.
conval. Galangae Staech. Arab. Chamomilla Anacard. Nuc. Mosch. Succinum Moschus
Ambra. griz. Lig. Aloes Caryophyll. Cubebae. Cardamomi Macis, etc.
And these by an Essential Fire we have brought into Quintessences, Elixars,
Extracts Tinctures, Balsoms, Magistralls, Spirits, Arcani, and the like: all
which you shall find far more toothsome, and Specificall to Cephalicall
Distempers than any of these following Methodicall Dishes, Diambra Diamosc.
amar. Diacastor. Diapaeonias. Theria^. d^^tes. Pleres archont. Op^yra Conf.
Anacard. Hygija Graec. Diaolibar. Aurea Alex. Mithridat. Dianthos Theriaca, etc.


No, I presume all sorts of delicate and nice tempers will rather honor our
Hermeticall Feast: especially those curious Females whose very Stomachs are
Complementall, in so much that they will not take a grain of Physic, under a
Pound of Ceremonies. Nor can I blame them! For whose Disease has once invited
them to Galens Table, they shall find that the Nauseous variety of Syrups,
Potions, Boles Pills* Apozemes, Emulsions, Powders, Electuaries, Lozenges,
Eclygmes, with a world of such like Kitchin-stuff, shall give his Stomach so
complete a Surfit, that at a second invitation, they will rather (dispensing
with good manners) appeal thrice to the Judgment of the Nose, before they will
once ask the Opinion of the Palate.

This if any man deny, I refer him to the infallible experience of his next
Malady; o^ to the Volums of Hippoc. Galen, Avi^en* Rhasis, Aretaeus, Aetius,
etc. Whose practice our Methodists now wholly imitate. Read those, and you
shall find most bitter Examples of all that I have mentioned. And whose belief
in this point, cannot be overcome but by Instances* let them taste a little of
this so much admired Antipilepticall Antidote of Aetius,. Castorei. Helleb.
nig. Sca^mon. an ij. Opopanac. Cumini Thebaic. Centaurii, Nitri, Sulphuris
vivi, Abrotani, Ammoniaci, Thymiamatis Sem. Rutae Sylvest. Absynt. an. j.


Contusa and cribrata, excipe aqua and efforma pillulas fabae Aegyptiae
magnitudine, and unam quotidie praebe, cum Aceti mulsi Cyathis quatuor.

Oh sweet Antidote! me thinks I see the Disease flying from it in the very
preparation. Gentlemen, one such a Dish as this might make you all leave my
Table, and run to the Cooks Shops.

Here therefore you shall see the difference between a good Cook and a bad.

For my part, had I Appetitus Caninus, or that ravening (...), I should not
move a Tooth at such Ogliopodridoes.

I remember, about my second Clymacterical year I had a Quartan Fever* and
requiring assistance of a good Old and reverend Dogmatist! for my Cure, he
prescribed me a Water to drink; the which has put me into an (...) ever since.

Take heed Sirs, how you mix such Waters with your Wine: for I can assure you,
you may grow mad upon it.

From Galens Cephalicall Sallads, I have made many Dishes, which I desire no
man to commend until he have tasted.

Pray therefore fall to this Dish of Extracts.

A Cephalicall Extract.
. Nuc. Mosch. Caryophyl. Cinamom. Cardamom. Calam. arom. Succini Maceris an.
ss. Sem. Anisi Sem. Faenicul. Sem. Coriand. praep. Sem. Sileris mont. Sem.
Paeoniae an. j. Flor. Betonicae Flor. Salviae Flor. Rosmar. Flor. Herb. paral.
Flor. Euphrag. Flor. Lil. conoal. Flor. Paeoniae Flor. Tilia arboris Flor.
Lavend. Flor. Staech. Arab. an. P.j. Folior. Majoranae Folior. Melissae Folior.
Lauri Folior. Nepitae Folior. Calamint. Folior. Serpilli Folior. Ocimi, an. M.
j. Rad. Paeoniae Rad. Acori Rad. Galangae Rad. Caryophyllatae, Rad. Ireos ana.
ij. Bac. Iunip. Bac. Lauri an. ij.ss. Lig. Aloes Lig. Sassafras Lig. Guaiacini
Lig. Visc. querc. Lig. Coryli Buxi an. j.ss.
Let the Herbs be bruised, the Woods rasp'd the Seeds, Aromaticks, roots and
berries grossly beaten. Put all into a large Matracio of Glass, and cover them
4. or 5. fingers deep with Spir. of Wine animated with the Spirits of Sage and
Juniper Berries. Set them in Balneo to Ferment six or 8. Days. Then separate
the Tincture from the Faeces per inclinationem. To the remaining Faeces power
half as much as aforesaid of the S. of W. animated with the S of Annise, and
Cinnamon. Set them again in Digestion other six Days; which finished, and your
Matracium cold, separate the Tincture from the Faeces. Adjoyn these Tinctures,
and by a gentle heat in Balneo vaporoso first separate the Spirits, then put
your Alembick in Balneo bulliente and distill the Phlegma until your Tincture
coagulat into an Extract. To every ij. of which Extract add, Magister. perlar.
Magist. Coral. an. j. Tinct. Confect. Alcher. ij. Essentiae. gut. xx. Magister.
Cran. hum. Salis cran. hum. an. j. Essent. nuc. mosch. Essent. Cinam. an. g. x.
Spir. (...). gut. vj.


Mix all according to art in the consistence of an Extract. Dosis. ss. vel.j.

The Spirits of this Extract. have cochl. ss. vel cochl. j. to their Dose.

This Extract does miraculously corroborate the Brain, and both Preserves and
Cures you of all Cepbalicall diseases, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsyes,
Vertigines, Hemicranies, Sopors, Torpors, Lethargyes, etc. It fortifyeth the
Memory, acuates the sight, extenuates and dissipates cold, gross, viscous and
Tartareous humors of the Brain, which cause noise and pain in the Ears, Deafnes
and the like.

For a Preservative against all cold distempers of the Head, the first Extract
without the mixture of those, other Essences may excuse such as are not in our
Spagiricall Cooks Books.

Those which will not feed on that Dish, let them satisfy Nature with this
Elixir: though somewhat inferior to the first Extract which is (...).

Elixir Cephalic.
. Nuc. Mosch. j.ss. Maceris Caryophyll. Cinamom. an. ss. Galano. Calam. arom.
an. j. Euphrasiae. Flor. Lavend. Rosmarin. Herb. paral. an. Mj. Melissae Meant.
Romans Card. Ben. an. Mj.ss.
By the example of the former you shall extract the Tincture with Spir. of Wine
or ordinary Cinnamon water. Then separate the Elixir from his Tincture, and
proceed as before. The Coagulated Extract having.j. to his Dose. The Elixir
half a whole Sponfull in the morning: the which resists all cold and moist
distempers of the Brain: saves a bad Memory the expense of Table-books: and in
one half year (if generally used) it would make our Glasses Cheap by running the
Trade of Spectacles.

This likewise is a Capital enemy to Tale-carryers: for it makes the Sense of
hearing so exquisite, that their Employment would become unnecessary.

Here Variety calls you to another Dish.

. Zinzib. Santal. rub. Caryoph. an. ss. Cinamom. ij. Nuc. Mosch. Maceris
Piperis. Galangae Cubebae Cardamomi Anisi Sem. Faenic. Coriand. praep. an. ss.
Aromat. rosat. Spec. Diambrae Dianthos an. ij. Majoran. Flor. Ocini Lavend. an.
P.j. Ros. rub. M.j.
With lb ij. of the best Sack, and lb.ss. of the S. of W. with viij. of
Rose Water animated with the Essence of Musk proceed as in the other Elixir.
The virtues are the same with the former, but somewhat more efficacious.

He that thinks these Elixars and Extracts will be too hot for him, let him
play the good Fellow and fall to our Cock-broth which here waits for the
Innovation of his Spoon.

. An old fat Cock or Capon, being exenterated, cut him in pieces, and then put
him into a large Glass Phialum adding, Santal. Citrin. Lig. Aloes Caryophyl.
Nuc. Moschat. Cinnamon. Maceris an. j. Galangae Cort. Citri. Zedoariae Croci
orient. an. ss. Flor. Rosmarin. Flor. Salviae Flor. Betonic. Flor. Lavend.
Flor. Borag. Flor. Bugloss Flor. Ros. rub. an. P.j. Sal. corallor. j. Granor.
Kerm. iij. Vini Canarien. lb iij. Sacchar. albis. lb.ss.


Set all well stoped, 8. or ten Days in Balneo fervido. Then bring your Cock
to the Press and there execute him: which done distill all in Alembico vitreo:
Dosis j. 2. or iij. sponfulls.

This Restorative I recommend to Students, whose Cephalic Treasure is
exhausted, by their Prodigal exercise of the Brain, as most Specificall.

I have taken notice of some here who are so bad sighted that they cannot find
the narrow passage of their Mouths. Others again before they can draw their
Eyes out of their Pockets, lose many a choice bit which they gaped for. These
things must be better looked into: otherwise we shall make but a blind
reckoning of it. That I may not be troubled with blind Guest therefore, I will
bring you to to your Diet, and prescrib you this Opthalmick water: and this is
for such as prefer their ease, before their Eyes: who rather than suffer a
little smart, will sooner be at the charge of some well Tutored Mungrell, to
follow his Dogged Humor.

. Euphrag. Chelidon. an. M.ij. Card. Ben. Betonec. an. M.j. Rutae P.j. Salviae
Fenic. an. M.j. Enul. camp. Rad. Valerian. an. j. Faenic. Sem. Anisi Coriand.
praep. Siler. mont. an. ss. Bac. Iunip. j. Ros. alb. Flor. Rosmarin. Calondul.
Lavend. Staeched. an. P.j. Nuc. Mosch. Zinzib. Cardamom. Macropip. Calam. arom.
Cinamum. an. j.
Infuse all in lb. iiij. of the Spir. of Wine animated with the Spirits of
Sage, for the space of four Days in Balneo: from whence according to art, you
shall extract the Spirits and Tincture from the Faeces, by Calcination
Solution, Filtration, and coagulation; you shall resuscitate the Soul of those
Vegetables, with which you are to Animate the Spirits, and Phlegma. Which
Phlegma dissolving therein (...) li, with a little crocus metallorum, makes an
excellent external Opthalmick water. The Spirits are to be inhibited the
quantity of a Spoonful, or but half. The coagulated Tincture ss. vel j.ss.

Who will pry far into other men's matters, though he smart for it, let him use
this External Opthalmicall Water.

. Suc. Chelidon. Euphrag. an. lb.ss. Lact. Caprin. lb. j. Zinzib. Maceris an.
j. Aloes ss. Vitriol. alb. iij.
Give all four Days Infusion and then distill them in Balneo. To this
distilled water, take little pieces of Tutia, heat them red hot in a new Iron
spoon, and extinguish them in this water, with nine Repetitions, leaving your
Tutia at the last extinction in the water, and so reserve it for your use.

A blind man may see the Virtues of this water, a drop thereof being often put
into his Eyes. It cures all Opthalmies, Gumms, salt Tears, Pearls, etc.

In your first Stomaticall Course, I told you of a new Hermeticall method in
curing Diseases (which I have often practiced on Infants and extreme feeble
Patients) only by external remedies, without any Internal praesidio: Whereby
I will undertake, and maintain, that any Disease, either Acute* Chronical, or
Astralis, (where no Malignity praedominates) may be perfectly, and with far
less expense to Nature eradicated. And that all exterior affects, as Ulcers,
Wounds, etc. may be brought to an exact sanation without any local
application, but merely by a Magneticall Sympathy.

This Opinion I know will be better than a Gig to our modern Methodists to
provoke Laughter: But let them beware, in their Laughter they revive not the
Example of Z^uxis that famous Painter, who imitating the Deformity of an Old
Tripefac'd Beldam, whose arched Chin supported the fall of her Nose, and the
want of teeth gave her Tongue Liberty to drown her mumping Eloquence with
dribling Oratory; every Eye likewise being so retired, that their Gravity
eclypsed all suspect of Lightness. When he had finished this Masterpiece, and
wrought it so near to the Life, that Art had almost lost her Interest in it; he
was so overcome with the extravagancy of his Pensills perfection, that bursting
into a violent Laughter, he let out his soul to animate his Pourtraict.

Thus perchance the Extravagancy of our Art mixed with perfection, may draw some
of them to a Violent Laughter: But I fear twill be Sardinian.

Faith if they laugh! I must do as Fools do, and laugh for Company: Yet with a
more hearty laughter, as was of that of Chrysippus, when he saw an Ass forsake
sweet Grass and fall to Thistles. Apply who will.

Here (Purpose bringing me upon it) to make this new Art more Speculative, and
my Opinion more apparent, I will give you an Ocular Instance.

In all Opthalmies where a Plethora does indicate evacuation, we have an
Hermeticall Opthalmick water whereof three drops put into the Eye has these
three Properties.

First per (...) it causes a Universal Revulsion of the humor peccant, which
flows to the part affected. Secondly by a repulsion it resists the flux of
humors. Lastly, per (...) it makes an insensible discussion of those humors
already compacted and coagulated in the Eye.

Now they will not only laugh, but conclude I am Mad; to say that the dropping
water in the Eyes can purge per (...).

If this seem so strange to them, perchance I may shortly present them with a
Monster (yet no (...)) whose smell only shall excite Intestin^ll evacuations.

To show that I am not in choler, therefore, with Methodicall Obstinacy, which
Jeeres at Truth, to blind their Ignorance; ^ will drink to them in a Cup of
our Hermeticall Claret.

. Caryoph. Nuc. Mosch. M^ceris an. j.ss. Zinzib. Cardamom. an. ss. Coriand.
praep. Anisi Faenicul. an. iij. Diptamni Zedoariae rad Angel. an. ij. Flor.
Rosmarin. Bugloss. an. P.ij. Tabel. arom. ros. j. Sacchar. alb. lb. j.
All grossly beaten, put them into a glass vessel with lbiiij. or five of the
best Wine of Candia, or good Canary; set them the space of two or three days
in Balneo tepido. Then pass it two or three times through a Hippocras Bag.
Which done, mix therewith of the Spirits of Roses essentiated with Musk and
Amber; then put it up into Vessels for your use. One or two spoonfulls taken
of this in a morning, corroborates all the Animal, Vital, and Natural
Faculties.

Hence it conduces to all Cephalicall affects: as also to all Cardialgiae,
Lipothimiae, Sincopi, etc. It Is excellent in all weakness Crudityes, and
ventosities of the Stomach. It corroborates the Liver and Spleen and cures all
Cachexies, Hypochondriacall Melanchollies, and Hystericall Passions. It
preserves from the Pestilence, Worms, and all sorts of putrifactions.

I must not here omit the recreating of your Senses by some external perfumes:
accept therefore of these Pomanders.

. Styrac. calam. Landan. an. j.ss. Benzoes j. Garyoph. Macis Lig. Aloes Flor.
Lavend. an..ss. Moschi Ambrae an. g. iiij. Gum. Tragac. in aq. Ros. dissolut.
q.s. Terebint. parum.
In a hot Mortar make them up into a Pomander, according to art.

If that please not, make use of this. Ladani ij. Styrac. call. j.ss. Benzoes
Thuris Succin. alb. Lig. Aloes Ros. rub. Lig. Cypres. Cinamom. Garyophil.
an..ij. Ambrae Moschi an. g.v.


With Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Spir. of Roses, q.s. make them up into small
Trochisks; one of which cast upon the Coals fills your Chamber with a grateful
Odor.

Or this,. Thuris Lig. Aloes Styr. Call. an. ss. Styr. liq. vj. Laudan. j.ss.
Ambrae Moschi an. g. vij. Carbonum Tiliae, vel Salicis j. Tragacant. ss.


Your Gum dissolved in Spirit of Roses with a little S. of W. make them up into
little Roles like small Candles.

Or use this Water.

. Aq. Rosar. lb iij. Vin. malvat. lb.ss. Flor. Lavend. Spicae an. ij. Cort.
Citri ss. Rad. Ireos ij. Cinamom Nuc. Mosch. Styr. calam. an. ss.
After ten Days infusion, distill them, putting in the Nose of your Alembick,
Musk and Amber an. j. This water you may mix with common Water for your Hands
or face; Or put some of it in a perfuming pot, the Vapor whereof will recreate
your Senses with a delightful Aer.

If none of those perfumes please you, I must call for my Hermeticall Cabinet,
where I think to find a Balsam shall please you all in despite of your Noses.

. Butyr. Gelsom. ss. Essent. flor. Citri. Essent. Cort. Citri. Ess. Cinamom.
Ol. Nuc. Mosch. Essent. Rosar. an..ss. Flor. Benzoin..j. Essent. Moschi Essent.
Ambrae Essent. Zibettae an..ss.
These in some small mortar, sine calore you shall mix well together: and then
reserve it in some silver box to your use.

With this you may rub your Gloves, Handkerchief, or any thing else about you.
When the Barber elevates your Mustachoes, this will be of singular use, making
your Whiskers stand up most sweetly. In time of Pestilence it will be very
serviceable, and where it lays hold it will a long time stick to your Coat.

Here since I have taken you by the Nose, I must hold you a little longer: for
I have a Secret to reveal to you, but it will trouble your Brains, and
therefore I doubt you will take it in snuff. Yet as it concerns the Health both
of your Soul and Body, I am bound in conscience to reveal it: make good use of
it therefore for my sake, and i will promise you every one shall pray for you.

Pulvis sternutatorius.
. Sem. nigel. Helleb. alb. an..j. Majoranae. Rosmarin. Salviae an. ss. Moschi
g. iij. Fiat pulvis. s.a.
These and such like neesing powders are never to be used but fasting: for you
know, fasting and praying go always together.

This following is safer and better: but you will be the less praid for,.
Pyrethri.ss. Helleb. nig. j. Nasturt. ss. Fiat pulvis.


Tie it in a piece of fine Cloth, and steep it in Rose water, and by smelling
to it, it gently provokes sternutation.

Here I have another Dish for some body which perchance little dreams of it,.
Quatuor sem. frig. maj. an. ij. Sem. Papav. alb. lb.ss. Lactucae iiij.
Hyoschyam. ij. Flor. Nymph. Violarum. Rosar. rub. Papav. rhead. an. p.iiij.
Flor. Sambuci. Su^mitat. Rutae an. P.ij. Macis Nuc. Moschat. Benzoini an. vj.


All grossly beaten infuse them four days in Aqua rosar. Lactucae Nenupharis
Papav. rheadis an. lb. ij.


Then strein it with a strong expression, to which you shall add Requies Nich.
ss. Croci orient. Mumiae an. iij. Camphorae Castorei. an. j.


Being well mixed, distill them according to Art. The Dose is ij. at your wonted
hour of rest. This spoils all your Watches: Silenceth your Clocks, and makes
you lose more time then you think of: The best property it has, is, it makes a
man forget all wrongs.

All that is bad in it is this, that who ever takes of it he will be no more
good for any thing a long time after.

This is far safer and of better effect than any of the Vulgar Narcoticks, and
it emulates our Hermeticall Laudanum, mitigating all Internal dolours,
Inflammations, Inquietudi^i, etc.

Gentlemen, I did let your Noses go a little too soon: here is a bloody Action
put in against them, which may cost some of you your Lives. I should be very
sorry to see any of my Guest throw away themselves by their own weakness.
Believe me it is to be pittyed, and I would spend part of my best Blood to save
them.

Whenever therefore Prodigious drops of Blood shall fall from the upper
Region of the Microcosme, knock at our Hermeticall Cabinets Door: for there you
shall find a Sympaticall Powder, which increases both in Quantity and Quality
every time you make use of it: One Dragm of which is sufficient for an Army.
It Is to be preserved in some little box in your Pocket, and when your Nose
bleeds let but a drop or two fall on this Powder: then put up the Box presently
from the Aer, and you shall find your Blood stop miraculously. And thus it
Cures all Fluxes of Blood either of Man or Woman without any other helps. And
this I have here Inserted, to add a Nerve to the Truth of our former Opinion.

Here when I call to mind the Malice of Ignorance, I could play the
Montinbanco and draw Teeth. But from whom? not from my Guess! but from the
Jaws of those (...) whose Canine and rabid Envy like that of Timonus the
Athenian Man-hater ( quod nihil ingratius animo concipiat quam erga Homines
benevolum ac beneficum Deum se habere, eosque prospere ac feliciter prospiciat
degere) runs snarling and biting at every Man. Nay Nature her self cannot pass
them! But because she is (...), and favors Man with the use of her Secrets,
they hourly labor to discredit her, and ruin her Reputation with their
Malignant Calumnies. But she is so well armed with her Panacaeae, and Truths
Arcani, that in vain with Aesops Dog they do but bark at the Moon.

While I was Student in Padoua, upon many particular occasions, I have often
tasted of that bitter Galenicall Envy against Hermeticall discipline. Amongst
which this was one.

Walking one day in the Garden of Simples, with one of the Professors of that
Academy in Physic: (and none of the Simplest neither) we gathered our
Discourse out of our Mothers Aperne: where I by chance taking up the Herb
Heliotropium (whose name discovers his Solar Sympathy) it gave me occasion to
sublimate the Terrestriety of our Discourse into Celestial Influences, where
rising from the bare and Elementary Virtues of Herbs an other Vegetables* we
flew up at last unto their Occult Qualities: where I made sure account to have
adorned the naked Wings of my Quaesiti, with the choicest Feathers of this Old
Asclepians Answers.

I entered him upon the Signatures of Vegetables and Mineralls, telling him how
many miraculous Cures I had seen from Sympatical Remedies, to the great
Amazement of the Ignorant, and to the greater Elogie of Hermetick, whose
enucleating Curiosity had thus stole into Natures most secret Mysteries.

The good Man was so suddenly choleric to hear me attribute any Truth or
belief to Sympaticall Physic, that he had no leisure to answer me with
Patience; but, calling me Paracelsian, he began very Galenically to rail in
Method against our Hermetick Discipline: telling me that if I had ever read
Galen or Hippocrates, I should Impart little Honor to any of our Chymiatri, or
Impyricall Charletaines, who contemning rational Method, apply themselves
wholly to Venomous Mineralls, Magic Spells, and Diabolical Characters.

Our Art, in that University being prohibited! I durst not cure those broken
Heads with our Balsamicall Reasons, which he so desperately wounded with the
blunt Beetle of Ignorance.

But letting him run on his Heat; his over angry Tongue had so bastonadoed his
teeth, that at last they Silenced him with a vendicative Dolor. Nature I think
visiting his Ignorance on purpose to show him the experience of her Sympaticall
Secrets.

Here like the Samaritan I took out a little Violl from the Pharmacopaea of my
Pocket, and profer'd to lend him ease. Imagine with what scorn he contemned my
younger Practice: but bidding me follow him to the Apothecaries, I should see
he was not destitute of Remedies far better than any of my Impyricall
Fopperies. There he made a mixture of Theriaca with a grain or two of Opium,
with which he filled the hollow Vault of his ruined Tooth. This by the
narcoticall Sulphur of the Opium, stupefied the Nerve, and so for a while
mocked his martyred Sense with a seeming Ease: which brought him presently into
the Vanity of his Secret Encomium, asking me how long I would undertake to dig
before I found a Mineral so rarely qualified. I laughing asked how long it
might be before he expected the return of his Currier: at which very Instant,
his Opiate was now overcome; and his Dolor answered him in a Duplicate.

Once more I abused him with Courtesy, and desired him to make use of my
Sympaticall Unguent: praying him but to draw blood from his aching Tooth with
his tooth-picker, and make a Resignation of the stick to me; I would return him
an Acquittance of his Dolor, without any local application.

My Opportunity at last won his Obedience: and his Toothpick was no sooner
buried in my Sympaticall Unguent, but a sudden ease contradicted his
Expectation. Who, like a Crocodyle, when I had picked the dolor out of his
Teeth, he was like to have swallowed me up with his malicious Oratory: telling
me that this Cure was Diabolical, answerable to our Hermetick Doctrine; and
advised me not to make farther use of it, but to content my Practice with
rational Galenicall Ingredients.

I must confess it angered me to hear a Philosopher so lost in Obstinacy, who
blushed not to repay the Use of Natures Secrets, with Ingratitude. His
Ignorance gave my Teeth such an (...), that I could never since masticate a
Galenicall Sallad.

Gentlemen, I hope you are more rational, and better natured: and when a Tooth
pains you, will rather make use of our Sympaticall Unguent, than draw it out.

In this my Cephalicall Course, twenty to one but some old Lady will be looking
for a Dish to renovate Natures defaced Masterpeece with some Artificial
Shadow: Or to illuminate her Microcosmical Map with the superficial Beauty of
our Hermeticall Tinctures.

To say the Truth, I had prepared many Dishes for this effect: but my fear was
lest some of our younger Beauties (whose Perfection is so complete that Nature
her self has many years since confessed she cannot add unto it) would* for
want of more substantial Pastimes, fall a dappling with our Spagiricall
Accidents: and like ambitious Painters, which never thinking their Retraits
finished, with too much Curiosity spoil the whole Piece. Indeed I should be
heartily sorry to see a good Face marred for want of a Play-fellow.

To such pregmaticall Fancies therefore I will shortly (God willing) make a
Present, wherein they shall find such variety of intertainment, that I doubt
not but many a Fair Face will thank me for it.

In the mean Time I wish that their busy Heads may nor abuse the Innocence of
their Beauty, cheating themselves of Natures Treasure under a Color of fair
dealing.

The desire therefore which I have to see such Beauties flourish in their
Meridian, has made me lose many a nights sleep in Contemplation, before I
could attain to their true external Prophylactick. I sent the Ambassadors of
my Fancy through every part of the World for Vegetables, Mineralls,
Semimineralls, Fukes, Belletti, Smegmatick Secrets, Unctions, Pomadoes, Waters,
any thing that had or might be practiced in that nature.

Faith I found all to be but Curtains to a good Picture, which only kept the
Dust from it, but Eclypsed the Glory of it.

Yet I could not rest thus satisfied, but persuaded my self that Nature had
given all things their Preservatives. In which contemplation I called to mind
how that Celestial Beauty, the Sun, used no other Art but fair Water, Morning
and Evening washing his bright Rays in that Fountain the Sea.

This then as Natures best Secret for maintaining a lively, ruddy* clear, and
Snowy skin, I freely impart to all Fair Faces: wishing them to make some clear
fountain their Painter, and to dabble there as long as they please: remembering
that they make not that, their Glass of Philautia; and so Sacrifice their good
Faces to Narcissus.

THE THIRD COURSE HEPATICALL.
SEe what a merry Gossip Health is! she is always exciting us to Mirth. I have
already wandered through two Parts of ^he World with her: in which Pilgrimage my
^ides are so larded with the Fat operation of ^er good Diet, mixed with the
extravagancies of ^er ridiculous Mirth, that with a Months hard ^odging I might
very well supply the defect ^f a Christmas Brawner. And now she has ^ut me in
this good plight, I must not leave ^er neither. If I but speak of parting, she
^enies me my Billeto di Sanita. Then she ^ugs me, kisseth me, bids me rowse up
my ^pirits, laugh, sing, dance, and let care go a ^atter-wauling. She swears
that she is in love with my good Diet* and doteth on the Temperance of my
Youth: and tells me that I shall do very ill to leave her, that have so often
protested that I could not live well without her.

Faith I felt all this to be true! And though I knew her to be a noted
Strumpet^ one that would sell herself to any man for a little good Diet.
Besides how Inconstant she was drawing every Man's Eyes upon her to corrupt her;
and letting every Boy lie with her. Again* accustomed to feed on the best and
would not be brought out of her good Diet; but if she misliked her feeding,
leave a man. Yet considering that she was of good Blood, honest Parentage,
always well disposed, and of good breeding; Full of Mirth, a^^fable, not
subject to any Ill Humors Fair, and of a pure Complexion. Her virtues being
equivalent with her vices; I fell so far in Love with her, that I made her Lady
of my Desires and in short time she won so far upon me, that she governed me,
and withal made me so fond of her, that if I were absent but a Minute from her
me thought I was Sick. In fine* let her be in what Humor she would, I was her
Morpheus, and Imitated: if she slep'd so did I. If she were distempered* So was
I^ And being thus lost in the Labyrinth of Love: let her wander where she
please I have vowed to follow, humor her, and beat her charges.

Thus captivated there did I
Fall in the Veins of Poesy.
The Magic of my Mistress Eyes
Made me no more apologize:
But at a look, where ere she went,
Follow I must, or lose Content.
Here toth' Hepatick land she would go,
Where Delicacies overflow:
And there she promised I should see
Mars in a Box of Quidini.
Next Venus Court, Whereas I might
In time with Cupid lose my Sight.
But ear these Wonders I could see
I first an Israelite must be,
And pass the mercy of a Flood
Which some baptize the Sea of Blood.
There I was Sea-sick and would fain
With Healths permission open a Vein:
No she would no such bloody Trick,
Sheed first for company be sick;
Empty my stomach, and she said
The Red-Seas fury would be laid.
After those Waves had played their sport, Vena. Porta.

At last they brought us to a Port
Whose milky Torrent drove us in
To Loves restoring Magazin.
Here sweet Health laughs, gives me a buss,
And bids me hug my Genius;
Then shows where Venus hid her Treasure,
Some for Health and some for Pleasure,
Next her Temple (whereat she bows)
Then her Altar, then her Vows,
(Upon which Altar, a Chalice stood
Brim full of desperate Lovers Blood)
Bids me be modest, shut mine Eyes,
Lest I were called to Sacrifice.
And here she showed that fatal Well
Wherein she said Narcissus fell.
Hence in all haste my Love departs
And ushers out the Queen of Hearts,
Whose Deity was magnified
By a rich Train of Courtly Pride.
Her Whiteboy Cupid flew before
To ^orce all strangers to adore
His Mothers beauty; For which intent
His Bow was always ready bent.
Next came Intemp^rance with a Cup
Of ruddy Nectar: Drinks it up,
And then grows wanton: At me she ran
And kissed me twice. Here Health began
To swell look big, and puffing to me said,
I was to blame to kiss Loves Chambermaid.
I prayed my Mistress not to take it ill:
Since she kissed me, 'twas manners to stand still.
In this Distemper Venus came,
Who calls my Mistress by her name,
And asked where she that Youngster had
Which made her Maid Intemp'rance mad.
Quoth Health, a stranger it is, would be
A Pupil in your Nursery.
Venus straight swore, he is Patron here,
Such Guest we have not every year:
My Family is so decai'd
That I am forced to woe my Maid
Intemperance, to bring me In
Some able Sparks a Gossiping.
Here Venus kissed me, and protests
For Health sake she would obey my heasts,
Her Mars from hence as Old she would quite deny,
I was chief Member of her Family.
She bids Intemp'rance to retire,
And charge her Cooks to lay toth' Fire
Their Egge-pyes, Marrows, armed Fishes,
What they thought restoring Dishes.
To see her dining Chamber were
Perfumed against Guest entered there,
And to express our Welcome more,
Bad her strew Rushes at the Door.
Then to her Palace she invites
The fury of our Appetites.
Here health corrupted was she said
By a strong Phylter from Loves Maid,
And therefore followed, gins to dance,
And kisses sweet Intemperance.
Entering, stood Hercules at the Door
As Portar, and a Lambs skin wore.
No sooner in, but Venus she
Kissed me again to welcome me.
First by the Kitchen Door we past,
Where I a sheepish eye did cast
Upon the Cooks (fair Ladies all)
So busy at the Funeral
Of hot Potatoes, young Cock Sparrows,
Whose graves they dig'd in Pyes of Marrow.
That Men interred by such a strong refection
Must needs expect a speedy resurrection.
Some which delighted not in Pyes
Were knuckle deep in Quidinyes.
There Geladini, Consummadi,
Cockbroth, Caudles, Pineoladi,
Eggs and Amber, Maqueroni
Avec Gallorum Coglioni
Made those sweet Laydes sweat and labor so
That every Juncture seemed in Balneo.
Health whispered here into mine Ear,
And said those meats I must forbear,
Lest that Temptation should at length
Force me to go beyond my strength.
Hence passing up to Loves sweet Chamber,
Where every step was Musk, and Amber,
Venus to vary her sweet blisses,
Numbered our steps with sugared kisses,
And when we entered at the Door
She multiplied a thousand more.
There a round Table spread I found
With Diaper hanging to the ground,
Where the first Course did ready lie
Epecting Hungers Battery.
Venus uncovered all her Dishes,
Better cheer for me she wishes,
Bids me fall to: then guides my hand
Into a Dish of Marzapan.
My Appetite being up, I fed
Like one new risen from the dead.
And had't not been for Eggs and Ling
I had endangered surfeiting.
Venus there saw I was distasted,
Whispers to Cupid; who straight hasted,
Brings, sweet waters in a Dish
For us to wash after our Fish.
After a Cup or two of Wine,
A kiss, a smile, in little Time
The second Course here entered in.
I fed as I had famished been.
My hunger was so sharply set
I laid about me till I sweat.
Venus so taken was at this
My mouth she often stopped with a kiss.
Swearing I was a well-come guest,
Whose hunger did commend her Feast.
Health was content that I should here
Participate of Venus Cheer,
Until she saw a third Course come,
Then she would have had me left the room.
M' Herculean Pillar there she said that I
Must straight put up, and non plus ultra cry.
How to please both I could not tell,
Venus I loved, and Health as well.
If I neglected what was there
Love thought I scorned such homely fare;
If I exceeded 'twas a chance
But Health would scorn m'Intemperance.
Here I grew dull, and very sad.
Venus or drunk, or else half mad,
Claps in my spoon into a Pot
Of perfumed Gelly scalding hot,
And cried it was a restoring bit
For such as Diet Health with Wit.
I cursed a Pox upon her Gelly,
Wished spoon and Pot within her Belly,
Gave her knocks which made her ly
For half an hour in Ecstasy,
Flung down the Table, Split her Dishes,
Rent all her napkins, burned the Rushes,
Broke Cupids head, and called Health Whore,
Made her drink drunk and sleep inth'Dore:
Then up I went, called Bacchus in,
Where he and I afresh begin.
Mars hid himself within the Barrel,
Let out the Wine to make us quarrel*
Bacchus begins a double glass
Unto my Mistress Sanitas,
I swore I Would pledge it full as deep,
And make her drink it in her sleep.
Health in a Dream here stagring up
Made Venus rise: Then takes my Cup
And challenged Bacchus. Venus she
Filled Cupids Quiver* and challenged me
With a deep draught, a good yard long,
Of Bristow Milk, pleasant but strong,
Whose practice made her heave it in,
As though it had but a spoonful been.
Half spent before, I could not stand,
Against this Bachanalian,
I still gave back, and durst not venture,
Fearing I should not reach the Center.
Venus the slut begins to boast,
And ask if I would have a Toast.
Or if I Would have a Neats-tongue pie,
The which she said would make me dry,
To save my Credit (for I saw
A Woman's will would hear no law,
And though it were a Venial Sin,
Drunk or sober she would hav't in)
To it I went, and at first bout
I sucked but half the Quiver out.
She smiled and bad me try again.
I feared the breaking of a Vein.
Yet this I saw, that she was laid
And could not stand; Yet must be paid,
Swearing't should cost another fall
But she would see me take up all.
Mad Girl quoth I, then drink't I wool
Although it wear a Pulpit full.
Here Is to thy Mars. Were Vulcan up
We Would make his horn our second Cup.
And know that I am none of those
Which sleep when th'Glass is at their Nose
Oh how she hugged me for that word!
But lo comes Health armed with her sword
And vows if that we do not fly,
Mars would be at us by and by.
For she had spied in Bacchus Butt
A man lie armed from Head to Foot,
And asking Bacchus who it was there,
He trembling said God Mars I fear.
Tush let him come out of his Barrel
Quoth Venus! I Will maintain your quarrel
What do you tremble at his sight?
My Courtiers must expect to fight.
At this boy Bacchus staggers up,
And forced my Mistress the other Cup.
I flung a Bowl of Sack in's eyes,
And bad him learn to Temporize:
Here Bacchus flung me to the ground,
His Barrel broke, the hoops ran round,
God Mars awaked, and out he comes,
Where head against head excused for drums.
Health here was wounded; so was I.
Venus fell in a Lethargy,
The loss of blood made Mars retire.
Bacchus still cast new coals inth'fire.
A bloody Fray there had you seen,
If Somnus had not entered in,
Who did his heavy Club advance
And knocked us all into a Trance.
Sanitas was dreaming here
Of Bacchus Bowls and Venus cheer,
So whilst I slep'd, she stole away
Three hours before the break of Day.
Out of this trance when I awaked,
My brains they crow'd, my back that ak'd.
I felt for Health; looked under the bed,
Faith she was gone. There I halt dead
Called Cupid: told him I was dry,
Pray him to bring some Quidiny.
The Jacknapes Boy gave a blind look,
Bad me to's Mother, she was Cook.
I flung my slippers at his head
And weakly crawling out the Bed
I crope to Venus chamber Door
(...) to enter as before.
She thrust me back, and swore she would see
What arms I bare ear in I be.
I knew 'twas Death for any one to bring
Toth' Privy Chamber a Pocket Pistol In.
Therefore I durst not strive to enter
Lest that my firelock peradventer
Should take fire: But only asked if she
Knew where my Sanitas might be.
Alas quoth Venus corn you here
To seek for Health! since fifteen year
I never saw that sober lass
Your Diaetetick Sanitas,
Go home and fast with bread and water,
You Will see your Mistress will come after.
Did not I tell you Gentlemen what an Inconstant Baggage this Health was. She
was not only content to entice me to a Bawdy House and there leave me; but she
must rob me of my Poetry too. Well she shall not escape me thus. Rather than
lose her i will follow her in Prose: for in that disguise I may chance to recover
her, since the very name of a Poet makes her hide her self in the Buttery. I
know this is but a trick of hers to make me forsake Venus Court and follow her:
for I remember at her parting she seemed much distempered only at the sight of
Venus, wishing her as far as Naples.

Had she not spoke that in cold blood I should have had little reason to
believe her; since I ever found her Venus bosom friend, and always alluring
me to her Court. Nay I could never rest for her, until she had entered me
there: where for her sake I was content to do any thing, and yet the Peevish
slut would ever be hitting me in the teeth with my inconstancy; though she know
it was for her sake I first became dishonest.

I think few men would do so much for a Mistress as I have done for her. I was
content to lead my obedience into the race of her Method: where I always run
one Course, fed upon one dish, exercised but once a day, drunk but one sort of
drink, never flattered Appetite with more sawces than one, which was Hunger: and
yet this precise Girl would not be content. Let her dance over her monologies
with her lean sister Temperantia and she will. For my part if I but find her
again, I Will teach her another course of life: she shall be glad to dance after
my Pipe, or i will make her heart blood smart for it.

To go back again to Venus Court to seek her, I have no inclination in the
World: neither does hope give me any assurance of finding her there. Yet find
her I must that is Certain, or else all will not go well.

I am almost of Opinion that if I could but regulate my self according to the
custom of these Hepatick Inhabitants, and settle my self well here but one
forty days, and let health run out her course, that in the end she would come
sweating to me again. But I fear I shall not digest their hard Diet.

The other day in a hungry humor I was looking about in the Cooks shops here
for some choice bit: faith I could find nothing but dry livers, and a kind of
black burnd broth they made which was bis^cotto.

I asked the Cooks what they did with the rest of their better meat? they said
that I was come in a very ill hour, and that they had already sent all their
best provision to the Cardiacall Princes Court.

Yea thought I! here is no abode for me: i will none of your chewed meat. Hence
wandering up and down in this bloody land; I came at length into a passage so
narrow, that at every step I gal'd my Elboes. Vesica fellis.
The bitterness of the Passage, and the fury it put me into made my legs make
many a motion to begone out of it. As hasty as I was, I could go but slowly,
every lim being over-loaden with passion. If I had ^et my Mistress there, I had
beaten her out of all Reason.

I thought this had been the way to Venus Hospital, it made me sweat so: but
in over^oing a little more labor I found it was a ^lind passage to Mars his
Arsenall. Where I was no sooner entered, but I fell in choler with Ajax
Lieutenant of the Guard for stain^ng my Stockins*

Here I saw a great number of Fachini strongly laden with Vast Baskets on
their shoulders, hasting to a little bitter well, where ^ saw them open their
burdens, taking somewhat out of their Baskets, dipping of it in the water, and
presently retiring of it again. My Curiosity was upon thorns to understand the
Mystery of their exercise. So that drawing toward them and discovering their
Baskets to be full of Humane Tongues, I asked one of them what secret might be
enclosed in that bitter Ceremony.

Quoth he! the Women of the Hepatick ^and (being all sanguine and me^ry
Gossips) one day at a Public Feast in Venus Court were all so silenced by the
thundering Rodom^n^adoes of the Garrison Soldiers of Mars his Arsenall, that
their Tongues grew cold for want of Motion. Here they called a Counsel among
themselves, how they might arrive to this braving humor. A Virago start up, and
persuaded them that the best, and readiest way was to single out one of those
Soldiers from his Cameradi, and said she i will undertake with the smell only of
a Baston to make him confess where they stole our Female Treasure o^ Talking
and how they became so nimble Linguists. This was approved of by all, and
suddenly executed.

They made Venus call up one of those Garrison So^ldiers into her Chamber,
there they all set their tongues on a wheel, and run upon him with so violent a
Prologue that Thunder seemed still Music to it. The Soldier, accustomed to
such storms, answered their Thunder with such a rimbombo, that his Ecco's eat
up their Audience. Here my Virago takes him by the bigoteroes* and by virtue of
a bed-staf^ first char'd him to be more masculine, and let silence skin his
Tongue which over galld with his continual motion, and then give them leave to
talk to whom other arms were prohibited. Next quoth she I conjure thee by this
fearful Maedusa's head of thine (for he was a Spaniard) to reveal truly unto
us, where you with the rest of your Companions have learned this Womanish Art,
and verbal Bravery. My poor D^^ promises upon his knees, if they would omit
Violence he should discover how and where he was thus possessed. Venus her self
secured him that no hand should be guilty of injury, only let him disclose his
secret.

Why then quoth he, you must first know that our Court of Guard in Mars his
Arsenall, when Nature first practiced Chemistry, was her Laboratory. Mars being
troubled with too many white-liver'd Soldiers (such as durst never serve but
in some Garrison where there was never any likelihood of employment) one day
discoursing merrily with dame Nature concerning the Philosophers stone, he told
her that his curiosity led him not into those golden vanities; so that his
Soldiers were paid, heed never mo^l for other Treasure. But quoth he if I
thought your skill afforded any secret to arm a Coward with Valor, I should
gladly carry coals and be your Pupil.

In that, Quoth Nature you speak of Impossibilities* for those kind of men are
composed of a Metal so dull cold and Saturnine, that like Salamanders, they
resist and extinguish our actuating fires: so that I am ever fain to thrust
them into the World do baked.

Yet said she, this I can do; I will make you a Spagiricall water which shall
give Cowardice an External Tincture of Valor: into which let the dullest
Spirited Man in your Camps but dip his Tongue, and he shall seem another
M^gaera; and maintain in a Soldiers style that the Valor of Achilles, and the
labors of Hercules were but a game at Cudggells in Comparrison of those
Conquests, Siedges, Batteryes, Assaults, Skirmishes, Amboschadoes,
Pitch'd-Battells, Combats, Seafights, Duells, etc. Which the World can witness
his Arm to be the author of.

Now as I am a Soldier, quoth Mars, this Secret must not be lost. And though
in our Actions 'twill lend us but little succor; yet be it only to delight our
Colonels, and Commanders at a siege, when they want Pastime to call one of
these Rodomontadi into their Tents, and hear him batter Castles with his
Tongue, It will be very acceptable to me if you please to favor me with it.

Nature told him, very willingly, and withal desired his patience to stand by,
and see the Operation, which she promised him would be very delightful to him.

Then she first took of Tongues and galls of Bulls. Bears. Wolves. Dogs.
Magpies. Dawes. Parretts. Parrakitoes. Iayes. Cuckoes. Nightingales. an. n. j.


From Vegetables she took these Herbs Cynoglossum. Hippoglossum. Arnoglossum.
Buglossum. Ophioglossum an. M. j.


From Reptilia animalia she took of the tongues and tails of Vipers. Adders.
Snakes. Lizards an. number. j.


From Spagiricall Compositions she took of Aurum fulminans. Aqua fortis.
Gunpowder. an. lb. j.


From every great Bell she took a Clapper, from every Apothecaries great Mortar
she took a Pestell. These she mixed all with the former; and then luted them up
in great Bells, and so Calcined them in the Aetna.

The Ashes of which she dissolved in a water distilled from all the Violent
Torrents and after Filtrated it first through the leaves of Calepine (to make
her Operation the more verbal) then through twelve new Moons, thereby to
attract the essence of their Change and variable inconstancy.

Being well Filtrated, she distilled all through a Trumpet, and then separated
the Phlegma as unprofitable in this Work.

The Spirits which remained, she put into the Mouth of a Canon, closly luting
it Sigillo Hermetico, and then Circulated them twelve years in the Primum
mobile: where contrary to our Spagiricall Circulating fires, they became more
agile, mobile, and volatile. Those Spirits thus Circulated she mixed with a
Mouthfull of the Quintessence of every Erratick Star. Then she opened the
Graves of all new deceased Lawyers, Charlitani, Tripe-wives, Oyster-Wives, and
such like talkative people; cut out all their Tongues, and with the skins
thereof she made a great Bladder; which bladder she strongly luted with
Drum-heads; and then filled it up with Storms, Tempests Whirl-winds, Thunders,
Lightnings* etc. Those for their better Incorporation she set (twelve other
years) in a Ruff Sea in Fermentation. Which finished, she mixed these with the
former: and to be sure there should not remain the lest breath of Phlegma, she
rectified them every day thrice in a Balneo of Quicksilver twelve other years.

Lastly, to inrabiate the whole Elixir, and make it the more Canine, she cut a
vein under the Tongue of the Dog Star, drawing from thence a pound of the most
Choleric, adust, and malign blood; from which she Sublimated the Spirits, and
after mixed them with the foam of a mad Dog. Then incorporating all together,
she returned them into the former Bladder, Stitching it up only with the Nerves
of Socrates his Wife.

And thus she finished her Operation, and presented it to Mars; bad him put it
into any Spring, Well or Fountain, and it should suddenly contaminate the Water
with that talkative Virtue.

Mars presently (said the Soldier) put it into our Well here in the Court of
Guard in his Arsenall, and commanded the better part of his Soldiers once in
the year to dip their Tongues in this Water, whereby (quoth he) fair Ladies I
became so bitter a Linguist.

And said he* if this be the ground of your ^uarrell* I wish that all your
tongues were perboiled in that water that so you might never be taken Prisoners
by that dull Enemy si^ence.

Here, the Women had no patience to thank him; but turning him speedily out of
the Chamber (as having what they looked for) they presently began a new to
consult, how they might get their Tongues washed in this Well; knowing that it
was prohibited for any of their Sex to enter Mars his Arsenall.

Some of them (whose itching tongues could not admit of delay) longing to have
a lick at this Water, stole privately out of the Chamber, and home they ran; put
on their Husbands Breetches, and a way to Mars they went, took pay, and were
admitted into his Court of Guard.

The rest, concluded, that Venus, having a great Command over Mars, should
petitionate to him that all the Women's tongues (of the Hepatick land) might
once in the year be dipped into his Lexicon to make them Talkative. Mars for
Venus sake (being resolved likewise never to marry) gave them license; but upon
promise they would send their Tongues but once a year, and never to come
personally.

And thus, said the Fachin, once a year I and my Camaradi (we having purchased
the Monopoly) gain more upon this Day than our Familyes can consume all the
year following: not a Woman omitting the day appointed, to send their tongues,
with a double Fee; to have them the better washed.

This amazed me more than any thing I had hitherto seen in my Travells.

And indeed, the strangness of it had eat up my belief, had I not heard the
tongues which he had washed lie^* scolding in his Basket. Then I asked this
Fac^ino whether he had ever washed his Wives tongue yet? Oh quoth he, she could
never sleep until she had it: insomuch that I am glad to wash mine own tongue
twice for her once, and yet not able to silence her. Upon this I desired him to
give me a little bottle of that water to carry into my Country as a Rarity. By
no means quoth he, for it will make you run Mad and scold withal you meet. Why
then said I are not all your Women mad? Marry replied he so they are, more or
less, according to my descretion in washing them.

I began to thank Jove here, that this Well was so far from our Country: though
I did suspect that some of them had been licking here. The general love
therefore which I bare to that Sex, made me in pity, not able to see their
Tongues so infected; but drawing my Sword I beat away more than a hundred of
those Tongue-loaden Knaves, which were coming to this Well: (presuming that
some Wittall or other would put me in his prayers for it) and then knowing I
had committed an Error by drawing my sword in the Arsenall, out I ran all in
Choler, and as yellow as a Kites leg. I had not gone far from thence, but I met
my wandering Mistress Sanitas with a double Tertian on her back. She perceived
that I had been lately in Choler, which made her come shaking to me, and excuse
her long absence with trembling Apologies. I took her by the hand (which Fear
had benumbed with a sleepy chilness) and asked her why she trembled so? Oh quoth
she, the fear which I have that you will not keep me, turns me all into a
Gelly. So that the Organ pipe of your breath only makes me answer you in
quavers.

The poor Girl lent me such pitiful looks, that I had a feeling of her
misery: wherefore I presently eased her of the burden of her Song, and took a
Tertian on my Back, in place of a Knap-sack, and away we went to seek out some
charitable Hospital. Thus thinking speedily to depart out of the Torrid-Zone
of this Hepatick Land contra^y to expectation we found all the passages stopped,
by a great inundation of Waters: an affliction surely sent from Heaven to
punish those corrupt Livers. This made us lie at Anchor one Month the longer:
where I had much ado to keep life in my Mistress Sanitas, finding no provision
there that was Edible, all things being so unsavory with those brackish waters,
that what ever we put into our Mouths Nature thought time lost in masticating
them. Hence not only we, but all the inhabitants grew weak, some pale, some
greenish* others yellow, and black, all sickly, for want of our fomer good
nourishment.

It would have mollified a Heart of Adamant to have seen those matchless
beauties of this Clymate* young Lasses of fourteen years, ruddy and sanguine*
have their Virgin beauties Eclypsed by the green Mantle of Loves standing Pool.

Young married Wives whose tender Palates having been lately accustomed to feed
on fresh and dainty bits, now finding their Markets ill served, with dull and
sapless Sallads; their Beccarii full of drowned Calves whose flagging, and
flashy flesh, scarce sweet, their Dogs formerly would not have gaped at: not
able to subsist with this course diet, rather choose to feed upon green fruits,
and frutta nova, until at last their forbidden diet bring them into a Tympany.

Young lusty Batchelours here, which entered into Pension at other men's Tables,
never remembering this general inundation, but finding their diet altered,
their meat rank, stale, and of a fishly savor; they suspecting the Cause to be
their Hostesses desire of gain, forsake her Table straggle up and down, taking
here a snap, and there a snap, until at last many littles of what is bad,
corrupt them making them perfect Pythagorists and abhor all flesh ever after.

Gentlemen, if any of you be Travelers, and Curiosity lead you at any time to
visit the Hepatick Dominions, see first in the Map of my Travells whether you
can make any observations profitable for so dangerous, and desperate a Voyage*
Read my description of Venus Court, and see if her entertainment can allure you
out of your Country. And when you go, be sure to make Health your Mistirss, and
when you come to Venus table, let not that wanton Hostess intise you to
disorder. Or if she do* do not drink your Mistress drunk that she might not be
Jealous, and then play false under Nose. Have a special Care likewise that you
be not too familiar with that Lady Venus, for she is Mistress unto the Viceroy
Spiritus Naturalis, of those Hepatick Territoryes, who will play the Tyrant if
he take you napping: bringing you first on your knees to a public Confession,
and then delivering you into the Hands of the Tormentor, who puts you into a
little Hole like a Tub, and feeds you with nothing but dry musty Crufts, and
puddle water, the very smell whereof puts you into Symptomaticall sweats. There
he will smoke you like a Bacon hog: and for forty days you must expect twice a
day to be stewed in your own grease. Believe me every bone will have a feeling
of his Torments, and though at last he relieve you, yet you shall never be your
own man again.

If you encounter with Bacchus (as he is never from Venus Court) be sure that
your first Cup be a parting Cup. And for Mars come not near him, lest you grow
Choleric, and so be inflamed, to your great loss of Blood.

This Hepatick Land is so delicious, and bewitching, that few young men return
from hence without a Calenture.

Considering therefore how many strong and well-fleshed bodies are brought low
in the Torrid-Zone of this Hepatick land, I have altogether labored in this
third Course to feed you as Venus fed me, only with Restoratives, that you may
travel more cheerfully with me unto the Cardiacall Court.

But first that you may examine the honesty of our Splenditore, I shall desire
you here to over-see what Hepaticall Ingredients he has brought out of Galens
Market, before he deliver them to the Cook, and his Lardery* that so if the
Cook and he should afterward play false; you may find it in your Dishes.

Hepaticall Ingredients which Heat and Corroborate a cold weak Liver.
Agrimon. Absinth. Capill. Salvia. Cuscuta. Asarum. Schaenant. Spica. Agerat.
Faenicul. Apium. Asparag. Eupator. Avicen. Helenicum. Flos Tunicis. Vvae pas.
Pistachia. Sem. calida. Call. aromat. Cassia lig. Cinamom. Aromata omnia. Nucl.
Persic. Lig. Indic. Sassafras. Rad. Chinae. Sassaparill.
Such as Cool and strengthen a hot Liver.
Endivia. Cichoria. Scariota. Dens Leon. Portulac. Rosae. Violae. Nimphaea.
Acetosa. Fragaria. Sem. frig. Hordeum. Santal. Camphor. Pom. gran. Ribes.
Berberis. Melones. Cerasa. Acetum. Serum Capr.
Now that our liquid Restoratives may run down with a better relish, we will
first fall to our Biscuit.

And for this purpose our Cook here presents you with a French Biscuit, which
he has borrowed from a French Cook; and to make it the more Sympaticall with
your Diet, he gives it here another heat.

. Of the purest flower, lb.ss. Of the whitest Sugar, iiij. Cream of Pinioli.
Cream of Pistacks Cream of Almonds. an.j. Oil of Annise. an. g. x. Oil of
Cinnamon. an. g. x.
With four or five fresh Eggs beaten together in Almond milk made with
Rosewater, mix all together, s.a. Of which make your Biscuit in what shape you
please, and then recommend it to the Oven.

Next comes in play a Martial bread, Panis Martius, which the French Character
stamps into Maquaron; whose composition, is thus,

. Sweet Almonds blanched, lb j. beat them exquisitely in a mortar, moisten them
with Rosewater, then incorporate therewith of the best white Sugar lb j. Gum
Dragant dissolved in Rosewater, with three or four whites of Eggs, beat all to
a perfect mixture, and make your Maquarons, and dry them only with a temperate
heat.

These give a speedy nourishment, and are therefore necessary in all
Consumptions of the Liver and Lungs.

From Biscuit we will fall to our diet d^ink: presuming every man to wax dry
after a Crust.

That we may remember therefore our merry Days past, lets drink our own
Healths ^n this Hepaticall Cup: and if the last Man quarrel because there is no
body to pledge him; let him call his Mistress Sanitas in play, and then all will
go well.

The first Hepaticall Diet drink,
. Agrimon. Fol. Salviae. Cochlear. Eupator. Avic. an. M. j. Flor. Rosmarin.
Spicae. an. P. j. Sem. Faenic. Anis. an. ss. Rad. Asparag. Petrosel. Faenicul.
an. j. Cinamom. Zinzib. Calam. arom. an. iij. Sassafras. vj. Passularum. lb.ss.
All prepared according to art, and put up in a Canvass Bag, Cast it into a
little Barrel of White Wine, or new Wort. Then have you a diet drink both
Therapeutick and Prophylactick in all cold Distempers of the Liver, preserving
likewise every Part from Obstructions the Original of most Diseases.

The Second Hepat. Diet drink,
Rad. Chinae. Santalor. om. an. vj. Rad. Cichor. Endiv. Nymph. Liqu^rit. an. j.
Flor. Rosar. rub. Violar. Nymphae. an. P.j. Sem. Portulac. Lact. Papav. alb.
an. iij.
With these proceed as with the former, but taking small Wort, and you shall
find it a Singular Cooler after your Travells in the Hepatick Torrid Zone.

And who ever loves Coursing, and is at the charge of a Running Nag, he shall
find this his best watering.

The third Hepat. Diet drink.
Lig. Guaiac. Sassaparil. Sassafras. Rad. Chinae an. ij. Sem. Anisi. Faenic.
an. j. Rad. Glycyrrhys. Cichoriae. Endiviae. an. ss. Cinamom. Nuc. mosch.
Galangae. an. ij.
Enclose all in a Barrel of White wine, and ^^serve it to your use, which is
an Excellent ^^yer of all superfluous humidityes of this ^epatick soil;
corroborates and califies a ^^ld distempered Liver, Evacuates all malign
^apours per Diaphorisin, and restores it to his ^aturall temper. Therefore I
recommend it ^^all Philogynists.

Before you drink any more Healths give our Palate a little dry Gust, and taste
of these ^egall Pastes, which in all Consumptions, ex^^ustion of Spirits, lost
forces, bring you in ^^e Field again and make you Combatant.

The first Regal Paste.
Amygdal. dulc. decort. Nucleor. Pineor. Pistachior. an. iii.j. Sem. Cucum.
Cucurb. Melon. an. j.ss.
All beaten in a Mortar, irrigate them with Rosewater, then add Sacch. alb.
xij. Peni^^dii. ij. Gum. Arab. iij. Amyli. j. Fiat^ past. Regal. s.a. The which
is an excellent restoring cooler.

The Second Regal Paste.
Pulp. Capon. assi. Perdic. assatar. Carnium Testud. Cancror. fluviat. inVin.
alb. lot. Et in aq. hord. decoctar. an. iiij. Pinearum recent. mund. in aq.
rosar tepid. per 4. horas infusar. iij. 4. sem. frig. major. mund. Amygdal.
dulc. decort. an. ij. Penidiorum. j.ss.
All beat in a Marble Mortar; pass them through a Scive with Rosewater: to
which you shall add Sacchar. alb. in aq. rosar. dissolut. lb. j. Sacchar.
cand. ij. gum. Tragaeant. iij. Boil them all with a gentle fire unto a
convenient conglutination, which when it cools, you shall adorn with these
Jewels, Salis Perlar. Salis Coral. an. ij.


Then make it up into little Cakes of what form your Fancy falls into, and dry
them in a tepid Oven.

This for Restoring exceedes all, and is able to incarnate a (...) repairing
Nature so fully her losses, that she will run Mad to be gaming again.

The third Regal Past.
Rad. Satyr. in jure Capon. ebullit. Et postea cum aq. ros. cribat. iiij.
Amygdal. dulc. decortic. Pistach. mund. Pinear. mund. an. iij. Pulp. rad.
fring. per crib. passat. Pulp. rad. Pastinac. cribr. an. ij. Farin. Cicerum.
ij.ss. Scinci marini. ss. Galangae. Zinzib. condit. an. iij. Vitel. ovor.
recent. number. x. Sacchar. alb. lb.j.ss. Fiat Past. Reg. s.a.
I did very Ill I did not reserve this third Regal Past until the end of my
Banquet: for I fear 'twill make some of you rise before the last Course enter.

You hotter Livers, shall use for a Cooler this ensuing Amygdaline Milk: which
in Summer heats, and after other calefying excercises, you shall find inflamed
Nature repay your Charity in cooler terms.

Lae Amygdalinum.
Amygdal. decort. iiij. Sem. Cucum. Papav. alb. Lactuc. Melon. an j.
Macerate all four hours in Rosewater, then with Sugar. q.s. fiat lac. Amygd.

Here is an Italian Dish for you Gentlemen, very substantial and pleasant: and
I doubt not but when you have tasted of it you will gladly enrich your Cooks
with the.

I will not bid you fall to whilst it is hot: for it is to be eaten cold.

Bianco mangiare.
. Of the flower of Rice. lb.ss. dissolve it in Milk, q.s.
Then take the Pulpe of a young Capon tender boyld, sweet Almonds numb. xxiiij.
beat these well in a Mortar, then mix them with the Milk, and Rice: pass all
through a Course Cloth, adding thereto what quantity of Sugar you please: Then
boil it on a soft fire, still stirring it, until it coagulate into the
consistence of a strong Gelly: when it begins to cool add thereto of Amber,
and musk dissolved in Rose water as much as shall render it a grateful odor.

But for those which are brought so low, that Nature is almost desperate of
ever giving another flesh Livery, to such I present this ensuing Restorative or
Consummada, which above all other, manifests his effects in a most momentary
Operation, replenishing the Veins faster with blood, than assimilation can
dispense of it.

The Prime way for Consummadoes.

. An old Capon exenterated, his neck, wings, and feet cast away* and the rest
cut into small pieces. Then take one or two Partridges, the flesh of a leg of
Veal all cut small then macerate all 24. hours in white Wine. Then put the Wine
and flesh into a great glass Phialam with ss of Cinnamon, and two nut-megs
grossly beaten prepared Pearls and Coral of each iij. Flowers of Borage,
Bugloss, an. P. j. All being well mixed together and the Orifice of your Glass
exactly stopped, set it ^n Balneo bulliente where let it boil well for eight or
nine hours without Intermission. Then strain all through a Coarse Canvas,
separating the fat which swims on the superficies, and if there yet appear any
sign of Crudity, reboil it again between two dishes until it is whiteness
manifests a perfect decoction. Of which you are to take but three or four
spoonfulls warm, reiterating the same every three hours: and thus in little
time you may promise your bones a Winter Coat.

Here is Don Consummadoes Cousin German Signior Geladino, who petitionates as a
well-wisher to your State, and desires to enter into pay: pray Sirs judge him
not at first sight to be a Coward, because he trembles when any Man touches
him: for upon my Word he is hearty enough, and deserves to be your Corporal.

Geladina.
. A Capon of two years old, the flesh of a leg of Veal, four Calves feet, White
Wine, Fair water. an. lb vj.
Boil all in a new earthen vessel, scuming of all the fat: when it is well
boild, strein it, separating all the fat. Then put this broth into a new
vessel with lbj.ss. of Sugar. Cinnamon unbeaten ss. Cloves number. 12. boil it
again a little, then add thereto the whites of two eggs; then rebo^l it again,
and pass it per manic. Hip. s.a. before it cool mix a little Musk, and Amber
dissolved in Rosewater with it.

These Hepaticall Dishes which you have hitherto fed upon do only restore:
here I will close up your Stomachs with a Therapeutick Dish*

An Hepaticall Antidote.
. Agrimon. Fol. Eupator. Avi^. Absinth. Salviae. an. M.j. Faenic. Rad.
Petrosel. Aspar. Helenii. an. j. Spicae. Flor. Salviae. Tunicis. an. P.j.
Faeniculi. Sem. Anisi. Carui. an. ss. Calam. arom. Cinamom. Cassiae lig.
Sassafras. Rad. Chinae. an. ij.
With the rectified Spirits of Wine draw their Tincture: to which Tincture you
shall add, Extract. santal. Extract. Chelid. an. ss. tartarri vitriollati.
iij. Tinctur. croci cum {oil} {sulphur}ris praep. ij. Salis Corallor. ss.
Essentiae j.


Circulate them all in Balneo the space of twenty four hours, then in B.
Vaporoso separate the Spirits from the Tincture until it coagulate to an
Extract which you shall reserve a part.

The Spirits you shall animate with the Soul of his Vegetables.

The Virtues.

It Is a Universal Antidote against all Hepaticall debilitations proceeding
from a cold Distemper. It corroborates the Liver, and all the Natural
Facultyes, returning them their proper strength and temper.

So that for all such Persons as by reason of a weak Liver are proclive to
Dropsies, Cachexies, Jaundice* etc. Art never lent us a more absolute
Preservative.

Dosis.

You are to take the Quantity of a scruple, either alone or in Wine, Broth, or
some Specificall Water.

THE FOURTH AND LAST COURSE CARDIACALL.
BEing well recovered from my great weakness brought by Disorders in my late
Hepatick travells: that I may finish my discovery of this Microcosmicall Globe;
and from my observations compose an Anthropographicall Map, for a light to such
young Travelers as hereafter the devotion of Curiosity shall fall into this
Pilgrimage, I am now resolved to set on toward the Cardiacall Territoryes.

My Mistress Sanitas dares not undertake this Voyage: for she tells me we must
Imbark again in the Red Sea from whence we shall sail into a bloody gulf which
hurries us down into a hollow vein of that Earth, Vena cava
where we uncomfortably go many Leagues under ground before we can arrive to
the Viceroyes Court Spiritus Vitalis. Besides quoth she, it is to passionate a
Land for our weaker Sex to abide in* there abounding so many Discontents,
Treacheryes, Rebellions, Dissimulations, Flatteries, Inconstancies, Vain
desires* Desperations, Arrogancies* mixed with Envy* Hatred, Avarice, Pride,
Ambition, Vain glory, with a thousand such like Fanatic Spirits in the Hearts
of those Inhabitants that it is too difficult a Task either for young or Old to
live there without infection; especially for her to whom they were all
professed Enemies.

Asking of her why she called those (...), Fanatic Spirits? She answered,
because the Princess Phantasia, of the Cephalic Peninsula first, in a depraved
humor gave them their entertainment: Where they grew to such a head, that
Spiritus Animalis began to be jealous of his Princess Phantasia, fearing they
might corrupt her: Therefore he commanded Intell^ctus his Favorite whom it did
likewise much concern) to banish them his Peninsula, and to confine them to the
Center of the Microcosme. Where said she they have now incroached into the
Cardiacall Court, and so blinded the Viceroy Spiritus Vitalis* that they now
command and rule his Court.

I could not but laugh here at Sanitas to ^ere how like a Woman she talked: and
then ^urning to her* I asked if she thought those mo^ives sufficient to divert
the resolutions of a Traveller. Or if she took me for one of those Milk-sops
which durst not pass the Sea because it roard* and would defer his Voyage into
France until the Frenchmen had learned the English tongue. I told her I
feared no Bug-Beares; My Nature was better pleased with horrid and foreign
Monsters, than with the yealping Beauties of Domestic Puppy dogs.

And though she were my Mistress; she had not yet drawn me into the Predicament
of slavery to oblidge me never to row out of her Gally. I assured her I was
free born, and her Eyes were yet too dull to fire me out of my Liberty. Besides,
I bad her Remember in what a case she left me in the Hepatick Land: where when
I returned sickly to Venus Court, expecting a Copy of my first Well come,
Venus then not knowing me (I being before Animus adipe and sanguine suffocatus)
shut her Door against me crying tuus inter nos non volat Cupido* The Kitchen
maids also anatomized my Skeleton with Jeasts, one asking me if I would drink a
Caudle? and then singing Ova uon meruit qui non Galinam nutrit.


Another took up a lean Gridiron, and with a rib of an old Servant of hers, she
scrape out this Motto* Quam been convenient.

A third stood knocking of an empty Marrow bone against a broken Pipkin crying,
Jupiter non mella plus pluit, then threw it into the Fire, and sung this
Epidicticon.

Lean bones which yield no fat at all,
The Fire is their best Funeral.
Sweet Sir, if you will renew Desire?
Go pass our Therapeutick Fire.
Then without knocking you may enter in,
As Prophylactick of our Magazin.
The remembrance of this was such a cooling card to Sanitas, that she let fall
all persuasive Arguments, and leaves me to my wandering Discretion* telling me
wherever I went I had her Heart. And since she was unfit for such a Journey;
she prayed me to accept of her Sister Convalescentia, who was very well
acquainted with my Humor and Diet, and therefore might be serviceable in so
long a Voyage. I thanked her with acceptance, and giving her a parting kiss,
presently Embarked on the Red Sea where a fair Gale brought me presently upon
the Cardiacall Gulf; where as Health said) we fell desperately under Ground in
a hollow Vein of the Earth, which ^rought our Ba^k in few hours directly upon
^e Viceroyes Court, where had not the Sluices ^indred us, we had landed at the
Court Door; he Court Swimming in a Lake of Christaline water.

There expecting the opening of those Floud-gates, I was received by one of the
Court Boats, the Ferry-man whereof was at^^r'd more like a Gentleman Usher,
than a water-man. His good Clothes made me take better notice of him, and
examine his profession. Therefore I knew no better way to put my self upon his
Discourse, than by hitting him in the Teeth with that empty headed Complement,
Pray what may I call your name Sir? The Gentleman (as I after found him to be
so) answered in an affected Phrase, that he was Signior Curioso, and Son to the
Signiora Curiosita Lady of Honor to the Duchessa Superbia, Wife to his Lord
and Prince Don Ambitio* whom quoth he, I serve; my place and charge being as
you see, to Ferry Stangers over into his Court.

Here I interrupted his Geneologies, and desired him to row me back again,
craving him pardon, for I was mistaken: my Travells tending to the Cardiacall
Court of Spiritus Vitalis, which it seemed was not there. Sir quoth he, have
Patience; You shall not nee^ to return; for you are entering the place which you
seek: though it now be called the Court of Don Ambitio, who being at first a
Favorite to this Cardiacall Prince, in few years gained so far upon the Hearts
of the Subjects, that they all neglected their legitimate Viceroy Spiritus
Vitalis and wholly doted upon him who now rules and commands all: the other
being only Titular.

Finding him so open in his Relations; I resolved to make him Dictator to my
Table-books, knowing that his Curiosity would omit nothing. First therefore I
brought him on, with superficial Questions; asking him ( a Dutch Curiosity)
how many Paces that Cardiacall Lake might eat up in Latitude?

Sir, quoth he, It seems you have not yet seen the new Anthropogeographicall
Map lately Extant; where this Cardiacall Part is called Italia Microcosmi (as
containing the Center of the World) and this Lake is there baptized by the name
Il Lago passionato, where the hearts of Desperate Lovers hourly float in
Passion.

His mouth had scarce closed up this relation; but lo! appeared the Heart of
Dido swimming after our Boat, and calling for her Aeneas. This brought his
Theory into Pra^tick, and made me the more credulous, and prompt to exercise
his Historical tongue, with other propositions of my Ignorance. Turning my
face therefore toward the Cardiacall Court, and seeing so Princely a Fabric
lie ^ounding with a perpetual motion upon so still a water! so soon as
Amazement returned my Tongue her Liberty, I asked Signior Cu^ioso if it were
not a Vanity to demand the cause of that Magic Motion, which there appeared
dancing from Dyastole to Systole in the ^ircle of Enchantments.

He answered, that I had here brought him upon a great Antiquity: the Relation
of which would be a Present very grateful to Memory. Know therefore quoth he
that this Lago Passionato, is properly and anciently called the Lake of Icarus
(and by corruption Ichor) as Ovid sings, Icarus Icarias nomine fecit aquas.


For herein fell that Ambitious Son of Daedalus, whose presumption was the
Original of this Cardiacal motion. For when Daedalus by his winged Art did
emulate those Angelic. (...) Deityes, as one day, he and his Son were
exercising their Ambitious Plumes; flying beyond the Region of Mortal Liberty,
Phoebus was called forth from his Helion's Sphere to view those presumptuous
Cretensi, Daedalus had no sooner Spied him draw back the Curtain of his Clouds,
but, wisely, he retired. Icarus, hot in Ambition, and, neglecting his Fathers
more aged precepts, follows the sublimity of his Fansy, and soars up so high,
that Phoebus in choler with his aspiring vanity called him up to the Element
of Fire, where his Wings being burned, his Ambition fell with his Body into
thi^ Lake. Then, to make him and his Father Secular Examples; he caused
Daedalus to build a floating Tem^le in this Lake, and to fill it with
Penitential Fires* Then Phoebus chained the winged Soul of drowned Icarus,
upon the top of this Temple, there to labor in a perpetual motion; striving
by the strength of his Wings to elevate his Ambitious Soul, which was as fast
pulled down again by its overburdened Terrestriety. Which constant Motion
likewise did ventilate the Enclosed Fires, whereby the Soul of Icarus was
hourly refreshed in the violence of his exercise, to the end his Torments might
be eternal. And for Daedalus he commanded him to wander perpetually in this
Lake (wearing his Ambitious Plumes in his Head) that the hourly sight of his
Sons Torments, might feed the Memory of his Presumption.

Hence said he proceeds the cause of this constant motion of our Cardiacall
Palace: Those Penitential Fires remaining to this hour in some Chambers of our
Court: though now few or none make use of them in their Sacrifice; the whole
Court applying themselves wholly to the flattering of Don Ambitio, every one
laboring to be his (...), and because he days not perfume his greatness with
the mortifying smoke of these Penitential fires, (lest it should choke the
Torrent of his Pride, and bring him to a Miserere) they all, not to alienate
from his humor, rake them up in the embers of Vanity.

But after some few hundred years said he, Phoebus being moved to Pity by the
tears of Daedalus, and Penitential Offerings brought to this Temple by his
Parentage, at last gave Liberty unto their pining Souls, by turning the Soul of
Daedalus into an Eagle, whereof he made a Present to Jupiter. And of Icarus he
made the Phoenix, thereby to express the singularity of his Pride: and lest
Time might blot out the Memory of his great Presumption, once in an Age he
Inioyn'd him build an Altar of Arabian Aromaticks and thereon to Sacrifice his
Body with the Fires of his So^ar Rays. In reward of which he promised that his
Youth should be as often renewed.

In those Days likewise, quoth he, this Cardiacall Palace, upon that Occasion
was called the Temple of Sol (...), whither many Ambitious Sinners came in
Devotion to kiss those Penitential Fires: so that no part of the World was so
famous for Devotion. But Phoebus had no sooner relieved those tormented Souls
of Daedalus and his Son; but straight Religion here ceased: and it was
presently Inhabited by those Fanatic Spirits which Intellectu had banished
from the Cephalic Peninsula for bewitching of the Princess Fantasia, and
threatening his Ruin.

Here the Viceroy, Spiritus Vitalis, one Day in his Progress, taking notice of
these fair Buildings, and seeing them lie buried in their Ruins: falling in
love with the situation of the Place, presently sent for his Magicians, whom he
commanded to conjure all those Spirits to retire into a little chamber in the
left partition of this Palace (where lay the Penitential Fires) and there to
chain them up. Then he caused his Architects to renew the lost Beauty of those
demolished Ruins: And to revive the dead Fame of that Former Temple he made
his Magicians inchant it with a perpetual and Prophetical Motion: on whose
Top, (to make it more miraculous) he raised a vast Pyramid, hewn out of one
Entire Ruby: and then proclaimed it the Oracle of Aesculapius; causing the Fame
thereof to be published through out the whole Universe; and that all Diseased,
of what Infirmity so ever, let them repair to this Oracle in Devotion, and but
touching the Motion thereof only, the Oracle should infallibly assure them
whether their Disease were Mortal or not. Here our Boat arriving at the Palace
Gate, his Relation (which I found more Poetical than Rational) was silenced by
the approach of his Mother the Lady Curiosita: who came thither ready with all
her followers to attend my landing. Where the Earth had scarce kissed my Feet,
but she commanded her Gentlemen Ushers Signior Polito and Signior Ceremonioso,
together with her waiting Gentlewomen Signiora Impudentia, and Signiora
Confidentia, to bring me forward. Then presently she her self seaz'd upon me,
leading me into the Court, and telling me that her Curiosity had imposed that
duty upon her, to give entertainment to strangers, her Genius being most proper
for such employments.

Following that Lady up a pair of high Stairs (whose Altitude made our Hearts
nimbler than our heels) and being with a quick Sublimity, by the Mercuriall
Complements of Signior Ceremonioso, brought to the highest step: there I was
taken by the Duchessa Superbia. Who ere she would deign to let her tongue move
toward me, she commanded her M^ior Domo, Signior Prodigo, to clap one of her
Lords ( Don Ambitio) gaudy suites on my back, and to put me in Fashion. Here,
me thought I looked, like a candle in the Sun: or like a wooden spoon in a Sack
Posset. I was just like a new rigged ship, governed by a Sculler: who laboring
with a Contrary Wind to leave my Common Road, and show my self in the Ocean; I
made my rich Apparel my Compass: from which I never durst draw mine Eyes, lest
I should forget my Course, and so be blown back again into my old Harbor.

I wished that she had lent my Face a new Cover to: for I was very suspicious
lest that (though Impudent enough) should have betrayed my outside, there
remaining still a Rusticall character, which rich Imbroaderyes could not Eclyps,

In fine she had put me so far out of Fashion with my Natural Gate, Annuities,
and obscu^e breeding; that I was more troubled in Practicing how to be taken a
man of my Clothes, than ever Ierelictum was when he first Tutored his Apes.

For Courtly Phrases and Complements, wanted none: For, Sir Philip Sidney, and
Ben Johnson can testify, that I have so overburthened my Memory out of their
Granaries, that it being too weak to retain them lets them often drop here, and
there to no purpose.

For exterior gestures, and Ocular Ceremonies, my private Chamber Practice had
so inured me, that I mistook every man I met in the street for my Looking-glass.

To say the truth, nothing blank'd me, but a scurvy durty Opinion, which like
an evil Angel hourly persecuted me: telling me that my clothes would
subscribe to antiquity, before my Fortunes could renew their threadbare Titles,
by some better Calling. Looking downward upon the ugly Foot of this Opinion, I
was letting all my Bravery (with the Peacock) fall to the Ground, and sneaking
again into my posture.

But here Signiora Confidentia prevented me: who cocked up my Beaver, gave me a
resolute kiss, and assured me that her Lady Mistress Superbia was in love with
me: for whose sake, she said, she had settled a good Opinion of me; bad me be
bold, and Confident of my well-come, and to proceed; for she would warrant me
preferment.

At this, I began to make a noise with my Spurs: call for my Lackquies (though
they all knew poverty preserved me from that Vanity) and then desired this
resolute young Lass Considentia, to carry me into the chief Lodgings of the
Court, that I might be taken notice of by some of the Nobility, whom I was then
Confident would cast a Fortune upon me.

The desperate Wench, without f^rther Ceremonies* brings me presently into the
Chamber of Presence, were sat Don Ambi^^o on a high Throne swelling in the
pride of his Humane Deity. Where he gave entertainment to himself (esteeming
his conversation too great an Honor for that poor worm Man) by viewing the
Retraicts of those proud Egypptian Pyramides, with that Rhodian Colossus* and
promising himself, that his Name should feed Posterity with greater Memorialls.
And sometimes reading the lives of Caligula, Domitian, and Heliogabalus (qui
sibi divinos honores deferri, simulacra sua ubique erecta adorari, seque in
Deorum numerum referri, ^ussit) whereupon he falls in love with that Romish
Pride, and would fain second it; but that his Ambition will not admit of
Imitation.

Seeing him as it were lost in those serious meditations; I asked Signior
Confidentia, whether we were not fallen into Presumption by daring to enter a
Place which seemed prohibited. Sir, quoth she, you can not do me a greater
wrong than by nursing such vain suspects.

No place to me is prohibited. Were it in his most secret and private Counsels,
I am confident he would embrace me. He dares not shut me out at any time, lest
I make him ashamed for it. For he knows full well, 'twas I gave him his Titles
in the Court, by putting him forward, and from a poor younger brother made him
chief Favorit here in the Cardiacall Court, where he now wholly Commands.

And though I be but a poor waiting Gentlewoman, I can make him forsake all
his negotiations, and hearken to any thing that I shall put into his Head.

With that she ran to him: strikes his Book out of his hand, and kissed him. I
expected still when he should have kicked her Confidence. Whereas he quite
Contrary paid her with interest in her own money, hugging of her, as if she had
bin his Minion. And then taking notice of me (as being alone he must of
necessity) he began to mix Anger with Pride, and so threw a scornful look upon
me; asking her in a low voice, what Fellow that was which had thus lost himself
in presumption. I began to tremble fearing he might think I had stolen his suit
of Apparel which I had then on my back: But Confidentia excused all, and told
him I was a poor Gentleman, and a stranger that was betrayed by Fortune, and
therefore came thither alone, to manifest his Innocence.

Ask him quoth he, his Name, his Country and Parentage.

Here that I might enter into the Geneologies of his Kindred, knowing him to
have a Spanish Heart, I bad her tell him that I was a Spaniard: my name Signior
Aemulatio; base son to one Signior Ambitio a man of great blood in Spain, whose
Estate being decai'd, left his tender Nursery to the blind Tuition of Fate: who
had transplanted me out of that barren Soil, hither into his Cardiacall Garden,
where I hoped the Sun of his Favor would make me fruitful.

She had no sooner delivered my answer, and name Aemulatio; but he presently
start up; began to look about him, and then calling three or four Oaths to
witness, swore that I was his Cousin german, and the nearest in blood to him,
that day extant.

Whereupon he made me large promises: bad me be always at hand: and not to
leave him, until he should supplant me by some greater Fortunes.

Then he commanded Signiora Confidentia to wait upon me, cherish me, carry me
into every corner of the Court, and to recommend me unto his Lady Superbia for
a Favorite: Then bad us retire a while, for 'twas his hour of rest.

Signiora Confidentia was mad until she had entered me into the practice of the
Court: therefore bringing me speedily out of the Chamber of Presence, she lead
me first into the Lodgings of the Lady Avaritia, Tesoriera to Don Ambitio,
where we found her and her five Furies ( Diffidentia, Metus, Solicitudo, Spes
vana, and Desperatio) at Dinner, excercising their lean rigid Mandibles upon
the hard, musty, and brown Chippings of sour Barley bread; with Onions,
Garlic, Stock Fish, Red-Sprats, Ship- Beef which had been seazon'd with an
Indian Voyage: without either Table Stools, Napkins, Knives, or any such
Stomach Instrument.

But all lay in a horrid Mixture upon a heap of straw, which after dinner they
fired to encourage Natural Heat to fall aboard on such indigestible Materials.

Amazement here broke my Silence; calling therefore Confidentia aside, I told
her how strangely I was lost in Labyrinth of Admiration, if she with the thread
of Reason did not guide me out. I prayed her therefore to set me at Liberty, in
making me understand what new Policy Don Ambitio had found to make
Shee-Treasurers in his Court: and besides to tell me what Virtues could subsist
in that dry hydebound Hag and M^gaera Avaritia, to make his Ambi^ious Spirit
cast such principle Honors upon her de^ested Ugliness.

Confidentia hearing me no better then rail in my demands, presently falls into
my tune, and professing her self an open Enemy to that Witch Philargiria:
satisfyes me with this impartial description.

Quoth she, you must know that this now Lady, was first a Common Baw'd, but so
cunning, and dexterous in her Calling; that she would undertake by Virtue of a
Jewel to make Chastity her self a Whore. And this Profession brought her first
into our Court: where she presently forced a Respect from the Necessity of her
Calling.

Her beginning was in the Kitchen; from thence she rose to be a Chamber maid;
and so to a Waiting Gentlewoman. Here, notice began to be taken of her by the
great ones: so that if any of them were lovesick, she presently felt their
Pulse, and with a small feeling from them, promised a speedy and pleasant Cure.

It happened that our Lord Don Ambitio, among his Infinity of Mistrisses* could
not satisfy himself, but one day taking notice of three young Virtuous Virgin
Ladies ( Signiora Castitade, Signiora Innocentia, and Signiora Constantia* who
abhorring his insatiate and lascivious Lust, and to avoid the malice of his
Ambition, lived retired* and never appeared publicly in the Court unless upon
a Christmas, or Easter Day) their beauties gave such an Inflammation to his
Lust, that without opening of a Vein there was no scaping of a Phrensy. Here,
quoth Confidentia, I like a mad Girl, under hand played the Baw'd, and put him
upon this more Authentic Baw'd Avaritia, assuring him that she would corrupt
them if Corruptible.

He, like an expert Gamster at Inn-and-Inn, would not hazzar'd those Golden
heaps until he had made the Dice run of his side. Sends therefore for, then
but Mistress, Avaritia, and makes her Lady of Honor. Thus he first made her a
companion for the Noblest* that young simplicity might not dream of corruption
in such Greatness. Then he throws the Dice freely; venters all at a Cast,
opens his Desires, and shows the game which he gave Chase to: tells with what
Innocent and Chaste simplicity they avoided his snares, and how difficult it was
to entrap them.

Avaritia laughed at his Ignorance: and then bad him take no more Care, but go,
and beat the bush for some new Game: as for those, she would speedily bring
them into his Golden Net.

To those Young Ladies she goes; enters into their Cabinets; there falls into
Discourse and familiar Conversation: First fingring them, as Lutanists do their
more Delicate and choice Trebbles, with ordinary Womanish Discourse of
Husbands; lamenting the unfortunate and miserable estate of a single life.

If she perceived no Shadows of falseness in that Motion! Then presently she
admired their Continency; commended their Chastity, told them how happy they
were in that State of Innocence and hereupon falls into an Encomium of their
Beauties, their Virtues, their rare Qualityes, and so by little and little puts
them on upon the sweet Instrument of Philautia.

There she proves them again* scruing them up with an Ambitious pin, by
swearing they are Companions for Emperors, and that she wonders not, why they
let the flower of their Beauties fade in the Mirror of their own Suns
reflection, si^ce man is too rude a Mixture to Incorporate with such Delicacies.

Here she scrues them up within a degree of breaking; finding the higher they
are scru'd up, the sweeter their answer was to the touch of her Trial.

Then she plays on, makes them sing and dance* In which merry Tune, she lets
the hand of her discourse by degrees slide down unto the belly of her Lenatick
Lute, where by a more shrill and penetrating sweetness she brings their Ears to
such an itching Delight, that Auditus can no longer keep Counsel, but
presently calls in her Neighbor Senses to participate. When she perceives that
they have now a feeling of those sweet Aers, and that there is no time to be
lost, but to keep them going whilst they were in tune, she winds them up yet a
Note higher, with great promises, and assurances of Riches, Honors,
Preferments, Principalities, and the like: at which pitch, she no sooner
touches them but they break.

Thus did she make those unmanned Haggards, stoop to the rich Lure of Don
Ambitio. And by this Practice she has raised her Preferment to this Degree of
Tesoriera: where she now may dispose of what Sums she please: for he knows, her
Covetous Heart does so Antipathize with Prodigality, that she grows sick at the
naming of a spend^ thrift. I thanked my little Wagtail Confidentia for her
Impartial enucleation of this Philochrysonticall Lady: And my Patience being
somewhat distempered with those Alliatick Savors, whose loathsome Violence
being still augmented by the often recoiling of the Lady Avaritias Stomaticall
Artillery, which was overcharged with Stock Fish, and Garlic I desired that we
might depart those famished Lodgings, and enter upon some more Restoring
Objects.

It Is true said Confidentia, we have lost too much time with this Purse-worm
Avaritia; but our next Visit shall recover it with Interest. Follow me
therefore said she unto the Lodgings of the Old Lady Invidia, who you must
first know was born mad, and therefore may presume she Continues so, all
Physicians concluding her Disease Incurable, it being Morbus haereditarius.

This Old Trot, runs Post Day and Night, from Chamber to Chamber, not suffering
the poor Ladies to lie quietly in their Beds: therefore 'twill deserve
admiration if we find her in her own Lodgings: Besides we must expect a
Bastonado ere we depart, for she hates to see any thing that is hand-some: nay
Malice wrings her into a shower of tears, if she see but a healthful body, and
well apparelled, open her Gates.

Here in spite of her teeth we entered her Lodgings; where I thought it had
been Carnavall time, there appearing none but Masqueradi. She had more Servants
than all the Court besides: but those so horrid, and deformed, that it appeared
the School of Ugliness.

All her Chambers were full of false Glasses to make People appear ill favored
and dismembered; for she could not abide that any one should discover
themselves to be handsome.

She had more than fourscore old decayed waiting Gentlewomen attending on her;
all which had been turned out of service: some for putting Mercury in their
Lady Mistrisses Pomade to spoil their good Faces.

Others for eclypsing the lovely brown of their Ladies Hair, with Cypress
powders, under a color of shadowing some false additions.

Others for wearing out every other Day a new ruff with often turning it in and
out of fashion.

Those came all about us like so many Furies, some pissing on my Stockins to
stain them; others under pretense of Courtesy to pick out the lace of my Cuffs
and tear them; Others with an Envious Hug twine their Arms about my Neck to
bring my band in the same wrinkled Predicament with their Faces; Others kissing
me to make my lips scabby.

Signiora Confidentia wanted not her share neither; for some presented her with
a sweet powder for her Hairs, which brought them the falling sickness; Others
gave her receipts for her Teeth, which made them all dance out in method;
Others pretending to renew the lost curles of her hair, sets them afire; Others
gave her waters to make her fair, which no sooner applide, but her face looked
like a picked Goose.

Others, without farther Ceremonies called her Whore, scrach'd her face,
telling she was the cause of their disgraces.

Whilst we were in this Purgatory, In came the Lady Invidia, with her brother
Il Conte Odio, and her Sister la Contessa Malitia.

Never was man frighted with more delight, than I at the sight of that Monster
Invidia.

Who ever saw the Bears Masque, may Conceive her entrance. She had eaten up all
the flesh of her Face with her own scratches: so that she looked as if her head
had been dished out in a Grave, to a Mess of hungry Worms, who had picked all
clean to the bones.

Her Eyes were so dry with often weeping, that for want of moisture they had
lost their motion: they being but as two pieces of rotten shining Wood, stuck
in a dead Horses Head.

Her Nose, as I guest by the Promontorious Gristle had been Roman.

She hopp'd toward me with an Intent to rail: but her mouth was so stuffed with
bitter Languages that she could not speak: for with belching up too many hasty
words at once into the little Portal of her Mouth, they wedged one another so
fast in the Door, that she saluted me open mouthed with a driveling Silence,
just like a mad Dog, whose depraved Fancy could not resolve whether to bark or
bite first.

Her brother Count Odio had the Mine of a Complete Courtier, and his better
Judgment, made him not dance into his Sisters Passionate rashness: but with a
reserved Malice, he made Flattery the Engine of his Hatred. Where like an old
Ape with his mimicall and fawning Gestures he forced a belief of Friendship,
that so (no false suspicion opposing the Operation of his lingering Venom)
whilst you slept in security, he might with the better advantage bite you.

He entered upon me with a gracious smile; desiring me not to take notice of his
Sisters distemper, a woman's weakness being too poor an Object for Masculine
Reason: but rather bid me seal up her Envy with his Friendship, which he
protested was more at my Devotion than at his own.

Confidentia here Tutored my Ears with a soft whisper, and bad me loose no
Trust upon that Old Fox, for I could never hope to recover it again.

He takes you quoth she for a green Goose presented as a Rarity unto some Noble
man's Table: and fearing least from thence you might be preferred unto a more
Princely Mess, he labors to undermine your Designs with his scraping
Friendship that so without suspect, he may at his leisure blow you up.

I had been formerly Informed likewise of his double Heart and how his
malicious subtilties run all upon such Aenigmata, that young Novices must
maintain their Oedipus to understand him.

Very Jealous therefore of his proferred Courtesies (which to me did little
better then stink) and finding his name a Traitor to his promises: I resolved
to trust him no farther than his Lodgings. Yet that I might bring him on to his
purpose, and better my Experience by making him a Copy of my future Practice, I
desembled for Company, and began to reveal unto him as private Secrets, things,
God he knows, but then born: to which he so seriously listened, that me thought
I already saw his Malice promise him, that he had Theory enough to Practice my
Ruin.

I think, as Cunning as he was, I had made some sport with him, had not
prevention checked my Design by the entrance of Signiora Iustitia, Signiora
Amicitia, Signiora Fideltade, and Signiora Conscientia, all sweet young Ladies
of honor in this Cardaicall Court, who as Confidentia told me had long before
been corrupted (with the help of that Bawd Avaritia) by Don Ambitio: and now
they were come in Visit to the young Lady Contessa Malitia.

The Lady Amicitia did so overflow with winning graces, that I fell desperately
in Love with her, and desired Signiora Confidentia (who by her former
Confession I knew to be Embassatrice de Amore) to put me forward into her
Friendship.

But she desired me by no means not to take notice of her in that place, for
Don Ambitio had turned her off to Count Odio, whom she began now to affect:
although he abused her, and kept her only to make his detested projects the
more advantageous.

This information, put Ice in my Mouth: for I knew too much of that crabbed
count, to become his Rival.

Yet being now a Courtier, I thought my humor must as well wait upon the
Fashion, as my Clothes.

Every one I saw* wore his Mistrisses Favor, otherwise no Courtier.

Faith then a Mistress I must upon too, and wear her Colors, though I had
never yet spoke to her.

He^e I was in conceit that the Lady Iustitia was ready to cast her self away
for me: for me thought she never looked toward me but her Heart labored to
steal to me in a sigh.

Knowing therefore how apt those tenderhearted Creatures were to precipitate
in Passion and searing lest she might condemn me of Cruelty (though for my part
I would have given her leave to have hanged me for a Kiss) to answer her
silent Oratory, I began to return her sighs, and as near as Fancy could
imitate* I framed such looks withal, as she might call pityfull.

Then I called Signiora Confidentia apart, and told her what passages had
happened, and ^ow the Lady Iustitia made love to me.

The Jeering slut burst into such a Laughter at my mistake that all the Ladies
took notice of it; and desired to be brought into Consort, by participating of
the Jest. But Confidentia to save her Credit and mine concealed it. And then
told me that hereafter in the presence of Ladies she would not stand so near
me, lest too much Confidence might make me Ridiculous. And then said that those
sighs and sorrowful looks of the Lady Iustitia, which I applied to my self,
were for those injuryes. Perjuryes, Contempts* Neglects, Brybes, Partialities,
and a thousand such like abuses which the world daily cast into her teeth;
which makes the poor Lady so slighted and low-priz'd of every Man, that growing
Dull and Melancholy, she lives so retired, that we can hardly see her above
once a quarter.

This mistake therefore made Confidentia retire farther from me: insomuch that
I became so overwise ever after, that when a Woman looked or smiled upon me* I
thought she jeered at some defect: which mistrust made many pretty passages
happen between me and the Lady Conscientia, for she had a mind to me in good
earnest: as it after appeared by her fondness, and tenderness of me: who
blushed not to cast her self into my Breast; prick me with her bodkin, to
express her desires in Hieragliphicks: rouse me, kiss me, and often put me to
the start with her secret motions. All which I regarded not, suspecting still
that it was but a plot of hers to betray my weakness.

When ever she came near me therefore, I told her plainly she troubled me* and
that she made all the world take notice of her bad proceedings: bad her go and
accompany the Lady Iustitia who was Melancholy, and had the Green sickness for
want of Exercise, for my part I would not be guilty of her looseness.

This Lady Conscientia, became so desperate upon my checking her: that stealing
from us she ran out of the Court-Gate and threw her self into the Lake of
Passion, where she perished.

It was a long time before any of us mist her: so that had not the Lady
Penitentia came in laughing and crying both at a breath and told us that
Conscientia had drowned her self, none had ever taken notice of it.

Here I observed what alteration this news would beget, and I found it almost
impotent, producing no other issue but a few abortive Tears, which were
delivered by a Womanish Consent who like so many Ducks, if one cry the whole
brood answers.

And those showers were suddenly drunk up by the Sun of Gladness. For in came
Don (...), with the Lady Laetitia, laughing so heartily that though at that
instant, all were weeping; their tears dissolved into such a storm of Laughter,
that the Aier grew choleric with his Violent Motions, and broke the Windoes to
prevent combustion,

The Jest was to hear every one laugh, and non able to satisfy Reason with the
Cause: only all confessed that they felt their Hearts of a sudden much
lightened, and a free inclination invited them to any thing that might give them
delight.

Well, the Laugh being ended, Don Zara with a cheerful countenance, ruddy as
the Aurora, stepped to the Ladies and thanked them for the honor they did him
in entering into his Consort: then bad them proceed, rejoice, sing, dance, and
make no more scruple of honest mirth, but to be free and open in all their
delights, without suspect of any future repentance; for that (...) Conscientia
was dead. She that had caused so many showers of Tears was now drowned in her
own Deluge.

I presently took my Advantage of this good news* and began to renew my Suit to
the Lady Iustitia, who before had deceived me with the Melancholy of her
Conscious Jealousyes: Now I presumed she would make no scruple of playing false
with any man: wherefore I made the less doubt in Corrupting her.

And see how happy I was in this Attempt; as if Fortune had vowed to chain all
my desires together with the links of Opportunity, and then throw them into my
Bosom. Don Z^r^ to celebrate the death of his Arch Enemy, Invited all the
Ladies to a Masque.

Where wanting Masquers, he desired me to succor his necessity, and make one.

It was the thing I gaped for; my Mouth therefore being ready opened to his
hand, the first word that I could spit out, was a grant, with a willing
acceptance.

Well for brevities sake Gentlemen Imagine you saw the Ladies all placed; the
Music playing; and the Masquers entering, each of them having his hand enriched
with a present, to bestow at Discretion upon any of the Ladies.

My Present was a rich Quadra, wherein was represented, the Heavens opening,
and from thence a Wolf falling, with a Lamb i his Mouth. This Emblem was
eclypsed with a fair Curtain of Tissu, emaculated with Golden letters, whose
connection made this Emblematicall Anagram,

Lady this Emblem seems too rude
For one professing Servitude.
But be not rash in judging me
Until you find I guilty be.
You are my ^ Heaven, to whom I sha
Till I be heard, for Mercy call.
If you deny me, then I must
Needs say you are Cruel, and unjust.
But if your harsh sententious Eyes,
Will rather here Embelmatize,
Then open your Heaven; let Wolf and Lamb
Tumble toth'Earth from whence they came.
I Will venture breaking back, yea Neck and all,
So that we may but once together fall.
Our Presents being delivered; before we dished out our Capers into a Dance, we
made way for the Lady Laetitia; who to express her joy in the loss of her Enemy
Conscientia, she welcomed the Ladies with this Sonnet.

Sonnet.
YOu pensive Souls why are you sad?
Conscience is drowned; Then lets be glad;
Let not your pining Hearts from hence
Stagger at future Penitence.
She that quenched our joviall Fires:
Checking Natures sweet desires:
Shall no longer curb us in
With Horrid fears of Mortal sin!
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Come then sweet Fansy show thy power,
Invent new Pleasures every hour.
Teach Don Ambitio to betray,
His Dearest Friend that stands in's way.
Tell him that it is a Noble Feat,
By supplantation to grow great.
And bid him quarrel now withal,
That interpose him and the Wall.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Bid Avaritia wider gape;
Tell her she now may freely scrape:
And propagate a Mineral
To renovate some Prodigal.
Let her proceed and multiply
In her extorting Usury,
Without a thought of growing Wise;
By a Church building Sacrifice.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Let great Superbia Jeere, at those
Which out oft'h Fashion wear their Clothes.
And bid her call her Tailors in
To Massacre some new born sin.
Teach her some sweet and secret way
How to maintain her rich Array.
Bid her first turn an Honored Whore,
Rather then let her name grow Pore.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Bid Penitentia wipe her Eyes
And check with Smiles her peevish Cries,
Tell her it suits not with the Times,
To lose her Mirth for petty Crimes.
Make her be cheerful! rowse her up!
And drown Repentace in a Cup.
Let her not fear the newborn Day
Can now her Night-past Sins betray.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Bid Wise Iustitia here be free,
And make a Present blind a Fee.
Teach her to feed upon lost sheep,
And pass her Sentence in her sleep.
Let her not stick to play the Whore
With any* so they be not Poor.
Make her be Confident, and say,
With her shall dye the Judgment Day.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Bid Castitade blush no more
Because she is Don Ambitio's Whore.
And let Constantia break with all,
Since his Ambition made her fall.
Bid sad Maeslitia now awake
And d^own her Cares in Passions Lake.
Let none forbear their Hearts Content,
Till they grow Old, and Impotent.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Let now Religious Pieta
Come wait upon Superbia.
And bid her bring her Bible In
To elevate her Passive Sin.
Bid her upon a Holy Day
Neglect a Sermon for a Play.
And let her trouble God no more,
With often knocking at his Door.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Kind Charitade now grow wise!
Be no more gulled with Poor men's Cries.
Keep Home, and learn to lock thy Door;
If any beg, tell them you are Poor.
Be not so fond to run in Debt,
By building of a Lazaret.
No, keep thine own; and only spend,
To gain an Office, or a Friend.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
Come then Don (...) lead your dance,
Whilst Mirth lays sorrow in a Trance.
Let your sweet Revells blow the Fires,
Of these Fair Ladies hot Desires.
And when they burn, Tell them they may
^et Reputation melt away.
The Golden Age is now come In
Where Pleasure drowns (...) Sin.
Conscience shall here
No more appear.
WHilst the Lady Laetitia exercised her Voice: I prostrated my self (as the
Custom is at all Masks in their Parts) on my Knees, at my Lady Mistress
Iustitias feet. Where with a feeling Oratory I made my case known unto her:
told her, her Eyes were murderers: and I desired Justice.

The richness of my Present made her take the better notice of me; besides I
found her Disposition very corruptible. So that having brought her Just upon
the point of a Merciful Promise: the Sonnet being ended, we were forced to
break up our Session: every one falling into his Posture, and then by mutual
copulations we begat a Ballo.

How every Man governed his heels I commit to your Fancyes: since every Man's
Heart was freed from the heavy clog of Conscience.

Well, our Masque ended I renewed my suit again with that hard Hearted Mistress
of mine Iustitia: who in that little time, had dashed me out of her Memory,
acknowledging neither me nor Present.

Here I called my old Chamerada Confidentia: who presently assured me that there
was no trusting to that Lady above all the rest. For said she; she is one of
Don Ambitio's aged Concubines, whom he first Corrupted, and made her one Day by
false Witnesses attach that Noble Lord (...), that he might Usurp his Place.

And now having served his turn, he has cast her off, leaving her to her self:
who now makes a Trade of her Necessity, and will lie with any Man for his Money.

When I heard this, I began to wish for my Present again. Yet content to buy my
Experience at that Rate; it growing late, Confidentia and I departed; every one
wondering that I did not wait upon the Lady Iustitia to her Coach.

Confidentia, as we left the Lodgings of Don (...) told me that there was never
a Chamber yet provided for me in the Court; therefore said, if I would accept
of a part of her Bed (which said she, runs upon Wheels under my Lady Superbia)
I should be very welcome: for said she this cool Weather I want a Coverlid:
and where are two in a Bed, there wants not Coverings.

I laughed to hear her so confident in her looseness. And to Bed we went
without further ceremonies.

In the Morning I stole from her before she waked (lest I should be made pay
for my Nights Rest) and going toward the Court-Gate, I met the Spenditore and
the Master Cook going to the Market to buy provision for the Cardiacall Prince
Spiritus Vitalis.

Having little other Employment I accompanied them partly to learn what Diet
people kept in that Country and partly for a Breakfast out of the Cooks Fees.

There for the Younger and hotter Spirits they bought these cooling Cardiaca.

Rosae. Violae. Acetosa. Borago. Buglos. Nymphaea. Plantago. Suc. Citri. Limon.
Granat. Cerasa. Pom. odor. Rub. Idaei. Santal. Corn. Ceru. Os de Cord. C.
Vnicornu. Terra Sigil. Bol. Armen. Margarit. Corallium. Bezoar non falsificat.
Hyacynth. Saphyr. Smaragd. Chrystallus.
Some Compounds (to mix among their ordinary sawces) they bought, which were
these, Diarrhod Abbat. Diarrhod. comun. Diatrion. Santal. Diamarg. frig. Elect.
ex Acetos, etc.


For the more Aged, and colder bloods they took up these, Cardiaca Calida.
Melissa. Rosmar. Ocymum. Card. Ben. Scordium. Veronica. Cort. Citri. Sem.
Citri. Chermes. Charyop. hort. Rad. Angel. Helenii. Flor. Calend. Xyloaloes.
^^ Cook, or (...), was retired into a little private Room, and there very
close at Work, upon an Antepidemicall Antidote, wherein as I remember he put
these praeparations.

. Confect Alkerm. Confect. ex Hyacynt. Theriac. Extract. bac. Iunip. an.j.
Salis Perlar. Salis Coral. an.iij. Antimon. diaphor. Sulphuris, aurat. diaph.
Balsam. lact. Sulp. an.ss. Essent. Croci ij. Essentiae Camph. j. Tinctur. Auri
cum Spir. Sal. extract. j. Lapid. Bezoar. ver. j. Essent. Cinamom. Essent.
Caryophyl. an..j. Moschi. Ambrae. an.g.viij.
Those he mixed* s. art^m, and thereof made his Antidote. Which he told me was
an admirable Preservative against the Plague every morning the quantity of a
small Pease being taken fasting, Likewise for those which were already stricken
with that Infection, if they took,.ss. or j. of it dissolved in ij. of some
Cardiacall Water, it cured them by a Violent sweat: corroborating the Heart;
and banishing all contagious or Pestilentiall Spirits to the remotest parts of
the Microcosme.

Having seen that Antidote finished; I went into another fair large Room which
seemed another Muran of Glasses.

There I found ready prepared.

Aurum Potabile. Tinctura Auri. Aurum Diaphoret. Arcanum Auri. Bezoardic.
minerale. Tartar. Vitriolatum. Spir. Tartari. Sal. Viperin. Essent. Unicorn.
Flores Sulph. Lac. Sulphuris. Spir. Salis. Spir. Nitri. Margarit. Mineral.
Mercur. diaphor. Sal. Christalli. Sal. Corallor. Sal. Perlar. Tinctur. Croci.
Tinct. Rubinar. Tinct. Smarald. Tinct. Hyacynt. Tinct. Corallor. Tinct.
Antimon. Balsam. Cinamom. Balsam. Caryoph. Bals. Nuc. Mosch. Essentia Ambrae.
Essentia Moschi. Spir. Rosar. Essent. Corn. Cerv. Spir. Melissae. Spir. Card.
Ben. Spir. Rosmarin. Sir. corallor. Sir. Perlar. Essent. Flor. narant. Essent.
Flor. Citri.
With many other such like principal Cardiacall preparations.

I returned again to the Master Cook, and desired him to give me the Receipts
of those Cordial Rarityes which I had seen in his Operatory. He answered that
they were all secrets reserved for the Preservation, and Renovation of his
Prince Spiritus Vitalis, and were by him forbidden to be published to any but
such who serve out their time in his Kitchen.

If any of you Gentlemen have a liking to any of these Dishes, (the worst of
which may be served to a Princes Table) pray fall to whilst they are before
you; and when those are digested, who ever desires* to make use of them at Home
for his Private Family, let him retire to any of our Spagiricall Kitchings, and
you shall find our Cooks more open Hearted than those of the Cardiacall
Princes; and freely present you all their Art in such Hermeticall Delicacyes.
In the mean time I am sorry my cheer is not answerable to your Merits. What you
want In meat; I desire you to satisfy with Mirth: For so believe me you shall
be Heartily Welcome.

FINIS.

