Detur Pulchriori: OR, A POEM in the Praise of the University OF OXFORD.

Et pueri nasum Rhinocerotis habent. Mart. Ep. Vivitur ingenio, caetera mortis
erunt. Ovid. Anno Dom. 1658.

Patri mihi Charissimo I. V. Haec parerga mea D. D. C. Q.
NOn meus agnoscit Parnassi somnia Phoebus,
Neve Caballina Musa Lavatur aqua;
Maenadis inspirat sitientes Mente Poetas,
Ebria, nam nunquam Sobria Musa furit.
Sis Genitor mihi Phoebus, erit pro font Caballi
Isis, sim Vates Sobrius inde tuus,
Et Filius etc. Philomus^^

To my most Honored Schoolmaster.
Sir
IF like a Pythonist I from my Wits
May chance to start, vent Oracles by fitts,
And so be Poet dubbed, know I am one
Not born but made by inspiration,
For from Your influence my Muse begun,
My lines the Paralelies of Your Sun.
And since from the Pindarique Mountain You
Descend, to lend Your hand to us below:
Lo our Inferior Orbs begin to move,
And act by the Intelligence of Your Love,
And though you cannot expect from Pigmey brains
Witt's Garagantuas, Gigantique strains,
How 'ere my Muse (though stretched upon the Last
Of an Hyperbole,'s but a Neurospast
Moved by Your Candours Mysterious wire)
Inspired, though not with a Delphique fire,
But a pure Vestall flame, contends to raise
Her note, unto the Elah of Your praise,
If you accept these tender spriggs, know she.
Will give You better at Maturity.
Yours etc. Philomusus.

An Apology.
HAve you not seen when Titans glorious ray
Does peep through the Azure Welkin, and display
It Is Splendent luster, not alone to those,
Whose faces are more Painted then their clothes,
Nor yet to those, who with Grandezza bear
Their stately looks above the Vulgar Sphere;
Noe, no, the humble Sun descends to all,
Glancing with smiles upon the lowest vale;
Even so our Sun, our true Apollo leaves
None in Cimmerian mists, to all he gives
To be his Stars, and have from him their light;
Lest some should set in a perpetual night.
Well then, I Will show my self to be his Son,
His genuine Son, a boon companion
Of the Aonian sisters, though I see
The Sun of Censure Levelling at me:
Look how he forms his thoughts into a Cone,
And smites me with the sharpest end? anon
He carps, he bites; this quick-ey'd Basilisque
What ere he sees, wounds with an Asterisque:
He Will fine, if i will not cleanse what I have writ
Which shows he is but the Scavinger of Wit.
To his ingenious Friend F. V.
SInce in so little room Thou have set forth
Thy Mothers praise, and Her deserved worth,
Which required Volumes, Thee in rank we will put
With him who wrote the Iliades in a Nut.
W. C. G^

A Poem in the Praise of the University of OXFORD.
Hum! hum! what is it, that does impede my note
Causing a swelling Squincy in my throat?
Methinks my Wide-boar'd Muse might with her noise
Drown Pistoll-Shott, yea a Granadas vojce,
But since so many Pamphlet bullets fly
About mine ears, 'twill be best Chivalry
To fight it out, and with a valiant pen
Win Oxfords credit from Malignant men.
Dear Mother, though unhallowed lips would stain
with Satyrs flowing from a Wormwood brain
Thy comely feature, with a Viperous strife
Gnawing those bowels that did give them life;
Although they sully Thee, 'twill be their shame,
Thy Honor, and immortalize thy fame,
Though full-mouthed Cynnicks be in Sent so hott.
Each Black patch Calumny's thy Beauty spott.
The first mouth that Malign's thee is the Clown's,
Whose tongues more thumb'd and sullied, then the Town's,
Or Parish-book, he never does cease to Yawn
And swallow Solecismes, as smooth as Brawn,
He Would rather be a Page unto his Car,
Or his Swines Guardian, then go so far
As to a Versity, for none but Vools,
Che swears will send their Children unto Schools.
More could I name whose Counterpoising tounges
Spit words far more corrupted then their lungs,
But since it is not my scope to answer those,
Whose names Donquixoted do live in prose,
And never knew that Poets only claim
Maugre the teeth of time, aeternall fame,
Then rouse my Muse and with immortal lays
Caroll unto the world famed Oxford's praise.
Oxford! the Arsenall of Arts, the Muses
Sole staple, where Apollo only uses
To Barter, where our half-starv'd Poets buy
Their soaring Pegasus, and mounted fly
Up the Aonian cliffs, the towering mount
Does make them giddy, 'till the Castalian fount
Begins to reinspire their spur-gall'd brains,
And add new spirits to their empty veins.
In thee the Grave Logician does commence
To rant mysterious terms, and fustian sense,
While his Lines cragg'd, and hard to understand
Do far more baffle then the Devill's hand.
Daring more with his three fork'd mace of late,
Then the three neck'd Porter of the Infernal gate
while his amazed Auditors suppose
Some Demogorgon always in the close.
From thee the Politician has his books,
The Hieroglyphiks of majestique looks.
Of thee Apollo his melodious strains,
His dulced Anthems, sugared Hymns obtains,
Tyeing with Music sweeter then the Sphear's
Men madd with aspiration by the ears,
And least injurious tongues fly-blow thy praise,
He will Thee crown with never dying Bays.
Thou Oils the Rustique's tongue, and on him showrs
In his Youth's April, and produces flowrs
Of party-colored Retorique, he talks
On Stilts, his slippery tongue confusedly walks,
So he (whose tongue hide-bound before) in sense
Can prate, Imbellished with eloquence.
Again thou teach Devious Youth to tread
In Virtue's path, and giv'st them hands and head.
Thou giv'st them Heads, from whence Conceptions flow,
High soaring thoughts and not Pestantique low
Thou giv'st them hands to hold Minerva's shield,
From conquered Ignorance to gain the Field.
Were not for the, the Milk-sopp-youth would nere
Be moralliz'd nor would he ever bear
His Father's Royal stamp, nor would his age
Admit of Council, from the grave and sage
Although the Rustique scorns, it is from thee
He got the rules of right Economy.
Of Thee the Learned Galenist obtains
His knowledge in the Mystery of the veins
And nervs; of late his skill he so inhances
By finding out the blood's Maeandring dances,
That he old nature with Industrious pain
Renews, makes aged Aeson young again.
The Art of numbering does confess that she
Endowed was with the Golden rule by thee.
The skilled Geometrician who surveighs
With Curious eyes the Continent and Seas
Squares by thy rule;
He who at every rise
Waits on Night's fairest Queen with courting eyes,
And who Inamorato-like does Honor
And Homage pay to those that wait upon her,
To every pinck-ey'd Star; who swears that he
Will have noe Mistress but a Cassiope,
Does vow to sacrifice to Thee each year
The stalled Bull, snatched from his Hemisphear,
A Quarter of the Hevenly Tupp, what is more,
He Will add the Golden fleice, to quit the score,
That still is chalked in his mind, He ows
To Thee, what rarities so er'e he knows,
In lieu of payment therefore will he set
On thy Head Ariadnes coronet,
He Will make the Zodiac be thy golden chain,
Aquarius vernall showrs upon Thee rain,
To make thy May more Pregnant, and thy stemm,
Outgoe the Pearls in Flora's Diademm.
The grave Divine, who does the People aw
Bonarges-like with the Mosaique Law,
Again a Barnabas, who does dispense
Sweet nunico, of Christ intelligence,
Inspiring with pure Zeal the amazed Soul,
Making her lave her self then sin more foul,
Says it is his Debvoir, before the greyzeyd day
Puts on her Mornings dress, for Thee to pray;
"Great God, Immortal King! cast down an eye,
"On Britains Fountains, let them never dry;
"Let more especially my Mothers Fountain,
" Be baptized Helicon in Sions Mountain,
"Let it her Honor be t'extoll Thy fame,
"Let all her praise be still to praise thy name.
Lo now my Muse is Jaded, and my quill
Tired, beggs a Vacation, she will
No longer travel in Thy Praises Ocean,
How 'ere she will say Amen to the Devotion,
Floreat aeternis Academia Nostra Camaenis.
To the Author.
WIll none none commend Thee? well had I but been
Born at the brink of sacred Hippocrene,
Or were the Muses darling, or might be
An equal sharer in the Daphnean Tree;
I would commend Thee, so that I would raise
An Altar, and would offer to Thy praise
An Hecatomb of verses, and my Pen
If thou were dead, should make Thee live again,
T. S. Oxon.

FINIS.

