THE Unfortunate Couple; Or, The Unkind FATHER:
Being a true Relation of a Squire's Son, who having Married his Father's Maid
against his Consent, was reduced to such great Necessity, that his Young Wife
Died for Grief, and his Father denying him releif, he fell into sad Despair,
and Shot himself Dead with a Pistol, in his Chamber in L -- d-g-te-street on
Saturday last.

Tune, of or give me if my looks I thought etc.
YOU Cruel Parents, most severe
now Listen to my story,
And pity your own Children dear,
if they for Love do Marry:
For it is not saiding Earthly Dross,
that will true joys procure,
When Lovers find a fatal Cross,
none can such pains endure.
Al Squires Son, of Wealth and fame,
in Love was much affected,
With a most fair and brisk young Dame,
who kindly him respected,
But being but his Fathers Maid,
his Friends did all despise her,
Quoth they, let us the Youth persuade,
to leave her, and be wiser.
But all their words did but increase:
his true and real affection,
He vowed that he would soon release,
his Love from their subjection,
And in the Dark and silent Night,
he privately did Carry,
His only Darling from their sight,
and quickly her did Marry.
No sooner did the Squire hear,
what his Young Son had acted,
But he with rage did rave and tare,
as if he would been Distracted,
Quoth he, no Spawn of Beggar's Bratts,
shall e're enjoy my Treasure,
I Will never own him for my Son;
so great is my displeasure.
The Cruel Father, thus unkind,
did make them both Distressed
For no subsistence could they fi^d
with wants they were oppressed.
So that the poor unhappy Bride,
with sorrow and vexation,
Her heart it broke, and soon she Died,
While he made Lamentation.
Two pretty Babes she left behind,
would move a Tark's compassion:
But yet the Squire's cruel mind;
retained his Indignation:
For when his Son on bended Knee;
implored some small assistance,
(Quoth he) bring not her Bratts to me:
But pray keep at a distance.
This answer filled his heart with grief;
and brought despair upon him,
Because he missed of all releif:
and friends they did disown him,
Disturbed mind and fearful Dreams:
did Night and Day Molest him,
Confused thoughts, and such extremes:
as more, and more oppress't him.
He set a Pistol to his Head,
which cut Lif's thread insunder:
And in his Chamber fell down Dead
which filled the Town with wonder:
Let all take warning by his fall:
despair it was his Ruin
Take heed in time both great and small
for fear it is your undoing.
LONDON, Printed for P. Markham near Bridge-water-Square.


