The Unfortunate Quaker.
An ACCOUNT of the Strange and wonderful Manner How one Mrs. COCKBID, One of
those People called QVAKERS,
The Wife of an eminent Glover, at the Hand and Glove in Low-Holborn, was found
miserably Scorched and parched to DEATH, her Night-rail, the Handkerchief about
her Neck and Head-cloaths being entirely BVRNT, though none of the Woollen in the
least touched, after she had been left not much above a Quarter of an Hour in a
Room belonging to a Washer-woman, whom she came to visit, lodging at the
Chandlers shop over against Ely-house, although there was scarce any Fire in the
Grate, with this further heightening Circumstance of Wonder, viz The Child that
was left with her being found Crying on its Back in the middle of the Room, etc.

AMongst all the Instances of Divine Judgment, that Heaven has been pleased to
execute in this sinful Age, either as Punishments to particular Persons, or
Warnings to others; none has been more amazing, strange and terrible, than the
ensuing Relation I am about to make, all Circumstances duly weighed and
considered: And, however Fame augments or substracts to or from Accidents of
this Nature, according to Popular Fancy, yet I shall endeavor (on the best
Credit) only to relate plain Matter of Fact, and so leave every Person to make
such Comments thereon as his own Reason shall best guide and direct him.

At the Sign of the Hand and Glove, in Lower-Holborn, lives one Cockbid, a
Person of good Fame and Reputation, by Profession a Glover, and by Religion (si
fas sit ita loqui) one in Communion with the People called Quakers. This
unhappy Gentleman's Wife, on Friday last, the 12th of this instant November,
went to visit an Acquaintance and Customer of theirs, one Mrs. Islip a Lodger
at the Chandlers Shop, opposite to Ely-house, and one who followed the
Occupation of washing Gloves. This Quaker-woman the Glover's Wife, as
aforesaid, had not long sat (as I am reputably informed, in common Chat about
the Affairs of the World with this Washer of Gloves, e're this said Washer had
occasion to go to a Friend's House in Field-lane: Her Business requiring no
long tarriance, she left the Quaker with her Child in the Room, sitting by a
little Fire in a very small Grate. Half an Hour was the very utmost of her
absence^ yet, when she returned, to her inexpressible trouble, fright and amaze,
she found the unhappy Quaker miserably scorched to Death, with these very
strange and astonishing Circumstances:

Her Face and Throat dreadfully scorched, or parched; her Night-rail,
Handkerchief, and Head-cloaths entirely burnt; but the rest of her Clothes,
that is her Woollens, without the least symptom of Fire discernable; and all
this without any Fire in the Room morally possible to effect it, although such a
dead Sleep or Drowsiness had seiz d her, that she had fallen into it: And what
infinitely more added to the Wonder was, that the Child, left with her, was
found thrown on it is Back (...) the midst of the Room, whose crying after the
Mother, who was come into her Landlady the Chandler's Shop, hastened her up.

It seems ^o me indeed a very strange Accident, that only her Nightrail, the
Handkerchief about her Neck, and her Head-cloaths should be burned, without
prejudice to her Woollens, since Fire, ^^ke Death, is of that devouring
Quality, that it spares nothing, but equally where its furious F^mes have got
the ascendant, consumes Ermins and Vermin, Linen and Woollen, Silks an^ Satin,
as well as Rags and ^atters.

Various a^ the Conjectures of People on this unhappy Occasion, especially
since the Subject was one of that Pure Fold, those Unspotted Lambs, the
Quakers: But, indeed, tho some would insinuate, Th^^ the Woman had taken too
large a Dram of that burning Liquor call d Brandy, and consequently, in
Judgment to which, that this more terrible Fire had consumed her, yet, upon the
st^ictest Enquiry, we and her no ways addicted to such Beastial Excess. And I
could wish all the Pious Sisters of that Communion had no greater Blots in
their Scutcheon than she had.

To be brie^ I shall only remind such Conjecturers of what Christ told his
Disciples in the 13th of Luke. ^hen some told him of the Galileans, whose Blood
Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifice, Supp^^^ ye (quoth he) that those
Galileans, because they suffered such things, were Sinners above all the
Gali^^^ans? I tell you nay; but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish
Or those eighteen upon whom (...) Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, think
you they were sinners above all that dwelt in Jerusalem? I (...) you nay. I
heartily desire all Christians would make a due Improvement of God's Judgments
and that those of this Sect would more particularly take notice of this; for as
I am far from ^ading the Memory of the deceased with unjust Imputations, so I
am far from asserting the ^nnocence of that Tribe, well knowing the Puritanical
Garb and Demure Look amongst them, to ^e too often but the Cloak of vilest
Iniquities.

London: Printed by J. VV: near Fleet Street, 1697.


