A BRIEF Natural History Intermixed with variety OF Philosophical Discourses;
AND REFUTATIONS Of such VULGAR ERRORS As our Modern Authors have hitherto
omitted.

By Eugenius Philalethes.

LONDON Printed for Matthew Smelt next door to the Castle near Moor-gate. 1669.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
I Presume I shall no sooner appear upon the Stage I am prepared for, but I
must without evasion expect to be assaulted by that furious and inconsiderate
Monster called Censour; whose lashes I will receive with the same slight
concern, the Lacedaemonians did the cruelty of their Correctors, sporting
themselves whilst their backs were torn with the unmerciful Whip. Of that
efficacy is Resolution, that it presents pain but mere Opinion, and values a
scoffing Lucian, or a satirical Memphus, no more then a harmless Hellespont did
the vain threats of a proud Xerxes. Seneca says well, better aliud agere quam
nihil, for Idleness is the Devils opportunity: the Considerations of which
(with my assent to the Judgment of Thucidides, who says, To know a thing and
not to express it, is all one as thongh he knew it not) made me to expose my
self to public view. My Subject is good and great, called by the Name of
Nature; here I present her, expressing man's Ingratitude, who is fit to strip
her of those Robes of Privilege that God himself has endowed her with, not:
considering that what she acts, is by the virtue of his Power; and that She is
one of those Mirrours that represents him to us, which a Philosophic Passion
adores as the supreme Efficient. But indeed, how can She expect our Veneration,
till we have divested our selves of that prejudice ignorance possesses us with,
which must be done by a serious reflex upon her Effects, as this little Volumn
will acquaint you, if you read it with an impartial and unbyased Reason; for I
have, as all others of the same Inclination must do, used Philosophy as the
Tellescope by which we must make our Observations, as you will, when you see,
find my curiosity descending to little Insects, and that with wonder at their
production out of Corruption; from thence I view her care in beautifying this
little Globe we live in, with Robes suitable to every Season; and when I ascend
the lower Region, and mark the Clouds ranging themselves in such bodies as
though they intended another Deluge, it occasions wonder; so likewise the
coldness of the middle Region with the heat of the upper, and the Element of
Fire, must be Miracles to ignorance. And if we observe the Moon, with the
Motion attending that of the Seas flux and reflux, it would make us judge, that
there is some secret contract made ab Origin betwixt her and the watery
Element. Mercury and Venus I have spoken of in their places: the next that
presents us with cause of Admiration, is the glorious Sun, the Luminary of the
Universe, called by some, and not improperly, the Anima Mundi, for we find her
approach gives life to Vegitives, sense to Animals, and almost a new Nature to
Rationals. As for Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, the Eighth Sphere, and
Christalline Heaven, and the Empyreum, I have treated on, if not like a knowing
Secretary of Nature, yet a submiss Admirer of her. And whereas I make a
refutation of Errors, as an addition to my Title, some perhaps will say, I am
like the Tinker, that for stopping of one hole make two, or for my refuting of
one Error, I have made two; it may be I have in the Opinion of some: But
whether I have or no, who shall be judge? for what appears an Error to one, is
to another a very evident truth: sometimes a Week or a Day, nay an hour puts a
change upon an Opinion of many years standing. But let my Errors be as great
and as many as I pretend to correct, Reason shall convince me, and command my
Acknowledgment; for it is our Errors that presents us human. I have writ this
to give Satisfaction to others if I can; but if not, howsoever I have secured
it to my self; And let the Reader judge of it as it pleases him. I have writ
that which delights me; And if envy cause a misapplication of my intention, it
matters not, the contempt of it will make me bold to say, I value it and thee
after the rate as thou do it and me.

The assertions here laid down are plain and perspicuous, convincing and
satisfactory to the intelligent. But I know that common prejudice which is
usually taken of any thing (though never so true) which is contrary to any man's
belief, it does beget such Passion and animosity, etc. and makes such a breach
as is hardly to be repaired. And since our own Opinion may make it disputable
what reason we have to pretend of convince another by, I shall only offer this
for common satisfaction, that things demonstrable are the most evident marks of
Truth; and that they are so clearly manifested in this little Book, deserves
nothing but sobriety and moderation, and a well weighing of the matter herein
contained. Reader, I am loath to leave thee, but that I would not keep thee from
the Book it self, which I hope will be to thy ample satisfaction, etc.

Vale. Eugenius Philalethes.

A Brief Natural History Intermixed With variety of Philosophical Discourses,
etc.
GOD by his presential Essence gives unto all things an Essence; so that if he
should withdraw himself from them, as out of Nothing they were first made, so
into Nothing they would be again resolved. In the preservation then of the
Creature, we are not to consider so much the impotency and weakness thereof, as
the goodness, wisdom, and power of the Creator, in whom, and by whom, and for
whom, they live, move, and have their being. The spirit of the Lord fills the
world, says the Author of the Wisdom of Solomon; and the secret working of the
Spirit, which thus pierces through all things, as Virgil AEneid 6, has
excellently expressed,

Principio coelum ac terras camposque Liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaq, astra,
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus,
Men's agitat molem and magno se corpore miscet.
The Heavens, the Earth, and all the Liquid Main,
The Moons bright Globe and Stats Titanian;
A Spirit within maintains, and their whole Mass
A Mind, which through each part infused does pass,
Fashions and works and wholly does transpierce
All this great body of the Universe.
The Spirit the Platonists call the Soul of the World; by it, it is in some
sort quickened and formalized, as the body of Man is by its reasonable Soul.
There is no question then, but that this Soul of the World, (if we may so speak
with reverence) being in truth no other then the immortal spirit of the
Creator, is able for to make the Body of the World Immortal; and to preserve it
from Dissolution; as he does the Angels, and the spirits of men, were it not,
that he has determined to dissolve it by the same supernatural and
extraordinary Power, by which at the first he gave it existence. For my own
part I constantly believe that it had a beginning, and shall have an ending;
and judge him not worthy of the name of a Christian; who is not of the same
mind: yet so as I believe both to be matter of faith; Through Faith we
understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, Heb. 11. 3. And
through the same Faith we understand likewise, that they shall be again
unframed by the same Word. Reason may grope at this truth in the dark; howbeit,
it can never clearly apprehend it, till it be enlightened by the bright beams of
Faith. Though I deny not but that it is probable, though not demonstrative, and
convincing Arguments may be drawn from the discourse of Reason to prove either
the one or the other.

I remember the Philosophers propose a question, Uirum Mundus filo general
concursu Dei perpet^^ durare possit? and for the most part they conclude it
affirmatively, even such as professed the Christian Religion, and for the proof
of this assertion, they bring in effect this reason. The Heavens, say they, are
of a nature which is not capable of it self of corruption; the loss of the
Elements is recovered by compensation, of mixed bodies without Life by
accretion, of living bodies by succession, the fall of the one being the rise
of the other: as Rome triumphed in the ruins of Alba, and the depression of
one Scale is the elevation of another; according to that of Solomon, One
generation passes away, and another generation comes, but the Earth abides
for ever, Eccles. 1. 4.

Again, all Subcoelestial Bodies (as is evident) consist of Matter and Form;
now the first Matter having nothing contrary unto it, cannot by the force of
Nature be destroyed; and being Created immediately by God, it cannot be
abolished by any inferior Agent. And as for the Forms of Natural Bodies, no
sooner does any one abandon the Matter it informed, but another instantly steps
into the place thereof; no sooner has one acted his part and is retired, but
another presently comes forth upon the Stage, though it may be in a different
shape, and to act a different part; so that no proportion of Matter is, or at
any time can be altogether void and empty; but like Vertumnes or Proteus it
turns it self into a thousand Shapes, and is always supplied and furnished
with one Form or other, by a power Divine above Nature: but to proceed, such
and so great is the Wisdom, the Bounty, and the Omnipotence which God has
expressed in the Frame of the Heavens, that the Psalmist might justly say, The
Heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1. The Sun, and the Moon, and the
Stars serving as so many Silver and Golden Characters, embroidered upon azure
for the daily Preaching and Publishing thereof to the World. And surely if he
have made the floor of this great house so beautiful, and garnished it with
such wonderful variety of Beasts, of Trees, of Herbs, of Flowers, we need
wonder the less at the Magnificence of the Roof, which is the highest part of
the World, and the nearest to the Mansion House of Saints and Angels. Now as
the excellency of these bodies appear in their Situation, their Matter, their
Magnitude, and their Spherical and Circular Figure; so specially in their great
use and efficacy; not only that they are for Signs and Seasons and for Days
and Years; but in that by their Motion, their Light, their warmth, and
Influence, they guide and govern, nay cherish and maintain, breed and beget
these Inferior Bodies, even of Man himself, for whose sake the Heavens were
made. It is truly said of the Prince of Philosophers, Sol and homo generunt
hominem, the Sun and Man beget Man. Man concurring in the generation of Man as
an immediate, and the Sun as a remote cause. And in another place he doubts not
to affirm of this inferior World in general. Necessa est Mundum inferiorem
super in ^ibus continuari, ut ^^^^is inde Virtus ^^rivetur. It is requisite,
that these inferior parts of the World should be co-joyned to the Motions of
the higher Bodies, that so all their Virtue and vigor might be from thence
derived.

There is no question but the Heavens have a mavelous great stroke upon the
Air, the Water, the Earth, the Plants, the Metals, the Beasts, and upon Man
himself, at least wise in regard of his body and natural faculties. To let pass
the quailing and withering of all things by their recess, and their reviving
and resurrection, (as it were) by the reaccess of the Sun. I am of opinion,
that the sap of the trees so precisely follows the motion of the Sun, that it
never rests, but is in a continual agitation, as the Sun it self; which no
sooner arrives at the Tropic, but he instantly returns, and even at the very
instant (as I conceive) and I think it may be demonstrated by experimental
Conclusions) the sap which by degrees descended with the declination of the
Sun, begins to remove at the approach thereof, by the same steps that it
descended: And as the approach of the Sun is scarce sensible at his first
return, but afterward the day increases more in one week, than before in two;
in like manner also fares it with the Sap, in Plants, which at the first
ascends up insensibly and slowly, but within a while much more swiftly and
apparently. It is certain that the Tulip, Marigold, and Sun-flower open with
the rising, and shut with the setting of the Sun; so that though the Sun appear
not, a man may more infallibly know when it is high noon by their full
spreading, then by the Index of a Clock or Watch. The Hop in its growing
windeth it self about the Pole, always following the course of the Sun from
East to West, and can by no means be drawn to the contrary, choosing rather to
break then yield.

It is observed, by those that Sail between the Tropicks, that there is a
constant set Wind, blowing from the East to the West, Sailors call it the
Breeze, which rises and falls with the Sun, and is always highest at noon; and
is commonly so strong, partly by its own blowing, and partly by overruling the
Current, that they who sail to Peru, cannot well return the same way they came
forth: And generally Mariners do observe, that caeteris paribus, they sail
with more speed from the East to the West, then back again from the West to the
East, in the same compass of time. All which should argue a wheeling about of
the Air, and Waters by the diurnal Motion of the Heavens, and especial by the
motion of the Sun. Whereunto may be added, that high-Sea springs of the year,
are always nearer about the two AEquinoctials and Solstices; and the Cock as a
trusty Watchman, both at midnight and break of day, gives notice of the Suns
approach.

These be the strange and secret effects of the Sun, upon the inferior Bodies;
whence by the Gentiles he was held the visible God of the World: and termed the
Eye thereof, which alone saw all things in the World, and by which the World
saw all things in it self.

Omnia qui videt, and per quem videt omnia Mundus. And most notably it is
described by the Psalmist, in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which
is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to
run a race, his going forth is from the beginning of the Heaven, and his
Circuit to the end of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof,
Psalm. 19 4, 5, 6.

Now as the effects of the Sun, the headspring of Light and warmth, are upon
these inferior Bodies more active, so those of the Moon (as being Ultima
caelo, Citima terris, nearer the Earth, and holding a greater resemblance
therewith) are no less Manifest. And therefore the Husbandman in sowing and
setting, grafting, and planting, lopping of Trees, and felling of Timber, and
the like, upon good reason observes the waxing and waining of the Moon, which
Learned Zanchius in his Operibus Dei, well allows of; commending Hesiod for his
rules therein Quod ex Lunae decrementis and incrementis totius agricolationis
signa notet, quis improbet? who can mislike it that Hesiod sets down the signs,
in the whole course of Husbandry, from the waxing and waining of the Moon: the
Tides and ebbs of the Sea follow the course of it, so exactly, as the Seamen
will tell you the age of the Moon only by the sight of the Tide as certainly,
as if he saw it in the water. It is the observation of Aristotle and Pliny out
of him, That Oysters, Mussels, Cockles, Lobsters, Crabbs, etc. and generally
all Shellfish grow fuller in the increase of the Moon, but emptier in the
decrease thereof. Such a strong predominancy it has upon the Brain of Man,
that Lunaticks borrow their very name from it; as also does the Stone
Selenites; whose property, as St. Augustine and Georgius Agricola records it,
is to increase and decrease in Light with the Moon, carrying always the
resemblance thereof with it self. Neither can it reasonably be imagined, that
other Planets, and Stars, and parts of Heaven, are without their forcible
operations upon these lower Bodies, specially considering that the very Plants
and Herbs of the Earth, which we tread upon, have their several virtues, as
well single by themselves, as in composition with other ingredients. The
Physician in opening of a Vein, has ever an eye to the Sign then reigning. The
Canicular Star, especially in those hotter Climates, was by the Ancients always
held a dangerous Enemy to the practice of Physic, and all kind of Evacuations.
Nay, Galen himself, the Oracle of that profession, advises practitioners in
that Art, in all their cures, to have a special regard to the reigning
Constellations and Conjunctions of the Planets. But the most admirable m^stery
of Nature, in my Mind, is the turning of Iron touched with the Lodestone
toward the North Pole; (of which I shall have occasion to discourse more
largely hereafter in another Tract,) neither were it hard to add much more to
that which has been said, to show the dependence of these Elementary Bodies
upon the Heavenly: Almighty God having ordained, that the higher should serve
as intermediate Agents, or secondary Causes; but so, as in the Wheels of a
Clock; though the failing of the Superior, cannot but cause a failing in the
Inferior, yet the failing of the Inferior, may well argue somewhat for it
self, though it cannot cause a failing in the Superior, we have great Reason
then, as I conceive, to begin with the examination of the State of Celestial
Bodies, in as much as upon them the condition of the subcoelestial depends.
Wherein five things will offer themselves to our consideration, their
Substances, their Motion, their Light, their Warmth and their Influence. That
the Heavens are endued with some kind of Matter, though some Philosophers in
their jangling humors, have made a doubt of it, yet I think no sober and wise
Christian will deny it: But whether the Matter of it be the same with that of
these inferior Bodies, adhuc sub Judice lis est, it has been and still is a
great question among Divines. The Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive
Church for the most part following Plato, hold that it agrees with the nature
of the Elementary Bodies, yet so as it is compounded of the finest flower, and
choicest delicacy of the Elements: But the Schoolmen on the one side, that
follow Aristotle, adhere to his Quintessence, and by no means will be beaten
from it, since, say they, If the Elements and the Heavens should agree in the
same Matter, it should consequently follow, that there should be a mutual
Traffic and, Commerce, a reciprocal Action and Passion between them, which
would soon draw on a change, and by degrees a ruin upon those glorious Bodies.
Now though this point will never (I think) be fully and finally determined,
till we come to be inhabitants of that place, whereof we dispute; (for hardly
do we guess aright at things that are upon Earth. And with labor do we find
the things that a^e at hand; but the things that are in Heaven, who has
searched out? Wis^. 9. 16. Yet for the present, I should state it thus, that
they agree in the same Original Matter; and surely Moses, methinks, seems to
favor this opinion, making but one Matter, (as far as I can gather from the
Text) out of which all bodily substances were Created.

Unus irat toto vultus in Orb. Ovid. 1. Metam. So as the Heavens, though they
be not compounded of the Elements, yet are they made of the same Matter that
the Elements are compounded of; They are not subject to the qualities of heat,
cold, or drought, or moisture, nor yet to weight, or lightness, which arise
from those qualities, but have a Form given them, which differs from the
Forms of all corruptible Bodies, so as it suffers nor, nor can it suffer from
any of them being so excellent and perfect in it self, as it wholly satiateth
the appetite of the Matter, that is informs. The Celestial Bodies then,
meeting with so noble a Form to actuate them, are not, nor cannot, in the
course of Nature, be liable to any Generation or Corruption, in regard of their
Substance; to any augmentation or diminution, in regard of their quantity; no
nor any obstructive alteration, in respect of their qualities.

I am not ignorant that the controversies touching the Form, what it should be,
is no less then touching the Matter; some holding it to be a living and a
quickening Spirit, nay a sensitive and rational Soul; which opinion is stiffly
maintained by many great and learned Clerks, both Jews and Gentiles, and
Christians, supposing it unreasonable that the Heavens which impart life to
other Bodies, should themselves be destitute of Life: But this Error is
notably discovered and confuted by Claudius Espenatus, a famous Doctor of
Sorbone, in a Treatise which he purposely composed on that point de Caelorum
animatione: In as much as what is denied those bodies in Life, in Sense, in
Reason, is abundantly supplied in their constant and unchangeable duration,
arising from that inviolable knot and indissoluble Marriage, betwixt the Matter
and the Form, which can never suffer any Divorce, but from that hand which
first joined them. And howbeit it cannot be denied, that not only the
reasonable Soul of Man, but the sensitive of the least Gnat that flies in the
Air, and the vegetative of the basest Plant that springs out of the Earth, are
(in that they are endued with Life) more Divine, and nearer approaching the
Fountain of Life, then the Forms of the Heavenly Bodies; yet as the Apostle
speaks of Faith, Hope, and Charity, concludes Charity to be the greatest,
(though by Faith we do apprehend and apply the merits of Christ) because it is
more universal in operation, and lassing in duration; so though the Forms of
the Creatures endued with Life do in that regard, come a step nearer to the
Deity, then the Forms of the Heavenly Bodies, which are without Life, yet if
we regard their purity, their beauty, their efficacy, their indeficiency in
moving, their universallity and independency in working, there is no question,
but that the Heavens may in that respect be preferred, even before Man himself,
for whose sake they were made; Man being indeed Immortal, in regard of his
Soul, but the Heavens in regard of their Bodies, as being made of an
incorruptible stuff.

Which cannot well stand with their opinion, who held them to be composed of
Fire, or the Waters, which in the first of Genesis are said to be above the
Firmament, and in the hundred forty eight Psalm, Above the Heavens, are above
the Heavens we now treat of, for the tempering and qualifying of their heat, as
did St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine hold, and many others, venerable for their
Antiquity, Learning, and Piety. Touching the former of which Opinions, we shall
have fitter opportunity to discourse, when we come to Treat of the warmth
caused by the Heavens. But touching the Second, it seems to have been grounded
upon a mistake of the Word Firmament, which by the Ancients was commonly
appropriated to the eighth Sphere, in which are feated the fixed Stars;
whereas the Original Hebrew (which properly signifies Extention, or Expansion)
In the first of Genesis, is not only applied to the Spheres in which the Sun
and Moon are planted, but to the lowest Region of the Air, in which the Birds
fly; and so do I with Pareus and Pererius, take it to be understood in this
controversy. This Region of the Air being, as St. Augustine somewhere speaks,
Terminus intransgressibilis, a firm and irremoveable wall of separation
betwixt the waters that are bred in the bowels of the Earth, and those of the
Clouds. And for the Word Heaven, which is used in the hundred fortyeighth
Psalm, it is likewise applied to the middle Region of the Air, by the Prophet
Jere^y, Jer. 10. 13. Which may serve for a Gloss upon the Text alleged out of
the Psalm, When he utters his voice, there is a noise of the waters in the
Heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the Earth.

Now, the Schoolmen finding that the placing of the waters above the Starry
Heavens, was both unnatural and unuseful, and yet not being well acquainted
with the propriety of the Hebrew Word, to salve the matter, tell us of a
Christaline or glassie Heaven, above the eight Sphere, which say they, is
undoubtedly the waters above the firmament, mentioned by Moses; which
exposition of theirs, does cross the course of Moses his Historical Narration,
his purpose being as it seems, only to write the History of things which were
visible and sensible, as appears in part by his omitting the Creation of
Angels; whereas the Christaline Heaven they speak of, is not only invisible and
insensible; but was not at all discovered to be, till the days of Hipparchus or
Ptolomy.

And as for the fresh luster and brightness wherewith, as is commonly thought,
the Heavens shall be renewed at the last day, as a garment by the turning is
changed, and by changing refreshed, it may be well by the making them more
resplendent then now they are, or ever at any time were since their first
Creation, not by the scowring of contracted rust, but adding a new gloss and
augmentation of glory. And whereas some Authors have not doubted to make the
spots and shadows appearing in the face of the Moon to be unredoubted arguments
of that contracted rust; if those spots had not been original and native, of
equal date with the Moon her self, but had been contracted by the continuance
of time, as wrinkles are in the most beautiful faces, they had said somewhat,
but that they were above fifteen hundred years ago, appears by Plutarch's
discourse de Maculis in facie Lunae; and that they have any whit since
increased, it cannot be sufficiently proved. Perchance by the help of the late
invented perspective-glass, they have been more clearly and distinctly
discerned then in former ages, but that proves no more that they were not there
before, then that the Sydera Medcaeo, lately discovered by the virtue of the
same Instruments, were not before in being, which the discoverers themselves
knew well enough they could not with any color of reason affirm.

Howbeit it cannot be denied, but that new Stars have at times appeared in the
Firmament; as some think, that was at our Saviors Birth; in as much as it
appointed out the very House in which he was born, by standing over it, and was
not (for ought we find) observed by the Mathematicians of those times; I would
rather think it to be a blazing Light created in the Region of the Air,
carrying the resemblance of a Star, seated in the Firmament.

As for that which appeared in Cassiopaea in the year One thousand five hundred
and seventy two, (the very year of the great Massacre in France) I think it
cannot well be gainsaid to have been a true Star, it being observed by the most
skillful and famous Astronomers of that time, to hold the same Aspect in all
places in Christendom, to run the same course, to keep the same proportion,
distance, and situation, everywhere, and in every point, with the fixed Stars,
for the space of two whole years. But this I take not to have been the effect
of Nature, but the Supernatural and miraculous work of Almighty God, the first
Author and free disposer of Nature. And the like may be said of all such Comets
which have at any time evidently appeared, (if any such evidence can be given)
to be above the Globe of the Moon.

St. Augustine in his de Civitate Dei, reports of Varro's book entitled de
Gente Populi Romani; and he out of Castor, touching the Planet Venus, which to
add the greater weight and credit to the relation, being somewhat strange and
rare, I will set it down in the very words of Varro, as I find them quoted by
St. Augustine, in coelo mirabile extitit portentum, n^m in Stella Veneris
nobilissima, quam Plautus vesperuginem, Homerus. Hisperon appellat, pulcherimam
dicent: Castor scribit tantum portentum ex^^tisse, ut mutaret color^^,
magnitudinam and figuram, eursum, quod factum ita neque antea, neque postea
^i^, hoc factum Ogyge Rege, dicebant Adrastus, Cyzicenus, and Dyon Neapolites.
Mathematici Nobiles, says he, appeared a marveilous great wonder, the most
noted Star called Venus, which Plautus calls Vesperugo, and Homer Vesperus the
fair, as Castor has left upon Record, changed both color, and bigness, figure
and motion, which accident was never seen before, nor since that time; the
renouned Mathematicians Adrastus and Dion averring that this fell out during
the Reign of King Ogyges; which wonder, neither Varro nor Augustine ascribe to
the changeable matter of the Heavens, but to the unchangeable will of the
Creator. And therefore the one calls it as we see mirabile portentum, and the
other makes this Comment upon it, that it happened, quia ille voluit qui summo
regit imperio ac potestate quod condidit, because he would have it so, who
governs all things that he has made, with a Sovereign independing Power. So
that two special reasons may be rendered for these extraordinary unusual
Apparitions in Heaven; the one that they may declare to the World that they
have a Creator and Commander, who can alter and destroy their Natures,
restrain or suspend their operations at his pleasure, which should keep men
from worshipping them as Gods, since they cannot keep themselves from
alteration. The other to portend and foreshew his Judgments, as did that new
Star in Caessopaeia, a most unnatural inundation of Blood in France; And this
change in Venus, such a Deluge in Achaia, as it overflowed, and so wasted the
whole Country, that for the space of Two hundred years after, it was not
Inhabited. It will next fall to our task to Discover of the Eclipses, of which
Virgil, in his Georg. Lib. 2. Calls,

Defectus Solis varios Lunaeque Labores.
Defects and travels of the Sun and Moon.
As also the manner of the Ancient Romans while such Eclipses lasted; who as
Tacitus in his Annals says, Lib. 7. Did use to lift up burning Torches toward
Heaven, and withal to beat pans of Brass and Basins, as we do in following of a
swarm of Bees. So B^etius, Lib. 4. Met.

Comm^v^t Gentes publicus Error,
Lassantque cr^bris p^lsibus ara.
A Common Error through the world does pass,
And many a stroke they lay on pans of Brass.
And Manilius speaking of the appearance of the Moons Eclipse by degrees, in
diverse parts of the Earth, in his Lib. 1.

Seraque in extremis quatiunt^^ gentibus ara.
The utmost Coasts do beat their Brass pans Last.
And Juvenal the Satyrist wittily describing a tatling Gosship in his Lib. 2.
Sat. 6.

Una l^boranti poterit succurr^re Lunae.
She only were enough to help
The Labors of the Moon.
They thought thereby they did the Moon great ease, and helped her in her
Labor; as Plutarch in his Life of AEmilius observes: That AEmilius himself a
wise man, as the same Author there Witnesses, did congratulate the Moons
delivery from an Eclipse with a solemn Sacrifice, as soon as she shined out
bright again; which action of his, that prudent Philosopher and sage Historian,
does not only relate, but approve and commends it as a sign of godliness and
devotion; yea this Heathenish and Sottish custom of relieving the Moon in this
case by noise and outcries, the Christians it seems borrowed from the
Gentiles, as St Ambrose expresses in his Ser. 83. And Maximus Turriuensis has
a Homile to the same purpose. Whereas Aristotle in his eighth Book of his
Metaphysics, makes it plainly to appear, That the Moon suffers nothing by
her Eclipse; where also he evidenceth by reason, that it is caused by the
shadow of the Earth, interposed betwixt the Sun and the Moon: as in exchange or
revenge thereof (as Pliny speaks) the Eclipse of the Sun is caused by the
Interposition of the Moon, betwixt the Earth and it. The Moon so depriving the
Earth; and again, the Earth, the Moon of the beams of the Sun: which is the
true cause, that in the course of Nature, the Moon is never Ecclipsed but when
she is Full, the Sun and She being then in opposition; nor the Sun, but when it
is New Moon; those two Planets being then in Conjunction: I say, in the course
of Nature; for the Eclipse at our Saviors Passion, was undoubtedly
Supernatural: Quam solis obscurationem ^^^ ex ^^nico syder^^^ cursu accidisse
satis oftenditur, quod tune er at Pascha Jude^^^, nam pl^nae Luna solemniter,
agitur, says St. Augustine Lib. 3. Civit. Dei, cap. 15. It is evident, that
that Eclipse of the Sun happened not by an ordinary and orderly course of the
Stars, it being then the Passover of the Jews, which was solemnized at the
Full Moon; And this was it, that gave occasion, as is commonly believed, to
that memorable exclamation of Dennys the Areopagite, being then in Egypt, Aut
Diu^ Nature patitur, aut Machina M^^^di dissolvetur; Either the God of Nature
suffers, or the Frame of the World will be dissolved. And hereupon too, as it
is thought by some, was erected the Altar at Athens, Ignot^ De^, T^ the unknown
God, Act. 17. 23. Though others think, that this Eclipse was confined, in the
borders of Judaea; howsoever it cannot be denied, but that it was certainly
besides and above the compass of Nature. Neither ought it to seem strange, That
the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven should appear to suffer, when the Sun of
Righteousness indeed Suffered upon the Earth.

But for other Ecclipses, though the causes be not commonly known, yet the
ignorance of them was it which caused so much Superstition in former Ages, and
left that impression in men's minds, as even at this day, wise men can hardly be
persuaded, but that those Planets suffer in their Ecclipses, which in the Sun
is most childish and ridiculous to imagine; since in it self, it is not so much
as deprived of any Light, nor in truth can be, it being the Fountain of Light,
from which all other Stars borrow their Light, but pay nothing back again to
it, by way of retribution. Which was well expressed by Pericles, as Plutarch in
his Life reports it, for there happening an Eclipse of the Sun, at the very
instant when his Navy was ready to Lanch forth, and himself was embarked; his
followers began much to be appald at it, but especially the Master of his own
Gally, which Pericles perceiving; takes his Cloak, and therewith hood winks the
Masters eyes, and then demands of him, what danger was in that, he answering
none, Neither said Pericles is there in this Eclipse; there being no
difference betwixt that Vail and my Cloak, with which the Sun is covered, but
only in bigness. And the truth is that the Sun then suffered no more by the
intervening of the Moon, then from Pericles Cloak, or daily does from the
Clouds in the Air, which hinder the sight of it; or by the interposing of the
Planet Mercury, which has sometimes appeared as a spot in it. But whether
these Ecclipses either cause or presage any change in these inferior Bodies, I
shall have fitter occasion to examine hereafter; and so I pass from the
Consideration of the substance, to the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies.

Motion is so universal and innate a property; and so proper an affection to
all Natural Bodies, that the great Philosopher knew not better how to define
Nature, then by making ^^ the Engineere and Principle of Motion; and therefore
as other Objects, are only discernable by the sense, as colors, and sounds by
hearing, Motion is discernable by both, nay and by feeling too, which is a
third sense really distinguished from them both. That there is in the Heavenly
Bodies, no motion of Generation or Corruption, and of Augmentation or
Diminution, or Alteration, I have already showed. There are also, by reason of
the incredible swiftness of the first Mover, and some other such Reasons; dare
deny, (as Copernicus does) that there is in them any Lation, or Local motion,
herein flatly opposing in my judgment both Scripture, Reason, and Sense; But
take it as granted, without any dispute, that a Local motion there is; which is
the measure of Time, as Time again is the measure of Motion; the Line of
Motion, and the Thread of Time, being both spun out together: some doubt there
is touching the Mover of these Heavenly Bodies, what or how it should be; some
ascribing it to their Matter, some to their Form, and some to their Figure, and
many to the Angels, or Intelligences; as they call them, which they suppose to
be set over them. For mine own part; I should think that all these, and every
one of them, might not unjustly challenge a part in that Motion: the Matter as
being neither light nor heavy; the Form as well agreeing with such a Matter;
the Figure as being Spherical or Circular; the Intelligence as an assistant: in
the Matter is a disposition; for where light Bodies naturally move upward, and
heavy downward, that which is neither light nor heavy, is rather disposed to a
Circular motion, which is neither upward nor downward. In the Figure is an
inclination to that motion, as in a Wheel to be carried round, from the Form an
inchoation or onset: and Lastly, from the intelligence, a continuance or
perpetuation thereof, as that great Divine Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy,
5. 69. Expresses, (says he,) Gods own Eternity is the bound which leads
Angels in the course of their perpetuity, the perpetuity the hand that draws
out Celestial Motion; that as the Elementary substances are governed by the
Heavenly, so might the Heavenly by the Angelical. As the Corruptible by the
Incorruptible, so the Material by the Immaterial, and all Finites by an
Infinite. It is the joint consent of the Platonicks, Peripateticks, Stoics and
all noted Sects of Philosophers, who acknowledge the Divine Power, with whom
agree the greatest part of our Christian Doctors; That the Heavens are moved by
Angles, neither is there in truth any sufficient means beside it, to discover
the being of such Creatures by the discourse of Reason.

The most signal Motions of the Heavens (beside their Re^rogations
Treoidations, Librations, and I know not what hard Words, which the Astronomers
have devised to reconcile the diversity of their observations;) are the Diurnal
Motion of the fixed Stars and Planets, and all the Celestial Spheres, from
East to the West, in the compass of (...) four and twenty hours, and the (...)
Motion of them all, from the West to (...) These Motions, whether they perform
themselves, without the help of Orbs, as Fishes in the Water, or Birds in the
Air; or fastened to their Spheres, as a Gemme in a Ring, or a Nail or knot in a
Cart Wheel, I cannot easily determine: howbeit I confess, we cannot well
imagine how one and the same body should be carried with opposite Motions, but
by the help of somewhat in which it is carried. As the Mariner may be carried
by the Motion of his Ship, from the East to the West, and yet himself may walk
from the West to the East in the same Ship: or a Fly may be carried from the
North to the South upon a CartWheel, and yet may go from the South to the North
upon the same Wheel; but howsoever it be, it is evident, that their Motions
are even and regular, without the least jarr or discord, variation or
uncertainty, languishing or defect that may be; which were it not so, there
could be no certain demonstrations made upon the Globe or Material Sphere:
which notwithstanding, by the Testimony of Claudian, are most infallible, as
appears by those his elegant Verses upon Archimedes admirable invention thereof.

Jupiter ^^ paervo cum cerneret aethera vitr^,
Risit, (...) superos talia dicta dedit:
Huc(...)alis progressa potentia curae?
Jam (...) fragili luditur Orb labor
Jura Poli, ^erumque fidem ^igesque; Deorum
Ecce Syracusus transtulit art Senex.
Inclusus variis famulatur spiritus astris
Percurrit propri^m mentitus signiser annum
Et simulati^ novo Cynthia mense redit.
Jamque suum volvens audax industria Mundum
Gaudet and Humana sydera mense regit.
When Jove within a little glass survaid
The Heavens, he smiled, and to the Gods thus said;
Can strength of Mortal Wit proceed thus far?
Lo in a frail Orb my works matched are.
Hither the Syracusians art Translates
Heavens form, the course of things, and human fates.
The included Spirit serving the Star decked signs,
The living Work in constant Motion winds.
The adulterate Z^diak runs a Natural year
And Cynthias forged horns monthly new light bear,
Viewing her own world; now bold industry
Triumphs and rules with human power the sky.
The Gentiles says Julian (As Cyril in his third Book against him, reports it)
Violentes nihil eorum quae circa caelum minus vel augere n^que ullam sustinere
de ^rdinatum affectionem, sed congruam illius motionem ac been optatam ordinem;
definitas queque leges Lunae, definites ortus and occasus solis, statutis
semper temporibus, merito Deu^ and D^i solium suspicabantur. Seeing no part of
Heaven to be diminished and decreased, to suffer no irregular affection, but
the Motion thereof, to be as duly and as orderly performed as could be de^ired,
the waxing and waining of the Moon, the rising and setting of the Sun to be
settled and constant at fixed and certain times; they deservedly admired it as
God, or as the Throne of God. The order and Regulation of which Motions we
shall easily perceive by taking a particular view of them. I will touch only
those of the Planets. The proper Motion of Saturn was by the Ancients observed,
and is now likewise found by our Modern Astronomers, to be accomplished within
the space of thirty years, that of Jupiter in twelve, that of Mars in two, that
of the Sun in Three hundred sixty and five days and almost six hours: neither
do we find that they have quickened or any way slackned these their courses, but
that in the same space of time they always run the same races they have passed.
These then are the bounds and limits to which these glorious Bodies are
perpetually tied, in regard of their Motion; these be the unchangeable Laws,
like those of the Medes and P^rsian^, whereof the Psalmist speaks, He has
given them a Law which shall not be broken, Psalm. 148. 6. Which Seneca in his
Book De divina providentia, well expresses in other words, AEterna legis
imperio pr^^^dunt, they move by the appointment of an eternal Law, that is, a
Law both invariable and inviolable. That which Tully has delivered of one of
them, is undoubtedly true of all: Suturni stella in su^ cursu multa miracula
efficiens, tum ante ^dende, tum r^tardando, tum vespertin^s temporibus
delitesend^, tum matutinis rursum se aperi^nd^, nihil tamen immutat sempiternis
saeculerum aetatibus, quam ^adim eiisdem t^mporibus efficiat, Lib. 2. de not.
Deor. The Planet Saturn does make strange and wonderful passages in his Motion,
going before, and sometimes coming after, withdrawing himself in the Evening,
and sometimes again showing himself in the Morning, and changes himself
nothing in the continual duration of ages; but still at the same season works
the same effects. And in truth, were it not so, both in the Planet and in all
other Stars, it is altogether impossible that they should supply that use
which Almighty God in their Creation ordained them unto, that is, To serve for
Signs and Seasons, for days and for years to the Worlds end, Genesis 1. 14. And
much more impossible it were, that the year, the month, the day, the hour, the
minute of the oppositions, the Conjunctions and Ecclipses of the Planets,
should be as exactly calculated and foretold One hundred years before they fell
out, as at what hour the Sun will rise to morrow morning. To which perpetual
aequability and constant uniformity in the Celestial Motions, the Divine Pl^io
accords, Nec errant, nec praeter antiquu^ ordinem revolvuntur, Neither do they
run at randum, nor are they rolled beyond their ancient order. Aristotle in his
Book De Mundo, breaks out in this passionate admiration thereof, Quod nunquam
poterit aequart caelesti ordin^, and volubilitati, cum sydera convertantur
exal^issi^a norma de alioin aliud seculum. What can ever be compared to the
order of the Heavens, and to the Motion of the Stars in their several
Revolutions, which move most exactly by a rule or square, by line and level
from one Generation to another.

There were among the Ancients not a few, nor they unlearned, who by a strong
fancy conceived to themselves an excellent melody made up by the motion of the
Celestial Spheers; it was broached by Pythagoras, entertained by Plato, and
stiffly maintained by Macrobrius, and some other Christians, as Bede, Boethius,
and Ans^lm Bishop of Canterbury: But Ariste^le puts it off with a jest in his
Lib. 2. de Caelo Cap. 9. as being L^pide and Musice dictum, factis autem
impossible, a pleasant and Musical conceit, but in Effect impossible; in as
much as those bodies in their Motion make noise at all. Howsoever it may well
be that this conceit of theirs was grounded upon a certain truth, which is the
Harmonical and Proportionable Motion of those Bodies in their just order, and
s^^ courses, as if they were ever dancing the rounds and the Measures. In which
regard the Psalmist tells us, That the Sun knows his going down, he
appoints the Moon for seasons, Psalm. 104. 19. Which words of his may not be
taken in^^ proper, but in a figurative sense; the Prophet therefore implying,
that the Sun observes his pr^^cribed Motion so precisely to a point, that in
the least j^t^ he never erreth from it: And therefore he is said to do the same
upon knowledge and understanding, Non quod animatus fit aut ratione ^ut atur,
says Basil upon the place, S^d quod juxt^^ terminum divinitus, prescriptum
ingrediens, semper e^^dem curs^s ^^rvat, ac mensuras suas custodit. Not that
the Sun has any Sou^^ or use of understanding; but because he keeps his
courses and measures exactly according to Gods prescription. But the Motion of
the Heavens puts me in mind of passing from it to the Light thereof. As the
Waters were first spread over the face of the Earth: So was the Light dispersed
through the Firmament: and as the Waters were gathered into one heap, so was
the Light knit up, and united into one body: as the gathering of the Waters was
called the Sea, so that of the Light was called the Sun. As the Rivers come
from the Sea, so is all the Light of the Stars derived from the Sun; and
lastly, as the Sea is no whit lessened, though it furnish the Earth with
abundance of fresh Rivers: So though the Sun have since the Creation, both
furnished, and garnished the World with Light, neither is the store of it
thereby deminished, nor the beauty of it any way stained. What the Light is,
whether of a corporeal or incorporeal Nature, it is not easy to determine.
Philosophers dispute it, but cannot well resolve it. Such is our ignorance,
that even that by which we see all things, we cannot discern what it self is.
But whatsoever it be, we are sure that of all visible Creatures, it was the
first that was made, and comes nearest the name of a Spirit, in as much as it
moves in an instant from the East to the West, and piercing through all
transparent Bodies, and still remains in it self unmixed and undivided; it
chaseth away sad and melancholy thoughts, which the Darkness both begets and
maintains; it lifts up our minds in meditation to him that is the true Light,
that Lightneth every man that comes into the World, himself dwelling in Light
in accessible, and clothing himself with Light as with a Garment. And if we
may behold in any one Creature any spark of that Eternal Fire, or any farr-off
dawning of Gods brightness, the same in the beauty and virtue of this Light may
be best discerned^ Quid pulch^rrimus Luce, says Hugo de sanctoVictore, quae
cum in se colorem non habeat, omnium ^am^n rerum colores ips^ quodammodo
colorat. What is more beautiful then Light, which having no color in it self,
yet sets a luster upon all Colors? And St. Ambrose, Unde Vex D^i in Scriptura
debuit inchoare nisi a Lumine? unde Mundi ornatus ^^si a Luce exordium sumer^?
frustra enim esset si non videretur. From whence should the voice of God in
holy Scripture begin, but likewise from the same Light; for in vain it were,
were it not seen, as Bartas excellently Expresses.

O Father of the Light, of wisdom Fountain,
Out of the Bulk of that confused Mountain,
What should, what could issue before the Light,
Without which, Beauty were no beauty hight.
St. Augustine in diverse places of his works is of opinion, That by the first
Created Light, we understood the Angels, and herein is he followed by Beda
Eucherius, and Rupertus, and diverse others; which opinion of his, though it be
questionless unsound, in as much as we are taught, That the Light f^r^ng out of
Darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Which of the Angels can in no sort be verified, yet it
shows the lightsome nature of Angels; so likewise the Angelical nature of Light
still flourishing in youth, and is no more subject to decay then the Angels
are. They who maintain, that the Soul of Man is derived ex traduce, hold
withal that the Father in begetting the sons Soul looses none of his own, it
being tanquam Lumen de Lumine, as one Light from another: nay, more then so, it
is the very resemblance that the Nicene Fathers thought not unmeet to express
the unexpressible Generation of the second Person in the Trinity from the
First; who is therefore termed by the Apostle The brightness of his Glory,
Heb.1. 3. As then the Father of the Communicating of his Substance to his Son,
looses none of his own; so the Sun by Communicating of his Light to the World,
looses no part nor degree thereof. Some things there are of that nature, as
they may be both given and kept, as Knowledge and Virtue, and Happiness, and
Light, which in Holy Scripture is Figuratively taken for them all. Whether the
same Individual Light, be still resident in the body of the Sun, which was
planted in it at the first Creation; or whether it continue empty and spend it
self, and so l^ke a River be repared with fresh supplies, for my part, I cannot
certainly affirm, though I must confess, I do rather incline to the former: But
this I believe, as the body of the Sun is no whit lessened in extention, so
neither is the Light thereof in intention: Men being now no more able to fix
their eyes upon it, when it shines forth in its full strength, then they were
at the first Creation of it. Now we have spoken of the Light, we shall next
discourse of the warmth and influence thereof, which springs from it, which now
succeed in their order.

The Light of Heaven, of which we have spoken, is not more comfortable and
useful, then is the warmth thereof; with a Masculine virtue it quickens all
kind of Seeds, it makes them Vegitate, blossom and fructify, and brings their
Fruit to Perfection, for the use of Man and Beast, and the perpetuating of
their own kindness; nay, it wonderfully refreshes and chears up the Spirits of
Men, Beasts, Birds, and creeping things; and not only imparts the life of
Vegitation, but of Sense and Motion, to many thousand Creatures, and like a
tender Parent fosters and cherishes it being imparted. Some there are that
live without the light of Heaven, searching into and working upon those Bodies
which the Light cannot pierce, but none without the warmth, it being in nature
the universal instrument thereof, which made the Psalmist say, That there is
nothing hid from the heat of the Sun. Few things are hid from the Light, but
from the Heat thereof nothing.

I am not ignorant that St. Augustine, St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and many
Divines, held that there were Waters, properly so termed, above the Starry
Firmament; who held withal, that the Sun and Stars cause heat as being of a
fiery Nature; those waters being set there, in their Opinion, for the cooling
of that heat, which Opinion of theirs seems to be favored by Syracides in the
forty third of Ecclesiasticus, where he thus speaks of the Sun, At noon it
parcheth the Country, and who can abide the burning heat thereof. A man blowing
a Furnace is in works of heat: but the Sun bu neth the Mountains three times
more, breathing out fiery vapors. Neither were there wanting some among the
Ancient Philosophers, who maintained the same Opinion, as Plato and Pliny, and
generally the whole Sect of Stoics, who held that the Sun and the Stars were
fed with watery vapors, which they drew up for their nourishment, and that
when the vapors should cease and fail, the whole world should be in danger of
combustion; and many things are alleged by Baelbo in Cicero's Second Book of
the Nature of the Gods, in favor of this Opinion of the Stoic. But that the
Sun and Stars are not in truth fiery and hot, appears by the ground already
laid touching the matter of the Heavens, that it is of a nature incorruptible,
which cannot be if it were fiery, in as much as thereby it would become liable
to alteration and corruption by an opposite and professed enemy: besides, all
fiery bodies by a natural inclination mount upwards, so that if the Stars were
the cause of heat, as being hot in themselves, it would consequently follow,
that their circular Motion should not be natural but violent: Whereunto I may
add, the noted Stars being so many in number, namely, One thousand twenty and
two, besides the Planets, and in Magnitude so great, that every one of those,
which appear fixed in the Firmament, are said to be much bigger then the whole
Globe of the Water and Earth; and the Sun again so much to exceed both that
Glob^, and the biggest of them, as it may justly be styled by the Son of Syrac,
Instrumentum admirabile, A wonderful instrument, Ecclesiast. 43. 1. Which being
so, were they of fire, they would doubtless long ere this have turned the World
into ashes, there being so infinite a disproportion betwixt their flame, and
the little quantity of matter supposed to be prepared for their Fuel. That
therefore they should be fed with vapors, Aristotle deservedly laughs at it,
as a childish and ridiculous device, in as much as the vapors ascend no higher
then the middle Region of the Air, and then distill again upon the Water and
the Earth from whence they were drawn up; and those vapors being uncertain,
the flames likewise feeding upon them must needs be uncertain, and daily vary
from themselves both in quantity and figure, according to the proportion of
their Fuel.

The absurdity then of this Opinion being so foul and gross, it remains that
the Sun and Stars infuse a warmth into these Subcoelestial Bodies, as not
being hot in themselves, but only, as being ordained by God to bread heat in
matter capable thereof, as they impart life to some Creatures, and yet,
themselves remain void of life, like the brain which imparts sense to every
Member of the Body, and yet is it self utterly void of sense. But here again,
some there are which attribute this effect to the Motion, others to the Light
of these glorious Bodies: And true indeed it is, that Motion causes Heat, by
the attenuation and rarefaction of the Air; But by this reason should the Moon,
which is nearer the Earth, warm more than the Sun which is many thousand miles
farther distant? and the higher Regions of the Air, should be always hotter
than the lower, which notwithstanding if we compare the second with the lowest,
is undoubtedly false. Moreover the Motion of the Celestial Bodies being
uniform, so should the heat in reason derived from them likewise be; and the
Motion ceasing, the Heat should likewise; and yet I shall never believe, that
when the Sun stood still at the Prayer of Joshua, it then ceased to warm these
Inferior Bodies. And we find by experience, that the Sun works more powerfully
upon a Body, which stands still then when it moves, and the reason seems to be
the same in the rest or Motion of a Body warming or warmed, that receives or
imparteth heat.

The Motion being thus excluded from being the cause of this Effect, the Light
must of necessity step in, and challenge it to its self; the Light then it is
which is the cause undoubtedly of Celestial heat, in part by a direct beam,
but more vehemently by a reflexed: for which very reason it is that the middle
Region of the Air is always colder then the lowest, and the lowest hotter in
the Summer then in the Winter, and at Noon then in the Morning and Evening, the
beams being then more Perpendicular, and consequently in their reflection more
narrowly united, by which reflection and union, they grow sometimes to that
fervency of heat, that fire springs out from them as we see in Burning-glasses;
And by this artificial device it was that Archimedes, as Galen reports it in
his third Book De temperamentis, Cap. 1. Set on fire the Emperors Ships: and
Proclus a famous Mathematician, practiced the like at Constantinople, as
witnesses Zonarus in the life of Anastatius the Emperor. And very reasonable
methinks it is, That Light, the most Divine Affection of the Celestial Bodies,
should be the cause of warmth; the most noble active and excellent quality of
the Subcoelestial. These two like Hippocrates Twins, Simul oriuntur and
moriuntur, they are born and dye together, they increase and decrease both
together; the greater the Light is, the greater the Heat; and therefore the Sun
as much exceeds the other Stars in Heat, as it does in Light.

The Suns continual Declination, or nearer approach to the Earth, is rather an
idle Dream than a sound position, grounded rather upon the difference amongst
Astronomers, arising from the difficulty of their observations, then upon any
certain or infallible conclusion. Ptolomy, who lived about the year of Christ
one hundred and forty, makes the distance of the Sun to be from the Earth, One
thousand two hundred and ten Semidiameters of the Earth. Albategnius, about the
year Eight hundred and eighty, makes it One thousand one hundred and forty six.
Copernicus, about the year One thousand five hundred and twenty, makes it One
thousand five hundred and seventy nine. Tycobrahe, about the year One thousand
six hundred makes it One thousand one hundred eighty two. Now I would demand
whether the Sun were more remote in Ptolomies time, and nearer in the time of
Albategnius, and then again, more remote in the latter ages of Copernicus and
Tychobrahe? which if it were so, then one of these two must needs follow, that
either these observations were not grounded upon so certain Principles as they
pretend, or that the declination of the Sun is uncertain or variable, not
constant and perpetual, as is pretended. But what would Bodwin say, if he
l^ved, to hear Lansbergius and Kepler, and other famous Astronomers of the
latter times, teaching that the Sun is now remote above Two thousand and eight
hundred, nay three thousand Semidiameters from the Earth; affirming, that
Copernicus and Tycobrahe neglected to allow for refractions, which (as the
Optics will demonstrate) do much alter the case.

I will close up this point with the censure of Scaliger in his Exercit. 99.
upon the Patrons of this fancy, Quae vero nonnulli prodere ausi sunt, solis
corpus long proprius nos esse, quam quantum ab Antiquis scriptum sit, it a ut
in ipsa deferentis corpulentia ^^cum mutasse videatur, vel ipsa scripta
spongiis, vel ipsi Authors scuticis sunt castigandi. In as much as some have
dared to broach, that the body of the Sun is nearer the Earth then by the
Ancients was observed to be, so that it might seem to have changed place in the
very bulk of the Sphere; either the Authors of this Opinion deserve themselves
to be chastened with stripes, or surely their Writings to be razed with Sponges.

So that (as I conceive) it may fitly and safely be inferred, first, that
either there is no such removal at all of the Sun, (as is supposed) or if there
be, as we who are situate more Northerly, feel perhaps the effects of the
defects of the warmth thereof, in the unkindly ripening of our fruits, or the
like; so, likewise by the rule of Proportion, must it needs follow, that they
who lie in the same distance from the South Pole, as we from the North, should
enjoy the benefit of the nearer approach thereof; and they who dwell in the
ho^test Climates interjacent, of the abating of the immoderate fervency of
their heat: From hence I again infer, that supposing a mutability in the Suns
greatest Declination, look what damage we suffer by his further removal from
us in the Summer, is at least in part recompensed by his nearer approach in
Winter, and by his Periodical Revolutions fully restored. And so I pass from
the Consideration of the warmth, to those hidden and secret qualities of the
Heavens, which to Astronomers and Philosophers are known by the name of
Influences.

Howbeit Aristotle through all those Works of his which are come to our hands,
to my remembrance, has not once vouchsafed so much as to take notice of such
qualities, which we call Influences; and though amongst the Ancients Averroes
and Avicenne, and amongst some of the latter times Picus Mirandula, and
Georgius Agricola, seek to disprove them: yet both Scripture, and Reason, and
the weighty Authority of many good Scholars, as well Christians as Ethnicks,
have fully resolved me that such there are. They are by Philosophers
distinguished into two Ranks; the First is, that Influence which is derived
from the Empyreal Immovable Heaven, the Pallas and Mansion House of Glorified
Saints and Angels, which is gathered from the diversity of Effects, as well in
regard of Plants, as of Beasts, and other Commodities under the same Climate,
within the same Tract and Latitude, equally distant from both the Poles, which
we cannot well originally refer to the inbred nature of the soil, since the
Author of Nature has so ordained, that the temper of the Inferior Bodies
should ordinarily depend upon the Superior; nor yet the Aspect of the moveable
Spheres and Stars, since every part of the same Climate, successively, but
equally enjoyes the same Aspect: It remains then, that these Effects be finally
reduced to some Superior immovable cause; which can be none other then that
Empyreal Heaven; neither can it produce these effects by means of the Light
alone, which is uniformly dispersed through the whole, but by some secret
quality which is diversified according to the diverse parts thereof; and without
this, we should not only find wanting that connection and unity of order, in the
parts of the World, which make it so comely, but withal should be forced to make
one of the worthiest pieces of it void of Action, the chief end of every
Created thing. Neither can this Action mis-beseem the worthiness of so glorious
a piece, since both the Creator is still busied in the works of Providence,
and the Inhabitants in the works of Ministration.

The other kind is that which is derived from the Stars, the Aspect of several
Constellations, the Opposition and Conjunction of the Planets, and the like.
These we have warranted by the mouth of God himself, in Job 38. 31. according
to our last and most exact Translation; Can thou bind the sweet Influences of
the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? can thou bring forth Mazoreth in
his season? or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons? know thou the
Ordinances of Heaven? can thou set the dominion thereof in the Earth? where
by the Ordinances of Heaven, it may be thought is meant, the course and order
of these hidden qualities, which without Divine and Supernatural Revelation,
can never perfectly be known to any mortal Creature.

Besides as Sr. Walter Raleigh has well and truly observed, it cannot be
doubted, but the Stars are Instruments of far greater use, then to give an
obscure Light, and for men only to gaze at after Sun set: it being manifest
that the diversity of Seasons, the Winters and Summers, more hot or cold, more
dry or wet, are not so uncertained by the Sun and Moon alone, who always keep
one and the same Course, but that the Stars have also their working therein,
as also in producing of several kinds of Metals and Minerals in the bowels of
the Earth, where neither Light nor Heat can pierce. For as Heat pierces where
Light cannot, so the Influence pierces where the Heat cannot.

Moreover, if we cannot deny, but that God has given Virtues to Springs and
Fountains, to the cold Earth, to Plants, to Stones, and Minerals, nay to the
excremental parts of the basest living Creatures; why should we rob the
beautiful Stars of their working Powers? for seeing they are many in number,
and of eminent beauty and Magnitude, we may not think, in the Treasury of his
Wisdom who is Infinite, there can be wanting; even for every Star, a peculiar
Virtue and Operation: As every Herb, Plant, Fruit, and Flower, adorning the
face of the Earth, has the like. As then these were not Created to beautify
the Earth alone, or to cover and shadow her dusty face; but otherwise, for the
use of Man and Beast, to feed them and cure them: so were not those
incomparably glorious Bodies set in the Firmament, to none other end then to
adorn it, but for Instruments and Organs of his Divine Providence, and Power,
so far as it has pleased his just Will for to determine; which Bartas
admirably expresses,

I Will never believe, that the Arch-Architect.
With all these Fires the Heavenly Arches decked
Only for show, and with these glistering Shields
TO amaze poor Shepherds watching in the Fields.
I Will never believe, that the least Power that pranks
Our Golden Borders, or the common Banks,
And the lest Stone that in her warming lap,
Our kind nurse Earth covetously does wrap,
Has some peculiar Virtue of its own,
And that the Glorious Stars of Heaven have none,
But shine in vain, and have no charge precise,
But to be walking in Heavens Galleries,
And through that Palace up and down to Clamber,
As golden Guls about a Princes Chamber.
But how far it has pleased God in his Divine Wisdom to determine of these
Influences, it is hard, I confess, to be determined by any human Knowledge.

For if in the peculiar virtues of Herbs and Plants, which our selves sow and
set, and which grow under our feet, and we daily apply to our several uses, we
are notwithstanding in effect ignorant, much more in the Powers and workings of
the Celestial Bodies. For (as to this purpose we said before) Hardly do we
guess at the things that are on the Earth, and with labor do we find the
things that are before us: but the things which are in Heaven who has searched
out? Wisd. 9. 16. It cannot well be denied, but that they are not Signs only,
but at least wise concurrent Causes of immoderate cold or heat, drought, or
moisture, lightning, thunder, raging winds, Inundations, Earthquakes, and
consequently of Famine and Pestilence; yet such cross accidents may and often
do fall out, in the matter upon which they work, that the Prognostication of
these casual Events, by the most skillful Astronomers, is very uncertain: And
for the common Alminacks, a man by observation shall easily find, that the
contrary to their Predictions is commonly truest.

Now for the things which rest in the liberty of Man's Will, the Stars have
doubtless no power over them, except it be led by the sensitive appetite, and
that again stirred up by the constitution and complexion of the body, as too
often it is, specially when the humors of the Body are strong to assault, and
the Virtues of the Mind weak to resist. If they have dominion over Beasts, what
shall we judge of Men, who differ little from Beasts? I cannot tell, but sure I
am, that though the Stars incline a Man to this or that course of life, they
do but incline, enforce they cannot: Education and Reason, and most of all
Religion, may alter and over-master that Inclination, as they may produce a
clean contrary Effect. It was to this purpose, a good and Memorable speech of
Cardinal Poole, who being certified by one of his acquaintance, who professed
the knowledge of these secret favors of the Stars, that he should be raised
and advanced to a great Calling in the World; made answer, that whatsoever was
portended by the figure of his birth, for natural Generation, was cancelled and
altered by the grace of his second Birth, or Regeneration in the Blood of his
Redeemer.

Again, we may not forget that Almighty God created the Stars, as he did the
rest of the Universal, whose secret Influences may be called his reserved and
unwritten Laws, which by his Prerogative Royal he may put in execution, or
dispense with at his pleasure. For were the strength of the Stars such as God
has quitted unto them, all Dominion over his Creatures, that Petition in the
Lords Prayer, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, had been
none other but a vain expense of words and time. Nay, be he Paga^ or Christian
that so believes, the only true God of the one, and the imaginary God of the
other, would thereby be despoyled of all worship, reverence, and respect.

As therefore I do not consent with them who would make those glorious
Creatures of God vertuless; so I think that we derogate from his Eternal and
Absolute Power, to ascribe to them the Dominion over our Immortal Souls, which
they have over our Bodily Substances, and perishable Natures. For the Souls of
Men loving and fearing God, receive Influence from that Divine Light it self,
whereof the Suns Clarity and that of the Stars is by Plato called but a
shadow, Lumen est Umbra Dei, and Deus est Lumen Luminis, Light is the shadow of
Gods brightness, who is the Light of Lights.

There have been great talks touching the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
and many ominous conjectures are cast abroad upon it, which if perhaps they
prove true, I should rather ascribe it to our sins, then to the Stars; they
were not created to govern, but to serve Man, if he serve and be governed by
his Creator: so that we need not to search the Cause so far off in the book of
Heaven, we may find it written nearer home in our own Bosoms: And for the
Stars, I may say, as our Savior Christ does the Sabbath, the Stars were made
for Men, and not Men for the Stars; and if God be on our side, and we on his,
Jupiter, and Saturn shall never hurt us. But whatsoever the force of the States
be, upon the persons of private Men, or the Stars of Wealpublicks, I should
rather advise a modest ignorance therein, then a curious inquisition hereinto,
following the witty and pithy counsel of Phaverirus the Philosopher in Gellius,
Lib. 4. Sect. 1. where he thus speaks, Aut adversa ev^^tura dicuot, aut;
prospera: fidicunt prospera, and fallunt, iniser fies frustra expecta, d^, and
si adversa dicunt and m^ntiuntur, ^iser fies frustra timend^: si vera
respondent, eaque sunt non prospera, j^m inde ex ^nim^ miser fies antequam e
fat^ fias; si faelicia promitiunt eaque eventura sunt, ^^m plane du^ gorum
in^^moda, and expectatio te spe suspensum fatigabit, and futurum gaudii fructum
sp^s tibi defler^v^rit. Either they portend or bad or good luck, if good, and
they deceive, thou will become miserable by a vain expectation; if bad, and
they lie, thou will be miserable by a vain fear; if they tell thee true, but
unfortunate Events, thou will be miserable in mind before thou art by destiny;
if they promise fortunate success, which shall indeed come to pass, these two
inconveniences will follow thereupon, both expectation by hope will hold thee
in suspense, and hope will d^fl^ure and devour the fruit of thy content. His
conclusion is, which is also mine for this point and this discourse touching
the Heavenly Bodies; Nullo ig tur pacto utendum est isti^smodi ^^minibus
resfuturas praesagientibus: We ought in no case to have recourse to these kind
of Men, which undertake the foretelling of careful Events. And so I pass from
the consideration of the Celestial Bodies, to the Subcoelestial, which by Gods
ordinance depend upon them, and are made subordinate to them; touching which
and the Celestial Bodies both together, comparing each with the other, the
Divine Bartas thus sweetly and truly sings;

Things that consist of the Elements uniting,
Are ever tossed with an intestine fighting,
Whence spring in time their Life and their deceasing,
Their diverse change, their waxing and decreasing.
So that, of all that is, or may be seen
With Mortal Eyes, under Nights horned Queen,
Nothing retains the same form and face,
Hardly the half of half an hours space.
But the Heavens feel not Fates impartial rigor,
Years add not to their Stature nor their Vigor:
Use wears them not, but their green ever age,
Is all in all still like their pupillage.
Sublunary Bodies are such as God and Nature has planted under the Moon. Now
the state of these Inferior being governed by the Superior: as in the Wheels
of a Clock or Watch, if the first be out of order, so are the second and third,
and the rest that are moved by it; for it is more then probable that the first
partake with them in the same condition; which dependence is very well
expressed by Boethius, where having spoken of the constant regularity of the
Heavenly Bodies, de Consol. Lib. 4. Met. 6. He thus goes on.

Haec concordiae temperat aquis, etc.
Thus Englished,
The Concord tempers equally
Contrary Elements,
That moist things yield unto the dry,
And heat with cold conse^ts;
Here Fire to highest place does fly,
And Earth does downward bend,
And Flowery Spring perpetually
Sweet odours forth does s^n^.
Hot Summer Harvest gives, and store
Of Fruit Autumnus yields,
And shoures which down from Heaven do pour,
Each Winter drowned the Fields:
What ever in the World does breath,
This temper forth has brought,
And nourished: the same by Death
Again it brings to naught.
Among the Subcoelestial things following Natures Method, I will first begin
with the consideration of the Elements, the most simple and Universal of them
all, as being the Ingredients of all mixed Bodies, either in the whole or in
part, and into which the mixed are finally resolved again, and are again by
turns remade of them, the common matter of them all still abiding the same: of
which ^Barts,

Here Is nothing constant, nothing still does stay,
For Birth and Death have still successive sway:
Here one thing springs not till another dye,
Only the Maker lives Immortally.
The Almighty stable, Body of this all,
(Of changeful chances common Arcenal,
All like it self, all in it self, contained
Which by times flight has neither lost nor gained)
Changeless in Essence, changeable in face,
Much more then Proteus or the subtle race
Of roving Polypes, who (to rob the more)
Transform them hourly on the waving Shore:
Much like the French, (or like our selves their Apes)
Who with strange habits do disguise their shapes.
Who loving novels full of affectation,
Receive the manners of each other Nation.
By consent of Antiquity the Elements are in Number four, The Fire, the Air,
the Water, and the Earth, of which the same Poet thus expresses himself:

Four Bodies Primitive the World still contains;
Of which, two downwards bend, the Earth and Watery planes.
As many weight do want, and nothing forcing, higher
They mount, the Air, and purer streams of Fire,
Which though they distant be, yet all things from them take
Their Birth, and into them their last returns do make.
Three of them show themselves manifestly in Milk, the Butter being the Aerial
part thereof, the Why the Watery, and the Cheese the Earthy: but all four in
the burning of green Wood, The Flame being Fire, the smoke the Air, the Liquid
destilling at the ends the Water, and the Ashes the Earth. Philosophy likewise
by reason teaches and proves the same, from their Motion upwards and downwards,
from their second qualities of lightness and heaviness, and from their first
qualities, either Active as heat and cold, or Passive as dry and moist. For as
their Motion proceeds from the second qualities, so do their second from their
first from the Heavenly Bodies, next to which, as being the Noblest of them
all, as well in purity as activity, is seated the Element of the Fire (though
many of the Ancients, and some later Writers, as namely Cardane, (amongst the
rest) seemed to make a doubt of it, Lib. 1. Subtle. And Manilius in his first
Book of Astronomy.

Ignis ad aetb^reas volucer se sustulis auras
Summaque complexus Stellantis culmina Coeli,
Flammarum vallo Naturae Maenia fecit.
The Fire est soones up toward Heaven did fly,
And compassing the Starry World, advanced
A wall of Flames to safeguard Nature by.
Next the Fire, is seated the Air, divided into Three Regions, next the Air the
Water, and next the Water the Earth; so Bartas,

Who so (sometime) has seen rich ingots tried,
Where forced by Fire their Treasure they divide:
(How fair and softly Gold to Gold does pass,
Silver seeks Silver, Brass conforts with Brass,
And the whole lump, of parts unequal, severs
It self apart, in white, red, yellow Rivers)
May understand how, when the mouth Divine
Opened to each his proper place to assign)
Fire flew to Fire, Water to Water slid,
Air clung to Air, and Earth with Earth abid,
The Vail both of the Tabernakle and Temple, were made of Blew, and Purple, and
Scarlet, or Crimson, and fine twisted Linen: by which four as Josephus notech,
were represented the four, Elements; Lib. Antiquit. 15. Cap. 14. His words are
these: Vel^^^ ^ec erat Babiloni^^s variegatum, ex Hyaecintho, and bysso,
ce^ecqu^ and purpura, mirabiliter elaboratum, non indignam contemplatione
materiae commistionem habent, s^d velut ^mnium imagine^^ praeferens, Cocco enim
videbatur ignem imitari, and Bysso terram, and Hyacintho aerem, ac Mare
purpura, partim quidem coloribus, bysso autem and purpura Origi^e, bysso
quid^^^ quia de terra, Mare autem purpura gign^t. The Veil was Babilonis^
Work, most artificially imbrodered with Blew, and fine Linen, and Scarlet, and
Purple, having in it a mixture of things not unworthy of our Consideration, but
carrying a kind of resemblance of the Universe, for by the Scarlet, seemed the
Fire to be represented; by the Linen the Earth, by the Blew the Air, and by
the Purple the Sea; partly by reason the Colors of Scarlet and Blew, partly by
reason of the Original of Linen and Purple, the one coming from the Earth, the
other from the Sea. And St. Hierom in his Epistle to Fab^^la, Epist. 128. has
the very same conceit, borrowed, as it seems, from Josephus, or from Philo, who
has much to the like purpose, in his Third Book of the life of Moses: or it
may be from Wis^^ 18. 14. In the long Robe was the whole World: As not only the
Vulgar Latin, and Arias Montanus, but out of them and the Greek Original, our
last English Translation reads it.

The Fire is dry and hot, the Air hot and moist, the Water moist and cold, the
Earth cold and dry and thus are they linked, and thus do they embrace one
another with their Simbolizing qualities, the Earth being linked to the Water
by coldness, the Water to the Air by moistness, the Air to the Fire by warmth,
the Fire to the Earth by drought: which are all the combinations of the
qualities that can possibly be; hot and cold, as also dry and moist, in the
highest Degrees, being altogether incompatible in the same subject: and though
the Earth and the Fire are most opposite in distance, to substance, and in
activity, yet they agree in one quality, the two middle being therein directly
contrary to the two extremes, Air to Earth, and Water to Fire.

These four then, as they were from the beginning, so still they remain the
Radical and Fundamental Principles of all Subcoelestial Bodies; distinguished
by their several and Ancient Situations, Properties, Actions, and Effects; and
howsoever after their old wont they fight and combat together, being single,
yet in composition they still accord mavelous well, as Boethius Lib. 3. Met.
9.

Tu numeris Elementa liga^, us frig^ra f^ammis,
Arid^ convenient Liquidis, ne puri^r ignis
Ev^let, aut mersas deducant pondera terra^.
To Numbers thou the Elements do tie
That cold with heat may symbolize, and dry
With moist, lest purer Fire should soar to high,
And Earth through too much weight too low should lie.
The Creator of them has bound them, as it were, to their behavior, and made
them in every mixed body to stoop and obey one Praedominant, whose sway and
conduct they willingly follow. The Air being Praedominant in some, as in Oil,
which always swimmes on the top of all other Liquors; and the Earth in others,
which always gather as near the Center as possibly they can. And as in these,
they vary not a jo^ from their nature and wonted properties; so neither do they
in their other conditions. It is still true of them, that Ni^ graevitant nec
l^vitant in suis l^eis, there is no sense of their weight or lightness in their
proper places, as appears by this, that a Man lying in the bottom of the
deepest Ocean, he feels no burden from the weight thereof; the Fire shall
serve to warm us, the Air to maintain our breathing, the Water to cleanse and
refresh us, the Earth to feed and support us, and which of them is most
necessary for our use is hard to determine: Likewise they still hold the same
proportion one toward another, as they have done: For howbeit the
Peripeteticks, pretending herein the Authority of their Mr. Aristotle, tell us,
that'as they rise above one another in Situation, so they exceed one another
propertione decupla, by a ten-fold proportion; yet is this doubtless a foul
Error, or at leastwise a gross mistake, whether we regard their entire
bodies, or their parts? if their entire bodies, it is certain, that the Earth
exceeds both the Water and the Air by many degrees: the depth of the Waters not
exceeding two or three miles, and for the most part not above half a mile, as
Mariners find by their Line and Plummer, whereas the Diameter of the Earth, as
Mathematicians demonstrate, exceeds Seven thousand miles. And for the Air,
taking the height of it from the part of the ordinary Comets, it contains by
estimation about fifty two miles, as Nonius, Vitellio, and Alb^^en show by
Geometrical proofs. Whence it plainly appears, that there cannot be that
proportion betwixt the entire Bodies of the Elements which is pretended, nor at
any time was since the Creation. And for their parts, it is as clear by
experience, that out of a few drops of Water, may be made so much Air as shall
exceed them a thousand times at least.

There is in the Elements a noble compensation of their fourfold qualities,
dispencing themselves by even turns and just measures. For as the Circle of
the Year is distinguished by four quarters, one succeeding another, the time
running about by equal distances: In like manner the Four Elements of the
World by a reciprocal vicissitude exceed one another: and which a man would
think to be incredible, while they seem to dye, as Philo writes, they become
Immortal, running the same race, and instantly traveling up and down by the
same path. From the Earth the way rises upward,, it dissolving into Water,
the Water vapors forth into the Air, the Air is rarefied into Fire, and again
they descend downward the same way, the Fire by quenching being turned into
Air, the Air thickened itto Water, and the Water into Earth. Hitherto Philo,
wherein after his usual manner he Platonizes, the same being in effect to be
found in Plato's Timaeus, as also in Aristotle's Book De Mundo, if it be his, in
Damascen, and Gregory Nyssen. And most elegantly in the wittiest of Poets, Ovid
Met. 15.

-- Resolutaque tellus
In liquidas rarescit aqu^s tenuatur in auras,
Aeraque humor habit dempto qucque pondere rursus
In superos aer tenuissimus emicat ignes.
Inde retro redeunt: idemqne retexitur ord^
Ignis enim densum spissatus in Era transit
Hinc in aquas tellus glomerata cogitur unda.
The Earth resolved is turned into streams,
Water to Air, the purer Air to Flames:
From whence they back return, the fiery flakes
Are turned to Air, the Air thickened takes
The Liquid form of Water, that Earth makes.
The Four Elements herein resembling an Instrument of Music with four strings,
which may be tuned diverse ways, and yet the harmony still remains sweet: and
so are they compared in the Book of Wisdom, Cap. 19. v. 17. The Elements agreed
amongst themselves in this change, as when one tune is changed upon an
Instrumont of Music, and the Melody still remains.

Utque novis facilis signatur cera figuri^
N^^ manet ut fucrat, nec formam servat candem,
Sed tame^ ipsa cadem est.
They are the Verses of Ovid in the 15 Met. touching which several Prints
stamped upon one and the same lump of Wax Bartas curiously dilates in one of
his weeks.

Our next subject will be to discourse of Comets and Blazing Stars, he
uncertainty of the Predictions of them. Some took the Comet to have been a Star
Ordained and Created from the first b^ginning of the World, but appearing only
by times and by turns: of this mind was Sen^cae; Cardan likewise in latter
times harp's much, if not upon the same, yet the like string. But Aristotle (in
his Nature. Quest. Lib. 7. Cap. 21. 23. (whose weighty reasons and deep judgment
I much reverence) conceives the Matter of the Comet, to be a very hot and dry
exhalation, which being lifted up, by the force and virtue of the Sun, into the
highest Region of the Air is there inflamed, partly by the Elements of Fire,
upon which it bordereth, and partly by the motions of the Heavens which hurleth
it about; so that there is in the same manner of an Earthquake, the Wind, the
Lightning, and a Comet, if it be imprisoned in the bowels of the Earth, it
causes an Earthquake, if it ascend to the Middle Region of the Air, and be
from thence beaten back; Wind if it enter that Region' and be there environed
with a thick Cloud; Lightning; if it pass that Region a Comet, or some other
fiery Meteor, in case the matter be not sufficiently capable thereof.

The common Opinion has been, that Comets either as Signs or Causes, or both,
have always Prognosticated some dreadful mishaps to the World, as out-ragious
Winds, extraordinary Drought, Dea^th, Pestilence, Wars, the death of Princes
and the like.

Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether.
Nere did the Heavens with idle blazes Flame.
So Manelius has it. But the Lord Privy Seal, Earl of Northampton, in his
Defensative against the Poison of supposed Prophesies, has so strongly
incountered this Opinion, that for my own part^ must profess, he has persuaded
me, that there is no certainty of those Predictions, in as much as Comets do
not always fore run such events, neither do these events always follow upon the
appearing of Comets. Some instances he produces of Comets, which brought with
them such abundance of all things, and abated their prises to so low an Ebb,
as stories have recorded it for Monuments, and Miracles to posterity: and the
like, says he, could I say of others, Anno Dom. 1555. 1556. 1557. 1558. After
all which years nothing chanced that should drive a man to seek out any cause
above the common reach: and therefore I do allow of the diligence of
Gemma-Frisius, in taking notice of as many good, as bad effects, which have
succeeded after Comets. Moreover he tells us, that Peucer, a great
Mathematician of Germany, Prognosticated upon the last Comet, before the
writing of his Defensative, that Men's bodies should be parched and burned up
with heat: But how fell it out? Forsooth, says he, we had not a more unkindly
Summer for many years, in respect of extraordinary cold: never less inclination
to War; No Prince deceased in that time, and the Plague in Lombardy, as God
would have it, ceased at the rising of the Comet. Besides all this he reports,
of his own experience, as an Eye witness, that when diverse persons, upon
greater scrupulosity then cause, went about to dissuade Queen Elizabeth, lying
then at Richmond, from looking on the Comet which then appeared, with a courage
answerable to the greatness of her State, she caused the Window to be set open,
and cast out this Word, Jacta est alea, the Dice are thrown; thereby showing,
that her st^dfast hope and confidence, was too firmly planted in the good
pleasure and Providence of God, as not to be blasted or affrighted with those
beams, which either had a ground in Nature whereupon to rise, or at leastwise
no warrant in Scripture to portend the misfortune of Princes. Neither have I
heard of any Comet that appeared before her Death (as at her entrance there
did) nor that of Prince Henry, nor of Henry the Great of France; the one being
a most peerless Queen, the other a most incomparable Prince, and the third for
Prudence and Valor, a matchless King: Therefore as Seneca truly notes Natural
is magis nova quam magna mirari, It is natural unto us to be inquis^ived and
curious rather about things new and strange, than those which are in their own
nature truly great; yet even amongst the Ancients, Charlemaine professed, that
he feared not the sign of the Blazing-Star, but the Great and Potent Creator
thereof. And Vespasian, as Dion reports, when the apparition of a Comet was
thought to portend his Death, replied merrily: No, said he, this bushy Star
notes not me, but the Parthian King: Ipse enim Cometus est, ego vero calvus
sum; for he wares bushy Locks, but I am bald. Lastly, some Comets have been the
Messengers of joyful and happy tidings, as at the Birth of our Savior, and
another at the Death of Nero, Cometes sum bonis apparuit, qui praenuntius
suit Mortis Magn^illius ^yranni, and pestilintissimi hominis, saita Tactius:
There appeared a favorable and auspicious Comet, as an Herald to Proclaim the
Death of that Great Tyrant and most Pestilent Man. Though as to some judgments
we are sensible (they by the Effects have been predictive) though the
Astronomers have not found them out. Now that which has been said of Comets
may also be applied to other Fiery and Watery Meteors, as Streamings, Swords,
flying Dragons, fighting Armies, Gapings, two or three Sunns and Moons, and the
like appearing in the Air, many times to the great terror and astonishment of
the beholders: of all which and many more of that kind, he that desires to read
more of, I refer him to Vicomercatus, Garzaus, Pontanus, and Lycostehenes de
prodigiis and portentis ab orb condito, asque ad annum 1557 And to other
latter writers of Monstrous and Prodigious accidents. But the strangest
Apparition in the Air that ever I heard or read of, was that which I find
reported by Mr. Fox. in his Acts and Monuments, whilst the Spanish Match with
Queen Mary was in the heat of treating, and near upon the concluding, There
appeared in London on the fifteenth of February 1554, a Rainbow reversed, the
Bow turning downwards, and the two ends standing upwards, a Prodigious and
Supernatural Sign indeed of those miserable and bloody times which quickly
followed after.

As touching unseasonable Weather, for excessive Heat and cold, or immoderate
Drought and Rain. Thunder and Lightning Frost and Snow, Hail and Winds, yea and
Contagious Sicknesses, and Pestilential and Epidemical Diseases, these arise
from the infection of the Air, by noisome Mists and Vapors, to which we may
add Earthquakes, burning in the bowels of the Earth, and the like

Earthquakes arise also from the distempers of the Air, but in another manner.
They first gave occasion to the composing of that Letany, and therein to the
Petition against suadain Death, which by Public Authority is used through the
Christian Churches at this day. By the force of Earthquake contrary to the
Proverb, Mountains have met the City of An^ioch, where the Disciples were first
called Christians, with a great part of Asia bordering upon it, was in Trajans
time swallowed with an Earthquake, as Dien writes, who reports very merveilous
things thereof. By the same means at one time were Twelve famous Cities of Asia
over-turned in the Reign of Tiberius. And at another time as many Towns of
Campaniae under Constantine. And of late times we have not been without such
wonderful examples of the dreadfulness of this accident, above the Pestilence
or any other Miseries incident to Mankind. Seneca excellently discourses of
them, in the Sixth Book of his Natural Question, Hostem mure expellaem, says
he, and so he goes on; to avoid prolixity I shall here give you only the
English, A Wall will repel an Enemy, Rampires raised to a great height by the
difficulty of their access will keep out powerful Armies, An Haven shelters us
from a Tempest, and the covering of our Houses from the violence of Storms and
lasting Rains; the Fire does not follow us, if we Fly from it: against Thunder
and the Threats of Heaven, vaults under ground, and deep Caves are Remedies;
those Blastings and Flashes from above, do not pierce the Earth, but are
blunted by a little piece of it opposed against them; In the time of Pestilence
a Man may change Dwellings, there is no mischief but may be shunned, the
Lightning never struck a whole Nation, a Pestilential Air has emptied Cities,
not over-turned them: but this mischief is large in spreading, unavoidably
greedy of Destruction, generally dangerous. For it does not only depopulate
Houses and Families, and Towns, but lays waste and makes desolate whole
Regions and Countries: sometimes covering them with their own Ruins, and
sometimes overwhelming them, and burying them in deep Gulfs, leaving, nothing
whereby it may appear so much as to posterity, that that which is not,
sometimes was, but the Earth is levelled over most famous Cities, without any
mark of their former existence; so far Seneca.

As these quakings of the Earth are very terrible, so are the burnings of the
Bowels thereof no less dreadful; the one being as it were the cold, and the
other the hot fits thereof. The Mountain AEtna in Sicile has flamed in time
past so abundantly, that by reason of the thick smoke and vapors arising
therefrom, the Inhabitants thereabout sometimes could not see one another (if
we may give credit to Sandies relation Lib. 4.) I raged so much that Africa was
thereof an astonished Witness. But Virgils admirable description of it may
serve for all.

-- Horificis tonat AEtna ruinis
Interdumque atram perumpit ad aethera Nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo, and candente favilla,
Attollitque globos Flammarum and Syd^ra Lambit;
Interdum scopulos, avulsaque viscera Montis
Erigit eructans ^^quefactaque saxa sub auras
Cum gemitu glomerat, fundoque exaestuat i^^o.
AEtna here thunders with a horrid noise,
Sometimes black clouds evaporated to the skies,
Fuming with pitchy curles, and sparkling Fires,
Tosseth up, Globes of Flames to Stars aspires,
Now belching Rocks, the Mountains entrails torn,
And groaning hurles out liquid Stones there born
Through the Air in showers.
But rightly did Ovid in the 15^ Met. Devine of this Mountain and the burnings
therein,

Nec quae sulphuriis ardet fornacibus AEtna
Ignea semper erit, neque enim fuit ignea semper.
AEtna which flames of Sulphur now does raise,
Shall not still burn, nor has it burnt always.
The like may be said of Vesuvius in the Kingdom of Naples, it flamed with the
greatest horror in the first, or as some say in the third year of the Emperor
Titus, where besides Beasts, Fishes, and Foul, it devoured two adjoining
Cities, Herculanum and Pompeios, with the People in the Theater: Pliny the
Natural Historian, then Admiral of the Roman Navy, desirous to discover the
reason, was suffocated, as his Nephew expressed in an Epistle of his to
Cornelius Tacitus; the like, as to his too strict enquiry of the increase and
decrease of the Sea, being reported of Aristotle.

Having thus employed my Reason as Divinly as I could, in presenting my Reader
with an explanation of a few Leaves of the great Volume of Nature: I shall now
(with his favor) think it convenient before I proceed to treat of the Powers
of the Mind in the Arts, etc. To refute such other Vulgar Errors in their
several Classes (though less considerable) as hithe^^o I have not met withal.

1. It is a common received Opinion in Philosophy that the principal faculties
of the Soul, the Understanding, the Imagination and Memory are distinguished by
three several Cells or Ventricles in the Brain, the imagination (as is
conceived) being confined to the forepart, the Memory to the hinder part, and
the Judgment and Understanding to the middle part thereof; which Opinion
Laurentius confutes, in his Hist. Anat. Lib. 10. 9. 2. and Fe^^elius derides,
making them all to be dispersed through all the receptacles of the brain, in as
much as sometimes when the whole Brain is disaffected, the operation but of one
of these Faculties is hurt, and sometimes again, when but one Ventricle is hurt
the operation of all the three Faculties is hindered. Neither ought it to seem
more strange, that the same Ventricle in the brain should be capable of all
these three Function, then that the same Bone or Sinew and every part or
Particle thereof should have in it (in regard of the nourishment it receives,
and the excrement it drives forth) an attractive, a retentive, an assimilative,
and an expulsive Virtue. 2. That in Nature there is an East and a West, which
as to me it seems cannot be, since that which to us is East, is West to our
Antipedes, and that which is East to them, is West tous. 3. That a man has a
Natural speech of his own, as he is a man, (some think Hebrew) which Language
he could speak by Nature if he were not taught some other: but this is a Dream,
and has as Herodotus Lib. 6. been twice confuted by a double experiment. The
first was by Psammeticus a King of Egypt, who desiring to understand which was
Man's most Ancient and Natural Language, caused two Children to be seq^estred
from all focie^y of Men, and to be nourished by two she Goats, forbidding all
speech unto them: which the Children continuing for a long time Dumb, at last
uttered Bec, Bec: The King being informed, that in the Phrigian Language Bec
signified Bread, imagined the Children called then for Bread; and from thence
collected that because they spoke that Language which no man had taught them,
therefore the Phrigian Language was the Natural speech of Man. A weak proof and
silly conceit. For the Childrens Beck (as is probably collected) was only that
Language which they learned of their Goat-Nurses, when they came to suck their
Tetts, who receiving from them some ease by their sucking, saluted them with
Bec, the best Language they had, from whom the Children learned it; and so much
as they heard, so much j^st they uttered, and no more: and if they had not
heard it, they could never have pronounced it, as we may evidently see in men
that are born Deaf; and by another experiment tried upon other Infants, (which
is our second instance) Purchase mentions it in his Pilgrims, Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
tried by Melabdim Elchebar, whom they call the great Mogore or Magul. He
likewise upon the forenamed Error, That a Man has a certain proper Language
by Nature, caused thirty Children to be brought up in dumb silence, to find out
the Experiment, whether all of them would speak one and the same Language,
having inwardly a purpose to frame his Religion according to that Nation, whose
Language should be spoken, as being that Religion which is purely Natural to
Man. But the Children proved all Dumb, though they were so many of them, and
therefore they could not speak, because they were not taught: whereby it
appears, that the speaking of any Language is not in Man by Nature; the first
Man had it by Divine Infusion, but all his Posterity only by Imitation. 4. In
Philosophy it is commonly received, that the Heart is the seat and shop of the
Principal Faculties of the Soul: Nay, Divine Scripture applying it self to the
ordinary Opinion therein, in many places Attributes Wisdom and Understanding to
the Heart: Whereas the noble pair of Physicians Hipocrates and Galen have made
it evident by experimental proofs, that those Divine Powers of reasoning and
discourse are seated in the brain, in as much as they are never hindered by the
Distemper of the Heart, but of the Brain, nor recovered, being lost, by
Medicaments applied to the Heart, but to the Brain. 5. That the Radical
Moisture, and primogenial heat naturally ingrafted in us wastes always by
degrees from the time of our Conception, as Oil in a Lamp, or Wax in a Taper:
whereas till we come to the age of Consistence, we still grow in bulk, in
strength, and stature: which for my own part I cannot conceive how it should
be, if from our Infancy, our Natural heat and moisture still decreased. 6. That
one hand by Nature is more useful and properly made for Action then the other:
whereas we find no difference betwixt the two Eyes, the two Ears, the two
Nostrills; and if Men were left to themselves, as many I think, if not more,
would use the left hand, as now by education and custom do the right: And in
truth I am of Opinion that God and Nature have given us two hands, that we
should use both indifferently, that if need required, the one might supply the
loss or defect of the other. Such would Plato have the Citizens of his
Commonwealth to be, and such I do take those seven hundred Benjamite, to have
been mentioned in the 20 th. of Judges; and if either hand should in Nature be
preferred before the other, methinks in reason it should be that next the
Heart, the Fountain of Life and Activity.
Secondly in History, which is Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Natural. To begin with
that of Ecclesiastical.

1. It is commonly received, that Simon Peter encountered with Simon Magus, and
that the Magician undertaking to fly up into the Air, the Apostle so wrought by
Prayer and Fasting, that he came tumbling down and brake his Neck: But of this
story says St. Augustine, in his Epist. 86. Consulano, est quidem and baec
Opinio plurimorum, qua nvis eam perhibeant esse faelsam plerique Romani: Many
are of this Opinion, yet most of the Roman Writers would have it but a Tale.
And in another place he calls it Greciam fabulam, an invention of the Grecians,
who were so fruitful in these kind of Febles, that Pliny himself could say of
them, Hist. Not. Lib. 8. 22. Mirum est qu^ procedat Graeca credulitas, nullum
tam impudens mendaeium est ut test careat; it is a wonder to see whether the
credulity of the Greeks carry them, there being no lie for shameful, but it
finds at ^atron among^st them: ^ay, Juvenel the very (...) took notice of
their immoderate liberty this way, Juven. Sat. 10. Et ^^^ ^^^a. Graeci^ mendax.
Au^^ in Historia.
What dares not Lying Greece insert in Histories. 2. That St. George was a Holy
Martyr, and that he Conquered the Dragon; Whereas Dr. Reynolds de Eccl. Romans
Idol Lib. 10. Cap. 50. Proves him to be both a wicked man and an Arrian, by the
Testimony of Epiphanius, Athanatius and (...) and Baronius himself in plain
terms affirms. Apparet totam illam (...) commentum Arrion It appears that the
whole story of George (...) a forgery of the Arrians; yet was he received (as
we know) as a Canonized ^^^^ through Christendom, and to be the Pastor both of
our Nation, and of the most honorable Order of Knighthood in the World. 3.
That the Wisemen that came out of the East to Worship our Savior, were Kings,
and from hence (their bodies being Translated to Cullen) they are at this day
commonly called the three Kings of Cullen, and the day Consecrated to their
Memory, is by the French termed Le jour de Trois Rois, The day of the Three
Kings. Yet Mantuan a Monk, fears not to declare his Opinion to the contrary,
and gives his reason for it. Nec Reges ut opiner trant, ntque enim tacuissent
Historiae Sacrae Authors; Genus illud honoris est
Inter Mortales qu^ non sublimius ullum,
Add qu^d Herodus, ut magnificentia Regum
Postulat, hospitib^^ tantis regale dedisset
Hospitiu^^, secumqu^ Lares duxisset in amplos.
Had they been Kings, not holy History
Would have concealed their so great Majesty,
Higher on which on Earth none can be named;
Herod's Magnificance would sure have framed
Some entertainment fitting their Estates,
And harbored them within his Royal Gates.
4. That the Sybills clearly foretold touching the Name of the forerunner, the
Birth and Death of Christ, the coming of Antichrist, the overthrow of R^^^, and
the consummation of the World, which notwithstanding, (as Cansabon has
learnedly observed) seems to be contrary to the Word of God, that so profound
Mysteries should be revealed to the Gentiles, so long before the Incarnation of
Christ; especially since they write more plainly and particularly of those
matters then the Prophets of God themselves amongst the Je^s; and the greatest
Cla^ks amongst the Gentiles Plato, Aristotle, Th^^p^ astus, and others curious
searchers into all kind of Learning, never so much as once mention either their
Names or then Writings, nor any of their Mysteries. While the Church of Christ
was yet in her Infancy, many such kind of Books were forged, thereby to make
the Doctrine of the Gospel more passible among the Gentiles; and no marvel then
that these of the Sybills passed for current amongst them.
1. In History Civil or National, it is commonly received, that there were
four, and but four Monarchies succeeding one the other; the African, the
Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman; yet John Bodwin, a man of singular
Learning, especially in matter of History, dares: thus to begin the seventh
Chapter of his Method. Inveteratus error de qua^^^ Imperiis, ac magnorum
virorum opinione pervulgatus, tam altc radices egit, ut vix evelli posse
videatur, That inveterate error of Four Empires made famous through the
Opinion of great Men, has taken such deep roots, as it seems it can hardly be
plucked up; and through a great part of that Chapter labors he the confutation
of those that maintain that Opinion. 2. That Brute a Trojan by Nation, and a
great Grandchild to AEneas, arrived in this Island, and gave it the Name of
Great Britain from himself, here Reigned, and left the Government thereof
divided amongst his three Sons, England to L^^gri^^^, Scotland to Albanak, and
Wales to Camber: Yet Camden our great Antiquary, Brit. de primis Incolis,
beating (as he professes) his Brains and bending the force of his Wits to
maintain that Opinion, he found no warrantable ground for it. Nay by forcible
Arguments (produced as in the person of others disputing against himself) he
strongly proves it, (in my judgment) altogether unwarrantable and unsound.
Boccace, Vives, Adricam^^, Junius, Polidorus, Vignier, Genebrard, Molinaeus,
Bodine, and other latter Writers of great account, are all of opinion, that
there was no such man as this supposed Brute; And amongst our own Ancient
Chronicles, John of Wat^^sted, Abbot of St. Alban, holds the whole Narration
of Brute rather to have been Poetical then Historical, as you shall find in his
Granarto 1440. which methinks is agreeable to reason, since Caesar, Taci^us,
Gildas, Ninius, Bid, William, of Malmesbury, and as many others as have
written any thing touching our Country before the year 1160. make no mention at
all of him. The first that ever broached it was G^ffery of Monmouth about Four
hundred years ago, during the Reign of Henry the Second, who publishing the
British, story in Latin, pretended to have it taken out of Ancient Monuments
written in the British Tongue: but this Book as soon as it peeped forth into
the Light, was, sharply censured both by Giraldus-Cambrensis, and William of
^^^^^ who lived at the same time; the forme^ ^^^^^ in no better then Eabulosam
Historiam, ^^ ^^ ^^^^^y, and the latter Ridicula Figm^^^ ridiculous Fictions,
and it now stands branded with a black cole amongst the Books prohibited by the
Church of Rome. 3. That the Saxons called the remainder of the Britains,
Welsh, as being strangers to them: Whereas that Word signifies not as strangers
either in the high or low Dutch, as Verstigan, a man skilful in those
Languages, has observed; and that the Sexons gave them the name of Welsh,
after themselves came into Britain, is altogether unlikely: For that,
inhabiting so near them as they did, to wit, but over against them on the other
side of the Sea, they could not want a more particular and proper Name for
them, then to call them Strangers. It seems then to be more likely, that the
Romans being Originally descended from the Gauls, the Saxons according to
their manner of speech, by turning the G. into the W. and instead of Galtish
called them Wallish, and by a breviation Wal^h or Welsh, as the French at this
day call the Prince of Wales, Prince de Galls. 4. That the Pigmies are a
Nation of People not above two or three foot high, and that they solemnly set
themselves in battle array to fight against the Cranes, their greatest
Enemies: of these notwithstanding Caesa^ion in his Book De. Gigantibus, Cap.
U^^^^^, says, Fabules^ illa omnia sunt quae de illis, vel Poetae, vel alii
Scriptures tradiderunt: All those things are Fabulous, which touching them
either the Poets or other Writers have delivered. And with him further
accords Carda^, De ror^^ vari^tate Cap. 4. Apparet ergo Pigmiorum Historiam
esse fabulosam, quod and Strabo sentit, and nostra aeras, ^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ firm
^^is mirabitia innotuerint, declarae. It appears then that the History of the
Pigmies is but a Ficton, as both Straba thought, and our age, which have now
discovered all the wonders of the World, fully declares, Gellius also, and
Redogis refer those Pigmies, if any such these be, to a kind of Apes.
1. In Natural History, (to pass by that Vulgar Error of the Ph^^^ix, so
learnedly refuted by one of our late Writers,) I shall here first gain say than
gross. Opinion, that the Wholps of Bears are at first littering without all
form or fashion, and nothing but a little congealed Blood, or lump of Flesh,
which afterward the Dam ^^^apeth by licking; yet is the Truth most evidently
otherwise, as by the Ey witness of (...) and others it has been proved. And
herein, as in many other fabulous Narrations of this Nature, (in which
experience checks report) may we justly put that of Lucretius, -- Qui nobis
c^rtius ipsis
Se^^^^us esse ^o^^ qu^ (...)
What can more certain ^^^^^ sense;
Discerning truth from false pretense.
2. That Swan^^^ a little before thein Death sing most sweetly, of which
notwithstanding Pl^^ Hist. 10. 23^ thus speak ^^ ^^ ^^ mor^e narratur flebilis
caentus, falso ut arbitror al^ perimentis. Swans are said to sing sweetly
before their Death, but falsely, as I take it, being ^^ ^ so to think by some
experiments. And Sealigi^, Exercitat. 2 ^. To the like pure, pose, ^^ Cygnt
(...) Graecia (...) ad Lucian^ tribounal, apud quem aliquid ^^^^ ^^ status
^^^^^. Touching the sweet singing of the Swan, which with Greece the Mother of
Lies you dare to Publish; I cite you to Luciant Tribunal there to set abroach
some new stuff. And AElian, Lib. 10. 14. Cantandt studiosos esse ^ ^ (...) in
every man's mouth, but for my self I never heard them sing, and perchance no
man else. ^ by daily and manifest experience are found to be untrue. 4. That
the (...) being hunted and in danger to be taken, biteth off his Stones,
knowing that for them his Life only is sought, and so often ^^^ hence some have
derived his (...) from gelding himself: and upon this supposition the
Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics, when they will signify a man that (...)
himself, they picture a (...) bitinh off his own Stones, though (...) it to a
contrary purpose (...) by that example to give away (...) rather than our
lives, and by our Wealth to redeem our danger (...) this relation touching the
(...) been by sense and experience, and the testimony of Dioscerid^^, Lib. 3.
Cap. 13. is manifested. First, because their stones are very small, and so
placed in their bodies as are a Beres, and therefore impossible for the Bever
himself, to touch or come by them; and Secondly, they cleave so fast unto their
back, that they cannot be taken away, but the Beast must of necessity lose his
Life; and consequently most ridiculous is their Narration, who likewise affirm,
that when he is hunted, having formerly bitten off his stones, he stands
upright, and shows the Hunters that he has none for them, and therefore his
Death cannot profit them, by means whereof they are averted and seek for
another. 5. That the Hare is one year a Male, and another a Female: whereas
Reud^^^tius affirms, that they are not stones which are commonly taken to be so
in the Female, but certain little bladders filled with matter, such as are upon
the belly of a Bever, wherein also the Vulgar is deceived, mistaking (as I
should before have taken notice) those for stones as they do these; Now the use
of these parts both in Bevers and Hares is this, that against Rain both the one
and the other Six suck out a certain humor, and anoing their bodies all over
therewith, which serves them for a kind of a defense against Rain. 6. That a
Salamander lives in the Fire, yet both Galen and Dioscorides resute this
Opinion. And Mathi^lus in his commentaries upon Dioscorides, a very famous
Physician, affirms of them, that by casting of many Salamanders into the Fire
for trial, he found it false. The same experiment is likewise avouched by
Jouber^^^. 7. That a Wolf, if he see a man first suddenly strikes him dumb,
whence comes the Proverb, Lupus est in fabula, and that of the Poet, Lupi Marim
viders prior^^.
The Wolves saw Maeris first.
Yet Philip Gomerarius professes, fabul^s^^ esse quod vulga ^riditur (...),
subito (...) and voc^m amittere. That it is fabulous which is commonly
believed, that a Man being first seen of a Wolf is thereupon astonished and
loses his voice. And that himself has found it by experience to be a vain
Opinion; which Scaliger likewise affirms upon the fame ground. Utinam tet
f^^^icastigantur mend^^^um afferter^ isti, (...) Lupis vi^i sumus si^e jactura
vocis: I wish those Patrons of Lies were chastised with so many blows, as at
sundry times I have been seen of Wolfes without any loosing of my voice.

8. That men are sometimes transformed into Wolves, and again from Wolves into
men: touching the falsehood whereof Pliny himself is thus confident, Not. Hist.
Lib. 8. Cap. 22. Homines in Lopos ve^it rur su^ov^^resti^^ti sib^, falsum esse
^^^fidenter existimare deb^mus, aut credere omnia quae fabulosa tot secuis
comperimus: That menare changed into Wolves, and again restored to themselves,
that is to the shape of men, we ought assuredly to believe false, or give
credit to whatsoever we have found fabulous, through the course of so many
ages. Now that which has given occasion to this opinion might be as I suppose
either an illusion of Satan in regard of the beholders, or a strong melancholy
imagination in the patients, or the education of men amongst Wolves from their
very infancy. For that the Devil can at his pleasure transsubstantiare or
transform one substance into another, I hold it no sound Divinity. 9. That the
Mandrakes represent the parts and shape of a Man: Yet the same Mathiolus in his
Commentary upon Dioscoride^y affirms, ^^ them, Radices parro M^ndragarae
humanam assig^^ representare, ut vulgo oreditur, ^^ ^^^^ That the Roots of the
Mandrake represent the shape of a Man, as it is commonly believed is fabuolous,
calling them cheating knaves and ^^ salvers that carry them about to be sold,
there with to deceive barren Women. 10. That the Pelican turns her beak^
against her breast, and therewith pierces it ^^ll the blood gush out, wherewith
she nourishes her young: whereas a Pelican has a beak bread and flat, much
like the slice of, Apothecaries and Chirurgions, wherewith they spread their
Plasters, no way fit to pierce, as Laurentius, Gubertus, Counselor and
Physician to Henry the Fourth of France, in his book of popular Errors has
observed. 11. That Vipers in their Birth kill their Mother of whom they are
bred; Sealiger out of his own experience assures the contrary: Viper as, says
he, ab impatientibus morae faetibus Numerosimis, atque idcirco crump^ntibus
rumpi atque interire falsum est seimus, qui in Vincentu G^merini Lign^^thec^
videmus enatas viperillas par^^te salva: That Vipers are re^^ and slain by that
number of their young ones, impatient of ^^ lay, and striving to get forth, we
know to be false, who in a wooden box belonging to Vineontius Camerinus have
seen the young ones newly brought forth, together with the old one, safe and
sound. True it is that the Viper bringing sometimes twenty or more, and being
but delivered of one a day, the hindermost impatient of so long delay sometimes
gnaws through the tunicle or shell of the Egg in which they are enclosed, and
comes forth with part of it upon them, which Aristotle affirming, thereupon it
seems has grown the mistake, that they gnaw through the belly of their Dam,
which is undoubtedly false. The derivation then of the Word Vipera being Quasi
vi parism, is but a trick of wit, grounded upon an Erroneous suspicion: It
being rather (as I conceive) from vinum parient^, there being no other kind of
Se^pent that brings forth her young hatched out of an Egg, but only the
Viper. For the Readers ampler and fuller satisfaction in such curiosities, I
referr him to Doctor Browns Learned discourse of the Errors of the Vulgar.
For though I might give many more instances both in Philosophy and History, to
show that it is a thing neither new nor unjustifiable by the practice of
Wisemen, to examine and impugn received Opinions, if they be found Erroneous;
Nevertheless for the present, Let it suffice (that amongst many others
throughout this Treatise) I have also removed these few stumbling blocks out of
the way. I shall next make good my promise according to the brevity of my
former Method, to treat of the decay of the Powers of the mind in the Arts and
Sciences, their helps and hindrances in matter of Learning, balanced; as also
that there is both in Wits and Arts, as in all things besides, a kind of a
circular progress, as well in regard of places as tunes, that they have their
rise and fall, increase and decrease, and so through the Divine assistance I
shall set a period to this discourse.

Since it is a received conclusion of the choiceest, both Divines and
Philosophers, that the reasonable Soul of Man is not converted into him by his
Parents, but infused immediately by the Creator, and with all that the Souls
of all men, at their first Creation and Infusion, are equal and perfect alike,
endued with the fame Essence and abilities, it must needs be, that the
inequality and disparity of actions, which they produce, arise from the diverle
temper of the matter which they inform, and by which, as by an instrument they
work. Now the matter being tempered by the disposition of the bodies of our
Parents, the influences of the Heavens, the quality of the Elements, Diet,
Exercise, and the like, it remains, that as there is a variety and Vicissitude
or these in regard of goodness, so is there likewise in the temper of the
matter, whereof we consist, and the actions which by it our Souls produce: yea,
where both the Agents and the instruments are alike, yet by the diversity of
education and Industry, their works are many times infinitely diversified.

The principal faculties of the Soul are Imagination, Judgment, and Memory. One
of the most famous for Memory amongst the Ancients, was Seneca the Father, who
reports of himself Proaemic, Lib. 1. Controver. That he could repeat a thousand
names, or two hundred verses, brought to his Master by his School fellows
backwards or forwards. But that which Muretus Lib. 3. Variar. Lection. reports
of a young Man of Corsica, a Student in the Civil Law, whom himself saw, at
Paedua, far exceeds it: he could, says he recite Thirty thousand Names in the
same order as they were delivered, without any stop or staggering, as readily
as if he had read them out of a Book: his conclusion is Huic ego nec ex
antiquitate quidam, quem opponam haebeo, nisi forte Cyrum, quem Plinius,
Quintilianus, and alii Latini Scriptores tradiderunt tenuisse omnium militum
nomixa: I find none among the Ancients, whom I may set against him, unless
Cyrus perchance, whom Pliny, Quintillian, and other Latin Writers, report to
have remembered the names of all his Soldiers, which yet Muretus himself doubts
was mistaken of them. Zenophon, of whom only or principally they could learn
it, affirming only that he remembered the names of his principal Captains, or
chief Commanders. And AEneus Sylvius, in his History of the Council of Basil
(at which himself was present) tells us of Lodovicus Pontanus of Spoleta, a
Lawyer likewise by Profession, (who dyed of the Pestilence at the Council, at
Thirty years of age) that he could recite not the Titles only, but the entire
Bodies of the Laws, being for vastness and fastness of Memory, Nemini
Antiquorum inferior, as he speaks, nothing inferior to any of the Ancients.
Famianus Straeda, in his first Book of Academical Prolusions, relates of
Francis Suar^z, who had, says he, so strong a Memory, that he had St.
Augustine (the most copious and various of the Fathers) ready by heart,
alleging every where (as occasion presented it self) fully and faithfully, his
Sentences, and which is stranger, his very words; nay, if he demanded any thing
touching any passage in any of his Volumes (which of them will make a great
show toward the filling of a Library) Statim quo lequo, quaque pagina
disseruerit ea super re expedite docentem ac digito commonstrantem saepe
videmus: I my self have often seen him instantly showing and pointing with his
Finger, to the place and Page in which he disputed of that Matter; this is, I
confess, the Testimony of one Jesuit touching another, but of Dr. Rainolds, it
is most certain, that he excelled this way, to the astonishment of all that
were inwardly acquainted with him, not only for St. Augustines works, but also
all Classick Authors: so that as in this respect it might truly be said of him,
which has been applied to some others, that he was a living Library, or a
third University: for it has been very credibly reported of him, that upon
occasion of some writings which passed to and fro, betwixt him and Dr.
Gentilis, then a professor in our Civil Laws, he publicly professed, that he
thought Dr. Reynolds had read, and did remember more of those Laws then
himself, though it were his Profession, in which he admirably excelled.

And for the excellency of the other faculties of the Mind, together with that
of the Memory, it is a wonderful Testimony that Vines (a Man of eminent parts)
in his Commentaries on the second Book, and 17. Cap. de Civit. Dei, gives
Budaeus; Que viro, (says he) Gaellia accutiore ingenio, acriore judicio,
exactiore diligentia, majore cruditione nu^tum nunquam produxit, haec vera
etate nos Italia quidem; then which man, France never brought forth a sharper
wit, or pierceing judgment, of more exact diligence, or greater Learning, nor
in this age Italy it self: And then going on tells us, that there was nothing
written in Greek or Latin, which he had not turned over, read and exmined;
Greek and Latin were, both alike to him, yet was he in both most excellent,
speaking either of them as readily, and perchance with more ease then the
French, his Mother Tongue; he would read out a Greek Book in Latin, and out of
the Latin Book into Greek. Those things which we see so exquisitely written by
him, flowed from him ex tempore; he writ more skilfully both in Greek and
Latin, then (as he affirms) the most skillful in those Languages understand.
Nothing in those Tongues being so abstruce and difficult, which he had not
ransacked, entered upon, looked into, and brought as it were another Cerberus
from Darkness to Light. Infinite are the significations of Words, the Figures,
and proprieties of speech, which unknown to former Ages, by the only help of
Budaeus, studious men are now acquainted with. And these so great and admirable
things, he without the direction of any Teacher, learned merely by his own
industry; Faelix and faecundum ingenium, quod in se uno invenit and doctorem
and discipulum, and docendi viam rationemque, and ^ujus decimam partem, alii
sub magnis Magestris vix discunt, ipse id totum a se Magistrum ed^ctus est: An
happy and fruitful Wit, which in himself alone found both a Master and a
Scholar, and a method of teaching; and the tenth part of that which others can
hardly attain unto under famous Teachers, all that learned he of himself, being
his own Reader. And yet (says he) hitherto have I spoken nothing of his
knowledge in the Laws, which being in a manner ruined, seem by him to have been
restored; nothing of his Philosophy, whereof he has given us a trial in his
Book de Ass, that no man could compose them, but such a one as was assiduously
versed in all the books of the Philosophers; and then having highly commended
him for his piety, his sweet behavior, and many other rare and singular
Vertuos added to his greatness, he farther adds, notwithstanding all this, that
he was continually conversant in domestic and state Affairs at home, and
Ambassages abroad; for it might truly be said of him, As Plixius Caecilus
speaks of his Unde Secundur, when I consider his State Affairs, and the happy
dispatch of so many businesses. I wonder at the multiplicity of his Reading and
Writing; and again, when I consider this, I wonder at that and so leave him
wish that happy distick of Buckan^^.

Galliae quod Graeca est, quod Graeca barbara nonest,
Utraque Budaeo debet utrumque suc.
That France is turned to Greece, that Greece is not turned rude,
Both o^^e them both to thee, their dear great learned Bud^.
And if we look over the Peryneeus, Metamorus, in his Treatise of Universities
and learned men of Spain, he spares not to write of Testatus Bishop of Abulum,
si ali^ quam su^ seculo vivere c^ntig^sset, neque Hipponi Augustinum, nique
Stvidoni Hieronymuns, nec quempiam ex illis pr^^eribus Ecclesiae antiquis nunc
inviacrimus: had he lived any other age save his own, we should not have needed
now either to envy Hippo for Augustine, or Stridon for Hiorom, nor any other of
those ancient Worthies of the Church: To which Possevin in his Appaeratus adds,
that at the age of two and twenty years, he attained to the knowledge of almost
all Arts and Sciences. For besides Philosophy and Divinity, the Canon and Civil
Laws, History and the Mathematics, he was skilled in the Greek and Hebrew
Tongues: so as that it was written of him,

Hic super est Mundi, qui scibile discutit omne.
The Worlds wonder for that he,
Knows whatsoever known may be.
He was so true a student, and so constant in fitting o^ it, that with Didymus
of Alexandria, AEnea ^^^uiss^ intestina putar^ur, he was thought to have a body
of Brass, and so much he wrote and published, that a part of the Epitaph
engraven on his Tomb was; Pri^ae natalis Luci foliae omniae aedaeptans
Nondum sic faeerit paegina trina satis;


The meaning is, that of his published Writings, we shall allow three leaves to
every day of his Life from his very Birth, there would be yet some to spare;
and yet withal he wrote so exactly, that Ximenes his Scholar, attempting to
contract his Commentaries upon Matthew could not well bring it into l ess then a
thousand leaves in Folio, and that in a very small Print; and others have
attempted the like in his other works with like success. But that which
Paesquier has observed out of Monaesteries Lib. 56. 38. Touching a Young Man,
who being not above twenty years old, came to Paris in the year 1445, and
showed himself so admirably excellent in all Arts, Sciences, and Languages,
that if a man of an ordinary good wit and sound constitution should live one
hundred years, and during that time (if it were possibly) study incessantly,
without eating, drinking, sleeping, or any other recreation, he could hardly
attain to that perfection: insomuch that some were of opinion, that he was
Antichrist begotten of the Devil, or somewhat at least above human condition;
which gave occasion to these verses of Castellanus, who lived at the same time,
and himself saw this Miracle of Wit.

I'ay veu par excellence
Un jeune de Uinge ans
Avoir toute Science and les degrees montans
Soyse vantant scaevoir dire
Cequ' onques faet escrit
Par seule fois le Lire
Comme jeune Antichrist.
A young Man have I seen
At twenty years so skilled,
That every Art he had, and all
In all degrees excelled.
What ever yet was writ
He vaunted to pronounce
Like a young Antichrist, if he
Did read the same but once.
Not to insit upon Supernaturals; were there among us that industry, and the
union of forces, and contribution of helps, as was in the Ancients, I see no
sufficient Reason but the Wits of this present Age might produce as great
Effects as theirs did, nay greater, inasmuch as we have the Light of their
Writings to guide and assist us: we have books by reason of the Art and Mystery
of Printing more familiar, and at a cheaper rate: most men being now unwilling
to give Three hundred pounds for three Books, as Plato did for those of
Philolaus the Pithagorean. And by this means are we freed from a number of
gross Errors, which by the ignorance or negligence of unskilful Writers crept
into the Text: yet on the other side it is as true that we are forced to spend
much time in the learning of Languages, especially the Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, which the Ancients spent in the study of things, their learning being
commonly written in their own Language. Besides the infinite and bitter
controversies amongst Christians in matters of Religion since the Infancy
thereof even to these present times, has doubtless not a little hindered the
progress and advancement of other Sciences.

Likewise it cannot be denied, but that the encouragements for the study of
Learning were in former times greater. What liberal and bountiful allowance did
Alexander afford Aristotle, Eight hundred Talents for the entertainment of
Fishers, Faulkners and Hunters to bring him in Beasts, Fowls, Fishes of all
kinds, and for the discovery of their several natures and dispositions: Nay,
the daily wages of Roscius the Stage Player, as witnesses Mucrobrius, in his
Saturnal Lib. 3. Cap^ 14. was a thousand Dexarii which amounts to Thirty
pounds of our Coin. And AEsop the Tragaedian by the only exercise of the same
Trade, if we may credit the same Author, that he left his Son above One hundred
and fifty thousand pounds Sterling, whereunto may be added, that the Ancients
copying out their Books, for the most part with their own hand, it could not
but work in them a deeper impression of the matter therein contained, and being
thereby forced to content themselves with fewer Books, of nece^sity they held
themselves more closely to them. And it is true what Seneca says, as well in
reading as eating, Varietas delectat, certitudo predest, Variety is delightful,
but certainty more useful and profitable.

So that upon the matter, reckonings cast up on all sides, and one thing being
set against another, as we want some helps which the Ancients had, so we are
freed from some hindrances wherewith they were encumbered; as again it is most
certain, that they wanted some of our helps, and were freed from some of our
hindrances: if then we come short of their perfections, it is not because
Nature is generally defective in us, but because we are wanting to our selves,
and do not strive to make use of, and improve those abilities wherewith God and
Nature has endowed us. Male de Natura censet quicu^que un^ illa^ aut altero
partu effatum esse arbitratur, says Vives; He thinks unworthily and
irreverently of Nature who conceives her to be barren after one or two Births;
No, no, that which the same Author speaks of places, is likewise undoubtedly
true of times, Ubiqu^ bona nascuntur ingenia, exc^lantur mod^, alibi fortassis
frequ^ntiorae, sed ubique nonnulla. Every where and in all ages good Wits
spring up, were they dressed and manured as they ought, though happily more
frequently in some places and ages then others. Scythia it self anciently
yielded one Anacharsis. And no doubt had they taken the same course as he did,
more of the same Metal would have been found there.

There is (it seems) both in Wits and Arts, as in 'all things besides, a kind
of circular progress: they have their Birth, their growth, their flourishing,
their falling, and fading, and within a while after their Resurrection, and
reflourishing again. The Arts flourished for a long time amongst the Persians,
the Caldeans, the AEgypitans, and therefore is Moses is said to be learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, who well knowing their own strength, were
bold to object to the Grecians, that they were still Children, as neither
having the knowledge of Antiquity, nor the Antiquity of Knowledge: But
afterward the Grecians got the start of them, and grew so excellent in all
kind of Knowledge, that the rest of the World in regard of them, were reputed
Barbarians, which reputation of wisdom they held even till the Apostles time. I
am debtor, says St. Paul, Both to the Graecians and to the Barbarians, both to
the wise and to the unwise. Romans 1. 14. And again, The Jews require a Sign,
and the Graecians seek after Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 22. By reason whereof they
relished not the simplicity of the Gospel, it seeming foolishness unto them:
And n the seventeenth of the Acts the Philosophers of Atbens, (sometimes held
the most famous University in the World) out of the opinion of their own great
Learning, scorned St. Paul and his Doctrine, terming him a sower of Words, a
very Babbler or trifler: yet not long after this, these very Graecians declined
much, and themselves (whether through their own inclination, or the reason of
their Bondage under the ^urk, the common Enemy both of Religion and Learning, I
cannot determine) are now become so strangly Barbarous, that their Knowledge is
converted into a kind of Ignorance, as is their Liberty into a contented
Slavery: yet after the loss both of their Empire and Learning, they still
retained some spark of their former Wit and Industry. As Juvenal has it Sat. 7.

Ingenium ^elox; audacia perdita, ser^^^
Pr^mptus, and Isaeo terrent^or, ede quid illum
Esse putas quemvis hominem secum attulit ad nos
Grammaticus, Rhet^r, Geometres, Picter, Aliptes,
Angur, Schaenobates, Medicus, Magnus, ^mnia novis
Graeculus ^suriens in Caelum jusseris, ibit.
Quick witted, wondrous bold, well spoken, then
Isaeus Pluenter, who of all Men
Brought with himself, a Soothsayer, a Physician,
Magician, Rhetorician, Geometrician,
Grammarian, Painter, Ropewalker, all knows
The needy Greek^ bid go to Heaven, he goes.
But now they wholly delight in ease, in shades, in dancing, in drinking, and
for the most part, no further endeavor either the enriching of their minds or
purses then their bellies compel them.

The Lamp of Learning being thus near extinguished in Greece,

In Latium spretis Accademia ^igrat Athenis.
Athens forsaken by Philosophy
She forthwith traveled into Italy.
It began to shine afresh in Italy near about the time of the Birth of Christ,
there being a general peace through the World, and the Roman Empire fully settled
and Established, Poets, Orators, Philosophers, and Historians, never more
Excellent. From whence the Light spread it self over Christendom, and continued
bright till the Inundation of the Goths, Hunns, and Vandals, who ransaked
Libraries, and defaced almost all the Monuments of Antiquity, insomuch as that
Lamp seemed again to be put out, for the space of almost a Thousand years, and
had longer so continued, had not Mensor King of Africa and Spain raised up and
spurred on the Arabian Wits to the restoration of good Letters by proposing
great rewards and encouragements to them. And afterward Petarch, a man of
singular Wit and rare Natural Endowments, opened such Libraries as were left
undemolished, beat off the Dust from the Moth-eaten Books and drew into the
Light the best Authors. He was seconded by B^cca^e, and J^h^ of Ravenna, And
soon after by Aretine, Philephus, Valla, Poggius, Onimbonus, Vergerius,
Bl^ndus, and others. And those again were followed by AEneus Sylvius, Angelus
Politianus, Hermola^s Barbarus, Marsilius Ficinus, and that Phoe^ix of Learning
J. Picus Earl of Mirandula, who as appears in his entrance of his Apogie
proposed openly at R^^^ Nine hundred questions in all kind of Faculties to be
disputed, inviting all strangers thither, from any part of the known World, and
offering himself to bear the Charges of their Travel both coming and going, and
during all their abode there: so as he deservedly received that Epitaph, which
after his Death was bestowed on him.

Joannes hic jacet Miraudula, caetera ^^^^nt,
Et Tagus, and Ganges, forsan Antipodes.
Here lies Mirandula, Tagus the rest does know,
And Ganges, and perhaps the Antipodes also.
And rightly might that be verified of him which Lucretius sometimes wrote of
Epicurus his Master.

Hic genus humanum ingenis superavit, and omnes
Praestrinxit stellas exortus us aether^^^ S^l.
In Wit all men he far has overgrown,
Ecclipsing them like to the rising Sun.
This Path being thus beaten out by these Heroical Spirits, they were backed by
Rodulphus Agricola, Reucline, Melanct^on, Joachimus Camerarius, Musculus,
Beatus Rhenanus, Almains; the great Erasmus a Netherlander, Lodovicus Vives a
Spaniard; Bembus, Sadoletus, Eugubnius, Italians, Turnebus, Muretus, Ramus,
Pithaeus, Budaeus, Amiot, Scaliger, Frenchmen. Sr. Thomas More, and Li^aker,
Englishmen; And it is worth the observing, that about this time the slumbering
drowzie Spirit of the Graecians began again to be revived and awakened in
Bessaerion, Gemistius, Trapenz^ntius, Gaza, Argyropolus, Gal^ondilus; and
others: nay, these very Northern Nations which before had given the greatest
wound to Learning, began now by way of recompense to advance the honor of it
by the fame of their Studies, as Olaus Magnus, Holsterus, Tycho Brabe, Frixius,
Crumerus, Polonians; But the number of those Worthies, who like so many
sparkling Stars have since through Christendom succeeded, and many of them
exceeded these in Learning and Knowledge, ^ is so infinite, that the very
recital of their names were enough to fill whole Volumes: And if we descend to
a particular examination of the several Professions, Arts, Sciences, and
Manufactures, we shall sure find the Praediction of the Divine Seneca
accomplished, Natural. Quest. Lib. 7. Cap. 31. Mult^ v^nientis aevi populus
ignota n^bis sci^t. The People of future Ages; shall come to the knowledge of
many things unknown to us; And that of Tacitus, is most true, Annal, Lib. 3.
Cap. 12. Nec omnia apud prures meliores^ prioria, sed nostra quoque ae^^ multa
laudis, and artium imitanda posteris tulit: Neither were all things in ancient
times better than ours, but our Age has left to Posterity many things worthy
of Praise and Imitation. I shall conclude with what Ramus writes further, and
perhaps warrantably enough in his Preface. Scholast. Mathemat. Majorem doctorum
hominum and operum proventum seculo uno vidimus, quam tot is antea 14. Majores
nostri viderunt. We have seen within the space of one Age, a more plentious
Crop of learned Men and Works, then ourPredecessors saw in fourteen next going
before us. But our prejudice is so great, against all things po^ited without
the Sphere of our Knowledge; that all the advantage we can make of it, is, to
condemn to the flame both Works and Authors. To acquaint Ignorance with the
glory of the Heavens; the Magnitude, Distance, Motion and Influence of the
Stars, is to present our selves guilty of that folly, never to be pardoned, by
that Multitude; amongst which, to appear wise, is a crime, so Capital, that a
punishment, less, then what the good Bishop suffered, for holding Antipodes,
cannot exp^ate, which was no less than Death it self. Judge then, what courage
a man ought to be master of, that will expose his Judgment to Public Censour.
Caesar and Alexander had not more occasion to use it, then that man has, which
shall dare to oppose an Opinion, which has Generallity and Antiquity for its
guard, to tell them, (that the Eight Sphere is Sixty five millions two hundred
eighty five thousand and five hundred of miles from us; and that the least Star
in that Sphere is greater then the Globe we tread on,) and to maintain it
amongst the rabble, is as dangerous, as to be a Daeniel in the Den, with the
Lions; to speak of the seven Planets, their Natures, with the Effects that
attends, their Times, Squares, Conjunctions, and Oppositions to any (...)
Ingenious, is madness it self, the Zodiac with its Duodessi^ division of
Signs, with their quaternal Triplicities, and the Suns progress through those
Signs, with the alterations that it occasions, as to heat and coldness of the
weather, the length and shortness of the days and nights, the flourish and
decay of all the fruits of the Earth, astonishes Ignorance, but to the Learned,
observation has made the reason of it obvious to understand. The language of
the Heavens, how excellent a thing it is, all that have Souls of the first
Magnitude can witness. Augustus himself was so great a lover of this Science,
that he caused the Sign Capricorn (it being the Ascendant of his Nativity) to
be Stamped upon his Coin, and advanced the same in his Standard.

Tiberius did so dote upon the knowledge of the Heavens, that he learnt the
same of Thrasillus at Rodes; and indeed, the Wonders that has been told, by
those that have understood the speech of the Coelestials, might justly
encourage all to the same Study; for how could Gauricus have admonished Henry
the Second, King of France, from Tilting in the one and fortieth year of his
age, but that he read the danger of it in the Stars; or the Bishop of Vienna
assured Don Frederick, that he should be King of Naples, Twenty years before it
happened. I could quote many more examples, of the like nature, if I thought it
were to any purpose; but my dread is, that most of the Sons of Men, are so
prepossest with an injury against all intelligibleness, but that which tends to
the fil^ing of their Coffers, that a truth may expect the same welcome amongst
them; that a true Savior found amongst the false J^^^

FINIS.

