ANTHROPOSOPHIA THEOMAGICA Or A Discourse of the Nature of Man and his state
after death; Grounded on his Creator's ProtoChimistry, and verified by a
practical Examination of Principles in the Great World.

By Eugenius Philalethes.

Dan: Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

Zoroaster in Oracul.

Audi Ignis Vocem.

LONDON, Printed by T. W For H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill. 1650.

Illustrissimis, and vere Renatis Fratribus R. C. (...) Eclesiae in tumultuoso
hoc Saeculo Apostolis Pacificis, Salutem a Centro Saluris.
QUum in summum Altar summo tanrum Pontifici Jus sit, audens nimis hoc Libum,
nec sine sacrilegio Vobis obtrudi videatur; habet and pietas suos Cancellos:
Qui accedit injussus, Adaciae, non Obsequii reus est. Allusit Istis olim
Poetarum illa gigantomachia, quae Coelum etiam expugnare moliebatur. Nec desunt
hac nostra AEtate fatui quidam, and palustres Igniculi, qui Stellas se
somniant, and soli a latere creduntur. Absit Engenio fastus iste, and Climax
ambitionis! Hoc est,

-- imponere Pelion Ossae.

Ego, Fratres Nobilissimi, in Sacrarii vestibulo, nec ad Aram Ear hoc meum, Sed
in Limine modestius expono. Vellem (si mihi in Censum accedissent) Talia vobis
offerre,

-- Quae saecula Posterique possint Arpinis quoque comparare Chartis.

Sed non est quod desperem. Prodeant forsan in Novissimis, Qui faculam hanc
meam praferent vel Solibus tusculanis. At que hac quidem ratione Marci Tullii
Collega sum, quod in eandem Immortatem tendit noster Consulatus. Peragravi Ego,
Quod Apes factitant, (non illo Quintiliani in Area venenata) Floscuculos
Coelestes libaturus, and Qui suavia sua ex Aromatum Montibus attraxerunt. Si
quid mihi Mellisicii est, Ego vobis Favum hunc, and alveare Solent tamen Rosae
in aliquorum sinu sordescere: sordescet forsan and hic noster Manipulus,
quoniam meae Messis est. Fateor, Errata Eugenii sunt, Caetera Veritatis. Sed
quorsum hoc Veritati Testimonium, Vobis etiam astantibus, Quibus in propatulo
est triplex illud Spiritus, Aquae, and sanguinis Martyrium? Supervacanea est
haec, non auxiliaris Vocula: Qui silet ad Coelum, sapit. Accipite ergo ( F.
Illustrissimi) Quadrantem hunc meum non Qualem Vobis offerre Debui, sed Qualem
potui. Men's mihi pro Munere est. Hoc etiam praefari voluit paupertas, Nolite
Rem ipsam expendere, sed Obsequium

Oxonii 48. Oratoris Vestri E. P.

Errata.
Pa. li. Read Second part. Pa. li. Read 2 18 rambl'd 3 10 whereon 9 29 Demoniu^
4 29 Finihaebi^ 12 3 paulo post 21 5 Iodims 29 26 this fire 40 17 ad dextra^ 64
13 I carve 48 20 per misto^

The Author to the Reader.
I Look on this life as the Progress of an Essence Royal: The Soul but quits
her court to see the country. Heaven has in it a Scaene of Earth; and had she
bin contented with Ideas, she had not traveled beyond the Map. But excellent
patterns commend their Mimes: Nature that was so fair in the type, could not be
a slut in the Annglyph. This makes her ramble hither to examine the Medall by
the Flask, but whiles she scanns their Symmetrie, she forms it. Thus her
descent speaks her Original: God in love with his own beauty frames a Glass to
view it by reflection; but the frailety of the matter excluding Eternity, the
composure was subject to dissolution. Ignorance gave this release the Name of
Death, but properly it is the Souls Birth, and a Charter that makes for her
Liberty; she has several ways to break up house, but her best is without a
disease. This is her mystical walk, an Exit only to return. When she takes air
at this door, it is without prejudice to her tenement. The Magicians tell me,
Anima unius Entis egreditur, and aliud ingreditur. Some have examined this, and
state it an Expense of Influences, as if the Soul exercised her Royalty at the
eye, or had some blind Jurisdiction in the pores. But this is to measure
Magical Positions by the slight, superficial strictures of the common
Philosophy. It is an age of Intellectual slaveries; If they meet any thing
extraordinary, they prune it commonly with distinctions, or dawb it with false
Glosses, till it looks like the Traditions of Aristotle. His followers are so
confident of his principles they seek not to understand what others speak, but
to make others speak what they understand. It is in Nature, as it is in
Religion; we are still hammering of old elements, but seek not the America that
lies beyond them. The Apostle Hebr.
tells us of leaving the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and going
on to perfection: Not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, and of faith toward God; of the Doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of
Hands, of Resurrection, and the eternal Judgment; Then he speaks of
Illumination, of Tasting of the Heavenly gift, of being partakers of the Holy
Ghost, of Tasting of the good word of God, and tho powers of the world to come.
Now if I should question any Sect (for there is no Communion in Christendom)
whither these later Intimations drive? They can but return me to the first
Rudiments, or produce some empty pretense of spirit. Our Natural Philosophers
are much of a Cast with those that step into the prerogative of Prophets, and
Antedate events in configurations, and motions. This is a consequence of as
much reason, as if I saw the Suede exercising, and would find his Designs in
his postures. L. Verulam in his N. H.
Friar Bacon walked in Oxford between two steeples, but he that would have
discovered his Thoughts, by his steps, had been more his Fool, then his Fellow.
The Peripateticks when they define the Soul, or some Inferior Principle,
describe it only by outward circumstances, which every child can do, but they
state nothing Essentially. Thus they dwell altogether in the Face, their
Endeavors are mere Titillations, and their Acquaintance with Nature is not at
the heart. Notwithstanding I acknowledge the Schoolmen ingenious: They conceive
their Principles irregular, and prescribe rules for Method, though they want
Matter. Their Philosophy is like a Church, that is all discipline, and no
Doctrine: For, bate me their prolegomena, their form of Arguing, their Reciting
of Different Opinions, with several other digressions, and the substance of
these Tostati will scarce amount to a Mercury. Besides, their Aristotle is a
Poet in text, his principles are but Fancies, and they stand more on our
Concessions, then his Bottom. Hence it is that his followers, notwithstanding
the Assistance of so many Ages, can fetch nothing out of him but Notions: And
these indeed they use, as He says Lycophron did his Epithets, Non is it
Condimentis, sed ut Cibis; Their Compositions are a mere Tympanie of Terms.
Arist. Rher.
It is better then a Fight in Quixot, to observe what Duels, and Digladiations
they have about Him. one will make him speak Sense, another Nonsense, and a
third both, Aquinas palps him gently, Scotus makes him winch, and he is taught
like an Ape to show several tricks. If we look on his adversaries, the least
amongst them has foyld him, but Telesius knocked him in the head, and
Campanella has quite discomposed him. But as that bald haunter of the circus
had his scull so steeled with use, it shivered all the tyles were thrown at it,
so this Aristotle thrives by scuffles, and the world cries him up, when truth
cries him down. The Peripatetickes look on God, as they do on Carpenters, who
build with stone and Timber, without any infusion of life. But the world, which
is Gods building, is full of Spirit, quick, and living. This Spirit is the
cause of multiplication, of several perpetual productions of minerals,
vegetables, and creatures engendered by putrefaction: All which are manifest,
infallible Arguments of life. Besides, the Texture of the universe clearly
discovers its animation. The arth which is the visible natural Basis of it,
represents the gross, carnal parts. The Element of Water answers to the Blood,
for in it the pulse of the Great World beats; this most men call the Flux and
Reflux, but they know not the true Cause of it. The air is the outward
refreshing Spirit, where this vast creature breathes, though invisibly, yet not
all together insensibly. The Interstellar skies are his vital, aethereall
waters, and the stars his animal, sensual fire. Thou will tell me perhaps,
This is new Philosophy, and that of Aristotle is old. It is indeed, but in the
same sense as Religion is at Rome. It is not the primitive Truth of the
Creation, not the Ancient, real Theosophie of the Hebrews and Egyptians, but a
certain preternaturall upstart, a Vomit of Aristotle, which his followers with
so much diligence lick up, and swallow. I present thee not here with any
Clamorous opposition of their Patron, but a positive Express of principles as
I find them in Nature. I may say of Them as Moses said of the Fiat: These are
the Generations of the Heavens, and of the Earth, in the Day that the Lord God
made the Heavens, and the Earth. They are things extra Intellectum, sensible
practical Trueths, not mere Vagaries, and Rambles of the Brain. I would not
have thee look on my Endeavors as a design of Captivity: Intend not the
Conquest, but the exercise of thy Reason, not that thou should swear
Allegiance to my Dictats, but compare my Conclusions with Nature, and examine
their Correspondency. Be pleased to consider, that Obstinacy inslaves the
Soul, and clips the wings which God gave her for flight, and Discovery. If
thou will not quit thy Aristotle, let not any prejudice hinder thy further
search; Great is their Number who perhaps had attained to perfection, had they
not already thought themselves perfect. This is my Advice, but how welcome to
Thee I know not. If thou will kick and fling, I shall say with the Cardinal,
Etiam Asinus meus recalcitrat: for I value no Man's Censure. It is an Age
wherein truth is near a Miscarriage, and it is enough for me that I have
appeared thus far for it, in a Day of Necessity.

E. S.

ANTHROPOSOPHIA THEOMAGICA
WHEN I found out this Truth, That Man in his Original was a Branch planted
in God and that there was a continual Influxe from the Stock to the Sion, I
was much troubled at his Corruptions, and wondered his Fruits were not
correspondent to his Root. But when I was told he had tasted of an other Tree,
my admiration was quickly off, it being my chief care to reduce him to his
first Simplicity, and separate his Mixtures of Good and Evil. But his Fall
had so bruised him in his best part. that his Soul had no knowledge left to
study him a Cure, his Punishment presently followed his C. Agrip. de vanit.
Scient.
Trespass: Velata sunt omnia, intravitq oblivio matter ignorantiae. This Lethe
remained not, in his body, but passing together with his Nature, made his
Posterity her Channel. Imperfection's an easy inheritance, but Virtue seldom
finds any Heirs. Man had at the first, and so have all Souls before their
Intrance into the body, an Explicit methodicall knowledge, but they are no
sooner Vessel'd but that Liberty is lost, and nothing remains but a Vast
confused Notion of the Creature, Thus had I only left a Capacity without Power,
and a Will to do that, which was far enough above me. In this perplexity I
studied several Arts, and ramel'd over all those Inventions which the folly of
man called Sciences; But these endeavors sorting not to my purpose, I quitted
this Booke-businesse, and thought it a better course to study Nature then
Opinion. Hereupon I considered with my self, that man was not the Primitive
immediate work of God, but the World, out of which he was made. And to
regulate my studies in point of Method, I judged it convenient to examine his
Principles first, and not him. But the World in general being too large for
Inquisition, I resolved to take Part for the Whole, and to give a guess at the
Frame by Proportion. To perfect this my Essay, I took to task the Fruits of
one Spring: Here I observed a great many Vegetables fresh and beauteous in
their Time, but when I looked back on their Original, they were no such things
as Vegetables. This Observation I applied to the World, and gained by it this
Inference: That the World in the beginning was no such thing as it is, but some
other seed or matter out of which that Fabric which I now behold, did arise.
But resting not here, I drove my Conclusion further; I conceav'd those seeds
whereof Vegetables did spring, must be something else at first then Seeds, as
having some praeexistent matter whereof they were made, but what that matter
should be I could not guess. Here was I forced to leave off Speculation, and
come up to Experience. Whiles I sought the World, I went beyond it, and I was
now in Quest of a Substance, which without Art I could not see. Nature wrapps
this most strangly in her very bosom, neither does she expose it to any thing
but her own Vital Caelestiall Breath. But in respect that God Almighty is the
only proper immediate. Agent which actuates this matter, as well in the work
of Generation, as formerly in his Creation, it will not be amiss to speak
something of Him, that we may know the Cause by his Creatures, and the
Creatures by their Cause.

My God, my Life! whose Essence man
Is no way fit to Know, or Scan;
But should aproach thy Court a Guest
In Thoughts more low, then his Request.
When I consider, how I stray,
Methinks it is Pride in me to Pray
How dare I speak to Heaven, nor fear
In all my Sins to court thy Ear?
But as I look on Moles that Lurk
In blind Intrenchments, and there work
Their own dark Prisons to repair,
Heaving the Earth to take in Air:
So view my fetterd Soul, that must
Struggle with this her Load of Dust
Meet her Address, and add one Ray
To this mewed Parcel of thy Day
She would though here imprson'd, see
Through all her Dirt thy Throne and Thee.
Lord guide her out of this sad Night
And say once more, Let there be Light.
It is Gods own positive truth: In the Beginning That is, In that dead silence,
Esdr.
In that horrible and empty Darkness when as yet nothing was fashioned, then
(says the lord) did I consider those things, and they all were made through me
alone, and through non other, By me also shall they be ended and by none other.
That Meditation forerunns every Solemn Work, is a thing so well known to
man, that he needs no further Demonstration of it then his own Practice: That
there is also in God something Analogicall to it from whence Man derived this
Customary Notion of his; As it is most agreeable to Reason, so withal is it
very suitable to Providence. Dij (says I amblicus) concipiunt in se totum opus,
antequam parturiunt. And the Spirit here to Esdras, Then did I consider these
things, He considered them first and made them afterward. God in his AEternall
Idea, foresaw That whereof as yet there was no Material Copy: The goodness and
Beauty of the one, moved him to create the other, and truly the Image of this
Prototype being imbosom'd in the Second made Him so much in love with his
Creature, that when Sin had defaced it, He restored it by the suffering of that
Pattern by which at first it was made. Dyonisius the Areopagite, who lived in
the Primitive Times, and received the Mysteries of Divinity immediately from
the Apostles, styles God the Father, sometimes Arcanum Divinitatis, sometimes
Occultum illud Super substantiale and elsewhere he compares him to a Root,
whose Flowers are the Second and Third Person. This is true; For God the Father
is the Basis or supernatural Foundation of his Creatures. God the Son, is the
Pattern in whose express Image they were made: And God the Holy Ghost is
Spiritus Opifea, or the Agent, who framed the creature in a just symmetrie to
his Type. This Consideration or type God has since used in the performance of
inferior works. Thus in the Institution of his Temple he commands Moses to the
Mount, where the Divine Spirit shows him the Idea of the future Fabric; And
let them Exodus
make me a Sanctuary that I may dwell amongst them, according to all that I
show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of all the
Instruments thereof, even so shall you make it. Thus the Divine mind does
instruct us porrigendo Ideas quadam extensione fui extra se, and sometimes more
particularly in dreams. To Nebuchadnezzar he presents a Tree strong and high,
reaching to the Heavens and the sight thereof to the ends of the Earth. To
Pharaoh he shows seven Ears of Corn. To Joseph he appears in sheafes, and then
resembles the Sun, Moon and Stars. To conclude he may express himself by what
he will, for in him are innumerable, eternal Prototypes, and he is the true
Fountain. and Treasure of Forms. But that we may come at last to the scope
proposed: God the Father is the Metaphysicall, supercelestiall Sun, The second
Person is the light, and the Third is Amor igneus, or a Divine heat proceeding
from Both. Now without the presence of this Heat there is no Reception of the
Light, and by Consequence no Influx from the Father of Lights. For this Amor is
the Medium which unites the Lover to that which is beloved, and probably it is
the Platonicks Demon magnus, Qui con^ungit nos spirituum praefecturis. I could
speak much more of the Offices of this Loving spirit, but these are Magnalia
Dei, and Naturae, and require not our Discuss, so much as our reverence. Here
also I might speak of that supernatural Generation, whereof Trismegistus:
Monas gignit Monaden, and in se suum reflectit Ardorem; But I leave this to the
Almighty God as his own Essential, Centrall mystery. It is my only Intention
in this place to handle Exterior Actions, or the Process of the Trinity from
the Center to the Circumference: And that I may the better do it, you are to
understand, that God before his work of Creation was wrapped up, and contracted
in himself. In this state the Egyptians style him Monas solitaria, and the
Cabalists Aleph tenebrosum; But when the decreed Instant of Creation came, then
appeared Aleph Lucidum, and the first Emanation was that of the holy Ghost into
the bosom of the matter. Thus we read that Darkness was upon the sace Genesis
of the deep and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Here you
are to observe that notwithstanding this process of the third person, yet was
there no Light, but darkness on the face of the deep, Illumination properly
being the Office of the second. wherefore God also, when the matter was
prepared by Love for Light, gives out his Fiat Lux, which was no Creation as
most think, but an Emanation of the Word, in whom was life, and that life is
the light of Men. This is that light whereof Saint John speaks, that it shines
in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. But lest I seem to be
singular in this point, I will give you more evidence. Pimandras informing
Trismegistus in the work of the Creation tells him the self-same thing. Lumen
illud Ego sum, Men's, Deus Tuus antiquior quam natura humida, quae ex umbra
effulsit. And Georgius Venetus in his Book de Harmonia mundi: Omne quod vivit,
propter inclusum calorem vivit, Inde colligitur Caloris naturam vim habere in
se vitalem, in Mundo passim diffusam: imo omnia ex Igne facta esse testatur
Zoroastres, dum ait, Omnia sub I gne uno genita sunt, I gne quippe illo, quem
Deus Igneae essentiae Habitator, (ut Plato ait) mess jussit materiae Coeli,
and Terrae jam creatae, rudi and informi: ut vitam praestaret, and formam, Hinc
illis product is statim subintulit Opifex, sit Lux: pro quo Mendosae Traductio
habet Fiat lux, Non enim facta est Lux, sed Rebus adhuc obscur is communicata,
and insita: ut in suis Formis Clarae, and splendentes furent. But to proceed:
No sooner had the Divine Light pierced the Bosom of the Matter, but the Idea,
or Pattern of the whole Material World appeared in those primitive waters like
an Image in a Glass: by this Pattern it was that the Holy Ghost framed and
modelled the Universal Structure. This Mystery or appearance of the Idea is
excellently manifested in the Magical Analysis of Bodies; (For he that knows
how to imitate the Proto-Chymistrie of the Spirit by Separation of the
Principles wherein the Life is Imprisoned, may see the Impresse of it
Experimentally in the outward natural vestiments. But lest you should think
this my Invention, and no Practical Truth, I will give you another Man's
testimony. Quid quaeso dicerent bi^tanti Philosophi, (says one) is Plantam
quasi: Momentonasci in vitreo vase viderent, cum suis ad Viuum Coloribus, and
rursum interixe, and renasci, idque quoties, and quando luheret? Credo
Daemonium Art Magica inclusum dicerent illudere sensibus humanis. They are the
words of Doctor Marci in his Defensio Idearum Operatricium. But you are to be
admonished, there is a twofold Idea: Divine, and Natural. The Natural is a
fiery, invisible, created Spirit, and properly a mere Enclosure, or vestiment
of the true One. Hence the Platonicks called it Nimbus Numinis Descendentis.
Zoroaster, and some other Philosophers think it is Anima Mundi, but by their
leave they are mistaken, there is a wide difference betwixt Anima and Spiritus.
But the Idea I speak of here, is the true primitive exemplar one, and a pure
Influence of the Almighty. This Idea before the Coagulation of the seminall
principles to a gross, outward Fabric, which is the End of Generation,
impresseth in the Vital Ethereall Principles a Model, or Pattern after which
the Body is to be framed, and this is the first inward production, or Draught
of the Creature. This is it which the Divine Spirit intimates to us in that
Scripture where he says, That God Genesis
Created every plant of the field before it was in the ground, and every herb
of the field before it grew. But notwithstanding this presence of the Idea in
the Matter, yet the Creation was not performed Extramittendo aliquid de
Essentia Ideae, for it is God, that Comprehends his Creature, and not the
Creature God.

Thus far have I handled this primitive supernatural part of the Creation. I
must confess it is but short in respect of that which may be spoken but I am
confident it is more then formerly has been discovered: Some Authors having
not searched so deeply into the Center of Nature and others not willing to
publish such Spiritual mysteries. I am now come to the gross work or mechanics
of the Spirit, namely the separation of several substances from the same
Mass: but in the first place I shall examine that Lymbus or Huddle of Matter
wherein all things were so strangely contained. It is the opinion of some men.
and those learned, That this sluggish empty Rudement of the Creature was noe
created thing. I must confess the Point is obscure as the thing it self, and
to state it with Sobriety except a man were illuminated with the same Light
that this Chaos was at first, is altogether impossible, For how can we judge
of a Nature differrent from our own, whose Species also was so remote from any
thing now existent, that it is impossible for Fancy to apprehend, much more for
Reason to define it. If it be created, I conceive it the Effect of the Divine
imagination acting beyond it self in Contemplation of that which was to come,
and producing this Passive darkness for a Subject to work upon in the
Circumference. Trismegistus having first expressed his Vision of Light, describes
the Matter in its primitive state thus Et paulo post (says he) Tenebrae deor
sum ferebantur, partim trepidandae, ac tristes effectae tortuosae terminatae:
ut maginarer me vidisse commutatas Tenebras in humidam quandam Naturam ultra
quam dici potest agitatam, and velut ab igne fumum evomere, ac sonum aliquem
edere inenunciabilem, and lugubrem. Certainly these Tenebrae he speaks of or
Fuliginous spawne of Nature, were the first created Matter, for that Water we
read of in Genesis was a Product or secondary. Substance. Here also he seems
to agree further with the Mosaicall Tradition; For this Fumus which ascended
after the Transmutation can be nothing else but that Darkness which was upon
the Face of the Deep; But to express the particular Mode or way of the
Creation, you are to understand that in the Matter there was a horrible
confused Qualme, or stupifying spirit of Moisture, Cold and Darkness; In the
opposite Principle of Light there was Heat and the Effect of it Siccitie; For
these two are noe Elementall qualities as the Galenists and my Peripateticks
suppose: But they are (if I may say so) the Hands of the divine Spirit by which
He did work upon the Matter, applying every Agent to his proper Patient. These
two are Active and Masculine, Those of Moisture and Cold are Passive and
Faeminine, Now as soon as the holy Ghost and the Word (for it was not the one
nor the other, but both, Men's opifex una cum Verbo, as Trismegistus has it; I
omit that Speech, Let us make man, which effectually prooves their Union in the
Genesis
Work) had applied themselves to the Matter, there was extracted from the
Bosom of it a thin Spiritualt Caelestiall substance, which receiving a
Tincture of Heat and Light proceeding from the Divine Treasuries, became a pure
sincere innoxious Fire. Of this the Bodies of Angels consist, as also the
Empyraeall Heaven, where Intellectual Essences have their Residence. This was
primum Matrimonium Dei, and Naturae, the First and best of Compositions. This
Extract being thus soiled above, and separated from the Mass, retaind in it a
vast portion of Light, and made the first Day without a Sun. But the Splendor
of the Word, expelling the Darkness downwards it became more settled, and
compact toward the Center, and made a Horrible thick Night. Thus God (as the
Hebrew has it) was between the Light and the Darkness, for the Spirit
remained still on the Face of the Inferior portion to extract more from it. In
the second separation was educed Aer agilis, as Trismegistus calls it a Spirit
not so refined as the former, but vital, and in the next degree to it. This
was extracted in such abundance that it filled all the space from the Mass to
the Empyraeall heaven, under which it was condensed to a water, but of a
different constitution from the Elementall, and this is the Body of the
Inter-stellar sky. But my Peripatericks following the Principles of Aristotle
and Ptolomie, have imagined so many wheels there with their small diminutive
Epicycles that they have turned that regular Fabric to a rumbling Confused
Labyrinth. The Inferior portion of this second Extract from the Moon to the
Earth remained Air still, partly to divide the inferior and superior waters,
but chiefly for the Respiration, and Nourishment of the Creatures. This is that
which is properly called the Firmament, as it is plain out of Esdras; On the
Second Day thou diddst create the Spirit of the Firmament: for it is Ligamentum
totius Naturae, and in the outward Geometrical Composure it answers to Natura
media, for, it is spread through all Things, hinders Vacuity, and keeps all the
parts of nature in a firm, invincible union.

This is Cribrum Naturae, as one, wittily calls it, Auth. Philos. Rest it.
a thing appointed for most secret and mysterious offices, but we shall speak
further of it, when we come to handle the Elements particularly. Nothing now
remained but the Two inferior principles, as we commonly call them, Earth and
water. The Earth was an impure, Sulphurous subsidence, or Caput mortuum of the
Creation. The water also was Phlegmatic, crude, and raco, not so vital as the
former Extractions But the Divine Spirit to make his work perfect, moving also
upon These, imparted to them Life, and Heat, and made them fit for future
Productions. The Earth was so overcast, and Mantl'd with the Water, that no
part thereof was to be seen: But that it might be the more immediately exposed
to the Celestial Influences, which are the Cause of Vegetation, the Spirit
orders a Retreat of the Waters, breaks up for them his decreed place, and sets
them Bars and Doors. Job.
The Light as yet was not confined, but reteining his vast Flux, and primitive
liberty, equally possessed the whole Creature. On the Fourth Day it was collected
to a Sun, and taught to know his Fountain. The darkness, whence proceed the
Corruptions, and consequently the death of the Creature, was imprisoned in the
Center, but breaks out still when the Day gives it Leave, and like a baffled
Giant thrusts his head out of doors in the Absence of his Adversary. Thus
Nature is a Lady whose face is beauteous, but not without a Black-bag.
Howsoever when it shall please God more perfectly to refine his Creatures, this
Tincture shall be expelled quite beyond them, and then it will be an Outward
darkness from which Good Lord deliver us?

Thus have I given you a Cursorie, and short Express of the Creation in
general: I shall now descend to a more particular Examination of Nature and
especially her Inferior, Elementall parts, through which Man passes daily, and
from which he cannot be separated. I was about to desist in this place to
prevent all future Acclamations; for when a Peripatetick finds here but Three,
nay but two genuine Elements Earth, and Water, for the Air is something more:
will he not cry out I have committed Sacrilege against Nature, and stole the
fire from her Altar? This is Noise indeed: but till They take Coach in a Cloud,
and discover that Idol they prefer next to the Moon, I am resolved to continue
in my Heresy. I am not only of Opinion, but I am sure there is no such
principle in Nature, The Fire which she uses, is Horizon Corporeorum, and
Incorporeorum, Nexus utrinsque Mundi, and Sigillum Spiritus sancti. It is no
Chymaera, Commentitious Quirck like that of the Schoolmen. I shall therefore
Request my Friends the Peripateticks to return their fourth Element to
Aristole, that he may present it to Alexander the Great as the first part of a
new world, for there is no such Thing in the Old.

To proceed then: The Earth (as you were told before) being the Subsidence, or
Remains of that Primitive Mass, which God formed out of Darkness, must needs
be a faeculent impure Body: for the Extractions which the Divine Spirit made,
were pure, oleous, aethereall substances: but the Crude, phlegmatic,
indigested humors settled like Lees toward the Center. The Earth is spungie,
porous, and magneticall, of Composition loose, the better to take in the
several Influences of Heat, Rains, and Dewes for the Nurture, and Conservation
of her Products. In her is the Principal Residence of that Matrix, which
attracts, and receives the sperm from the Masculine part of the world. she is
Natures AEtna: here Vulcan does exercise himself, not that limping, Poetical
one which halted, after his Fall, but a pure, Celestial, plastic Fire. we
have Astonomy here under our feet, the stars are resident with us, and
abundance of Jewels and Pantauras, she is the Nurse and Receptacle of all
Things, for the Superior Natures ingulph themselves into her; what she receives
this Age, she discovers to the next, and like a faithful Treasurer conceales
no part of her Accounts, Her proper, Congeneall Quality is Cold.

I am now to speak of the Water. This is the first Element we read of in
Scripture, the most Ancient of Principles, and the Mother of all Things amongst
visibles; without the meditation of this the Earth can receive no blessing at
all, for Moisture is the proper Caus^ of Mixture and Fusion. The water has
several Complexions according to the several parts of the Creature; Here
below, and in the Circumference of all things it is volatile, crude, and raco.
For this very Cause Nature makes it no part of her provision, but she rectifies
it first, exhaling it up with her Heat, and then condensing it to Rains and
Dews, in which State she makes use of it for Nourishment. Some where it is
Interior, vital, and Celestial, exposed to the Breath of the first Agent,
and stirred with Spiritual, aeternaell Winds. In this Condition it is Natures
Wanton, Foemina Satacissima as One calls it. This is that Psyche of Apuleius,
and the Fire of Nature is her Cupid. He that has seen Them both in the same
Bed, will confess that love rules All. But to speak something of our Common
Elemental water. It is not altogether Contemptible, there are hidden Treasures
in it, but so enchanted we can not see them, for all the Chest is transparent.
Spiritus Aquae Invisibilis congelatus melior est quam Terra Universa, says the
noble, and learned Sendivow. I do not advice the Reader to take this Phlegm to
task, as if he could Extract a Venus from the Sea, but I wish him to study
water, that he may know the Fire.

I have now handled the Two Elements, and more I cannot find: I know the
Peripateticks pretend to four, and with the help of their Masters Quintessence
to a fifth Principle. I shall at leisure diminish their stock, but the thing to
be now spoken of, is Air. This is no Element, but a Certain miraculous
Hermaphrodit, the Caement of two worlds, and a Medley of Extremes. It is
natures Common Place, her Index, where you may find all that ever she did, or
intends to do. This is the worlds Panegrick: The Excursions of both Globes meet
here, and I may call it the Rendezvous. In this are innumerable Magical Forms
of Men and Beasts, Fish and Foul, Trees, Herbs, and all Creeping Things This
is Mare Rerum invisibilium, for all the Conceptions in sinu superioris Naturae
wrap themselves in this Tiffany, before they imbark in the shell. It retains
the species of all Things whatsoever, and is the Immediate Receptacle of
Spirits after Dissolution, whence they pass to a Superior Limbus. I should
amaze the Reader if I did relate the several offices of this Body but it is
the Magicians Backdoor, and none but Friends come in at it. I shall speak
nothing more, only This I would have you know: The Air is Corpus vitae
spiritus nostri sensitivi, C.Ag.
our Animal Oil, the Fuel of the Vital, Sensual fire, without which we cannot
subsist a Minute.

I am now come to the Fourth, and last substance, the Highest in Scala Naturae.
There is no Fifth principle, no Quintessence as Aristotle dreamed but God
Almighty. This Fourth Essence is a moyest, silent Fire. This Fire passes
thorough all things in the world, and it is Natures Chariot, in this she rides,
when she moves this moves, and when she stands this stands, like the wheels in
Ezekiel whose Motion depended on that of the spirit. This is the Mask, and
skreen of the Almighty, wheresoever he is, this Train of Fire attends Him.
Thus he appears to Moses in the Bush, but it was in Fire. The Prophet sees him
break out at the North, but like a Fire catching it self. At Horeb he is
attended with a mighty strong wind rending the Rocks to pieces, but after this
comes the Fire, and with it a still small voice. Esdras also defines Him a God,
whose Service is Conversant in Wind, and Fire. This Fire is the vestiment of
the Divine Majesty, his Back-parts which he showed to Moses, but his naked,
Royal Essence none can see, and Live; The Glory of his presence would swallow
up the Natural man, and make him altogether spiritual. Thus Moses his Face,
after conference with him, shines, and from this small Tincture we may guess
at our Future Estate in the Regeneration. But I have touched the Veyle, and
must return to the outer Court of the Sanctuary,

I have now in some measure performed that which at first I promised, an
Exposition of the world and the parts thereof; But in respect of my affection to
Truth and the dominion I wish Her, I shallbe somewhat more particular in the
Examination of Nature, and proceed to a further Discovery of her Riches. I
advise the Reader to be diligent, and curious in this subsequent part of the
Discourse, That having once attained to the Fundamentalls of Science, he may
the better understand her superstructures.

Know then, that every Element is threefold, this Triplicity being the express
Image of their Author, and a Seal he has laid upon his Creature, There is
nothing on Earth though never so simple, so vile, and abject in the sight of
man, but it bears witness of God even to that abstruse Mystery, his Unity and
Trinity. Every Compound whatsoever is Three in One and One in Three. The basest
Reptill even in his outward Symmetrie testifies of his Author, his several
proportions answering to their aeternall superior Prototype. Now Man has the
use of all these Creatures, God having furnished him with a living Library
wherein to employ himself; But he neglecting the works of his Creator,
prosecutes the Inventions of the Creature; Laps up the Vomits of Aristotle and
other illiterate Ethnicks, Men as concerning the Faith, Reprobate, and in the
Law of Nature altogether unskillful, Scribbling Blasphemous Atheists, Quorum
Animas (as Agrippa has it) distraht, and torqueri audiunt; videntque Inferi.
He is much troubled at those Mysteries of the Trinity and the Incarnation, one
Denies, another Grants them: But if they did once see the Light of Nature, they
might find those Mysteries by Reason, which are now above their Faith. When I
speak of a Natural Triplicity, I speak not of Kitchen-stuffe, those three
Pot - Principles Water, Oil and Earth, But I speak of Caelestiall hidden
Natures, known only to absolute Magicians, whose eyes are in the Center, not
in the Circumference, and in this sense every Element is Threefold. For
example, there is a threefold Earth, first there is terra Elementaris, then
there is terra C aelestis, and lastly, terra spiritualis, The Influences of the
spiritual Earth by mediation of the caelestiall are united to the terrestiall,
and are the true Cause of Life and Vegetation. These Three are the
Fundamentalls of Art and Nature. The First is a visible, Tangible substance,
pure, fixed, and Incorruptible: of Quality Cold, but by Application of a
Superior Agent, Dry, and by Consequence a fit Receptacle of Moisture. This is
Aleph Creatum, the true Terra Adama, the Basis of every Building in Heaven, and
Earth. It answers to God the Father, being the Natural Foundation of the
Creature, as He is the Supernatural: without this Nothing can be perfected in
Magic. The Second Principle is the infallible Magnet, the Mystery of Union. By
this all Things may be attracted whether Physical, or Metaphysicall, be the
distance never so great. This is Jacobs Ladder: without this there is no
Ascent, or Descent either Influentiall, or Personal. The Absence of This I
conceive to be that Gulf between Abraham, and Dives. This answers to God the
Son, for it is That which mediates between Extremes, and makes Inferiors and
Superiors communicate. But there is not One in ten thousand knows either the
Substance, or the use of this Nature. The third Principle is properly no
Principle, It is not Ex Quo, but per Quod omnia. This can do all in all, and
the Faculties thereof are not to be expressed. It answers to the Holy Ghost, for
amongst Naturalls it is the only Agent, and Artificer. Now He that knows these
three perfectly with their several Graduations, or annexed Links, which differ
not in Substance, but Complexion: He that can reduce their impurities to one
sincere Consistence, and their Multiplicities to a Spiritual. Essential
simplicity, he is an absolute complete Magician, and in full possibility to all
strange, miraculous Performances. In the second place you are to learn, that
Every Element is two fold. This Duplicity, or Confusion is that Binarius
whereof Agrippa in Scalis Numerorum, as also both himself and Trithemius in
their Epistles. Other Authors who dealt in this Science, were Pragmaticall
Scriblers, and understood not this Secretum Tenebrarum. This is it in which the
Creature praevaricates, and falls from his first Harmonicall Unity. You must
therefore subtrahere Binarium, and then the Magicians Ternarius may be reduced
per Quaternarium in Monaden Simplicissimam, and by Consequence in Metaphysicam
cum suprema Monade vnionem.

The Sun, and Moon, are two Magical principles, the One active, the other
passive, this Masculine, that Eoeminine. As they move, so move the wheels of
Corruption, and Generaion: They mutually dissolve, and compound but properly
the moon is Organum Transmutationis inferioris materiae. These Two Luminaries
are multiplied and fructify in every one particular Generation. There is not a
Compound in all Nature but has in it a little Sun, and a little Moon. The
little Sun is Filius solis Coelestis, The little Moon is Filia Lunae Coelestis.
What offices soever the two great Luminaries perform for the Conservation of
the great world in General, These two little Luminaries perform the like for
the Conservation of their small Cask, or Microcosm in particular. They are
Mimulae Majoris Animalis, Heaven and Earth in a lesser Character. God like a
wise Architect, sits in the Center of All, repaires the Ruins of his Building,
composeth all Disorders, and continues his Creature in his first, primitive
Harmony. The Invisible, Centrall Moon is Iela illa rivosa, and Multifontana, at
whose top sit Jove, and Juno In a Throne of Gold, Juno is an incombustible,
Eriternall Oil, and therefore a fit Receptacle of Fire. This Fire is her Jove,
the little Sun we spoke of formerly. These are the true Principles of the
stone, these are the Philosophers Sol and Luna, not Gold and Silver, as some
Mountebanks, and Carbonadoes would have it. But in respect I have proceeded
thus far, I will give you a true Receipt of the Medicine. Rc. L^ni Coelestis
parts december, Separetur Masculus a Faemina, vterque porro a Terra sua physicae
tamen and citra omnem violentiam Separata proportione debita, harmonica, and
vitali conjungs: statimque; Anima descendens a sphaera pyroplastica, mortuum
suum, and relictum Corpus amplexis mirisico restaur abit; Conjuncta foreantur
Igne naturali imperfectum matrimonium spiritus, and Corporis. Procedas
Artisicio vulcanico-Magico quousque exaltentur in Quintam Rotam Metaphysicam.
Haec est Illa, de Qua tot scribillarunt, tam Pauci noverunt, Medicina.

It is a strange thing to consider, That there are in Nature incorruptible,
immortal principles. Our ordinary Kitchen Fire, which in some measure is an
Enemy to all compositions, notwithstanding does not so much destroy, as purify
some parts. This is clear out of the Ashes of Vegetables, for although their
weaker exterior Elements expire by violence of the fire, yet their Earth cannot
be destroyed, but Vitrified. The Fusion, and Transparency of this substance is
occasioned by the Radical moisture or Seminall water of the Compound. This
water resists the fury of the Fire, and cannot possibly be vanquished. In huo
Aqua (says the learned Severino) Rosa latet in Hiemo. These two principles are
never separated for Nature proceeds not so far in her Dissolutions. When Death
has done her worst, there is an Union between these two, and out of them shall
God rise us at the last day, and restore us to a spiritual constitution.
Besides there remains in them that primitive, universal Tincture of the Fire:
this is still busy after Death, brings nature again into Play, produces
worms, and other inferior Generations. I do not conceive there shall be a
Resurrection of every Species, but rather their Terrestiall parts together with
the Element of Water ( for there shall be no more Sea) shall be united in one
mixture with the Earth and fixed to a pure, Revel.
Diaphanous substance. This is Saint John's Chrystallgold, a Fundamental of the
new Jerusalem, so called not in respect of Color, but constitution. Their
Spirits I suppose, shall be reduced to their first Limbus, a sphaene of pure,
ethereall fire like rich Eternal Tapestry spread under the Throne of God. Thus
Reader, have I made a plenary, but short Inquisition into the Mysteries of
Nature. It is more then hitherto has been discovered, and therefore I expect
the more Opposition. I know my Reward is Calumny, but he that has already
condemned the Vanity of Opinion, is not like to respect that of Censure. I shall
now put the Creatures to their just use, and from this shallow Contemplation
ascend to Mine, and their Author.

Lord God! This was a stone,
as hard as any One
Thy Laws in Nature framed:
It Is now a springing Well,
and many Drops can tell,
Since it by Art was tamed.
My God! my Heart is so,
it is all of Flint, and no
Extract of Tears will yield:
Dissolve it with thy Fire,
that something may aspire,
And grow up in my Field.
Bare Tears I Will not entreat,
but let thy Spirits seat
Upon those Waters be,
Then I new formed with Light
shall move without all Night,
Or Excentricity.
It is requisite now, if we follow that Method which God himself is Author of,
to examine the Nature, and Composition of Man, having already described those
Elements, or principles whereof he was made, and consists, Man, if we look on
his material parts, was taken out of the great world, as woman was taken out
of Man. I shall therefore to avoid repetitions, refer the Reader to the former
part of this Discourse, where if things be rightly understood, he cannot be
ignorant in his material Frame, or Composure. We read in Genesis that God made
him out of the Earth; This is a great Mystery: For it was not the common
`Pot-clay, but an other thing and that of a far better nature. He that knows
this, knows the subject of the Philosophical medicine, and by consequence
what destroys or preserves the Temperament of Man, In this are Principles
homogeneall with his life, such as can restore his Decays and reduce his
Disorders to a Harmony. They that are ignorant in this point, are not competent
Judges of Life and Death, but Quacks and Piss-pot Doctors. The learned Arias
Montanus calls this matter Multiplicis Terrae particula singularis, If these
words be well examined, you may possibly find it out, and so much for his Body.
His Soul is an Essence not to be found in the Texture of the great world and
therefore merely Divine and Supernatural. Montanus calls it divini spiritus
aura, and vitae Divinae Halitus, He seems also to make the Creation of Man a
little Incarnation, as if God in this work had multiplied himself. Adam
(says he) received his Soul exadmiranda singularique Dei Inspiratione, and ut
sic loqui sit fas, Fructificatione. S. Luke also tells us the same thing For he
makes Adam the son of God, not in respect of the exterior Act of Creation, but
by way of Descent; and this S. Paul confirms in the words of Aratus, For we
also are his Generation. Act.
The Soul of man consists chiefly of two Portions Ruach, and Nephes, inferior
and superior, the superior is Masculine and Eternal, the inferior Foeminine
and Mortal. In these two consists our spiritual generation. Vt autem in
Coeteris animantibus, atque etiam in ipso homine Maris ac Foeminae conjunctio
Fructum propagationemq, Arias Mont.
spectabat naturae singulorum dignam: ita in homine ipso illa Maris ac Foeminae
interior, arcanaque societas, hoc est animi atque animae Copulatio ad fructum
vitae Divinae idoneum producendum comparabatur. Atque huc illa Arcana
benedictio and faecunditas concessa, huc illa declarata Facultas and monitio
spectat, Crescite, and multiplicamini, and replete Terram, and subjicite illam,
and Dominamini. Out of this and some former passages, the understanding Reader
may learn, That Marriage is a Comment on Life, a mere Hieroglyphick, or outward
representation of our inward vital Composition. For Life is nothing else but an
Union of Male and Foemale Principles, and he that perfectly knows this secret,
knows the Mysteries of Marriage, both Spiritual and Natural, and how he
ought to use a Wife. Matrimony is no ordinary trivial business, but in a
moderate sense Sacramental. It is a visible sign of our invisible Union to
Christ, which S. Paul calls a Great mystery, and if the thing signified be so
Reverend, the signature is no ex tempore, contemptible Agend. But of this
elsewhere. When God had thus finished his last, and most excellent Creature, he
appointed his Residence in Eden, made him his Viceroy, and gave him a full
jurisdiction over all his Works; That as the whole man consisted of Body, and
Spirit, so the Inferior Earthly Creatures might be subject to the one, and the
superior intellectual Essences might minister to the other. But this Royalty
continued not long for presently upon his preferment there was a Faction in the
Heavenly Court, and the Angels scorning to attend this piece of Clay, contrived
how to supplant him. The first in this plot was Lucifer, Montanus tells me his
name was Hilel. He casts about to Nullify that which God had Inacted, that so
at once he might overreach him and his Creature. This Policy he imparts to
some others of the Hierarchy, and strengthens himself with Conspirators. But
there is no Counsel against God. The mischief is no sooner hatched but he and
his Confederates are expelled from Light to Darkness, and thus Rebellion is as
the sin of Witchcraft, a Witch is it Rebel in Physics, and a Rebel is a
Witch in Polliticks: The one acts against Nature, the other against Order, the
Rule of it: But both are in League with the devil as the first Father of
discord and sorcerie. Satan being thus ejected, as the condition of Reprobates
is, became more hardened in his Resolutions, and to bring his malice about,
arrives by permission at Eden. Here he makes Woman his Instrument to tempt Man,
and overthrowes him by the same Means that God made for an help to him. Adam
having thus transgrest the Commandment, was exposed to the Lash, and in him
his Posterity. But here lies the Knot: How can we possibly learn his Disease,
if we know not the immediate Efficicent of it? If I question our Divines what
the Forbidden Fruit was, I may be long enough without an answer, Search all the
Schoolmen from Ramus to Peter Hispan, and they have no Logic in the point.
What shall we do in this case? To speak any thing contrary to the sling of
Aristotle (though perhaps we hit the mark) is to expose our selves to the
common Hue; But in respect I prefer a private Truth to a public Error, I
will proceed. And now Reader Arrige Aures, come on without prejudice, and I
will tell thee that which never hitherto has been discovered.

That which I now write must needs appear very strange, and Incredible to the
common man, whose knowledge sticks in the Bark of Allegories, and Mystical
speeches, never apprehending that which is signified by them unto us. This I
say must needs sound strange, with such as understand the Scriptures in the
Litterall plain sense, considering not the scope and Intention of the Divine
spirit, by whom they were first penned and delivered. Howsoever Origin being
Vnus de multis, and in the judgment of many wise men, the most learned of the
Fathers, durst never trust himself in this point, But always in those
Scriptures where his Reason could not satisfy, concluded a Mystery.

Certainly if it be once granted (as some stick not to affirm) that the Tree of
knowledge was a Vegetable, and Eden a Garden; it may be very well inferred,
that the tree of life being described in eodem Genere, as the Schoolmen
express it, was a Vegetable also. But how derogatory this is to the power of
God, to the Merits, and Passion of Jesus Christ, whose Gift eternal life is,
let any indifferent Christian judge. Here then we have a certain intrance into
Paradise, where we may search out this tree of knowledge, and (happily) learn
what it is. For seeing it must be granted, that by the tree if life is figured
the Divine Spirit (for it is the Spirit that quickens, and shall one Day
translate us from Corruption to Incorruption) it will be no indiscreet
Inference on the Contrary, that by the tree of knowledge is signified some
sensual Nature repugnant to the Spiritual, wherein our worldly sinful
Affections, as lust, anger, and the rest have their seat, and predominate.

I will now digress a while, but not much from the purpose, whereby it may
appear unto the Reader that the letter is no sufficient Expositor of Scripture,
and that there is a great deal of difference between the sound and the sense of
the Text Dionysius the Areopagit in his Epistle to Titus gives him this Caveat.
Et hoc praeterea Operae and pretium est cognoscere, Duplicem esse Theologorum
Traditionem, Arcanam Alteram, ac mysticam: Alteram vero manifestaem. and
notiorem. And in his Book of the Eclesiasticall Hierarchy written to
Timotheus, he affirms, that in the primitive, Apostolical times, wherein he
also lived, the mysteries of Divinity were delivered partim scriptis, partim
non scriptis Institutionibus. Some things he confesses were written in the
Theological Books, and such are the Common Doctrinals of the Church now; in
which notwithstanding (as Saint Peter says) there are many things hard to be
understood. Some things again Ex Animo in Animum medio quidem intercurrente
verbo corporali, sed quod Carnis penitus excederat sensum, Sine literis
transfusa sunt. And certainly this Orall Tradition was the Cause that in the
subsequent Ages of the Church all the mysteries of Divinity were lost. Nay,
this very day there is not one amongst all our School-Doctors, or late
Ex-Temporaries that knows what is represented unto us by the outward Element of
Water in Baptism. True indeed: They tell us it betokens the washing away of
sin, which we grant them, but this is not the full signification for which it
was ordained. It has been the Common error of all times to mistake signum for
signatum, the shell for the Kernel; yet to prevent this, it was that Dionysius
wrote his book of the Caelestiall Hierarchy, and especially his Theologia
significativa, of which there is such frequent mention made in his works.
Verily our Savior Himself who is blessed for evermore, did sometimes speak in
parables, and commanded further that Pearls should not be cast forth unto
swine, for it is not given to all men to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Supposing then (as it is most true) that amongst other mystical
speeches contained in Scripture, this of the Garden of Eden, and the Trees in
it, is one: I shall proceed to the Exposition of it in some measure,
concealing the particulars notwithstanding.

Man in the beginning (I mean the substantial inward Man) both in, and after
his Creation for some short time, was a pure intellectual Essence, free from
all fleshly, sensual Affections. In this state the Anima, or sensitive Nature
did not prevail over the spiritual, as it does now in us. For the superior
Mental part of Man was united to God per Contactum Essentialem, and the Divine
light being received in, and conveyed to the inferior portions of the Soul did
mortify all carnal desires, insomuch that in Adam the sensitive Faculties
were scarce at all employed, the spiritual prevailing over them in him, as
they do over the Spiritual now in us. Hence we read in Scripture, that during
the state of Innocence he did not know that he was naked: but no sooner eats he
of the tree of knowledge but he saw his nakedness, and was ashamed of it;
Wherefore also he hides himself amongst the Trees of the Garden, and when God
calls to him, he replies; I heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid
because I was naked, and I hid my self. Genesis
But God knowing his former state, answers him with a Question. Who told thee
that Thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee
thou should not eat? Here we see a Twofold state of Man: his first, and best
in the spiritual substantial union of his Intellectual parts to God, and the
Mortification of his aethereall, sensitive Nature, wherein the fleshly sinful
Affections had their Residence. His second, or his Fall in the eating of the
forbidden fruit which did cast asleep his Intellectual Faculties but did stir
up, and exalt the Sensual. For (says the Serpent) God does know that in the
Day you eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods
knowing Good, and Evil. And when the woman saw that the Tree was good for
food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes and a tree to be desired to make one
wise: She, took of the Fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her
husband, with her, and he did eat; And the Eyes of them both were opened, and
they knew that they were naked. Genesis
Thus we see the sensual faculties revived in our first Parents, and brought
de potentia in actum as the Schoolmen speak, by virtue of this forbidden
Fruit. Neither did this Eating suppress the Intellectual powers in Adam
only, but in all his Generations after him, for the Influence of this Fruit
past together with his Nature into his posterity. We are all born like Moses
with a Veil over the Face: This is it, which hinders the prospect of that
Intellectual shining Light, which God has placed in us; And to tell you a
Truth that concerns all Mankind, the greatest Mystery both in Divinity and
Philosophy is, How to remove it.

It will not be amiss to speak something in this place of the Nature and
Constitution of Man, to make that more plain which already has been spoken.

As the great World consists of Three parts. the Elementall the Celestial and
the Spiritual above all which God himself is seated in that Infinite,
inaccessible Light, which streams from his own Nature; Even so man has in him
his Earthly, Elemental parts, together with the Celestial, and Angelical
natures, in the Center of all which moves, and shines the Divine Spirit. The
sensual, Celestial, aethereall part of Man is that whereby we do move, see,
feel, taste, and smell, and have a Commerce with all material Objects
whatsoever. It is the same in us as in Beasts, and it is derived from Heaven,
where it is predominant, to all the inferior Earthly Creatures. In plain Terms
it is part of Anima Mundi, commonly called Anima media, because the Influences
of the Divine Nature are conveyed thorough it to the more material parts of the
Creature, with which of themselves they have no proportion. By means of this
Anima Media, or the ethereal Nature: Man is made subject to the Influence of
Stars, and is partly disposed of by the Celestial harmony. For this middle
spirit (middle I mean between both Extremes, and not that which actually
unites the whole together) as well that which is in the outward Heaven, as that
which is in Man, is of a fruitful insinuating nature, and carried with a
strong desire to multiply it self, so that the Celestial Form stirs up, and
excites the Elementall. For this Spirit is in Man, in Beasts, in Vegetables, in
Minerals: and in every thing it is the mediate Cause of Composition and
Multiplication. Neither should any wonder that I affirm this spirit to be in
Minerals, because the Operations of it are not discerned there. For shall we
conclude therefore, that there is no inward Agent that actuats, and specifies
those passive, indefinite Principles whereof they are Compounded? Tell me not
now of blind Peripateticall Forms, and Qualities. A Form is that which
Aristotle could not define substantially, nor any of his followers after Him,
and therefore they are not competent Judges of it. But I beseech you, are not
the faculties of this Spirit suppressed in Man also, when the Organs are
Corrupted, as it appears in those that are blind? But notwithstanding the Eye
only is destroyed, and not the Visible power, for that remains, as it is
plain in their dreams. Now this vision is performed by a reflection of the
Visuall Radii in their inward, proper Cell: For Nature imployes her gifts only
where she finds a Conveniencie, and fit disposition of Organs, which being not
in Minerals we may not expect so clear an Expression of the natural powers in
them. Notwithstanding in the Flowers of several vegetables (which in some sort
represent the Eyes) there is a more Subtle, acute perception of heat and cold,
and other Celestial Influences then in any other part. This is manifest in
those Herbs which open at the Rising, and shut toward the Sunset: which motion
is caused by the spirit being sensible of the Approach and departure of the
Sun; For indeed the Flowers are (as it were) the spring of the Spirit, where it
breaks forth, and streams, as it appears by the Odours that are more
Celestial, and Comfortable there. Again, this is more evident in the
Plantanimals, as the Vegetable Lamb, the Arbor Casta, and several others. But
this will not sink with any, but such as have seen this Spirit separated from
his Elements, where I leave it for this time.

Next to this Sensual Nature of Man is the Angelical, or rational Spirit.
This Spirit adheres sometimes to the Men's or superior portion of the Soul, and
then it is filled with the Divine light, but most commonly it descends into the
ethereal inferior portion, which Saint Paul calls Homo animalis, where it is
altered by the Celestial influences, and diversely distracted with the
irregular Affections, and passions of the sensual Nature.

Lastly, above the Rational Spirit is the Men's, or Intelligentia abscondita,
commonly called Intellectus illustratus, and of Moses spiraculum Vitarum. This
is that Spirit which God himself breathed into Man, and by which Man is united
again to God Now as the Divine light flowing into the Men's, did assimilate and
convert the inferior portions of the soul to God; so on the Contrary the Tree
of Knowledge did obscure, and darken the superior portions, but awaked and
stirred up the Animal sinful Nature. The sum of all is this. Man as long as he
continued in his union to God knew the Good only, that is, the Things that
were of God: but as soon as he stretched forth his hand, and did Eat of the
forbidden fruit that is, the Anima media, or Spirit of the greater world,
presently upon his disobedience and transgression of the Commandment, his Union
to the Divine Nature was dissolved, and his Spirit being united to the Spirit
of the world, he knew the Evil only, that is the things that were of the
world. True it is, he knew the Good and the Evil, but the Evil in a far greater
measure then the Good.

Some sparks of Grace were left, and though the perfection of Innocence was
lost upon his Fall from the Divine Light, yet Conscience remained still with
him, partly to direct, partly to punish. Thus you see that this Anima Media or
middle Spirit is figured by the Tree of knowledge, but he that knows why the
Tree of Life is said to be in the midst of the Garden, and to grow out of the
Ground, will more fully understand that which we have spoken. We see moreover
that the Faculties ascribed to the Tree of Knowledge are to be found only in
Middle Nature. First, it is said to be a Tree to be desired to make one wise,
but it was Fleshly sensual Wisdom, the Wisdom of this world, and not of God.
Secondly it is said to be good for Food, and pleasant to the Eyes: So is the
Middle Nature also; For it is the only Medicine to repair the Decays of the
Natural Man, and to continue our Bodies in their primitive strength, and
Integrity.

Lastly, that I may speak something for my self: This is no new unheard of
fancy, as the understanding Reader may gather out of Trismegistus. Nay, I am
verily of opinion, that the Egyptians received this knowledge from the Hebrews
who lived a long time amongst them, as it appears out of Scripture, and that
they delivered it over to the Graecians. This is plain out of Iamblichus in his
Book de Mysteriis, where he has these words. Contemplabilis in se Intellectus
Homo, erat quondam Deorum Contemplationi conjunctus: deinde vero alteram
ingressus est Animam, circa humanam Formae Speciem contemperatam, atq,
propterea in ipso Necessitaetis, Fatique Vinculo est alligatus. And what else I
beseech you, is signified unto us in that poetical Table of Prometheus? That
he should steal a certain fire from Heaven, for which Trespass afterward, God
punished the World with a great many Diseases, and Mortality.

But some body may reply: Seeing that God made all Things very Good, as it
appears in his Review of the Creatures on the sixth day; how could it be a sin
in Adam to eat that which in it self was good? Verily the sin was not grounded
in the Nature of that which he did eat, but it was the Inference of the
Commandment, in as much as he was forbidden to eat it. And this is that which
Saint Paul tells us, That he had not known sin, had it not been for the law;
And again in another place, The strength of sin is the law. But presently upon
the Disobedience of the first Man, and his Transgression of the Commandment
the creature was made subject to Vanity: For the curse followed, and the impure
seeds were joined with the pure, and they reign to this hour in our bodies,
and not in us alone, but in every other Natural Thing. Hence it is we read in
scripture, That the Heavens themselves are not clean in his sight. Job.
And to this alludes the Apostle in that speech of his to the Colossians, That
it pleased the Father to reconcile all things to himself by Christ, whether
they be things in Earth or Things in Heaven. And here you are to observe that
Cornelius Agrippa mistook the act of Generation for Original sin, which indeed
was the Effect of it, and this is the only point wherein he has miscarried.

I have now done, only a word more concerning the Situation of Paradise, and
the rather because of the diversity of Opinions concerning that solace and the
Absurdity of them. Saint Paul in his second Epistle to th Cori^thians discovers
it in these words. I knew a Man in Christ above fourteen years ago (whether in
the Body, or out of the Body I cannot tell, God knows:) such an One caught up
to the Third Heaven. And I knew such a Man (whether in the body, or out of the
body I cannot tell, God knows) how that he was caught up into Paradise. Here
you see that Paradise and the third Heaven are convertible Terms, so that the
one discovers the other. Much more I could have said concerning the Tree of
knowledge, being in it self a large, and very mystical subject but for my part
I rest contented with my own particular apprehension, and desire not to enlarge
it any further: Neither had I committed this much to paper, but out of my love
to the truth and that I would not have these thoughts altogether to perish.

You see now, if you be not durissimae Cervicis Homines, how man fell, and by
Consequence you may guess by what means he is to rise. He must be united to
the Divine light from whence by disobedience he was separated. A Flash, or
Tincture of this must come, or he can no more discern things spiritually, then
he can distinguish Colors naturally without the light of the Sun. This light
descends, and is united to him by the same Means as his Soul was at first. I
speak not here of the Symbolicall exterior Descent from the
Prototypicall-planets to the Created spheres and thence in Noctem Corporis: but
I speak of that most secret and silent Laps of the Spirit per Formarum
naturalium Seriem, and this is a mystery not easily apprehended. It is a
Cabalisticall maxim, Nulla res spiritualis descondens inferius operatur sine
Indumento. Consider well of it with your selves, and take heed you wander not
in the Circumference. The Soul of Man whiles she is in the Body, is like a
Candle shut up in a darkLanthorn, or a Fire that is almost stifled for want of
Air. Spirits (say the Platonicks) when they are in sua patria, Procl. de. Any.
are like the Inhabitants of green Fields, who live perpetually amongst
Flowers, in a Spicie oderous Air: but here below, in Sphaera Generationis,
They mourn because of darkness, and solitude, like people locked up in a
Pesthouse. Hinc metuunt, cupiuntque dolent, etc. This is it makes the Soul
subject to so many Passions, to such a Proteus of humors. Now she flourishes,
now she withers, now a smile, now a tear: And when she has played out her
stock, then comes a Repetition of the same fancies, till at last she cries out
with Seneca, Quousque eadem? This is occasioned by her vast, and infinite
Capacity, which is satisfied with nothing but God, from whom at first she
descended. It is miraculous to consider how she struggles with her Chains when
Man is in Extremity, how she falsisies with Fortune; what pomp, what pleasure,
what a Paradise does she propose to her self? she spans Kingdoms in a Thought,
and injoyes all that inwardly, which she misseth outwardly, In her are patterns
and Notions of all things in the world. If she but fancies her self in the
midst of the Sea, presently she is there, and hears the rushing of the
Billows: she makes an Invisible voyage from one place to another, and presents
to her self things absent, as if they were present. The dead live to her, there
is no grave can hide them from her thoughts. Now she is here in dirt and mire,
and in a trice above the Moon:

Celsior exurgir pluviis, auditque ruentes
Sub pedibus Nimbos, and caeca Tonitrua calcat.
But this is Nothing. If she were once out of the Body, she could act all that,
which she imagined in momento (says Agrippa) quicquid eupit, assequeretur. In
this state she can movere Humores majoris Animalis, make general Commotions in
the Two sphaeres of Air, and water, and alter the Complexions of Times.
Neither is this a Fable, but the unanimous Tenent of the Arabians, with the two
princes Avicebron, and Avicen. She has then an absolute power in miraculous,
and more then natural Transmutations. She can in an Instant transfer her own,
vessel from one place to another, She can (per unionem cum virtute.
universali) infuse, and communicate her thoughts to the Absent, be the distance
never so great; Neither is there any thing under the Sun but she may know it,
and remaining only in one place, she can acquaint her self with the Actions of
all places whatsoever. I omit to speak of her Magnet, wherewith she can attract
all things as well Spiritual, as natural. Cor. Agr.
Finally, Nullum opus est in tota Naturae serieatam arduum, tam excellens, tam
denique miraculosum, quod Anima humana Divinitatis suae Originem consecute,
Quam vocant Magi Animam stantem, and non Cadentem, propriis viribus, absque
omni Externo Adminiculo non queat efficere. But who is he inter tot millia
Philosophantium, that knows her Nature substantially, and the genuine,
specificall use thereof? This is Abraham's secretum magnum, maxim mirable, and
occultissimum sex Annulis sigillatum, and ex eis exeunt Ignis, Aqua, and Acr,
Quae dividuntur in Mares, and Foeminas. We should therefore pray continually.
Sepher. Tetz.
That God would open our Eyes, whereby we might see to employ that Talent,
which he has bestowed upon us, but lies buried now in the ground, and does not
fructify at all. He it is, to whom we must be united Contactu Essentiali, and
then we shall know all things revelata facie, per claram in Divino Lumine
Visionem. This Influx from Him is the true, proper Efficient of our
Regeneration, that(...)of Saint John, the seed of God which remains in us. If
this be once obtained, we need not serve under Aristotle or Galen, nor trouble
our selves with foolish Vtrums and Ergos, for his Unction will instruct us in
all things. But indeed the Doctrine of the Schoolmen which in a manner makes
God and Nature Contraries, has so weakened our Confidence toward Heaven, that
we look upon all Receptions from thence, as Impossibilities. But if things were
well weighed, and this Cloud of Tradition removed, we should quickly find that
God is more ready to give, then we are to receive. For He made Man (as it were)
for his Play-fellow, that he might survey and examine his works. The inferior
Creatures he made not for themselves, but his own Glory: which glory he could
not receive from any thing so perfectly as from Man, who having in him the
Spirit of discretion, might judge of the Beauty of the Creature, and
consequently praise the Creator. Wherefore also God gave him the the use of
all his works, and in Paradise how familiar is He, or rather how does he play
with Adam? Out of the Ground (says the Scripture) the Lord God formed every
Beast of the Field, Genesis
and every fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would
call them, and whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, that was the Name
thereof. These were the Books which God ordained for Adam, and for us his
Posterity, not the Quintessence of Aristotle, nor the Temperament of Galen the
Antichrist. But this is irritare Crabones: Now will the Peripateticks brand me
with their Contra `Principia and the School-Divines with a Tradatur satanae. I
know I shall be hated of most for my pains, and perhaps scoffed at like
`Pythagoras in Lucian. Quis emet Eugenium? Quis super Hominem esse vult? Quis
scire Vniversi Harmoniam; and reviviscere denuo? But because, according to
their own Master,(...), and that an Affirmative of this Nature cannot fall to
the Ground with a Christian, I will come to my Oath. I do therefore protest
before my glorious God, I have not written this out of malice, but out of zeal
and Affectito the Truth of my Creator. Let them take heed then, least whiles
they contemn mysteries, they violate the Majesty of God in his Creatures, and
trample the Blood of the Covenant under Foot. But shall I not be counted a
Conjurer, seeing I follow the Principles of Cornelius Agrippa, that grand
Archimagus, as the AntiChristian Jesuits call Him? He indeed is my Author, and
next to God I owe all that I have unto Him. why should I be ashamed to confess
it? He was, Reader, By Extraction, Noble. By Religion a Protestant, as it
appears out of his own writings, besides the late, but malicious Testimony of
Fromondus, a learned Papist. For In Crisi Sua ad Causam desperatam Sisber ti
Voetii.
his Course of Life, a Man famous in his Person both for Actions of war, and
peace. A Favorit to the greatest Princes of his Time, and the just wonder of
all learned men. Lastly He was One, that carried himself above the Miseries he
was born to, and made fortune know, Man might be her Master. This is answer
enough to a few Sophisters, and in defiance to all Calumnies thus I salute his
Memory.

Henricus Cornelius Agrippae ab Nettesheim, Armatae Militiae Eques Auratus,
Max. Caesaris a Conciliis, and Archivis Indiciarius, Utriusque Juris, and
Medicinae Doctor.


Pinge Duos Angues. Hic est Agrippa, Supernis
Demissae Fax ab Ignibus,
Caeli magnum Instar: nec in ullo Sydere fulsit
Natura plenior Deo.
O si Sacratus tanto Spiramine Lychnus,
Lustrarot Aureus Solum!
Sed nimis offensae sancta imignatio Flammae AEona Caelitum subit.

Quid Dominae inspersum lector, mirabere fucum
Nec cernis quam sit Foemina, falsa Venus.
Sanctam oculis salvere umb^am, faciemque ^ubeto,
Totus and in magnum dirige Cornelium.
Illius ut dicas te haesisse in Vultibus AEtas
Cui vel nulla dedit, nec dabit ulla Parem.
Great, glorious Penman! whom I should not name,
Left I might Seem to measure Thee by Fame.
Natures Apostle, and her Choice High Priest,
Her Mystical, and bright Evangelist.
How am I rapt when I contemplate Thee,
And wind my self above All that I see?
The Spirits of thy Lines infuse a Fire
Like the Worlds Soul, which makes me thus aspire:
I am unbodi'd by thy Books, and Thee,
And in thy Papers find my Exstasie,
Or if I please but to descend a strain,
Thy Elements do skreen my Soul again.
I can undresse my Self by thy bright Glass,
And then resume the Enclosure, as I was.
Now I am Earth; and now a Star, and then
A Spirit: now a Star, and Earth again.
Or if I will but ramasle all that be,
In the least moment I ingrosse all Three.
I span the Heaven and Earth, and things above,
And which is more, join Natures with their Jove.
He Crowns my Soul with Fire, and there does shine
But like the Rainbow in a Cloud of mine.
Yet there is a Law by which I discompose
The Ashes, and the Fire it self disclose,
But in his Emrald still He does appear,
They are but Grave-clothes which he scatters here.
Who sees this Fire without his Mask. his Eye
must needs be swallowed by the Light, and die.
These are the Mysteries for which I wept
Glorious Agrippa, where thy Language slept,
where thy dark Texture made me wander far,
Whiles through that pathles Night, I traced the star;
But I have found those Mysteries, for which
Thy Book was more then thrice-pil'd over with Pitch.
Now a new East beyond the stars I see
where breaks the Day of thy Divinity:
Heaven states a Commerce here with Man, had He
but grateful Hands to take, and Eyes to see.
Hence you fond Schoolmen, that high trueths deride,
And with no Arguments but Noise, and Pride;
You that damn all but what your Selves invent,
And yet find nothing by Experiment.
Your Fate is written by an unseen Hand,
But his Three Books with the Three Worlds shall stand.
Thus far Reader I have handled the Composure and Royalty of Man, I shall now
speak something of his Dissolution, and close up my Discourse, as he does his
Life, with Death. Death is Recessus vitae in Absconditum: not the Annihilation,
of any one Particle but a Retreat of hidden Natures to the same State they were
in, before they were Manifested. This is occasioned by the Disproportion and
inequality of the Matter: For when the Harmony is broken by the Excess of any
one Principle, the vital Twist (without a timely Reduction of the first Unity)
Disbands and unravells. In this Recesse the several Ingredients of Man return
to those several Elements, from whence they came at first in their Access to
a Compound; For to think that God creates any thing ex nihilo in the work of
Generation, is a pure Metaphysicall Whymsey. Thus the Earthly parts, as we see
by experience, return to the Earth, the Celestial to a Superior heavenly
Limbus, and the Spirit to God that gave it. Neither should any wonder that I
affirm the Spirit of the living God to be in Man, when God himself does
acknowledge it for his own. My spirit (says he) shall not always be sheathed
Genesis
(for so the Hebrew signifies) in man, for that he also is flesh, yet his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. Besides, the breathing of it into Adam
proves it proceeded from God, and therefore the Spirit of God. Thus Christ
breathed on his Apostles, and they received the Holy Ghost. In Ezechiel the
Spirit comes from the Four Winds, and Breathes upon the Slain, that they
might live. Now this Spirit was the Spirit of Life, the same with that Breath
of Life which was breathed into the First Man, and he became a Living Soul:
but without doubt the Breath or Spirit of Life is the Spirit of God. Neither is
this Spirit in Man alone, but in all the Great World though after an other
manner: For God breathes continually, and passes through all things like an
Air that refreshes: wherefore also he is called of Pythagor as (...) Animatio
univer sorum, Hence it is that God in Scripture has several names according
to those several Offices he performs in the Preservation of his Creature.
Quin etiam (says the Areopagite) in mentibus ipsum inesse dicunt, atque in
Animis, and in corporibus, and in Caelo esse, atque in Terra, ac simul in
seipso; Eundem in Mundo esse, circa mundum, supra mundum, supra Caelum,
superiorem Essentia, Solemn, Stellam, Ignem, Aquam, Spiritum, Rorem, Nebulam,
Ipsum Lapidem, Petram, Omnia esse quae sunt, and nihil eorum quae sunt. And
most certain, it is because of his secret passage and Penetration through all,
that other simile in Dionysius was given him. Adam etiam (says he) and quod
omnium vilissimum esse, and magis absurdum videtur: Ipsum sibi vermis speciem
adhibere, ab ijs, Qui in rebus Divinis multum, diuque; ver sati sunt, esse
traditum. Now this Figurative kind of speech, with its variety of Appellations,
is not only proper to Holy Writ, but the Egyptians also (as Plutarch tells
me) called Isis; or the more secret part of Nature, Myrionymos; and certainly
that the same thing, should have a Thousand Names, is no news to such as have
studied the Philosophers Stone. But to return thither whence we have
digressed. I told you the several Principles of Man in his Dissolution, part,
as sometimes Friends do, several ways. Earth to earth, as our Liturgy has
it, and Heaven to Heaven, according to that of Lucretius.

Cedit item re^^^ de Terra quod fuit ante,
In Terram: and quod missum est ex AEtheris Oris,
Id rursum Coeli sulgentia Templa receptant.
But more expressly the Divine Virgil speaking of his Bees.

His Quidam signis, atque baec Exempla secuti
Esse Apibus partem Divinae Mentis, and Haustus
AEthereos dixere: Deum namque ire per Omnes
Terrasque Tractusque Maris, Coelumque profundum.
Hinc Pecudes, Armenta, Viros, Genus omne Ferarum,
Quemque sibi tenues Nascentem arcessere Vitas.
Scilicet huc reddi deinde, ac resolut a referri
Omnia: nec Morti este locum; Sed Viva volare
Syderis in Numerum, atque alto Succedere Coelo.
This Vanish, or ascent of the inward Ethereall Principles does not presently
follow their separation: For that part of man which Paracelsus calls Homo
Sydereus, and more appositly Brutum hominis: but Agrippa Idolum, and Virgil

AEthereum, sensum atq, Aurai Simplicis Igne;
This Part I say, which is the Astral Man hovers sometimes about the
Dormitories of the Dead, and that because of the Magnetism, or Sympathy which
is between him and the Radical, vital moisture. In this Idolum is the seat of
the Imagination, and it retains after Death an Impresse of those passions, and
Affections to which it was subject in the Body. This makes Hun haunt those
Places, where the whole Man has been most Conversant, and imitate the actions,
and gestures of Life. This Magnetism is excellently confirmed by that memorable
accident at Paris, which Doctor Flud proves to be true by the testimonies of
great, and learned Men. Agrippa also speaking of the apparitions of the Dead,
has these words. Sed and Ipse Ego, quae meis Oculis vidi, and manibus tetigi,
hoc loci refer nolo, ne me ob Rerum stupendam Admirationem de Mendacio ab
Incredulis argui contingat. But this Scaene exceedes not the Circuit of One
year, for when the Body begins fully to corrupt, the Spirit returns to his
Original Element. These Apparitions have made a great noise in the world, not
without some Benefit to the Pope; But I shall reserve all for my great work,
where I shall more fully handle these mysteries.

I am now to speak of Man as he is subject to a Supernatural Judgment: And to
be short, my Sentiment is this. I conceive there are besides the Empyraeall
Heaven, two inferior Mansions, or Receptacles of Spirits. The One is that,
which Our Savior calls(...), and this is it whence there is no
Redemption:(...), unde Animae nunquam egrediuntur, as the Divine Plato has it.
The Other I suppose, is somewhat answerable to the Elysian Fields, some
delicate, pleasant Region, the Suburbs of Heaven as it were; Those Seven mighty
Mountains, whereupon there grow Roses and Lilies, or the Outgoings of Paradise
in Esdras. Such was that Place, where the Oracle told Amelius the soul of
Plotinus was.

Ubi Amicitia est, ubi Cupido visu mollis,
Purae plenus Laetitiae, and sempiternis Rivis
Ambrosus irrigatus a Deo: unde sunt Amoru^
Retinacula, Dulcis Spiritus, and Tranquillus Ether
Aurei Generis magni Jovis.
Stellatus supposes there is a Successive, graduall ascent of the Soul
according to the process of Expiation, and he makes her Inter-Residence in the
Moon. But let it be where it will, my Opinion is, That this middlemost mansion
is appointed for such Souls, whose whole man has not perfectly repent in this
world: But notwithstanding they are de Salvandorum numero, and reserved in this
place to a further Repentance in the spirit, for those Offenses they committed
in the Flesh. I do not here maintain that I gnis Fatuus of Purgatory, or any
such painted, imaginary Tophet, but that which I speak of (if I am not much
mistaken) I have a strong Scripture for. It is that of Saint Peter, where he
speaks of Christ being put to Death in the Flesh, but Quickened by the spirit;
By which also he went, and preached unto the spirits that were in Prison: which
sometimes were disobedient when once the long-suffering of God waited in the
Days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing, wherein Few, that is, eight Souls
were saved by Water. These spirits were the souls of those who perished in the
Flood, and were reserved in this place till Christ should come, and preach
Repentance unto them. I know Scaliger thinks to evade this Construction with
his Qui Tunc, That they were then alive namely before the Flood, when they were
preached unto. But I shall overthrow this single Nonsense with Three solid
Reasons drawn out of the Body of the Text. First, it is not said that the
spirit it self precisely preached unto them, but He who went thither by the
Spirit, namely Christ in the Hypostaticall union of his Soul and Godhead, which
union was not before the Flood, when these Dead did live. Secondly, it is
written that he preached unto spirits, not to Men: to those which were in
Prison, not to those which were in vivis,(...), which is quite contary to
Scaliger; and this Exposition the Apostle confirms in another place,(...), the
Dead were preached to, not the living. Cap. 4. ver. 6.
Thirdly, the Apostle says. These spirits were but sometimes disobedient, and
withal tells us when, namely in the Days of Noah: whence I gather they were
not disobedient at this time of preaching and this is plain out of the
subsequent Chapter.

For this Cause (says the Apostle) was the Gospel preached also to them that
are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the Spirit. Now this Judgment in the Flesh was grounded on
their Disobedience in the Days of Noah, for which also they were drowned, but
Salvation according to God in the Spirit proceeded from their Repentance at the
preaching of Christ; which was after death. I do not impose this on the Reader,
as if I sat in the infallible Chair, but I am confident the Text of it self
will speak no other sense. As for the Doctrine it is no way hurtful, but in my
Opinion as it detracts not from the Mercy of God so it adds much to the
Comfort of Man.

I shall now speak a word more concerning my self, and another concerning the
Common Philosophy, and then I have done. It will be questioned perhaps what I
am, and especially what my Religion is? Take this short answer. I am neither
Papist, nor Sectary but a true, resolute Protestant in the best sense of the
Church of England. For Philosophy as it now stands, it is altogether imperfect,
and withal false. A mere Apothecaries Drug, a mixture of inconsistent,
Contrary Principles, which no way agree with the Harmony, and Method of Nature.
In a word, the whole Encyclopaedia (as they call it) bateing the Demonstrative
Mathematical part, is built on mere Imagination without the least Light of
Experience. I wish therefore all the true sons of my famous Oxford Mother to
look beyond Aristotle, and not confine their Intellect to the narrow, and
cloudy Horizon of his Text, for he is as short of Nature, as the Grammarians
are of Steganography. I expect not their Thanks for this my Advice, or
Discovery, but verily the Time will come when this Truth shall be more
perfectly manifested, and especially that great, and glorious mystery, whereof
there is little spoken in this Book, Solus Rex Messiah, Verbum Patris Caro
factum, Arcanum hoc revelavit, Aliqua Temporis plenitudine apertius
manifestaturus. It is Cornelius Agrippa's own prediction, and I am confident
it shall find Patrons enough when nothing remains here of me, but Memory.

My sweetest Jesus! 'twas thy Voice: If I
Be lifted up; I Will draw all to the sky. John

Yet I am here: I Am stifled in this Clay,
Shut up from Thee, and the fresh East of Day.
I know thy Hands not short: but I Am unfit
A foul, unclean Thing! to take hold of it.
I am all Dirt: Nor can I hope to please,
Unles in mercy thou love a Disease.
Diseases may be Cured: But who will reprieve
Him that is Dead? Tell me my God, I live.
It Is true, I live: But I so sleep withal,
I cannot move, scarce hear when thou do call.
Sins Lullabtes charm me when I would come,
But draw me after thee, and I will run.
Thou know I Am sick: let me not feasted be,
But keep a Diet and prescribed by Thee.
Should I carve for my self, I would exceed
To Surfets soon, and by self-murder bleed.
I ask for stones and scorpions, but still crossed,
And all for Love: should Thou grant, I were lost
Dear Lord deny me still; And never sign
My will, but when that will agrees with Thine,
And when this Conflict's past, and I appear
To answer, what a Patient I was here,
How I did weep, when Thou did woe: repine
At thy best sweets, and in a Childish whyne
Refuse thy proffered Love; yet cry, and call
For Rattles of my own to play withal;
Look on thy Cross, and let thy Blood come in,
When mine shall blush as guilty of my Sin
Then shall I live, being rescued in my Fall
A Text of Mercy to thy Creatures all,
Who having seen the worst of sias in me,
Must needs confess, the best of Loves in Thee.
I have now done Reader, but how much to my own prejudice, I cannot tell. I am
confident this shall not pass without Noise, but I may do well enough if thou
grant'st me but one Request. I would not have Thee look here for the Paint, and
Trim of Rhetoric. and the rather because English is a Language the Author was
not born to. Besides, this Piece was composed in Haste, and in my Days of
Mourning, on the sad Occurence of a Brother's Death. Et Quis didicit scribere
in lucta Lacrymarum, and Atramenti?

To Conclude: If I have erred in any Thing (and yet I followed the Rules of
Creation) I expose it not to the Mercy of Man, but of God: who as he is most
able, so also is he most willing to forgive us in the Day of our Accounts.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IF the old Itch of Scribbling, a Disease very proper to Galenists, surprise any
of their Tribe, I shall expect from them these following performances. First, a
plain Positive Exposition of all the passages in this Book, without any Injury
to the sense of their Author: For if they interpret Them otherwise then they
ought, they but Create Errors of their own, and then overthrow them.

Secondly, to prove their Familiarity and knowledge in this Art, let them give
the Reader a punctual Discovery of all the secrets thereof. If this be more
then They can do, it is Argument enough they know not what they oppose: And if
they do not know; how can they judge? or if they judge, where is their Evidence
to condemn?

Thirdly, let Them not mangle, and discompose my Book with a scatter of
Observations, but proceed Methodically to the Censure of each part, expounding
what is obscure, and discovering the very practice, that the Reader may find
my Positions to be false, not only in their Theorie, but if he will assay it,
by his own particular Experience.

I have two Admonitions more to the Ingenuous, and well-disposed Reader. First,
That he would not slight my Endeavors because of my years, which are but few.
It is the Custom of most men to measure knowledge by the Beard, but look Thou
rather on the Soul, an Essence of that Nature, quae ad perfectionem suam
Curricula Temporis non desiderat. Procl.
Secondly, that He would not conclude any thing rashly concerning the subject
of this art, for it is a Principle not easily apprehended. It is neither Earth,
nor water, air, nor Fire. It is not Gold, Silver, Saturn, Antimonie, or
Vitriol, nor any kind of Mineral whatsoever. It is not Blood, nor the Seed of
any Individual, as some unnatural, Obscene Authors have imagined. In a word,
it is no Mineral, no Vegetable, no Animal, but a system as it were, of all
Three. In plain Terms, it is Sperma Majoris Animalis, The seed of Heaven, and
Earth, our most secret, miraculous Hermaphrodite. If you know this, and with it
the Hydro-pyro-magical Art, you may with some security attempt the work, if
not, practice is the way to Poverty. Assay nothing without Science, but confine
your selves to those Bounds, which Nature has prescribed you.


