Thalia rediviva

THE Pass-Times and Diversions OF A COUNTREY-MUSE, In Choice POEMS On several
Occasions WITH Some Learned Remains of the Eminent Eugenius Philalethes, Never
made Public till now.

-- Nec erubuit sylvas habitare Thalia. Virgil.

Licensed, Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane, near
Fleetstreet, 1678.

TO THE Most Honorable and truly Noble HENRY Lord Marquis and Earl of
WORCESTER, etc.
My Lord,
THough Dedications are now become a kind of Tyranny over the Peace and Repose
of great Men; yet I have confidence I shall so manage the present Address as to
entertain your Lordship without much disturbance; and because my purposes are
governed by deep Respect and Veneration, I hope to find your Lordship more
facile and accessible. And I am already absolved from a great part of that
fulsome and designing guilt, being sufficiently removed from the causes of it:
for I consider, my Lord! that you are already so well known to the World in
your several Characters, and advantages of Honor; it was yours by traduction,
and the adjunct of your Nativity, you were swaddl'd and rocked in it, bred up
and grew in it to your now wonderful height and eminence: that for me under
pretense of the inscription to give you the heraldry of your family, or to
carry your person through the famed Topics of Mind Body, or Estate, were all
one as to persuade the World that Fire and Light were very bright Bodies, or
that the Luminaries themselves had Glory. In point of Protection I beg to fall
in with the common wont, and to be satisfied by the reasonableness of the
thing, and abundant worthy precedents; and although I should have secret
prophecy and assurance that the ensuing Verse would live eternally, yet would
I, as I now do, humbly crave it might be fortified with your Patronage; for so
the Sextile Aspects and Influences are watched for, and applied to the actions
of Life, thereby to make the Scheme and good Auguries of the Birth pass into
Fate, and a success infallible.

My Lord! By a happy obliging Intercession, and your own consequent Iudulgence,
I have now recourse to your Lordship; hopeing, I shall not much displease by
putting these Twin Poets into your Hands. The Minion and Vertical Planet of the
Roman Luster and Bravery was never better pleased, than when he had a whole
Constellation about him: not his finishing Five several Wars to the promoting
of his own Interest, nor particularly the prodigious success at Actium, where
he held in chase the Wealth, Beauty and Prowess of the East; not the Triumphs
and absolute Dominions which followed, all this gave him not half that serene
Pride and Satisfaction of Spirit as when he retired himself to umpire the
different Excellencies of his insipid Friends, and to distribute Laurels among
his Poetic Heroes: If now upon the Authority of this, and several such
Examples I had the Ability and Opportunity of drawing the Value and strange
Worth of a Poet, and withal of applying some of the Lineaments to the
following pieces; I should then do my self a real Service, and atone in a
great measure for the present insolence. But best of all will it serve my
Defense and Interest to appeal to your Lordships own conceptions and image of
Genuine Verse; with which so just, so regular Original, if these Copies shall
hold proportion and resemblance, then am I advanced very far in your Lordships
pardon: the rest will entirely be supplied me by your Lordships Goodness, and
my own awful Zeal of being,

My Lord! Your Lordships most obedient, most humbly devoted Servant J. W.

To the Reader.
THE Nation of Poets above all Writers (...) ever (...) perpetuity of Name, or
as they please by their Charter of Liberty to call it, Immortality. Nor has the
World much (...) claim, either easily resigning a Patrimony in it self not very
substantial; or, it may be, (...) of despair to control the authority of
Inspiration and Oracle. Howsoevert he price as now quarreled for among the
Poets themselves is no such rich bargain: it is only a vanishing interest in the
Lees and Dreggs of Time, in the Rear of those Fathers and (...) in the Art, who
if they know any thing of the heats and fury of their Successors must extremely
pity them.

I am to assure, that the Author has no portion of that aerie happiness to lose
by any (...) or unkindness which may be done to his Verse: his Reputation is
better (...) in the sentiment of several judicious Persons, who know him very
well able to give himself a lasting Monument, by undertaking any Argument of
note in the whole Circle of Learning.

But even these his Diversions have been valuable with the matchless Orinda,
and (...) they deserved (...) esteem and commendations; who so thinks them not
worth the publishing, will put himself in the (...) Scale, where his own
arrogance will blow him up.

I. W.

To Mr. Henry Vaughan the Silurist: upon these and his former Poems.
HAd I adored the Multitude, and thence
Got an Antipathy to wit and sense,
And hugged that Fate, in hope the World would grant
'Twas good Affection to the Ignorant:
Yet the least Ray of thy bright fancy seen
I had converted, or excuseless been.
For each Birth of thy Muse to aftertimes
Shall expiate for all this Ages Crimes.
First shines thy (...), twice crowned by thee:
Once by (...) Love, next by thy Poetry;
Where thou the best of Unions do dispense
Truth clothed in Wit, and Love in Innocence.
So that the muddie Lover may learn here,
No Fountains can be sweet, that are not clear.
There (...), by thee revived declares
(...) flat man's Joys are and how mean his Cares;
And wisely does upbraid the World, that they
Should such a value for their ruin pay.
But when thy sacred Muse diverts her Quill
The Landscape to design of Sions Hill,
As nothing else was worthy her, or thee:
So we admire almost (...)' Idolatry.
What savage Breast would not be raped to find
Such Jewels in such Cabinets enshrined?
Thou filled with joys (too great to see or count:)
Descend'st from thence, like Moses from the Mount,
And with a candid, yet unquestioned awe
(...) the Golden Age, when Verse was Law.
Instructing us, thou so secur'st thy Fame,
That nothing can disturb it, but my name.
Nay I have hopes, that standing so near thine
'Twill loose its dross, and by degrees refine.
Live! till the disabused World consent
All Truths of Use, of Strength or Ornament
Are with such Harmony by thee displayed
As the whole World was first by number made;
And from the charming rigor thy Muse brings
Learn, there is no pleasure but in serious things!
Orinda

Upon the Ingenious Poems of his Learned Friend, Mr. Henry Vaughan the Silurist.
FAirly designed! to charm our Civil Rage
With Verse, and plant Bays in an Iron Age.
But has steeled Mars so ductible a Soul,
That Love and Poesy may it control?
Yes: brave Tyrtaeus, as we read of old,
The Grecian Armies, as he pleased could mold;
They marched to his high Numbers, and did fight
With that instinct and rage, which he did write.
When he fell lower, they would strait retreat,
Grow soft and calm: and temper their bold heat.
Such Magic is in Virtue! See hear a young
Tyrtaeus too, whose sweet persuasive Song
Can lead our Spirits any way, and move
To all Adventures: either War or Love.
Then veil the bright Etesia, that choice She,
Lest Mars, ( Timander's Friend) his Rival be.
So fair a Nymph, dressed by a Muse so neat,
Might warm the North, and thaw the frozen Get.
Tho. Powel, D. D.

To the ingenious Author of Thalia Rediviva.
Ode I.
WHere Reverend Bards of old have sat
And sung the pleasant enterludes of Fate,
Thou take the hereditary shade
Which Natures homely Art had made,
And thence thou giv'st thy Muse her swing, and she
Advances to the Galaxie;
There with the sparkling Cowley she above
Does hand in hand in graceful Measures move.
We grovelling Mortals gaze below,
And long in vain to know
Her wondrous paths, her wondrous flight
In rain; alas! we grope,
In vain we use our earthly Telescope,
We Are blinded by an intermedial night:
Thine Eagle-Muse can only face
The fiery Coursers in their race,
While with unequal paces we do try
To bear her train aloft, and keep her company.
II.
The loud harmonious Mantuan
Once charmed the world, and here is the Us an Swan
In his declining years does chime,
And challenges the last remains of Time.
Ages run on, and soon give over,
They have their Graves as well as we,
Time swallows all that is past and more,
Yet time is swallowed in eternity:
This is the only profits Poets see.
There thy triumphant Muse shall ride in state
And lead in Chains devouring Fate;
Claudian's bright Phoenix she shall bring
Thee an immortal offering;
Nor shall my humble tributary Muse
Her homage and attendance too refuse,
She thrusts her self among the Crowd
And joining in the applause she strives to clap aloud.
III.
Tell me no more that Nature is severe
Thou great Philosopher!
Lo she has laid her vast Exchequer here.
Tell me no more that she has sent
So much already she is spent;
Here is a vast America behind
Which none but the great Silurist could find.
Nature her last edition was the best,
As big, as rich as all the rest
So will we here admit
Another world of Wit.
No rude or savage fancy here shall stay
The travailing Reader in his way,
But every coast is clear: go where he will
Vertu's the road Thalia leads him still:
Long may she live, and wreath thy sacred head
For this her happy resurrection from the dead.
N. W. Jes. Coll. Oxon.

To my worthy Friend, Mr. Henry Vaughan the Silurist.
SEe what thou were! by what Platonic round
Art thou in thy first youth and Glories found!
Or from thy Muse does this Retrieve accrue,
Does she which once inspired thee, now renew!
Bringing thee back those Golden years which time
Smoothed to thy Lays and polisht with thy Rhyme.
Nor is it to thee alone she does convey
Such happy change, but bountiful as day
On whatsoever Reader she does shine
She makes him like thee, and for ever thine.
And first thy manu'al opening gives to see
Eclipse and sufferings burnish Majesty,
Where thou so artfully the draught have made
That we best read the luster in the shade,
And find our Sovereign greater in that shroud:
So Lightning dazzles from its night and cloud;
So the first Light himself has for his Throne
Blackness, and Darkness his Pavilion.
Who can refuse thee company, or stay,
By thy next charming summons forced away,
If that be force which we can so resent
That only in its joys it is violent:
Upward thy Eagle bears us e're aware
Till above Storms and all tempestuous Air
We radiant Worlds with their bright people meet,
Leaving this little All beneath our feet.
But now the pleasure is too great to tell,
Nor have we other business than to dwell
As on the hallowed Mount the Apostles meant
To build and fix their glorious banishment.
Yet we must know and find thy skilful (...)
Shall gently bear us to our homes again;
By which descent thy former flight's impli'd
To be thy (...) and not thy pride.
And here how well does the wise Muse demean
Her self, and fit her song to every Scene!
Riot of Courts, the bloody wreaths of War,
Cheats of the Mart, and clamours of the Bar,
Nay, life it self thou do so well express
Its hollow Joys, and real Emptiness,
That Dorian Minstrel never did excite,
Or raise for dying so much appetite.
Nor does thy other softer Magic move
Us less thy famed Etesia to love;
Where such a Character thou giv'st that shame
Nor envy dare approach the Vestal Dame:
So at bright Prime Idea's none repine,
They safely in the Eternal Poet shine.
Gladly the Assyrian Phoenix now resumes
From thee this last reprizal of his Plumes;
He seems (...) more miraculous thing
Brighter of Crest, and stronger of his Wing;
Proof against Fate in spicy Urns to come,
Immortal past all risque of Martyrdom.
Nor be concerned, nor fancy thou art rude
T'adventure from thy Cambrian solitude,
Best from those (...) Cliffs thy Muse does spring
Upwards, and boldly spreads her Cherub-wing.
So when the Sage of Memphis would converse
With boding Skies, and the Azure Universe,
He climbs his starry Pyramid, and thence
Freely sucks clean prophetique influence,
And all Serene, and raped and gay he pries
Through the Ethereal volum's Mysteries,
Loath to come down, or ever to know more
The Nile's luxurious, but dull foggy shore.
I. W. A. M. Oxon.

Choice POEMS on seveveral occasions.
To his Learned Friend and Loyal FellowPrisoner, Thomas Powel of Cant. Doctor
of Divinity.
IF severed Friends by Sympathy can join,
And absent Kings be honored in their coin;
May they do both, who are so curbed! but we
Whom no such Abstracts torture, that can see
And pay each other a full self-return,
May laugh, though all such Metaphysics burn.
It Is a kind Soul in Magnets, that attones
Such two hard things as Iron are and (...),
And in their dumb compliance we learn more
Of Love, than ever Books could speak before.
For though attraction has got all the name,
As if that power but from one side came,
Which both unites; yet, where there is no sense,
There is no Passion, nor Intelligence:
And so by consequence we cannot state
A Commerce, unless both we animate.
For senseless things, though never so called upon,
Are deaf, and feel no Invitation;
But such as at the last day shall be shed
By the great Lord of Life into the Dead.
It Is then no Heresy to end the strife
With such rare Doctrine as gives Iron life.
For were it otherwise (which cannot be,
And do thou judge my bold Philosophy:)
Then it would follow that if I were dead,
Thy love, as now in life, would in that Bed
Of Earth and darkness warm me, and dispense,
Effectual informing Influence.
Since then it is clear, that Friendship is naught else
But a Joint, kind propension: and excess
In none, but such whose equal easy hearts
Comply and meet both in their whole and parts:
And when they cannot meet, do not forget
To mingle Souls, but secretly reflect
And some third place their Center make, where they
Silently mix, and make an unseen stay:
Let me not say (though Poets may be bold,)
Thou art more hard than Steel, than Stones more cold,
But as the Mary-gold in Feasts of Dew
And early Sunbeams, though but thin and few
Unfolds its self, then from the Earths cold breast
Heaves gently, and salutes the hopeful East:
So from thy quiet Cell, the retired Throne
Of thy fair thoughts, which silently bemoan
Our sad distractions, come: and richly dressed
With reverend mirth and manners, check the rest
Of loose, loathed men! why should I longer be
Racked 'twixt two Ev'ls? I see and cannot see,
Thalia Rediviva.
The King Disguised.
Written about the same time that Mr. John Cleveland wrote his.
A King and no King! Is he gone from us,
And stolen alive into his Coffin thus?
This was to ravish Death, and so prevent
The Rebels treason and their punishment.
(...) would not have them damned, and therefore he
(...) deposed his own Majesty.
(...) did pursue him, and to fly the Ill
(...) wanders (Royal Saint!) in sheep-skin still.
(...), obscure shelter! if that shelter be
(...), which harbors so much Majesty.
(...) profane Eyes! the mysterie's so deep,
(...) Esdras books, the vulgar must not see it.
Thou flying Roll, written with tears and woe,
(...) for thy Royal self, but for thy Foe:
(...) grief is prophecy, and does portend.
(...) sad (...)'s sighs, the Rebels end.
Thy robes forced off, like Samuel's when rent,
Do figure out another Punishment.
Nor grieve thou have put off thy self a while,
To serve as Prophet to this sinful Isle;
These are our days of Purim, which oppress
The Church, and force thee to the Wilderness.
But all these Clouds cannot thy light confine,
The Sun in storms and after them, will shine.
Thy day of life cannot be yet complete,
It Is early sure; thy shadow is so great.
But I am vexed, that we at all can guess
This change, and trust great Charles to such a dress.
When he was first obscured with this coarse thing,
He graced Plebeians, but profaned the King.
Like some fair Church, which Zeal to Charcoals burned,
Or his own Court now to an Alehouse turned.
But full as well may we blame Night, and chide
His wisdom, who does light with darkness hide:
Or deny Curtains to thy Royal Bed,
As take this sacred covering from thy Head.
(...) of State are points we must not know;
This vizard is thy privy Council now,
Thou Royal Riddle, and in every thing
The true white Prince, our Hieroglyphic King!
Ride safely in his shade, who gives thee Light:
And can with blindness thy pursuers smite.
O may they wonder all from thee as far
As they from peace are, and thy self from War!
And wheresoever thou (...) design to be
With thy (now spotted) spottles Majesty,
Be sure to look no Sanctuary there,
Nor hope for (...) in a temple, where
Buyers and Sellers trade: O strengthen not
With too much trust the Treason of a Scot!
The Eagle
It Is madness sure; And I am in the Fit,
To dare an Eagle with my unfledged wit.
For what did ever Rome or Athens sing
In all their Lines, as lofty as his wing?
He that an Eagles Powers would rehearse
Should with his plumes first feather all his Verse.
I know not, when into thee I would pry,
Which to admire, thy Wing first: or thine Eye;
Or whether Nature at thy birth designed
More of her Fire for thee, or of her Wind.
When thou in the clear Heights and upmost Air
Do face the Sun, and his dispersed Hair,
Even from that distance thou the Sea do spy
And sporting in its deep, wide Lap the Fry.
Not the least Minoe there, but thou can see;
Whole Seas are narrow spectacles to thee.
Nor is this Element of water here
Below, of all thy miracles the sphere.
If Poets ought may add unto thy store,
Thou have in Heav n of wonders many more.
For when just Jove to Earth his thunder bends
And from that bright, eternal Fortress sends
His louder vollies: strait this Bird does fly
To Aetna, where his Magazine does lie:
And in his active Talons brings him more
Of ammunition, and recruits his store.
Nor is it a low, or easy Lift. He soars
'Bove Wind and Fire; gets to the Moon, and pores
With scorn upon her duller face; for she
Gives him but shadows and obscurity.
Here much displeased, that any thing like night
Should meet him in his proud and lofty flight,
That such dull Tinstures should advance so far,
And rival in the glories of a star:
Resolved he is a nobler Course to try
And measures out his voyage with his Eye.
Then with such fury he begins his flight,
As if his Wings contended with his sight.
Leaving the Moon, whose humble light does trade
With Spotts, and deals most in the dark and shade:
To the day's Royal Planet he does pass
With daring Eyes, and makes the Sun his glass.
Here does he plume and dress himself, the Beams
Rushing upon him, like so many Streams;
While with direct looks he does entertain
The thronging flames, and shoots them back again.
And thus from star to star he does repair
And wantons in that pure and peaceful air.
Sometimes he frights the starrie Swan, and now
Orion's fearful Hare and then the Crow.
Then with the Orb it self he moves, to see
Which is more swift the Intelligence or He.
Thus with his wings his body he has brought
Where man can travel only in a thought.
I will not seek, rare bird, what Spirit it is
That mounts thee thus; I Will be content with this;
To think, that Nature made thee to express
Our souls bold Heights in a material dress.
To Mr. M. L. upon his reduction of the Psalms into Method.
SIR,
YOu have obliged the Patriarch. And it is known
He is your Debtor now, though for his own.
What he wrote, is a Medley. We can see
Confusion trespass on his Piety.
Misfortunes did not only Strike at him;
They charged further, and oppressed his pen.
For he wrote as his Crosses came, and went
By no safe Rule, but by his Punishment.
His quill moved by the Rod; his wits and he
Did know no Method, but their Misery.
You brought his Psalms now into Tune. Nay, all
His measures thus are more than musical.
Your Method and his Aires are justly sweet,
And (what is Church-musick right) like Anthems meet.
You did so much in this, that I believe
He gave the Matter, you the form did give.
And yet I wish you were not understood,
For now it is a misfortune to be good!
Why then, you will say, all I would have, is this;
None must be good, because the time's amiss.
For since wise Nature did ordain the Night,
I would not have the Sun to give us Light.
Whereas this does not take the Use away:
But urges the Necessity of day.
Proceed to make your pious work as free,
Stop not your seasonable charity.
Good works despised, or censured by bad times,
Should be sent out to aggravate their Crimes.
They should first Share and then Reject our store:
Abuse our Good, to make their Guilt the more.
It Is War strikes at our Sins, but it must be
A Persecution wounds our Piety.
To the pious memory of C. W. Esquire who finished his Course here, and made
his Entrance into Immortality upon the 13 of September, in the year of
Redemption 1653.
NOw, that the public Sorrow does subside,
And those slight tears which Custom Springs,
While all the rich and out-side-Mourners pass (are dried;
Home from thy Dust to empty their own Glass:
I (who the throng affect not, nor their state:)
Steal to thy grave undressed, to meditate
On our sad loss, accompanied by none,
An obscure mourner that would weep alone.
So when the world's great Luminary setts,
Some scarce known Star into the Zenith gets,
Twinkles and curls a weak but willing spark:
As Gloworms here do glitter in the dark.
Yet, since the dimmest flame that kindles there,
An humble love unto the light does bear,
And true devotion from an Hermits Cell
Will Heavens kind King as soon reach and as well
As that which from rich Shrines and Altars flies
Lead by ascending Incense to the Skies:
It Is no malicious rudeness, if the might
Of love makes dark things wait upon the bright,
And from my sad retirements calls me forth
The Just Recorder of thy death and worth.
Long did thou live (if length be measured by
The tedious Reign of our Calamity:)
And Counter to all storms and changes still
Kept'st the same temper, and the self same will.
Though trials came as duly as the day,
And in such mists, that none could see his way:
Yet thee I found still virtuous, and saw
The Sun give Clouds: and Charles give both the Law.
When private Interest did all hearts bend
And wild dissents the public peace did rend:
Thou neither won, nor worn (...) still thy self;
Not awed by force, nor basely bribed with pelf.
What the insuperable stream of times
Did dash thee with, those Sufferings were, not Crimes.
So the bright Sun Ecclipses bears; and we
Because then passive, blame him not, should he
For enforced shades, and the Moon's ruder veil
Much nearer us, than him; be Judged to fail?
Who traduce thee, so err. As poisons by
Correction are made Antidotes, so thy
Just Soul did turn even hurtful things to Good;
Used bad Laws so, they drew not Tears, nor Blood.
Heaven was thy Aim, and thy great rare Design
Was not to Lord it here, but there to shine.
Earth nothing had, could tempt thee. All that e're
Thou pray'dst for here, was Peace; and Glory there.
For though thy Course in times long progress fell
On a sad age, when War and opened Hell
Licensed all Arts and Sects, and made it free
To thrive by fraud and blood and blasphemy:
Yet thou thy just Inheritance di'dst by
No sacrilege, nor pillage multiply;
No rapine swelled thy state: no bribes, nor fees
Our new oppressors best Annuities.
Such clean, pure hands had thou! And for thy heart
Man's secret region and his noblest part;
Since I was privy to it, and had the Key
Of that fair Room, where thy bright Spirit lay:
I must affirm, it did as much surpass
Most I have known, as the clear Sky does glass.
Constant and kind, and plain and meek and Mild
It was, and with no new Conceits defiled.
Busy, but sacred thoughts (like Bees) did still
Within it stir, and strive unto that Hill,
Where redeemed Spirits evermore alive
After their Work is done, ascend and Hive.
No outward tumults reached this inward place,
'Twas holy ground: where peace, and love and grace
Kept house: where the immortal restles life
In a most dutiful and pious strife
Like a fixed watch, moved all in order, still;
The Will served God, and every Sense the Will!
In this safe state death met thee. Death which is
But a kind Usher of the good to bliss.
Therefore to Weep because thy Course is run,
Or droop like Flowers, which lately lost the Sun:
I cannot yield, since faith will not permit,
A Tenure got by Conquest to the Pit.
For the great Victour fought for us, and He
Counts every dust, that is laid up of thee.
Besides, Death now grows decrepit and has
Spent the most part both of its time and wrath.
That thick, black night which mankind feared, is torn
By Troops of Stars, and the bright day's Forlorn.
The next glad news (most glad unto the Just!)
Will be the Trumpet's summons from the dust.
Then I Will not grieve; nay more, I Will not allow
My Soul should think thee absent from me now.
Some bid their Dead good night! but I will say
Good morrow to dear Charles! for it is day.
In Zodiacum Marcelli Palingenii.
IT is performed! and thy great Name does run
Through every Sign an everlasting Sun.
Not Planet-like, but fixed; and we can see
Thy Genius stand still in his Apogie.
For how can thou an Aux eternal miss,
Where every House thine Exaltation is?
Here Is no Ecclyptic threatens thee with night,
Although the wiser, few take in thy light,
They are not at that glorious pitch, to be
In a Conjunction with Divinity.
Could we partake some oblique Ray of thine,
Salute thee in a Sextile, or a Trine,
It were enough; but thou art flown so high,
The Telescope is turned a Common Eye.
Had the grave Chaldee lived thy Book to see,
He had known no Astrology, but thee;
Nay more, (for I believed,) thou should have been
Tutor to all his Planets, and to him.
Thus whosoever reads thee, his charmed sense
Proves captive to thy Zodiac's influence.
Were it not foul to err so, I should look
Here for the Rabbis universal Book:
And say, their fancies did but dream of thee,
When first they doted on that mystery.
Each line's a via lactea, where we may
See thy fair steps, and tread that happy way
Thy Genius lead thee in, Still I will be
Lodged in some Sign, some Face and some Degree
Of thy bright Zodiac, Thus I Will teach my Sense
To move by that, and thee the Intelligence.
To Lysimachus, the Author being with him in London.
SAw not, Lysimachus, last day, when we
Took the pure Air in its simplicity,
And our own too: how the trimmed Gallants went
Cringing, and past each step some Complement?
What strange, phantastic Diagrams they drew
With Legs and Arms; the like we never knew
In Euclid, Archimed: nor all of those
Whose learned lines are neither Verse nor Prose?
What store of Lace was there? how did the Gold
Run in rich Traces, but withal made bold
To measure the proud things, and so deride
The Fops with that, which was part of their pride?
How did they point at us, and boldly call,
As if we had been Vassals to them all,
Their poor Men-mules sent thither by hard fate
To yoke our selves for their Sedans and State?
Of all ambitions, this was not the least,
Whose drift translated man into a beast.
What blind discourse the Heroes did afford?
This Lady was their Friend, and such a Lord.
How much of Blood was in it? one could tell
He came from Bevis and his Arundel;
Morglay was yet with him, and he could do
More feats with it, than his old Grandsire too.
Wonders my Friend at this? what is it to thee,
Who can produce a nobler Pedigree,
And in mere truth affirm thy Soul of kin
To some bright Star, or to a Cherubin?
When these in their profuse moods spend the night
With the same sins, they drive away the light,
Thy learned thrift puts her to use; while she
Reveals her fiery Volume unto thee;
And looking on the separated skies
And their clear Lamps with careful thoughts and eyes
Thou break'st through Natures upmost rooms and bars
To Heaven, and there conversest with the Stars.
Well fare such harmless, happy nights that be
Obscured with nothing but their privacie:
And missing but the false world's glories, do
Miss all those vices, which attend them too!
Fret not to hear their ill-got, ill-giv'n praise;
Thy darkest nights outshine their brightest days.
On Sir Thomas Bodley's Library; the Author being then in Oxford.
Boast not proud Golgotha: that thou can show
The ruins of mankind, and let us know
How frail a thing is flesh! though we see there
But empty Skulls, the Rabbis still live here.
They are not dead, but full of Blood again,
I mean the Sense, and every Line a Vein.
Triumph not over their Dust; whoever looks
In here, shall find their Brains all in their Books.
Nor is it old Palestine alone survives,
Atbens lives here, more than in Plutarch's lives.
The stones which sometimes danced unto the strain
Of Orpheus, here do lodge his muse again.
And you the Roman Spirits, learning has
Made your lives longer, than your Empire was.
Caesar had perished from the World of men,
Had not his Sword been rescued by his pen.
Rare Seneca! how lasting is thy breath?
Though Nero did, thou could not bleed to Death.
How dull the expert Tyrant was, to look
For that in thee, which lived in thy Book?
Afflictions turn our Blood to Ink, and we
Commence when Writing, our Eternity.
Lucilius here I can behold, and see
His Counsels and his Life proceed from thee.
But what care I to whom thy Letters be?
I change the Name, and thou do write to me;
And in this Age, as sad almost as thine,
Thy stately Consolations are mine.
Poor Earth! what though thy viler dust enrouls
The frail Enclosures of these mighty Souls?
Their graves are all upon Record; not one
But is as bright, and open as the Sun.
And though some part of them obscurely fell
And perished in an unknown, private Cell:
Yet in their books they found a glorious way
To live unto the Resurrection-day.
Most noble Bodley! we are bound to thee
For no small part of our Eternity.
Thy treasure was not spent on Horse and Hound,
Nor that new Mode, which does old States confound.
Thy legacies another way did go:
Nor were they left to those would spend them so.
Thy safe, discreet Expense on us did flow;
Walsam is in the midst of Oxford now.
Thou Have made us all thine Heirs: whatever we
Hereafter write, it is thy Posterity.
This is thy Monument! here thou shall stand
Till the times fail in their last grain of Sand.
And wheresoever thy silent Relics keep,
This Tomb will never let thine honor sleep.
Still we shall think upon thee; all our fame
Meets here to speak one Letter of thy name.
Thou can not dye! here thou art more than safe
Where every Book is thy large Epitaph.
The importunate Fortune, written to Doctor Powel of Cantre.
FOr shame desist, why should thou seek my fall?
It cannot make thee more Monarchical.
Leave off; thy Empire is already built;
To ruin me were to enlarge thy guilt,
Not thy Prerogative. I am not he
Must be the measure to thy victory.
The Fates hatch more for thee; 'twere a disgrace
If in thy Annals I should make a Clause.
The future Ages will disclose such men,
Shall be the glory, and the end of them.
Nor do I flatter. So long as there be
Descents in Nature, or Posterity,
There must be Fortunes; whether they be good,
As swimming in thy Tide and plenteous Flood,
Or stuck fast in the shallow Ebb, when we
Miss to deferve thy gorgeous charity.
Thus, Fortune, the great World thy period is;
Nature and you are Parallels in this.
But thou will urge me still. Away, be gone;
I am resolved, I will not be undone.
I scorn thy trash and thee: nay more, I do
Despise my self, because thy Subject too.
Name me Heir to thy malice, and I Will be;
Thy hate's the best Inheritance for me.
I care not for your wondrous Hat and Purse:
Make me a Fortunatus with thy Curse.
How careful of my self then should I be,
Were I neglected by the world and thee?
Why do thou tempt me with thy dirty Ore,
And with thy Riches make my Soul so poor?
My Fancy's prisoner to thy Gold and thee,
Thy favors rob me of my liberty.
I Will to my Speculations. Is It best
To be confined to some dark narrow chest
And Idolize thy Stamps, when I may be
Lord of all Nature, and not slave to thee?
The world's my Palace. I Will contemplate there,
And make my progress into every Sphere.
The Chambers of the Air are mine; those three
Well furnished Stories my possession be.
I hold them all in Capite, and stand
Propt by my Fancy there. I scorn your Land,
It lies so far below me. Here I see
How all the Sacred Stars do circle me.
Thou to the Great giv'st rich Food, and I do
Want no Content; I feed on Manna too.
They have their Tapers; I gaze without fear
On flying Lamps, and flaming Comets here.
Their wanton flesh in Silks and Purple Shrouds,
And Fancy wraps me in a Robe of Clouds.
There some delicious beauty they may woo,
And I have Nature for my Mistress too.
But these are mean; the Archtype I can see,
And humbly touch the hem of Majesty.
The power of my Soul is such, I can
Expire, and so analyze all that is man.
First my dull Clay I give unto the Earth,
Our common Mother, which gives all their birth.
My growing Faculties I send as soon
Whence first I took them, to the humid Moon.
All Subtilties and every cunning Art
To witty Mercury I do impart.
Those fond Affections which made me a slave
To handsome Faces, Venus thou shall have.
And saucy Pride (if there was ought in me,)
Sol, I return it to thy Royalty.
My daring Rashness and Presumptions be
To Mars himself an equal Legacy.
My ill-plac'd Avarice (sure it is but small;)
Jove, to thy Flames I do bequeath it all.
And my false Magic, which I did believe,
And mystic Lies to Saturn I do give.
My dark Imaginations rest you there,
This is your grave and Superstitious Sphaere.
Get up my dismtangled Soul, thy fire
Is now refined and nothing left to tire,
Or clog thy wings. Now my auspicious flight
Has brought me to the Empyrean light.
I am a separate Essence, and can see
The Emanations of the Deity,
And how they pass the Seraphims, and run
Through every Throne and Domination.
So rushing through the Guard, the Sacred streams
Flow to the neighbor Stars, and in their beams
(A glorious Cataract!) descend to Earth
And give Impressions unto every birth.
With Angels now and Spirits I do dwell.
And here it is my Nature to do well,
Thus, though my Body you confined see,
My boundless thoughts have their Ubiquitie.
And shall I then forsake the Stars and Signs
To dote upon thy dark and cursed Mines?
Unhappy, sad exchange! what, must I buy
Guiana with the loss of all the sky?
Intelligences shall I leave, and be
Familiar only with mortality?
Must I know naught, but thy Exchequer? shall
My purse and fancy be Symmetrical?
Are there no Objects left but one? must we
In gaining that, lose our Variety?
Fortune, this is the reason I refuse
Thy Wealth; it puts my Books all out of use.
It Is poverty that makes me wise; my mind
Is big with speculation, when I find
My purse as Randolph's was, and I confess
There is no Blessing to an Emptiness!
The Species of all things to me resort
And (...) then in my breast, as in their port.
Then leave to Court me with thy hated store,
Thou giv'st me that, to rob my Soul of more.
To I, Morgan of White Hall Esquire upon his sudden Journey and succeeding Marriage.
SO from our cold, rude World, which all things tires
To his warm Indies the bright sun retires.
Where in those provinces of Gold and spice
Perfumes his progress: pleasures fill his Eyes.
Which so refreshed in their return convey
Fire into Rubies, into Chrystalls day;
And prove, that Light in kinder Climates can
Work more on (...) Stones, than here on man.
But you, like one ordained to shine, take in
Both Light and Heat: can Love and Wisdom spin
Into one thread, and with that firmly tie
The same bright Blessings on posterity;
Which so entailed, like Jewels of the Crown,
Shall with your Name descend still to your own.
When I am dead, and malice or neglect
The worst they can upon my dust reflect,
(For Poets yet have left no names, but such
As men have envied, or despised too much;)
You above both (and what state more excells
Since a just Fame like Health, nor wants, nor swells?)
To after ages shall remain Entire,
And shine still spottles, like your planets Fire.
No single luster neither; the access
Of your fair Love will yours adorn and bless;
Till from that bright Conjunction, men may view
A Constellation circling her and you:
So two sweet Rose-buds from their Virgin-beds
First peep and blush, then kiss and couple heads;
Till yearly blessings so increase their store
Those two can number two and twenty more,
And the fair Bank (by heavens free bounty Crowned)
With choice of Sweets and Beauties does abound;
Till time, which Familys like Flowers far spreads;
Gives them for Garlands to the (...) of heads.
Then late posterity (if chance, or some
Weak Echo, almost quite expired and dumb
shall tell them, who the Poet was, and how
He lived and loved thee too; which thou (...) know)
Strait to my grave will Flowers and spices bring
With Lights and Hymns, and for an Offering
There vow this truth; That (...) (which in old times
Was censured blind, and will contract worse (...)
If hearts mend not; did for thy sake in me
Find both his Eyes, and all foretell and see.
FIDA: (...) The Country-beauty: to Lysimachus.
NOw I have seen her; And by Cupid
The young Medusa made me (...)!
A face, that has no Lovers stain,
Wants forces, and is near disdain.
For every Fop will freely peep
At Majesty that is asleep.
But she (fair Tyrant!) hates to be
Gazed on with such impunity.
Whose prudent Rigor bravely bears
And scorns the (...) of whining tears:
Or sighs, those false All-arms of grief,
Which kill not, but (...) relief.
Nor is it thy hard fate to be
Alone in this Calamity,
Since I who came but to be gone,
Am plagued for merely looking on.
Mark from her (...) to her foot
What charming Sweets are there to do it.
A Head adorned with all those glories
That Wit has shadowed in quaint stories:
Or pencill with rich colors drew
In imitation of the true.
Her Hair laid out in curious (...)
And Twists, does show like silken Nets,
Where (since he played at Hitt or Miss:)
The God of Love her prisoner is,
And fluttering with his skittish Wings
Puts all her locks in Curls and Rings.
Like twinkling Stars her Eyes invite
All gazers to so sweet a light,
But then two (...) Clouds of brown
stand over, and guard them with a (...).
Beneath these rays of her bright Eyes
Beautie's rich Bed of blushes lies.
Blushes, which lightning-like come on,
Yet stay not to be gazed upon;
But leave the Lilies of her Skin
As fair as ever, and run in:
(...) swift Salutes (which dull paint scom,)
Twixt a white noon, and Crimson Morn.
What Coral can her Lips resemble?
(...) hers are warm, swell, melt and tremble:
And if you dare contend for Red,
This is alive, the other dead.
Her equal Teeth (above, below:)
All of a Cise, and Smoothness grow.
Where under close restraint and awe
(Which is the Maiden, Tyrant law:)
Like a cag'd, sullen Linnet, dwells.
Her Tongue, the Key to potent spells.
Her Skin, like heaven when calm and bright,
Shows a rich azure under white,
With touch more soft than heart supposes,
And Breath as sweet as new blown Roses.
Betwixt this Head-land and the Main,
Which is a rich and flowery Plain:
Lies her fair Neck, so fine and slender
That (gently) how you please, 'twill bend her.
This leads you to her Heart, which taken
Pants under Sheets of whitest Lawn,
And at the first seems much distressed,
But nobly treated, lies at rest.
Here like two Balls of new fallen snow,
Her Breasts, Loves native pillows grow;
And out of each a Rose-bud Peeps
Which Infant beauty sucking, sleeps.
Say now my Stoic, that make soures faces
At all the Beauties and the Graces,
That criest unclean! though known thy self
To every coorse, and dirty shelfe:
Could thou but see a piece like this,
A piece so full of Sweets and (...):
In shape so rare, in Soul so rich,
Would thou not swear she is a witch?
Fida forsaken.
FOol that I was! to believe blood
While swollen with greatness, then most good;
And the false thing, forgetful man:
To trust more than our true God, Pan,
Such swellings to a dropsy tend,
And meanest things such great ones bend.
Then live deceived! and Fida by
That life destroy fidelity.
For living wrongs will make some wise,
While death chokes lowdest Injuries:
And skreens the faulty, making Blinds
To hide the most unworthy minds.
And yet do what thou can to hide
A bad trees fruit will be described.
For that foul guilt which first took place
In his dark heart, now damns his face:
And makes those Eyes, where life should dwell,
Look like the pits of Death and Hell.
Blood, whose rich purple shows and seals
Their faith in Moors, in him reveals
A blackness at the heart, and is
Turned Ink, to write his faithlesness.
Only his lips with blood look red,
As if ashamed of what they sed.
Then, since he wears in a dark skin
The shadows of his hell within,
Expose him no more to the light,
But thine own Epitaph thus write.
Here burst, and dead and unregarded
Lies Fida's heart! O well rewarded!
To the Editor of the matchless Orinda.
LOng since great wits have left the Stage
Unto the Drollers of the age,
And noble numbers with good sense
Are like good works, grown an offense.
While much of verfe. (worse than old story,)
Speaks but Jack-Pudding, or John-Dory.
Such trash-admirers made us poor,
And Pyes turned Poets out of door.
For the nice Spirit of rich verse
Which scorns absurd and low commerce,
Although a flame from heaven, if shed
On Rooks or Daws: warms no such head.
Or else the Poet, like bad priest,
Is seldom good, but when oppressed:
And wit, as well as piety
Does thrive best in adversity;
For since the thunder left our air
Their Laurels look not half so fair.
However it is 'twere worse than rude
Not to profess our gratitude
And debts to thee, who at so low
An Ebb do make us thus to flow:
And when we did a Famine fear,
Have blessed us with a fruitful year.
So while the world his absence mourns
The glorious Sun at last returns,
And with his kind and vital looks
Warms the cold Earth and frozen brooks:
Puts drowsy nature into play
And rids impediments away,
Till Flowers and Fruits and spices through
Her pregnant lap get up and grow.
But if among those sweet things, we
A miracle like that could see
Which nature brought but once to pass:
A Muse, such as Orinda was,
Phoebus himself won by these charms
Would give her up into thy arms;
And recondemn'd to kiss his Tree,
Yield the young Goddess unto thee.
Upon sudden news of the much lamented death of Judge Trevers.
LEarning and Law your Day is done,
And your work too; you may be gone!
Trever, that loved you, hence is fled:
And Right, which long lay Sick is dead.
Trever! whose rare and envied part
Was both a wise and winning heart,
Whose sweet civilitys could move
Tartars and Goths to noblest love.
Bold Vice and blindness now dare act,
And (like the gray groat,) pass, though cracked;
While those sage lips lie dumb and cold,
Whose words are well-weigh'd and tried gold.
O how much to descreet desires
Differs pure Light from foolish fires!
But nasty Dregs out last the Wine,
And after Sunset Gloworms shine.
To Etesia (for Timander,) the first Sight.
What smiling Star in that fair Night,
Which gave you Birth gave me this Sight.
And with a kind Aspect tho keen
Made me the Subject: you the Queen?
That sparkling Planet is got now
Into your Eyes, and shines below;
Where nearer force, and more acute
It does dispense, without dispute,
For I who yesterday did know
Loves fire no more, than does cool Snow
with one bright look am since undone;
Yet must adore and seek my Sun.
Before I walked free as the wind,
And if but stayed (like it,) unkind.
I could like daring Eagles gaze
And not be blinded by a face;
For what I saw, till I saw thee,
Was only not deformity.
Such shapes appear (compared with thine,)
In Arras, or a tavern-sign,
And do but mind me to explore
A fairer piece, that is in store,
So some hang Ivy to their Wine,
To signify, there is a Vine.
Those princely Flowers (by no storms vexed,)
Which smile one day, and droop the next:
The gallant Tulip and the Rose,
Emblems which some use to disclose
Bodyed Idea's: their weak grace
Is mere imposture to thy face.
For nature in all things, but thee,
Did practice only Sophistry;
Or else she made them to express
How she could vary in her dress:
But thou were formed, that we might see
Perfection, not Variety.
Have you observed how the Day Star
Sparkles and smiles and shines from far:
Then to the gazer does convey
A silent, but a piercing Ray?
So wounds my love, but that her Eyes
Are in Effects, the better Skys.
A brisk bright Agent from them Streams
Armed with no arrows, but their beams,
And with such stillness smites our hearts,
No noise betrays him, nor his darts.
He working on my easy Soul
Did soon persuade, and then control;
And now he flies (and I conspire)
Through all my blood with wings of fire,
And when I would (which will be never)
With cold despair allay the fever:
The spiteful thing Etesia names,
And that new-fuells all my flames.
The Character, to Etesia
GO catch the Phoenix, and then bring
A quill drawn for me from his wing.
Give me a Maiden-beautie's Blood,
A pure, rich Crimson, without mudd:
In whose sweet Blushes that may live,
Which a dull verse can never give.
Now for an untouched, spottles white,
For blackest things on paper write;
Etesia at thine own Expense
Give me the Robes of innocence.
Could we but see a Spring to run
Pure Milk, as sometimes Springs have done,
And in the Snow-white streams it sheds
Carnations wash their bloody heads.
While every Eddy that came down
Did (as thou do,) both smile and frown.
Such objects and so fresh would be
But dull Resemblances of thee.
Thou art the dark worlds Morning Star,
Seen only, and seen but from far;
Where like Astronomers we gaze
Upon the glories of thy face,
But no acquaintance more can have,
Though all our lives we watch and Crave.
Thou art a world thy self alone,
Yea three great worlds refined to one.
Which shows all those, and in thine Eyes
The shining East, and Paradise.
Thy Soul (a Spark of the first Fire,)
Is like the Sun, the worlds desire;
And with a nobler influence
Works upon all, that claim to sense;
But in (...) has no fever,
And in frosts is cheerful ever.
As Flowr's, besides their curious dress
Rich odours have, and (...).
Which tacitly infuse desire
And even oblige us to admire:
Such and so full of innocence
Are all the Charms, thou do dispense;
And like fair Nature, without Arts
At once they seize, and please our hearts.
O thou art such, that I could be
A lover to Idolatry!
I could, and should from heaven stray,
But that thy life shows mine the way,
And leave a while the Diety,
To serve his Image here in thee.
To Etesia looking from her Casement at the full Moon.
See you that beauteous Queen, which no age (...)?
Her Train is Azure, set with golden flames.
My brighter fair, fix on the East your Eyes,
And view that bed of Clouds, whence she does rise.
Above all others in that one short hour
Which most concerned in, she had greatest (...).
This made my Fortunes humorous as wind,
But fixed Affections to my constant mind.
She fed me with the tears of Stars, and thence
I sucked in Sorrows with their Influence.
To some in smiles, and store of light she broke:
To me in sad Eclipses still she spoke.
She bent me with the motion of her Sphere,
And made me feel, what first I did but fear.
But when I came to Age, and had o'regrown
Her Rules, and saw my freedom was my own,
I did reply unto the Laws of Fate,
And made my Reason, my great Advocate:
I labored to inherit my just right;
But then (O hear Etesia!) lest I might
Redeem my self, my unkind Starry Mother
Took my poor Heart, and gave it to another.
To Etesia parted from him, and looking back.
O Subtle Love! thy Peace is War;
It wounds and kills without a scar:
It works unknown to any sense,
Like the Decrees of Providence,
And with strange silence shoots me through:
The Fire of Love does fall like Snow.
Has she no Quiver, but my Heart?
Must all her Arrows hit that part?
Beauties like Heaven, their Gifts should deal
Not to destroy us, but to heal.
Strange Art of Love! that can make sound,
And yet exasperates the wound;
That look she lent to ease my heart,
Has pierced it, and improved the smart.
In Etesiam lachrymantem.
O Duicis luctus, risuque potentior omni!
Quem decorant lachrymis Sydera tanta suis.
Quam tacitae spirant aurae! vultusque nitentes
Contristant veneres, collachrymantque suae!
Ornat gutta genas, oculisque simillima gemma:
Et tepido vivas irrigat imbre rosas.
Dicite Chaldaei! quae me fortuna fatigat,
Cum formosa dies and sine nube peruit?
To Etesia going beyond Sea.
GO, if you must! but stay -- and know
And mind before you go, my vow.
To every thing, but Heaven and you,
With all my Heart, I bid Adieu!
Now to those happy Shades I Will go
Where first I saw my beauteous Foe.
I Will seek each silent path, where we
Did walk, and where you sat with me
I Will sit again, and never rest
Till I can find some flower you pressed.
That near my dying Heart I Will keep,
And when it wants Dew, I will weep:
Sadly I will repeat past Joys,
And Words, which you did sometimes voice:
I Will listen to the Woods, and hear
The Echo answer for you there.
But famished with long absence I
Like Infants left, at last shall cry,
And Tears (as they do Milk) will sup
Until you come, and take me up.
Etesia absent.
LOve, the Worlds Life! what a sad death
Thy absence is? to lose our breath
At once and dye, is but to live
Enlarged, without the scant reprieve
Of Pulse and Air: whose dull returns
And narrow Circles the Soul mourns.
But to be dead alive, and still
To wish, but never have our will:
To be possessed, and yet to miss;
To wed a true but absent bliss:
Are lingering tortures, and their smart
Dissects and racks and grinds the Heart!
As Soul and Body in that state
Which unto us seems separate,
Cannot be said to live, until
Reunion; which days fulfill
And slow-paced seasons: So in vain
Through hours and minutes (Times long train,)
I look for thee, and from thy sight,
As from my Soul, for life and light.
For till thine Eyes shine (...) me,
Mine are fast-clos'd and will not see.
Translations. Some Odes of the Excellent and Knowing Severinus, Englished.
Metrum 12. Lib. 3.
HAppy is he, that with fixed Eyes
The Fountain of all goodness spies!
Happy is he, that can break through
Those Bonds, which tie him here below!
The Thracian Poet long ago
King Orpheus, full of tears and woe
Did for his loved (...)
In such sad Numbers mourn, that he
Made the Trees run in to his (...),
And Streams stand still to hear him (...).
The Does came fearless in one throng
With Lions to his mournful Song,
And charmed by the harmonious sound
The Hare stayed by the quiet (...)
But when Love heightened by (...)
And deep reflections on his Fair
Had swelled his Heart, and made it (...)
And run in Tears out at his Eyes:
And those sweet (...), which did appease
Wild Beasts, could give their Lord no (...);
Then vexed, that so much grief and Love
Moved not at all the gods above,
With desperate thoughts and bold intent,
Toward the Shades below he went;
For thither his fair Love was fled,
And he must have her from the dead.
There in such Lines, as did well suit
With sad Aires and a Lovers Lute,
And in the richest Language dressed
That could be thought on, or expressed.
Did he complain, whatever Grief,
Or Art, or Love (which is the chief,
And all innobles,) could lay out;
In well-tuned woes he dealt about.
And humbly bowing to the Prince
Of Ghosts, begged some Intelligence
Of his Euridice, and where
His beauteous Saint resided there.
Then to his Lutes instructed groans
He sighed out new melodious mones;
And in a melting charming strain
Begged his dear Love to life again.
The Music flowing through the shade
And darkness, did with ease invade
The silent and attentive Ghosts;
And Cerberus, which guards those coasts
With his loud barkings, overcome
By the sweet Notes, was now struck dumb.
The Furies, used to rave and howl
And prosecute each guilty Soul,
Had lost their rage, and in a deep
Transport did most profusely weep.
Ixion's wheel stopped, and the cursed
Tantalus almost killed with thirst,
Though the Streams now did make no haste,
But waited for him, none would taste.
That Vultur, which fed still upon
Tityus his liver, now was gone
To feed on Air, and would not stay
Though almost farnish'd, with her prey.
Won with these wonders, their fierce Prince
At last cried out, We yield! and since
Thy merits claim no less, take hence
Thy Consort for thy Recompense.
But, Orpheus, to this law we bind
Our grant, you must not look behind,
Nor of your fair Love have one Sight,
Till out of our Dominions quite.
Alas! what laws can Lovers awe?
Love is it self the greatest Law!
Or who can such hard bondage brook
To be in Love, and not to Look?
Poor Orpheus almost in the light
Lost his dear Love for one short fight;
And by those Eyes, which Love did guide,
What he most loved unkindly dyed!
This tale of (...) and his Love
Was meant for you, who ever move
Upwards, and tend into that light,
Which is not seen by mortal fight.
For if, while you strive to ascend,
You droop, and toward Earth once bend
Your seduced Eyes, down you will fall
Even while you look, and forfeit all.
Metrum 2. Lib. 3.
WHat fixed Affections, and loved Laws
(which are the hid, magnetic Cause;
Wise Nature governs with, and by
What fast, inviolable tie
The whole Creation to her ends
For ever provident she bends:
All this I purpose to rehearse
In the sweet Airs of solemn Verse.
Although the Lybian Lions should
Be bound with chains of purest Gold,
And duly fed, were taught to know
Their keepers voice, and fear his blow:
Yet, if they chance to taste of blood,
Their rage which slept, stirred by that food
In furious roarings will awake,
And fiercely for their freedom make.
No chains, nor bars their fury brooks,
But with enraged and bloody looks
They will break through, and dulled with fear
Their keeper all to pieces tear.
The Bird, which on the Woods tall boughs
Sings sweetly, if you Cage or house,
And out of kindest care should think
To give her honey with her drink,
And get her store of pleasant meat,
Even such as she delights to Eat:
Yet, if from her close prison she
The shady-groves does chance to see,
Straitway she loathes her pleasant food
And with sad looks longs for the Wood.
The wood, the wood alone she loves!
And toward it she looks and moves:
And in sweet notes (though distant from,)
Sings to her first and happy home!
That Plant, which of it self does grow
Upwards, if forced, will downwards bow;
But give it freedom, and it will
Get up, and grow erectly still.
The Sun, which by his prone descent
Seems westward in the Evening bent,
Does nightly by an unseen way
Haste to the East, and bring up day.
Thus all things long for their first State,
And gladly (...) return, though late.
Nor is there here to any thing
A Course allowed, but in a Ring;
Which, where it first began, must end:
And to that Point directly tend.
Metrum 6 Lib. 4.
WHo would unclouded see the Laws
Of the supreme, eternal Cause,
(...) him with careful thoughts and eyes
Observe the high and spacious Skies.
There in one league of Love the Stars
Keep their old peace, and show our wars.
The Sun, though flaming still and hot,
The cold, pale Moon annoyeth not.
Arcturus with his Sons (though they
See other stars go a far way,
And out of sight,) yet still are found
Near the North Pole, their noted bound.
Bright Hesper (at set times) delights
To usher in the dusky nights:
And in the East again attends
To warn us, when the day ascends,
So alternate Love supplys
Eternal Courses still, and vies
Mutual kindness; that no Jars
Nor discord can disturb the Stars.
The same sweet Concord here below
Makes the fierce Elements to flow
And Circle without quarrel still,
Though tempered diversely; thus will
The Hot assist the Cold: the Dry
Is a friend to Humidity.
And by the Law of kindness they
The like relief to them repay.
The fire, which active is and bright,
Tends upward, and from thence gives light.
The Earth allows it all that space
And makes choice of the lower place;
For things of weight have to the Center
A fall to them is no adventure.
From these kind turns and Circulation
Seasons proceed and Generation.
This makes the Spring to yield us flowers,
And melts the Clouds to gentle showers.
The Summer thus matures all seeds
And ripens both the Corn and weeds.
This brings on Autumn, which recruits
Our old, spent store with new fresh fruits.
And the cold Winters (...) Season
Has snow and (...) for the same reason.
This temper and wise mixture breed
And bring forth every living seed.
And when their strength and substance spend
(For while they live, they drive and tend
Still to a change,) it takes them hence
And shifts their dress; and to our sense
Their Course is over, as their birth:
And hid from us, they turn to Earth.
But all this while the Prince of life
Sits without loss, or change, or strife:
Holding the Rains, by which all move;
(And those his wisdom, power, Love
And Justice are;) And still what he
The first life bids, that needs must be,
And live on for a time; that done
He calls it back, merely to shun
The mischief, which his creature might
Run into by a further flight.
For if this dear and tender sense
Of his preventing providence
Did not restrain and call things back:
Both heaven and earth (...) go to wrack.
And from their great preserver part,
As blood let out forsakes the Heart
And perishes; but what returns
With fresh and Brighter spirits burns.
This is the Cause why every living
Creature affects an endless being.
A grain of this bright love each thing
Had given at first by their great King;
And still they creep (drawn on by this:)
And look back toward their first bliss.
For otherwise, it is most sure,
Nothing that lives could endure:
Unless it is Love turned retrograde
Sought that first life, which all things made.
Metrum 3. Lib. 4.
IF old tradition has not failed,
Ulysses, when from Troy he sailed,
Was by a tempest forced to land
Where beauteous Circe did command.
Circe, the daughter of the Sun,
Which had with Charms and Herbs undone
Many poor strangers, and could then
Turn into Beasts, the bravest Men.
Such Magic in her potions lay
That whosoever past that way
And drank, his shape was quickly lost;
Some into Swine she turned, but most
To Lions armed with teeth and claws;
Others like Wolves, with open Jaws
Did howl; But some (more savage) took
The Tiger's dreadful shape and look.
But wise Ulysses by the Aid
Of Hermes, had to him conveyed
A Flower, whose virtue did suppress
The force of charms, and their success.
While his Mates drank so deep, that they
Were turned to Swine, which fed all day
On Mast, and humane food had left;
Of shape and voice at once bereft.
Only the Mind (above all charms,)
Unchanged, did mourn those monstrous harms.
O worthless herbs, and weaker Arts
To change their Limbs, but not their Hearts!
Man's life and vigor keep within,
Lodged in the Center, not the Skin.
Those piercing charms and poisons, which
His inward parts taint and bewitch,
More fatal are, than such, which can
Outwardly only spoil the man.
Those change his shape and make it foul;
But these deform and kill his soul.
Metrum 6. Lib. 3.
ALL sorts of men, that live on Earth,
Have one beginning and one birth.
For all things there is one Father,
Who lays out all, and all does gather.
He the warm Sun with rays adorns,
And fills with brightness the Moon' s horns.
The azur'd heavens with stars he burnished
And the round world with creatures furnished.
But Men (made to inherit all,)
His own Sons he was pleased to call,
And that they might be so indeed,
He gave them Souls of divine seed.
A noble Offspring surely then
Without distinction, are all men.
O why so vainly do some boast
Their Birth and Blood, and a great Host
Of Ancestors, whose Coats and Crests
Are some ravenous Birds or Beasts!
If Extraction they look for
And God, the great Progenitor:
No man, though of the meanest state
Is base, or can degenerate;
Unless to Vice and lewdness bent
He leaves and taints his true descent.
The old man of Verona out of Claudian.
Faelix, qui propriis aevum transegit in arvis, Una domus puerum etc.
MOst happy man! who in his own sweet fields
Spent all his time, to whom one Cottage yields
In age and youth a lodging: who grown old
Walks with his staff on the same soil and mold
Where he did creep an insant, and can tell
Many fair years spent in one quiet Cell!
No toils of fate made him from home far known,
Nor foreign waters drank, driven from his own.
No loss by Sea, no wild lands wastful war
Vexed him; not the bribed Coil of growns at bar,
Exempt from cares, in Cities never seen
The fresh field-air he loves, and rural green.
The years set turns by fruits, not Consuls knows;
Autumn by apples: May by blossomed houghs.
Within one hedge his Sun does set and rise,
The world's wide day his short Demeasnes comprise.
Where he observes some known, concrescent twig
Now grown an Oak, and old, like him, and big.
Verona he does for the Indies take,
And as the red Sea counts Benacus lake.
Yet are his limbs and strength untir'd, and he
A (...) Grandsire three descents does see.
Travel and sail who will, search sea, or shore;
This man has lived, and that has wandered more.
The Sphere of Archimedes out of Claudian.
Jupiter in parvo cum cerneret (...) vitro Risit, and ad superos etc.
WHen Jove a heaven of small glass did behold,
He smiled, and to the Gods these words he told.
Comes then the power of man's Art to this?
In a frail Orb my work new acted is.
The poles decrees, the fate of things: God's laws
Down by his Art old Archimedes draws.
Spirits enclosed the several Stars attend,
And orderly the living work they bend.
A feigned Zodiac measures out the year,
Every new month a false Moon does appear.
And now bold industry is proud, it can
Wheel round its world, and rule the Stars by man.
Why at Salmoneus thunder do I stand?
Nature is rivall'd by a single hand.
The Phoenix out of Claudian.
Oceani summo (...) aequore lucus Trans Indos, Eurumque viret etc,
A grove there grows round with the Sea confined
Beyond the Indies, and the Eastern wind.
Which, as the Sun breaks forth in his first beam,
Salutes his steeds, and hears him whip his team.
When with his dewy Coach the Eastern Bay
Crackles, whence blusheth the approaching day;
And blasted with his burnished wheels, the night
In a pale dress does vanish from the light.
This the blessed Phoenix Empire is, here he
Alone exempted from mortality,
Enjoys a land, where no diseases reign;
And never afflicted, like our world, with pain.
A Bird most equal to the Gods, which vies
For length of life and durance, with the skies;
And with renewed limbs tires every age,
His appetite he never does assuage
With common food. Nor does he use to drink
When thirsty, on some River's muddy brink.
A purer, vital heat shot from the Sun
Does nourish him, and airy sweets that come
From Tethis lap, he tastes at his need;
On such abstracted Diet does he feed.
A secret Light there streams from both his Eyes
A fiery (...) about his cheeks does rise.
His Crest grows up into a glorious Star
Given to adorn his head, and shines so far.
That piercing through the bosom of the night
It rends the darkness with a gladsome light.
His thighs like Tyrian scarlet, and his wings
(More swift than Winds are,) have skie-colour'd rings
Flowery and rich: and round about enrolled
Their utmost borders glister all with gold.
He Is not conceived, nor springs he from the Earth,
But is himself the Parent, and the birth.
None him begets; his fruitful death reprieves
Old age, and by his funerals he lives.
For when the tedious Summer's gone about
A thousand times: so many Winters out,
So many Springs: and May does still restore
Those leaves, which Autumn had blown off before;
Then pressed with years his vigor does decline
Foiled with the number; as a stately Pine
Tired out with storms, bends from the top and height
Of Causacus, and falls with its own weight:
Whose part is torn with daily blasts, with Rain
Part is consumed, and part with Age again.
So now his Eyes grown dusky, fail to see
Far off, and drops of colder rheums there be
Fallen slow and dreggy from them; such in sight
The cloudy Moon is, having spent her light.
And now his wings, which used to contend
With Tempests, scarce from the low Earth ascend.
He knows his time is out! and does provide
New principles of life; herbs he brings dried
From the hot hills, and with rich spices frames
A Pile shall burn, and Hatch him with its flames.
On this the weakling sits; salutes the Sun
With pleasant noise, and prays and begs for some
Of his own fire, that quickly may restore
The youth and vigor, which he had before.
Whom soon as Phoebus spies, stopping his rayns,
He makes a stand and thus allayes his pains.
O thou that buriest old age in thy grave,
And art by seeming funerals to have
A new return of life! whose custom it is
To rise by ruin, and by death to miss
Even death it self: a new beginning take,
And that thy withered body now forsake!
Better thy self by this thy change! This sed,
He shakes his locks, and from his golden head
Shoots one bright beam, which smites with vital fire
The willing bird; to burn is his desire,
That he may live again: he is proud in death,
And goes in haste to gain a better breath.
The spicie heap (...) with celestial rays
Does burn the aged Phoenix, when strait stays
The Chariot of the amazed Moon; the pole
Resists the wheeling, swift Orbs, and the whole
Fabric of Nature at a stand remains,
Till the old bird a new, young being gains.
All stop and charge the faithful flames, that they
Suffer not nature's glory to decay.
By this time, life which in the ashes lurks
Has framed the Heart, and taught new blood new works;
The whole heap stirs, and every part assumes
Due vigor; the Embers too are turned to plumes.
The parent in the Issue now revives,
But young and brisk; the bounds of both these lives
With very little space between the same,
Were parted only by the middle flame.
To Nilus strait he goes to consecrate
His parents ghost; his mind is to translate
His dust to Egypt. Now he hastes away
Into a distant land, and does convey
The ashes in a turf. Birds do attend
His Journey without number, and defend
His pious flight like to a guard; the sky
Is clouded with the Army, as they fly.
Nor is there one of all those thousands dares
Affront his leader: they with solomn cares
Attend the progress of their youthful king;
Not the rude hawk, nor the Eagle that does bring
Arms up to Jove, fight now; lest they displease;
The miracle enacts a common peace.
So does the Parthian lead from Tigris side
His barbarous troops, full of a lavish pride
In pearls and habit, he adorns his head
With royal tires: his steed with gold is lead.
His robes, for which the scarlet fish is sought,
With rare Assyrian needle work are wrought.
And proudly reigning over his (...) bands,
He raves and triumphs in his large Commands.
A City of Egypt famous in all lands
For rites, adores the Sun, his temple stands
There on a hundred pillars by account
Dig'd from the quarries of the Theban mount.
Here, as the Custom did require (they say,)
His happy parents dust down he does lay;
Then to the Image of his Lord he bends
And to the flames his burden strait commends.
Unto the Altars thus he destinates
His own Remains: the light does gild the gates;
Perfumes divine the Censers up do send:
While the Indian odor does it self extend
To the Pelusian fens, and fills all
The men it meets with the sweet storm. A gale
To which compared, Nectar it self is vile:
Fills the seav'n channels of the misty Nile.
O happy bird! sole heir to thy own dust!
Death, to whose force all other (...) must
Submit, saves thee. Thy ashes make thee rise;
It Is not thy nature, but (...) age that dies.
Thou have seen All! and to the times that run
Thou art as great a witness, as the Sun.
Thou saw the deluge, when the sea outvied
The land, and drowned the mountains with the tide.
What year the straggling Phaeton did fire
The world, thou know. And no plagues can conspire
Against thy life; alone thou do arise
Above mortality; the Destinies
Spin not thy days out with their fatal Clue;
They have no Law, to which thy life is due.
Pious thoughts and Ejaculations.
To his Books.
BRight books! the perspectives to our weak sights:
The clear projections of discerning lights.
Burning and shining Thoughts; man's posthume day:
The track of fled souls, and their Milkie-way.
The dead alive and busy, the still voice
Of enlarged Spirits, kind heavens white Decoys.
Who lives with you, lives like those knowing flowers,
Which in commerce with light, spend all their hours:
Which shut to Clouds, and shadows nicely shun;
But with glad haste unveil to kiss the Sun.
Beneath you all is dark and a dead night;
Which whosoever lives in, wants both health and sight.
By sucking you, the wise (like Bees) do grow
Healing and rich, though this they do most slow:
Because most choicely, for as great a store
Have we of Books, as Bees of herbs, or more.
And the great task to try, then know the good:
To discern weeds, and Judge of wholesome Food.
Is a rare, scant performance; for Man dies
Often e're it is done, while the be feeds and flies.
But you were all choice Flowers, all set and dressed
By old, sage florists, who well knew the best.
And I amidst you all am turned a weed!
Not wanting knowledge, but for want of heed.
Then thank thy self wild fool, that would not be
Content to know -- what was to much for thee!
Looking back.
FAir, shining Mountains of my pilgrimage,
And flowery Vales, whose flowers were stars:
The days and nights of my first, happy age;
An age without distaste and wars:
When I by thoughts ascend your Sunny heads,
And mind those sacred, midnight Lights:
By which I walked, when curtain'd Rooms and Beds
Confined, or sealed up others sights:
O then how bright
And quick a light
Does brush my heart and scatter night;
Chasing that shade
Which my sins made;
While I so spring, as if I could not fade!
How brave a prospect is a bright Backside!
Where flowers and palms refresh the Eye:
And days well spent like the glad East abide,
Whose morning-glories cannot dye!
The Shower.
WAters (...) eternal Springs!
The dew, that (...) the Doves wings!
O welcome, welcome to the sad:
Give dry dust drink; drink that makes glad!
Many fair (...), many Flowr's
Sweetened with rich and gentle showers
Have I enjoyed, and down have run
Many a fine and shining Sun;
But never till this happy hour
Was blessed with such an Evening-shower!
Discipline.
FAir prince of life, lights living well!
Who have the keys of death and hell!
If the mule man despise thy day,
Put chains of darkness in his way.
Teach him how deep, how various are
The Councels of thy love and care.
When Acts of grace and a long peace
Breed but rebellion and displease;
Then give him his own way and will,
Where lawless he may run until
His own choice hurts him, and the sting
Of his (...) sins full sorrows bring.
(...) Heaven and Angels, hopes and mirth
Please not the mole so much as, Earth:
Give him his Mine to dig, or dwell;
And one sad Scheme of hideous hell.
The Eclipse.
WHither, O whither did thou fly
When I did grieve thine holy Eye?
When thou did mourn to see me lost,
And all thy Care and Councels crossed.
O do not grieve where ever thou art!
Thy grief is an undoing smart.
Which does not only pain, but break
My heart, and makes me blush to speak.
Thy anger I could kiss, and will:
But (O!) thy grief, thy grief does kill.
Affliction.
O Come, and welcome! Come, refine;
For Moors if washed by thee, will shine.
Man blossoms at thy touch; and he
When thou draw'st blood, is thy Rose-tree.
Crosses make strait his crooked ways,
And Clouds but cool his dog star days.
Diseases too, when by thee blessed,
Are both restoratives and rest.
Flowers that in Sun-shines riot still,
Dye scorched and sapless; though storms kill.
The fall is fair even to desire,
Where in their sweetness all expire.
O come, pour on! what calms can be
So fair as storms, that appease thee?
Retirement.
FResh fields and woods! the Earth's fair face,
God's footstool, and man's dewlling place.
I ask not why the first Believer
Did love to be a Country liver?
Who to secure pious content
Did pitch by groves and wells his tent;
Where he might view the boundless sky,
And all those glorious lights on high:
With flying meteors, mists and showers,
Subjected hills, trees, meads and Flowers:
And every minute bless the King
And wise Creator of each thing.
I ask not why he did remove
To happy Mamre's holy grove,
Leaving the Citie's of the (...)
To Lot and his successless train?
All various Lusts in Cities still
Are found; they are the Thrones of Ill.
The dismal Sinks, where blood is spilled,
Cages with much uncleanness filled.
But rural shades are the sweet fense
Of piety and innocence.
They are the Meek's calm region, where
Angels descend, and rule the sphere:
Where heaven lies Leiguer, and the Dove
Duly as Dew, comes from above.
If Eden be on Earth at all,
It Is that, which we the Country call.
The Revival.
UNfold, unfold! take in his light,
Who makes thy Cares more short than night.
The Joys, which with his Day Star rise,
He deals to all, but drowsy Eyes:
And what the men of this world miss,
Some drops and dews of future bliss.
Hark! how his winds have changed their note,
And with warm whispers call thee out.
The frosts are past, the storms are gone:
And backward life at last comes on.
The lofty groves in express Joys
Reply unto the Turtles voice,
And here in dust and dirt, O here
The Lilies of his love appear!
The Dayspring.
EArly while yet the dark was gay,
And gilt with stars, more trim than day:
Heavens Lily, and the Earth's chaste Rose: S. Mark c. 1. v. 35.

The green, immortal BRANCH arose; S. Mark c. 1. v. 35.

And in a solitary place
Bowed to his father his blessed face.
If this calm season pleased my Prince,
Whose fullness no need could evince,
Why should not I poor, filly sheep
His hours, as well as practice keep?
Not that his hand is tied to these,
From whom time holds his transient Lease:
But mornings, new Creations are,
When men all night saved by his Care,
Are still reviv d; and well he may
Expect them grateful with the day.
So for that first drawght of his hand,
Which finished heaven and sea and land, Job. c. 38. v. 7.

The Sons of God their thanks did bring, Job. c. 38. v. 7.

And all the Morning-stars did sing. Job. c. 38. v. 7.

Besides, as his part heretofore
The firstlings were of all, that bore:
So now each day from all he saves,
Their Soul's first thoughts and fruits he craves.
This makes him daily shed and shower
His graces at this early hour;
Which both his Care and Kindness show,
Chearing the good: quickening the slow.
As holy friends mourn at delay,
And think each minute an hour's stay:
So his divine and loving Dove
With longing throws does heave and move,
And soar about us, while we sleep:
Sometimes quite through that lock does peep,
And shine; but always without fail
Before the slow Sun can unveile,
In new Compassions breaks like light,
And Morning-looks, which scatter night.
And will thou let thy creature be
When thou have watched, asleep to thee?
Why to unwellcome, loathed surprises
Do leave him, having left his vices?
Since these, if suffered, may again
Lead back the living, to the (...).
O change this Scourge! or, if as yet
None less will my transgressions fit:
Dissolve, dissolve! death cannot do
What I would not submit unto.
The Recovery.
FAir Vessel of our daily light, whose proud
And previous glories gild that blushing Cloud:
Whose lively fires in swift projections glance
From hill to hill, and by refracted chance
Burnish some neighbour-rock, or tree, and then
Fly off in coy and winged flams again:
If thou this day
Hold on thy way,
Know, I have got a greater light than thine;
A light, whose shade and back-parts make thee shine.
Then get thee down: then get thee down;
I have a Sun now of my own.
II.
Those nicer livers, who without thy Rays
Stir not abroad, those may thy luster praise: (know!)
And wanting light ( light, which no wants does
To thee (weak shiner!) like blind Persians bow;
But where that Sun, which tramples on thy head,
From his own bright, eternal Eye does shed
One living Ray,
There thy dead day
Is needless, and man to a light made free,
Which shows what thou can neither show, nor see.
Then get thee down, Then get thee down;
I have a Sun now of my own.
The Nativity.
Written in the year 1656.
PEace? and to all the world? sure, one
And he the prince of peace, has none.
He travels to be born, and then
Is born to travel more again.
Poor (...)! thou can not be
The place for his Nativity.
His restless mother's called away,
And not delivered, till she pay.
A Tax? it is so still! we can see
The Church thrive in her misery;
And like her head at Bethlem, rise
When she oppressed with troubles, lies.
Rise? should all fall, we cannot be
In more extremities than he.
Great Type of passions! come what will,
Thy grief exceeds all copies still.
Thou came from heaven to earth, that we
Might go from Earth to Heaven with thee.
And though thou found st no welcome here,
Thou did provide us mansions there.
A stable was thy Court, and when
Men turned to beasts; Beasts would be Men.
They were thy Courtiers, others none;
And their poor Manger was thy Throne.
No swaddling silks thy Limbs did fold,
Though thou could turn thy (...) to gold.
No Rockers waited on thy birth,
No Cradles stirred: nor songs of mirth;
But her chaste Lap and sacred Breast
Which lodged thee first, did give thee rest.
But stay: what light is that does stream,
And drop here in a gilded beam?
It is thy Star runs page, and brings
Thy tributary Eastern Kings.
Lord! grant some Light to us, that we
May with them find the way to thee.
Behold what mists eclipse the day:
How dark it is! shed down one Ray
To guide us out of this sad night,
And say once more, Let there be Light.
The true Christmas.
SO stick up Ivy and the Bays,
And then restore the heathen ways.
Green will remind you of the spring,
Though this great day denies the thing.
And mortifies the Earth and all
But your wild Revels, and loose Hall.
Could you wear Flowers, and Roses strew
Blushing upon your breasts warm Snow,
That very dress your lightness will
Rebuke, and wither at the Ill.
The brightness of this day we owe
Not unto Music, Masque nor Show:
Nor gallant furniture, nor Plate;
But to the Manger's mean Estate.
His life while here, as well as birth,
Was but a cheek to pomp and mirth;
And all man's greatness you may see
Condemned by his humility.
Then leave your open house and noise,
To welcome him with holy Joys,
And the poor Shepherd's watchfulness:
Whom light and hymns from Heaven did bless.
What you abound with, cast abroad
To those that want, and ease your load.
Who empties thus, will bring more in;
But riot is both loss and Sin.
Dress finely what comes not in sight,
And then you keep your Christmas right.
The Request.
O Thou! who did deny to me
This world's adored felicity,
And every big, imperious lust,
Which fools admire in sinful Dust;
With those (...), subtle twists, that tie
Their bundles of foul gallantry:
Keep still my weak Eyes from the shine
Of those gay things, which are not thine,
And shut my Ears against the noise
Of wicked, though applauded Joys.
For thou in any land have store
Of shades and Coverts for thy poor,
Where from the busy dust and heat,
As well as storms, they may retreat.
A Rock, or Bush are douny beds,
When thou art there crowning their heads
With secret blessings: or a Tire
Made of the Comforter's live-fire.
And when thy goodness in the dress
Of anger, will not seem to bless:
Yet do thou give them that rich Rain,
Which as it drops, clears all again.
O what kind Visits daily pass
'Twixt thy great self and such poor grass,
With what sweet looks does thy love shine
On those low Violets of thine!
While the tall Tulip is accursed,
And Crowns Imperial dye with thirst.
O give me still those secret meals,
Those rare Repasts, which thy love deals!
Give me that Joy, which none can grieve,
And which in all griefs does relieve.
This is the portion thy Child begs,
Not that of rust, and rags and dregs.
Jordanis
QUid celebras auratam undam, Et combusta pyropis
Flumina, vel Medio quae scrit aethra salo?
Aeternum refluis si pernoctaret in undis
Phoebus, and incertam sydera suda Tethyn
Si colerent, tantae gemmae! nil caerula librem:
Sorderet rubro in littore dives Eos.
Pactoli mea lympha macras ditabit arenas,
Atque Universum gutta minuta Tagum.
O charum caput! O cincinnos unda beatos
Libata! O domini balnea Sancta mei!
Quod fortunatum voluit spectare Canalem,
Hoc erat in lauds area parva tuas.
Jordanis in medio perfusus flumine lavit,
Divinoque tuas ore beavit aquas.
Ah! Solyma infoelix rivis obsessa prophanis!
Amisit Genium porta Bethesda suum.
Hic Orientis aquae currunt, and apostata Parphar,
Atque Abana immundo turbidus amne fluit.
Ethnica te totam cum faedavere fluenta,
Mansit Christicola Jordanis unus aqua.
Servilii Fatum, five Vindicta divina.
ET sic in cythara, sic in dulcedine vitae
Et facti and luctus regnat amarities.
Quam subito in fastum extensos atque effera (...)
Ultrici oppressit vilis arena sinu!
Si violae, spiransque crocus: si lilium (...)
Non nisi Justorum nascitur e cinere:
Spinarum, tribulique atque infoelicis avenae
Quantus in hoc tumulo and qualis acervus erit?
Dii superi! damnosa piis sub sydera longum
Mansuris stabilem conciliate fidem!
Sic olim in coelum post nimbos clarius ibunt,
Supremo occidui tot velut astra die.
Quippe ruunt horae, qualisque in Corpore vixit,
Talis it in tenebras bis moriturus homo.
De Salmone. Ad virum optimum, and sibi familiarius notum: D. Thomam Poellum
Cantrevensem: S. S. Theologiae Doctorem.
ACcipe praerapido Salmonem in gurgite captum,
Ex imo in summas cum penetrasset aquas.
Mentitae culicis quem forma elusit inanis:
Picta coloratis plumea musea notis.
Dum captat, capitur; vorat inscius, ipse vorandus;
Fitque cibi raptor grata rapina mali.
Alma quies! miserae merces ditissima vitae,
Quam tuto in tacitis hic (...) aquis!
Qui dum spumosi fremitus and murmura rivi
Quaeritat, hamato fit cita praeda cibo.
Quam grave magnarum specimen dant ludicra rerum?
Gurges est mundus: Salmo, homo: pluma, dolus.
The World.
CAn any tell me what it is? can you,
That wind your thoughts into a Clue
To guide out others, while your selves stay in,
And hug the Sin?
I, who so long have in it lived, That if I might,
In truth I would not be repriev d: Have neither sight,
Nor sense that knows
These Ebbs and Flows.
But since of all, all may be said,
And likelines does but upbraid.
And mock the Truth, which still is lost
In fine Conceits, like streams in a sharp frost:
I will not strive, nor the Rule break
Which does give Loosers leave to speak.
Then false and foul World, and unknown
Even to thy own:
Here I renounce thee, and resign
Whatever thou can say, is thine.
Thou art not Truth; for he that tries
Shall find thee all deceit and lies.
Thou art not friendship; for in thee
It Is but the bait of policy.
Which, like a Viper lodged in (...),
Its venom through that sweetness pours.
And when not so, then always it is
A fadeing paint; the short-lived bliss
Of air and Humor: out and in
Like Colors in a Dolphin's skin.
But must not live beyond one day,
Or Convenience; then away.
Thou art not Riches; for that Trash
Which one age hoords, the next does wash
And so severely sweep away;
That few remember, where it lay.
So rapid streams the wealthy land
About them, have at their command:
And shifting channels here restore,
There break down, what they bank'd before.
Thou art not Honor; for those gay
Feathers will wear, and drop away;
And princes to some upstart line
Give new ones, that are full as fine.
Thou art not pleasure; for thy Rose
Upon a thorn does still repose;
Which if not cropped, will quickly shed;
But soon as cropped, grows dull and dead.
Thou art the sand, which fills one glass,
And then does to another pass;
And could I put thee to a stay,
Thou art but dust! then go thy way,
And leave me clean and bright, though poor;
Who stops thee, does but dawb his floor,
And Swallow-like, when he has done,
To unknown dwellings must be gone!
Welcome pure thoughts and peaceful hours
Enriched with Sunshine and with showers;
Welcome fair hopes and holy Cares,
The not to be repented shares
Of time and business: the sure rode
Unto my last and loved Abode! O supreme Bliss!

The Circle, Center and Abyss
Of blessings, never let me miss
Nor leave that Path, which leads to thee:
Who art alone all things to me!
I hear, I see all the long day
The noise and pomp of the broad way;
I note their Course and proud approaches:
Their silks, perfumes and glittering Coaches.
But in the narrow way to thee
I observe only poverty.
And despised things: and all along
The ragged, mean and humble throng
Are still on foot, and as they go,
They sigh and say; Their Lord went so!
Give me my staff then, as it stood
When green and growing in the Wood.
(Those stones, which for the Altar served,
Might not be smoothed, nor finely carved:)
With this poor stick I Will pass the Foord
As Jacob did; and thy dear word.
As thou have dressed it: not as Wit
And depraved tastes have poisoned it:
Shall in the passage be my meat,
And none else will thy Servant eat.
Thus, thus and in no other sort
Will I set forth, though laughed at for it;
And leaving the wife World their way,
Go through; though Judged to go astray.
The Be.
FRom fruitful beds and flowery borders
Parcell'd to wastful Ranks and Orders.
Where state grasps more than plain Truth needs
And wholesome Herbs are starved by Weeds:
To the wild Woods I will be gone,
And the course Meals of great Saint John.
When truth and piety are mist
Both in the Rulers and the Priest;
When pity is not cold, but dead,
And the rich eat the Poor like bread;
While factious heads with open Coile
And force first make, then share the spoil:
To Horeb then Elias goes,
And in the Desert grows the Rose.
Hail Crystal Fountains and fresh shades,
Where no proud look invades.
No busy worldling hunts away
The sad Retirer all the day:
Hail happy harmless solitude,
Our Sanctuary from the rude
And scornful world: the calm recess
Of faith, and hope and holiness!
Here something still like Eden looks,
Honey in Woods, Julips in Brooks:
And Flowers, whose rich, unrifled Sweets
With a chaste kiss the cool dew greets.
When the toyls of the Day are done
And the tired world sets with the Sun,
Here flying winds and flowing Wells
Are the wise, watchful Hermits Bells;
Their buisie murmurs all the night
To praise or prayer do invite,
And with an awful sound arrest
And piously employ his breast.
When in the East the Dawn does blush,
Here cool, fresh Spirits the air brush;
Herbs (strait) get up, Flowers peep and spread:
Trees whisper praise, and bow the head.
Birds from the shades of night releast
Look round about, then quit the neast,
And with united gladness (...)
The glory of the morning's King.
The Hermit hears, and with meek voice
Offers his own up, and their Joys:
Then prays, that all the world may be
Blessed with as sweet an unity.
If sudden storms the day invade,
They flock about him to the shade:
Where wisely they expect the end,
Giving the tempest time to spend;
And hard by shelters on some bough
Hilarion's servant, the sage Crow.
O purer years of light, and grace!
The difference is great, as the space
'Twixt you and us: who blindly run
After false-fires, and leave the Sun.
Is not fair Nature of her self
Much richer than dull paint, or pelf?
And are not streams at the Springhead
More sweet than in carved Stone, or Lead?
But fancy and some Artist's tools
Frame a Religion for fools.
The truth, which once was plainly taught,
With thorns and briars now is fraught.
Some part is with bold Fables spotted,
Some by strange Comments wildly blotted:
And discord (old Corruption's Crest,)
With blood and blame has stained the rest.
So Snow, which in its first descents
A whiteness, like pure heaven presents,
When touched by Man is quickly soiled
And after trodden down, and spoiled:
O lead me, where I may be free
In truth and Spirit to serve thee!
Where undisturbed I may converse
With thy great self, and there rehearse
Thy gifts with thanks, and from thy store
Who art all blessings, beg much more!
Give me the Wisdom of the Be,
And her unwearied Industry:
That from the wild Gourds of these days
I may extract Health and thy praise;
Who can turn darkness into light,
And in my weakness show thy might!
Suffer me not in any want
To seek refreshment from a Plant
Thou did not set! since all must be
Plucked up, whose growth is not from thee.
It Is not the garden and the Bowrs,
Nor fense and forms that give to (...)
Their wholsomness: but thy good will,
Which truth and pureness purchase still.
Then since corrupt man has driven hence
Thy kind and saving Influence,
And Balm is no more to be had
In all the Coasts of Gilead:
Go with me to the shade and cell,
Where thy best Servants once did dwell.
There let me know thy Will, and see
Exiled Religion owned by thee.
For thou can turn dark Grots to Halls,
And make Hills blossom like the vales:
Decking their untilled heads with flowers
And fresh delights for all sad hours:
Till from them, like (...) Be,
I may fly home, and hive with thee.
To Christian Religion.
Farewell thou true and tried Refection
Of the still poor and meek Election!
Farewell Souls Joy, the quickening health
Of Spirits, and their secret wealth!
Farewell my Morning Star, the bright
And dawning looks of the true Light!
O blessed shiner! tell me whither
Thou will be gone, when night comes hither?
A Seer, that observed thee in
Thy (...), and watched the growth of Sin,
Has given his Judgment and foretold,
That Westward hence thy Course will hold:
And when the day with us is done,
There fix, and shine a glorious Sun.
O hated shades and darkness! when
You have got here the Sway again,
And like unwholesome fogs withstood
The light, and blasted all that is good:
Who shall the happy shepherds be
To watch the next Nativity
Of Truth and brightness, and make way
For the returning, rising day?
O! what year will bring back our bliss,
Or who shall live, when God does this?
Thou Rock of Ages, and the Rest
Of all, that for thee are oppressed!
Send down the Spirit of thy truth,
That Spirit, which the tender Youth
And first growths of thy Spouse did spread
Through all the world, from one small head!
Then, if to blood we must resist
Let thy mild Dove, and our high Priest
Help us, when man proves false, or frowns,
To bear the Cross, and save our Crowns:
O! honor those, that honor thee!
Make Babes to still the Enemy:
And teach an Infant of few days
To perfect by his death, thy praise!
Let none defile what thou did wed,
Nor tear the garland from her head:
But chaste and cheerful let her dye,
And precious in the Bridegrooms Eye!
So to thy glory, and her praise
These last shall be her brightest days.
Revel. Chap. last, verse. 17.

The Spirit and the Bride say, Come.

DAPHNIS. An Elegiac Eclogue.
The Interlocutors,
Damon, Menalcas.
Da. WHat clouds, Menalcas, do oppress thybrow?
Flowers in a Sunshine never look so low.
Is Nisa still cold Flint? or have thy Lambs
Met with the Fox by straying from their Dams?

Men. Ah! Damon, no; my Lambs are safe, and she
Is kind, and much more white than they can be.
But what does life, when most serene, afford
Without a worm, which gnaws her fairest gourd?
Our days of gladness are but short reliefs,
Given to reserve us for enduring griefs.
So smiling Calms close Tempests breed, which break
Like spoilers out, and kill our flocks, when weak.
I heard last May (and May is still high Spring,)
The pleasant Philomel her Vespers sing.
(...) green wood glittered with the golden Sun
And all the West like Silver shined; not one
Black cloud, no rags, nor spots did stain
The Welkins beauty: nothing frowned like rain;
But e're night came, that Scene of fine sights turned
To fierce dark showrs; the Air with lightnings burned;
The woods sweet Siren rudely thus oppressed,
Gave to the Storm her weak and weary Breast.
I saw her next day on her last cold bed;
And Daphnis so, just so is Daphnis dead!

Da. So Violets, so does the Primrose fall,
At once the Springs pride and its funeral.
Such easy sweets get off still in their prime,
And stay not here, to wear the soil of Time.
While courser Flowers (which none would miss, if past;
To scorching Summers, and cold Autumns last.

Men. Souls need not time, the early forward things
Are always fledged, and gladly use their Wings,
Or else great parts, when injured quit the Crowd,
To shine above still, not behind the Cloud.
And is it not just to leave those to the night,
That madly hate, and persecute the light?
Who doubly dark, all Negroes do exceed,
And inwardly are true black Moors indeed.

Da, The punishment still manifests the Sin,
As outward signs show the disease within.
While worth oppressed mounts to a nobler height,
And Palm-like bravely overtops the weight.
So where swift Isca from our lofty hills
With loud farewels descends, and foming fills
A wider Channel, like some great port-(...),
With large rich streams to feed the humble plain:
I saw an Oak, whose stately height and shade
Projected far, a goodly shelter made,
And from the top with thick diffused Boughs
In distant rounds grew, like a Wood-nymphs house.
Here many Garlands won at Roundel-lays
Old shepherds hung up in those happy days,
With knots and girdles, the dear spoils and dress
Of such bright maids, as did true lovers bless.
And many times had old Amphion made
His beauteous Flock acquainted with this shade;
A Flock, whose fleeces were as smooth and white
As those, the wellkin shows in Moonshine night.
Here, when the careless world did sleep, have I
In dark records and numbers nobly high
The visions of our black, but brightest Bard
From old Amphion's mouth full often heard;
With all those plagues poor shepherds since have known,
And Ridles more, which (...) times must own.
While on his pipe young Hylas played, and made
Music as solemn as the song anacute;d shade.
But the cursed owner from the trembling top
To the firm brink, did all those branches lop,
And in one hour what many years had bred,
The pride and beauty of the plain lay dead.
The undone Swains in sad songs mourned their loss,
While storms and cold winds did improve the Cross.
But Nature, which (like virtue) scorns to yield
Brought new recruits and succors to the Field;
For by next Spring the checked Sap waked from sleep
And upwards still to feel the Sun did creep,
Till at those wounds, the hated Hewer made,
There sprang a thicker and a fresher shade.

Men. So thrives afflicted Truth! and so the light,
When put out, gains a value from the Night.
How glad are we, when but one twinkling Star
Peeps betwixt clouds, more black than is our Tar?
And Providence was kind, that ordered this
To the brave Suff'rer should be solid bliss;
Nor is it so till this short life be done,
But goes hence with him, and is still his Sun.

Da. Come Shepherds then, and with your greenest Bays
Refresh his dust, who loved your learned Lays.
Bring here the florid glories of the Spring,
And as you strew them pious Anthems sing,
Which to your children and the years to come
May speak of Daphnis, and be never dumb.
While prostrate I drop on his quiet Urn
My Tears, not gifts; and like the poor, that mourn
With green, but humble Turfs; write over his Hearse
For false, foul Prose-men this fair Truth in Verse.
Here Daphnis sleeps! and while the great watch goes
Of loud and restless Time, takes his repose.
Fame is but noise, all Learning but a thought:
Which one admires, another sets at naught.
Nature mocks both, and Wit still keeps ado;
but Death brings knowledge and assurance too.

Men. Cast in your Garlands, strew on all the flowers
Which May with smiles, or April seeds with showers.
Let this days Rites as steadfast as the Sun
Keep pace with Time, and through all Ages run.
The public character and famous Test
Of our long sorrows and his lasting rest;
And when we make procession on the plains,
Or (...) keep the Holyday of Swains,
Let (...) still be the recorded name
And solemn honor of our feasts and fame.
For though the Isis and the prouder Thames
Can show his relics lodged hard by their streams,
And must for ever to the honored name
Of Noble Murrey chiefly owe that fame:
Yet, here his Stars first saw him, and when fate
Beckoned him hence, it knew no other date.
Nor will these vocal Woods and Valleys fail,
Nor Isca's louder Streams this to bewail,
But while Swains hope and Seasons change, will glide
With moving murmurs, because Daphnis di'd.

Da. A fatal sadness, such as still foregoes,
Then runs along with public plagues and woes,
Lies heavy on us, and the very light
Turned Mourner too, has the dull looks of Night.
Our vales like those of Death, a darkness show
More sad than Cypress, or the gloomy Yew,
And on our hills, where health with height complied,
Thick drowsy Mists hang round and there reside.
Not one short parcel of the tedious year
In its old dress and beauty does appear;
Flowr's hate the Spring, and with a sullen bend
Thrust down their Heads, which to the Root still tend,
And though the Sun like a cold Lover, peeps
A little at them, still the Days-eye sleeps.
But when the Crab and Lion with acute
And active Fires their sluggish heat recruit,
Our grass straight russets, and each scorching day
Drinks up our Brooks as fast as dew in May.
Till the sad Heardsman with his Cattle faints,
And empty Channels ring with loud Complaints.

Men. Heaven's just displeasure and our unjust ways
Change Natures course, bring plagues dearth and decays.
This turns our lands to Dust, the skies to Brass,
Makes old kind blessings into curses pass.
And when we learn unknown and foreign Crimes,
Brings in the vengeance due unto those Climes.
The dregs and puddle of all ages now
Like Rivers near their fall, on us do flow.
Ah happy Daphnis! who, while yet the streams
Ran clear and warm (though but with setting beams,)
Got through: and saw by that declining light
His toil's and journey's end before the Night.

Da. A night, where darkness lays her chains and Bars,
And feral fires appear instead of Stars.
But he along with the last looks of day
Went hence, and setting (Sun-like) past away.
What future storms our present sins do hatch
Some in the dark discern, and others watch;
Though foresight makes no Hurricane prove mild;
Fury that is long fermenting, is most wild.
But see, while thus our sorrows we discourse,
Phoebus has finished his diurnal course.
The shades prevail, each Bush seems bigger grown:
Darkness (like State,) makes small things swell and frown.
The Hills and Woods with Pipes and Sonnets round
And bleating sheep our Swains drive home, resound.

Men. What voice from yonder Lawn tends hither? hark!
It Is Thyrsis calls, I hear Lycanthe bark.
His Flocks left out so late, and weary grown
Are to the Thickets gone, and there laid down.

Da. Menalcas, haste to look them out, poor sheep
When day is done, go willingly to sleep.
And could bad Man his time spend, as they do,
He might go sleep, or die, as willing too.

Men. Farewell kind Damon! now the Shepherds Star
With beauteous looks smiles on us, though from far.
All creatures that were favorites of day
Are with the Sun retired and gone away.
While feral Birds send forth unpleasant notes,
And night (the Nurse of thoughts,) sad thoughts promotes.
But Joy will yet come with the morning-light,
Though sadly now we bid good night! Da. good night!

Eugenii Philalethis, VIRI INSIGNISSIMI ET Poetarum Sui Saeculi, merito
Principis: VERTUMNUS ET CYNTHIA, etc.
Q. Horat. -- Qui praegravat arts Infra se positas, extinctus ambitur. --

LONDINI, Impensis Roberti Pawlett, M. DC. LXXVIII.

Ornatissimo viro Domino MATHAEO HERBERT, Institutori suo imprimis suspiciendo.
ACcipe primitias, dilecte Herberte, tuosque
Quales formasti, docte Mathaee, modos.
Te mea dissimili sequitur conamine Musa,
Pallet ut ad vivas picta tabella rosas.
Sic quae mella sacri congessit Alumnus Hymetti
Servant libati Suavia prima Thymi.
Aliud.
Quae viridi, Mathaee, fuit tibi messis in herba,
Hoc te compensat faenore cocta Ceres.
Non potes in nostri furtivis litibus aevi
Dicere, te segetem non decimasse meam.
E. P.

Vertumnus.
HEus! Vertumne, adsum, tumuloque incumbo rapinam
Commeditans: Tu quos incepit dextra tumultus
Fugisti, partamque tenes in funere pacem.
Non liceat dormire; Ego te, cineremque superbum
Excutiam somno. Non hic Equites peditesque
Circumstant; nulla est lateri Rhomphaea, Satelles
Nullus: nulla humeris jactatis laena lacertis
Fluctuat, and nostrum deridet murice pannum.
Praeterit illa aetas, qua te timuisse necesse
Et tutum fuit; haud umbras, manesque reclusos
Horremus: nihil est, si clausis naribus adsto,
Quod metuam, morbos, hircum, excrementaque:vermes
Sollicito; lectusque tuus de stercore versus.
Cur non eloqueris? neque palma morebere, nec Crus?
Tend manus; hic sunt tibi vectigalia, Census,
Poculaque argentumque auratusque annulus instar
Hannibalis; Sejanus Equus tibi ducitur, aut si
Non placeant, praesto est meretrix; hanc accipe saltem
In foveam, Vertumne. Neque hanc? quid? tune clientem
Deseris? ut video, NULLA est Captura Sepulchri.
Toll caput, raucaque iterum cum voce phalanges
Increpita; Satis est latrare audacter in hostem.
O qualis facies! recitanda Litania nunc est
Si possem; Lupus est, taceoque. Irata Minerva
Non tenuit tales, objecta Gorgone, vultus.
Sunt oculi patres, qui Lyncea, qui Galilaeum
Cum speculo vicere; and prophylactica Galli
Strumaque viderunt: quibus ipso Hispanus in ovo
Emicuit dolus; hic Scoti tentoria vidit
Prima, novasque faces in Sydere Cassiopeae.
Nunc nihil hic praeter caecosque cavosque meatus,
Pejoresque isto spurcoque foramine per quod
Claudius, impleto jam ventre, cacare solebat.
Depasta est facies, magnaeque proboscidis uncus
Depastus, totoque exesus (...) nasus.
Formosum faceret Tongillum and Rhinoceroten.
O patulam gingivam! ubi nunc tua pharmaca, malas
Quae radant, scabrosque albent rubigine dentes?
Haud equidem infaelix tales pandebat hiatus
Hecuba, cum misso vultu meliore, pudendis
Faucibus oblatret Graecis, rictuque canino.
Tune humilis tritusque cinis decreta piorum
Excindi petis, and divini lumina verbi
Nocte premi, umbrisque: ac sole funalia praefers?
Et superesse putas? Cujus jam brachia fracta
Curaque, multiplicis dispersa cadavera fati
Praesentant; tua quanta dedit documenta ruina,
Quae speciem immensae cladis, mortesque coactas
Multorum, tumulo Vertumni ostendit in uno?
Par cinis est, aequale lutum, similesque favilla
Qua constas, milesque triobolus; aut Agoraeus,
Quo foetat Quintana, parem coelestia sortem
Non tribuere. Horum miseras stipendia vitas
Venales faciunt, animasque ut villica porcos
Expendunt pretio: Tu non bibis in Nymphaeo
Cum grege; purpureus tecum commilitat, aut Dux;
Parmosos spernis; quotiesque ad Jurgia Currus
Convenient, crassa cum Majestate precantem
Absque oculis rides, and qui pede claudicat uno.
Nonne pudet duplicasse scelus, miserosque secunda
Morte premi, nec velle istis solatia servis,
Quos tua lignipedes fecit fuga, monoculosque?
Nunc scio quo tendit tua parsimonia; promus
Solvendus, meretrixque, and quae nasuta lupanar
Olfecit, rugosa Venus. Respublica tuta est
His instrumentis. Si vivida vina supersint
Quo pugnabis, habes; hic tota nocte tibi Mars
In lingua est, Spirasque inter tua pocula fumos,
Quales Amsanctus vomit, aut Vesuvius ardens.
Grande stratagema! Et quo Chinense domabis
Imperium, Budamque atque altos Ottomannos.
Proceed, expugna mundum; tibi serviet orbis
Terrarum, regnique extremo in margin pones,
Arcturumque Crucemque and Sydera Medicaea.
Sclopetum loquere and flammas: tormenta globosque
Ferratos; verbisque tuis, tanquam Catapulta,
Disjice vicinas aures: hoc tramite victrix
Palma redit, quaerenda tibi est his moribus. Hoc tu
Hannibalem fecisse putas, cum funera Cannis
Roma ageret, luscoque acies demessa Gradivo est?
Supremos expende dies, sitque exitus hujus
Fabellae ante oculos: quid nunc inconditus iste
Mos tibi profecit? vel quid sonus, and celeris vox
Juramenta rotans, and lassa opprobria lingua?
Quis te miratur? vel quis tua fulgura pluris
Esse putat, quam sunt crepitus tibi posteriores?
His tamen alta malis laturum in Sydera nomen
Sperastite posse tuum, nostrosque nepotes
Visuros aliquod Sydus, brutumve hominemve,
Assurgens, Angloq, ardentes Hercule Caelos.
Appia clausa via est, tumuit qua Julius olim
In Stellas, qua qui expiravit podice, repsit.
Tune istos, Vertumne, inter numeraberis heroes?
Numinibus si Scurra placet, si sancta libido
In trutina Jovis est, and Bacchanalia Sacra:
Justius in coelum quis scandet? apertior ibit:
Porta, and suprema sedeas, Vertumne, cathedra.
Quicunque es, qui scorta, dolos, homicidia, furta
Exerces, caecaeque armamentaria mentis,
Hic studeas; vocat e tumulo major Cicerone.
In Cinere hoc scriptum est, extatque in manibus illis
Quod discas: Brevis est, and transit vita, nihilque
Profeci his telis! Dic, quis Necromantica sumit
Haec praecepta sibi, creditque sagacior urnae
NON unum invenio, cui consiliarius est mors.
Tu legesque forumque and barbara Causidicorum
Labra moves, majora alio tua praedia fundo
Ut pateant; addisque tuis male jugera pauca
Pauperis: haec magna and praeter ludibria fati
Fixa putas; cum tu tantum examine vero
Aetatem laceras concessam, atque ardua nugis
Seria posthabeas; quoties improvida tecum
Digeris haec intraque coquis: mea vota secundet
Si non quae praesens lux est, tamen altera, saltem
Tertia; nec cernis repentem in saecula mortem
Incautus, credisque dies, ut suavia, posse
Te rapere, and stabilem furto producere vitam.
Temporis (heu!) nulla est, Annorum nulla rapina,
Quisq, suos numeros (...). Altae (...) famae
Nos agitant, properique nimis vestigia fati
Nemo audit, struit hic turrita palatica, montes
Marmoreos; tetroque alludit regia busto.
Quippe Sepulchra etiam sunt ipsa Cubilia, quae (...)
Exanimes videre, and tristia funera; nec stat
Improba posteritas, possitque in limine scribi
Hic vixit. Si vis animae Compendia nostrae
Ista petas, quae sola fides mercatur, and alto
Intendas coelo, terramque moramque relinques.
DIVITIAE verae illae sunt, and vera Supellex
Quae divina domos and praedia ponit in astris.
Cynthia.
TRansierat jam pura dies, and fortior ignis
Coelorum, temerasque ferens in lumine flammas
Phoebus, Venturae fecit praeludia nocti.
Cynthia cum molles aestus and mitia sensit
Astra, levemque leves errare per era ventos
Egressa est, hortosque suos floretaque sacra
Intravit, mediisque (...) in floribus ibat.
Dumque omnem explorat circa se provida partem,
Excurrunt oculorum ignes, and purior oris
Aura tremit, roseisque halat Diapasma labellis.
Luxuriant auro crines, dimissaque vestis
Ludentem insequitur specioso syrmate Nympham.
Hic gratas umbrarum hyemes, and frigora quaerit;
Aestivas hic sola rosas carpebat, and albis
Intexit rubeas, positoque e vertice peplo
Ipsa genis docuit similes fratrare colores.
Carpit te Narcisse puer! vosque O! sua (...)
(Nam cecidit, nulloque jacet curante,) Ligustra!
Lilia connectit violis, sacrosque Amaranthos
Fasciculo immifcet; nodoque maritat in uno
Dispersas florum veneres, speculoque remoto
Et formam faciemque suis agnovit in herbis.
Haec illa. At vegetam Florae sobolemque micantem
Dum legit, (...) est! obitusque in (...) est (...)!
Nunc, O nunc sylvae pereant, animaeque virentes
Hortorum, plantaeque! Et fascia (...) valeto!
Ecce! ruunt Veneres, multoque Cupidine cingunt
Spem vitae studiumque meae; spoliatur amoenus
Hortulus, and rapto, stant moesta rosaria flore.
O si non ultra (...)! si mea tantum
Cynthia mansisset similis sibi! (...) mores
Fata regunt, frustraque omnes meliora docemur.
Aureus assurgit, multoque nitore Cupido
Aggreditur nympham, spiratque superbior ignes.
Nectare distillant alae, and divina volatu
Ambrosia exiliens coelestes seminat auras.
Utque stetit, vidi celerem librare sagittam
Pennatamque suis plumis; stat missile fixum,
Accenditq, novas non duro in (...) flammas.
Illa ardet, clademque suam (...) ambit
Blanditiis, ipsoque sinu fovet (...) mortem.
O toties miseranda! deam hanc (...) Cupido
Faedasti, simul ora tuam superantia matrem.
Ast ego prospiciens sensi discedere (...)
Purpureos, niveosque mori cum virgin flores.
Nulla rubent tepidis immixta roseta pruinis,
Nec tremulae ludunt inter sua lilia flammae.
Marcet tanta venus, tristique in vertice sylva
Aurea dispersis pendet neglecta capillis.
Nil manet (...) nullusque Hyacinthus, ut olim,
Vernat in his labiis; tora est in funere Tempe.
Non nego (sit tua justa licet sententia) coelos
Crudeles; lapsae stellae revocantur in altum
Ex oculis, totoque excedunt sydera vultu.
Ingemuit, flevitque suum mea Cynthia fatum
Tristior, and nulla foelix albedine mansit.
In Chloen intuentem.
AFfixis formosa Chloe dum ludit occellis,
Et tacito in vultus (...) meos.
Obvia luminibus mea forma occurit apertis,
Hospitat inque oculis transanimata suis.
Hic and aquas penetratque ignes, vitreasque pupillas
Plena vel aerumnis pingit imago meis.
Flevit sacra Chloe, formosaque lumina plorat
In speculum tantis facta fuisse malis.
In Ephemeridas J. Kepleri.
ECce! mori properat dum prodigus annus, and horas
Urget sydereis in sua fata rotis,
Das, Keplere, novam temeris Echineida coelis;
Et stupet ad remoram machina tota tuam.
Nunc duraturo radias, Aurora, rubore;
Et praesens hic est, praeteritusque dies.
Vitrum horarium ex sepulti Mathematici pulvere.
SIc inclusa tuae respondet Mimula dextrae
Et coeli assuetas audet arena vices.
Affectare juvat superos post funera cursus,
Surgitque ex atomis certior hora tuis.
Si numerat, partitque diem tam nescia techna,
Quid facit ad solemn doctior umbra suum?
Ad virum eximium. D. Thomam Poellum Cantrevensem S. S. Theologiae Doctorem
ESt niveae amicus mentis, and calens mihi:
Rurique semper degit urbanus comes;
Nec scire possum, quas meus vices agit.
Non in remotis trutina and pace Curiis
Exercet ille lege quod cautum est, scelus;
Forique tritis litibus, jungit novas.
Non hospes intus rebus haud suis vacat,
Nec ambit art, quicquid est dispar deo.
At ore fundit ille non inops suo
Rosas, salesque mentis and mares Jocos:
Interque Doctos humilis and summus simul
Quos hic solutus perdo, componit dies.
Ad Fontem, ex quo bibere solita est Stella.
OMeae Stellae speculum! liberque
Suavium, castos ubi pingit ignes
Umbra subridens, and amantis Echo Muta puellae!

Quam nimis grato querulus susurro
In fugam serpis, viridesque tophi
Pectinas cinnos, vitreoque fundis Ore fluentem?

Hac Venus spuma poterit creari
Succubae praestans vetulaeque divae;
Quae novo formae, fideique solvet Foedere litem.

Pulchrior vultus, meliorque scaena
Font Narcisfi facieque fluctus
Hos facit lautos magis, atque nulla Caede cruentos.

Hic leves albis volitare pennis
Adsolent Ludi, veneresque castae;
Ista cultori dedit unda mortem, Haec mihi vitam.

In Stellam Lachrymantem.
NOn miror, mea Stella, tuo tua lumina fletu
Suffusa, and mixtas ignibus Ignis aquas.
Ex oculis ducendus erat fons. Altera nulla est
Digna satis faciem quae lavet unda tuam.
In Eandem acra febre dormientem.
HIc jaceo: mixta mortis and vitae Venus;
Amare Parcam docuit vel somnus meus.
Ludit Corallis morbus, and multa in nive
Combusta mors est, dum meas genas petit
Mirata praedam, transit in vitam tepens:
Et quam necasset, stravit in Iectum sibi
Dormitque capta. Quos superfusos vides
Florum popellos: Lilia and diam Rosam
Amator sparsit; exprimi nullis suam
Ut par, figuris ille sic deam docet.
Vix est creatus in (...) tropus mihi.
Ejusdem Epitaphium.
ADesto multa superum Nepenthe madens
Ver: annus infans, primula and florens Hebe.
Tuusque tecum Zephyrus accedat, tui
Serenus oris halitus, promus Rosae:
Florum solennis fascinus, carmen potens
Ipsis sepulchris mortuum germen vocans.
Adstes et Euri mitius volans ala,
Auraque degens divite, and thure in sacro
Fumata, pennis incubet tuis Eos.
Est urna parva Stellulam meam tenens,
Quae vos in arctum postulat typum deae.
Florum huc adesto, quicquid hic mundus parit,
Sui character sparsus, ac inops Icon.
Cognata venis viola, sanguini est rosa.
Natura ubique pingit in luctus meos,
Et tophus omnis parturit Stellae notas.
Sit Epitaphium par Hyacinthus tibi,
Qui flore pandens, quas tegit tellus genas,
Aiacis instar (...) meum semper ferat,
Tuaeque cladis annue monens Epos.
Visurus ora qualia, and quales manus,
Amplectar albas, purpura and tinctas rosas;
Tibique flores servient, spinae mihi!
Si liliis adsto, dicam, hic vivit meae,
Et si sepulchris, hic perit (...) color.
Gustavus Adolphus Rex Sueciae Intrat Germaniam.
SIste aquilas Caesar: quae solemn, ignesque potentes
Sustinet, his oculis caeca revertet avis.
Explorare mori est: haud tanto in lumine tents
Degenerem and nullo nomine pullitiem.
Fulminibus servire aquilae est; non regia flammis
Imperat; est superis penna ministra focis.
Gustavus fulgetra regit Mavortis, and Ille est
Invenient vel quem flammae, aquilaeque Jovem.
Tillium congrediens augurium rident.
ADstitit, in bellum Sueco veniente, volantum
Turba, and Lipsiacum fusa tegebat agrum.
Cum miles sub utroque ruens ductore Catervam
Dissipat, and turmis territa surgit avis.
Primo te, Tilli, comitesque supervolat, and mox
Gustavum: at rapta ex host salute, petit.
Non erat augurium hoc: aliud victoria pennis
Et dignum vel te gessit, Adolphe, suis.
Moriens Wallenstenium fundit.
ADsis and extrema major, Gustave, ruina,
Quam per tot vitae sparsa trophaea tuae.
Hic congesta jacent tanti miracula belli,
Contrahit inque unum se tua fama diem.
Cedite Romani! vobis vicisse, triumphus;
Gustavo plus est quam superare, mori.
Testatur se Germanorum libertatem sanguine suo sigillare.
SCripserat hanc, hostisque prius sua dextra cruore;
Jam signata suo sanguine charta valet.
Libertas quam lata tibi, Germania magna, est!
Cujus vel mundo tessera major erat.
Carolus Primus, Anglorum Rex.
EN, en Deorum Magnes, and tracti Numinis
Sub sole Thronus: Ignium Coeli Silex
Ferroque tritus in suas flammas abiens!
Depressa palma, quae veram palmam tulit,
Crevitque in ipsos oneri non cedens deos.
Christi, suoque sanguine hic unctus fuit,
Crucisque nemo majus Exemplum dedit.
Rex ille Regni, rex idem vixit sui,
Legemque, quam nec subditi ferrent, tulit.
Jus semper illi summa and regalis comes.
Fidesque sancta dirigens dextram suam,
Quam sic coercet, praesidem agnovit manum.
Furor, rapina, caedes and dolus malus
Unius omnes regium invadunt caput:
Caditque (nosti coelum!) tam sanctus parens
Ab his peremptus, vel quibus vitam daret.
Secunda ab ipso victima haec Christo fuit.
Disce Lector,
NOn semper bona invenit, qui bonum quaerit.
Epitaphium Gulielmi Laud Episcopi Cantuariensis.
OFida tellus! coeli depositum cape,
Neque illum topho premas, sed amplectere.
Hic jacet Lector, (serva tu lachrymas malis,)
Ecclesiae pharus, Idemque naufragium sibi;
Repumicator Orbis and Coeli pugil:
Frigentis arae titio, haud ignis novus,
Sed Angelorum flamma Manoae capax.
Desiste saeclum: majus non potes nefas.
Lassata crux est, martyrum appendix fuit.
Quotidiana non est talis manus.
Liberius nemo sanguinem patriae daret
Si res vocassent; nec confidentius dedit
Cum non vocabant, nempe curavit mori,
Anteitque istam, quam stabiliret fidem.
Sic ille coelum rapuit, and vitae tomos
Obliteratos maculis adversae manus
Proprio rescripfit sanguine, innocuus simul
Et condemnatus: sic citat testes Deus!
O festus ille cinis! and foelix miser,
Qui probro honores mutat, and mundi satur
Injuriis emit coelos, ac Stellas tenet!
Fecisti probe! fidei senex malum
Mors est: Ereptus vitae pugillus tibi
Cum diis acquirit annos, omisit diem.
Palles sceleste? non (...) sanum sibi
Cruorem, quisquis sic alienum sitit.
Sed non in terram fluxit, ne bibit lutum
Fluentem: sitiens sanguinem pulvis suum
Pulvere formatus homo est.
Non periit ergo. Laudis tam justae threnos
Nec morituras naenias hosts sui
Qui habent aures, audient.
Abi jam Lector, and been discas mori.
Mauritius Pontisfracti Castrum ingreditur.
ARx alta! and Caroli spes una atque ultima nostri,
Qua tria convenient hospita regna simul.
His extrema fides ponet vestigia muris,
Clarior eque tuis moenibus astra petet.
Non superesse licet: cupio fundamina mortis
Ponere, and hoc nostram condere test necem.
Praeside Mauritio tua moenia digna tueri,
Nec nisi Mauritio praeside digna capi.
Proposita ab host pactione, solus excluditur.
HAnc mea mors, mea vita diem celebrate: paresque
Et similes habeant utraque fata vices.
Vita, meam mortem celebra: tu mors mea, vitam;
Sitque audere mori, pactio Mauritii.
Vivere me trepidant hosts: faciamus and ipsos
Quam petiere, meam vel trepidare necem.
Dedito Castro, and pactione exclusus per medios hosts erumpit.
SOl, orbis spectator ades, curruque represso
Mirandum e superis aspice Mauritium!
Solus in hostiles audet procedere turmas,
Hac illi oblata est condition salus.
Mill refert, and mill ruit varia art per hosts:
Et varios quasi se dividit usque locos.
Stravit totam aciem dux atque Exercitus ipse:
Illa dies, quod vix postera credat habet.
Victricem obtinuit, morte indignante, salutem:
Credibile est tantum fata timere manum.
Aliud.
ARcta est, quam tribuis fortuna, redemptio; vel mors,
Vel requiem hostilis pervia turma dabit.
Aut manus haec nobis tutela, aut nulla; cadamque
Host semel major: me, Caroloque minor.
Par illi exemplum est; regem assimulare docemur:
Fataque inauditis exuperare modis.
(...)! levis est vobis, nullusque triumphus;
Non poteram vinci, nec dabo posse mori.
Aliud.
VEnit summa dies, and qua pepigisse, perire est.
Major sum, quam cui sic superesse licet.
Percutimus pulchrum posito cum funere foedus,
Sitque haec pro vita pactio, velle mori.
Plebeius vigor hoc, quivifque gregarius haud dat:
Hoc solius habent pectora Mauritii.
Desiderantur Alcippus and Jacintha (Poema Heroicum absolutissimum,) cum multis
aliis (...) ab Authore relictis.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and sold by Robert Pawlet at the Bible in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet.
VIllare Anglicanum, or a view of all Towns, Villages, etc. In England and
Wales, so that naming any Town or place, you may readily find what Shire,
Hundred, Rape or Wapentake it is in. Also the number of Bishoprics, Counties,
under their several jurisdictions, and the Shire-Towns, Buroughs and Parishes
in each County, by the appointment of the eminent Sir Henry Spelman Knight.

The Nuns Complaint against the Friars, being the Charge given in the Court of
France by the Nuns of St. Katharines near Provence, against the Father Friars,
their Confessors; showing their abuses in their allowance of undecent Books,
and Love Letters, and Marriages of the Friars and Nuns, their Frolicks and
Entertainments, etc. several times printed in French, and now faithfully done
into English.

Mary Magdalen's Tears wiped off; or the voice of Peace to an unquiet
Conscience.

The Golden Remains of that ever memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton College etc.
the second Impression with many additions not before published, in Quarto.

Episcopacy as established by Law in England, written by the command of the
late King Charles, by Robert Saunderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln, in Oct.

Incestuous Marriages, or Relations of Consanguinity and Affinity hindering and
dissolving Marriage, as making all Marriages within such Relations to be
Incestuous, and all Children of such Marriages to be Illegitimate, or Bastards
to all intents and purposes.

A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and other public Records of the Church of
England, with a Preface by Anthony Sparrow Lord Bishop of Norwich.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety; both by the Author of the whole
Duty of Man.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of Holy Scripture, or the certain and
indubitable Books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England, by
Dr. Cousin Lord B. of Durham.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England, as it stands separated
from the Roman, etc. by Sir Roger Twisden Baronet.

Mr. Chillingsworth's Reasons against Popery, persuading his Friend to turn to
his Mother the Church of England, from the Church of Rome.

The Book of Homilies appointed to be read in Churches.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

Divine Breathings, or, a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ in an hundred
excellent Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, or, the Annals and History of the Low Country
Wars.

A Treatise of English Particles: with a Praxis upon the same; by William
Walker B. D. Schoolmaster of Grantham.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillies (...) explained, with (...)
plainness, to Children of the meanest capacity, by William Walker, B. D. Author
of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Rationale on the Book of Common prayer of the Church of England, by Anthony
Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Norwich, with his caution to his Diocese against false
Doctrines.

A Treatise proving Spirits, Witches, and Supernatural operations, by pregnant
Instances and Evidences, by Meric Causabon. Octa.

A Catalogue of all the Parliaments, or reputed Parliaments from the year 1640.

A Narrative of some passages, in or relating to the long Parliament, by a
Person of Honor.

Nemesius, Nature of Man in English by George Withers, Gent.

Inconveniences of Toleration.

Toleration intolerable.

A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached before the King, by J. Dolbin, D. D. Dean of
Westminster.

B. (...) Sermons on Gunpowder-Treason.

A Narrative of the burning of London 1666. with an Account of the Losses, and
a most remarkable parallel between it and Mosco, both as to the Plague and Fire.

Lluellins three Sermons on the Kings Murder.

(...) Lusitanicum, or, the Portugal Voyage, with what memorable passages (...)
at the Shipping and Transportation of her sacred Majesty Katharine Queen of
Great Britain from Lisbon to England, by Dr. Samuel Hind.

All sorts of Law Books.

FINIS.

