THE DOVVNFALL OF THE PRETENDED Divine Authority of the Hierarchy into the Sea
of ROME. FROM Some Arguments, and Motives, to the final Extirpation of that
unlawful government of the PRELACY: as having no foundation in the Scriptures,
but only in that filthy dunghill of the Canon Law of the Popes Authority, and
therefore Antichristian. And So they are wrongfully blamed for abuse of their
offices, the very nature and right use whereof is to overthrow Churches and
Kingdoms, Laws of God and man, to propagate the kingdom of Antichrist: the
office is so bad as cannot be used otherwise. Also their dangerous practices
discovered: and the great Objection of Martyr-Prelates answered. By V. N. V.

I know thy works, and thy labor, and patience, and how thou can not endure
them which are evil, and thou haste tried them which say they are Apostles and
are not, and haste found them liars. Apoc. 2.2.

Ostentantes se se quasi sint pastores ecclesiae, quasi sint Episcopi cum sint
merae umbrae, personae lupercales, statuae mutae, and picturati trunci.

Sub magnifico Episcoporum titulo, totum Mundum perdentes.

Luther: de falso nom: and ordine Episcoporum. Tom. 2. Vitebergae. p. 330. Anno
ReX ChrIstVs, Vt VerVs, regnVM papae DestrVet.

Ad Chariss: suum, V. N. V.
PAstorum in orb cernimus
Ovilis Christi copiam:
Pauci ah! quibus cord Dei
Est gloriae meditatio:
Sed ventris esse plutimos
Britannae pastores, magis
Videmus addictos papae
Traditionibus impijs:
Cujus superbos spiritus
Sic, qui induerunt atque opes
Ejus relictas possident
Quas devorant voraciter:
Queis imminent regaliter:
Et veritatis deprimunt
Veros patrones, and Dei
Very timentes opprimunt
In gratiam nisi papae
Suique commodi, and sui
Honoris eminentiae.
Sed ipsa quae fluunt Dei
Ex font verbi Limpido
Hos judicant, hos comprobant,
Antistites papae imperi,
Qui templa tot deglutiunt
Qui templa tot tot devorant.
Ne quis per illos devius
Aberret a Dei via
Fugiatque tales impios
Et fastuosos clericos
Falsosque pastores procul.
procul.
procul.
In gratiam scripsit
Inanes Arce viros.
To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER;
IF duty to Religion and Subjects liberties; if loyalty to sovereign
Authority; if long and heavy pressures under the enemies of all these may
challenge any privilege at this time; then may I crave leave to creep in
amongst the crowd without presumption, in this abyss of troubles, with my
present (to this great work in hand for Reformation) composed of naked truth
clad in her own colors, in a few succinct Arguments, closely backing one
another, as lincks in a chain, drawing all one way in one strong cord, not one
of which I conceive could be wanting, though I have studied as much brevity as
might stand with perspicuitie, in abusinesse so very weighty, as to give vigor
and life to the active axiom of the time, and present exigent, for the final
extirpation of the usurped duplicated authority of the Prelacy; the great boll
or branch of the Romish Hierarchy: Eclipsing all our glory, cluding all
Authority, by their lofty dignity and innate Antipathy to all true Church
policy, and our Parliamentary sublyme authority, and noble designs, to which
above all humane service I profess to be devoted, and to which I here present
my homage and hostage of my best endeavors. If herein thou find any thing
worthy of observance, use it to thine advantage for the common good.

Every one within his limits improving his endeavors and interest in this
present honorable Parliament, to make the Hydraes head of Prelacy, with all
the corrupt members of that body, the holocaust to expiate the wrath of God so
long threatened against this Land defiled with their abominations, and bloody
cruelties, in their long opposition of Christ's Kingly office, and that by an
Antichristian tyrannical government, incompatible with all Christian policy
and free subjects liberties, the vindicating whereof shall assuredly add more
luster to this ancient Kingdoms glory, and our Parliaments deserved fame, than
all the gemmes or radiant stones in the Triple crown or Spanish Diadem.

And since the Prelates of late have been so presumptuously busy in melting
base metal, and casting their Canons, and mounting them so high as to batter
down all Religion, and authority, fortifying their tottering holds of
Episcopacy in the rearing again the old ruins of Babell. Shall not the Lords
servants be much more bold for Christ, than they for Antichrist? shall they
fortify and plant Canons contrary to both Laws of God and of the Land, to
batter down our Religion and liberties, and shall not we rear our forts and
plant Canons of proof by both Laws, and play upon their Babell Building? long
ago, yea of old determined to destruction, as Jericho, Josh. 6.
and cursed they who shall attempt to rear its ruins again.

If ever were a time for Christ's servants, as men of another spirit, to take
courage and Camp about Babell; then now when she has laid our Zion waste: high
time for every faithful servant of God, and loyal subject to be up and be
doing, every one something within compass of his calling. This is solely the
Authors mind and aim at this time in Conscience of his duty, here
representing to thy view, a new reard battery against Babells lofty fort of
Prelacy, planted with ten new cast Canons of old tried metal, playing upon
their tottering building on all parts, from the highest pinnacle to the
groundwork and foundation: which is not only sandy but laid in a filthy
dunghill, and wasting daily; so the servants of Christ may even hence be
encouraged, that the downfall of it is feizible enough if they camp about it
with courage and constancy, as the Israelites about Jericho, and we shall see
it fall suddenly with Shout and Cry.

The names of the Canons, and how they are planted and discharged.
1 Canon ab alto fulminans, strikes down right from heaven fiery hot
thunderbolts at their two high pinacles of Archiepiscopall bla^phemy. 2 Canon
lucis a meridie fulgens, pays them on the blind side for they look
South-east, Rome-ward, and are blind Southward. Sun-ward; their right eye is
darkened and no light in them, Zach. 14.17. 3 Canon Regis Caroli Christi vindex,
plays upon the corner stone of their building. 4 Canon John the Baptist ex
officio suo, plays upon their breast-works. 5 Canon old Roman on the
South-east, which way they look most for help, plays upon the maine bulk and
body of their building, where all their treasure and baggage lies. 6 Canon
Apostolic, in a running trench, closely batters the foundation round about on
every side. 7 Canon ex ore Christi eradicans, or Canon root all, fires a mine
which springs and scatters the ground-stones of the foundation. 8 Canon gregis
and utriusque legis, or Canon cleanse all, from the honorable high Court of
Parliament, runs round about their works, charged with great and small short,
sweeping out root and branches, and clensing the Land of all their remnants.
The next two Canons are planted upon their passage to cut off all aid and
succor from them, whiles the other are battering.
9 Canon Minans, or stand of Assistants. 10 Canon flagrans, a long Basiliske
whose siery eyes at long distance threatens death and destruction to all that
come near to plead for them, or partake with them against the Lord Jesus, the
mighty King incensed to wrath against their working.
And thus courteous Reader, if thou mindest aright this service, I hope thou
shall find it not unprofitable at this time, but affording some useful
instructions to all sorts of men, whereby it is hoped some may be bettered in
some measure.

1. The first to be looked at are the suffering servants of God, who have lain
under long and great oppressions under the Prelates, these may hence be
comforted, to see their long deserted cause at length victorious, though the
seidge prove long, these Canons are strong, will not miscarry if the service be
hot, nay if some of them be not discharged at all that depend on men's hands and
handling, yet there are enough besides in the number that will not spare them,
and are in the divine hand of a jealous God, who will let fly at them, one
thunderclap from on high at their blasphemy, will tear their building from top
to bottom, or a word from the Lord Jesus mouth, shall root them when he
begins to roar in mount Zion, his voice is powerful and full of majesty,
Psalm. 29.4. he will shake their deep rooting, and lay them on the ground; his
eyes are as flames of fire if once his wrath begin to burn, woe to them he
finds in his way of advancing his kingdom; he will make waste mountains and
hills of greatest enemies, for the Lord is jealous, the Lord avengeth, the Lord
avengeth and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance on his enemies, Nahum
1.2. and he will comfort Zion, and build her waste places, he has had respect
to the prayer of the desolate, and will not tarry, they may then be comforted,
to them belongs the songs and palms of victory over the beast of Rome and his
Image, in these bratts of Babell; these are they that come out of great
tribulation, that keep the Commandments and faith of Jesus, that are not
defiled with the silthinesse of the whorish woman, for they are the virgins
that follow the Lamb, and shall enter with him through the gates into the
City. The consideration whereof should mitigate their present sorrows, having
an eye to the recompense of reward.

2. The enemies of Christ's kingdom may read their doom from the righteous
judgment of the Lord of hoasts, and be at last provoked to repentance and
resignation of their unlawful offices, and do homage to Christ's Scepter, who
otherwise will come as a these in the night upon them, and cut off their pomp
and power, and make them naked and unarmed, and cast them out as dogs out of
the holy City; and so there be left them no place to repentance, though they
seek it with tears, out of time, when the gate of the Kingdom is shut against
them, they may howl, and cry, and knock till they be weary, ere St. Peter's
keys come to open. This will certainly befall them sooner or later, if they
repent not.

3. Those that are gone back to the fleshpots of Egypt, and are swimming down
with the stream of the time, may be forewarned to return, and come out of the
tents of these wicked men, least by partaking in their sins, they partake of
their plagues; Isa.
for it is the time of the Lords vengeance, the year of recompense of the
Controversies of Zion.

4. All sorts of men, loyal subjects of the King, and good Patriots of their
Country, may be moved with pity to help to remove the insupportable burdens
which press down the land to ruin and misery, Vbi dolor ibi digitus, is the
part and duty of every member of the body.
all flowing from the Hierarchy: and till the pressures in Religion be removed,
and Christ's kingdom advanced, the Commonweal cannot be eased: they are like
Hippocrates twinns, they mourn and rejoice, live and dye together. It Is the
office of Prelacy that keeps out Christ's kingly office, is the Achan sin that
troubles the Land, and is the cause of all our miseries, and threatens still
greater: if that be not removed, Gods wrath will not be appeased, our troubles
not ended. The Lord pity us, and ease himself and us of these his
Adversaries, who will not have Christ to reign over them.

Undique concurrunt ac crescit turba malorum, sed cum probrosi castra superba
tenent.

Lament. 5.17, 18. For this our heart is faint, our eyes are dim, because of
the mountain of Zion which is desolate, the Foxes walk upon it.


SOME ARGVMENTS AND MOTIVES TO The final Extirpation of the usurped unlawful
Government of the HIERARCHY. AS Having no foundation in the Scriptures, but
merely in that filthy dunghill the Canon Law of the Popes Authority, and
therefore Antichristian.
Argument I.
THat Name which is only proper to the Lord Jesus, is unlawful, yea blasphemy
for any man to assume. But so is the name Archbishop only proper to the Lord
Jesus, (1 Pet. 5.4. Heb. 13.20. Acts 3.15. and 5.31.) the chief Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls. 1 Pet. 2.25. Ergo for any man to assume that name is
unlawful; yea blasphemy, and the blasphemer should be stoned to death, Levit.
24.11.14.

II.
That office whose original is not known is unlawful. But the original of
the office of Archbishop is not known: as the chief champion of Prelacy
confesses, Whitgift cont. Cartwright, page 351. And further, nothing can be
said for the primacy of a Metropolitan Bishop, but what will as well maintain
the primacy of the Pope as universal Bishop of all the world. Ergo the office
of an Archbishop is unlawful.

III.
That name and office which is unlawsull, and blasphemy for any man to assume,
no Prince or humane power may lawfully give. But so is the name and office of
Archbishop, as before. Ergo no Prince or humane power may lawfully give it to
any man; and we hope his Majesty when he is rightly informed, will explode the
remembrance of it: this is the very corner stone of their building, if this
once fail, the whole fabric will suddenly tumble upon their heads. The Lord
grant it, and put into the heart of our royal Sovereign to execute his will
upon these Bratts of Babell.

IV.
No officer in the Church is lawful, who cannot prove his function from the
word, as John did when the Priests questioned him, 1 John 20.23.25. But all
these officers in the Hierarchy from the chief Metropolitan to the meanest
Apparitour, are such as cannot prove their functions from the word when they
are questioned: their only prooses are fulminations of Canons, censures,
excommunications, prisons, and fines, cutting of cares and noses and brands.
Ergo unlawful.

V.
Those officers whose names, offices, and practices are deriyed from
Antichrist, and serve principally to uphold and propagate his Kingdom, ought
not to govern the Church the Spouse of Christ: who will not have her ruled by
such as live by the vices of men, and hyre of whores, commutations of penance,
selling of sins and giving liberty to all licentiousness. But Archbishops,
Diocesan Bishops, Deanes Archdeacons, Chancellours, Officialls, etc. their
names offices and practices are such; as in one word appears in that they have
their foundation in that filthy dunghill of the Canon law, and thence their
practices, Ex mero officio, are only warranted to uphold and propagate the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and bring in Popery again. Neither can any thing be
produced for a Diocesan Bishop and Church, but from the same ground will arise
an Universal Church and Bishop, they stand upon one Antichristian foundation,
which makes the Prelates and their officers love the Papists so well. Ergo they
ought not to govern the Church the Spouse of Christ.

VI.
Those officers in the Church, whose offices and government from the foundation
and very nature of their offices, do waste and overthrow the principal
functions of the Church and offices of Christ, are not of Christ but of
Antichrist. But such are the offices of Archbishops, Diocesan Bishops, etc. and
the rest of that rabble. Ergo not of Christ but of Antichrist.

The Major I suppose no sound Protestant will deny.

The Minor proposition is that must abide all the battery from the lofty
Prelacy, their forts and mounts of molehill-authoritie; but in the skirmish, we
shall find them all in a confusion, flourishing their colors, and drawing
forth and mounting their Canons, and playing and discharging upon their own
Canon Law, as if they seemed to batter their own foundation, (like cunning
Fencers that make a flourish on the stage and seem to knock down one
another, but it is a point of art to maintain the trade) but as soon as the
fury is over, we shall find them with their Canons drawn into their old
fortification, and upon the next advantage in the field again, and at their
old work and battery, at the foundations of the Church with greater fury, (it
being the very nature of their office so to do) yea (if God prevent not now by
the diligent hand of this honorable Parliament) to mount their Canons and
Canon Law to such a height, as to batter at the Royal Authority,
Parliamentary privileges, and Subjects liberties, to make havoc of all, and
bring in and erect a papal foreign Jurisdiction in this Land again.

There be two maine Branches of our Minor proposition, Two branches of the
Minor.
that the offices and government of the Hierarchy, 1. from the foundation of,
2. from the very nature of their offices and government do waste and overthrow
the functions of the Church and offices of Christ, we will demonstrate.

1. First branch.
That it is founded in the Canon Law, what their offices are, and how to be
exercised, in such practices as uphold and propagate the Kingdom of
Antichrist, read Angelus de Clansio, and other Canonists, where you may see
their warrant for their offices, and practices in their government: to which
upon all occasions they have their recourse in any difficulty, and fetch their
dark light in stead of the Scriptures. So as when a new Prelate, a new
Archdeacon, or a new Chancellor comes into his new office like a fresh man,
the inferior officers that be old practicioners in that Law, must instruct him
in any matter of difficulty falling out in his government, after that Law, by
which all must be ordered: and that it is true that the Canon Law is the
foundation of their offices and government. See a book compiled out of the
Canon Law, and entitled; Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, Printed 1571, and
now of late reprinted and allowed by Authority; and in he Preface of the said
book it is confessed, that the Canon Law of Popish government was still
retained in England to that day, and so is to this.

Now what this Canon Law is, appears by the Law it self to be nothing else
but the Laws and Decrees of the Popes of Rome and their authority point
blanck opposite to the Laws of God in general, and the Laws of Christ (for
governing his Church) in special, and to our Kings prerogative royal and
laws of the Land. And it is a wonder how this Canon Law, branded and abolished
by so many Statutes and Acts of Parliament, should be suffered to be exercised
in this Land without (as Lawyers say) the incutring of a Praemunire. being a
Law of foreign and Papal Jurisdiction, abolished by the Stat. of 4. Edw. 6.
cap. 11. and 1 Eliz. cap. 5. and 5. Eliz. cap. 1.23. and others. And how this
usurped government, is grown to an insufferable height, overtopping all
authority, religion and liberties, I leave to the learned in the Laws, and
grave judgments of this honorable Parliament.

We come then to the second branch of our proposition; that it is from the very
nature of their offices, Second branch.
that they waste and overthrow the sunctions of the Church and offices of
Christ, merely from that their foundation and warrant (in the Canon Law) of
their practices in all they do in their offices, as before.

Now the nature of every thing is best tried and seen in the things which
issue from it, as the proper works and actions of every function, springing
from the root and foundation, as giving Laws for warrant and commission, so
vigor and life for execution; and from thence we shall see as in a Prospect
through their practices (so warranted) into the nature of their offices, and
whether they waste the Church and overthrow the offices of Christ or no.

The principail sunctions of the Church are; 1. Four maine functions of the
Church.
the word. 2. prayer. 3. Sacraments. 4. discipline; all which like the mother
that old withered wrinckled faced whore of Rome, they have most foully
adulterated and filthily polluted.

1. For the word it is the very nature of their offices, 1 The World.
flowing in through their so warranted practices, to mix and mingle it with
men's inventions, and shut their eyes against the Scriptures brightness; tell
one of these Prelates of warrant from the word, and he will give you such a
learned answer, as would make his horse break his halter, if he knew how
unmercifull his Master were to his beast, as to question what warrant he has
from the word to give him a peck of Oats. An argument from Scripture sets them
all in a rage; such an antipathy there is between the word and the very nature
of their offices. 2. They corrupt the word with false doctrines, from their
Canons, Books of Articles and Homilies, writings and preachings, wherewith the
Pulpits sound alowd throughout the Land. 3. Their offices are to cause the
people drink these troubled waters, or drive their backs to the wall. 4. They
have turned the Ministry wholly into a Jewish-Popish Sacrificing Priesthood.
5. They set up a new kind of reading-preaching, and suppress sound preaching,
silence and suspend the orthodox Preachers, and fill their places with
Metaphysicall cloudy-brain'd Humanists, Arminian * Mountebancks.
and Popish fellows, who usually stuff their Sermons out of Aristotle's
Ethics, and the Friars Postills. 6. In stead of the word they set up Images,
Crucifixes, Altats, and teaching Ceremonies, to stir up the dull minds of
men, against Christ's prerogative and prophetical office, to which it belongs
to teach his Church by his word and works, and not by men's inventions and works
of men's hands. 7. They Pope-like corrupt the word with their stinking breath,
breathing forth for Scripture what they please, some are the Fathers, others
the sons of the Church, and in summa the Church of themselves, and exalt
themselves above the Scriptures, especially when they meet in the Convocation
house, and have their Canons in casting, they make laws above and against the
word, and preach for them, and punish the breach of them more than the breach
of Gods Commandments. 8. By virtue of their offices they assume a power to
confer holiness upon things and places, consecrate Churches, Altars, and
places, and place holiness in their superstitions and abominations, as
Altars, Altar-cringing, Jesus, and East-worshipping, etc. Whereas the word
alone has power to sanctify and make holy. Thus by bringing in the accursed
thing of Romes Idolatry, they are become the A^bans that trouble the Land. 8.
Nature works so strongly in their offices, as you may now see it in their bold
impudent faces, professing reconciliation of us to Rome, pronouncing them happy
that shall be the instruments to reconcile the petty seeming differences, and
make us at one with their mother, but I hope before that be done they and their
mother shall be both confounded, Jere. 50.11, 12. For the light has dazzled
them, the Sun is gone down, and the day is dark over them to make them
confounded and ashamed, Zach. 14.17. Mich. 3.6, 7.

2. For Prayer, 2 Prayer.
how do they by their very office profess and practice the corrupting of it,
which as incense should be purely offered, Mal. 3. They, 1. fill the house of
God with smoke of the strange fire of their abominations of all sorts, new and
old inventions, Letany and long some service, said and sung, with yelling and
chanting like the Priests of Baal, their old and new inventions, fopperies,
second Service, and corrupt prayers, all put together, as like the Mass as an
apple is like an Orange. 2. By their offices, they ordain Priests of the
lowest of the people, to offer up their corrupt prayers, as dunibe Sir John's,
ale-house-keepers, and generally vile persons, who like Elyes sons cause men
to abhor their offerings. 3. All this corruption in worship flows out of the
Canon Law, as the filthy fountain through their offices, as the pipes to set
it abroad to infect the world, and is preserved as in cisternes in the Canons
and service-booke, the second maine basis whereupon Episcopacy stands in the
dunghill Canon Law, which casts such a foul savor in the nosthrills of God,
as we may admire his patience in suffering it so long, without sweeping it and
us all together away in some strange inundation of Judgment.

Nothing but a flood of Justice and reformation will prevent his kindled anger
against us, manifested of late in so many fearful and prodigious signs and
wonders, especially in and about Churches, as if he had pointed with his finger
that there is his quarrel, one strange fire procuring another, and threatening
yet greater if we repent not, reform not.

3. 3 Sacraments.
For the Sacraments, how have they changed them into Sacrifices, witness their
baptismall regeneration, kneeling at Sacrament, or bread-worship, wherein we
are beholding to Costerus the Jesuit for telling us their meaning right out,
if Christ (says he) were not teally in the bread, our kneeling were worse and
more gross Idolatry than that of the Heathen. Thus they turn the Sacraments
into propitiatory Sacrifices, to wash away sin and confer grace, xapere op
rato: and so the inward work of Gods Spurit banished, it would be too tedious
to be more in particulars.

4. 4 Discipline.
For discipline, the nature of the office shows it self here most, as in the
strongest pulse, working with all its might continually by their Canons and
Canon Law authority to oppose and suppress Christ's Kingly office and
government, to repair and restore the ruinous kingdom of Antichrist, and that
Iudas-like, Antichrist-like under a feigned profession of friendship to Christ.
2. Their offices uphold the Popish Canon law government, which has left us no
footsteps of the Apostolic discipline, and kingly office of Christ, wholly
swept away in the great deluge of Popery, and never yet restored as our first
reformers aimed, which may appear by the Preface to the commination in the
common prayerbooke, and were enough to set all reformed Spirits on work to
perfect what they in the infancy of reformation left undone or saw not clearly,
being then newly risen out of the long darksome night of Popery, and how should
their diligence shame our negligence in so bright a Sunshine of the Gospel as
we have had since, and stir up our spirits to search out and set up that
primitive discipline they aimed at now above fourscore years ago, which has
been so much disputed for, written for, and petitioned for at so many
Parliaments, and been only hundred by these Antichristian Prelates, whose
office it is to justle Christ from his throne, until the words of God be
fulfilled * Apoc. 17.1^.
, because they know the setting up of his kingdom will be the downfall of
theirs, they cannot stand together; therefore this has been long their
master-peice, with all their craft and cunning to uphold their Papal
government and tyranny by their Canons and Canon law, to crush all who have
stood in their way to oppose them, and plead for Christ's own discipline, using
them worse than Turks would have done as witness the multitude of Ministers
and people in prisons murdered, of thousands banished, of families scattered,
and estates ruined for standing for Christ's discipline. 2. The very nature of
their office is to thirst after the blood of Gods servants; Where Antipas my
faithful martyr is slain, there is Satan's throne, Apoc. 2.13. Of this
tyranny let one of themselves be witness, (out of whose mouth the Lord exacted
this testimony) Prelate Vaughan in a speech to Dr Morton long ago, (now
Prelate of Duresme) confessed that the persecution of these times were worse
than in Queen Mary's days, and gave reasons for it. Now let Prelate Morton
speak how they are increased in his time and by him, or if he will not, it may
be God may exact it of him sometime with more horror of conscience than any of
his predecessors, because he sins against greater light and more warnings; yea
let Prelate Usher speak whether his hands be clear of the bloody persecutions
in Ireland of late, and if they will not, the earth shall discover her blood,
and no more hide her slain: the infection of the bloody office is grown to
such a height as has not left any one of them untainted one way or other. 4.
If they all should hold their peace, the stones will cry in their High
Commissions and Courts, their books and Court Records shall testify to
posterity of their tyranny in government. So as it has been an old tried
Maxim of their Courts; That a good man makes a bad cause there: how has the
terror of their Courts made many Ministers and people, like the figgetree,
cast their fruit before they felt the storm, upon the first puff of wind of
appearance of troubles, when they have heard an I seen how other men have been
crushed and undone by them * Vestigia terrent.
. The very sight of a Puritan (as they brand them in their Courts, makes their
blood rise and their spirits rage and swell as against the mortal enemies of
their Dominion. And if the Papists plot of a long intended bloody Massacre had
prevailed and not of late from Heaven been prevented, I believe their white
sleeves would have been dyed in our blood ere now: their dog-like appetite so
hungers after the Puritanes blood, as the very nature of their office so to
do, and cannot be otherwise, for this is the fruit of the old withered stock
of Romes Hierarchy, and the longer this tree of Prelacy springing out of that
root shall stand, it grows taller and stronger, from the nourishment it
receives from the sap and root in the dunghill foundation of the Canon Law: and
according to the nature of the soil the fruit must be, and so of necessity
bring forth daily more bitter fruits to the Church of God, like apples of
Sodom. 5. The brightness of divine truth in this point of discipline, has so
dazzled the Prelaticall party, that of late they have confessed the discipline
of the Church of England to be the same with the Church of Rome; and yet they
are either so modest as ashamed to have it called Antichristian, or else so
impudent as to deny the Pope to be Antichrist; as whores and bawds love the
gain asid pleasarcof their filthy trade, but cannot endure the name. What a
shame is it to our Religion and Nation, to uphold Artichrists filthy trade and
government, the mother of all abominations, and mistress of whoredoms; a
thing so scandalous to all the reformed world of Protestants. 6. Let our dear
friends and exiles in America speak, and the whole Kingdom at home of the
scattered families of Christ's servants, witness what havoc they have made of
the Church; and what rule they keep in Court and Country, Town and City,
from the Metropolitan to the meanest son of the Church, how they pierck and
pranse it, above all Nobility and Centry, and become the only brave fellows
and fac t^^ums, in all affairs in the Commonweal as well as in the Church.
So as at length they have over-shadowed the whole State, Eclipsed the very
royal Authority, hindered the Sunshine of his Princely aspect from his loyal
subjects, and which is not the least of all, by the mists of then inventions
and smoke of their superstitious abominations, arising out of their
sulphurious Seas, like the Asphaltites, they darken the light of the sun of
Righteousness, and hinder us of the Lord Jesus his beautiful and shining
rays and influence of his sweet countenance, which like the Sun in his
strength, would revive all our droopings, and make the Land to flourish, when
once his throne, his rest were set up amongst us. O how would he make his rest
glorious, Isa. 11.10.

Thus at last to conclude this argument, we have found in the office of
Prelacy, the principal marks of Antichrist; corrupt doctrine, corrupt worship
and tyranny in government; all naturally flowing through their offices out of
the same dunghill foundation with Antichrist; for if it were not in the nature
and power of their offices thus to do, their kingdom would long ago have
fallen and come to nothing.

And therefore the Prelates are wrongfully blamed for abusing their offices,
thevery nature and right use whereof is to wast and overthrow the Church and
offices of Christ, to overturne Kingdoms and Laws, to propagate the kingdom
of Antichrist; the office is so bad they cannot use it otherwise, no more than
one of them can ride a horse blind and lame of all legs, over mountains and
hills, without hazard of his neck: the office or Episcopacy is the blind and
lame Jade which they are mounted upon to over-ride all divine and humane
authority, and will certainly break their necks ere long; and therefore the
best office their friends can do them, is to stop their gallopping, and to
save their necks help to dismount them.





And thus we see how under a pretense of love to Christ, they overthrow all his
offices, as Prophet, Priest, and King, and therefore the conclusion stands
firm, that they are not of Christ, but of Antichrist: and then our next
Argument tells us what will be the end of them.

Argument VII.
Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out,
Mat. 15.13. The Prelacy and their offices are no plants of the Fathers
planting. Ergo they shall be rooted out, and as an abominable branch (of the
old withered stock of Romes Hierarchy be cut down and cast out of the Church)
as the garments of the slain, (thrust through with the sword of authority)
and as a carcass trod under foot, Isa. 14.19.

The Major proposition is undeniable, being out of his mouth who is faithful
and true, Apoc. 13.14. and will make it good in his own time, for out of his
mouth goes a two edged sword, the sword of his Spirit, sharpening and thrusting
forth the sword of the Magistrate, which in due time he will cause to be
forbished and made bright to the slaughter of these his enemies, who will not
have him to rule over them, Luke 19.17.

The Minor is their part to prove. See Argument 4. And if they have any Letters
Patents for their offices, let them open their black boxes and produce them, or
else as polluted be put from the Priesthood, as those, Nehem. 7.64. that could
not reckon up their Genealogy from Livi. 2. In all the book of God from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of the Apocalypse, we find not one word of
warrant for the name or office of an Archbishop, Diocesan Bishop, Deane,
Archdeacon. Chancellor, or any of their orders, but are merely derived from
Antichrist, crept into the Church by carnal policy and flattery, and abuse of
Princes favors, and have no foundation but in the Canon Law of the Pope, as
before, Arg. 5. and 6. that's all the divine authority they have, and no wonder
if it be divine enough for them to stand upon, being the same with Antichrist;
for Diocesan Bishops were the first step whereby the Papacy mounted to its
height, and are the pillars of its support even to this day. But when the
Prelates father their authority, some upon God the Father, some upon God the
Son, and others upon the holy Ghost, they declare themselves to be of that
stamp Christ reproves and accuses of blasphemy, and to be of the Synagogue of
Satan, who say they are Jews and are not but do lie, Apoc. 3.9. Who say they
are Apostles and are not, but are found liars, Apoc. 2.2. So then when they
boast of divine authority, they are right like themselves, for that is another
mark of Antichrist, the adding of lies to all their abominations, for which
they shall be cast out of the holy City, Apoc. 22.15.

3. The whole stream of truth flowing out of the Scriptures, as the fountain
runs so strongly against them that down they go to the Sea of Rome, that dead
Sea, to fetch their pedigree from that ancient family of long Enmity to
Christ, the Ancient of days, and fountain of all Antiquity, before whom
nothing was, and without whom nothing was made or done, Joh. 1.2, 3.

That this is so, see clearly Mr Paul Baine his diocesan trial, the very
Prelates rats-bane, and will burst them ere long; it savours so sweetly of the
Scriptures fragrant fullness and excellency by the breathings of Gods Spirit
(which is the Prelates deadly poison) that none of them durst ever take it in
hand to answer it, now about twenty years published; and there who will may
read the doom of their divine authority.

4. If they fly to Antiquity, we ans. 1. We acknowledge no antiquity, but
what is according to the Scriptures, the Judge of all Controversy; its a sure
rule of the learned against the Papists, that Whatsoever is not according to
the Word, but by or besides the Word is against the Word. 2. We answer with
Cyprian the flower and sweetest bloome of all antiquity, a Martyr and a
Bishop, but no Lord, or Diocesan Bishop. Epist. ad Pomp. Epist. 74. Antiquity
without truth, is antiquity of error, and antiquity without truth is nothing
worth says our learned Whitakers, Controverse de Eccles. quaest. 5.

But to leave them more without excuse, we will prosecute yet one trial more of
them, which we learn from our great Master the Lord Jesus, for the discovery
of false Prophets, who come in sheep clothing, but inwardly, are avening
Wolves, By their fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 7.15, 16, 20. False Prophets
in Scripture always set forth such as have no lawful but a pretended office,
so the Diocesan Bishops, etc. are the false Prophets we have to do withal;
the name of Prophets, so the name of Bishops is the sheeps clothing they come
in to do the works of Satan and Antichrist; the very name of Bishop (which in
it self is good) is like Jacobs voice with Esaus hands, there is much power of
Satan used under the shelter of words and names, as of great force to deceive,
Mountebanck-like, and therefore says Luther, Luther. de falso nom. and ordine
Episcoporum. Tom. 2. p. 330.
they show or set out themselves as if they were Pastors of the Church, as if
they were Bishops, when they are mere shadows, sacrificing persons, dumb
statues, and painted truncks, under the lofty high title of Bishops,
destroying the whole world: and therefore having been too long deceived with
words and names, we now will follow Christ's rule, By their fruits to know them.

The office of Prelacy, is the lame Jade we spoke of even now, and has been
long tried by the Word, but now is grown so hot ridden, as will not abide that
kind of handling, therefore the last trial of them is this, By their fruits
to know them, and so by their footsteps we shall see which way they are running.

Now the fruits of the office, we have showed in the foregoing Argument to be
the overthrowing of the offices of Christ, and propagating the Kingdom of
Antichrist, Ex mero officio, as the proper fruits of their functions, and
naturally flowing through the office out of that filthy lake of Romes
authority (as before) and therefore the fruits must needs be according to the
soil, bitter fruits to the Church of God. And here we will take a further
trial of them, and how they grow and increase in fruitfulness.

Such plants as are of the Fathers planting, the Son purges that they may
bring forth more fruit, Ioh. 15.2. Fruits unto holiness: Ephesians. 4.24. But we
see when these men once enter into a Bishops Sea, or other their offices, they
soon wither and cast their fruit; how many of learning and good abilities,
before they entered into these corrupt offices, have quickly after fallen under
the withering curse of the Fig Tree, Never fruit grew more upon thee. And how
can it be otherwise, there is such a plaguey infection lies in the office arising
out of the filthy dunghill foundation, which rots and blasts all the fruits of
their learning and moral parts, and renders them wholly like the soil they
live in, and corrupt air of the Episcopal Seas they breath in: here is the
infection, the poison that kills them sooner or later; it is in the office, not
so much in the person, but as the office infects him; therefore no safety to
their persons till they be put out of the infected places to lodge in fresh
air. A Caveat.
Their counsel then is not good who would only remove and change the persons,
and put other learned men in the places. O it is the greatest cruelty you can
do to these men's souls, you had better place them to live in a Pesthouse, or
cast their bodies alive into the Mari Mortuo, than into a Bishops Sea, if they
be good men they should so save their souls, whereas this way you hazard their
souls and bodies both. Let none then be so cruel to their friends, to put
them upon this preferment on so desperate a condition, wherein its as possible
for them to bring forth good fruit as for an Apricock to grow in a dunghill.
We have Christ's assurance for it, A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit; the tree still signifies the office not the person, for its spoken of
false Prophets, and trial of them by their fruits; Do men gather grapes on
thorns, or figs on thistles, still shows it to be the office of those false
Prophets, where Christ never ordained any good fruits to grow, and therefore
none to be expected, but of a corrupt tree corrupt fruit; Therefore every tree
which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire,
Mat. 7.16. to 20. This good fruit as we showed even now is fruit unto
holiness.

We will try then the fruits of this tree of Episcopacy, and the several
branches of its offices, and we find them all taste of the dunghill soil,
they are rooted in and receive their proper nourishment from, and are no fruit
unto holiness: For we do find by woeful experience, that the fruits of
their offices and government has filled the Land with all profaneness, and
sinning with greediness in all licentiousness, and therefore unholy offices,
an unholy government, which not only countenance sincks of sin and
wickedness, but live in and are maintained by the vices of men, as the hire of
whores, selling of sins and filthiness, commutations of penance, and
oppressions of his Majesty's Subjects, and disabling them for King and
Countries service. This is the chief maintenance of their offices, which if
once, with the Canon Law that warrants these practices, were taken away, we
should quickly see this great Amphitheater of Prelacy moulder down and fall
into the dunghill from whence it arose, and then one fair flood of Justice
from this honorable Parliament, would soon sweep away all the filth together,
and cleanse the Land of these corrupt and contagious offices.

The seats of their offices, their Cathedral Cities and Palaces are very
donnes of all filthiness and profaneness, the most unclean birds in the
Country resort to dwell under their shadow, as having there liberty to live
in all licentiousness. The name of holiness there, is as a Jew to an Egyptian
an abomination; their Abbeyes, Deaneries and Episcopal Seas are like the
A^phaltites, pitchy sulphurious Lake, nothing that favors of or breaths
holiness can live there. Their Courts and Judgements-seats are so many
batteryes against holiness, thundering and flaming out fire and smoke from
their Canons and murdering pieces, at the very name of (or persons that look
after) holiness, as the mortal enemies of their dominion and government,
against which if a man let the least word fall, presently ex officio
excommunicate him, ipso facto, ere he stir from them, he shall not have a
warning peace to be gone, but a whole battery of Canons discharged upon him, in
such heat and rage, fire and smoke of their fulminations, as he shall scarce
know what ground he stands on, till for change of air he be hald away to a
stinking prison, to complain to the bare-walls. Oh if he be a Puritan, that's
condemnation in the abstract, enough to rid the Land of him, yea the world too,
if they get their opportunity.

And for their language in the exercise of their offices, they speak half in
the language of Ashdod, Nehem. 13.24. like the mingled people, Jere. 50.37. of
many religions, yea of any save the true, because that's no friend to them, and
their functions.

But because they boast so much of their descent from Christ and his Apostles,
but are found liars, Apoc. 2.2. We will (by their leave) take a walk further
through their Orchards, and taste of their ripest fruits and try what soil
they taste of, whether the fruits of the functions of Christ and his Apostles,
or of Antichrists functions and offices.

1. When Christ was to leave his dear Disciples in a troublesome world, he
left his peace with them for a Legacy, Ioh. 15.27. to comfort them in all their
troubles, and commands them to love one another because the world would hate
them, as it hated him, Ioh. 15.17. But these Prelates by their vexatious
offices, suffer Christ's Ministers and servants to have little peace, and less
love, hate them Cain-like, even to the death; but a Papist is a brave companion
for them, at Table, in Coach, in counsel and familiarity, in all their
affairs; as Blackwell the Priest said long ago, I wonder, said he, of what
religion your Bishops are, us they persecute because we are Papists, but they
hate a Puritan, and of the two, they love us the better: and how that love is
increased, shows they are birds of the black feather, (like the Raven that
after she once got out of the Arc never returned) so, as soon as ever one of
these Prelates is got into a Bishops Sea, they are flowne out of the Church,
the infection of the foul nest like the plague of Leprosy, strikes them, some
sooner, some later, so as they take to their wings and fly home to Rome, the
resting place of their ambitious minds, and who can blame them (for it is the
nature of the office, to be like and love their mother) and not rather help
them forward to her. Sic canibus catulos similes sic matribus haedos. Virgil.
Of this their flight to Rome, see it clearly in their endeavors of
reconciling us to their Mother, and others of them not so skillful in the art,
as forward in the flight, laboring openly to reduce us wholly to Rome, Ex
professo tanquam ex officio, as the very nature of the office so to do, to
beget and bring forth many children to their mother, there is some plain dealing
in these if they do not turn with the wind, which now troubles them in their
flight and work. For as birds nodding their heads, let us see which way they
are flying, so the Prelates and their sons of the Church by their nodding
Eastward, let us see their aim is Rome-ward. And when in this late Episcopal
quarrel with the Scots by their sole instigation, they saw a necessity of
open flight to the Popes and Papists aid, or lose their fat Bishoprics,
expecting this fair season for their flight, they were so ready for it, as
they had their excuses ready before hand. [That if Popery came into England
again, the Puritanes were the cause of it * Prelate of Duresme.
] as Tenterton Steeple is the cause of Goodwin Sands.

2. Christ would not meddle with the Magistrates authority in dividing the
Inheritance, Luke 12.13.14. as without compass of his office, his kingdom was
not of this world, Ioh. 18.36. These Prelates are wholly worldly, must be
chief in Parliaments, in the Kings Counsels, in chief offices. Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, etc. and oversway all the affairs in Court and
Country, as if by their pretended divine Authority, they had full Commission
from Christ to divide the world amongst them, and Pope-like challenge all the
Kingdoms of the world, and the ends of the Earth for a possession, from Psalm.
2. Thus like Foxes on the mountains, Ezekiel. 13.4. on mountains of prey ( Psalm.
76.4.) mounted in their High Commissions and Courts, like to the Mountains of
Leopards, Cant. 4.8. they prey upon all that come near them; fine and
imprison, and cease on men's lands and estates, and divide many an Orphans
inheritance among them.

3. John the Baptist the greatest Prophet bome of women, Luke 7.28. his
clothing was but course, Camells hair and a letherne girdle about his loins,
his diet but homely, Locusts and wild honey, Mat. 3.4. These Prelates ruffle
it bravely in silks and velvets, and pure Lawne sleeves, like Butchers ever
ready to have their hands in blood, and the meanest son of the Church must have
a silken girdle with a rose up to his nose, as if his pride were his persume,
and for his diet it must be dainty fare, no Butchers meat, Pheasant and
Venison for their weak stomachs (oppressed with studies but of what kind? Quare)
washed down with the most delitious wines. As they! so their Prebends must
keep residence at the Bishops Sea, (but not at their Parishes) to feast the
Clergy while the flocks are starving with cold service of a St John. Whose
belly is their God, whose glory their shame, who mind earthly things Phil.
3.19. Of whom that of the Monks of old is verified.

O monachi vestri st machi sunt amphora bacchi,
Vos estis deus est testis turpissima pestis.
4. Paul accounted all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ, and counted them but dung, and for to gain Christ suffered the loss
of all things, Phil. 3.8. These Prelates account all gain they by their
offices gather, and pick out of men's purses by fines and taxes and illegal
courses to gain Antichrist. Witness Paul's, and such like good works they cry
up, to make gorgeous Temples, nests for Idols, Images, Altars, Crucifixes, and
rich Ornaments, baits and allurements to carnal sense, to draw the ignorant to
their mothers fornications in her old rotten age. And for loss, before they
will lose any thing of their dignity to gain Christ, they will hazard the
loss of Christ and all these three Kingdom to Rome and Spain or France.

5. Peter calls Paul, Beloved brother these like Spanish Donns, must be called
of their brethren, My Lord, your Grace, and Right reverend Fathers, and be
bowed to like Princes.

6. Peter is content to stoop so low as to write himself in the lowest style
belonging to his function, An Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1. These on the contrary assume
the highest styles of Earls in their writing; as Will: Cant, Tho: Duresme,
Jos: Exon. Exonored of his spectacles in his old days, for he has eyes for
other men to see with, but it is at blind man buff. But thanks be to God we
can see so much with our own eyes, that they are begun to fall, when Jos: Exon
is fallen so low, as from a Father to a son of the Church, with the meanest
Priest, as having too long lorded it over his brethren.

7. We are commanded to fear God, honor the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change, Pro. 24.31. These Prelates are so Cock-sure in their
warm nests as in the clefts of the Rocks, that they show little fear of God
or his revenging Justice, as if they had writ over their gates, Mock God, Mock
Devil, Babellike at defiance with both; I sit as a Queen and shall never be
moved, Isa. 47. Apoc. 18. And as the Spaniard had writ over the gates of the
Buss in Brabant or Boss-le due, this blasphemous Inscription, When the Buss is
taken God shall be a liar; as I have heard of credible hands; but God made the
Hollander blot out that blasphemy, and left them liars. 2. For honor of the
King, they so far observe it as their own honor is concerned, and in the
first place regarded, the other must but serve it. 3. And because they have not
honor enough, or be high enough, they are busy meddling with Papists and
Jesuits, the great artists of the world for changes of Kings and Kingdoms and
States, turning them up-side down, to change our Laws, our Religion, and
liberties, and lives too; and to plant the Land with Spaniards, as we had found
ere now, if the Spanish Fleet last year had once landed, but blessed be God,
who without us prevented it, and broke that devilish design, and gives us
fair warning to take heed to such Prelates, so officious in their offices,
whose nature sures so with the Jesuits, always digging under ground and
working changes. They have sucked all the nourishment to higher advancement
that this State can afford them, and so full ripe for a Miter and a Cardinals
cap, which here are not, that it is high time they were gone where they may have
them, rather than they bring Rome and Spain to us to obtain them.

These are a taste of some of their ripest fruits we find as yet, though
doubtless others may find many more, but blessed be God who has a little
shaken their fruits that now our hoggs do eat them.

Yet certainly Right Honorable Worthies now assembled in Parliament, if this
tree of Episcopacy none of Gods planting, but a plant of Satan's planting,
sprung up in the dunghill of the Papacy, naturally bringing forth these bitter
fruits, be of you suffered to stand but till another solstice of warm
Sunshine come over from Rome or Spain, we shall find more dangerous and
deadly fruits of it ere long, Acherontam vendo. What mischiefs will they not
hatch ere they lose their gainful offices, their pleasant lofty dignities;
will never be content in a lower condition; nay, before they quit their ground,
as stout Soldiers and Champions of the Romish Monarchy, they will be busy
under ground with the Jesuits, the chief Masters of fireworks, to spring a
mine of some horrid plot of a new invention, to make all these three Kingdoms
shake: as some of their excommunicate brethren of Scotland bolted out of late;
alas their hearts were so heavy as they must vent some wind rather than burst.
Are not these brave Spirits will venture upon such hard service for their
Master? The King of Spain we hear stands in need of such artists to blow up
the walls of Lisbone, it is pity he should want them.

And therefore Right Honorable, bestirre your selves betime to meet those
underminers with a countermine, to spring them and their works together: there is
no other way of safety to our King and his posterity, and all these three
Kingdoms, so linked together in so many bands, as we must of necessity stand
and fall together. I love to speak plain English, and think none will blame me
of temeritie or rashness at this time, but such as speak too much Spanish. I
do but the office of a Beacon, which is Monstrare, non ducere nec docere, to
show the approaches of dangers, if you prevent not. Men use not to blame him
who lies Sentinel perdue as a lost man, for giving warning of danger.

Though now it might seem we have enough of the Prelates windy divine
authority, now found none of Gods planting as by their fruits at Christ's
command we have tried and found them: and therefore nothing now wanting, but
the execution of his own sentence, to be rooted out, which we now expect by the
diligent hand of this Honorable Parliament. Yet may I not pass till I have
met with Tho: Duresme in particular, because he has deceived many, both
Papists and Protestants in their expectations, and by his leave, I would feign
love my Religion and Country above his dignity or regalitie more fit for one
of the Kings Sons than any Prelate, and therefore for his cause we will have
one bout more about the office.

Argument VIII.
Those offices and that government in the Church, which nourish ignorance and
blindness, an idle, ignorant, and unsound Ministry, persecute our Religion
established, and the orthodox Preachers and professors of it, and cherish and
countenance Popery and Papists, and their dangerous meeting and Masses, are not
of Christ, but of Antichrist. But such are the offices and government of
Diocesan Bishops and the rest of that rabble. Ergo not of Christ but of
Antichrist.

The Major if they will cavil at here, see it made good Arg. 6. And so we
proceed to the proof of the Minor; which if it be all made good in the office
and officers of Tho: Duresme, accounted one of the best in the bunch, it may be
worth something, to move the rest in modesty to take it home to them without
more ado.

1. For ignorance and blindness, an ignorant idle and unsound Ministry,
persecution of Religion established, and the orthodox preachers and professors
of it, though too conformable, his diocese and government may better challenge
the Metropolitan precedence, than his kingly regalitie: none of them, not W^^
Cant. or the winged little Wren, has flowne more swiftly home to Rome in their
practices, at least he may deserve the place next to them, none of them h^ ^o
sco^d their Seas of sound Preachers, (as if they were Pirates to the Prelates
office) as he has done, so (...) few puritan Preachers (as they term them)
whom his worse reputed predecessors, had left in that diocese, and some others
brought in by men well affected to preaching in that poor ignorant Country,
(an object of this honorable Parliaments pity) he has had the honor to root
them out. So as in one poor County of Northumberland and town of Newcastle,
in about seventy two or more Parishes (besides Chappells) whereof diverse
livings of two three and four hundred per annum, as we are credibly informed
by some of the Inhabitants of credit, there is scarce a Minister left that is not
a superstitious innovator, or not popish, and Arminian, or that make conscience
of preaching, but as they please at their leisure, or regard the peoples
souls, but prey upon their fleeces, and poll their purses, August. de pastore.
like soule-murtherers, as Augustine calls them. And some Gentlemen who have
been at the charge of keeping godly Preachers, have been robbed of them by these
Wolves ravening, that lay waste Countries and Congregations; such rule he
keeps. If Tho: Duresms house were so kept as he has kept Gods, there would be
nothing but hungar and hard walls, and cold entertainment for his fat Prebends:
and who knows but the Lord may ere long send as much famine amongst them, as
they have had feasting, and the poor flocks starving. And for his County
Palatine of Duresme, that soil cannot bear sound preaching and Preachers, no
plants for his Palatinate, but if you will talk of fat parsons and parsonages,
fat Prebends, pluralists, and tot quots, etc. his soil affords as good store
of these fat Cattle, like kine of Bashan (as it does of fat Oxen) nestling in
fat livings of four, five, six, and seven hundred pound per annum, and as full
stall-fed as any in the Land: most of which livings have been of late supplied
by his kinsmen and others his friends, brought in by him into chief offices,
popish and superstitious, of Dr Cozens garb, so as he has out gone his
predecessors herein. In summa, Will: Cant. or little Wrenns diocesses cannot
parallel his, for a crew of dumb dogs, Sir John's, alchouse-keepers, profane
antic fellows, more fit for a stage than a pulpit and other popish Arminian
Mountebancks, that vend the Italian wares as fast as any in the Land. So that
in this particular, he is the greatest soule-murtherer in the Land without the
mountains of Wales, woe will be to him for it; and for oppression, and
Enclosures, etc. his poor Palatines say, that their case is little better than
the poor Irish Crammacrees under the Lord Lieutenant.

2. For Superstition, let his Cathedral and Sea of Durham witness, and be
visited, it will be found as well fethered as the Wrens nest: and for Tho.
Duresme himself, he is so zealous of Altar-worship, and such fopperies, as
before he miss of his devotion, he will duck to a Tomb, in stead of an Altar,
its good to be sure.

3. For countenancing Popery, and cherishing Papists, his Chancellor,
Archdeacon, and Officialls, in riding their Circuits, make these their chief
familiars: but for puritanes, they toss and tumble them in their Courts, till
they be wearied out of their callings, and Country too, Tho: Duresme himself
threatening to rid the Land of them, till then, says he, it will never be at
rest. And if the times had not suddenly turned above all humane expectation,
its most probable by many prodigious signs, that the first bloody massacre of
all that but favored our religion as well as the putitanes, Newcastle be
thankful to God, thou have escaped a scourging.
should have begun in his Diocese, in Northumberland, and town of New astle,
full stuffed with his palatine Papists, it seems, to that end, and those of the
most dangerous in the Land, never molested till the Scots scattered them.

The said Tho: Duresme amongst his palatine Soldiers, most Papists, in these
late Episcopal broils was observed to have in his Coach with him one of the
most dangerous Papists in the North, and fit to be one of his Council of War
in his regalitie, and in that Episcopal quarrel with the Scots; which being
publicly taken notice of, was very offensive to many, and scandalous to his
Majesty's government, and to his pretended divine Authority, to see Tho:
Duresme so accompanied: I know not what he can say to this, but that he left
his Rochet and office at his Sea of Duresme, and now in his regalitie no more
Bishop; as the Lutherane Priests in Germany, when they go to a feast, lay
down their black gown, saying, Lie thou there Priest, now I Will be as joviall
as the best of you: so Camelion-like change into any color.

He also nourishes in his Diocese a company of popish-Arminian Ministers, of
Will: Cants. chief correspondence, by whom (as by the like in other parts of
the Land) he has had constant intelligence of all matters, and of all the
persons and families that favor our religion in those parts, that once they
might get a day to rid the world of them.

He also connives at dangerous meetings of the most stirring Papists, their
baptismes and night burialls, with tapers, and torches, and bells ringing, but
without the use of the Service Book, and against their own Canons: whereby it
appears, their Service Book and Canons serve only against puritanes, and
must not be discharged against Papists. So as the chief Towns of his
diocese, are of late become dens of Papists, and places of resort to their
meetings and Masses, and of traffic and trade in their Books and Beads and
Romish Merchandise.

All which considered, he may be said to have given the lie to all his former
works and writings against the Papists. So that it may be verified of him, that
he is the greatest Papist friend that ever came in Duresme since our
reformation. See here how the Antichristian office has blasted all his fruits,
and made him the shame of his old age, and of that pretended divine office of
Episcopacy, which now the Lord will have made naked to the world. And all this
flows out of the dunghill foundation and filthy nature of the office, serving
principally to propagate Antichrists kingdom, to waste the Church and
overthrow the offices of Christ. So as it would seem that Episcopacy now is
come to its full height and ripeness in this Land: it has ever since our
reformation opposed Christ's kingly office, as its mortal enemy, whereby its
grown to this height at this day to overthrow his Prophetical and Priestly
offices also: that all the world may see, as in the Sunshine, that the offices
and government of the Prelacy, are merely Antichristian.

By this time, I think, they have done, and so have we with their divine
Authority, as having too long raked in that dunghill, and therefore we come
now to the issue. That since they cannot reckon up their genealogy from Levy,
(from another divine authority than the Canon Law) let them as polluted be put
from the Priesthood, Nehem. 7 64. Thus did good Nehemiah and the Princes, true
patterns of reformation before us. The Lord put into the hearts of his
Majesty, and the Worthies of this Honorable Parliament, to follow their
example, and to cleanse the Land of this polluted Priesthood and filthy dunghill
offices of Antichristian Authority, which has so long eclipsed the Gospels
light, and the name and fame of our Nations glory in the eyes of all the
reformed world, who with the bulk and body of Popery, have also cast off this
heavy yoke and regiment of Episcopacy.

Therefore as not compatible with Christ's kingly office and scepter of his
World, with Our royal Kings Authority, our Sions peace, and Kingdoms glory
in the flourishing of Christ's Kingdom. We hope this Honorable Parliament,
will no longer suffer this tree of Satan's planting to stand, but root it out,
according to Christ's own sentence and will, Away with all the reverend
Fathers, and their sons of the Church, with all their trumpery.
Mat. 17.16.20. and 15.13. Cut off from Babell root and branch, son and
nephew, name and remnant, destroy her utterly, let nothing of her be left, Ier.
50.26. Isa. 14.22. think it not to be sufficient (for you will not find it
so) to curb the insolency, and lop off the lofty spreading branches of this
tree of Episcopacy, when the Lord Jesus has said it shall be rooted out, and
has laid the axe of his Word to the root, and will have it cut down, Mat.
3.10. and cap. 17 20. and east into the fire.

Do you Right Honorable and Noble workmen of the Lord, take it as a choice
blessing, that now the Lord has by a Parliament put into your hands the axe of
authority, to be also laid to the root of this tree, and count it your
greatest honor, every one of you, to lend it a blow, and it will suddenly
fall; God has done his part, if you set to yours, he will put strength into
your hands against all difficulties; Ios. 1.9.
be strong and of good courage, these Cananites shall be but bread for you,
Numb. 14.9. for the Lord is with you: to remove mountains of difculties that
lie in your way, if ye faithfully trust to his assistance, ye shall say to
these mountains, remove and they shall be cast into the Sea, Mat. 21.22. Plow
up the very roots, and weed the ground, the land of it, that nothing of it be
left, and the place will be a fruitful soil. Their pluralities and fat
Livings they have enclosed and impaled to serve their ease, their pomp and
pleasures, will be as Sharon, Sheepfolds for Christ to feed his flocks by his
Shepherds tents, Cant. 1.8. Therefore do not this work of the Lord
negligently; if you curb their greatness and lop the branches never so much,
and leave the root, the office in the ground, within their warm nests and
Episcopal Seas, though you shall bind it down with Iron bands, and lay upon
it all the weight of good Laws you can possibly devise, it will through the
sent of the puddle water, Job 14.9.
bud and spring again next season, and bring forth more bitter fruits than
ever: Episcopacy, (not the persons is the root of all our evils) it is that
unclean bird we spoke of that is flowne out of the Arc, and will never be
drawn to your lure, never be disciplined. Set up Christ's Kingdom, and it will
bring in Arm-fulls of blessings to us and our posterity, and make our Kingdom
flourish. If men were but once acquainted with that royal Scepter and
government, his sweet and easy yoke, they would quickly see the benefit of
reformation, and what a heavy yoke the Prelacy has been to our King and State
and whole Land.

Now having showed the unlawfulness and evils of the offices, and tried them
both by the Word and by their fruits to be Antichristian. If any yet will be so
venturous against so clear light to open their mouths to plead for
Episcopacy, and oppose the setting up of Christ's Kingly office in his throne
and glory, we will show them the danger of it for their warning, in two shorts
Arguments.

Argument IX.
If the Prelates and their officers in the exercise of their unlawful offices,
do many things in the worship of God without warrant of the Word of God, they
are guilty of the sin and punishment of Nadab, and Abihu, of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram. But so do the Prelates and their Officers: as witness the whole
source of their superstitions, and men's inventions of old, and late innovated
abominations of Jewish Popish and Heathenish fopperies and Ceremonies, which
they have brought into the worship of God.

Ergo they are guilty of the like sin and punishment.

Argument X.
If Nadab and Abihu, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were so strangely punished for
once presuming (in the exercise of their lawful offices) to do that which
they had no warrant for. What may the Prelates and all their confederates
expect, but unheard of plagues, and strange punishments, for not once but many
years, (after many warnings, and against light and knowledge abounding) doing
many things in the worship of God without warrant of the word of God, and that
in the exercise of their unlawful offices. As those perished wonderfully in
the withstanding Moses and Aaron, and the word of God, shall not these Prelates
and their partakers perish much more wonderfully in the withstanding of Christ,
far greater than Moses.

But Nadab and Abihu, were so strangely punished as fire from heaven consumed
them, Levit. 10.1. and the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed up quick,
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and all their company, in the sight of Moses and
Aaron, and all the people; as we may see at large, Numb. 16.

Ergo the usurping Prelates and all their partakers, may look out for some
strange unheard of punishment, from the Lord of Hoasts waiting for them and all
that join with them in opposing Christ in his Kingly office and discipline. An
end is come, the end is come, it watches for them, behold it is come, says
the Lord, Ezekiel. 7 6. It is recorded to all posterity to the worlds end, as a
brand of infamy upon all those that did partake in that opposition of Moses;
They perished in the gainsaying of Core, Jude 11. Let all that plead for and
partake in the unlawful offices and practices of the Prelates, take heed to
this in time: for the Lord is a strong God, who judges the whore and all her
bratts and abominations, Partake not in her sins, least ye partake in her
plagues, Apoc. 18.4.8.

Come out of the tents of these wicked men, Numb. 16.26. Object. The maine
objection for Prelacy answered.
Oh but (say some) we have had godly Martyrs, and many learned men that have
been Diocesan Bishops as these are, and their government been long approved,
and Religion under it wonderfully flourished as in any Nation; And many worthy
Instruments both in the Magistracy and Ministry, who have submitted to this
government, which sure they would not have done if it were unlawful and
Antichristian.

Answ. 1. The Church and faithful Ministers have not all light at once or by
one instrument, or yet by many worthy lights, the remembrance of whom is
precious, and therefore as we would not detract any thing of their deservings
from them, so must we not stick fast in their footsteps and go no further. For
still daily more and greater light of the Gospells brightness is to be
expected till the fullness of the Gentiles light come in, and be swallowed up
in the Jews fullness, Romans 11.12. Christ Jesus comes to his people as the
Sun arises, first, there is the dawning, then the darkness expelled, and still
brighter light, till the Sun shine in his full strength.

Secondly, These worthy Martyrs that were Diocesan Bishops, in the dawning of
the Gospels light after a long darksome night of Popery, must be confessed to
rise up in their Rochets out of the Papacy, and saw not presently into the
unlawfulness of their office, yet some of them did and resigned, as Latimer;
but they set themselves against the most clear corruptions in doctrine and
worship, so far as they had light; as for Discipline it was so swept away in
that great deluge of Popery, that no footsteps of it were to be seen in those
times, or if any thing of it, yet but as the blind man in the Gospel
recovering his sight, saw men walking like trees, very darkly and confusedly.

Thirdly, As their sight grew somewhat clearer, they saw into a godly
discipline in the primitive Church, at which they aimed, as in the Preface to
the Common prayer book at the Commination may be seen, and implies they saw
into another discipline than that they had amongst them, and brought with them
out of the Papacy, and is used to this day, therefore not the right discipline,
and yet that primitive discipline, it is as probible they saw at a great
distance even then, and so left it to be searched out more clearly of the
following generation, and if they did see it any thing clearly, and if any
thing hindered their light of breaking out into a more full reformation, we may
thank even the Diocesan Bishops for it, whose love of pre-eminence as ours now
was the chief let in reformation in those times, as our Histories show. So as
we have little cause to boast of Bishops, as instruments of our resormation, if
we were well acquainted with the state of those times, and what hinderers of
Reformation the Bishops were, yea some of them that after suffered as Martyrs
in Queen Mary's time.

Fourthly, Some Bishops suffering as Martyrs after their morning light was
clouded again with hot persecutions and storms arising, even out of the same
Seas they were in, by the changing of the wind in Queen Mary's time, is no
more an argument from their martyrdom that their office was good, than if a
Cardinal in Rome or Spain should profess the Gospel, and suffer for it: his
office were nevertheless still Antichristian.

Fifthly, When these storms were over, and a greater light broke out in Queen
Elizabeth's time, of a brighter Sunshine, multitudes of learned and godly
Ministers began to see clearly the foundation of Babell lay close and unseene
in the office of Episcopacy, and in the keeping out Christ's Kingly office
especially, and therefore preached, writ, disputed, and suffered for it, even
as Martyrs of those times by the tyranny of the Prelates who still oppose it to
this day; as witness Cartwright, Parker, Fenner, Childerley, Chatterton,
Traverse, Reinolds, and a many more; and at King James his first entrance about
a thousand Ministers stood for Reformation of the Episcopal government, and
for setting up of Christ's Kingly office, who were in a sew years wasted and
spent and banished and devoured of these ravenous Wolves, wives and children
undone, and many families scattered, estates ruined for opposing this
prelaticall office and government, so as little cause have we to boast of the
office, it has been a bloody office to this day. Also many living yet can
witness how a reformation has been still petitioned for to Parliaments, even
to this day: though with no success, because their sins were not full, nor
ours repented of and reformed.

Sixthly, For many worthy instruments in Magistracy and Ministry, submitting to
Episcopal government. Ans. 1. Divine examples, (but not humane) do bind the
Conscience, and make their practices rules to us; secondly, the Churches of a
whole Nation, yea of many Nations, abounding with men of excellent parts, both
in the Magistracy and Ministry, may yet long neglect some of Gods Ordinances,
partly through ignorance, partly for want of assistance of the supreme
Magistrate, as all the times of the Judges, and many good Kings, even from
Joshua to the time of Artaxerxes, the feast of keeping of boothes was
neglected. Because, first, there is much natural blindness in the best men:
secondly, the Church often too careless in some weighty things: thirdly, men
are ready to sit down ere their work be half done, soon weary in so great and
public works as Reformation is: the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Thus as they of old long neglected the feast of boothes, so have we too long
neglected Christ's discipline and government: the Lord pardon it.

Seventhly and lastly, for the flourishing of Religion under the Prelates
government, we have no cause to thank them; they have always persecuted the
light and life of it, and done their best to put out the light, and to bring in
an Egyptian darkness again: secondly, it has been those they have most
persecuted who have spread the greatest light, for a persecuted light is ever
the brightest, which shows it to be of God, and like to him, though darkness
comprehend it not; to him be glory that we have any light after so hot
persecutions, and so many banished, this is a sign our persecuted light shall
prevail: Tandem bona causa triumphat, was that renowned old Duke of Saxons
Motto in all his bitter troubles with Luther. Thirdly, though some see it not,
so sleepy-headed in their ease and pleasures, they little regard the hazard
Gods Ark is in, yet others that have watched long in the long winter night of
the Churches troubles, for the dawning of the day of deliverance, have found
ill fruits of flourishing of Religion, and seen a great decay of the power of
godliness these many years past, and many Ministers and professors fallen,
some in following the sway of the times for worldly things, others through
pusillanimitie of spirit, into great decay of gifts and deadness, all for want
of Christ's discipline, to keep all men in their several stations, and active
in obedience; and to hedge in the Church from the inroades of enemies. The Lord
teach us the use and benefit of, and open our eyes to see the want of, and
pardon our so long neglect of Christ's Kingly office.

Conclusion of all.
Since now the pretended divine Authority of the Hierarchy is failed in the
foundation, and left them no footing, but in the filthy dunghill of the Canon
Law of the Popes Authority, exalted above the Scriptures, in which they Mother
like have built their nests, as in the clefts of the rocks of the seven hilled
City. And they in Gods just judgment so blinded and of late confounded in
their Counsels, as to cast off his Majesty's royal Authority, by which they
have stood too long: and not a little trenched upon, they deserve to find and
feel, that He bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4. but is Gods vindex of
his own and subjects wrongs many ways, so especially in opposing Christ so
long in his Kingly office, and now at last in all his offices. As they by the
abuse of his Majesty's sword have ruined many, so by the same sword let them
perish; Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; He that
kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword, Genesis 9.6. Apoc. 13.10.
Matthew. 26.52. the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and we wait the fulfilling
of it. The Lord put into the hearts of our royal King, and of this honorable
Parliament, to fulfill his will upon Babell and all her bratts and
abominations, Amen, Amen.

Jerem. 50.24.26. I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken O
Babylon, and wast not aware, thou art sound and also caught, because thou have
striven against the Lord. Tread her in heaps, destroy her utterly, let nothing
of her be left.

The benefits of Reformation of Discipline.
Then shall Christ's workmen with great alacrity begin to build the house of
God, which these men have defaced and defiled, and make a beautiful habitation
for the Lord Jesus to dwell and delight in, and great shall be his glory in the
midst of us, in presence and protection. Then shall our eyes see our King in
his glory on his throne, and our Jerusalem in peace, Isa. 33.17.20.

Then also shall King Charles his throne be more glorious than any his
predecessors; then shall Judgment and Justice flow forth as a mighty River, to
sweep away all sin and wickedness.

Then shall our King be to the Just as rain upon the grass new mowen; Psalm.
72.
the Mountains shall bring forth peace, and the little hills righteousness;
Court and Country shall flourish, the Land shall bring forth her increase, and
God even our God shall bless us, and all the ends of the Earth shall sear
him, Psalm. 67.6. When they hear and see what great things he will do for us.

A short appendix touching Discipline.
Since in this great and honorable High Court of Parliament, every subject is
so concerned as bound to submit to what shall be therein established, therefore
as a member and well-wisher of the welfare of the whole body, I crave leave
for a word or two concerning discipline. Since it is now in every man's mouth,
what form of discipline we shall have, when the Prelaticall, as none of
Christ's, shall be justly abolished. Which seems to me to upbraid the ignorance
and unthankfulness of this age, (the fruits of Episcopacy) as if men in the
Sunshine should complain of darkness: or as if the Spirit of Christ which
descended upon the Apostles, teaching all things, and leading them into all
truth, should have left them wandering at random without direction in governing
the house of God; or yet left it arbitrary to men's several minds, humors, and
frames. The Scriptures are full and plentifully furnished with instructions for
the whole frame and fashions of the house of GOD, which all brought together
and set up, would be a beautiful structure; it is the tabernacle of God with
men, Apoc. 21.3. walking in the midst of them, 2 Cor. 6.16.
Apoc. 2.1. Luke 2^.17. It were a piece of heavens happiness to see it
advanced in the same form Christ has appointed and his Apostles practiced and
instituted in all the Churches, to be perpetual to the worlds end. All I have
to say in one word, it is that I would consent to; keep close to that pattern,
and beware of the several frames of men's brains, to govern the Church by
humane policy, after the manner of earthly Kingdoms and States, which was the
first thing brought in the plague of Episcopacy, and will still leave a
back-dore to papal tyranny in the Church of God: from which we can never be
secured until Christ's own government be established, it is his own Scepter must
rule and no inventions of men or Angels, if possibly they could be consulted
with.

FINIS.

