THE SOVLES EXERCISE, In the daily Contemplation of our Saviors Birth, Life,
Passion, and Resurrection.

BY WILLIAM VAVGHAN, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas and Rich. Cotes, for Humphrey Blunden, and are to be
sold at his shop in Cornehill, at the sign of the Castle, 1641.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
1.
WHile Mammon blurred the Word within o^r West,
Which rose, like Lightning, from the radiant East,
God lent me Zeal, and cleared my Inward sight
To draw the Type of our Incarnate Light.
2.
Within this Map your Royal Grace shall find
Some Sparks to raise a true Nathaniels mind
Above the Clouds, in spite of tempting vice,
By the review of the Souls Exercise.
3.
Here Men may see in Christian Crystal glaesse,
That None from Earth shall up to Heaven pass,
Unless they be Refined, and from Above
Baptized with Flaming zeal and streaming Love.
4.
Here wrangling Wits and Make-bates may behold,
What shall become of them who plot for Gold
To crucify the Son of God again,
By wronging of his Members, Saints for Gain.
5.
Here Age may learn some harmless Rapsody
To rap the Souls of Youth with Melody,
Like that which Saul found for his Malady,
Except they stop their Ears, and raving die.
6.
Here Peace is taught, Old Simeons swan like song,
To wavering Minds, to Sick Folks, and the strong,
With Notice clear (to speak it without boast)
Why Some receive? Some lose the Holy Ghost;
7.
What Milder means can be for Jarres Correction
Then Christ his Cratch, Life, Cross, and Resurrection
In Numbers sung with an attracting voice?
Since Babes and Bees are charmed with tinkling Noise?
8.
What more can please the Fancies curious Taste
Than Types before the Understanding placed
In tuned Form? the Senses to rouse up
When surfeited with Copious prose they droup?
9.
Nay Souls perhaps, which Sermons fail to win,
They may Convert, assuage, or scare from Sin,
If, as Raines many Drops hard Marble pierce,
The Agents play on them with fluent Verse.
10.
So Moses, Miriam, Job, and Debora,
When Hebers wife had hammered Sisera,
So David did, and Jeremias call
Men to praise God by vows Numericall.
11.
The like rare Sound shapes the New Testament,
In Zacharies and Mary's Ravishment,
In Simeons Ode, and in Our Saviors Deed,
Who sung a Psalm, ere He in Sweat did bleed.
12.
The Soul, some write, consists of Harmony:
And that good Angels sing, none can deny,
Witness their Music, which Saint John describes.
Who then dares break on Sions Muse his Jibes?
13.
Among the Acts which Canterburies Sire,
Grave Cutbert made, within the Churches Quire,
He willed his Clergy every day to sing
In Saxon Tongue, the Praise of Heavens King.
14.
Among the Gifts rankt of Scholasticke Scope,
Which grace Great Urban, now the Roman Pope,
His Book of Poems wins him most renown;
The Laureat Wreath excells his Triple Crown.
15.
But if my Lays seem to some Worldlings light,
Excuse the Scribe, O Britains sweet Delight,
Say that he aimed at Love, not bubbling Fame,
Reward, nor Strife, nor Justice to defame.
16.
My Strain is plain, the Matter most sublime,
No Levite I. Then what does grace my Rhyme?
With willing mind the New-mans praise I sing,
For moulding in shrewd times so mild a King.
Whom with his Royal Spouse and Hopeful Fruit,
Like Saints, I pray the New-mans Lord to suite.
Amen.
So Prays your Majesty's most Humble Subject, William Vaughan.

The Preface. To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
ACcept, great Queen, from a poor Cambrian Knight
This sparkling Pile, wherewith the Souls delight,
You may discern an Empress most divine,
The Glory of the Gender Feminine,
The Lady Grace, I mean, Gods gracious Light,
Which saves Mankind from a despairing plight,
If they in Will their Outward Man resist,
And daily weigh the Birth and Death of Christ,
But since we are bathed in her streaming Love,
I know you will my New-mans Flames approve;
Cull out the best, which with Gods Word agree;
And leave the rest, as Fire-drakes unto me.
If I sing well, as Seraphins require,
Then take my Sparklings like Nehemies Fire,
Which in the Pit lay hid, late found again,
Not kindled by the New-mans Zeal in vain,
But for a Pious end: by Numbers dint
Our Saviors Form in weakelings to imprint.
This Form through worldly fraud lay hidden long
None durst translate it to the Mother tongue,
Until the Lord of his unbounded Grace,
In pity of his Churches wretched Case,
Looked down of late on his two Prophets slain,
And breathed New life into their Corpse again.
With Heavenly Oil He sent the Holy Ghost
To scour Faiths rust, when we were almost lost,
Lost through our sloth and Pride, near in Despair
To be snatched up by Fiends into the Air,
There, till Doomes-day to Goblin it at least,
Or, which is worse, with Tophets Dampe to feast.
But if my Tune, like gaggling Noise of Geese,
Displease, I then reserve it as a Piece,
Or Fragment fit for some Sidanens Ear
Of slighted Wales, with hooboobs Bray to fear
Night-walkers from purloyning of her Flock
Rather then I become a flouting-stocke
To English wits, I will at night retire,
(Couurez le feu) put out my Light and Fire,
And live immured, as in a Cynicks Cell,
Until I can in sweeter Lays excel.
Howere this proves, I lay it at your Feet,
Not daring stars with glozing phraze to greet,
Nor stare too long upon the Sunshine Light,
Least I be changed into a Bird of Night;
Or as Old Poets faign'd of Niobe,
Contesting with a Goddess, least I be
Transmuted to a stone, or stupid wight,
For thrusting forth to Your Majesticke sight,
This Ghostly task, my New-mans Exercise,
With Oaten Pipe, and in a poor disguise,
Before I know your Pleasure and your Will,
Whether you can affect a Mountain Quill,
And brook that a rude Bardh, or Corydon
Should screw his Songs with your Court-Helicon.
Sometime Great Dames the Blossoms of the Field
Have paralelled with those which Gardens yield;
So though by Fits or Chance I may expose
Old Edens Good and Ill, the Thorn as Rose:
Shall a few Slips of thorny Doubts downewaigh
My New-mans Hopes more fair then Flowers in May*
But least some say, that Sybill-like I rave,
Or that I do the Higher Thrones outbrave;
I here submit, and humbly sue to sing
These Lays: A Cat may look upon a King.
Both Town and Country strive for Courtly Grace:
And shall not I then wish to see your Face?
To see of Kings the Daughter, Sister, Wife,
And Mother borne to calm great Nations strife?
Not fawning wise, but hoping that you stand
For Our New man, I long to kiss your Hand;
Like Philips Greeks, who Christ desired to see,
Like One, who to that end climbed up a Tree.
And thus I bid Great Britains Queen Adieu,
With Sacrifice, my vows, and Service due.
To the Princes Highness.
MOst Noble Prince, Great Britains Royal Heir,
The Hope of Wales, where first I breathed Air,
And where I live from Troubles Home-retir'd,
But never for your Good with Prayers tired:
If harsh my Tune seems to your tender Ear^
Let Your mild Grace with my plain meaning bear,
As well because the matter I rehearse,
Requires bare naked Truth in simple Verse;
As that I might the vulgar sort allure,
To our New-man from their Old ways impure,
Since Gentle words may for their Babes afford
A winning Call to Jordans Bathing Ford;
And that I might hold on my Countries Guise,
Course Russet, yet sincere, without disguise
Of Art or Sense, lest that you might suspect,
That I on Truth no Exercise erect,
For if I cring'd with Charms adulterate
Of Pick-thank Soothes, or borrowed Terms of state,
I should then cast before your Eyes a Mist,
Not spreading Truth, like an Evangelist,
For Christian Peace with pure Devotions Flame,
But Wild conceits blown up for worldly Fame;
And so, instead of noysing her Effects,
I wrong her worth, and show my own defects.
Truth is the Star, which graced my New-Mans Flame;
O would I could to you so blaze her Fame,
As once fell out before the Persian King,
When her Renown Salathiels Son did ring
With such a Peale, that all the Court confessed
Truth only Great, fit for a Monarchs Breast!
Our Only God Created but One Sun
From Pole to Pole, Times yearly Race to run:
No more lent He then this Gift Uniform,
One Truth, to sway our Souls, and to inform
All Adams Seed of the Right way to Heaven,
One safe High way, not Labyrinth'd, but Even.
This Royal Way is Jesus Christ alone,
Who left us Truth our Discords to atone,
To guide our steps into his Churches Fold
Without hard Yokes, or selling souls for gold;
And to confound, as with a Lightning Sword,
The Obstinate by his Mysterious Word.
Upon this Words bright Substance we depend,
Fixing on Christ our Faith and Sovereign End,
With Will prepared, enfranchised by Grace,
His holy Life and Gospels Light to trace,
And to take up with zeal (when so he please)
His Cross and bitter Cup before soft Ease.
Besides this Way, to gain the Top of Heaven,
All Paths like Quick sands are, or puffed up Leaven;
Of which false steps are Ladders for the Turks
From Mecha rapt, and those stupendous Works
Fathered on Saints by Men possessed with Fiends,
In Legends famed for base Simonious ends,
Not for One Faith, one God, one Advocate,
But many Christ's, and Idols to create.
To shun such Bogges, By-ways, and Fallacies,
I have set forth the Souls sweet Exercise,
Kindled by Truth, Jehovahs bosom Daughter,
Who by his Son wrapped in the Scriptures brought her.
By her mild Rays reflecting on my strains
Your Grace may reap some fruit. And for my pains
Sweet Prince, I crave no other recompense,
Then that you take them into your Defense,
With my true vows; till in your riper Age
You them oppose against the Old Man's Rage.
The preface to the Reader.
Our New-mans Lord be praised for evermore,
Who with New Lays augmented has our store
And by his Rays has lately raised my will
To Sacrifice above Acquired skill.
He stirred me up with Zeal, on Sions stage
To act a Part, though in my drouping Age,
Having outgone the step which Sages call
Life's Fatal Year, the Climactericall.
My Morals He turned to Diviner ways,
My Roman Dactyles into English Lays.
My rugged Prose He changed to Smoother Lines,
That with New-straines I might win Libertines,
Maugre his Spleen, who does this Work confine:
Will Poets preach, or sing of things Divine?
Shall Knights usurp the place of Clergy men?
To praise Gods Church? or Christ his Life to pen?
He may as well Apollinarius tax,
Or as enraged against Old Ephres wax,
Both which by Tunes on Grecian Lyre did strive
To settle Faith in the Church Primitive.
He may as well blame Nazianzens Quill,
Prudentius, Claudians, or S. Austines skill,
As strike at Poets for recalling Souls
From Darkness unto Light by Sacred Scrowles.
Were Sions Muse to Clearks alone entailed,
The Critic might with Semeies sting have railed
On the sweet Post hume of our Royal James,
Which ravish English Ears with David's Psalms.
He might with Theons Tooth good Bartas bite,
Or for Doomes-Day our Noble Sterline smite.
Or if he fears to hit so high a Mark,
Why claims he not Zoiles privilege, to bark
At Him, whose worth deserves Ulysses style?
Whom Grotius taught Christ's Passion to compile?
Our stars late graced my Raptures of the Bride:
How then dare Momes the Bridegroomes praise deride?
But can a Prophet rise from Galilee?
Or Wa^es in Tune shape Truths Evangelee?
Or can her Geese compare with English Swans?
To sing good News to Contrite Publicans?
To paint such Flights no Mortal should presume,
Unless his Pen were of a Cherubs Plume,
Unless the Poet rapt above the Pole
Charm Men from Jarres, and Fiends from taking Toll.
So that the End be good, Truth ought to pass,
Though by a Scythian noised, or Balaams Ass,
And whilst we not Divine^ Flames profane
With false Poetique Dreams, Devotions Bane.
There is no Sex in Souls. As Well the Least
As Greatest here shall shine at Christ his Feast.
At the Lambs Feast where Saints for ever sing,
The Simplest Swain on Earth joys as the King.
Now if our Wales such Novelties relates,
Disdain them not, Ye Noble English States,
But pry into them, (like her Silver Mine,)
For which of late her Alps ye undermine.
And since ye see her Womb and Bowels yield
Lime, Coal, and Marle to raise the wearied Field:
Then why likewise may not her Streams afford
Some Swans, as well as Thames, or Humbers Foord?
If not to chaunt their Native Melody,
At least to tune a harmless Rhapsody,
Whereby from Fiends some Converts may be drawn
To ransom Wares, which they had left in pawn
That with our Head the Members sympathize,
God breathes into men's Hearts New Faculcies,
For when his Son ascended up on High,
He captive led our Wills Captivity,
Renewed of Grace our Charters Liberties,
And gave rare Gifts with Flaming Novelties,
Which if some hide, or Miser like engrosse
They frustrate make their Freedom by the Cross,
Least therefore I encurre that Prejudice
I publish here my New-mans Exercise,
With this true Warning shot, or Tolling Bell,
That the Old Man, Ye Readers, first expel,
Before ye mend these Raptures, or proscribe
With Catoes Broach or Brand a Christian Scribe
By a non licet, least your Negative
Bar that which sorts with Saints Affirmative:
That this my Work in substance comprehends
An Offering which to Christ his Glory tends;
Not Noised forth, like Chymiques Quintessence;
For sordid Gain, but strife and Carnal Sense,
(The Gangrenes of this Age) to cauterize,
I freely vent my Souls W^^kes Exercise.
And though my Tone, like Gileads shibbeleth,
Suits not nice Tongues, nor David's Leekes your Breath,
Yet does my Muse with Englands Faith agree,
And hopes by Trance our Savior Christ to see
In Bethlems Cratch, and on Mount Calvary;
His Rising up, and Triumph I descry,
And blunder forth by the like Mystery.
But with sharp Hounds, my Muse, and Memory,
I Will first assay Ol^ Reinards Brood to stoup.
View then the Game: Behold, the Hunt is up.
THE SOVLES EXERCISE.
The Argument.
Before the Great and Fearful Day of Doom,
Which by true Signs near past will shortly come,
Great Brittain's warned the Old Man's tricks to scan,
And with more Love to lodge the Inward Man.
O That Men would think on the Latter day!
Whose Signs began with Horror and Dismay,
Since Satan was let loose to rack and scorch
With Martyrs Flame our late Reformed Church!
No Preterperfect nor the Future Tense,
But then the Praesent suits the Creatures Sense,
When Time shall be no more, but ever Light
Or ever Dark. From this Perpetual Night
Of Sadness, Lord, defend my Spotted Soul,
That can at Will the Gates of Hell control,
And by sweet Trance can open the Milk-white way,
To lead my steps to that Eternal Day.
How often have thou from Weaklings raised thee Praise*
Then grant me Grace to warble out these Lays;
Which I began with th'Hunt is up to day:
That I may chase Hels Instruments away,
The wily Fox, the Wolf, and ravenous Bear;
But not with Y^alpes poor silly Sheep to fear,
No^ to disturb, like Taverns roaring Boys,
Good Christians Nightly Rest with Hellish Noise,
Or with base Fiddlers Tunes, who gape for Gain
Their Lusts from Strangers Windows to maintain*
(Fly Buff^ons hence; no flouts, nor wanton glance,
Nor scuffling Tones, suit with. our Newmans trance)
Not for wits Froth, nor Poets potting Pen,
Nor for Old Dreams shall any Godly men
Tax me withal. My aim is Libertines
And Sluggards to rouse up by Christian Lines;
And that The Elect of Britains I Will may blush
To jarre for Trifles, Nifles, or a Rush;
At least, to let them know, that we should side
With him, whose Rights with Mammon they divide.
But let Divines without Scholastic Cavell
And Politics without damned Machiavell,
Tell us how comes Mankind so prone to Evil?
(...) from O^d Adam? Custom? or the Devil?
Or rather from this mixed Triplicity
By Gods just Doom for men's Impiety?
Our Statesmen stand here gravel'd, nor define
Can Nature such deep Points, but the Divine
On these Resolves assures our Pilgrimage:
That, to secure from the Old Creatures Rage
Our New-mans Spark, we must contend and buckle
With Men and Fiends, ere Grace this Infant suckle;
We must Believe, and Pray, do Fruitful Works,
And crush the Snake, which in our bosom lurkes.
For these Attempts, the Serpent to unmaske
In Eden first Man's Cross row is: my Task.
The two, from whom our Heralds all agree
With one Consent to draw Men's Pedigree.
Be they Crowned Kings, or Subjects, bond, or Free,
Adam and Eve, the Male and Female Tree,
Were formed by Him, who both the Globs Created,
Whereof the One with Goodly Rights estated
God gave to them from Tax or Tribute free;
And so their Race enjoyed it, till the Fee
By Giants waved and Nemhrods Tyranny.
The upper like a Spangled Canopy
With Crystal propt, to lift their minds with wonder,
He left for Breath, for Heat, to seat them under;
And to observe the Influence, Motion, Height,
Not racking Stars with Negromanticke Slight?
Because Man should with Angels linkt in One
Harmonious League on God depend alone,
To do his Will, who raised him from the dust,
To praise his Name, without the least distrust,
Not Creatures, Thrones, or Principalities,
Nor courting other Gods with Sacrifice,
(For who would sue to an Inferior Lord,
The King in place that hears every word)
God for this End, and for his Glories sake
Assigned Man his Comforts to partake.
He left all things to his Elections Sway,
Except One Tree in Eden to assay,
And try by One Command his Creatures mind,
Whether he would prove Constant, or Unkind:
Yea, God forbad to taste the Curious Tree
Of Good and Ill, because He did foresee
"That Longing Fits in Maladies would end,
"That worldly Craft did restless Cares portend,
"That Innocence once lost, Man would divide
" Christ's Sovereignty, and with the Devil side;
"That he the Golden mean would soon neglect,
"And fall into Excess, or the defect;
"That Will uncurb'd to damned Actions tends,
"That Pride much knowledge puffes, shame Pride attends,
"For when good knowl^dge with the Ill did match,
"Then they began a Mungrell Brood to hatch,
"Like those who heretofore with Pagan Rite
"And Schoolemens Gloss disguised Gods ho^y Light.
Although such Plagues ensued by the Breach
Of Gods Command, yet does Experience teach
The Fruit it self so strange in Operation,
Perhaps might bring with it some Alteration,
And help the Humors to exasperate,
As the Breach did the Soul contaminate:
"So Meals without Thanksgiving cause disease,
"And Physic with Gods blessing turns to Ease.
Do not all things on which our Bodies feed,
Blood, Choler, Fleame, and Melancholy breed?
Do not we see, that things Inanimate;
As Roots and Gummes; nay Minerals, abate
Or raise the force of things more excellent?
Does not dimmed Eyes the Sapphire blew content?
And Hemlocks Juice, like Vapors of strong Wine,
Disturb the Brain, and Humor Christaline?
Does not the Jet insult upon a Straw?
As Steel is by the Loadstone kept in awe?
What Frantic Lust comes by Cantharides?
What Flames by Circes charmed Hippomanes?
How luckily Quicksilver mortified
Has for the Worms, and the great Pox bin tried?
Yet Sublimate does like to Hell inflame,
To Poison turns, and kills the Vital Flame.
How have the Lungs by Orpiment been cured?
And the Faint Heart by Liquid Gold secured?
How forcible against Plagues and Fevers are,
Mirrhe, Saffron, Aloes, Stibium, Bezoar?
Garlic allayes raw Air and watrish Food,
But Mads like Wine, the Dry Brain, and the Blood.
Wine-bibbers know, that Vines with Coleworts war;
As rampant Lust is cooled by Nenuphar.
Sometimes I saw a Glutton crossed in Will,
His Trencher daubed with Colloquintids Pill.
How by the Sun Glass things remote may fire,
To yield the reason, would not Reason tire?
Or why Tobacco, or the Vomick Nut,
Opium, or Henbane, do the Senses glut?
Or why the Juice of Spurge, or Tithimall,
Held to the Gummes, cause all the Teeth to fall?
If such as these with us work Mira^les,
And growing plants yet more, what Obstacles
Can Atheists plead to bar Our Fatal Tree?
Or that of Life? but that it grew so free?
Whereby on Man no ferall Deaths disease,
The Fruit once taken by him, could ever seize,
Until God did the impaled Garden fence,
Or drown it by the Flood for Lusts Offense?
This Fruit we reap't by knowing Good and Ill,
When as the Precepts Breach defiled the will.
But to return where now I did digress,
Man stayed not long before he did transgress,
And violate the Law with Carnal sense,
Slighting his Makers Love and Providence.
Man had large Grace and Freedom of Election,
But he of Both did quickly make defection,
He knew th'Events, the Covenant, his Doom
For Life or Death, and what would sure become
Of him, and his, if he Gods will transgrest,
Yet would he be of Knowledge more possessed
Than well became a Creature limited:
Yea, and perhaps the Woman coveted,
As Soon as Satan told his form all Tale,
With Carnal taste that fruit of sugared Bale,
And longed too, because she was forbidden;
Or else because, like to a Gues^ unbidden,
The Tempter, which is likely, watched the hour,
When she was less Devout, ere he could power
His Ban^ on her in a Corporeal shape,
That in the Fi^ she for the fruit might gape.
She sooner might all Enemies withstand
Than Pythons mists unseene always at hand.
"Where once he welcome finds he there does bring
"More Spirits like himself that Soul to sting:
"As to a Friar chanced, who tempted chose
"Once rather to be drunk than Soul to lose
"By Lust or Murders Choice. But by that feate,
"He whoor'd, and slew the Husband in his heat*
So Satan plays at this time with us all,
Old Adams seed; he knows in General,
That we by Nature frail and wavering are,
Lu^tfull, and Proud, then in particular
"He knows to what vain pleasure more than other
"We are most prone, whilst we Devotion smother;
"Which so observed by him with damned Craft,
"He Guilds that Pleasure fair before his shafts
"He shoots; from which, o Christ, we have no fence
"Nor help, but thy dear Cross and Innocence
To put them by with daily watch and Cares,
Least like to Eve he catch us unawares.
When Satan saw that God to Man assigned
The worlds whole Rule, he by a masked kind
Of shape devised with Lies to tempt Eves mind,
And by her means her Husbands wits to blind.
O subtle Fiends inevitable Fetch!
Above a Cheaters or Projectors reach!
To set upon the weakest of the Twain,
Before he dared the Husband in to train!
He knew the power of a Favorite,
And what Man's second self, the Night-Crow might
Suggest to bring strange matters to effect.
This moved the Fiend the Woman to select,
And work upon her Frailties imperfection,
Because he knew the Man had more perfection.
He knew the Man had more Composed wit,
More ancient, stayed, and harder to be hit:
He knew the Woman had a moyster Brain,
More shallow, nice, and of a smoother grain,
"More pliant than the Male to be allured
"With Tales and Toys, whereof he stood assured*
"Therefore, Ye Men, beware of Women's guiles;
"Take heed, Ye Women, of Old Satan's wiles,
"Tempt not your Husbands unto vanity,
"To Idols, Pride, nor sloths Infirmity:
"And let us hence both Men and Women all
"The Devil chase, the Author of our Fall.
He grudged to see those of an Earthly F^ature
Above him set, sometimes a Heavenly Creature;
That Humane-kind, such Creatures New and strange
Should breathe that Air, where he did hope to range,
Rage and despite to have Man thrown below
Or at the least in Furies fell his Fellow,
Wrought on his Spirit, all to Vengeance bent,
Till at the last he got his Lewd Intent.
About that time more Wise than any Beast
With speckled skin, like Golden Damask dressed,
The Serpent stalk't in Edens Paradise,
Him Satan seaz'd, and in his shapes disguise
Thus with his Charms to hide his cunning Hate,
He tempted Eve in absence of her Mate:
Fair Dame, more fit for thy sweet Beauties Grace,
As Goddess, to possess the Highest Place,
And all the world to Rule, then to be curbed
Of thy Freewill, or in thy Choice disturbed:
Has God forbidden you that Fruit to taste?
The fruit of Knowledge which shall ever last?
Which Life renewes, and makes an Idiot wise?
Eat it, and spare not; Be not too Precise.
Ye shall not Die: that is but a scaring Crow
To bleare your fight, least you this secret know.
For God well knows, that tasting of this Tree,
You like Himself will soon Immortal be.
The woman fir^d with Satan's fair discourse
Resisted not, but ran The Ambitious Course
Of Lucifer (who climbed the highest staire
Of Mysteries) built Castles in the Air,
And rapt with false Imaginary Toys
Of being wise, like God, with hope of Joys,
She started not with that odd Tree to grapple,
But thence she plucked, what God forbad, the Apple;
One, two, or more, as likt her Palate best,
With whose sweet Taste her Husband she possessed:
As likewise with the virtue of the Fruit,
Which did with their high towering Fancies suit.
Ev's haughty mind was soon, too soon persawded
And Adams too, whereby they were degraded
Of Innocence, true Joys, and Quiet Life,
Made Slaves to Vices, Death, and Endless strife.
The Devil too, which ranged then unbound,
With borrowed shape, in stricter Chains was bound
Yet mounting and descending with his Mates,
To try and sting, as Faith grows, or abates.
Hence Passions from Hels poison soon began since
To make Young Adam an Old worldly m^n:
With vain Proud thoughts his Seed were ever since
Swollen, and ban'd in every State and Province.
The Elder Part against the New rebels
With wily Plots, till Grace the Fox expels.
Hence spring those Plagues which now defile the Earth:
"Cold Charity, our sly and needless Dearth,
"Distrust of God, Ambition, Simony,
"Base Idleness, Carowsing, Gluttony,
"Damned mungrell Matches, Saints with Reprobates,
"High purchased Names, Envy in all Estates,
"Malice, Law-suites, Deceits, and Avarice,
"Pride, Thriftlesse Pomp, and every other vt^e:
Whose foul Excess, like Fire's abuse, I blame,
So to prepare room for Devotions Flame.
For such as those, the first Old world was drowned
As Our shall shortly burn about us round:
For such, the Lord our Tongues did first confound
At Babels Tower from one H^rm^nious sound.
For such as those, the Hebrew^ were rejected,
And unto such are most of us subjected
By that Old Pythons Sat^^ns subtilty,
Unless Faith help and (...) Humility:
We are indeed beset by him, that speaks,
And through a thousand throats now plays the Reaks,
In tempted Brains suborning men for Pelf
To sell the Spirits Gifts, yea Heaven it self,
Our mother Eve in Serpents shape he tempted,
To gull and gaine-How shall our Earthlings now
Escape? when that Bad Humors overflow
The Bodies State? when Tares do over top
The Gospels Seed? and when we see him hop,
Swear, and Carowse, even on the Sabatth Day?
And every other Day to catch some Prey?
O wits bewitched by the false Serpents Art!
Who sacrifice to Fiends your Noblest Part!
"There Is nothing more than Prayer which they fear,
"Because they know that is music in Gods Ear.
"When they hear Abbaes Peale ring from Man's Heart,
"With hate of present sin, they soon depart,
"And leave the Forts, which they usurped then,
" The Humors, Brain, and Heart of Man I mean.
And where they find no Catechizing is,
Nor weekly Sermons used, but All amiss
For want of Means, Gods Tithes kept back like spoils,
There, Sports with Oaths, with Healths they mingle broils.
"But woe to them, who do Gods Tithes ingrosse,
"Whereby ensues of Christian Souls such loss:
"If Cursed they were, who ravished them at first,
"Who dim Faiths Light, are they not more accursed?
"Transferring by those Pr^yes to yawning Hell,
"Like Antichrist, more Souls than Tongue can tell?
And here with drery eyes I must lament
The Fate of my poor Native Soil near rent
By Fiends a sunder through the Words defect:
For though the Tithes some Annually collect
Amounting in each Parish to the sum
Of hundreds twice, yet the poor Curates room
Is scarcely worth nine or ten pounds a year;
Nay, some there be, which counting that too dear
Hire yearly Cocks for half that sum to crow,
And what Soule-food such creatures chaunt you know.
Nor Parish-poore help they, nor Churches Rate,
But as it were in sin Inveterate,
Cloth with Church-goods their Sacrilegious backs,
Not dreaming once of Hell, or inward Racks,
For their converting Tithes to private store,
Which were ordained for Churchmen and the Poor;
"Nor weighing yet what Temporal^ despite,
"And fearful plagues on tythe-ingrossers light,
"Upon their house, and Crime-partaking fry
Here in this world, to rot their memory.
And some of these I knew in Jayles to lie
For Treason^, Debts; and some die suddenly.
And some likewise I knew, their Widows, Heirs
And Children tired with Broils and Law-affaires.
Take Learnings hire away, Learning decays,
Unless Gods Spirit by unusual ways,
Immediately to bring rare things to pass,
Inspire some wits with new Cae^estiall grace;
But if both fail, what Chaos may ensue,
I Will leave to scan till Time brings them to Rue,
And wail with howling pain and soule-sicke groan,
Alack the Day that we our Mothers moan
Contemned, and pill'd her bare, since Saracens,
Her dues to keep, feared like the Pestilence.
" All Laborers deserve their Day-reward,
"But much more they, who watch the soul to guard.
To this I add the scandal and offense,
Which they procure to sects of tender sense,
Who tax our Church, and Levites Commonweal
With Jeroboams Plot, and want of zeal,
For gracing Clerks of blind inferior rank,
As though we had no Church, but Babels Bank
On Willow trees our Trumpets up to hang,
Or those sad Lays, which there the Captives sang,
Denouncing Fate, far worse then Iewries woes,
With Plagues to light on Sions jeering foes.
So Romish Scribes quip us with scurrile songs
Unjustly for conniving at such wrongs,
And twit our Church with Cobblers and Sow-gelders,
When as the fault lies not upon our Elders,
But on some graceless greedy minded wights,
Who seizing on the Tithes put out our Lights;
As formerly their Monkish Hypocrites,
Had like to Kites snatched up those Tithing Rights,
(So Popes were taxt for granting Tithes and Tolles
To men more fit to feed their Mules then Souls)
So though Carmarthins Clerks for Parishes
Enrowl'd fourscore, yet fifty three of these
The Popes for Drones improperly assigned
Their Tithes which were of Old by Caesar's signed
For painful Bees, and made Authentical
To their sole use by Counsels General.
Whence Sions Vines, like Osneyes, nipt at first
By Wolsey in the Spring quenched Henry's thirst
In Summers rage; and served in Autumn since
As baits for sin: but now gone from the Prince
To Chapmens hands in time of Winters cold,
Church-Farmes by them are dearly set and sold,
With small regard to Clerks, or the Newborn,
As if Hels-stormes their consciences had torn;
Hence grow Mault-wormes, unlicenc'd Ale and Beer
With Shifts to rack for what men farmed so dear.
O would these Lines like pricking Goades might prove,
To stir up zeal with more Seraphicke Love,
Or now at last, that some would imitate
Those few, which rendered back unto the State,
Tith-spoyles, as did the Noble Huntington,
And in our days Religious Dodington.
For I avow, they Achans style deserve,
Who rob the Church, and her good Shepherds starve;
Or cause in them the New-mans zeal to freeze,
By their unjust purloyning of her Fleece:
I speak not of that Fleece, which Orpheus sung,
But of true Prophets there by worldlings wrung
Of their Fee simple rights, and lawful Fees,
Not due to Drones, but to industrious Bees,
Whoss Art spreads Sermons forth, like Chrysostomes,
Sweeter than Honey, or the Honey-combes;
For if they starve, how can the Flocks survive?
How can they rise to Faith? in Knowledge thrive?
Since Faith by hearing springs, Love by Gods word?
Since both wax dark, where Prophets are abhorred?
Hearts unprepared for vows and Fasting die,
Or rave with Pride, or pine with Malady:
And then their souls, like Slaves, are bought and sold,
When Satan's Ambush breaks into the Hold
For want of Guides, and watchful Sentinels,
Whose Means were stopped by worldly Machivils.
Our Parliament moved with their Brethrens tears,
Their Civil Iarres, their grievances and fears,
Proclaimed some public Fasts for Sacrifice,
With vows of late for their enormious vice,
That so they might the wrath of God allay,
And by good Jacobs Ladder make their way
With Abstinence to stint the fuming blood,
As with Soule-sighes, our Angel Guardians Food.
But if the Shepherds Limbs with Frost benumme
Lie languishing, or of the Palsy dumb;
How shall their Flocks the use of Fasts discern?
Or learn what may the minds true health concern
How shall they Fast? and feel for Discord grief?
If they be barred of Sermons, Souls relief?
How shall they Fast from inbred Avarice,
If none show them the way to Sacrifice?
How shall they fast from foul Conspiracies?
From Rapines, Bribes, Deceits, and Piracies?
How shall they stand secure from Perjurers?
If no man them from cursed Oaths deterrs?
And when such Slaves uncatechized swear,
Who lives not of false proofs in daily fear?
How shall our Juries wave Knights of the Post,
If they as these contemn the holy Ghost?
How shall we escape these last named Philistines,
Dwelling in Mesech, or with Libertines?
Hence I collect, that there ensues this curse:
"Where Teaching fails, there Souls grow worse and worse.
Proud Nemrod will not leave his rufling Port,
Nor crouch to Christ in Penitential sort
With vile Attire, much less with inward Shrift,
As for sins Guilt has been old Suppliants drift;
But fooled by Lust, he knows Dame Pleasures house,
More than Gods Church; or the Old man to touse;
Nay, in the Church he dares his Bravery
Of Plumes to show, or rather Ravery.
The Drunkard still goes on to play the Sott,
And more then Fasting Rules, to ply the Pot.
By heathenish healths, mad fits, and lavish cost,
Polluting gifts breathed from the Holy Ghost,
"So that moist vapors to the Head ascend,
"And Rheums from thence into the lungs descend*
"The fourefold humors foame, the blood inflames,
"More capable of Pestilentiall Flames,
"Then of mild Natures heat, vowed for impression
"Of Gifts divine, to hinder Fiends Oppression.
Our Gluttons will not cease to break the Law,
Nor spare one dish, to ransom Lazars Jaw,
But what the Earth, the Sea, and Air produce,
Their Panders dress for their full panches use,
With Spice exchanged for Englands dearest wealth,
Without regard to Souls or Bodies health.
For which delight, Days Fasting to profane
Some wish they had the long neck of a Crane,
That so they might, like to the ravenous Wolf,
Power down more store into the Gurmands gulf;
And though their penance were to take a Purge,
To have the Cramping Gout, or the like scourge,
"Yet will they feed on Cates varieties
"At the same meal in spite of Maladies,
"Of Laws, advice of friends, Physicians threats,
"And the repugnant Nature of the meats.
Nay, though they know some meats may cause offense
Unto the Weak, the Old man will dispense,
That on a Friday in a Papists sight,
They feast on Flesh, his Conscience to despite,
Against the rules of Civil Modesty.
As if they meant their Neighbors Swine to tie
To Meazeld troughs against the Owners Will,
Who bred them up with other kind of Swill
As bad perhaps as Sugar-sops or Fish,
Which raise up Lust more than the fleshy dish:
Of old it was not so; Good Christians then,
In feeding with the Jews, like Prudent men,
Abstained from Porke and puddings stuffed with Blood,
They lived content with their Mosaicall Food;
To win weak souls to Christ they seemed content laws
With all things, except sin, indifferent,
For whose dear sake, they would each Countries
Observe, and wear a Fools coat, were there cause.
And so sometimes we play the Humourists,
Faiths essence saved, to raise up Catechists.
But since our Head commands a Public Fast,
How dare the Members gape for much Repast?
But mutually join with their Christian mates
Of the same Church to calm the threatening Fates?
On Jonathan a thundering sentence past,
Because he brake unwittingly a Fast:
And shall our Gulles unpunished escape?
Who wilfully commit an Heathenish Rape?
And violate the Law with carnal taste,
Out of crosse-spleene, conceit, and wanton waste?
Nor for restraint of Wind, necessity,
Or for raw Air, but of mere Vanity?
A little serves the Hungry Maw to heal:
Why then will they devour more at a Meal
"Than twice five ounces of substantial Food?
And so much weight of drink to do them good?
More frugall yet, when Fasting days commence,
(Least Fumes oppress the Brain, Sleep press the sense
To keep in plight thereby the Bodies Frame
For the Souls Feast, and Belly Gods to shame?
Such Food, as will not over soon corrupt,
Biscuit, Rice, Pulse, or soft Panades supt?
"A small thing cheeres the heart, and Midriffe calm^
"As wines one draught kept Timothy from Qualmes.
Why then will Christians play the Epicures?
And frustrate make the Souls and Bodies Cures?
By causing Fumes to breath up to the Brain,
Where they beget the Souls and Bodies pain?
" Excess of Meats beyond the Golden Mean
"Turns into Fat, and Excrements unclean;
"It taints the blood, breeds Dropsies, Fevers, Gouts
"Or duls the wit, and makes them heavy Louts,
"Unweildy for Faiths Active Qualities
"To please our God with humble Sacrifice.
Of Vessels some are Rough, some Porcellane,
Of Bodies, some turn Pure and some Profane:
Note this in Beasts, their dung lets us to weet
That Swine and Dogs smell rank, the Stags more sweet
Now Gryllus choose thy mould, Hogs, Stags, or Dogs.
If Stags be scant, Dogs stink, then take the Hogs,
And wallow in his mire, until thou feel
The meazell'd Plague, and like a Dizzard reele.
These Points, and others more grave Levites preach
Where they enjoy their Rights, and how the breach
Of Fasting comes, which makes me tell my friends:
"He, that neglects the Churches moan, offends.
For which, and the like crimes, he ought to sob,
Who thinks it no offense Gods Tithes to rob.
"The Arts contempt, and robbing them of Hire,
"Cause many Plots and strange combustions fire
"In humane brea^ts, Divines to Simonize,
"And other Wits to rail and Libellize
"At Laws or Times; or else they fly from home,
"To Doway, Spain, Saint Omers, or to Rome:
Whence what ensues I leave for Politiques
To judge, while others turn home-Empiriques,
False Sycophants, or Mountebanks, to seem
More wise or skillful in the worlds esteem,
When to themselves they guilty are of fraud.
But Need allures dame Be^uty, like a Baud,
To prostitute, or rather want of Grace,
That makes the Whore, the Modest to outface,
Yet now I hope our forraigne-built Plantations
Will Britain free from many Imputations,
When Drones removed; the rest more elbow room
Shall have to thrive, like Honey-Bees, at home,
Unless (which God avert) the Pestilence,
Abate our swarms, and cross good men's Intents.
Mean time the world on wheels runs mad, by f^ends
And furies led, whom they mistake for friends:
One while they tempt to Apish imitation,
Whilst Pygmies swell with Gya^^s transformation,
With ^urld bold Ruffians Hair, immodest face,
Proud costly robes, with Gold and needless Lace,
And thriftlesse puffes winkt at perhaps to reign,
For Trades increase, Customs, or Mercers gain.
For whose support with rich Caparizons
T^ades with Coach-mares make often comparisons,
By these our Offsprings tainted (...)
Turn Harpyes, Peacockes, or Hermaphrodites,
By these high sails has Hospitality
Sunk in deep Gulfes with Christian Charity.
The multitude of sinners gone amiss,
Makes ^inne to seem the less, and so does this.
Another while our Gentry with delights
They train to tread Gods gifts with dogs and kites;
Or else to gape for Others goods at Play,
Often to the loss of their own worldly stay,
Whilst Satan's wily fiends subordinates
Confirm such Gamesters for his Reprobates,
But late they triumphed when against the Rheum
Some did create a God of Indian Fume,
Whereby men crazed their memory and wits,
And parcht their Vital Blood more then befits.
O Custom charmed, besotting Christendom!
Besotting Brains against the day of Doom!
Tobaccoes smoke no other Humor draws
Then Spawling, which it self does chiefly cause,
Nor does this Hells evaporating Puff,
End here, although worse then a Candles snuff,
To qualify the Dampish sooty Brain,
It must be moistened often for Tavernes Gain,
With Wine or Beer, that the heat Natural
May swim with Phlegm, as the Moist Radical
Lies dampt with drouth of sense-benumming smoke,
And this they do so long, until the Heat
Of Nature fails, corrupt with sulphures sweat:
The Brain thus soild, how shall Gods grace erect
The Spirits Temple in the Intellect?
By hearing Faith gets room: but if by fits
Their senses quail, their quailing hurts the wits.
"Then let this be in Brass, or Marble placed:
"Who smoakes Tobacco much, he doates at last.
"Who can deny but Satan in our Age
"Is let more loose with violence to rage?
"And with his Angels daily goes about
"To batter Faith? and true Zeal to root out?
"He is let loose to range about at Pleasure,
"And more then Love pricks men to dream of Treasure.
"We prate of Faith, but Pride eats up the fruits,
"We talk of Peace, but that ends in Law-suites.
For fear of humane Plots Saints often are dumb,
And Love is by the Dragons wiles become
A thing of naught, a Cipher without fellows,
Whilst Golden hopes of Lucre blow the bellows.
As Passengers their ship being weak and riven,
To s^ndry Coasts for many Leagues are driven
Of gusts and storms, of Gulfes they make report,
Before they can arrive at Safeties Port:
So now are Saints by Gog and Magog vexed,
And glad to fly with civil Broils perplexed
Out of their Native soil to Strangers Arms
For refuge against Mars his fierce alarmes.
As witness now of late the Valtoline;
France, Belgia, Hesse, all Dutchland, and the Rhine.
So others are by suits and quarrels faign'd
To sundry Courts for many miles constrained,
Through thick and thin to travel for small cause,
Under pretext to answer breach of Laws,
To lose their precious time and spend the same
In strife, which Christ enjoined to Holy flame,
To satisfy Officialls greedy wills
More than need is for moulture to their Mills,
As our King James of famous memory,
With lightning glaunce checked this foul injury,
Our coin by bribing Tongues grows scant of late;
And men for want of means wax desperate.
How many Motions do some make in vain?
And endless Pleas with in ward joy retain?
Such Sophisters in Paper-length to draw,
And spin rich Suites will white the blackest D^w,
And blurre the Candor of the holiest man;
But seldom help to save the weak and wan.
But O! are not those Christians whom they gull?
Christians they are, O worldlings, whom ye Lull
A sleep to feed upon, like Canniballs,
They look not like those Popes or Cardinals,
Or those great mighty men, whose flesh and Souls,
Are to be preyed on by the Mysticke Fowls
At Gods triumphant Supper; No, these are
Your Brethren, whom to pill and poll ye dare:
"Like to the Aierie fiends typ'd by those fowls
"Who feed upon the jarres of carnal Souls,
"On whose weak passions, wits, and fits ye work
"Whilst under Sugared Pills does danger Iurke.
Who knows not that the fiends of Hell rejoice
At these your broiles? to hear your screaming noise?
Therefore repent, before th^s waning light
^huts up the world with terrors of the Night*
Be sparing of your Crotchets for his sake,
Who spared not on himself our sins to take,
Let to your brawles six months a period fix;
Submit to friends award without Law-trickes,
Or costly fees, what ye suggest for wrong,
Not vaunting of a Mercenary tongue.
I need not warn our Gravest Counselors,
Who for the New-man spend more precious hours
In grieving at debates then taking Fees,
For they decline Gods wrathful cup of Lees;
But I exclaim, and raise with Hue and Cry
My Wits against our Petty-fogging fry,
Those Mountebankes, that Hollow-hearted crew,
Which cogge with Truth, and stir up Guls to sue;
Who make no Conscience in an honest cause,
To vex Good men, and scandalize the Laws.
Such men I only blurre. Let Honey Bees
Live by their painful Hire, and well-gain'd Fees:
I envy not their Station, nor their store,
But pray that they in Grace grow more and more.
I wish to them all Happiness and Joy,
That they with Love their Labors fruit enjoy.
For unto such our Patriots Commonweal,
Can not more portions then they merit deal,
Yea, those ripe silver hairs I honor most,
Who with good Laws help to entrench Gods host
From raving Ravening Wolves, which but for them
Had long since spoiled our Tents, and still contemn
Our Clergies Rites reformed, and their intents,
Supported by our Christian Parliaments,
These were indeed the Champions of our State,
Against Romes Bulls and the degenerate
From their Allegiance to our Native Prince;
They Abbots sloth, and Legates did convince,
By casting out Romes painted Wares and Trash,
For which brave Act, and memorable Lash,
Besides the Gospels Light, God yet is pleased,
To leave their Rank a prop for the diseased:
So some are blessed with an Immortal Lot,
Whilst useless Drones, like shooting Meteors, rot.
They merit too in Britains Orb to shine,
Like Stars, that move in the Eclipticke Line.
"Who weigh the Laws with Reason, Right, and Ruth,
"And at the first acquaint men with the Truth*
"What the Event will be, what danger lies,
"For daring Justice with surmized Lies.
And specially, those Lawyers I commend,
Who Clients suites with expedition end!
Scan well my Laws, ye Masters of the Law,
And ye, that be their Clients, stand in awe
Of Judgment justly due for your disunion,
For your contempt of Love and Christian Union.
"Be slow to wrath, speak fair, do good to all;
"Forgive your foes, and raise up them that fall,
"Look that false Mammons wiles tempt not your zeal,
"Lest for your bribes Astraeas Commonweal
"Grow to contempt, like that Monasticke state
"Of Ghostly form, which ye suppressed of late.
"Through many tongues the devil moves despite,
"And yet may seem an Angel of the Light.
That Spirit, which through Ahabs Prophets spoke,
Now tempts most men in falsehood to partake,
And likewise works in nimble factious pates,
That they for cursed hire spread more debates,
Which but for their suggestions would expire,
Or dormant lie, as under ashes Fire.
God loves a mild, a free, and open heart,
Which melts like wax, to see his neighbors smart.
As I went on our discords to atone,
My Zeal broke forth into a Prophets Tone:
Unkennell ye that old and crafty Fox
Whom having caught, cease not to thumpe and box
Him other whiles. If for the Palsies grief,
To nose his scent, ye yield him some releife,
Be sure in Chains to keep him always bound,
For if let loose, and he abroad be found,
Your tender Lambs, the hope of all your flock,
Can never escape, nor well endure the shocke
Of his slye tricks; O therefore let him now
Be wisely looked unto, that he may bow,
Make room for Lambs from spoil and theft secure
Wash, rince, and scour, and keep your vessels pure,
Flay not Christ's sheep; but feed them without strife,
As he for you has sacrificed his life.
"Let none Gods place of judgment undertake
"For Coin; but for true zeal, and Conscience sake*
"Let none for wealth accept a Benefice.
"For the Souls gain was Christ his chiefest prize.
"Let Dives bid his golden gods avaunt,
"Cashiering quite all things extravagant.
Let Christian Dames leave off the Peacockes train,
And now resume their modest Garbes again.
"Let Soldiers of the Fort, Ship, Tent or Tongue,
"Live with their hires content, not offering wrong.
Let them of all degrees, both Old and Young,
Both High and Low, of Sexes weak and strong,
Let all Repent, before the Eternal Day
Breaks forth, which shortly without more delay
Will fatally conclude their civil jarres,
Their greedy wiles, their Pomp, and bloody wars.
But put the case, that Day comes not so soon,
As Fools conceive, yet Orbed, like the Moon,
Man's brain receives the form of glistering notions
Except betimes he curbes the Old man's motions,
Whence if they break through those Ideaes room
Into the Heart, there, Idols they become.
The New man is sent back by Carnal sins,
As was God's Ark by Dagons Philistines,
And in his Place those Puppets he observes,
Whom more then Christ he loves, and oftener serves.
Thus Worldlings wise in darkness roame about
As well as they, whose Light strife has put out.
The Way unto Gods Paradise is straight,
Narrow, and steep, to which transcendent height
" Frail flesh and blood must not ascend, unless
"The Soul be in this world purged more or less
"By twofold Flames: whereof the one Hels pain
"Resembles; the other heates with zeal the Brain.
Like as the Body grows in Quantity,
And in the Fourefold Humors Quality:
So the New man shootes up, draws us to grace
If we do stop the Old man's wily race.
" Deatb Crowns a Saint, and none can die in Christ
"Except he living here become his Priest.
"For Gods Elect must lead a Righteous Life,
"Subject to Christ, as to her head the Wife;
"She knows no male but one, she stands in Aw,
"Yet loves him dear, and his Advice is Law.
"Sweet heart (quoth he) lose not the mornings Prime
"But, as Christ thee, do thou redeem the Time
"With Prayers, Zeal, true Love and Fruitful Deeds;
"For of ten thousand Souls scarce one well speeds.
Now he, that has discretion in his pate,
Must mark these Maxims, ere it be too late:
When strife for Love, and dreams we take for watching,
When Praise for Preyes, and Grace we look for Catching;
And when from Fasts we fall to Feasts and bibbing,
Then Abbaes stream stays in the lowest Ebbing.
Our Advocate craves it to flow again,
The Father yields, and so to every vein
Their stream flows fair, until our changling fools
Have sought to other Streams from Muddy Pooles.
The Trinity then loathing Brains so sick
Their Motions stop, and men dye Lunaticke*
From which Relapse, Distrust, and Lunacy,
Bless we our selves, as from Apostasy.
If I speak well, or rave with puffed up Learning,
Judge they, who have the Spirit of Discerning.
In the mean time keep we Gods Trumpets Feast,
And watch, till it shall summon us to Rest.
All Feasts expired in Christ's his Oracles,
Or were exchanged for our Souls Spectacles,
In memory to keep our Saviors Name,
The Blessed Virgins, and the Apostles Fame,
With watch against the brats of Antichrist,
Which bear Christ's Name, but not the marks of Christ.
To blaze these News I find none more Divine,
Then Epiphanius, and Saint Augustine
Since the decease of those good Fishermen,
Which toiled to free souls from the Devils den;
For he that marks them blazing Heretics,
May soon convince our modern Catholics,
Who were baptized and styled Regenerate,
Went out from us, but since degenerate.
Christ's Oracles next to the Apostles Time
Shone, as bright stars six hundred years in prime:
But afterward by Pomp, and Sodomy
They were left Breathless for Anatomy,
Yet to the Spirits Feast of Shavelings slighted
Our West has been by Prophets late invited,
To cleanse Christ's Church from Superstitious Feasts
Proclaiming Truth against the Mounted Beasts
Mysterious charms, Soule-gulling Merchandise,
Which Gospel seemed, till Wickliff proved them lies
Truths Oracles, which Antichrist suppressed,
Are freely now in our own Tongue expressed;
Each Parable made plain, to Babes revealed,
And every Mysticke Leaf lies now unsealed
In spite of the Red Dragons Flood and Fraud,
And maugre all the Tricks of Babels Baud,
So that we may (unless our Riots let)
Escape, and break out of the Hunters Net.
Strange Fires and croaking noise from Balaams lips
Cannot dash out our Light, nor yet eclipse
Those Rays whereby the murdered Lamb of late,
Cheares up his Faithful Bride, and Sions state
Relying on his Aid and powerful Arm
His Spirit warmes, and keeps from Leaguers harm*
But clandestine and by sly cheating tricks
Some win more Games to Babels Meretrix.
He that deceived Eve by subtle Train,
Would our return into her stews again
Persuade. By Sions Rents they shortly hope
To blurre our Church, and re-invest the Pope
With his Old Keys, and with his Golden Cross
In Gods own Temple Graces to ingrosse;
And for small cause to excommunicate,
Nay, for neglect of Fees to shut Heavens Gate,
They hope to put (by Satan's Tares late sown)
Our Laymens ward of Praemunire down.
But why cast I such Goblin doubts abroad?
When the Last Knell determines our abode,
Our short abode on Earth? O let us then
Repent, and wail our sins, dear Countrymen,
Let us renew, whilst that it is to Day,
Our Sacrifice, and vows of Love repay,
Often musing on Saint Paul's advice, that now
We Christ no more after the flesh must know;
But as it were in trance, the New-mans way,
To weigh his Cross and Passion every day.
The Service, which belongs to Him alone;
Withdraw not from that All-sufficient One,
By kneeling to our fellow servants down
For Ghostly help, who saved but their own
Dear Souls by virtue of that Costly Blood,
Which on the Cross was shed for our joint good.
If we believe, as Saints have done before us,
In Christ alone, Hels sting can never gore us.
Think on my words, O ye backe-sliding Souls,
Who pay to Saints your vows, like Market Tolles,
"Think on your own, and Christ his painful death,
"The Judgment day, and gaping hell beneath.
Our days are few: Times period is at hand,
And Christ his Arc will shortly sail from Land.
The waves of sin swell high; Love grown too cold
In most men's Hearts, Men's ruins does unfold,
True Faith for want of more Devotions heat
Exiled pleads before Gods Judgment seat
Against Mankind, as at the Flood of Noah.
To plague the world with flames, and worse annoy*
Men's hearts are hardened, like the Fiends of Hell,
For if a Prophet do sins doom foretell,
Dissuading them from Broiles, O how they swell
At the Good man, with rage and passions fell,
Imposing for his pains, Rackes, shackles, shame*
Or silencing, or blacking his good Name!
Before Doomes-day this dark Prodigious fault
Must follow next upon the Whores assault,
For though the Church Triumphant does rejoice
To see her Fall, our Jarres supplant our Joys,
And so instead of Psalms to Heaven sent
We temporize, or with her Complement.
Awake therefore, ye watchmen with your flock,
Lest you and they be hurld against the rock
Of scandal to our Churches infamy,
Ending in Schisms, Broils, or Phlebotomy.
Think on the Fowls, which ere the Sun did set,
Abram had watched, and then huge darkness met.
Awake, I say, out of your slumbring sleep,
Look to your charge in time, Christ's wandering sheep:
Behold our Souls great Shepherd is at hand,
Though some are loath the Signs to understand;
The last days Bell, or Clock of Mortals time,
(Be watchful ye were best) will shortly chime,
Christ shortly comes, the Faithful to requite,
And to confound our Mysticke Giants might:
No Tyrants threats, no double tongue will serve,
Fee, nor Reward, the guilty to preserve.
Gods Darts, like Comets, threate our Western Orb,
And Justice will the Austrian faction curb;
Gods Angel now begins to go about
To warn before Doomes-day the Christian Rout*
Already has his Holy Trumpets sounded,
Christ shortly comes to save the sick and wounded.
Watch, Fast, and Pray, and cheer up one another;
This is Gods will, by Christ our Elder Brother;
(His warning peale rung forth unto the Jews)
But scorned by them he left to us these News.
Because they slighted what they might have held,
The Word of Life, the Light, which they beheld,
The Lord removed his precious Candlestick,
Cleared others sight, and left them blind and sick;
The Obstin^te, I mean, not all of them,
For some believed before Jerusalem
Demolisht lay, yea, thousands were baptized
Both then and since of the Crew Circumciz'd,
Some Jews baptized were by the Apostles, some
At Christ his death, when Saints rose from their Tomb,
How many Jews turned Christians in one day,
Who had the gift of Tongues on Whitsunday?
Some Christian Jews, when Roman Rage had rent
Judaeas state, to Jordans Pella went
To Antioch, Tire, Arabia, Babylon,
To Corinth, Creet, Damascus, Macedon,
And to remoter Coasts in hope of rest,
Whence after James decease, in time distressed.
Some fell, some grew. By these the Gentiles rose
From darkness to Souls light, took up the Cross,
Preached Christ, and mixed with Jews they were ingraft
In one fair stock, until by Satan's craft,
The Nicholaites, and the Nestorian Sect
Did with false drugges the Eastern world infect.
"In vain therefore we look for more Conversion
"Of modern Jews before the Worlds subversion
"Then what is past, unless (which Jews abhor)
"Our Romanists leave off Shrines to adore;
"Much less, Elias to descend in Flesh
"With Enoch, since their Spirit some possess,
"And since the Formers gift infused in John,
"He cleared the way for the Creators Son.
Already has the Gospels Larum rung
To quicken souls, whom the Red dragon s^ung,
Yea Nations to our Ancestors unknown
Heard lately of Mount Olivets renown;
"And might unto the Christian Faith be won,
"If Britain, Spain, and Holland join in one
" Religious League to traffic on the Main
"For Indian Souls more than for Worldly Gain.
As Spain exchanged her wares for Gold and spice,
So we by Peter's Net may sacrifice,
And catch more Preyes for Christ then Spain has done,
Except henceforth our New Man's course she run:
What braver gain can be, then Souls to win,
From Heathenish spoils and superstitious sin?
What task can Pilgrims take more happily
Then the Abissine for Manuscripts to try?
Who, as they say, has those unknown to us,
Which will strike dumb all Sects Idolatrous?
What easy means and secondary ways
Has God lent us now in these latter days?
Since Printing and the Loadstone he made known,
To clear the dark, and put the Po^e-starre down?
That so his Word might with the setting Sun,
Conclude the work, which in the East begun.
O Noble Europe, how I pity thee!
If that great Plague, which some Divines foresee,
Due for thy Wiles and Pride, light on thy flock,
Americans raised to the Living Rock,
Whereof sometime thou vauntst in Aprill-youth,
While Feasts for Fasts, and Lies thou take for Truth.
But I leave these, as secrets of the Lord;
As yet thou have his Pledges and his Word,
Which may till Doomes-day last, if thou repent,
And banish Schism, the Ba^e of Loves content.
How many stout Confes^ou^ like bright Stars,
Has God inspired to (...) our jarres?
How many men of Ghostly Rank as Lay,
Yea, Mitred Saints have gone the Martyrs way?
Grave Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latimer,
And Ferrar famed in Englands Register,
Not fearing, like true Members of their Head,
To suffer rather death then be misled?
Or to connive with false dissembling Brow,
At Babels Charms, though never so fair of show?
How many Heralds has he sent of late,
Yet slighted all, to warn each Christian state,
To sue for Grace, their follies to forbear
And to prepare with true Religious fear
For their New Birth and Spirits Renovation,
Before the day of wrath, Earths conflagration?
Among the rest his Grace enlightened me
In Britains Isle, Soule-dangers to foresee,
And by a Spark lent from his Heavenly Flame,
To Sacrifice and spread the Newmans Fame.
To this effect, and that I might regaine
Some swarms for Christ, I chose a tinckling strain
Wherewith I found, like John in Jewry-Land:
Repent, Repent; Gods Kingdom is at hand.
Admonitio Christiana.
EXitus Orbis adest, Chaos and fatale diei
Extremae subit, atra brevi Campana sonabit.
Vos igitur moneo Praeconis more, Litate
Pectoris ex imis Christo Nova sacra Monarchae.
Ille Dei Sermo concludet Ovesque Luposque
Judicii extremi Sermon: Venite; vel Ite,
Ite hinc in Furias, in Tophe^ ite Ferae;
Fida sed ad Ferias Turba venite Poli.
A Christian Admonition.
THe Fatal end, which shall the world confound
Draws near, and Doomes-dayes Bell will shortly sound.
In Preachers Type, I warn you then to bring
New Offerings from the Heart to Christ our King.
For He Gods word will cloze the Latter day
Thus by his word: Come Sheep: Wolves pack away*
Pack hence to Hell, ye Creatures wild;
To Heaven Come ye, the True and mild.
A Hymn of Repentance to be sung for the ease of an afflicted Conscience.
WHat strange assaults of sins surrounding tide,
Break in upon our Souls on every side?
How fearfully Gods darts of vengeance glide?
So near they glide, we cannot turn aside?
We feel enough to pull down Pride,
More terrors then we can abide.
It is no wrong, but Justice which we feel
Though we were scourged with Wires of keenest steel
Or broiled on the Coals, or flayed alive.
We merit not Doomes respite, nor reprieve.
Because in time we did not grieve
For sin, nor sought in Grace to thrive.
Sin is the cause of our Lawsuits and jarres,
Sin is the cause of our late Civil wars.
The former robs us of our means of Thrift,
The latter of our friends with bloodier drift.
For want of shrift, and hearts uplift;
Fiends do as Wheat our Passions sift.
We ought indeed more god^y to have been,
Before we felt Gods Judgments for our sin:
We ought indeed his Arrows to prevent
With Prayers, Vows, and hours more frugall spent*
Yet we repent, with heart near rent
His Talents use, by us misspent.
We will not yet of Freedom quite despair:
No, Gracious God; we know thou can repair,
Our drooping state, though plunged in the mire
Of mangie sin, or scortcht with Troubles fire.
Thou can refrain thy Judgments Ire,
Our Temples cleanse, our Souls inspire.
Thou at a beck Soules-tortures can remove,
Or else assuage our griping fits above
Straind Natures reach, as thy Son Jesus did
Poor Publicans of their diseases rid.
Yea, though griefs were of causes hid,
Their utmost sting thou can forbid.
To thee alone for Mercy we appeal,
Who heretofore the Israelites did heal
By Serpents stung, and sundry others cure
By Miracle, thou can Soule-ease procure.
Nay, health assure, and cleanse us pure,
As thou did Naaman, though impure.
Lord pity us, and bless our Second Birth,
As thou with heat and showers do barren earth,
As Peter, Paul, the Thief in Calvary
And her, whom Jews took in Adultery,
Thou did cheer up in misery,
Because they did for Mercy cry.
Behold how Satan wheels about our brain,
More busy now than ever with his train
Of fiends unseene to circumvent our will;
He knows us weak, and therefore bends his skill,
The more his malice to fulfill,
Because we are so crazed and ill.
He styles our Heathenish spoils states purging pills,
Our jarring Pleas as necessary ills,
Our Niggardize good thrift, Pride decency,
Our drunken healths kind Fellowship: and why?
He knows that Carnal fallacy
Enwraps the Soul in Lunacy.
Against his snares we have no other fence,
Then thy Sons merits, Blood, and Innocence,
O God most Just, and for his sake we trust,
Thou of mere Grace wilt us repute as Just,
Before we be by Satan crushed;
Before our Bones lie in the dust.
Now is the Time, or never, to us aid;
For after death when we in earth are laid
What Sacrifice? what Offering will thou have?
Thy Christ has ransomed us, and thou do crave
No more then his deserts, to save
Sinners from Hels devouring grave.
Christ is our Head, him only we adore,
Christ is the Saint, whose help we still implore.
Christ is the Light, which hearts more cold then Ice
Has warmed and cheered by the Souls Exercise.
Christ is the Lamb, that paid the price
To Justice due for humane vice.
This Sacrifice regardfull of the strife
Twixt Heaven and Earth, for our sick souls releife,
Most gracious Lord, we to thy Grace present,
Not to fulfill Romes Amulets intent,
Or unction charmed for Sacrament,
But with pure Faith, Loves Balm to vent;
Both which thou have from Heaven sent,
Both which on Earth yield thee content.
Amen.
The Second Days EXERCISE.
The Argument.
The Mystery explained of Christ his Birth;
Why he came poor, and strange to Carnal Mirth.
Here they are touched, who soil his Feastivalls,
With Riot, Pomp, or drunken Bacchanalls.
THe Scribe, of late who blazed the Churches state
From Christ's Ascent till this years present date,
Now represents a more Soule-quickning part,
And to win strayes drops on the stony heart,
Alluring them by sacred charms to watch
And wait on Him, who made poor Bethlems cratch
(Borne there without Male-Sire in Judaes Land,
Like Daniels Mountaine-Stone cut without hand)
More glorious than the Roman Capitol,
Or Rhodes Colosse in the Sev'n Wonders Roll.
For this sweet Trance, to rebaptize the Will,
To rowze the Brain, the Soul with zeal to fill,
Draw, Christians, near: and view the Stable-Cratch
Where lay the Virgins Son; Draw near, dispatch,
And humbly greet this Heavens and Earths umpeere,
Whose Joyful Feast good Christians every year
Do solemnly renew for twelve Days space,
Till that bright Star ends at his Native place.
Wisemen they were, who did this Light partake
Led by that Flame, which through the Prophets spoke.
Had we their Star, or Jacobs Staff for Guide,
Diviner Dreams our Fancies would betide.
We might then hope with safety and with Ease
To pass the Spanish Straights and Mid-land Seas
In spite of Moorish Pirates, or Algiere,
And without fear of Turks to domineere,
Till we arrived at last on Joppaes Strand,
And so from thence survey that Holy Land,
Where dwelt sometime a Shepherd Royaliz'd,
Out of whose Ligne Our Savior Humaniz'd,
The second Adam, our souls Shepherd came
As well from God as from Just Abraham.
But how came thou, quoth Zeal, to found out Truth
In tuned form? a work for Joviall Youth?
No humane skill can ancient years exchange:
From whence then spring these Tunes? these motions strange
In thee, whose Beard bewrayes that Melancholy
Strives to supplant the sanguine humor wholly?
He that inspired poor Fishermen to roll
Deep Mysticks with New Tongues, and to enrowle
For aftertimes his Gifts on them conferred,
Has now fresh Heat into my veins transferred:
To scare the Proud, to cure the crazed Fool,
Like that which sometimes stirred Bethesdaes poole.
He guided me to Bethlem, Nazareth,
To Jordan, Salem, and Gennes^reth.
Whence by Christ's Birth, Deeds, Cross, and rising up
From death to Life, we cheer up Souls that droop
For there is no distemper, nor disease,
But if we fix on Christ, we shall find ease.
Christ paid the Price for our infirmities,
Christ only is the New man's Sacrifice.
To honor Him, with Soule-rapt Ecstasy
God breathed in me sweet-working Poes^e.
Slight not then, Readers, my conceits, but hear
With spungy ears what I deliver here.
God grant that these work more sung of his Son
Then all my former works; and I have done.
Old things are done; we must be borne anew
Rise, Libertine, and Christ his Birth renew.
Rise up, thou lazy Soul, thou pampred Sot,
It Is near Sunset; leave we this sensual Cot
For Castawayes, who spend their time in pleasure,
And cannot in a year find one days leisure
To meditate upon Christ crucified,
With humble thoughts and vessels sanctified;
Nor on Christ's Birth, how that his Incarnation
Availes us more than Adams first Creation
O why, came he into the world a stranger?
And would be borne in a poor homely Manger?
Why did the Lord of Lords himself abase
To take on him our faults? but to give place
To Justice, which equality required?
Which to shame Pride harmoniously desired?
Gods Righteous Zeal did satisfaction ask,
But Man could not perform so great a task
The infinite high Wisdom was offended,
And for a price as infinite intended.
The whole world shook; the Elements did war;
The Planets, stars, and humors fell to jarre;
All changed their former course; The Sun looked pale;
Fiends into Hell were like Mankind to hale.
There were but two: and they from goodness fell;
How could their Race then be but slaves to Hell?
Soft, hasty wit: I saw the New man coming
Just at their Fall to curb the Devils cunning
I saw their Grief, their Penitence and Cross;
I saw Gods Grace Conditional after Loss;
I saw Gods Seal of Pardon for their Sins,
When their bare Limbs he clothed with Coats of Skins,
For when our Parents sinned they were ashamed,
Sh^me wrought remorse. Then Christ Gods Mercy claimed;
The second of the Glorious Trinity
Took pity on Man's loss of unity;
The Word, that spoke when Light and Life began,
Claimed share of Grace for his Reformed Man.
As a Just Sire and his Mild wife do treat,
How their lewd Child they might reclaim, or beat*
So Justice did, and Gra^e expostulate,
What should become of Adam and his Mate:
Justice alleged their voluntary Fall,
But Grace opposed the Serpents Charms and Gall*
The One protested Death, but the kind Other
Sought with Gods Love the sting of Sin to smother.
The One did Man a Turne-coat Tra^tour name,
The Other on his Frailty laid the blame.
The One Man's wicked Thoughts insisted on,
The Other Man's Repentance stood upon.
Justice strict Law, but Grace against Laws Scourg^
Gods Court of Conscience did most strongly urge,
And sweetly prayed her Sister not to rank
Mankind with Fiends for One, though mortal Prank.
This Matter then of mighty consequence
Betwixt them Both yet standing in suspense,
With various Pleas concerning our Salvation,
Or in Hells Flames our final Reprobation:
The Virgins two did mutually agree
To compromit the same to Gods De^ree;
On which Suspense these Glorious Attributes
With Zeal and Love concluded their Disputes.
The Almighty then consulted not with any
Of Angels Rank, though there he had full many,
Not for their Zeal with Seraphins approved,
Nor Cherubins, though them he dearly loved,
(They Spirits were but of a Creatures mould.)
Then mystickly the Father did unfold
The Matter to his Son and Holy Ghost,
Gods Honor saved, how Man might not be lost,
Nor left deprived of Light and Favor who^ly,
Like those proud Angels darkened for their Folly.
There was no way to make Legitimate
Man's Bastard slips, nor to repair our state
With Faiths Free Will, Divine, and absolute,
Of whose essential Form Some now dispute;
There was no way for Adam, nor his Seed,
Nor Nature left to do this Glorious Deed,
Since that the vapor of the Dragons Gall
Had foully blackt their Gifts Organicall;
There was no way this work to bring to pass
But by Regeneration to deface
The sting of sin, and by a New-made Creature
Borne of the Spirit and of Humane Nature
To do Gods will, which Adam failed to do,
One that could live here poor, and patient too
Void of s^nne spleen, and thoughts deformitie^
Void of all guile, and lustful vanities;
One that could fix his Faith on God alone
Of Power earth with Heaven to atone;
One that could break the Devils combinations,
One that could brook the trial of Temptations*
One who mankind was able to renew;
And with New gifts their nature to endue;
Yea, such a one, that could endure the rod
Of his, for Sins of men displeased God;
And that partaking of Divinity
Could with the Head unite Humanity;
And lastly One, that able was to tread
Down s^nnes delight, the wily Serpents Head*
This Rares^ One the Trinity did see
Could not among Men's Race, nor Angels be
(For the brightest Angels unfaithful proved,
And the best men were bad, though well beloved
To satisfy Gods wrath there needed then
A Higher power for the Sins of men
To sacrifice before their full atonement.
No Blood of Be^sts could make this reconcilement*
No Prayers made to Angels, Stars, nor Saints;
No Purging Flames could stint sad Souls complaints;
No Dove-like Sighs, nor Cataract of Tears,
No Fasts, nor Hermits Garbs could ease their fears;
Not Incense, not the blood of all the World,
Nor all their merits yet together hurld;
But blood of Man that never had offended,
Of a New-man down from Above descended,
Of a New Mould endowed with Free will,
Which Adam lost, with power to bar all ill
Who taking on himself all men's transgressions
Would die that death, which by their own confessions
They had deserved, and by that means t'asswage
Gods Justice, and supplant the devils rage.
The Fathers Word then, and his bosom Son,
By whom, and for whose sake all things were done
Consented to be borne of Humane flesh
With dowries meet the fainting to refresh,
Whereby their eyes might see his real light,
Though Infinite, yet not to hurt their sight:
Gods own true Heir, the light and Spring of Life,
Did willingly assume to end all strife,
To bound himself, although ubiquity,
To Calendar in Time Eternity.
Christ undertook a new to represent
The second Adams Part, to which Intent,
And to redeem us from his Fathers Doom,
He our frail flesh took in a Virgins womb,
For Nine Months space shut up in narrow place,
Whose strength no place can hold, no Time, nor space.
Almighty God, his Promise to make good
To his adopted Saints of Adams Brood,
That One of Evaes Seed in time to come,
Should at the last the Serpent overcome,
And triumph by his Death on Hellish Sins
As Sampson did on Dagons Philistines,
Had moved Joseph one of David's House
To take the Virgin Mary for his Spouse,
Both known to be of Zorobabels Race,
Which branched from David's Root hold up to grace
Their Pedigree, though they were clouded then
Through poverty. Whereby appears to men
How much to Lawful means Gods Pureness tends
Whilst thus by Wedlocks veil He shrouds his Ends;
How Mary's lowly mind by Grace Divine
For her Babes worth did Evaes pride decline:
But leaves the Rich with Mammons Pitch defiled.
For She was Poor, and He a Carpenter,
Yet God did them before Great Folks prefer,
A Slighted Pair, his twofold Instrument,
To bring Christ's Birth to full accomplishment.
Now Six Months came, since Grave Elizabeth
Of John conceived: And then to Nazareth
God sent again the Angel Gabriel
Glad Tidings of much wonder to foretell,
That there the Blessed Virgin should with Child
Conceive, not by the Male, but by the Mild
And Gentle Sparks breathed from the Holy Ghost;
And that likewise in Judaes Hilly Coast
Elizabeth her Cosen then was blessed,
Though Old and barren, with an Embrion Guest,
Who born should room make for the highest King,
As his Dumb Sire Tong-loos'd would shortly sing.
This Sign the Angel added to Confirm
The Maidens Faith, and make his Message firm,
For Malachy had prophesied, that John
E^ias-like should preach ere Christ came on.
The Angel gone: in have the Virgin-Saint
Went with these news her Cosen to acquaint,
At whose Approach the Six months Embryon sprung,
And she a Psalm God Magnifying sung.
I need not, since Old Wives of it can prate,
The Angels Ave Mary here relate.
His words to her were News Miraculous,
But wrest for vows they prove Idolatrous,
When mumbling on fine Beads, like Parrats Cha^,
They beg in a strange tongue they know not what.
Yet by the New-mans leave we paraphraze,
And paint her Dowries forth in modest phraze,
Not Supp^iant wise to court Imagery,
But to renew, like Saints, her memory,
All hail to thee, O Mary full of Grace,
Happy be they, who see thy Virgins face
Among the Angels Legions raised on high,
And there advanced for thy Humility;
Which did Christ by the Holy Ghost conceive,
As Clay Gods stamp did by his Word receive.
Blessed be thy Name, O Maid, Gods Spouse, and Mother.
Which broughtst a Son, our Savior, and our Brother,
Such Greetings thou did from the Angel merit
Before thou knew'st Conception by the Spirit,
Whereby thou did Manoahs Wife excel,
Though Sampsons birth an Angel did foretell
But why seek I to overcloud thy Praise
With these poor lines, lame hobling sorry Lays?
To pray to thee would derogation be
To his high worth, who saved thee and me
(For not the Woman, but the Woman's Seed
Did Satan foil, and ransom Adams Deed)
To praise thee more then thy dear Son in Books,
That were to rack thy praise on Tenter-hookes,
As if God thee a goddess did install,
Conceived without sins sting Original.
In Heaven thou shin'st no more to be molested
With Sinners songs to superstition wrested;
Where leaving thee Gods Treasures to contemple
I greet on Earth thy Infants former Temple,
Concluding thee of Female kind the best
The mother of my Savior, ever Blessed,
The Type of that true Church, in which we thrive,
And therefore Blessed in the Superlative.
But when that Joseph knew his Bride with Child
By him untoucht, he thought he was beguiled
In his late choice, and therefore privately,
Like a Just man, most loath her publicly
To shame, by letting all their Neighbors know
Her fault supposed with Indignations Brow,
He purposed the matter to protract,
Or to give up the Note of the Contract.
He studied how this new Affinity,
He might shake off, and shun her company.
One while he thought to pocket up the Fraud,
Yet feared to be to his own house a Baud.
Love, Grief, and Shame perplexed him with remorce;
It grieved his heart to sue out a divorce:
He pittyed her, yet never more intended
To dwell with her: but while he so contended
With netled Cares, behold an Angels voice
Thus in a dream changed all his cares to joys:
Be not afraid, O Joseph David's Son,
To take thy Spouse. In her the Work begun
Proceeds from none but God. The Maid is not
By Man defiled, but is with Child begot
By Gods own Breath, which over-shadow'd her;
He to her womb did his sweet Rays transfer,
For which above all women she is blessed,
And of that Sex for ever ranked Best.
That Son, which she brings forth, shall called be
Jesus, that is, a Savior, because He
Shall many save, and from Damnation free,
Which they deserved had by Adams Tree;
Both God and Man, Prince, Priest, Emanuel,
He shall redeem men from the Bonds of Hell.
When Joseph had awakt, he plainly knew
It was Gods Will, and for a Vision true
Acknowledging the same, her hallowed Womb
He honored as Gods Seat, and took her home;
And during Life, as a true Saint became,
He lived with her without reproach or blame.
O Happy Saint, a Foster-Sire become
To Him, whose Sentence shall all creatures doom!
Who God and Man, God by the Fathers Side,
Man by the Mothers, through the Earth did glide!
Thrice Blessed is He, who with the Mornings L^^ke
Does Christ his Birth, his Life, and Passion mark;
And, ere the Sable veil invites the Brain
To slumbring Rest, repeates his Part again:
Christ is our New-mans Crown, the Woman's Seed,
Gods Word, Men's Light, who su'd for men unfeed,
Who trod on Satan's Head, on Death Sins Hire,
Sinaies Thund'rer, who spoke in Flames of Fire,
Jacobs Shiloh, Moses his Prophet Great,
Of Whom did David and Gods Prophets treat,
Daniels Messiah, Esayes Emanuel,
The Virgins Son, who strangely conquered Hell
By Lowliness, and scorn of worldly Fame;
Yielding himself a Spectacle of Shame
Upon the Cross with Nails tormenting woes
For most unthankefull Men, his mortal Foes.
To this High Priest, Melchisedech of Peace,
Stick, Christians, fast: and let home Quarrels cease;
For None get in through heavens narrow Gate
But Men of Faith in Christ Regenerate,
Men vowed to lead like Him a Godly Life,
Men that would leave Wealth, Honors, Pleasures, Wife,
Rather then they would blurre Gods tendered Grace,
Detract from Christ, or his poor Saints disgrace.
With this Belief, and Mysteries of Old
Well Catechized, like Saints, Come on, behold,
And kiss Gods Son, keeping the Evangelles Path,
Lest Jealous He consume you in his Wrath.
Faiths Curtain is removed, the Cloudy Bar,
View then the Root of Jesse, our Mornings Star.
About the end of Jacobs Prophecy,
That out of Judaes Land their Po^icy
And The Execution of their Laws Decree,
Till Shiloh came, should not extinguished be,
Nor that until he came Time should deface,
As with a Flood, the Lot of Judaes Race:
Heavens true Shiloh, Gods great Ambassador
Arrived on Earth, and yet could scarce have harbor
Although the Jews did see their Scepter gone
Under proud Aliens, and their Laws undone
Except a show of Policy with stain,
Which likewise ended in Vespasians Reign:
Yet few observed Old Jacobs testament,
Thinking that he and all the Prophets meant
A Temporal Prince by him that was to come,
Who as they dreamed, a David might become
With a Camp Royal, and the warlike drum
To Triumph, Conquer, and the world to doom
To free fair Sion, and the Land of Jury
From Caesar's yoke, and the Idu^^ans fury.
But their Messiah, while the Jews thus raved,
Of Judaes Tribe descended, and from David,
Typ'd in that Kings dreamed stone hewne without hand,
Begot without the Male, in Jewry Land,
Was borne at Bethlem, lodged among the Beasts.
(Such pity Innes show to distressed Guests)
Soon as th'Autumnall season of the year
Had Balanced the twofold Hemisphere,
The Temples Porch of Romes Bi^ronted Saint
Shut up, whom they the God of Peace did paint:
Augustus, then the Roman Emperor,
When he had swayd by his Triumphant power
The Land of Egypt, Syria, Palestine,
And what did next the Parthian state confine,
And more then forty years the Sovereignty
Had held, grew bold upon their Lenity,
Their vassalage, long Peace, and dandling rest,
Thence he resolved to hoord into his Chest
Much Eastern Gold, as he had often before
Vexed them with Rates, and with his Cohorts more
About that Time, when Annual Contributions,
Or Subsidies by Senates Constitutions
Were paid unto the Officialls of the Prince
For Legions Hire by the Subjected Province,
Which was September by Romes Audit Book,
And then belike they for this Toll did Look,
Unless they for this New, and special Rate
Prolonged the time, until Decembers date,
As Statesmen to prevent tumultuous Arme^,
In Winter use to tax repining swarms,
To this effect did Caesar Writs direct
To Syriaes Pre^our, that he should collect
This Rate: And sent withal a Proclamation
With these Contents, on pain of Confiscation
Of goods and states, and for their sloth Rebukes,
That all the Kings, and Tributary Dukes
Should cause Romes Eastern Vassalls to resort
To their Birth Place of the Espoused Sort
To pay a Rate, by Name, the Head, or Poll,
And this by Book the Pretour to inroll.
This strict Edict made all Men have away
Into their Native Soil, the Tax to pay.
Among the rest went Joseph to be taxt
With his true Virgin Bride, by that time waxt
Ready to Child of Isreal's fairest Hope,
The Woman's Seed which promised was to cope
With Carnal Sin, and to smite Lucifer,
So to save them, who lost in Adam were;
Her Time was come, and then the blessed Spouse
With Joseph took in have that homely House,
For want of other lodging at the Inn,
Which being full would not let poor Folks in.
Christ in the World this Entertainment had,
And who are truly his shall find as bad
Among his Foes, unless they bring them Gold,
Or Projects their Ambition to uphold;
Unless they come in Ruffling Vestiments
They are but held poor Snakes, or Innocents;
Or if such crave Relief, they with a P --
Will pack them to the Bead^e, or the Stocks.
What Patron now will his poor Members foster?
Few but for Gain. No Coin, no Pater noster.
"The Cross is Christians Badge, or Poverty,
"The Antichristians Mark is Dignity
"With Pride, and Wealth. Lord, temper our vagaries,
"When thee we do neglect, with Contraries.
Though few then knew the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
Nor heeded much the Cause of his poor Birth,
At which, although no Ladies of Renown
Did meet of Salems, or of Bethlems Town,
Nor giddy Gossips trig'd to Gurmandize,
To cheat the Time with idle Chat, or Lies,
Yet let our Inward man, his Swathes behold,
And this Child's Swathes the Scriptures shall unfold.
Here they shall find another Hercules
Than that which Poets faigne, to crush in less
Than a Thoughts while two Snakes from Juno sent
To Murder him within his Cradle pent.
Here they shall find a Theme beyond all Theames
Truth wrapped in Flesh, to thratle Tales and Dreams.
Here they shall find despised by worldly Men
Saints basely laid, as in a Dungeon Den.
Here they shall find Gods Babe in poorest Bed,
Though borne to tread upon the Serpents Head.
Yet though Dull Men were silent in his Praise,
The holy Angels with Harmonious Lays,
And shouts of Joy, divulged his Horoscope;
They sung of his sweet Grace, and future hope;
They chanted out Gods Glorious Name with Mirth,
Good Will, and Peace to men through Christ his Birth;
For at this Time, when All One Color wore,
Whilst Epicures out-slept their Dainties store,
Some Shepherds watch't their Flocks near Bethlems Town,
To whom the Angels made these Tidings known.
For Drowzy Drones here is Authenticke warning:
Some Mysteries disclosed for their Learning;
" The first Man in the Spring was formed of Earth;
" Of God and man in Autumn Christ his Birth
Began, and with more Light rose from the East,
But now it sets in Stormy Winter West.
Some think Christs-Tide false bears Decembers Date,
Because the Tax was by the Roman State
Exacted in September, as they prate:
And S. John's Birth bears March for antedate,
Abiaes Course cast up for Zachary:
Yet this supposed true, to shun their Cry,
I say, what if the Fiery Comforter
(Christ's Deputy, the Churches wise Supporter)
Indifferently Dispensed with this Exchange?
That with S. Mathewes Memory we change
The same, and with S. Michaels Jubilee?
Whereof the first records Christ's Pedigree,
And Birth, as the other serves to represent
His Churches State, through Civil Discord rent?
Or else because the World shrunk to old Age,
This changed Feast calmes Melancholies rage,
To comfort us amidst our Storms, and Snowes,
When to the Root the Sap fall from the Boughs?
Perhaps rude Goats Coucht under Capricorn
Now Good Men tame, or Tares divide from Corn,
New Hearts presenting, with the New years Sun
For Incense, Gold, and Myrrh unto Gods Son,
Who at this Feast took Flesh and Circumcision,
Whereto his Star led Wisemen in Procession,
Proclaiming him in Salem, King of Jews,
For all fierce Herod's craft vexed with the News:
That Isreal's Prince, Whose Spring of Pedigree
Eternal was, in Bethlem borne should be;
His Craft availd him not, for they by God
Were the same way home to Return forbod,
And though in stead of Christ poor Babes he slew,
He did by death his Deed soon after rue.
But why came they to Christ with Gold and Store
Of precioue Gummes, who might from Heaven have more?
Was it to show, that Christ our Royal Head,
High Priest, and Judge Commands the Quick and Dead
By virtue of his God-heads Triple Mace
Of Justice, Mercy, and Inspiring Grace?
Uniting Man to Gods Conformity
^y these three Gifts, Types of the Trinity?
A Priest to Mediate, Preach, and Sacrifice:
A King to Reign, a Judge to Punish vice?
"And that more often than Incense, Myrrh or Gold,
" God might with Faith perfumed Hearts behold?
Or did these Sages of their own accord
Present such Gifts, as welcome to the Lord?
Or which is likely, did Gods Spirit move
Those holy Pilgrims to express his Love
And Care for his Beloved in Distress?
Who at that sudden pinch were Money-lesse?
That with such needful Means they might supply
Their wants, when he forewarned them to fly
To Egypt from the Tyrants bloody sword,
Till their Return from Exile by his Word?
When they that sought the Infants Life were dead,
And Herod's Son Installed in his stead?
This Passage sure believe it as your Creed,
"God never fails the New Man in his Need;
But gives his Angels charge, as for his Son,
That he dash not his Foot against a Stone.
But missing Christ, why were poor Infants slain?
"That for the Head the Members suffer pain:
"And that their Types as Blazing Stars display:
Who Christians slay, they Christ himself wou^d slay.
And why blessed He a Virgin with his Birth?
And made her first Christ's Temple here on Earth,
That was no Lady Crowned with worldly Honor?
Nor with Rich glaring Robes took State upon her?
And why graced he poor Shepherds with these News?
Not full-fed Peers, Princes, nor wealthy Jews;
Not Rabbis, Popes, nor Lordings of the Church,
Who looked for Christ, ye^ lived upon the Lurch?
Let Dogmatists resolve these Doubts, that know
Why Thunder smites high Trees, and spares the Low.
" Gods Grace, and Pride, can never brook each other,
"Nor dwells Humility, and Pomp together:
The Former does our Breach with Heaven repair,
The Latter whilst it swells, bursts into Air:
For there, some play with Aerie Fancies Elves,
Till Hell devowrs the Tempters, and themselves.
Gods Church seems poor to Carnal Libertines:
"In Heavens she sups, though hard on Earth she dines,
" God chose the weakest to confound the Wise,
"That Man with Christ by simple means might rise,
Embracing more his Crib for Souls behoof
Than Satan^ Crown in this our world of proof:
"Yet God allows, to shun an Anarchy,
"For Orders sake a kind of Hierarchy,
"With Pastors Power in every Christian State,
"To Bind, or Loose, or Excommunicate;
"To heal the sickly, and to bath his Flock
"With Waters streaming from the Living Rock,
"More fishing for Men's Souls then Carnal Preyes,
"More glorying in the Cross than worldly swayes:
"Whom Christ bids Feed, and not like Wolves to bite us:
"Whom Christ bids Watch, as Paul exhorted Titus.
Yet, Little Flock, that bleat'st through Tyrants Rage,
Grudge not, there shortly comes a Newer Age.
He that revenged on Herod and his House
The Blood of Bethlems Babes, will right his Spouse.
The Blood late spilt in our West Christian Lands
God will require at Gogs and Magogs hands:
God will his Servants wrongs ease, or conclude,
Whom Tyrants snared in Aegypts Servitude.
God will revenge their Cause, Complaints, and Tears,
Whom our Make-bates by Tricks set by the Ears.
"No Motion, Plea, Decree, nor false Demurre
"Of Jarring Brains can Heavens Sentence blurre,
For with the Beast and Lords that took his part,
They shall in T^phets Flames for ever smart;
The Members for their Plots, Bribes, and Misdeeds,
Their Perking Heads for justifying their Deeds,
For suffering Elies Sons on Saints to prey,
For sparing Agags, whom the Lord bids slay.
Be patient then, Ye Servants of the Lord,
Poor Nabaoths, who fear the slaughtring Sword:
The Sun will shine after some Thunderclaps,
New Heavens Joys will smoother all Missehaps;
And God will plague those Lords, who make a Prey
Of Christians Goods, nay worse, who Christians flay.
Let none, that holds of Faith the smallest Grain,
Despair, but that with cheerful mind again,
Though girt with Flames, as the three Children were,
He may without Annoy, or Servile Fear
Of the Souls Guilt escape from his Distress,
If he believes that Gods bright Word took Flesh
And di'd for him, he cannot do amiss.
"Gods Grace appears in dangers most extreme
"Betwixt the Bridge and the devouring stream;
Nay, plunged in the Deep ore Head and Ears,
God may reprieve, or rid him of his Fears,
Transplanting him to that Eternal Rest,
Where griping Grief shall never him molest,
As the good Thief, whom they did Crucify
With Christ and others saved can testify.
"Let this suffice: None ever missed Relief;
"Who fixed on Christ alone his Hearts Belief.
From hence poor Joseph's, though in Closest ward,
May look for Liberty with Angels Guard.
From hence good David's, though in Banishment,
May hope for Calmer Days, and some Content.
From hence Gods Prophets may in their distress,
Like Jeremy and Paul, expect Redress.
From hence may Saints, though in their Tents beset
By Millions of proud Foes, deliverance get.
He that warned Joseph with the Babe to fly
From Herod's Sword to Egypt, will supply
Their wants, and aid them in their Pilgrimage
Against insulting Foes and Satan's Rage.
And though they feel the Plague, Saints may respire,
Casting, like Paul, the Viper in the Fire.
Or were their Eyes drawn out, their Noses slit,
Or all their Members rackt, they may hope yet
With Inward Joys to be more ravished,
Than if unmaim'd their Bodies flourished.
Nay, were they flayed for crossing Hells Decrees,
Like the sev'n Brethren in the Maccabees,
They shall overcome those Furies Insurrection,
And joy like Job, to see the Resurrection;
For they well know that their Redeemer lives,
And for that Martyrs Sight dare pawn their lives,
S^ Stevens Sight who here on Earth entraunc't
Saw Jesus first on Gods Right hand advanced,
Which with his stoning sealed confirms our Creed,
"That Martyrs Blood became the Churches Seed;
"And that al those, who would see Christ in glory,
"Must bear his Marks, and heed his Passions story.
In Spirit where saw John the Evangelist
The Throned Lamb but in his Banished List?
In Pathmos, where he saw by Revelation,
The Churches State, and Babells Fornication?
To feel Remorse, some feed their Ravishments
With Herod's Sword unsheathed on Innocents,
"That bloody Sword, wherewith the Eagles Peers
"Did persecute near for Three hundred years
"The Christians Race; And which lay then suspended,
"Till Satan it to Babells Whore Commended,
"As witnessed old Chaucers Pelican
"Against the Griffon, and his Vatican;
"Which Berengarius long before discry'd,
"Which the Waldenses and Albigians tried;
"And which as yet our Mother Christendom,
"Like Rachel, feels in her seeds Martyrdoome.
To show Faiths Tree more pregnant by the Fruit,
Some Lazars feed, some with Apparel suite.
One while they Chaunt the New Man's Sacrifice,
And how the Lamb un^eal'd hid Mysteries.
Another while they Co^^t these Festivals,
With Sions Songs, Or Bethlems Pastoralls;
Yet so, that whilst they kiss the Babes Memorial,
The Cross be not forgot, nor F^ery Trial.
Some hold it Joy, and great Felicity,
To keep for Saints Kind Hospitality
No Wassailes Cup, nor Cates variety
Does relish them, like Good Society.
The Reason is, God gave them their Request,
That Lady Conscience be their Daily Guest;
Dame Prudence does the Household charge o'relooke,
Her Cosen Thrift is Cater, Care the Cook,
Sobriety the Butler; Will the Page,
And Manners set in comely Equipage
The Pots and Messes full, where Zeal says Grace,
And honest Love points every one his Place:
Content with Welcome carves; then Doctor Diet,
Old Merry man, and the Peace maker Quiet
By stem recite what moral Tales conduce
To cheer the Heart for Souls or Bodies use.
"Thrice blessed are they, who pass the Time away
"With them, be it in Talk, at Board, or Play:
"For living so, like Angels, with the wise,
"Their Mansion seems a Second Paradise,
"With safer Fate than Palaces of State,
"Than Balthazars with all their gods of Plate.
Others steal Hours from the Immortal Part
With Games and Gambolls to delude the Heart,
Or which is worse, with Bacchanalian Potting,
And surfeiting, often to their Bodies rotting,
Which wanton Jiggs more often accompany
Then Sacred Hymns, with Soule-rapt Harmony.
"Mirth fits the Time, so does good Cheer and wine,
"But the excess bewrayes a Libertine,
That never quakes at the rich gluttons Fate,
Nor ever strives to be Regenerate.
Drown Hoary Cares with Healthes, and hang up sorrow,
For who will care, what may befall the Morrow?
Let Papists fast, let Puritans go whistle:
They are but Turks, who against Wine will Bristle:
No sullen Stoic, no crabbed Critic Fool
Shall taste the sweets of Aristippus School:
Such Revells keep our Roaring Epicures,
Whilst they protract the New Man's wholesome Cures.
But no such Course shall my new Sparkling Breast
Conceive to Counterpoize my Saviors Feast.
I love his Cratch, and fear his Judgments Thunder,
Both which warn me to slight a nine Days wonder,
For Pampred Sin can hardly be kept under,
Except vain things from the Divine we sunder;
"Who will be puffed with windy Lushious Fare,
"And leave the Soul half starved in Satan's Snare?
"How dare they spend in Drink, like Frantic Elves,
"Thrice more than serves men abler than themselves?
"Or wast in Smoke, at Games, or such Abuses
"The means left them for more convenient Uses?
When as such Deeds stink in our Makers sight,
And waigh'd, they prove with in his Balance Light?
How dare our Sots on Carnal Sense rely
When as they know, that they at last must Dye?
And after Death feel Hellish pain for ever
With Rackes and Flames worse than a Bedlem Fever?
Where Dives failed to have with Tortures wrung
One waters Drop, to cool his scorched Tongue?
But why touch I licentious Saturnalls?
Christian I am, and Christ his Festivalls
I humbly with new Raptures celebrate,
From whence I bar the Hare-brain'd Reprobate,
Whose Lamps may dim our Altars of Devotion,
Therefore I leave them to their Frantic Motion,
And to be fatned for those Mysticke Fowls,
Which at Gods Feast shall snatch their Flesh and Souls.
Yet now, because at Newyeares-tide they say,
They will turn New, I greet them on that Day,
Not with Rich Plate, nor Bowls of Liqour'd Sin,
But Gifts fetched from the Spirits Magazin,
Not with Delights of Putrif^actions Kind,
But which preserves to fortify the Mind.
Does Flesh and Blood, distrust what I have written?
Let Flesh and Blood be circumciz'd or Smitten;
Let the Old Man with will uncircumciz'd
Be puncht, or else with quickening fire Baptized.
So that our Thoughts be New, Christ represented
In sacred Swathes, and with New vows presented,
I weigh fierce Herod's Threats no more than chips,
And less I prize his Plot, his Sword, or whips.
For with the Magies rapt, I more behold
Gods Babe in Manger laid than Thrones of Gold.
O would I had been living in those days,
To feed mine eyes with that New Comets Rays,
Which led those wise Arabians from the East
To see him, whom I glaunce at in the West!
But whither has my zeal transported me,
At this great Feast, our Wimers Iubilee?
To place poor dust and Ashes near Divine
Conceits, like Roman Coleworts by the Vine?
Yet not so great is the Antipathy,
But that true Saints may feel some Sympathy
Betwixt the Members and their General,
Since a mild Sense will make them Musical.
Indeed sweet Love, and union help to hide,
Like Masticks velvet, what they find too wide
A Blemish, or a Scarre on Faces foul,
"But causeless Nips can never harm the Soul.
Then, let not worldly wits our New Man Scorn,
Though vile he seem, or of the Hope forlorn,
For he, that outwardly looks vilified,
May pass yet for a Creature Justified,
Whilst that he bears the Cribbe, where Christ was borne
In mind, with his Red Cross, and Crown of Thorn.
Be meek therefore ye States and people all,
All from the Kings Bench to the Cobblers Awle:
Thank God for them, whom for your Good he sends,
And ponder that which to your safety tends.
"Repent ye of your Sins, depend on Grace,
"That so Christ's merits may your sins deface.
"Think Daily on the New Man's Crucifixe;
"And Christ his Cratch in your Remembrance fix.
"Pray often against lewd Francies Provocation;
"And let your Deeds to Love have more relation.
"Compare our years from Christ his Incarnation
"With the Floods Time from Adams first Creation,
"And one Thousand six Hundred fifty six
"May to the World a Fatal Period fix;
In Desolation to all hardened Hearts,
In Dissolution of our Earthly Parts,
If all the Signs foretold by Daniel, Christ,
Paul and S. John, fall out with Antichrist;
True Signs indeed, which Faith and Love withdraw
By Wars, Pride, Schisms, and Wiles in winding Law;
"Besides this Sign: that Gods two Prophets lay
Martyred, ere Babel could her charms display.
And who can tell, but when the Electors fail
Romes Empire sets? and Doomes Day shall prevail?
"That Empire, which began when Christ was borne,
"Ere he returns, shall set and be forlorn?
"Since that which barred in Paul's time his Revealing,
Lies waste: what boots the Antichrists Concealing?
Now whilst we look for Times extremest Date,
And Christ his Coming, either soon or late,
Let us salute his Cratch, his Birth admire,
And pay our vows to him wiih zealous fire.
Great Abraham rejoiced to see his Days,
When rapt to Paradise, he felt his Rays.
So did that Baptist Babe in Mothers Womb
Spring by Instinct with Joy, to hear him come
Conceived in Flesh of that Immortal Flame,
Which promised was Sin, Death and Hell to shame.
So Angels sung of him Propheticke Lays:
So Simeon sung with Anna songs in praise
Of Bethlems Babe, both ravished at his sight,
(When Mary cloz'd her due Mosaicall Rite,)
Acknowledging the true Messiah Borne
Of Evahes seed to save the Soul forlorn.
And so shall we in mind feel Music rare,
If we muse on our New Man's Birth with care;
"I mean, that Spark, which at our Baptism rose
"Within our Hearts three Monsters to oppose.
Then freely we his Gospel may embrace,
And sing this Lullaby with measured pace:
The Holy Ghost, to save frail Adams Race,
Breathed a sweet Flame in Mary full of Grace.
This Flame infused in Flesh, both Man and God,
We greet and cloze his Birth with Simeons Ode:
Thy Birth and Name do saving Health betide,
O Maide-borne Man, God by the Fathers side.
Thou art the Gentiles Light, Emanuel;
The Glory, Head, and Crown of Israel:
Whose Glimpse we having seen in sacred Trance,
Lord, now in Peace us to that Light advance:
That Light, which thou conceived'st in our Flesh
To save Mankind, and Satan to suppress:
The Light of Souls, thy true essential Form
Of Mary borne, Eves Offspring to reform;
Whom with Thee and thy Spirit, three in one,
We honor, praise, and serve, Great God, alone,
Without depending upon Angels, Saints,
Or such whom Baal for Advocates be Saints.
A Hymn in Memory of our Saviors Birth and Incarnation,
ALL ye, that are of Spirit mild,
And long to greet the Virgins Child:
Lay by a while your worldly Cares,
The Outward man's bewitching snares,
And let us now submissive sing
The Cradle-cratch of Heavens King.
Blessed be the womb which Jesus bare;
Blessed be his Name, that saves from care
Frail Adams seed, if they repent
Their time misspent, to Satan lent.
Christ's only Name does Satan shame,
Then, let us all sound Christ his Fame,
Let every Heart submit to Christ,
For without Christ, none can subsist.
Blessed be the Breasts, which gave him suck.
Blessed be thy Cratch which had the luck,
O Bethlem, with a Star to boot,
To spread abroad King David's root.
In thee was the Messiah borne,
Jews Shiloh Prince, yet held in scorn,
Because he did not personate
A Royal Babe with open state;
But that he lay in Manger base,
They waigh'd not well the Mysticke Case,
That Mary did Eves want supply,
Our New-man Adams qualify;
How Christ was come to humble Pride,
And by Low Ebbes Floods to divide:
That Christ at first grew, like a Graft
From Heaven sent, to put down Craft:
Whence like a shrub, but Cedar now,
The hugest Tree he makes to bow:
And so must we stoop often Low,
Ere we shall like this Cedar grow,
We must embrace his Cribbe and Cross,
Ere parted be our Gold from Dross;
We must Cashiere wild Fancies wags,
Our high Conceits, and Merits brags.
Then Ye, that hope Gods Babe to meet,
Weigh more then Plumes your Peacocks feet.
Since Christ before a bed of Down
Preferred a Cratch, beat Pleasures down,
I mean, those snares, which ye shall f^nd
To cheat good Time, and mad the mind,
And bear about you more his Marks
Then Carnal Toys, or Nine days sparks.
Observe what things ye vowed of late
At your New Birth to shun and hate,
Ere ye presume to kiss this Child,
O ye that are by Nature wild.
The Third Days EXERCISE.
The Argument.
The Life, which Christ led in our vale of Tears,
Until of Age he grew to Thirty years,
How then he was Baptized by Holy John,
And tempted thrice by Satan thereupon.
THough Christ a Child inherent Righteousness
Original and Actual did possess,
And in his Youth sufficient gifts inherit
To cope with Hell, yet by the Sacred Spirit
He was not led into the Wilderness,
Till to more years he grew of Manliness,
That in all points like us, excepting sin,
He might on Earth his Humane course begin,
"Clothed with our f^esh, exposed to scorners gall,
" Temptations, Death, and yet o'recomming all.
"(For never God his children leaves for trials,
"Till he them arms against Satan's false espials)
Now I review the shadow of his Dial,
Back to his Swathes, with a short true Memorial
Of his rare gifts, and Heavenly Qualities,
Which more and more shot forth with properties
Convenient for his green, and tender Age,
Whilst here he went his earthly Pilgrimage,
"From his Conception, Birth, and Cradle Blessed,
"I do proclaim of Babes this Babe the Best.
Nature and Grace contended in his Feature,
Till they it formed a peerless lovely Creature,
And what they did (if ought at all) let slip,
His Godhead made complete their workmanship.
O would my Lord now do the like for This,
This weakeling, which with awful sense I kiss,
This Embryon, or Conception of my brain,
Christ's Portraiture, which I shall draw in vain,
Except the Spirit of the Evangelists;
The Holy Flame, which guided to the lists
Of the Triple Combat this Man of men,
Do purify my style from Blots unclean,
And my swift Trance, from Superstitious fury,
Whilst I from Wales to Galilee in Jury
Am carried with a rapid zealous Flame,
To see how Christ a Child, a Man became,
A Man Baptized, as we his Members ^e,
Tempted by Satan, yet got bravely free.
Though Jesus had escapt the Hunters snare,
Yet Judgment crossed the Tyrants jealous Care,
For out of hand, after the Butchery
Of Bethlems Babes deceased in Misery
With entrails scorcht proud Herod, to his Sons
Leaving his State waving in dissentions;
First having caused even in deaths agony,
His Eldest Son to bear him company;
When three of them stood for their Fathers place,
And each of them would bear a Royal Mace.
With factious sides, to make their challeng good,
These Aliens borne of Edoms-viper-Brood,
Contended for their Sires usurped Throne,
The Rule of Laws from Jewries People gone;
Since Shiloes Birth, Gods messenger of Peace,
The vigor of their Laws began to cease,
As afterward by Titus came to pass;
Who did their Laws and Nations state deface;
As likewise when in fierce Domitians reign
And Trajans, David's stock were sought and slain.
But all their claims appealed unto Rome,
The Brethren stood confind to Caesar's doom,
Who by Decree for taming of their fury
Most Politic then Tripartited Jewry,
To Archelaus by style of Ethnarchy
South-jewries Land he gave, the Tetrarchy
Of Galilee and Jordans Land betwixt
The other two he left for portions mixed.
The Brothers broils thus quieted at last;
When all those storms were overgone and past,
Joseph advised from Heaven with his Bride
Brought back the Child from Aegipt. But aside
Turned (doubting Archelaus the Tyrants Son,
Who then to sway South-judaes Land begun)
To Nazareth Northwards in Galilee;
Where suckled was the Infant Jesus, free
From worldly Broiles, as to a Nazarite
Belonged, His head unpoll'd by Legal Rite.
There Mary not omitting any mild
Or watchful care for nursing up her Child,
Directed him now weaned from her breast,
One while to go, another while to rest,
His Infants time beguiled wi^h Lullabies
With gentle smiles, sweet songs, or soft replies.
She fed him not with Suckets nor Conserves,
But with that meat, which strengthens tender nerves*
"To diet him for health, was her chief Care,
"Not urging him to eat of dainties rare,
But victuals fit for Nature thin and spare:
Butter and Honey were his daintiest fare.
"She knew that Souls in pampred bodies pine,
"That Both corrupt through lushious cheer and Wine.
But no man him with Idols durst present,
Nor with those sights whose pictures represent
Horned Bugges, or Household gods, for she her self
Could never brook to see a Labans Elfe:
Woe to those fondling dads, who tempt the souls
And pliant brain of their soft little Fools
With such Trim trash, the unmarkt Nursery
Of Faithless Fears, and blind Idolatry.
She those defects with sacred Care repaired
Which Mother Eve by Satan's fraud impaired,
Gods Instrument to bear and breed that Child,
Which jarring Earth with Heaven reconciled.
And when more years came on, she did assay
To teach his tongue a Psalm, or else to Pray;
Whereto his Will became more forward bent
Then Courtly Lads to learn smooth Complement*
"No Boys permitted she her house to haunt,
"Such Rakehel Boys, which used to lie and taunt,
Like those rude Impes, which heretofore did yalp,
And call Bald pate Elishaes reverend scalp,
"No Maid of hers durst sing a wanton song
"Within her ears or his; nor to the Throng
Of Reprobates, those whom she knew defiled,
Would she from home adventure out her Child.
And if she had (such was his Inclination,)
His inward Lore prevented Education.
There is no doubt but by Infusion He
Had needful what the Spirit knew to be.
Soon as his Childhoods Stature did increase,
His mirthfull-fits began soon to decrease;
For without grief how could that Heavenly spark
Hear men to swear, like fiends, like curres to bark?
How could he but lament to see them crouch
To Stocks? and yet the Godhead to avouch?
How could he choose but grieve at their Extortions?
Debates, and spending of their dearest portions?
To see a Brother fight, the Courtier faigne,
The Lawyer lie; and all for cursed gain?
To see men strive for Place and Soveraignety,
Like fiends for pride who lost their dignity?
To see the Townesman pawn his soul for wealth?
The Husbandman Corns price to raise by stealth?
Successively there budded every year
New Hopes of him, which did his Mother cheer:
His godly talk delighted Joseph's heart,
And made him often his labors lay apart;
Both Joseph and the blessed Virgin much
Astonished were to hear his Childhood touch
On such profound and Heavenly Mysterie^
Concerning Faith and Love, how they arise
In Adams Sons? and why they set again?
Wherefore it storms and why God sends us rain?
His only Reading was the Prophets Book,
He would not once on lying Legends look,
But on his Fathers Laws both day and night
He fixed his mind with all his will and might.
While other Lads were awed with Tutors curb,
He served the Lord, that swayes the Heavenly Orb.
"He never took a meal, but still the Lord
"He glorified with his Thankes-giving word.
And as himself lived Innocent and pure
So by his fair ensample from impure
And childish crimes, he many Children drew
To give God praise, as still in years he grew.
When Jesus had twelve tedious Winters past,
He traveled to Jerusalem at last
In company of his supposed Sire
And his dear Mother-maid, in whom the fire
Of zeal then burnt to see, and solemnize
In Abibs month the Legal Sacrifice.
Where when they had beheld the Rites past over
At their great Feast then styled, the Lambs Passover,
These sacred Saints returned homewards bound;
But with the Stuff when Jesus was not found,
They after search their friends and company
Forsook, and back again most heavily
They hyed fast, and looked him all about
Among their Kinsfolk every where throughout
The City, till they found Him in the Temple,
Where Saints Gods works accustom to contemple;
And there amidst the Doctors of the Law,
They saw, and heard how Jesus put in awe,
And posed Grave Rabbis, whom he out did single
For Questions deep, that made their ears to tingle
His Arguments their Fallacies did quash,
That they were stroke, as with a Lightning flash.
So fair a square, so just a Symmetry
The Godhead held with his Humanity,
His Actions sure his Godhead did express
(Yet in his Flesh we mortal him confess,)
That to dash Lies brave Flames he never wanted,
With smiles he pleased, and with his frowns he daunted.
His Godhead darted Awe and Majesty,
His Humane Presence shone with Lenity.
They wondered at his words well coucht, so sage,
So well composed to put by wrangling rage,
On Scriptures Ground, without Chymeres of Clerks,
Without Latriaes or Douliaes Quirkes.
Such Doctrine in a Child, such sparklings rare
Amazed them, as late did Bethlems Star,
Such thoughts confused, most sensible of Signs,
Doubting the effects racked and perplexed their minds
Whilst with the Scribes Christ thus disputing stood
Mary to meet her darling almost proud,
Betwixt Seraphicke Love and Ravishment,
Lay, like the Doctors in Astonishment.
As men rejoice in a dark Cloudy day
To see the Sun his sudden Beams display,
So did they startle at Christ's Lightning words
Whilst her soft greetings Mary thus affords:
My loving Son, why have thou stayed behind,
And not as does thee Natures duty bind,
Returned with us: Behold, I and thy Father
Have sought thee sad for three days space together;
Soon as we found thee missing by the way,
We hither came and sought thee night and Day.
We searched with careful thoughts most diligent,
The City where we used to frequent;
With heavy hearts God knows we looked for thee;
Whom Christ undaunted answered grave, and free,
Is It possible that you forget so soon
The favors late, which God for you has done?
Dear mother, wot you not that I must go
About my Fathers Business, to undergo
More travels yet? you know the Prophesies
Of Ancient Seers: you know the Mysteries
Disclosed by the Angel Gabriel,
That I am sent to ransom Souls from Hell,
That I must preach to Spirits thrall'd in Jaile
My Fathers will, which shall over sin prevail.
You know what means Heavens word, men's Light, Gods Breath
From Simeon, Anna, and Elizabeth;
And in your self the Spirits ravishment
Reveals the cause of my Birth and Descent.
( My Fathers zeal so burnt within my breast
Against these strayes I could not but contest)
Whose Oracles of me and many more
Your true Believing heart lays up in store;
Although the same as yet you seem to smother
You cannot but remember them, good Mother.
These words of his the blessed Virgin waigh'd,
And safe them up within her mind she laid.
Out of the Temple then wtth her he goes,
And presently they set for Nazareth,
Where Mary found his Will with hers agreeing,
Though Him she held the Author of her being,
And her sole Head, yet then the Head subjected
Unto the Limbs, and nothing he rejected
To Undergo in his Minority
For their behoof and best commodity,
Or murmured at, which his dear Mother Maid,
Or Joseph's voice of charge upon him laid:
But as a Son, or rather Servant true,
He yields them Honor and Obedience due:
What they at home, or else abroad assigned,
Labor or care in Body or in mind,
As an Apprentice, Carpentary Drudge,
To toil for them he never once did grudge,
But wrought his Task and servile Trade uprigh^
Not needing checkes, nor frowning oversight.
"Base idleness by Nature he abhorred,
"Which made him work, when some as Outlawe^ roared.
For he accounted meat not duly got,
If daily for the same he labored not.
"He for our sakes sustained poverty,
"To purchase wealth for us and Dignity.
In this poor plight the curse Christ underwent,
To earne his bread with sweat and small content,
Yet what he gained would scarce weak Nature feed
And it grieved him to see his friends in need,
What therefore he of meat earned by his sweat,
The Overplus he gave the Poor to eat.
Thus Christ shot up in shape, and thrived in Grace,
And all Good men loved him that saw his face,
For he preferred Gods praise before his own;
More prizing Truth then they Judae as Crown.
But to describe his worth, his modest looks,
And qualities would fill up many Books.
The matter far exceeds my strength and wit,
My Form turns proud except thou temper it,
O Holy Ghost, and curb'st my swelling sense
Above frail Natures botched excellence,
With humble thoughts Christ's Innocence to quote,
To note his plain Attire, and seamelesle Coat
Worn in his Youth, but parted since, which now
To burn as tainting Rage, false Christians vow;
To seek gay cl^a^hes never did curious Pride
Tempt him, he only cared his skin to hide.
"He knew that Man attired in ruffling Robes
"Begs seldom Grace, and vents but feigned sobbes*
"Nor can he shed salt tears, our Guardians food,
"Nor well submit for his perpetual good;
As for this cause they used heretofore
In vilesi weeds Gods Favor to implore;
He knew that our First Parents bare and poor
Went, till Fig leaves and Coats of Skins they wore,
Which, like these L^nes, our Gallants now would scorn,
For Satan prompts they were more Nobly borne,
Wherefore to rob, their Factours must persever
Silk worms and Beasts for Shamois, Plush and Bever.
No Pleasures shape so far his mind endeares,
To Idolize the same, though young of years.
No Envious Stings, nor motions Arrogant
Once pricked his heart, nor thoughts extravagant,
For he was so sincere, sweet Natured, mild,
That none with Passions knew him once defiled,
Though from without he often Temptings had,
As Man, while he conversed with the Bad,
Yet with contempt, and a most brave disdain
He past them by, not soyled with one stain.
For as the Sun, the worlds fair radiant Eye,
Does Dunghils touch, and stinking Jakes survey
And yet his Beams escape from tainting free:
So this blessed Youth, though he did daily see
Notorious sins, and Beast-like filthiness,
Himself he kept untoucht from wickedness.
He labored often in Childing woman-wise
Of our frail Passions and infirmities.
"He had, as Man, our Natural Affects,
"But yet without Excesses or defects,
"And not as we, overcome with their delight,
"Or seeming Good, or spurred on with despite.
In midst of Darkness shone Divinest Light,
Error he turned to knowledge, wrong to Right,
The words contempt he changed into Grace
Fables to Truth, our slips to surer pace.
He did exchange our Lustful sports to sorrow
And on to work our Humane Natures borrow.
For Lazarus he shed forth Tears of Grief,
And he much Grieved for Salems unbeleefe.
Ambition did his Man-heads Fancies raise,
But that Flight was to raise his Fathers praise,
His High desires stretched plyant Souls to win
To blissful Joys from Satan, death, and sin.
His mounting sparks to Magnanimity
Extended, mixed with zeal and Charity,
"His lofty thoughts aspired but to the Cross,
"That Theater which ransomed Adams loss.
"He Chastely longed, yea and he lusted too
"With flames of Love, for he the Church did woo,
"He sought her Love with zealous Oracles,
"Sometimes with tears, sometimes with Miracles.
"He Coveted for wealth, not worldly wealth,
"But for Eternal Goods, men's saving Health.
He felt within his Souls essential Parts
Great Joy to hear of True Believers hearts.
For barbed Steed, he chose a bare-backt Ass,
Fishers for Mates, for Palace the Low Grass;
He burned with wrath, when he drove from Gods House
Those Huckesters out, whom he with whips did touze*
"But his short wrath converted into zeal,
"Not for Revenge, but for the sinners weal.
He seemed to grudge, or Envy at the Priests,
Because he saw them live like Antichrists;
"He much repined that Pureness went to wrack,
That Satan's sway did keep Gods Kingdom back;
He languished with Fears and Agonies
The night before his deaths Extremities;
"But those deep Fears sprung of weak natures sense,
"Not of Despair, or want of Innocence.
So from our Passions Christ, as Mithridate
Of Vipers wrought, good Motions New begat.
For Jewish Thalmuds, he the Gospel taught;
For their Old Types, substantial Truth he brought
And our New-man in him Regenerate
Shall do the like, if we cooperate;
We shall Gods word love more than Superstitions,
And follow Truth more than Humane Traditions.
The which Christ grant, who felt, excepting sin,
All Natures griefs, which we are plunged in.
From those Ten Laws in stony Tab^es wrote
By God himself, he never swarv'd one Jot,
But them observed inviolated all,
Yea, and the Moral, as the Ceremonial.
On Sabbath days no man could him prevent,
But that he would the Synagogue frequent.
Which N^^e I may not silent overslip,
How sacredly Christ did all men outstrip
In honoring the Seventh feastfull Day,
At which time he most joyfully did pray,
With David's Tunes both Hymns and Psalms he sung,
His heart whole Peales to his dear Father rung
Of Jubilees and Thanks for Humane Good,
For sending him to save his Flesh and Blood.
"Yet nerethelesse, he seemed not to gainsay,
"But that Good deeds might well be done that day,
"Or Casual works forced of Necessity:
"Those would not bar the workers Piety,
"No more then David's deed, when as he fed
"Constrained by Hunger on the Holy Bread.
"For, as he said, God made the Sabbath day
"For Man, not Man for it; On it to pray,
"On it to satisfy weak Natures Need,
"And yet with mounting thoughts, to save his Creed,
"He must Praise God, the Author of his Calling
"And others by his steps confirm from Falling
"More often on that days Solemnized Feast,
"Then other days not limited for rest.
Six days God left for Natures wordly Carke,
But that day to refresh the Immortal Spark.
Gods Laws he kept unabrogated Holy,
Which none besides himself did ever wholly.
Above all sins, which he saw reigning here,
Idolatry he loathed most: for dear
His Fathers Honor was to him, and next
To this great sin, his soul was often perplexed,
To see debate amongst his Neighbors, Those
Of Abraham's seed, whom of mere Grace God chose
And singled out from Superstitious Nations
Peculiar to avoid their profanations.
For He (the Son of Love) borne from Above
Could not endure the Opposites to Love.
He could not brook without anxiety
And troubled thoughts to see Cold Charity,
To see them with fat gifts the Lawyers feed,
To nourish Pride, whilst others starved for need.
Therefore against all Malice he contested,
Nay them, who hated Good men, he detested.
He spent the best part of his Youthful hours
In hearty suite unto the Heavenly Powers
For their conversion from such carnal pleasure,
And for their Wills restraint with Graces measure
Because his life he might securely lead
Till thirty years were full accomplished,
Himself he mated with the simplest Jew,
But seldom with the Proud, or Heathenish Crew.
To shun Vaineglory, and the Serpents rage,
With Servants form he cloakt his Parentage.
"To Old and Young, though but of mean Repute
"With whom he met, he gave the first salute;
"With Peace, God speed, Good morrow, or Adieu;
"And chiefly to the virtuous, whom he knew
"So stamped in Soul, after the New-mans Form,
"Who did their best the Old man to reform,
With gracious words he ever heartned those
According to his Natural dispose.
To such as grieved in body or in mind,
He showed himself most pitiful and kind,
With word and deed he sought their Amity,
And to accord their strife and enmity.
Though he no thanks for Peace-endeavours had,
More then in Aegipt, Moses of the Bad.
He never Place nor puffed up Glory sought,
Nor what he not performed did promise ought.
"His Word and Meaning still agreed in one
"Grounded upon their substance, Truth alone.
"He for ill use his Tongue did never train,
"Nor ever took the Name of God in vain.
All wrangling Sects he shunned, the Pharisees,
For Pride, and for Faith wrackt the Sadduces.
"He hated them, who scandalized the Law,
"And nourisht strife for Profit without aw
"Of God or Man, as likewise their lewd Members
"Which kindled needless fires raked up in Embers.
"He scorned for Gold our Mercenaries hire,
"To cloak the Right, or Clients draw like wire.
"He loathed wyles, and lies, and loved Truth
"More than his life. In hottest time of Youth
"When choler, gall, and passions domineere,
"In him no sign of wrath did once appear.
"He used more to hold his Peace then speak,
"Comparing those to Sives which secrets leake.
Against the Bodies loathsome Maladies
To live, as if he were in Paradise,
A diet spare both to the whole and sick
He still advised, and Fasting the best Physic;
This moved him to fast in Youth far more,
Than in his Green, more springing years before.
"He knew the worth of Dyets Excellence,
"That a small thing works Chyles nutriments.
"Because the Blood and Humors Eb^^litions
"Derived from Food evapourate pollutions
"Toward the brain, and souls chief faculties
"Distemp'red by the Bodies Qualities,
"He affected Diet, even at a Feast,
Whereat ( Good man) he came a seldom Guest.
By this stayed course, of Constitution sound
His Body grew; no Humors did abound
Pernicious, but with Daniels might compare,
Or the like choycest Saints for sober fare,
And by this stint to Nature, his Complexion
Most rare arrived to Beauties chief perfection.
As Carbuncles do in the darkest Night
Afford to all the Room about them Light,
So was Christ's Life of all the Neighbors seen,
To shine, that none could tax him of one sin,
Or justly say, that he at wealth did aim,
Or Honor, for he did them both disclaim,
As opposite to what the Trinity
Affects in Man: divine Humility.
With daily Prayers, Fasts, and watchfullnesse
He still repulst the Darts of wickedness:
He had so much (and yet he made no boast
Thereof) Divine gifts of the Holy Ghost,
That Satan failed to peep in, or contemple
The smallest chinke of his fair Spirits Temple,
Perhaps not thinking, that the Godhead would
Descend so low, but leave Hell uncontrolled:
"Yet our defects, that were most miserable,
"He had as Man, but not one damnable;
"Which might have been to Purity a Bar,
"Or for our Ransom which might work a Jarre.
He honored God, the Author of his Good;
He loved Man, as his own Flesh and Blood:
His whole pure Heart not mixed by halves or hire
He vowed to God; and kept his vow entire.
He never halted betwixt God and Baal,
Nor ever made of Souls Mechanique sale;
Which was the cause he went by day unshot,
And with those shafts that fly by night unsmote,
Gods holy Angels guarded him without,
Gods holy Spirit guided him throughout
From those close Baits of the Infernal Angle,
Which more or less all Adams Brood entangle,
For proof or Loss, according to their Creed;
But Saints at last God succors in their need
With Patience, strength, and Faith Apostolic,
Whereby they may unto their Savior stick.
As God inspiring Gifts, and their true sense,
As God and Man Christ drew their Quintessence,
And left the same within the Gospel coucht,
Which Saints have since with Martyrs seals avoucht.
Thus Jesus lived, and spent his youthful days,
And yet my Pen sets out not half his Praise.
No Orators, nor Poets wit can Limme
At full the gifts, wherewith God furnished him,
For as the Suns bright shining Lamp at Noone,
Excells the lesser Stars, and pale faced Moon:
So Christ more Just, more Meek, and Patient was
Then Enoch, Moses, Job; and did surpass
As well in Mysticke, as in Actual Flames,
Whereof indeed we mortals know no Names;
Unless we term them Graces most Transcendent,
To him alone from Our Great God descendent,
All Adams Sons, with Joseph's Maiden wife
For Zeal, for Faith, for Holiness of life;
Nay more, were all their Virtues joined in One,
They would look foul, compared with his alone,
Comparing him with other men, the Light
Of Heaven you must confound with darkest night;
"For without his Habilliments of Grace
"No Mortal man can see Gods Heavenly Face:
"Without his Help the Godhead full of Ire
"Consumes Mankind as Stubble in the fire.
"Without his Merits veil, as Wedding suite,
"No Humane wight can win a Saints Repute;
Clothed with his Robes none ever went amiss,
The Alpha and Omega of all bliss.
At last Christ grew to thirty years of Age,
Which was the time, that in his Pilgrimage
He from thenceforth till death should exercise
His Priesthoods place to open Isreal's Eyes,
Melchisedechs predestined place,
Whose Order Time should never more deface.
But they more blind then Bats were in those times,
When Zeal and Love were Snares and Nets for crimes:
He therefore now to grace his Legate John
To Jordan went, and by him thereupon
Would be baptized, although the Prophet strove
To put him by, as worthyer from Above,
Christ's will was such, he Baptism would receive
That to his Church he might that Pattern leave,
And that, as he perfected Moses Laws,
So he for us would plead the New man's Cause.
Which at ^he Font from sin Original
Does cleanse, and to New life invites us all,
If we go on, as we were Catechized,
And crave with Flames of zeal to be baptized.
"For Baptism is Heavens gate, the which to open
" Grace gives to us the Keys of Faith and Hope.
No sooner did that heavenly Dove descend,
And Satan marked to what those words did tend;
This is my Son in whom I am well pleased,
But all amazed he stood, and sore displeased.
And hearing John before himself Him prize
The Lamb of God, that should with Fire baptize,
He doubted much lest this was He should tread,
As on a footestoole, his Old Serpents Head.
To cross therefore the doom of Gods Edict;
And Justice force her self to contradict,
This Prince of Fiends, the Python of the East,
Our Antichristian Dragon of the West;
Bent al his thoughts; his plots, and machinations
Gods Heir to win, and raze our Hopes foundations.
Which when the Searcher of all Hearts had read
With deep insight, he by the Spirit led
His Son from Jordan to a desert, where
He might be tried with Fasting and with fear,
As Well to satisfy for Adams Deed,
As us to warn the Dragons wiles to heed.
Satan, as shadow, dogs him at the heels,
And cunningly, ere he his Pulses feels,
Physitian^like, who first the Signs and Diet
Notes, and what brought the Patient out of quiet,
He waits aloof, and finds our Savior still
Watch, Fast, and Pray, to save Mankind from ill.
But at the last, with fasting forty days,
To Christ supposed weak, the Fiend bewrayes
His fraudulent and perilous design,
"Which was at Hels instinct to work a sign
"Or Miracle, and by that act repair
"His Pride-falne state, or drive Christ to despair.
Thou do believe ( says he) that thou art Holy,
The Child of God not dimmed with Carnal folly,
A Saint foretold by Prophets Oracles,
And can, like them, work some rare Miracles.
Now in this Place make Trial of the Spirit,
Whether such precious gifts thou do inherit
To equal Moses; and the Thesbites Fame,
Both which thou may by working wonders shame:
I see from Food thou fastest overlong,
Whereby thy Body faints, and feels much wrong.
"Loose not the Substance for the Accident,
"Nor thy dear life, for what is impertinent.
Thou art but Young, and in thy flower of Age,
And may do wonders on this worldly Stage,
If thou cheer up thy self this present day,
Else beauty, strength, and Body will decay.
"Some I have known so long to mortify
"Their Flesh, in hope their Souls to purify,
"That by such fasts they were much stupifide,
" Light heads, and all to seem Soule-glorifide;
Be thou more wise to shun the fatal rod
Of Famine. If thou be the Son of God,
Command these present Stones to be converted
Into pure bread, or else thou art perverted.
When Satan thus had ended his discourse,
Christ to Gods word did hasten his Recourse;
No other Shield then Scripture did he use,
Which by heavens leave I paraphrased produce:
I do renounce the Flesh, and World^y guile,
Thy tempting Baits shall not my heart beguile,
To long for Earthly Food, more then Gods Word,
To break the vow I made at Jordans Foord;
The Covenant of Baptism, which I sealed
I mean to keep, whereby Mankind is healed
And purged: I will not once distrust the Lord,
Nor in least thought traduce his written Word:
He can by many means releeve my wants,
That clothes the Lillies, and renews the Plants.
"Man's Body here not only lives by Bread,
"But with Gods word his Spirit must be fed.
The Holy Ghost for Light to after- Saints,
And to divulge our Ghostly Foes attaints,
To force them to confess: their wiles and pride
Do try, not daunt those whom the heavens guide,
Permitted Satan yet to tempt him more
With all his slights, but not to hurt or gore
His Body which reserved for Sacrifice
Himself would shortly yield for sinful vice.
The Fiend would not so let him pass away,
He had more Tricks upon Mankind to play:
Because our Savior Satan did contemn,
He rapt him up into Jerusalem;
And set him on the Temples Pinac^e:
Now show thy self (quoth he) by Miracle
The Son of God by casting thy self down
From hence headlong, for God will guard his own.
Be confident, and take it as thy Creed,
Saints may perform all things, it is so decreed.
I see thou shin'st replenished with Faith,
And know^st full well what sacred Scripture says;
By this great Act thou may thy Fame advance
Above the Stars, and now on earth enhaunce
Thy Praise among the vulgar Multitude,
Who will be weaned from their old, gross, and rude
Traditions, and thee for their Great Messiah
More will believe, then John their new Elias,
Who with new Rites of Baptism now of late
At Jordan toils men to regenerate.
Proceed then boldly to this famous Act,
And never doubt the Issue of the fact,
For God has given his Angels charge of thee
To save thy Body, and defend thee free
From all Annoyes, Perils, or hurts of Stones,
That might against thee dash, or bruise thy bones.
With such or like surmizes Satan sought
Our Savior to entrap, and turn his Thought
From lowliness, and worldly Pompes contempt,
The chiefest mean Man's Freedom to attempt
And bring to pass, which Satan well foreknew,
Although he strove Gods Judgments to eschew,
In vain he strove our Sunshine to eclipse
Where such as these come from a Christians lips:
Alas, what poor weak Fame, a Nine days wonder
Do worldlings rove at, if their Ends they ponder!
"When men ground Faith on Humane Policy,
" The Lord reputes it but Hypocrisy.
"When he vouchsafes to lend some Miracles,
"He does it to confirm his Oracles
"To be divine, and not Humane positions,
"He does it freely without Compositions,
"And with a Caveat too, that none wax proud,
"As though the gift were for their Own allowed
"Why should a Saint expect for Miracles?
"Whilst he enjoyes Faith and Truths Oracles?
For this regard did Jesus put to flight
With Holy writ the Fiend with all his slight;
Thou shall not tempt by any means, said he,
The Lord thy God who first Created thee,
That is the Scripture thou should muse upon,
And if infringed what vengeance hangs thereon.
Thus Jesus twice already for our faults
Endured had the Devils bold assaults;
Him now again the third time he assayles
To captivate, or make him strike his sails.
"And knowing nothing in this worldly frame
"Can tempt a Saint like to Ambitions Flame;
"Nor sooner can the finest wits defile,
"As is Recorded on old Athens File,
"Then to be pointed at by Peoples Prease:
"Lo this is he, the rare Demosthenes!
He comes no more with Scripture in his mouth,
But with the whole worlds Empire, North, and South,
The E^st, and West; he labors to entangle
Christ's Senses, like to Tybers Fishing Angle,
Wherewith his Vicar Crowns like Gudgeons took,
That Beast with Lambs two Horns and Dragons hook
So long ago described by Saint John;
The man of sin, and that Perditions Son,
Whom Cardinals at his Installment Grace
With Triple Crown, and on Mass Altar place;
He rapt him in the twinkling of an eye,
To a high Mountains Top, thence to descry,
As from Mount Ne^o, where Canaan was shown
To Moses, many Kingdoms of his own,
All the round world he there made to appear
In a false Map, doubling the Hemisphere.
The like Romes Prelate scarcely could install
For his to Right Castile and Portingall.
So Satan did his Monarchy contrive,
As Neptune stood on his Prerogative:
That great Command with triple forked Mace
By Lot to me, and not to him did pass.
Out of mere Grace and Love I bear to thee
(Says he to Christ) if thou will worship me,
And homage do, these Crowns I give in Fee,
These States for thee and thine for ever be.
No greater snare could Lucifer invent
Our Second Adams mind to circumvent*
No Motive, nor more working Argument
Then Scepters, or a Mitred Government;
As Mahomet took hold upon the First
With the Alcoran, and of them all the worst
Of Christian men usurped, aspiring higher
Both swords to manage, and approaching nigher
To the red Dragons claymed Jurisdiction
With Souls and Bodies sale, and interdiction.
But Gods dear Son did out of hand Control
These Lofty towering Flames, Souls tainting foul.
He would not listen to Supremacies,
Nor to the worlds suggeste Primacies;
His Kingdom was not of this worldly station
Of mortal Stamp, but for sick souls translation
By Fiery Trials to Jerusalem
Not built with hands, a place which fools contemn.
To cool therefore our Thoughts irregulare,
Our Savior thus put by the Serpents snare;
Not asking him, as our late Exorcists
Vain questions, but him packing from the Lists.
He could no longer his Just zeal refrain,
But instantly repulsed him with disdain,
Avaunt Satan, make here no more abode,
Pack hence I charge thee in the Name of God:
Thou of my Faith have made sufficient Trial,
But of his Rights I cannot brook denial;
I cannot hear with Patience Blasphemy
Against my Fathers endless Royalty,
Who swayes this Globe by Aristocracies,
Democracies, and awful Monarchies.
The Lord thy God, as Scriptures do observe,
Thou worship shall, and him alone must serve.
Such Checking Words spoke with a Conscience clean,
"Free from ambitious thoughts, and Deeds obsceane,
"With vows and Fasts as well to purify
"Themselves, as the Old man to mortify,
"Often naming Jesus Christ our Advocate,
"Will quickly Satan chase, or subjugate.
"There needs no Charms, Masses, nor Exor^ismes,
"No holy water, Relics, Cross nor Chrismes,
"To dispossess or send the Devil packing:
"Let such those trust where Faith and Love are lacking.
When as I know (as who is free?) my self
^ brain or dream near cast upon this shelfe.
With Gales of worldly winds in show most fair,
Gulling my Sense, like Atoms in the Air,
With false Self-love, by him an Idol praised,
With subtle Theames by his suggestions raised,
Such as on wits for want of vows have played,
Or with such Quirkes, as our late Sects displayed,
Or with wild fits, and moods extravagant:
Let me but say with Jesus Christ, Avaunt,
At their first coming with a pious mind,
At Christ's sweet Name God sends them back confined
"Let me review his Wounds, I may be bold
"To conjure Satan from his strongest hold.
This Shield I take, no other help I look
From Heaven or Earth against this Fishers ^ooke.
" Christ's coat I wear, no other Aid I crave,
"Then His: who other crave, do surely rave.
"To other Saints, whom they Gods Courtiers ca^^
"I say with Job: Poor helpers are ye all.
Against Sins Rage, and Satan's proud Bravad^^s
Against his Plots, his wiles, and Ambus^adoes
My Faith, though weak, supported me wit^ Arms,
Contritions Groans prevented all my Harms;
In Christ his Robes I feared no Annoyance,
Fenced with his shield, I ^^ung at him defyance,
After Resisting I did ever find
My Foes departed, and good motions signed,
Or printed in my Heart unknown to me.
From brutish Elves to guard my New-man free.
"This should be writ in Cedar, or in Gold;
"The man Newborn, who is for Grace enrold
"Shall sure be tempted by some wicked Fiend,
"Whom if at first he do suspect for Friend,
"And not receive his Baytes with hearts delight,
"That Man shall win the Field through Christ his Might,
And from thenceforth with greater dowries blessed
Shall surely live and dye a Saint professed;
His Soul with Christ shall rest in Paradise,
His Body at Doomes-day with Joy shall rise.
In this we have our Master for Example,
Who by the Cross on Satan's head did trample,
As living he his motions had repelled,
And with Gods Word three times had him refell'd;
Although he was alone, and destitute
Of Humane help, yet he made Satan mute.
After his Conflicts to congratulate,
And him releeve in the like hungry State,
As was Elias, who in Horeb past
His Forty days by means of fore-repast,
It is recorded that the Angels came,
Which shows Gods Care, Faiths strength, and Satan's shame.
But here is a doubt, a question scrupulous,
Which to decide for me were perilous,
Lest that I seem in Negromanticks versed,
Or that my Rule by Saints might be reversed;
Whether these Assaults Real were? or visions?
Or mixed with Satan's Juggling Apparitions?
To argue that Gods Son, the worlds bright Light,
Should be transported by the Prince of Night
From thence, up to the Temples pinnacle
With unextinguisht breath by Miracle,
Like to a Bird, in person through the Air,
Deserves small thanks for pleading to impair
Gods Glory in his wondrous workmanship
Of the New-man: That were by doubts to clip
His Providence for careless watch and ward
Over his Son, to whom the Angels Guard
He promised by Satan's own Confession;
The Fiend durst not, had Jesus made expression,
That he was God, have moved him to Transgression,
To shoot at Souls, which took his marks Impressions
"To play upon the wits of Reprobates;
"Yea and for Trial of Regenerates,
"Who like to wanton Apes, or stubborn Boys,
"Must smart till they leave off their prankes and toys:
"To charm the sense of witches who have ranged
"Their bodies resting still in rooms unchanged
"On Hackneyes, as they dreamed, borne through the sky
"With Nightly feasts their Wills to satisfy,
"(So Anodines, and Poppies drugger intrance
"Their heavy Nerves, that their wild fancies dance)
" The Lord indeed permits him still to range
"With lies, false shows, and seeming wonders strange.
Yea too, and other whiles to play the Ape,
Ghost, Goblin, Faiery, in fantastique shape,
Whereby men's outward senses he beguiles,
As their Crazed brains, with visions, dreams, and wiles.
The greatest Clerks sometimes he trains to folly,
Some for their Pride, and some for Melancholy,
Our Youth he leads with Fancies wild vagaries,
As at Full Moon Apes dancing the Canaries.
He wheels about the world, the Articke Pole,
As Southern Coasts; the virtuous, sick and whole.
All Is Fish alike: but his most dainty spoil
Is Learned Men with Crotchets to embroyle;
Whom rather than they shall escape his claws,
He tempts to jarre for words, bare Names, and strawes.
In Samuels shape he Saul by Endors Witch,
And in the Serpents form did Eve bewitch;
Hating the Woman's Seed, he sought by sleight
And Angels mask to bleare our Saviors sight;
But through the Air to bear his Body up,
I fear to pledge Scribes in that curious Cup:
For in the Place, where he first met him, there,
We read he left our Savior void of fear,
Although he did by Vision or in Trance,
Or Actual form his highest Plots advance*
And Jesus might through his Humanity,
Like Peter's Trance, see Satan's subtilty
Within that uncouth place, or Desert coast,
As opposite to that which Adam lost;
Because he found Christ in distressed plight,
Sole, and fasting, he thought to hit the White.
" Satan might tempt his Outward sight and Brain,
"But at his Will and Heart he shot in vain,
"The Godhead swayed those parts, his Angels Guard
"About his Person kept both watch and ward;
So that nor Satan could, nor all his Bands
Without his leave once touch his sacred hands,
Much less against his Will him to transport,
Whom God always did strengthen and support,
Till he by Judas sold should pay the Price,
Or Ransom due for our Enormities.
Yet where Gods Word does not my Light advance,
With Humble sails I veil my Ignorance.
Since Seraphins their zeal were feign to cover:
How then dare I nice Problems to discover?
" A modest wit affects the New-mans strain:
Pack hence therefore ye wormelings of the Brain.
Yet would I had the skill of Augustine;
Such knotty doubts to canvase and define,
Or that I were rapt with Poeticke Flam^,
Sedulius-like, or Ara^o, to tame
Wits puffes, that so I might in English style,
As they in Latin Lays, a work compile
Whereby our Saviors deeds, the New-mans Glass,
Might with fair Rays reflect on Hearts of Brass:
I would imprint by his Life's Innocence
In Britains thoughts an imitable sense,
To shun fond Quirkes, and Plainness to embrace,
I would assure them then of Heavens Grace;
Whereas most Wits now hover in the Air,
Betwixt frail Hope, Presumption, and Despair.
Who knows not that the Fiend from his restraint
Late loosed goes on the Saints with doubts to taint?
But some will say, An Angel clothed in flesh
Cannot the stings so punctually repress
Of raging Sin, as I have painted here;
Nor from Hels tempting baits his Passions clear,
For borne in sin how can we choose but err?
By our first Parents sold to Lucifer?
" The wisest Man some touch of madness has,
"Of Pride, or Lust, of Niggardize, or wrath.
Do what we can, our Gloss and Merits store
Look like a menstruous cloth, or mattry Core.
I grant that None but Jesus Christ alone,
The Fathers Essence and his Holy One,
Did wholly live according to this form,
Or spot-lesse could the Will of God perform:
But yet know this ( O worldly shifting man)
That thou art bound thy second Birth to scan;
Enamored more on Grace and Charity
Then on the World, and carnal Jollity,
And in all points to imitate thy Head,
Or else thou art cut off, as Member dead.
Thou must at first repel the Tempters snares,
Be they Ambitions ^ookes, or Golden wares;
And if through Faith thou struggle and do strive
Against lewd thoughts, thou shall over come, and thrive;
If his lives Type for Precepts thou avow,
Thou quickly shall attain thy self to know,
And be assoyld by Faiths Prerogative
Of Reigning sin, at least imputative.
For which Intent, and Saints encouragement
God many means both Old and Modern lent,
To rouse the Slothful up, to look about,
Before that Satan puts their Torches out.
Among the rest, I hope, Good men will hear,
Or read my Lines, and with my plainness bear,
Since my aim is proud sin to mortify,
And by the New-Mans Lamp to edify
The Lowly minded and the Penitent,
Who more prize Truth then Falsehoods blandishment.
Let others trim their Muse with Gaudy Tires:
I envy not their Lays, nor labors hires.
A simple Robe I like without a Seame,
(For such a Coat Christ wore) and such a Theme
Consorts most fit with an Evangelist,
Whether he English, French, or Latinist,
For public use the Praise of Christ compose;
Be it in Numbers, or in Copious Prose;
And so for Truth he sound a thankful Peale;
Ere vows he hoord up, for his private weal;
Not like to Clownes, who when they gain good turns,
Neglect their Patrons, or pollute their Vrnes,
And memory with Urine, Spittle, spite;
Instead of thanks tyth'd out to do them right.
But howsoever Young Gallants censure this,
The Graver sort will clear me from amiss,
And for the Cloze, these Golden Rules infer:
Plain Poems best become a Gospeller:
The Strayned phraze, puffes up: Truth suits a Saint;
Those women fairest look, who never paint.
A Hymn of Thankesgiving to the Lord for his Churches preservation from
Antichristian Tyranny.
1.
WHile Natures Sons at random rove,
Our New-Man fixed on things Above
By holy Trance does Christ descry,
In Bethlems Cratch, and Calvary.
Now, we Gods word and wonders sing,
Anon, we scan, O Glorious King,
Thy Triumph; how thy faithful Crew,
While Tyrants raved, the stronger grew,
And how bright stars, Hells storms withstood,
Till Mungrells on Man's Merits stood.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease,
Or them Release, if so thou please.
2.
As thou did drown proud Pharaohs Host,
And guid'st thine own through Marine Coast,
So thine Elect through every Age
Thou did preserve from Satan's rage;
So did thou raise to life again
Thy Prophets twain in Sodom slain;
So did thou, Lord, in Judgment meet,
In Eighty eight the Spanish Fleet;
And save us then, and since again
From Ruin, Loss, and Powder-traine.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease,
Or them release, if so thou please.
3.
Their Leaguers force thou did divide
When we most feared Hels raging Tide,
Reforming Faith in Publicans
Among the Britains, Dutch, and Danes,
Bohemians, Swethens, Polanders,
The Swizzers, French, and Hollanders,
To counterpoize Great Babels side
And by thy Word to tame her Pride;
Which near has rent her Triple Crown,
When every Bird required their own.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease;
Or them release, if so thou please.
4.
O Gracious God, how strange is this!
That thou have called blind Strayes to Bliss!
And did for us New Kings beget,
When Old Elizaes Sun was set!
The Tent she pitched, James settled sure;
And Charles now Reigns, like Cynosure,
With Golden stars encircled round;
He does not slight the Gospels sound,
But still renues the Holy Fire,
Bequeathed him by his Royal Sire.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease,
Or them release, if so thou please.
5.
When Bavares Duke, and Ferdinand
Had yok't thy Flock in Germane Land,
There rose up from the Northern Zone
A Machabee, who eased their moan.
Nor is it less miraculous,
That thou have raised great Bourbons House,
Against the Eagle to make head,
When Both would gripe thy Turtles dead;
And this diverting of their Force
Spinnes Truce for us, in them Remorse.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease;
Or them release, if so thou please,
6.
A thousand years the Fiend was curbed,
And no great Plague true Saints disturbed;
He made no fierce prodigious war,
Till Wichliffe preached what Berengare
And former Saints had vowed with cares
Against the Mass and Mauzzimes wares.
But afterward, when by thy Word
Some were Reformed, with Fire and Sword
He then pursued thy Newborn Flock,
Because they chose Faiths living Rock.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease,
Or them release, if so thou please.
7.
Even to this day, Hels Magogs still
Thy Servants rack, their Blood do spill.
O when shall we poor Pilgrims be
From Satan's wiles and tumults free?
O when shall we their Period see?
And sing to thee our Jubilee,
Exempt from cares and Carnal stings,
O Glorious God and King of Kings?
Not in this world, till Christ does come
In person first all Souls to doom.
Lord, grant us Peace, our Crosses ease,
Or them release; if so thou please.
Amen.
The Fourth Days EXERCISE.
The Argument.
Christ having Preached the Gospel, and New Birth,
Confirmed the same by wondrous signs on Earth;
The Priests conspire his Death. Judas revolts.
His Supper, Bloody Sweat, and sore Assaults.
"IF I had drank at pale Pirenes well,
"As to the wise Bellerophon befell;
"Or that I had Urania for my guide,
"I might transcend the Stars, and hope to ride
"On the Pegasean Steed with Azur'd Reins,
"Until the Poles resounded with my Strains.
Such Lofty wishes through Poeticke guile
Far be they from my Low and trembling style.
Not Phaeton, nor waxe-wing'd Icarus,
But Lucifers and Adams Fall should scare us
From mounting high to Pinacles and Towers,
Where Lightnings Flash, where reign the Aerie Powers,
Which may our Carnal thoughts blow to despair
(Such mighty sway bear Spirits in the Air)
Like them, whose Hearts once touched with hallowed Fire,
Have quenched the Flame by ruff^ing to aspire,
Or like our Eves, who in this Evening Age,
When they should kneel, climb up proud Honors stage,
Where Mammon they adore, and Christ by halves,
As if Gods Grace would breathe on Golden Calves.
No sure; his Spirit loathes Ambitious Fires,
But the mild Soul and humble he inspires:
Such as of Yore were Jewries Fishermen,
The Virgin Mary, Anna, Magdalen.
" God will not hold him guiltless that presumes
"To touch his Ark with Flanting robes or plumes.
Avaunt then, Gallants, with your Idoll-Fumes;
Depart, ye Ladies, with your nice perfumes;
Kiss not Gods Son, ye proud imperious Lords,
For he abhorres High looks, Bug-beares, bigge-words!
A simple Garb contents our Saviors Cratch:
"Smooth glozing Terms take those who Termely catch
"Sad Sackeclothes weed becomes this age of Our,
"Where Fiends unseene wait ready to devour,
As lawful spoils, our Kingdoms fairest flower.
This suites me plain; my Applications sour,
Yet wholesome, like to Lemmons in a Fever,
To curb those putrid Fumes of Head and Liver,
Which now of late the Gentry of this Isle
With Riot, Pride, and costly Feasts defile.
Then, O Great Britain, take it for no wrong,
If I enchaunt thine ears with a mean song
Not grounded on false Druydes Antique Tales,
But wrapped in Christ his Swathes, and found in Wales,
From that wild Place, where Satan's Policy
Failed to tempt his Will and Fantasy,
Arrived then to thirty years of Age,
Our Savior, to perfect his Pilgrimage,
Returned back to Galilee again
In the third luster of Tiberius Reign,
Where he on Truth at Nazareth commented
But thence repulsed, the next Coast he frequented,
With this true Note by that respectlesse Town,
"No Nation heeds a Prophet of their Own:
And having chose his Prime Apostles there,
Who to that end predestined were,
He Preached good News unto the true Beleeve^,
To cherish his New Church and to releeve her;
Good News indeed, which thralled Souls restore
To greater Grace then Adam lost before.
The Tree of Life that of Old Adams foiling,
And it of all Luxuriant Sap dispoyling
Christ did transfer to Mortal men on Earth,
Who hardly could believe the Second Birth;
They thought that none but an Old Serpent could
Cast off his Skin, and so renew his Old
Inveterate New; None but the Phaenix dead
Could of his Ashes rear another Head,
With lively Parts as burnisht as the First.
This seemed a work Divine, which no man durst
Attempt, before our Savior made it plain,
That Humane Impe must here be Graft again
And re-baptiz'd by the bright Holy Ghost,
Whose Name and Gifts he blazed through Jewries Coast.
Elixirs dream, nor Pythagorean Change
Could work this Feate, and Ghostly Wills exchange.
Not Sun, nor Stars, not Humane s^ed, nor Sense
Could breed or cause this quickening Quintessence;
That spirit, which breathed on the Waters crude,
When that earths Lump confused lay and rude;
From a thick Chaos the Elements did sever,
And with all- quickening Thaw did Ice dissever,
Transforming what he would have new and strait
Harmoniously by Number, Measure, weight;
This Love-bred Flame, graced the pure Virgins womb,
And none but him, such wonders great become.
This Doctrine Christ to Nich^demus taught,
Who then of him Soule-Consolation sought;
When at the brute of his strange Miracles
This Learned Scribe, to hear Christ's Oracles,
Had stole to him at Salem in the night
Fearing the Factions of the Herodians Might,
Who nere about that time got Captived John,
And through a frisking Wench slain thereupon:
I hear ( quoth he) that thou a Prophet art,
From Heaven sent Salvation to impart,
Thy Deeds import no less: for who but One
Of Gods own Choice, or his beloved Son,
Can do such works beyond set Natures reach,
Or utter such deep points as thou do preach.
Enflamed with the sparks of thy renown,
Which flies abroad throughout our spacious Town,
I come to thee desirous to be taught,
In the true way: and so to Heaven brought.
Our Savior turned to our Faiths Alphabet
And him to learn Truths A.B.C. did set.
Not Principles of men's Philosophy;
But Rules which Stony hearts do mollify;
"He must ( said Christ) who will Gods Kingdom see,
Become Newborn, and so an Infant be*
That saying is (quoth Nichodemus) strange,
How can I now my Ancient years exchange
For a New Birth: I shall get sooner room
In an old Tomb than in my Mothers womb.
Jesus convinced his Error, and mistake,
With this reply; Thou do my speeches take
In a wrong sense, for truth I tell to thee,
None enters Heaven, nor shall Gods Kingdom see,
Except he be of Water and the Spirit
First borne, and then that place he shall inherit.
" That part of Man borne of the Flesh, is Flesh,
"More Old, than of the Spirit, which is fresh,
"Young, and Gallant, he which is borne hence
"Leads a new Life, and void of Lusts Offense.
When the wind blows, thou hear'st a noise and sound,
But know not whence it comes, nor whither bound:
So fares it with the Holy Spirits man,
How he came rapt with Bliss he can not scan;
He knows not how his Spirit New became
By Grace unseene from the Great Spirits Flame.
When Nicodemus heard this Lesson rare,
He answered, these things not likely are,
How can it be that Man without Commotion
Of Natures sense should apprehend this Motion
Of his New Birth by the quick Spirits Seed,
And grow so strong except some thing him feed?
Except some Rays, which we not Outward see,
Or Godhead rap the Mind: how can this be?
Bear thou a Doctors Style? and do thou teach
(Said Christ) and know not this which I do Preach?
I speak the Truth, and what my Soul has seen,
I testify, yet all in vain has been.
If when I speak of Earth, you^le not believe,
Sure if I tell of Heaven, you will grieve
"None ever yet that Glorious place ascended,
"But through the word, which from that Place descended.
"Yea, none comes there, but who by faith on earth
"Believes Gods Word, the second Adams Birth.
" The Woman's seed foretold in Paradise,
"Who should confound the Charmers Sorceries,
"Who was fore-doom'd to be s^ung in the Heel
"By the Old Serpent, and Gods wr^th to feel,
"Whom men lift up, and wicked Satan stung,
"As the Brasse-Serpent in the Desert hung.
Out of this Text all ye who are misled
With glozing sins, your destiny may read,
"That no man shall behold Gods Glorious Face*
"Unless by Grace Regeneration raze
" Sins aspicke stings, and for those stings that zeal
"And Love be stamped in him with Heavens Seal;
"Unless we leave to serve the Old Man's Lord,
"And hate his Life and Laws in thought and word:
"Unless we look on Him, who was lift up
"On Calvares Cross, and pledge him in his Cup,
"Unless we leave our sins, and to conspire
"Against his Saints: Hell is indeed our Hire.
" Hell is Man's Hire, Except his Earthly Clod
"Be sanctified and rebaptiz'd from God:
"His Brain, Heart, Tongue, and Souls chief Faculties,
"In one must with Christ's Nature sympathize;
"Which spite of sin Gods Spirit soon or late,
"By Grace effects in the Regenerate:
"Which comes to pass by pondring Truths Record,
"Christ's Testament, his Covenants, and word*
"Shunning Scandal the cause of foul offense
"By a pure Life, Faith, Love, and Penitence.
"And lastly by often cheering up the Soul
"With that Repast, which Nature does control,
"That Mysticke Lamb unseene, yet real flesh,
"Slain, yet living now Souls to refresh.
Thus does the Holy Ghost work and Create
A newborn Babe, a Soul Regenerate;
Even He, that quickened Christ in Mary's womb,
Will breath on him, and make him then become
By Motion calm, unseene, and secret mean,
Christ's lively Member, pure, Reformed, Clean,
Conformed to the Head, our Elder Brother,
Whose last command was this: Love one another.
Now by these signs our Britains sure may know,
Whether they be of his true Christian Row.
To be Baptized without the Sacred Spirit,
Is surely never Heaven to Inherit.
They be but Nurles, half Christians, dwarfes, or elves,
Nor Hot, nor Cold, which do persuade themselves
By Baptism bare with Water, the Communion,
And Outward works to be of Saint-like union;
For what will our great Charters Seal avail?
If to perform the Covenants we fail?
"That is, to love our New man's Lord and Head,
"Learn his New Law, and a New life then lead?
God by Christ's death more power did restore
With that Free Will, which Adam lost before.
" Grace gave to us this Supernatural
" Free gift to cope with the Will Natural.
"This Will our New-man has from Bondage free,
"Because true Faith brought Bondage on his knee,
"Which, as Love Tokens, each good Christian has
"Left him by Grace, to lead him in Christ's path.
But if he slights this Path being Catechized,
How can he be with Flames Uncharacterized?
How dares he say that he does harmless save
His Sureties triple vow, except he rave?
"If he delights in Carnal talk, or Lust
"More than Gods Word: his Faith lies in the dust.
" Devotion fails, whilst sin in Man does reign,
"Whilst Satan's reigning fancy guides his brain
"Nor can Gods Gra^e within his heart fix anchor
"Till it be cleans'd of rust and Natures rancour;
"Or if it burn, it quickly may expire
"By Carnal means and blasts, except the Fire
"Of zeal be kept still in by daily use,
"With watch and ward from Holy things abuse:
"Except the Soul for God Faiths Tything powers
"Heapt daily from the four and twenty hours.
This is a Mystery, which few observe;
And fewer like: but give themselves to serve
The vicious Times: more for Promotion striving
Or Plots to please rich humourists contriving,
Then Grace to beg with humble hearts and sorry,
Then first to seek before their own Gods Glory.
"Join we our wills to his, we shall be pure,
For Christ his death Old Adams Plagues did our.
But now a days in worldly Policy
Some temporize, to hide their Lunacy,
Like Adams nakedness, till time more mellow,
And ripe shall change their Youthful hairs and yellow,
Or else because against the Holy Ghost
For sinning they do tremble to be lost,
If once Newborn of the same Flaming Spirit
They lose their Talent, or chance to bury it.
O causeless doubts, like to Hob-goblins Fears!
As though Gods spirit loathes the sighs and tears
Of his poor Converts, nay, he will assure
And help to make their rathe Election sure.
No Fits stop them, like Agues, storms, or Rain,
But Grace moves to their Centred Hearts again.
Though I confess that great Presumptuous sin
Concerns them much, who have New-formed bin,
(As many were soon after Christ's Ascent
Possessed with Gifts to Schools Astonishment)
By the Immediate wondrous Inspiration
Of Gods bright Flame, though by the Instigation
Of Satan, they chance afterward to fall
To Lunacies, yet let them hope with Paul
And Peter fallen by Christ his Blood Remission,
For who dares judge Grds Grace without misprision?
Or sentence our Grave Cranmer for his fears?
Since at his Death he purged his Fall with Tears,
And sacrificed his Hand first to the fire,
Because it did against his Heart conspire?
Let them take up these words with Job, and say:
"I Will put my trust in him, though he me slay.
"It Is true I fell: which Fall I will not Cover.
"I was Soule-sicke: but God may me recover.
"Bar Air and Blood of motion Circulare,
" Meteours the one, Heart-griefes the other scare,
"The Body feels sins Symptoms and diseases;
"So feels the Soul, till Grace them both releases,
"Which never fails a Saint, though for a while,
"Foul Lustful fogges Faithes working may defile.
"Let none despair that has Repentant been,
"Or can but once a day sigh for his sin.
Many grave Rules and Documents profound
Christ left, and did unto the Jews expound
Amongst which others here I will relate:
"The Lowly, Pure, the Poor and desolate,
" The Peacemaker, and for the Faith oppressed,
"These with the Zealous he pronounced Blessed*
Christ terms those Blessed, of Spirit Poor and Mild,
"Then what is Man's Great Spirit? Satan's Child.
"His bristling up with Braggadochian vaunts,
"With fuming Spleen, with Gall, and Girding Taunts;
"His standing on fond Natures brittle Pinion,
"Or his own Merits puff, or Wits opinion;
"His sleighting of a Saint that favor craves,
"As if himself were Pope; Christ's Members slaves*
"His thundering peales of Penalties high rackt,
"As if his own swelled Head no Surgeon lackt;
"His false designs to bring home Massy Crimes
"From Foreign Climes in Antichristian Times;
"His Challenges for Honors wronged repair,
"Or by Law-suites Saints Fortunes to impair:
"What Spirit swayes, shows the Red Dragons Mace,
"Not of the Lambs, but wicked Belials Race.
So far was Christ from wrath, or vengeance taking
So far from spoiling foes, or greedy raking,
That he bad Peter to put up his Sword,
When he had Malchus smote; and at his word
Confessing he was Jesus, though they were
Scared at his voice, he willed them not to fear;
And when his own Disciples did presume
To urge him, like Elias? to consume
Those men with fire, which wilfully denied
To harbor him; the fiend then undescry'd
By them he checked, and said, that they did rave,
"For he came not to kill, but Souls to save.
Who then believes Saint Patrickes Oracles?
That Irish Kernes he killed by Miracles?
Or credit our New Sects, who do conspire
To plant our Saviors Church by Sword and Fire?
So far lived Christ from Pride; at once he had
But one plain Robe, wherewith his back was clad;
One Coat he wore to shrowed his naked skin,
A Seamelesse Coat to cover Adams sin;
A Coat indeed wrought uniforme and plain,
To show that he recovered back again
Our former suite of Innocence entire
Without those seames of Schoolemens nice atti^e,
Which likewise we, like Turtle Doves, must wear
At our New Birth with Love and filial fear,
Not slashing it, like Schismatiques unbid,
Nor casting Lots, as Romes fell Soldiers did,
Who not content to gore his Guiltless side
And Body slay, his Raiment did divide.
"The Foxes had their Holes, the Aerie Foul
" Their proper Nests: But he poor harmless Soul,
"Like Noah's Dove, on earth could scarce have footing;
"No certain Lodge, nor comforts worth the booting,
"Glad in his Travels to receive releife
"Of them, who for his sake received Life.
Instead of Ease, he Persecution felt,
Chose Deserts often, and into Brine did melt
His Eyes with grief to see such Combination;
Such Pride among his own selected Nation.
He spent the day in Preaching and good deeds,
The night in Prayer for their foul Misdeedes:
Yet lived he more contented with his Fate
Than Solomon with all his Royal state,
Before whose pomp and trains Illustrious muster,
He prized the Lillies for their native Luster.
Such Artlesse flowers he saw of goodlier hew
And Glaring more then any Mask or show.
This Christ expressed with Gospels Majesty,
With Practicke patience, Love, and Poverty;
Tears often shed, true zeal, and thereupon
His Fathers Doom for Sinners undergone.
To stint our daily Cares for worldly pelf,
"The Morrowes Carke he bids leave to it self.
For why should we distrust our Fathers Aid,
When we see Fields with various Robes arrayed?
And Sparrowes bred without Man's industry?
Then how much more will he our Need supply?
Before we think on things mere Transitory,
Seek first, said Christ, the Joys of Heavenly glory,
And then be sure of this: you shall have more
Than serves your turn out of his bounteous store,
Or at the least, what Nature may suffice,
Food, Raiment, Lodging, or the like supplies:
Have you forgot the many Thousands fed
With a few Fish, and Barley Loaves of Bread?
To teach us thrift, the scraps when they were fil^d
Most frugally to be laid up he willed:
Look carefully the Fragments be not lost,
Or cast away (quoth he, the Gentle Oast.)
"A fair advice to them that spend on Hounds,
"What serves for Humane use, though wealth abounds.
"This Rule likewise a warning Type I place
"For them that waste their Inward Food of Grace,
"Distributing in Plays, some Pearls to Hogs,
"Christ's holy scrappes, as Huntsmen cheer their Dogs.
"When we must keep the Relics of our board,
"Ought we not more the Sacred Word to hoor'd?
"The smallest crummes and passag^^ of Grace,
"May stead the weak in their New holy Race,
O let us then without Sophisticke Brabble
Reserve all Remnants of the Mysticke Table,
Least that the Seed, which Christ the better Part
Most needful calls, miss rooting in the Heart,
Least Martha-like with Household toil ^pprest
We want the Food which Mary liked best,
The Word, which she so well disgested then,
That her best Choice crowns her Saint Magdalen.
To weane us from aspiring to Promotion,
The Old man's plot, the Serpents shining Motion,
When some of his Apostles strove for place,
Jesus did thus their lofty minds abase:
He took and rank't a Child in midst of them,
Protesting that, though he of scorned stem
Were held by them: yet Meek and Innocent,
His Spirit might an Elders worth prevent,
And that unless a Child we imitate
In harmless Love, we seek Gods Lamb too late*
Doubtless there is a great Antipathy
Betwixt the World and Heaven for Quality
And Motion: when the Church here Militant
Fails to Consort her Tunes extravagant
With the Elects Allelujahs Union,
The Greatest here may miss of Saints Communion
But if our thoughts shine circled in the Ring
Of mutual Love with constant Faith, (a thing
That may not be except the Holy Ghost
Infuse those flaming Twins) then will the Hoas^
Of Angels Quire by the like Sympathy,
As Load stones, meet our Wills conformity.
Though Nature does Impostumated swell,
Or burn with Fevers, like the fits of Hell,
The Spirit yet more strong in the Vacation
Will overcome, and settle our Vocation;
Gods Mercy will with Natures moods dispense,
If fixing on his Son our Confidence
And Rest, we kneel twixt Love and reverend fears
To Him alone with contrite sighs and tears,
Unfaignedly sweet Abbaes sound to greet,
Often looking down on our vile Peacockes feet.
O would these Lays might now rebound with Echoes!
And pierce the Ears of Earths Magnificoes,
With sad Portents reverberating Rue,
And Wormwood moods for slighting what is true!
Because they doat, despising Saints Correction,
On Idoll-praise of Good my Lords reflection,
And derogate from Gods Prerogative,
Not giving thanks to him by whom they thrive
With Titles more than Done, then Gundamore,
Like Herod, or proud Babels scarlet Whore:
Gods wrath in spite of all their brave reputes
Will squeeze their Pomp and Popelike Attributes.
Truth echoed Ruth: and he that scorns her Echo
Pigma^ion turns, Don Quishot, or a Hicco.
Truth spoke this doom with Trumpets sounding loud:
"God helps the meek, and tumbles down the proud.
"So spoke her voice in them that bad us shun
" High Seats, rich Robes, to wear the homely spun
"Old Sackecloathes weed, plain stuff, or Camels hair,
"Contritions Garbes, puffed Honors to impair.
So spoke bright shining Truth, that Noble Dame,
In them that warned the Outward man to tame,
Who by Saint John at the Lambs Feast records
That Fou^es shall eat the flesh of Mighty Lords,
When poorest Saints and meanest of Esteem
Shall feed with Christ, though they unworthy seem
To Carnal Eyes, and whilst those Potentates,
Or pamp'red Lords with all their Glistring states.
For want of Wedding Robes shall be excluded.
And to become a shameful prey concluded.
Mean while to gain a Name like Alexander,
Some live by Bloody spoils, or else they squander
Their surest Means on Earth for the support
Of their high pomp, and blazing stars report.
But after death, O Fools; what Harvest shall
Ye reap by Fame? or Port Pontifical?
Or if perchance ye live to dappled Age,
Will not a lingering hell abate your Rage?
Would God these Lines might prove Angelical
That they were stamped in Letters Capital,
For never Age durst be so bold to call
Like Ours, Damned Pride of Graces Principal^.
Christ wills us not to Judge men for that sin,
Whereof we know our selves have guilty been,
For look with what rough measure we do mete
To others, God will make the like complete
Upon our score: To cure a Brothers sight
It Is fit our own be clear to Judge aright.
We must not give Gods holy things to dogs,
Nor Minister his Mysteries to hogs,
For hogge^ in Mire the finest Pearls will tread,
And envious dogs with Brutish Passions led,
Will snarling-wise their Masters Guests molest,
Whom he invited to his marriage Feast.
These dogs and ^ogs, Christ warnes us to prevent
Full cautiously, lest us they circumvent,
And interrupt our entry into bliss,
The Gate whereof is strait, and many miss
To find it out; Although they have been Called,
Yet very few are chosen and installed
True Saints: (so narrow is the heavenly Gate.)
Some know the Way, but coming there too late
They are repulsed; some boast of Miracles,
And of great Merits, yet find Obstacles,
And for their vaunts are dashed; Not every one
That calls Lord, Lord; or knows Gods murdered Son,
Shall enter there with glozing snares and Nets:
The hollow Hearts prove then the greatest Lets,
As do their Bragges of Meritorious works,
Or naked Faith. Here the sly Serpent lurkes
Unseene of Carnal eyes, and will betray
Souls with faign'd Echoes, till they lose their way.
But if they like our highest Fathers will,
They must shun ill, and so climb up his Hill.
How many thousands doat on worldly Pleasure
So long, until they lose Souls sacred Treasure?
Sometimes Hels thieves break in, and all is gone;
Some other time wanting the Corner stone,
Their house falls down, which whilst they build again,
Death summons them, or tortures them with pain
That they forget their Master and their charge,
And lose thereby his Grace, and their discharge.
All ye therefore, that mind the Heavenly Palace,
Take Christ's advise; Build not for carnal solace,
On Bog, or Sand: but build upon the Rock
Your Temple, where you need not fear the shocke
Of Tyrant-waves, nor foggy Earths eruptions,
Nor undermining Fankes, nor Thieves irruptions.
And then you shall be sure though Natures date
Concludes your State, to meet with happier Fate.
"To Counterfeits much blame Christ did impute,
"And such as gave their Alms for vain repute;
"He wills us not to strive for Wealth or Place,
"Nor for Good works to look for Humane Grace,
"To love his Friends, and not on them to prey,
"Nay, to forgive, and for our Foes to pray.
"We must not on a Brother wrecke our teene,
"Nor let the Sun go down upon our spleen;
We must remit not only seven Times,
But Seventy times seven; and that betimes,
Lest that we run that wretched Stewards race,
To whom his Lord compassioning his Case
Suspended all his Debts, until he heard
How he had dealt with others sore and hard.
He God forbad with Babbling to abuse,
But when we pray, the briefest Terms to use,
"More tending to his Praise, then our supplies,
"Which last we season must sometimes with sighs:
"Not Parrot-like by roate, but from the Root,
"And Bottom of the Heart with Abbaes Note;
The Module whereof himself declared,
Thus having us from tedious Forms debarred:
"Father most High, thy Name be glor^fide:
"Thy Kingdom come: As does in heaven betide,
"Thy will on Earth be done: Food daily give,
"To us: As we our Foes; Lord, us forgive:
"And let us not be tempted by the Devil,
"The World, or Flesh, but free us from all Evil.
This pithy Form the Lord to us did leave
For pattern pure, if we it well conceive.
We must in chief look on Gods Sacred Power,
And sanctify his Name before we power
Devotions forth for our own Private Ends.
We must do nothing worldly, but what tends
More to his Praise than to our own respect.
He warnes that we false Christians must expect,
Who the true Faith to bring into neglect
Will forge strange things well-nere to fool the Elect;
False Balaams, who not holding Love for Roof,
Would cover Faith with Golden Clouds aloof,
" False Teachers, like the Scribes and Pharisees
"Who should seduce the world with Dreams and lies,
"Who like Jews Rabbis for Supremacies,
"Should gape, and Hunt for Lordly Primacies,
"Over his Members, whom he Brethren styles,
A Caveat true for Antichristian Wiles.
Yea, and for Lords, if they good Christians grieve
Under pretext of Gods Prerogative.
To these he other adds, signs that portend
The Judgment day at hand, and the worlds End.
"When that we see strange Plagues, Fraud, Famine, Jarres,
"With Massacres of Saints, and Bloody wars,
"When Mauzzims Type reigns in Gods holy place,
"Like Caesar's set for Sions last disgrace:
"When Frogs, or Locusts wast our means of Light;
"When the Baptized our New man's Gifts do slight,
"And sell men's Souls; when one betrays another,
"And of Christ's flock the Brother hurts the Brother;
"When Children to their Sires rebellious prove,
"And Wives to Husbands fail in mutual Love:
"These tearing Unions Bond by loves divorce,
"Those razing Natures Fort without remorce:
"When both these States, the Churches mysticke type,
"Each other cloy with Tares, or fruit unripe:
"When men create New Christ's both here and there,
"Or, then in Heaven, Christ's body seek elsewhere;
"When his bright Light shines in the utmost West,
"Which, like to Lightning, rose first from the East*
"When most men's zeal shall frozen be and cold,
"Then every hour look for the End foretold;
"Which End steals on, like Daniels desolations,
"Or Noah's Flood, which overtooke all Nations,
"Whilst they were feasting, like our Libertines,
Who slight these Flames, as they those Crystal signs.
Heed, Readers, then your Monitors advise,
And scorn not this his Servants Sacrifice.
Other good Rules to us Christ left behind
To clear the sight of the most sinful blind,
And those in solid words more comprehending
In one short Parable, more by descending
From Generals to forms Particular,
Conducting Saints to the Archangels war,
With easy steps, and edifying phraze,
More than by thorny doubts, Meanders maze.
"Which course if Preachers now adays would trace
"With Catechizing Lectures to make place
"For Seed to spring, not half so many Tares
"Would choke pure-seeded hearts with worldly cares.
"If in their Sermons to the simpler sort
"They leave to canvase and to make report
"Of matters past their reach and Apprehensions,
Or such deep points, which might provoke contentions:
As Gods Essential Form, Pelagian doubts,
The Souls Free Will, hels place, or whereabouts
Departed Saints are seated till Doomes-day;
And not the Pulpit beat with an Affray
On Bellarmine, and other Clerks unknown,
Who^ they with Latin there would tumble down.
If they shoot not Wits Squibs against the Truth,
Nor Legend-dreames to sindge the ears of Youth;
If they Preach nothing but Christ Crucified,
And saving Faith, sin would lie mortifyed:
Their zeal would spring, if they with zealous mood,
Expound Christ's Gospel to be understood.
Men would repent, sins Baits if they disgrace,
Dividing the Laws Thunder from mild Grace.
Some kind of sins, which daily he beheld
Committed by poor humble Souls, he held
More venial, of compassionate regard:
He pittyed them, and their petitions heard,
If with Contritions Groans they did lament,
And of their sins unfainedly repent.
To show his Love unto the Convertite,
To lift up Souls from discontented plight,
And that none should despair of Clemency,
He did these short similitudes apply.
A man had lost one sheep of many score,
But finding it with toil, rejoiced more,
Than for the rest, which never strayed at all
From their own Rank, his whistle, or his call.
A Woman next he cited, who did boast,
More of one silver piece, which she had lost
And after search recovered, then of nine
Left in her purse, that never made her whine.
For further proof, he brought the Prodigal,
Who spent his means, both use and Principal,
Most lavishly, yet afterward Repenting,
With tears he found his Fathers hearts relenting,
That his Return a New-man from a Beast
He welcomed with a Calfe, and made a Feast.
"Such Joy (Christ said) transports the Angels Quire,
"When men Repent, and seek their Heavenly Sire.
"They triumph more for One poor Convertite
"Then for less Strayes, or more in life upright.
So pitiful was Christ, that to unfold
His Love, Remorce, and mercies manifold:
Were endless pains above Capacity
Of Humane wit clogged with Infirmity:
As may appear by that Adulteress
Led by the Scribes, when seeing her heaviness
He bad her to go home, and sin no more;
And when himself stood tortured at deaths door
He comforted the Thief with Paradise,
Because he asked for Grace with doleful eyes.
"But for the Higher sort, who proudly dared
"Maskt under Laws pretense with burdens hard
"To Tyrannize upon men's Consciences,
"And by School Quirkes, or wrested sentenc^s
"Of Scripture to molest the Churches union,
"Those with a woe he doomed for disunion,
With such who force the gift of Chastity,
Unless God gave it, on Humanity;
Who barring Saints Gods Im age to beget,
Would weave for foul Asmod^eus Priests a Net.
Christ utterly mislikt such Scandalists,
Like them who dare, beyond Religions Lists
As petty Kings, to Lord it by their gripes,
Wounding the Poor, worthy of many stripes,
Those he Judged to be, for above all sins
Then reigning strong, and whereby Satan wins
Most in our Age, smooth-faced Hypocrisy
He loathed as foul thoughts, Souls Leprosy.
Eight several woes therefore against the Scribes
He thundered for their hollow deeds and Bribes:
"Who knew his Masters will and did it not,
"But wilfully would loyter, play, or plot
"Some lewd design against his Masters profit,
"Or saw his loss, and not informs him of it;
Such witting slaves he sentenced to be
Worthy of smart in a most high degree.
It grieved him much to see Wisemen contend,
Like Idiots, and fond children to no end,
For shadows on the wall, for Dignity,
Short lasting Pomp, for so true Liberty
Quite losing through their Pride, and vain desires
They quench the flame of Intellectual fires:
Christ saw these Flashes, Dreams, and Fooleries,
And often lamented them with weeping eyes.
To shun therefore Gods wrath, and to fulfill,
While we on earth survive, his Fathers will,
"Of force we must ( he said) forsake our own,
"Though dearest, Lusts, and tread Temptations down:
"We must take up his Cross, and that prefer,
"As Heavens door, and our Remembrancer,
"Before our Parents, Children, or Alliance,
"And on his Blood to fix our whole Affiance.
To Penitents through Faith, he preached Remission
Of sins, but Plagues for temporiz'd omission,
The which with Tears he Prophesied would light
For wilful sin on every faithless wight.
This Judgment on Jerusalem foretold
By Romes proud Conquests afterward took hold,
When Abraham's seed, the Circumcized Ligne,
Were quite expulst the Land of Palestine.
And sithence we, the Christians of the West,
Yea, and the East, whom Infidels molest,
Have felt for sin Gods Plagues of Vengeance due,
And shall feel worse, unless we change our hue,
With better Leaven then the Pharisees,
Our Faith, like ill baked bread, soon putrifies.
O hardened hearts! O most unhappy men!
How often sought Christ, like to a careful Hen
Her wandering Chickens, or a loving Brother,
To reunite your strayes? and wrongs to smother?
How often likewise has he recalled home,
Into his Flock our Western Christendom?
God grant our B^itaines may regard this pittance,
These crummes of mine, not slighting their admittance
Into his Fold, least Antichristian foul
Devour their seed and their New man control;
"Lest for their want of Faiths Lampe-oyle in Heaven,
"They be like to the Foolish Virgins driven
"From the Kings Feast; or that they hide their Talents;
"Or they shut out for want of wedding rayments;
"Or like those Clownes, who their Lords Servants stripped,
" Murtherd his Son, and were themselves extirpt.
These several sorts of Temporizers touched,
We find by Christ himself, and sharply coucht
Under these pithy Parables, like them;
Which praise the Tree, and yet the Fruit contemn
For some there are, as Jesus did rehearse,
Who by the High way side, good Corn disperse,
And this the Birds catch up, and prey upon.
Some sow in Barren ground too near the Stone;
Which wanting Earth and moisture wants increase;
"So hardened Faith can never harvest Peace.
"And though Gods word be Preached on Sabbath days,
"Yet lacking Roo^e, it withers and decays.
Such Auditors, and outward Formalists
Stand both excluded out of Christian Lists.
"Some seed springs fair, but choakt with thorns and Tares,
"Soon fail, like brains too full of worldly cares.
"When Satan's weeds of vanity, or Lust
"Grow up with Faith, then Faith lies in the dust.
So in Gods Church spring Heresies accursed,
Unless Good Pastors weed them up at first.
"But blessed be they, who sow in Fruitful ground,
"Their Grain shall sure a hundred fold abound;
"Like Mustard seed, though at the Prime but small,
"Yet at the Harvest, it grows full and Tall.
If Adams Sons could with a zealous mind
Receive Gods Word, his Spirit they should find,
His holy Gifts would multiply with store;
From bliss to bliss they should rise more and more.
Such Prophesies of Christ's are come to pass,
Where we may see, as in a steely glass,
How some ^ay for Gods Messengers a train,
Yea and to slay their Masters Son again.
How near some run into damnations brinke,
Like Bears to eat his Flesh, his Blood to drink?
"For do not they with Blasphemy mistake?
"To brag, that they did Flesh material take?
"When Christ before his Passion, as he sat
"At Supper, did no such communicate.
" In real form? nor yield for them to gnaw
"His Limbs, which then and there entire they saw?
"His Flesh and Blood Christ consters to be Life,
"And Quickening Spirit, and to end all strife.
"He says, that Man must have another Birth,
" The Elder borne of flesh, or Carnal earth.
"The second of the Spirit, New and quick;
"Whereto a Saint with constant faith must stick,
"For as the flesh subsists with earthly Bread,
"So by his Deaths Record the Soul is fed:
" His Sacrificed flesh with mouths Confession
"And Hearts Belief received, heales all Transgression;
"And does through Grace the Spirits food impart
"Unto Gods Image pure, Man's noblest part.
"This made Christ say: The flesh cannot avail,
"For Bliss, but that his quickening words prevail.
"This quickening food Christ's Spirit satisfide,
"When Satan tried his Body mortifide:
"Man's person here not only lives by Bread,
"But with the word of God he must be fed.
" This unseene meat Christ had, as he did tell,
"Whereof they knew not, at Samariaes Well.
"On which Eternal ^ates those Souls that feed,
"Of Carnal food shall never stand in need,
"Nor at Doomesday, when Hagges howl out, Alas!
"Shall Soule-fed Saints to condemnation pass.
This Living water free'y without sale,
Christ cried to all a ^hirst, both great an small;
"To drink, believe, and feed on Christ, implies
"The self same thing in our great Sacrifice.
Our Bodies food by Nature rots at last,
Converts to dung, and to the draught is cast,
Or is to Humors changed; but Christ his food
Transformes us to his quickening flesh and blood,
Of the like Substance formed and Quality
As the New man's by Christ's Conformity.
"The Rock a figure was, the Vine a sign;
"Blessed be the Branches grafted in this Vine,
"So blessed be they, who make true Ghostly use
"Of this Rock, Vine, and Blood without abuse.
"As here our Souls feed on Christ's flesh and blood,
" By faith: so musing on his Sacred food,
"We shall raisd up to higher Dignity
"Feed on Christ's God^ead and Humanity;
"Where now we feed on Christ the Lamb divine,
"We then shall Feast through Christ, with God in Trine.
" Gods word begat the Churches Sacraments,
"Of sundry forms, yet One in their intents;
"The Circumcision and the Easter Lamb,
"Our Baptism and the Eucharist became;
"Mysterious signs Christ's Image to renew
"By Grace in man, the Gentile as the Jew,
"In which, as they their Faith infolded fixed,
"So we on Christ Baptized, and C^ucifixt;
"For in the Cloud the Nation circumciz'd
"Were in the Desert to Faiths Rock baptized,
"An easy yoke for us, two Objects free,
"Both which they darkling saw, through Crystal we:
^They God admired in their old Sacrifice,
"As we do Christ in ours with Ecstasies.
" Faith saved them and did their souls releeve,
"And the same God saves us, if we believe.
"Since they were saved believing in the Shadows,
"Then why not we receiving him that made us?
"Yea sure, we may according to our Creed
"And zeal, feed on his Flesh, true Flesh indeed,
"Not Chymicke-like, with changing Accidents,
"But as our New-man feeds with Soule-rapt sense;
"Not with our Teeth, nor yet Fantastic flesh,
"But as himself at Supper did express
"It for Souls Food to his Disciples then,
"As now, with his Deaths type, to Christian men.
Who this believes and helps the wounded man,
Without a Fee, like the Samaritane,
If he be Lowly, as the Publican,
Ashamed of sin, and does the best he can
To please the Lord* he shall be borne anew,
Of Gods bright Spirit, and see all things New,
"The Sacraments typ'd with New properties;
"The one does cleanse the Babes impurities,
The other cheeres us up by Sacrifice
Of Bread and Wine, Food of new Qualities,
Under whose veil they blessed by sacred Word
We mind in Trance the Body of the Lord,
And then we check the World, the Flesh, the Devil;
For Saints well know, that nothing which is evil,
Nor yet that Flesh, wherein our Spirits move,
Shall Heaven see, till Grace our sins remove:
(Which may not be, unless we will Repent
To Natures grief, and Fiends astonishment*)
How we become Newborn, no more we know
Than Nicodemus, how the wind did blow,
But by our Faith: that Gods Son crucified
Does now on his Right hand sit glorified
Above all Thrones, A Savior, Priest, and King,
Triumphant over sin, the Dragons sting,
And may heal us, as the Brass Serpent hung
Did Israelites by fiery Serpents stung,
If we receive this Viands excellence
With Inward taste more than with Outward sense.
But why did Christ Evangelize Salvation
In mysticke sort? and aim at Reprobation
By sentences to carnal wits so dark,
Was it that we more seriously might mark,
The Sense, when they should moralized be
By Clerks of our Leviticall Degree.
Perhaps such Tropes propt with Divinity,
May work in some with greater Majesty
"So Saints sometimes to States Tyrannical
"Have read by Riddles, or in General
" Grave Lectures on the Gospels Lightning Text,
"Least their seeds growth by spleen or by pretext
"Of winding Laws were dashed with dis-respect,
"Or silenced themselves with foul neglect,
"If bluntly they, or headlong out of Season
"Preach much of Peace to Tyrants void of Reason.
Christ's flock well knows his voice: but on the rest
That stray, let Wolves and Roamers Feast,
Let carnal Sots poare on Carnalities,
Whilst we Christ's Body see with Angels eyes,
Or at the least, while with our New man's sight,
We do discern from Carnal Sense his Light:
After this way hid from the Old man's brood
Our Noblest part receives Christ's mysticke Food.
Some other times He proved his Oracles
Concerning fruitless faith by Miracles;
As when he to a Fig Tree did repair
For fruit; which a far off seemed green and fair
In show, but finding there not ought but Leaves,
Incensed, he it with indignation leaves,
Because he found it backward in the yielding,
And not well Graft, he left it for a Hielding,
And from thenceforth a Reprobated Tree:
For when he said, Let never fruit on thee,
Ripe or unripe, ^e from ^ence forward found,
The Boughs fell dead, and withered to the Ground.
What shall I write of Tabors Mount the Story?
Where three Disciples saw his shining glory?
In all his works of greatest Eminence,
He ever had his end and Reference
To Constant Faith, and to his Fathers Will,
Which for Man's good he thirsted to fulfill.
The number of the signs which Jesus wrought,
Were infinite, beyond man's Wit or Thought:
Whereof the first was water turned to Wine,
To grace a Marriage Feast by Deeds divine
At Cana wrought a Town of Galilee:
Which him confirmed the Mysticke Vine to be;
That as raw water took the taste and shape
Beyond men's reach of Natures rarest Grape,
So might dull Thoughts, though cold, receive impression
Of the Fire-cloven tongued zeales expression.
He by his word made simple Fishermen,
More wise then Doctors without Book or Pen.
He made the Blind to see, the Lame to go,
The dumb to speak; the sick past cure, forgo
Their Palsies, Dropsies, and Issues of blood
Yea, from his Vesture touched proceeded good.
He forced his Foes, the Luciferian rout,
To quake, and at his word he chased them out.
He many freed with Real fiends possessed;
Cleansed Lepers, and all as were distressed
With Fevers Fire, or Humors foaming Rage,
Or were diseased of Young or Elder Age,
In Body, or in Mind; He raisd the Dead
To Life, and Lazar in his Earthy Bed
For four days space entombed he revived,
And thousands with small victuals he relieved:
Which deeds his Power proved Omnipotent,
That could raise Food, and make his guests content.
He walked dry-foote on the liquid Seas:
He calmed rough storms with words: Be still and Peace;
Words cyphring him Gods mighty Son, and Word,
Which could so soon both winds and waves accord.
Not one, who had of Faith the smallest grain,
Departed from his sight uncur'd of pain.
He cured their Bodies griefs, their sins remitted,
He calm^d Gods wrath, and nothing he omitted
Expedient for the Souls salvation here,
Whereby we might before Gods Throne appear,
Made pure by Faith: free from Concupiscence
Original, and sins derived from thence
By means of his great Merits excellence,
His words, his works, and Virgin-Innocence.
He knew the thoughts and Plots of Salems Clerk^,
And did strike home at their slye muttring quirks.
And all these wonders of amazement full,
Christ acted to provoke a Nation dull,
Yea to confirm his Gospels Oracles
Transferred from God, he wrought such Miracles,
To make our Souls to see the Heavenly Light
With Eyes of Faith, and here to live upright,
According to his Pattern: more to raise
Our Makers Glory, then our causeless praise;
To muse on more the New man's lasting Food,
Then Transubstantiate Toys of Flesh and blood,
That we by fiends and worldly wiles perplexed,
Might find sound Cure in his true Gospels text,
Christ's Testament, which in the Church more bold
Then wise, some in their hands, not Hearts do hold
But it is in vain to turn the Scriptures over,
To quote some Text, and presently to hover
About our worldly business, as if borne,
Like Butter flies, or Natures shameful scorn,
To flutter time away with painted wings;
But we must plod on these Eternal things
With serious care, that when our Tempters come
(As come they will) they may not find us dumb,
Or Planet struck, but finding us prepared,
With Jesus in our mouths, and hearts; out dared,
They out of hand will from our Lodge depart
To other Ranks their venom to impart.
Such wonders were achieved for three years space,
To witness Christ Gods Son, and in Gods place,
The first at Canaes Marriage did appear,
The last concludes by healing Malchus Ear.
More Miracles were by our Savior wrought,
To satisfy the true Believers Thought
Then living in that Age. But these suffice
To manifest his God head to the Wise,
To Penitents, and hopeful Catechists,
Which were left by the four Evangelists.
For if the Precepts all, which Jesus taught,
With Wonders wrought, were to our knowledge brought,
They would confound the Hearers memories,
And fables seem in Baals blind Oratories.
Gods word is pithy, short, and ponderous,
Where Humane Gloss is long and frivolous.
We have enough Christ's Gospel to confirm;
We crave no more to keep our Inside firm,
Than what we by the Spirits Penmen find
Recorded there to edify the Mind.
If any cover more, let them take heed,
That they smart not for their Presumptuous deed*
As sometime sought a Princess fond with zeal,
Of Christ his deeds to add an ampler deal;
Those which Saint John omitted she desired
To bring to Light, but while she thus aspired,
A wandering Friar of like Holiness
From Italy arrived; and did possess
Her mind so much, that he by Revelation,
False dreams, deceites, and Satan's provocation,
And faigning, that he got into his hand
Saint Peter's Relic sho^e in Jewrie^ Land
Had soon persuaded her, that from her womb
A Prophet borne should afterward become
The man, that should those Miracles omitted,
Divulge to Light, whereby he was admitted,
Because more Holy in her vain opinion,
Then other men, to be her Carnal Minion,
Until at last, This Story is largely set out in that Treatise entitled, Les
Comptes du monde Adventureux Imprinted at Paris. 1572.
A Dukes Inheritrix
With a great Belly turned a Meretrix.
BUt all Christ's works could not from Martyrdom
Protect his Life, such was the Godheads Doom,
That him to sting the Serpent should aspire,
And him to slay now men and fiends conspire:
That Year, when Caiphas sat in Aarons room
By Deputation from Imperious Rome,
In the Eighteenth year of Old Tiberius Reign,
When Pontius Pilate for ambitious gain,
And bloody spoils had rackt Judaeaes Land
About seven years with his Praetorian Band:
Then Christ his Fame for raising Lazarus
From death, and for such deeds Miraculous,
Began to spread abroad with glorious wings,
And then it pleased the Sovereign King of Kings
To free his Son from Earthly cares and fears,
And to recall him from this vale of tears,
Where he had lived among the Jewish Route
For three and thirty years, or thereabout.
The period now approacht of that Decree
Foredoomed by the Sacred Trinity:
That Gods dear Son, New Creatures to create,
Should for Old Adam dye a shameful Fate.
The Jewish Scribes of Salems Hierarchy
Had long before with plots begun to try,
How him they might entangle in his speech,
But his wise answers still outstript their reach.
Sometime they did with questions him assay,
To know, if they should unto Caesar pay
Tribute or no; whereby they might for Treason
Attach him: but they failed for that season.
So wary in his talk they found him still,
They could no way entrap his Tongue for ill,
Nor tax his life with the least heinous Fact.
At last the brute of his late famous Act,
How Lazarus revived from his Grave,
Where he had lain for four days space, that gave
More cause of envy and astonishment,
New Jealousies, fuel of discontent;
But most of all when loud Hosannae^ shout
To welcome him the City rang throughout.
How many griefs on his Humanity?
How many wrongs on his Divinity
Did they from time to Time, when they should render
Him grateful thanks, inflict? though thanks were slender:
Instead of thanks his Favors they requited
With Adders stings; his wonders they backebited,
And took him for a Witch or Conjurer,
With Beelzebub in League; that he did err,
Dislodging F^iends but by the Prince of hell.
But how Christ raisd the dead, they could not tell
Which way that chanced before the latter date
Of crooked Time doomed to a flaming fate.
That some revived, they had some instances,
But they were few, or but few hours in trances.
Never did Enoch pay his debt to death,
Death never stopped the zealous Thesbites breath:
For these they had their Schoole-distinctions clear,
But Christ's late Act amazed them with fear.
They feared the loss of their high Temporal sway,
Lest this New man might turn men's hearts away
From Moses Laws, and make their Offerings less:
They had of late by Rome felt some distress.
Their yearly gains, which did support their pride,
They doubted much would fall with his Springtide.
This moved the Scribes, with their High Priest and Judge,
Proud Caiphas, so at Christ his Fame to grudge;
Which to deface a Council they did call
Of their chief Priests and Scribes in Caiphas Hall,
Where Annas styled the High Priests Suffragan,
Or SAGAN to Jews Metropolitan,
Whose Daughter was that time to Caiphas Wife,
Conspired thus against our Saviors life:
Right Reverend Rabbis, and renowned Scribes,
The Countenance of our most holy Tribes,
Have we not suffered griefs enough of late?
But that more cares must now infest our state?
A Counterfeit Messiah, a New Man,
Jesus of Galile, a Puritan,
Thinks now because he is a Nazarite
Professed, to change the Priesthoods Ancient Rite,
And Ceremonies of Mount Sinaies Law.
Behold, how he does labor to withdraw
The frail and giddy-headed multitude
From our Traditions, which he terms rude,
Humane, and not Divine. If this World hold,
Farewell Peace offerings, which our State uphold.
We must bid Moses, with Gods Laws adieu,
And Aarons Tinkling Bells shall lose their due.
We shall no more meet here before the Lord,
If this upstart with his unlettred word
Shall by New dreams raise up a Newer sect
Than Holy John's, whom none of us suspect
Of Fraud. To Schisms this matter sure will tend,
Which in short time our Synagogue will rend.
Romes greedy Kites will of these News be glad,
Nor Herod will be thereof very sad.
But both will join to share our finest wool,
And down they will our goodly Temple pull.
How shall our Levites then themselves sustain?
Nay, how shall our Grand Mitred Prelate reign,
To represent great Aarons Majesty?
If this Impostour maskt with poverty
Do stop the gap, through which to Paradise
We lead Men's Souls, the simple and the wise.
I do protest it grieves me to the Heart,
And I foresee, we shall hereafter smart,
If he goes on in this his Newfound motions,
Though Begger-wise, yet may it breed Commotions.
For did you note, when through the Streets he past
Upon a bare-backt Ass, how some did cast
Their Garments on the way, with Branches green
Held in their hands, like Fools, to have him seen,
And for a Demy-god observed, the Crowd
Hosanna with great Shouts proclaiming loud?
And all because he had by Satan's Aid
To Lazarus late dead new Life convayd.
Indeed some signs he works, and men possessed
With Fiends he cures, having some league professed
With Beelzebub: for which he has no warrants
From God, or us, to execute such arrants.
Annas had scarce expressed himself at full:
When Caiphas, like to Basans bellowing Bull,
Began to roar: Shall we put up this wrong?
And not suppress him, ere he be too strong?
Have we not yet both Swords at our Command?
Pilate will not deny, if we demand
His Armed help to take a Mutineere,
Who calls himself Gods Son, to domineere
The sooner by that high and lofty style.
But let us now attache him by some wile,
Lest to some Desert he depart again,
When he shall hear, that we would take him fain;
And thither will a world of people flock,
Itching to hear what of the Living Rock,
Or the New Birth he blunders out, to bleare
Their silly sight, and so away to bear
The Palm from us, or draw them to despise
Our Ancient Rites, and Stately Sacrifice.
It Is meeter for one man, though Innocent,
To dye, then that we live in discontent;
Yea, and that Lazarus, his late raisd minion,
Shall suffer too, to stay the worlds opinion.
And then with shame the Rabble rout shall see,
That Prophets never rose from Galilee;
For our new King in Bethlem must be borne
With state and pomp, not like this wretch forlo^n
Who for a Throne, shall mount the Cross most royal,
And for a Mace, shall bear a Reed as loyal.
This is his doom, though he the dead revive,
That dares affront our high Prerogative
Derived from God, with Ephod^ golden Guard,
With Vrim which and Thummim we regard;
Which evermore Jehovah did assign
Over his Church to us of Levies Ligne;
At least until our Great Messiah come
Of Judaes stock in Kingly David's room,
Before which day Elias must descend
From Heaven down, things crooked to amend.
In the mean time let us our State defend
Against New wits, which labor it to rend,
By broaching forth a New Religions Form,
Under pretense the Ancient to reform
From all Traditions and Formalities
By their New f^ames, the Spirits Novelties.
Before his fame soar up a higher pitch,
Clip we his wings, lest his New Sect bewitch
The better sort with Hells attractive charms:
His sudden fall will stop all future harms.
So Caiphas yalpt; and all the Sadduces
Approved his plot with some proud Pharisees.
From that time out they sought to apprehend
The Lamb of God. And Satan to that end,
Because he thrice failed in the Wilderness
To Tempt him with his Baltes to wickedness,
With all his Art began to play his part,
And to his Mates his poison to impart,
Aiming at Peter, whom he thought to sift
As whea^e. He had already to his drift
Snared Judas in by Nets of Avarice
To gape for gain, and some of those supplies,
Which by Free-hearted men for their Relief
Had been conferred, to turn, like a false Thief
To his own use. With him therefore the Fiend
Conspired to bring to pass his damned End;
Which was to ruin Christ, and all his Crew
Before he could on Earth Gods Church renew:
But could none other of the Apostles win
Save this Perditions Child to act that sin.
Judas suborned thus his Instrument
Against his Lord and Master did invent
An ambushment Christ's Body to betray,
Though he his own, and Soul did cast away
To Satan for a Prey. For when he saw,
As Purser, that he could no money draw
More than he had by Christ his Company,
And that at Simons house in Bethany,
Whilst he summed up with avaricious Care
His Theft, he marked how Christ went poor and bare,
Not caring for the world, or worldly gain
(His chiefest aim) and would not then restrain
The woman which powered Nard upon his Head
And feet; an Oil, that might him much bestead,
If to the Druggist sold; he murmured sore,
He could not catch, as he had done before.
This when our Savior marked: Why do thou grudge,
Judas, said he, like a pelfe-serving drudge?
This Ointment sold disposed to the poor,
I grant, might have their wants relieved more;
But they are always here, so am not I.
Embalmed thus, know, I shall shortly dye;
And through the world, where shall be read my story,
Her loving deed shall published be with glory.
These words distasted foul Iscariots thought,
And to betray him now he hourly sought.
Away he went to the Chief Priests in have,
And told them of Christ's life, and of this waste.
Now is the Time, quoth he, for you to take him,
Whilst he at night to Prayers does betake him.
He names himself the Christ. I heard him say,
He would Gods Temple raze and ^ast away,
And afterward r^build it up as well
In three days space in spite of Men and Hell.
The Priests were all of such a Chapman glad,
And presently a Contract with him made,
That their Catch-poles might without jeopardy
Arrest him by the Nights obscurity,
For thirty pieces of that Country Coin,
Which to their Treasure house they did purloyne
By shifts and fraud, for which they were reproved
Of Christ before; which them to malice moved
Far more for that than any other cause,
Though they surmiz'd the breach of Moses Laws,
For plucking Corn upon the Sabbath day,
Or bringing down their Temple to decay.
About that time, the Paschall feast to hold,
On Maundy Thursday, so enstyl'd of Old,
Jesus did sup that Evening tide his last
At Salem in an upper room; where placed
With his Disciples twelve he first took Bread,
B^est, brake, and gave it them, whereon they fed
After his blessing: This my Body is,
"His body sure Man's sacrifice for Bliss,
"If rightly taken by a Just true Receiver
"With Inward taste, and of a true Believer
"(For otherwise who touched Christ in the Prease
"As Well as the Blood-flux'd had found more ease)
"In the remembrance of his body naild
" Unto the Cross, whereby the Saints stand baild
"From terrors here and in the world to come;
Nay, warranted in Spirit they become
Against doomes-day from the dark second death.
He blessed the Cup alike with holy Breath
"After the New man's way, and bad them drink
"The Sacred Wine, and on his Blood to think;
As lately at our New man's Sacrifice
With bright daylight confounding Heresies,
My ravished Muse beheld the Heavenly Vine
With Purple Grapes for Mortals pressed to Wine.
^This costly food, Souls Manna purging vice,
"The figure of his Bodies Sacrifice,
"This Type of Blood* unbloudyed Mystery,
" Christ left for Saints to keep in memory
" His death, until his coming from above,
"Where yet he sits to intercede, and move
"For Penitents his Father wronged by Man;
"This way I feed through Faith: And who dares scan
"Another sense, yet with Humility
"Let him here stop, as with the Trinity
" Of Persons in the Godhead, which he ought
"More to admire than by transcendent thought
"To soar more high than Eagles to the Sun,
"Where, by the stame his sense may be undone;
"Since how we change to Christ no more he knows
"Then Babes the manner how the Spirit blows.
"The Sun draws up Earths vapors: And so can
Christ lift like Stephen up our Inward Man.
This humbleness of mind, when Christ had supt
That Evening, as it were to interrupt
Our Future doubts, he showed by stooping down
To wash his Servants feet with Love unknown.
"To which he added, that the Mark for ever
" True hearted Christians from the false to sever,
"Was mutual Love, which a Commandment New
"He styled, for without Love Faith proves untrue.
" Our souls, and bodies are the Church, where God
" In the third person holds his sweet abode.
"But if we hate good men, God dwells not there,
"For the true Churches Roof Love ought to bear.
The Sacrifice all done, Christ went his way
Out of the City, as he used, to Pray,
Accompanied with his Disciples true,
For Judas was departed to his crew,
(His Masters nippe made him the sooner go:
Do quickly that which thou intend'st to do.)
To execute his Treason and Compact,
And to receive his bire; while Jesus rackt
With grief prepared by Fervent Love as well
As Faith and vows, against Sin, Death and Hell.
With his ensuing griefs he had acquainted
His Chosen Mates, how he should be attainted,
Bound, and arraigned that night, how thereupon,
As scattered Flo^kes, his servants would be gone,
And him would leave amidst his Bloody foes
Enthralled, and sore distressed with dismal woes.
But Peter trusting to his rusty sword
Seemed to distrust his Lords Propheticke word;
No Mortals force, nor death, nor Furies grimme
From Gods dear Son should ever sever him.
Before the Cock crow thrice, thou will deny,
Replied Christ, me and my Company;
Thou and thy Mates before the Mornings peep
Will fly for fear, like weak and heartlesse Sheep.
There close unto Jerusalem confined
Near Olives Mount, a place for him assigned
By Destiny, which was his Fathers Will,
To vent the throbs which did his Inside fill,
A Garden styled of Old Gethsemanee,
Secure at Nights from Worldlings Company.
There, Jesus felt what might the stoutest quell,
A world of griping cares, of Torments fell,
The dreadful vengeance which the Godhead past
Upon Mankind, his own so over cast
And almost sunk with Agonies of sorrow,
That one had thought he could not live till morrow.
His tender Body did extremely languish,
And did partake of more and sadder anguish
Then other men's, wanting the Nature Male
In the mixed frame of his Conception Female,
Or weaker earthly Flesh, whereby he stood
So tortured, that he sweated drops of Blood:
"So sensible, so full of piercing pain,
"That he could not but more then man complain;
"Like him, whose youthful Locks changed into Gray
"In one nights space, on fame that the next day
"He should be slain. But Sweates to sacrifice
"Of streaming Blood exceedes all prodigies,
"And shows that Saints by means most violent,
"Win Grace, to Natures sore astonishment.
Christ by this Strange Pro-passion tortured
Shows that his Mind as Body languished.
His Agony surmounted all men's Fears,
Whose eyes for sin gush seldom out with tears:
Nor can they force one brinish pearly drop,
Nor fetch true sighs, though sighs might vengeance stop:
To which I join the burden which he bare
Of Adams sins, which did augment his care.
His delicate smooth mortal Flesh did strive
With Hell, and as it were sought to reprieve
The coming vengeance of the Godheads Doom
To every Mortal due, even from the womb;
And after he had craved his Fathers Aid
For his true Church, thus for himself he prayed:
Dear Father, now let not my Soul become
For Sinners debts charged with a greater sum,
Than Nature can repay. But let me pass
Without more pain; poor man is like to glass,
Soon broke and bruised; or like the withered grass,
Unless he be supported by thy grace;
"Unless thou please the Torture to abate,
"Or give him strength* hard is the Martyrs Fate.
Is It possible thy Lees and wrathful Cup
To pass, that I shall not sins banquet sup?
Ah no; The Ordered course of things to come
Must correspond with thy Eternal Doom.
Therefore my will to thine, Lord, I submit,
I kiss thy Cross, I love and honor it.
Such piteous plaints Christ with a troubled spirit
Powered, when no curse he for himself did merit.
And no marvel, for he endured the scourge
For all men's sins, and all he sought to purge:
"He took on his own back, on his own score,
"The whole burden, which made him groan the more.
"Of mere Free will, and Love, not by constraint,
"He took on him our frailties, as our shape,
"That from the Hunters snare we might escape.
" Our Pride, our lusts, malice, and wiles he bare,
"And bathed them in his sweat, tears, blood and care
"He suffered for all Adams Progeny,
"Unless some madly cross their Destiny,
"And choose the Kite, the Fox, and Leopard
"Before the Spirits Dove or Lamb for Guard.
All Christians reap his Passions benefit,
Save those who had renounced him of despite:
Or those who fixed their hope on others Fate,
Distrusting him to be Sole Advocate.
O that men marked what their Redemption cost,
How Christ's dear Blood has Gods Handwriting crossed!
And that they waigh'd the Persons dignity
Abased thus out of mere charity;
To Sacrifice his own most guiltless Blood
For saving from hellfire frail Adams Brood.
With weeping eyes and with a bleeding heart
He came to his Disciples gone apart,
And in this posture sad besmeared with signs
Of griefs excess, Tears shed like brackish Brines,
He calls to them, whom fast he found asleep:
Awake my Friends, from sleep can you not keep
Your selves one hour to watch and pray with me
Arise, I say, for now my time I see
Draws near, I may not shun what is decreed
In Heaven, that I must ransom Adams Seed.
The Fatal Hour draws near, that I must smart
For Humane kind, Come, let us hence depart.
With such Propheticke words he them awakt,
Although his heart strove with deep sorrows rackt.
And thereupon the beaten path they took
Near Olivet to cross Old Cedrons Brook,
Which running through Jehosaphats fair vale
Did, where they were, bedew the Garden pale.
A Hymn in honor of the blessed Trinity, for our New Birth and Spiritual
Regeneration.
LEt us extol with Sacred Mirth
The Triple Spring of our New Birth.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
Recalled us from every Coast,
When we were tossed,
And almost lost.
The Father chose us for our Good,
The Son redeemed us through his Blood,
The Holy Ghost came from Above
And sealed us Faith with Flaming Love,
Yea, Jordans Dove
Taught us to Love.
The Turtle Dove loves only One,
But losing Him, she lives alone:
And so do we, as heretofore,
^n Persons three one God adore,
One God implore
For evermore.
The Son of God, who represents
The Fathers Person, Excellence,
And Majesty, we daily bless,
And sue unto in our distress,
For wrongs redress,
Or more or less.
Above the Stars three persons shine
Of Godhead One, One will Divine,
Who bathed our Wounds, and gave us Wine,
When we for pain were like to pine.
Christ is the Vine,
His Cross the sign.
By them we change from Death to Life;
By them we hate fell Passions strife;
By them we do these Rays partake,
That Pride and Lust we must forsake,
And Fiends, which rake
For Tophets Lake.
For our Old Lord the Tempter, now
We Christ for our New Lord avow,
And for old Plots and Carnal lies,
With our New man we sympathize,
And Christian-wise
We Sacrifice.
By his dear Blood we do confess
He ransomed has our wretchedness;
If we repress the Rebel Flesh,
He will not leave us comfortless,
But us will bless
With Joys Excess.
He, as our Head, Faiths Living Rock,
Both God and Man of Judaes stock
Was borne, and bathed in Jordans stream,
To wash us from sins foul extreme.
This Holy Theme
The New-mans Dream,
We to thy Throne present, O King Supreme,
Dipped in the Spring, which from thy side did stream.
The Fifth Days EXERCISE.
The Argument.
Christ is surpised, and Peter him forsweares,
But soon repents. False Judas raves with fears.
Led after floutes to Caesar's Judgment Hall,
Christ is condemned, to stint the Jewish brawle,
By Pilate to the Cross, where pained he dies;
Then Joseph begges the Bodies Obsequies.
HE that affects the eternal Sabbaths Rest,
There with the Lamb to live for ever Blessed;
He that desires to be a Saint professed,
And to the Son of God a joyful Guest,
Must in this world for sad Good Frydayes Feast
Reserve one Day within the Week at least:
He must take up the Cross with Love-dread Note
And wear with Abbaes sound Christ's seameles coat:
He must lay cares aside, be moved to pity,
And for his sake sing out a doleful Ditty.
It Is not a Poets feast of Prognes Cooking
Her guiltless Child; but here is one worth the booking
And looking on without nice wits rebukes
By Men of Lowest Rank, as Greatest Dukes.
A Feast in blood before the Father laid
By his dear Son to save the Soul dismayed;
A Feast indeed, which Carnal minds despise,
Because it types the New-mans Sacrifice.
O Happy Guests, for whom this Feast is dressed!
O Happy me, if I could cook this Feast
According to the New-mans appetite,
And without blame to do the Founder right!
If it be dressed like to a Hodge-podge, say:
What meat God sent, the Scullion marred to day;
If well, give God the praise, and not to me,
Give Him the Thanks, who sent these Cates to thee,
Bought at a Costly rate to clear from Lust
And passions Gall thy Soul, and mine I trust.
To further this, we must first Purify
Our selves with Fasts, and Nature mortify,
Not like our Gulles, or gutling Libertines,
Who slight all Fasts, vows, and Religious Lines.
Pack hence therefore, ye carnal Epicures,
Touch not this feast, nor our Mount Calvares cures.
Good Frydayes Priest warnes them that went astray,
With Peter's Tears to greet that mournful day,
Which puts the Soul in mind twixt Love and Fear
To heed the Cross each Friday in the Year,
Or oftener, if Occasion so require,
To watch, and cast Sins viper in the fire.
Now had the Priests the silent Night chose out
To act their plot, which they to bring about
By Daylight feared, lest that the vulgar sort,
Who late Hosanna cried, might Christ support,
Or rescue from their foul injurious hands,
In spite of all their Scribes, and bribed Bands.
Whilst He the path with his Disciples took
Which led from Olives Mount to Cedrons Brook,
That Brook, which gliding through the Royal vale
Did tears then from Gethsemane exhale;
Judas arrived, who, his Compact to gloze,
Thus with a kiss betrayed him to his foes:
Master, All-haile; at which watchword a Band
Of Armed men commanded him to stand,
And yield himself to the High Priests command.
Christ soon obeyed, not willing to withstand
The Serpents Hiss, but like a Lamb gave way
To their Arrest, as to stern Wolves a prey,
Knowing that now the Fatal time was come
To satisfy Gods wrath for Adams Doom:
For at their first Approach, to their demand,
Which Jesus was? He them to understand
Gave without false Equivocations wiles,
Wherewith Hels Dragon now the world beguiles:
I am the man, said he; But why come ye
To apprehend with Clubs and Halberds me,
As if I were a Thief. I daily taught
Among you in the Temple, yet none sought
Me to impeach. Though at his Lightning word
They backward fell, and Peter drew his Sword
In his Defense, and lopt off Malchus Ear,
Yet he controlled the Fact, bad them not fear,
Healed the Cropped Ear, and voluntary went
Along with them without astonishment
To Annas house, who to his Son in Law
Transferred him bound, whom when proud Caipha^ saw,
He on some points examined, but still
The witnesses produced agreed but ill,
For the chief Article they stood upon,
Or in blind zeal so seemed to stand thereon,
Was for their high towr'd Temples casting down,
And in three days to build it with Renown:
Which words he spoke by figure or a sign,
As he termed Bread his flesh, himself the Vine.
Unto the which when Jesus stood still mute,
Not answering with cavilling dispute,
Caiphas adjur'd him in the Name of God,
As him he loved, or feared his smarting rod,
To tell; if he were Christ, Jehovahs Son,
Who Israel should restore then near undone?
Our Savior then engaged to show the Truth,
Undauntedly, though Inward touched with Ruth,
I am, said he, the very same, and ye
Shall me the Son of Man hereafter see
A Judge from Heaven descending on you all,
I am that Christ, Messiah whom ye call.
When Caiphas heard this constant Protestation,
He rent his clothes with yelling acclamation:
O Cursed speech, Intolerable Tongue,
Worthy of stoning both by Old and Young.
So fumed the Fiend, so cried the Orgian Priest,
As at Gods Word did since the Foes of Christ,
As likewise to this day, blood-sucking Rome
His Members tempts with taunts and fiery doom.
No other proof than this his Blasphemy
Need we produce worse than Idolatry.
Who hearing this can from Revenge contain?
With outcryes loud they roared, and did arraigne
Christ guilty of a foul notorious crime,
Of Sinners the most capital and prime;
They railed on him, and could no longer brook,
But buffeted, and with their fists him struck.
They strove who first his Person should deface,
And with a Reed they smote his Head and Face.
They bound his eyes, and rapt with Lunacy,
With Girdes and Blows they said: Now Prophecy.
They spat on him, who with his spittle cured
The Blind man's Eyes, and him his sight assured.
One while his tender Flesh the Sergeants nipt,
Another while with drunken Songs they quipt
His Doctrine; which they termed New Oracles,
And by and by they mocked his Miracles.
Such spite they wrought on him with revel reakes
Till word was brought to them, The Morning breaks.
When Peter had observed, who present was,
How all things did against his Master pass,
And that some charged him borne in Galilee,
Bewrayed by Speech of Christ his crew to be,
He utterly denied, and Christ renounced,
Which he with Oaths to save his life pronounced
He never knew the man. This thrice he swore,
But then the Cock warned him, that he forswore.
By which sure real sign poor Peter knew,
That he had broke his Vow, and proved untrue.
With trickling tears distilling down his cheeks
He then retires aside, Gods Mercy seeks,
And with such words as these bewailes his fault:
"Why did I wretch twixt God and Belial hault?
"Why did I play the base Dissemblers part
"For fear of rage, or momentary smart
"The Son of God, my Savior to deny?
"Who for my sins feared not deaths agony?
Why did I not think better on my Fate;
Whereof my Lord forewarned me so of Late?
That Satan watched to winnow me like Wheat?
Why did I not his Prophecy repeat?
That I would him thrice, Craven like, not know
Before the Cock should clap his wings to Crow?
Alas, that I a Member from my Head
Disjoynted prove, like Judas, false, and dead!
Alas that I Baptized to Grace, once feeling
Good motions, pine with Falling sickness reeling!
That I a Saint in Possibility
Am turned Apostate by impiety!
That I late taught by Christ's eternal word
Am now become a Traitor to my Lord!
Alas, that I, whose feet my Savior washed,
Should now so soon with Durty sins be dashed!
Sins pain I do deserve, and foul disgrace,
Because I strove ambitiously for place;
Because I stood too much upon my worth,
I well deserve from grace to be thrust forth.
O what is Man, if destitute of Grace
He shall presume with Saints to gain a Place?
In stead of place with Saints he merits well
With Lucifer to tumble into Hell.
But I disclaim Men's merits, Grace entreat,
And fly from Justice to Gods mercy Seat.
Mercy I crave, for Mercy still I cry,
And if that fails, no other means I Will try.
If for this fault I meet with Mercies stream,
I will take heed how ever I blaspheame.
I Will cleanse my Heart with Folly lately stung,
And will henceforth reform my erring Tongue.
I will redeem my foul Apostasy,
That all the World shall see my Constancy.
"I will protest the Truth, that it is Damnation
"To cloak the Truth with mental reservation.
"Let him retain Hels Scribe for Advocate,
"That trains his Fellows to Equivocate:
"Though with his Tongue he has untruely sworn,
"Yet in his Heart he bears a Mind unsworne.
"But I was taught within a better School
"At Truths Wellhead, than so to play the Fool.
My Conscience, upon whom my thoughts relied,
This Hearts true Judge tells me, I foulely lied.
There needs no trick, nor traverse in my Plea:
One may the Sands count sooner of the Sea,
Then reckon up the many sins I did;
Of Sinners chi^fe I vouch my self unbid.
Yet of all sins none troubles me so deep,
As this my last, for which I wail and weep.
O would my eyes a Fountain were of Tears!
If tears would please my God, and ease my feare^,
I would then hope to show a Converts Love,
And to my Lord a constant Soul yet prove.
But though salt tears do fail, sighs shall abound,
Which with my Heart well-nigh in sorrows drowned,
I once again present to thee, Dread Lord,
And without shift here of mine own accord
I humbly do confess my grievous crimes,
For which I merit Hell, unless betimes
It please thy Grace some pity to extend
On me vile wretch, and my weak thoughts to bend
Toward thy Laws, forgiving what is past,
That my sins be from thy memorials racked;
The which I beg for thy Son Jesus sake,
Whom I henceforth will never more forsake.
Thus poor Saint Peter bitterly complained,
And lived to Christ a servitour unfaign'd
Chief Elder of that memorable Town,
Where, by that Name first Christian men were known;
One of the Prime Apostles in Commission
With James, and others for all doubts decision,
Toyling with them to feed the New-mans flock,
Which built their Faith upon the Living Rock.
Which Pastors place he did so well improve,
That all true Saints Saint Peter's deeds approve.
Nay, he that room did since so well discharge,
That roaming Rome doates on Saint Peter's charge,
And till this day, to gratify his Fame,
Our chiefest Towns hold Temples of his Name.
This happy Lot did to this Saint befall,
"Whereas the Traitor Judas by his Fall
"Exemplifies to us what Carnal Scribes
"Shall reap at last for their Truth-choaking bribes
"For sale of Souls, and what great dangersly
"For them in store, who plot most wickedly
"Good Christians ruins, hired for Golden Fees
"To play the Waspes by wronging painful Bees.
But we have now more sobs of grief to vent,
For Pilates Doom recalls us to lament.
Scarce did the day, sad Frydayes Morn, begin
To dawne, when that about their Bloody Sin
The Clergy met, consulted, and arraigned
Of Treason Christ with Accusations faign'd.
Nor paused they too long, what should become
Of him. They had already read his Doom,
That Christ should dye for their whole Nations good,
Lest his New sect might put down Levies Brood.
And to this end, soon as the Sun had rose,
Because they would not the least minute lose,
Themselves not daring on that Sabbaths Eve
Him to condemn, lest they their Nation grieve
Or scandalize for sitting then on Blood.
When they should more prepare to do some good
They Jesus led to Caesar's Judgment Hall,
Who had reserved Offenses Capital,
Such as concerned not Religions Breach,
Or their Misdeeds, who did false Doctrine teach
To be heard by his President alone:
To Pilate there with glozing bitter moan
They Christ accused, how he himself a King
Had styled to Caesar's wrong. About which thing
When Jesus was demanded, he stood mute,
Grieved at his Nations spite, loath to dispute,
Or make his power known unto his Foes,
For whose Salvation he resolved those woes
To undergo, and his dear Blood to give
In Sacrifice for them that would believe.
But when the Judge had often to him replied;
He said, that never he on Man reli'd;
"His Kingdom was not earthly, but Divine,
"To which high Orb he did his thoughts confine;
Which by this sign and Argument he proved:
For if he were a King on Earth beloved,
His Armed troops his Scepter would defend:
Whereas the cause, which made him to descend
From Heaven down, was Sacred Truth to show
To sinful men, who for Gods Grace would sue
Truth was to Pilates Ears so rare, divine,
And mysticke, that he could not it define,
But asked him what Truth was, yet would not stay
To hear it blazed, but wondering went away,
And told the Jews: I find no heinous fault,
No Treason, Theft, no Criminal assault,
Nor crying sin. In utt'ring of which speech
One whispred him, his Wife did him beseech,
As he himself did love, not to proceed
In Judgment against Christ for any deed
Pretended by the Jews, but to take heed
Of their false Bills. It makes my heart to bleed
Said she, to think what troubles most extreme
I for his sake have suffered in a Dream.
This Message I scarce risen from my Bed
Have sent to thee, lest that thou be misled
To yield consent for shedding guiltless blood.
Therefore for mine and for thy Future Good
Be not severe against that Righteous man.
When Pilate did this dream and message scan,
And knew the Priests had of mere Envy brought
Jesus before him without cause, he sought
By all fair means to free him from their spite,
And him of causeless Treason to acquit.
" Fear, pity, fraud, wrought on his Policy,
"But Fraud at last got the supremacy:
And thereupon he shifted for a while
To lengthen out the cause, or them beguile,
To satisfy his Wife, or else to brew
A plot to make the Envious King to rue;
To curry favor, or to Complement,
Because he was of Herod's Government,
At Nazareth bred up in Galilee,
(That part, which Caesar ^^yl'd the Tetrarchy)
Who at that time lay in Jerusalem,
He Christ transferred to him, and caused them
What circumstance or proof that might conduce
Before the Tetrarchs Throne there to produce,
And to obey what Herod would adjudge,
Whom you shall find, quoth he, a Meeter Judge,
A man that Better knows your Countries Laws
Than I a stranger do, show him the cause.
Herod seemed glad at first the Man to see,
Of whom he heard such Fame in Galilee;
Or that John Baptist was rose up again,
Whom for a Dancing wench he late had slain;
In hope he might behold some Miracle
Wrought in his sight, or hear some Oracle,
Which might delight his curious carnal sense
With Courtly News, or Projects excellence.
But finding Christ in outward habit plain,
Of sad aspect, and that he could not gain
What he desired from him to see, or hear,
With Thanks to Pilate now his Friend most dear,
By this late act of tendered Amity,
(For till that time both lived in enmity)
He sent Christ back to the Pretorian Bar,
Despised by him, his Guard, and men of war.
Yet morall-wise betokening Innocence
They veiled the Lamb in white, and packt him thence.
Thus was the Lamb of God, Men's Savior, tossed
By wicked men from pillar unto post.
When that Romes Praetour saw, he must content,
Or move the Jews to wrath or discontent,
And thinking that some corporal correction
Might qualify their spleen or Insurrection,
He scourged him. But that they deemed too light,
For they, like Dragons, gaped his blood outright
To suck. Yet Pilate seemed to calm their spite,
"Like to those rash and partial Politicians,
"Who punish Saints to pleasure Antichristians.
Because they had a Customary Right,
Or Indulgence to bleare the vulgars sight,
To pardon one against that Festival,
He sought to save, or else to make reprivall
Of Jesus. But they all cried out amain:
Not him, but Barrabas. Jesus in vain
Thou offrest us, for this man may amend.
If Jesus escape, thou art not Caesar's friend.
This Barrabas was a notorious Thief
With murder stained, the more was Pilates grief,
(For of the both he Jesus favored).
Yet seeing their Hate, he at the last agreed
To please the Rout, whom Caiphas with his mates
Of Herod's side to murder animates.
And thereupon the Roman Hypocrite
First washed his hands, as if he were upright
And clean from Blood shed by his own command,
Alluding that he could not them withstand,
"When as he might the Prisoners Life defend,
"Or him before the Roman Senate send,
"Or conster with mild sense Jews wrested Laws,
"Or on the cause, like grave Gamaliel, pause.
But to content the giddy multitude,
He chose the suite with slaughter to conclude,
Adjudging to the Cross in Caesar's Name
Christ to be nailed, whom he found void of blame,
Whom neither he, nor yet the Incestuous King
Could once in compass of set Treason bring:
Nay, when he heard the People Christ upbraid
With Tide of Gods Son, he seemed afraid:
As witnessed his Conscience pricked within,
As openly he said: I find no sin
Deserving Death, what evil has be done?
They yelling still, he styles himself Gods Son,
Himself a King, to Caesar's wrong a King:
The former merits Death, the Latter thing
No less than death. The first is Blasphemy,
The other Treason in a High Degree:
By our just Laws he well deserves to dye
Without delay, demurre, or remedy;
Let then your Judgment pass securedly.
His Blood on us and on our children lie,
His Death on us and on our Nation rest.
Yells ominous. And so they live unblest:
For ever since their Nation fared the worse
By this entailed hereditary curse.
The Romans since, on whom they did rely,
Like Aegipts Reed, in stead of Aids supply,
Or humane Ruling Lords, proved Hellish Rookes,
With rapines, spoils, and circumventing Hooks
Imbrued in blood by Albines Briberies,
Felix, Florus, and others Butcheries,
Such griping Tyrants proved at last their Foes,
Ransackt their City, turned their weal to woes,
Burnt their Temple, and made them slaves abhorred
As they had scorned and Crucified the Lord;
And to this day they either live in Bonds
Of servitude, or, like Caine, vagabonds;
To Christians odious for their bloody works,
For killing Christ, as odious to the Turks;
For their Religion, or patcht Alcoran
Bears Christian shows, as lies Mahumetan.
"They breathe, and that is all, by Brokery,
"Only to keep the Nations Memory,
"Least if they perished quite, some doubts again
"Might grow perhaps of the Messiah slain.
Their Land, which once with milk and honey flowed,
Lies waste, and cursed as with a Fatal Cloud;
In stead of Wine, Figs, Balsame, and good seeds,
Repleate with Snakes, wild Beasts, and stinking weeds
Like a rude desert grown, for where the Horse
Of Ottoman once swayes, he leaves a Curse.
When that the Judge had so delivered him
To his Praetorian Band, or Sergeants grim
With the Mad Jews applause, they Christ attired
In Purple Robes, as if he had aspired
By mutiny to make himself a King,
Which he worse loathed then they the Serpents sting^
A Crown of Thorns they plaited on his Head,
And him blasphemed with abase Sceptred Reed
Saluting him: All hail thou King of Jews,
With bended knees we will pay thee all thy dues.
Yea, Pilate too for all his Inward sting
Proclaimed: Behold the Man, the Jewish King,
And to the Cross he fixed that style alike
In Characters of Hebrew, Latin, Greek.
When they had mocked their fill, with many bobs
And scorns they took from him those royal robes
Apparrell'd him in his own Coat again,
And fell anew to their deriding vein,
Besmearing him with spittle on the Face,
And with a Cane they lasht him in disgrace.
O bloody Folk! the grieved Soul to gore!
To torture him, who tortured was before!
Hood-winking him, like Boys at blind man's Buffe,
With Frumps, who smote? they did him lately cuffe
And now again vexed him, till Nature stoupt,
And but for Heavens strength had deadly droopt.
The Thorns, wherewith they crowned his tender Head
Put him to so much pain, that almost dead
His Soul was forced most grievously to groan,
The thought whereof would melt even hearts of stone.
They heard the Praetours doom, yet would they add
More fuel to the flame to make him sad.
They heard his groaning sighs, and that no sorrows
were like to his; his face seemed plowed like furrows
They wreathed his Head with thorns, and yet that wreath
Saves us from prickling Thorns of sin and Death
When Judas now had seen his Master bound
Reviled, beaten, spet upon, and found
Guilty of Death, he grieved, but too late,
Felt deadly gripes, and therewith desperate,
He to the Temple speedily resorted,
There left his hire, and to the Priests reported:
Lo, here I yield you back the Price of Blood,
The man, quoth he, did never harm but good*
He, whom I sold I know is Innocent,
A Righteous man, from God a Savior lent.
Your Eyes have seen his mighty Miracles:
Your Ears have heard his Gospels Oracles.
His words and life his Innocence express:
For who with sin can tax him more or less?
Ah woe is me, that I have lived the day
For a base Bribe my Master to betray.
Look thou, said they, to that; for die he shall,
Were he more Just, to save us from a Fall:
For, if he lived, opinions would arise,
And Caesar then would stop our Sacrifice.
It Is better that one dye, than many fall;
That one miscarry, then we perish all.
This policy the Jewish Church professed;
And the same course Great Babels whore possessed,
As testifies her Hate to Protestants,
Whom for no cause she calls Extravagants
(Excluding them from Romes Society,
Although one God they serve in Trinity)
But that she fears the Radiant Gospels Light
With their New-man might quite expel the night
Of Ignorance, and Superstitious mists,
Which darken yet her roaming Romanists
With bribing sale of Pardons meritorious:
Redeeming Flames to sinners most notorious.
For so that Whore her Lovers bears in hand,
If they bequeathe unto her Goods or Land,
Or Fight for her Croisadoes Liberty;
Under her guard they need not fear to die:
She will appease, like an Indulgent Mother,
Gods Justice, though for murdering of a Brother.
But from the West returning to the East:
See here what rage seaz'd on the Traitors breast.
Judas distract with furious discontent
By Satan, and his Spirits Instrument
Choler adust, departed out of hand,
And wanting Grace his Passions to withstand,
He hanged himself, and to be marked the more,
The Lunaticke his weight down headlong bore,
Till all his Bowels gusht to public view,
And at his death such words as these did spew:
And shall I live, quoth he, a Traitor named,
For selling guiltless Blood, always defamed?
What hope of Rest, when God does me debar
Of inward Peace? When he proclaims me war?
And lets those slaves, which I was wont to tame,
Base Passions, now to black my former Fame?
O let the Sea on me Christ's quarrel wreake
With vengeance, with a Millstone at my neck.
Cursed be the hour that ever I was borne,
I am undone, My Wife all quite forlorn,
My Children must unpittyed vagabonds
Range through the world, my self in satan's bonds
For it is decreed that I in Hell must lie
And that Another must my charge supply.
Nothing but horror sounds without, within
My Soul, like Zims and Oyms full of sin
Scritcheth out aloud: Judas Iscariot,
Come away to Hell, for thou have forgot
And renounced thy Baptism, betraying God,
The Son of God, make here no more abode
On Earth. I come, I come, a Damned Ghost
By you, O Furies, to be ever tossed.
God frowns, because my Master I did sell:
And now, because God frowns, I Will down to hell.
The fearful end, which Judas made, so known,
So common ran dispersed through all the Town,
That Salems Clergy stood as men aghast,
And doubting lest for their rash sentence past,
And treachery, the hand of God might strike
With vengeance them for their false deeds dislike:
They all agreed their Church not to defile
With Bloods Reward, but so to reconcile
The fact with works of Merits bastard kind,
That God might seem to them, like Mortals, blind.
This made them play for cloaking of abuses
Bo-peepe with Faith, and turn to Pious uses
The Thirty pence, the hire of treachery,
As Zachary foretold their Salary,
Buying therewith the Potters field to Bury
Poor strangers in, thereby to slack Gods fury.
O fond conceit! to do an Injury,
And afterward, like Hallifaxes Jury,
To fit, and see the wronged man redrest,
When doom forepast could never be reverst,
Nor ransomed with guerdon Competent,
Chiefly for Blood, to which they gave consent
Against Gods Lamb, not of Religious care,
But factiously the Churches Fleece to share
Without reproof, or Shepherds Brow severe;
For this made them to Christ such malice bear,
Fearing lest that in time the Cautious wise
Might counterchecke their maskt hypocrisies,
If this New man in that luxurious Age
Should draw their Flock to his New Pasturage,
With Parables enfolding Charity,
Repentance, Faith, and Hearts Humility.
No doubt but they acknowledged the Word
To be Divine, and worthy of Record,
Which Jesus taught confirmed with Miracles,
But Satan had cast forth such Obstacles
Of Merits Clouds before their Carnal sense,
That they might slight the Spirits Quintessence,
The Bread of Life, the New man's nourishment,
As cross to that which they for Lucre vent:
Gods holy Writ corrupting with Traditions,
With Thalmuds Quirkes, and thorny Expositions.
For Juries Church with Carnal Pharisees
Was branded then, and with dull Saduces,
Which with their Monks Essences would deface
By Merits bragges Gods Covenant of Grace,
Making the weaker sort of Souls believe,
That they could stint Gods wrath, or it reprieve.
But why blame I the Jews Apostasy?
When now the time of Daniels Prophecy
Was come, that their Messiah should be slain?
Not for himself; but for Another stain?
(The more vile wretches we, that gave the cause
By the flat breach of our Creatours Laws.)
"He Legions might of Angels to his Aid
"Have called, but then Man's ransom was not paid.
"He might to Hell all Adams race have cast,
"But then he had left none his Grace to taste.
And this sweet Grace of his made him to bear
Such wrongs in Jewry Land, and to forbear
With us our debts, which none could satisfy,
But he alone, whose Merits Justify.
"This is my Faith, the upshot of my Creed:
" Thy Blood, O Christ, can save frail Adams seed
"If they Repent, believe, and turn to God,
"Thou will absolve them from thy Fathers rod,
"Yea, from Hell-flames, for thy worths excellence
"Restored what Adam lost, Souls Innocence;
Thy humble Life and Death upon the Cross
Have crossed Gods Sentence, and repaired our Loss.
Let therefore to his Cross our zeal return,
And never cease with Holy Flames to burn,
Until we end sad Fridayes Sacrifice,
And see what Christ paid more for Humane vice,
"I mean not only that which Helene found
"With rubbage soiled, but the Cross, solid, sound,
"Which scorching Souls for new Jerusalem
"A^ords to Saints a more expedient Theme.
We never saw the Cross, where Christ was fixed*
Yet we believe, that he was Crucifixt.
Now to his Death, his sore tormenting Death,
They led Gods Lamb to end his wearyed breath.
With floutes and shoutes they led him to the Cross,
The weight whereof by force they did impose
(Because his Lambe-like strength began to faint,
And could no longer bear it by constraint)
On Simon of Cirean, a laboring man,
A good poor Soul, an honest Publican,
Whom there by chance the Ruffian Soldiers met
Upon the Raised Cross they Jesus set
With loud Outcries as at a May Pole Game,
And to the same with Contumelious shame
His hands and feet with piercing Nails they fixed,
And, like a Judge, placed him two Thieves betwixt
The more to spite him. But the Moral is,
Some he shall doom to Hell, and some to Bliss,
For these two Thieves were of a diffrent Faith,
The one railes at him, the other meekely says,
We faulty are, but this man guiltless dies.
Remember me, Good Lord, when thou do rise^
To whom sweet Jesus instantly replies:
This day thou shall with me to Paradise.
Which words well marked, who will not thence infer
But Grace works more than Merit? and aver
"That Christ Gods power had; when Crucified
"He could so soon a Thief make Justified,
"To reap that Harvest, where he never sowed,
Even Bliss, which with their Caterwalling loud
Some hunted for, yet could not with it meet,
Like Cats for Fish, that would not wet their feet.
But the unbaptiz'd, that lived not to restore
What he had robbed, does wonder-rap me more
To see him Crowned a Saint in Heaven Above,
Then that I dare discuss Gods hidden Love,
Who of mere Grace pays some at Sunset hires
Equal with them, whom earlier he inspires;
Or ask the King, why he to Honor screwes
Some men of less desert than mine in shows.
Faith wins us Grace, So while proud Rabbis laughed,
Poor Women wept, and at the Cross were taught.
With Swan-like Song, though in deaths Agony,
Christ warned them by way of Destiny:
Shed not, ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
Your Tears for me, but for your selves shed them.
My Father, to whose care I recommend
My Soul, will to his children comfort send.
The days will come, when they that Barren are,
More safely shall then Women Fruitful share;
When many shall in perils dolorous
Cry out, ye Caves and Mountains cover us:
For if a Blooming Tree of verdant sap
Be thus cut off, how shall the dry escape?
To show what Love is unto Parents due,
His Mother Mary at his last adieu,
( Whose Soul with his, as Simeon did relate,
Was, as with sword, pierst in that Bloody fate,)
Having with constant mind, whilst others fled,
Staid by the Cross, till she should see him dead,
He comforted with John, Behold thy Son,
With charge to him: Behold thy Mother, John.
(Two sacred Saints joined in one Legacy,
Two Souls fast knit in Saint-like Amity)
John therefore home the blessed Virgin took,
And never she her Son bequeathed forsook,
But in his house remained a Widow-Mayd,
Until her debts to Nature she had paid.
These pithy Types of Charity and Grace
Christ dying left for his New Church to trace.
God grant, that they may sink with some remorce
Into our Hearts, and that they Nature force
With her proud wanton brats to lay aside
Our pranks, and view what from our Saviors side,
Twofold, besides his Hands and Feet did slow:
That to Christ's Yoke they by those signs may bow;
An easy yoke* if on those double Rillets
They humbly poare without vain quirkes and quillets;
If inwardly his Cross they muse upon,
As Mary did with doleful tears, and John*
While Natures Light, the New man's Glory, lay
Thus on the Cross in doleful pains dismay,
The Suns Noone-light mourned for such cruelty
From twelve to three with Sable Canopy,
At sight whereof Romes fierce Centurion quakt,
And like to Aspen leaves most Newtrals shakt.
"Note here the Nature of the Clay and Wax:
"The one turns hard, the other soft does wax
"By the Suns Heat, or Fire. And so were then
"The lookers on, some mild, some hardened men;
"Some mollifyed by Grace grieved with remorce;
"Some scorched by fiends yell'd out till they were hoarse,
Chiefly, some Scribes were hardened more and more,
For they Christ still derided, as before:
Though Nature did her childrens deeds deplore,
Some (...)-necked Jews held on with taunts to gore
The fainting Lamb: Now, if thou he Gods Son,
Come down from thence, or else thy Fame is done:
Where are become thy famous Miracles?
Thy latest vaunts, stupendous Oracles?
That Gods fair Temple ruin^d to the ground
Thou in three days could build it up more sound
Physiti^n, heal thy self. Could others cure,
And raise to life? and not thine own assure?
Some mocked his coming forth from Galilee,
His Native home supposed: Hurl down the Tree,
Great Nazari^e, and tear those boring Nails,
Which trouble thee. At him another railes:
Could thou a man from death to life restore,
Which in the Grave had lain four days before?
And can not now thy dearest self redeem?
Thus did they, like mad Bedlems, scoff and skream,
While the poor Lamb almost brought to despair
Souls by his Cross and patience to repair,
Perplexed as well for their obduracy
Of heart, as for their foul conspiracy,
Like a Childing Woman overcome with Throes
He cried out in height of all his woes,
(Borne down with weight of man's mortallity*
His Fathers wrath, his Nations Cruelty,
And pressed with Satan's threats of Tyranny)
Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani?
In English, why have thou forsaken me
My God, my God? When I forsake not thee?
Some hearing that, and does our Great Messiah
Vouchsafe, said they, to call upon Elias?
Well, let him come, and save this Royal man
With Fatal Fire from Heaven, if he can.
Near to deaths point he made his Moan: I thirst,
That is, for Souls Salvation, which accursed
By Justice stand in a suspended plight,
Like to be chained with Spirits of the night,
Unless, O Father, this my Sacrifice
Thou will accept to purge their damned vice.
But his lewd Foes with unrelenting Gall,
In stead of drink to quench his thirst withal,
Soon dipped a Sponge in gally vinegar,
Which on a Reed reached him, although eager
And bitter too, he tasted to fulfill
The Prophecy, as thereby Lust to kill
In Adams Seed, and likewise to distaste
The Fatal Apples sweet delicious taste.
Since now all needful things for Humane good
Christ had fulfilled by shedding of his Blood,
Which through his Nailed Hands and Feet did stream
With pain in Soul and Body most extreme,
The New-mans Offering, powered out to assuage
Gods wrath conceived against the Old man's rage;
And knowing that all Prophesies relation
Were to the bottom brought by his Oblation,
He said: Now all is at a final End.
Into thy hands, O Father, I commend
My Spirit. O forgive this Crying sin,
Which they of Blindness are now plunged in.
At which Last words groaned out with Sacred breath,
The Lamb of God, men's Savior, sealed his death.
As Soon as He had yielded up the Ghost,
Whilst at his death the rout insulted most,
Black hideous clouds, which had begun before,
Quite dimmed the Sun; The Earth then labored sore,
As if her womb some uncouth Birth would vent;
Her Center shook with Throes so violent,
That Salems Temple veil asunder cleft
(A sign that Levies brood should be bereft
Of the Holy of Holies, by Entaile
The High Priests room, and parted by that veil
Then rent) so that the vulgar gazed on
The Mysticks hid, and Tetragrammaton
With great Jehovahs Name, which Satan fears,
They saw disclosed in Hebrew Characters.
This Rupture chanced soon as by Pilates T^^ine
Our Prince Messiah on the Cross was slain,
When Nature was, or Natures God perplexed,
As one then glossd at Athens on the Text
Of this Eclipse, if Credit be to Greeks.
But Holy Writ informs us that with shriekes
Some Jews that saw those signs, disclaimed their crimes,
And beating of their breasts, bewailed the Times.
Others stood still, and looked on him with fear,
When they beheld his side pierced with a spear.
God grant their race, which roam as yet, like Cain*
May turn to Christ, and so redeem their stain,
Preferring more the Cross, than Aarons Ri^es,
Christ's living Temple more than Carnal sights.
Now ye, that read, or hear this Tragedy,
Tell me, did any man more causeless dye?
"If ye retain a sympathyzing sense
"With ours on Earth, and know what past from hence,
" Ye Passengers, who saw that bloody day,
" Was any grief like his? declare I pray.
That harmless Souls should for lewd souls attaint
Be pained, deserves a pitteous sad complaint.
"When faithful Pythias should for Damon dye,
" A Tyran^ could not brook that Tragedy;
"But that Gods Son, to free men from hell-^^ares,
"Should suffer death, might Tigers more to ^^ares
His Cares transcend all men's Capacity;
His Love surmounts Seraphicke Charity.
O think on Christ his Passion, sinful Man;
What here I penned, with understanding scan;
And never let his Bloody Cross depart
By worldly charms or wiles, out of thy Heart;
"But every day in spite of tempting vice,
"Think on the Cross, the New man's Sacrifice;
How he spent years, Man to regenerate,
Who did the World but in few Days Create.
Think how He died to ransom us from Death,
By whose sweet Word man first received his breath.
At Evening tide, on this their Sabbaths Eve,
Among the Jews, who then for Christ did grieve,
One Joseph was of Arimatheas Town,
An upright Man, a Counselor well known
In Salem for his zeal, good deeds, and wealth,
One that Believed, but as it were by stealth
In visits close, for fear of Factious Scribes,
Which in those days possessed the Jewish Tribes
With doubtful Schisms: He grieved the Priests to see
So fierce and so unnatural to be,
Like to those Cains, Spaines Inquisitions bounds,
Who trounce poor Souls beyond Religions bounds,
As to complot the murder of their Brother;
But now his grief he could no longer smother,
Undauntedly, not caring to be shent,
He for Christ's Body unto Pilate went,
Entreating him, that from the Cross he might
Remove the same, and bury it in the night:
For with our Feast suits not this sight of sorrow,
You know (quoth he) our Sabbath is to morrow,
And by our Law, we are by Moses Taught,
That but till night no hanged Body ought
To lie unburied, lest it taint the Air,
Defile the Land, or Health with smells impair*
We vowed our selves, a Nation consecrate
To God, who hates all things contaminate,
Such as might bar us to be Sanctified
In Soul, and in our Bodies purified.
Our Soil likewise, while we from vices stand
Absolved, is styled Jehovahs Holy Land;
Which Holiness of Body, Soul, and Soil
Makes for his Burial me to keep this coile.
O let not then the Nailed Coarse endure
Polluted long for want of Sepulture;
Since not so much as any Carrion Beast
Is left uncovered at our sacred Feast.
My Country men have wreackt their ut-most teene
On him, and you their bloody minds have seen,
When Barrabas, that Robber, they preferred
Before his Life, whom now to be enterr'd
I beg and crave at your most gracious hands.
And none of them, I think, this Boon withstands,
Or if they should by scrupulous surmise
Oppose my suit, that he again will rise
Within three days from Death to Newer Life,
Because he did so Prophecy: In brief,
I am content they watch the silent Grave;
Or seal it up; And what more would they crave?
When Pilate knew, that Christ was dead indeed,
After some pause, he at the last agreed
With this Proviso, that the Priests should set
His Seal, and with a Guard the Tomb beset.
Then instantly, unto his great renown,
Good Joseph took the breathless Body down,
Enwrapt it in a shroud, and it conveyed
To a New Tomb, where no man else was laid.
An Epitaph upon our Saviors Corpse hanging upon the Cross.
Mark, Worldling, here a Tragic Mira^le,
Suspend vain Hopes, and view this Spectacle:
The Son of God hanges fixed to that Tree
With nailed Hand^ and Feet, thy Soul to free
From his Dread Fathers Curse, and the same pain,
Which thou of right should feel, He does sustain;
Gods wrathful Cup, to ransom Adams F^ll
And lusts, he drinks with vinegar and Gall.
To add more woes, in presence of his Mother,
Like Kid^-flesh boiled in the Dammes Milk, their Brother
See how the Priests do flout, the Romans mangle
His Harmless Corpse, whom they could near entangle
In the least Word or Act, whilst he did Preach
His Fathers Will, and in the Temple teach.
He tendered Grace, and eased Laws Penalties,
He cured their Fevers, Palsies, Leprosies;
Restored their Lame, gave Sight to Blinded Eyes;
Raised up the Dead, and for these gifts he dies,
He Praying dies; and then Gore-Blood did come
From his pierst side with that clear water from
The Pericardion Skin about his Heart,
Which late it held to cool that Moving part.
O wretched Men, who did Gods wrath provoke,
And were the cause of this great Bloody stroke!
A Lamentable Hymn in the Memorial of our Saviors Passion.
AS our sins did Our Savior pie^ce,
So must we bathe with tears his Hearse,
Though One of his Bloods many drops
Exceeds all Tears, and Passion stops.
How can our Souls choose but complain
To see our Prince Messiah slain?
Not for himself, but for our Cause,
Who daily break our Makers Laws?
How can the Members choose but weep,
That the Good Shepherd for the Sheep,
The Head of all our Humane Race
Should lose his life with such disgrace?
With bitter ^ibes, more bitter stripes,
And dismal Deaths most bitter Gripes?
His Forehead Crowned with pricking Thorn,
His Hands and Feet Crosse-naild and torn?
Christ's senses all paid for that sin,
Which the first Man delighted in.
For the fair Fruit of Paradise,
The Jews hood-winked his harmless Eyes;
For Adams lis^ning to his Wife,
His Ears heard s^outes and raylings rife.
For Eves hand-reaching to the Tree,
His feeling gripped with Tortures see.
For the sweet fruits delicious taste,
With bitter gall he brake his Fast;
And where the Fruit Eve Fragrant smelt,
He Skulles foul scent at Golgoth felt.
This doleful doom to Christ besell,
Though he dislodged the Fiends of Hell;
And though their Prince failed him to win
With his three snares, or charms to sin
Within that wild or Desert place,
Where Christ withstood him to his Face:
Yet now in part he got his Will,
And to that end with poisned skill
By Judas means had made his way
For greedy gain him to betray:
He got his Will, bruiz'd Adams Heel,
And mad with Rage made Christ to feel,
As he was Man, his utmost shaft,
Since him he missed to gull with craft;
Nor could him charge in thought, or word,
That he transgrest against the Lord.
Only because our sins he bore,
God suffered Satan him to gore
By Sinners hands, hells Instruments,
The Guiltless Lamb with Punishments;
Which we indeed, and none but we,
Had well deserved for Adams Tree
To Undergo from Crown to foot,
With all the Pain of Hell to boot,
The Sixth Days EXERCISE.
The Argument.
The four great wonders wrought at Christ his Death.
How Paradise received his Ghostly Breath,
Purgatory condemned, and Tombs expense,
The Cross is praised, what profit comes from thence.
I Sing no songs of antique Saturnalls,
Emblemes of Time, Sithes mowing Festivalls;
Though Saturnes name I wrest to that set day,
On which our Saviors Corpse entombed lay:
Nor daigne I once his memory to greet,
Who fled to Latium from his Native Creete.
Nor strike I at that Melancholique Sphere,
Whose Motion ends not till the Thirtieth year.
No such conceits intoxicate my Brain,
To think, that Ovids Ta^es might grace my strain
No such Capricious Toys, wits whimsey-dances
Nor dreams of Raving Pates take me with trances
Improper for a Christian Scribe to hold,
Or them to blaze abroad, like Bardhs too bold,
Who in this Age of impudence and scorn
Turned more Baboones then Babes for Christ Newborn,
Would gul the world with lewd Fantastique fables,
Our Youth with Cupids baits, or E^vish Bables:
No line shall glide through my New sacred Pen
Save that, whereto Gods Angels say Amen.
But who will hear, or credit our Reports?
When men wax deaf, bewitched with Babels sports
When though they know, that her Chief Forts were taken,
Her Lovers sundred, and her Basans shaken
By them that hate the Whore, yet still they strive
By the Old Dragons false prerogative
To build her Walls, like Jerichoes again?
And blow up Sion, with Hels Powder-traine?
Look how they Plot to undermine our walls!
And to repair their own, Just ruined, falls!
See how Romes Mungrels, mercenary whelps,
Go on to bite the Saints! And how she helps
Some, viper-like, their Neighbors hearts to tear
Under pretense of Purgatories fear!
Behold how Mammon tempts our brightest stars
To fall down from the Orb of Peace to Jarres;
Whilst Humane Arts do want no Licencing,
They threat Gods Heralds with a silencing.
But O! are not those wordlings much too blame?
Or do they not obscure the Spirits Flame?
Well meriting from Heaven punishment
Exemplified with Arrows Pestilent
For their Eclipse of zeal? if that they fear
To favor those Choice works, which every year
Some Newborn Spirits in these days of evil
Present from Christ, to conjure down the Devil?
I fear no such false Squibs, nor cloudy Brow,
That some with Benets Badge might overcrow,
Or clog my Conscience, like an Ape, in Hell;
I fear no such Bug-beares, nor Magic spell,
Wherewith Masse-mongers, Flamines most profane
Brag to fetch Fiends from out a Puritan.
For in my Will the marks of Christ I bear,
His Image on the Cross, which thus I wear:
"Like as the Fiery Serpent made of Brass
"Within the Desert raised an Object was
"To cure all such as were by Serpents stung,
"Only by seeing that which Outward hung:
"So the Resemblance of Christ Crucifixt,
"With constant Faith in our Remembrance fixed
"Heales up the wounds and scars which Python old
"Procured to sin, when our first Parents sold
"Themselves for slaves. There is no Antidote
"More strong than Christ his Cross, or Seamelesse Coat
"Against our Foes; The which with more impression
We shall believe, if following our Profession,
We mark what dismal change the whole world crossed,
When Natures God on Earth gave up the Ghost.
Even then (O strange) Apparent to the Eye
" Four Miracles amazed Mortallity,
"Which four likewise sour Creatures made aghast,
"For Nature they, Sin, Death, and Hell defaced.
The first, that rapt the standers by with wonder,
Was Salems Temples veil then rent asunder:
(A Sign, that shadows of Reallities
Ceased with the Jewish Rites and Sacrifice)
The third did Tombs and Monuments uncase,
With Trembling Motion of the solid Base,
(A Sign, that Satan's Kingdom was undone,
And by the Cross, the Gentiles should be won.)
The Fourth, the Resurrection did make clear,
For certain Saints did visibly appear
Unto their Friends out of their Monuments,
When Christ fulfilled the Prophesies Contents;
(A certain sign, that God will, like to those,
Others through Christ into New life transpose)
In the mean time the Soldiers stood not Idle,
Nor would their spite, nor greedy Passions bridle.
Some swagger'd for their Robes with open throat,
Some did cast lots about Christ's seamelesse coat;
Some broke the Prisoners Bones; but finding sure
Jesus deceased, yet they to keep in ure
Their Bloody hands, them would not then forbear,
But one of them his side pierst with a spear.
"A Soldier of proud Rome then pierst his side
"As now that City would his Limbs divide.
"Out of whose wounds two Sacramental signs
"Did Water flow and Blood, like juice of Vines
"Both White and Red; The One for Circumcision,
"Pre-figur'd Baptism; the other Sins Remission
"By Blood unseene within the Vine presented
"Instead of Carnal Altars represented
"By Moses Laws, and abrogated since
"By our great Prophet, Savior, Priest, and Prince.
The Guardian Chief, whom they Centurion styled,
Began to quail, and to become more mild,
When he had seen those strange and fearful signs
From Heaven sent for Pilates fierce Assigns
To warn Mankind of Judgments Doom to come:
That God for wrong was neither deaf, nor dumb
He (to conclude) did make this Protestation,
That Jesus was most Just, and Gods own Son.
View here ye Mortals, the effects of Blood,
Of Crying sin, wherewith the Jewish Brood,
And the Old Roman state imbrued their hands.
O let their Deeds amaze our Christian Lands
With horror, dread, and true relenting Fears
Mixed with the Hearts Compunction and sad tears,
To see the Son of God slain for our sakes,
For our defaults Felonious, as Mistakes;
A^ive his hands and feet, transfixed were
With Iron Nails; And after death his side
So gored through with a Soldiers spear beside,
That many there dismayed in sight and Breast
Most earnestly behold him, whom they pierst.
(Which doleful sight likewise thrice happy we,
Could it in our deep Breast reposed be)
But what ensued to them, that were the cause
Of this sad Feast, you heard in Frydayes Clause.
As for the Judge, false Pilate, Romes Records
Authenticke show, that by the Senate-Lords,
And the Imperial doom, a Banished wretch,
(Because his deeds beyond the Laws did stretch)
He went forth in despair, and slew himself.
And for Romes state, then Proud for worldly pelf
Triumphant, Great, and Potent over Nations,
She never found one year without vexations.
Her Consuls, Knights, and Legionary Bands,
Her Tribunes, and her Pretours had their hands
So full of Treasons, Treacheries, and Blood,
That seldom since but she Confused stood.
Yea, and her Caesar's, like to Cedars fell,
Whilst Christian shrubbes, mauger the plots of hell
Gayn'd Rooting firm through both the Hemispheres,
Spreading our Saviors Fame with filial fears.
The Parthians, and Arabians robbed her East,
The Goths and Vandals spoiled her in the West:
"And her huge Scepter to the Thracian strait
"Transferred, she staid behind for Babels Bait,
"Or tempting Bath unto the Man of sin
"For Sale of Souls to plunge the Faithless in,
Such Plagues Rome felt, and shall feel yet far more,
If she holds on Christ through his Limbs to gore.
So suffered Christ for our Infirmities,
Whilst his divinest part to Paradise
Rapt up with Joy, expatiated free
From Satan's spite, where tasting of the Tree
Of Life, to his Elect perpetual Life
He gaind instead of those dark Passions rife,
Which Adams sin with deaths Calamity
Had heapt on him and his Posterity.
Such comforts there, of Immortality,
Christ of his own, above capacity
Of our weak knowledge did no doubt possess,
As he deserved. And yet our Schoolmen press
So far to know of his departure hence
In those two days, before he did commence
The Resurrection of his Bodies hew,
That some have broacht what Curious Wits did brew
By Satan's fraud. And thence did schisms ensue,
To yoke, and Christ to Crucify anew.
What Croaking noise in our decrepit years,
Have lately been stirred up by Mauzzims Peers,
Like Hellish Frogs, for Purgatories seat?
The Quintessence of Superstitions heat
Extracted from the Dregs of Gods just wrath,
Because they did forsake the beaten Path?
And worshipped a God not known before,
Which Christ his Primer Church did never adore?
These Lees made Friars bray, like Balaams Ass,
Made Schoolmen prate, and both like Chemists rash,
New Bodies Forms by crotchets to create,
By Sophistry strange terms to procreate.
Such Gibbrish stuff, and Metals blind Projection
Bewitched Grave Clerks, and caused true Faiths defection;
Whilst their Crazed Brains commixt Divinity
With dunghill heaps of men's Philosophy:
(As Curious Chinois hatch their Ducklings rathe,
Like Chemists Temper of Saint Mary's Bathe)
With Apish Art the Spirit to disguise
And more then God was pleased with, to seem wise;
"Bare Accidents by Whymsyes of the Brain
"To Substances turned of Promethean strain,
"With Moone-sicke sense, and Carnal Apetite,
"Like Capernaites, eating their God outright.
Out of such Eggs many a Cockatrice
Hatched to uphold the Old man's Sacrifice.
Were fostred since the Time of Hildebrand,
The Western Churches scourge, Plague and Firebrand.
Out of such Nests came words of Giants growth,
Huge Mungrels fit for Garagantuaes mouth
Baals sophistry, and Chymickes Transmutation
Begot and coined Transubstantiacion.
Then, Vulcans built Souls Purgatories Forge,
And by those Flames phantasticke lies did forge.
For near about that time did Alchymy
Begin to reign with Schoole-Theology,
When Satan was let loose from his Restraint
To play upon the Conscience of a Saint.
Woe to the Time that our W^st Church forsook
The New-Mans way, which Berengarius took,
And dared Christ Body so to understand
Which till Doomes day does sit on Gods Right hand
Since his Ascent, and there in Heaven stays,
Till Saints at rest, his Foes suppressed he lays.
Thence Purgatory sprung, Romes forged Bull,
Of Satan's plot to fill their Bellies full
Like Bells false Priests, by making men believe
They could Redeem, or Purge poor Souls that grieve
In that Third place for their Offenses past,
Which Pardons bought with money might lay wast,
And frustrate, if Romes Indulgence assure,
When she her self of Sickness cannot cure
By Miracle or Charm; nor stop one hour
Of Deaths Arrest by her Transcendent power:
Much less can she, frail Mortal wight, abate
Another pain, when Physic comes too late.
Some Fathers dreamed at doomesday, not before,
Souls should be purged with flames, or less or more.
But in this Life, where time is limited,
Souls must be purged, or they are forfeited:
" Souls may be purged with Sighs, Fasts, and Contrition;
"By Faith with works, which some hold in derision
" Souls may be purged, and that with Sacred fire,
"If them Gods Grace with Faith and Love inspire.
It Is not enough to have a Christians Name,
Except we be Baptized with Christ his Flame.
The Jews did vaunt of Abraham for their Father,
Where they should joy of Abraham's Faith the rather.
It Is not enough to be Baptized alone,
For so were Jews in Jordans Flood by John;
Nor yet sufficient to Communicate;
So Judas did, yet Excommunicate.
The gentle Spark, that stirs the Heart and Brain,
Must pray Gods Spirit in those Seats to reign,
For whose Content, as he was Catechized,
So with Loves Flame he would be Re-baptiz'd;
Which done, he harmless grows, an Infant twice
In worldly Craft, and in Christ only wise;
Though tempting fiends with carnal baits he fears
Yet, Serpent-wise, a newer Coat he wears,
A Coat quite void of Seames, or Factious Schisms,
Which with Gods Word he wears for Exorcismes.
Souls Comforter then to Gods Son does marry
The Understanding, Conscience, Memory,
Those Threefold parts of this adopted Soul
Whose Name with Saints New Man he does enroule,
And signs with Abbaes Seal. The Man vows Love,
And this rare vow the Trinity approve,
Thence-forward giving him the Two fold Flame
Of Christ his Cross, and Zeal, with Christian Name
To purge his Outward Man of Earthly dross,
Which may be styled our Purgatories Gloss.
Long since God earned the New man for his Son,
"And gave through Christ him Free Will thereupon,
"Which for his Faiths support can never fail him
"But in the proof and combat shall avail him;
"The Son, by whose dear Blood he is Justified,
"Loves him, because his Will is purified:
"He loves, and makes his first Election firm
"By sending One his Conscience to confirm.
"Because he chose his Pattern and his Cross
"When as he might false joys and wealth ingrosse
"According to the Freedom of his Will,
"Which Grace restored, and Faith had Schooled from ill:
"He carkes for him, and sues for his Persev'rance,
"He hears his griefs, and warrants his delivrance.
" The Holy Ghost, as Man's Love ebbes and flows,
"His sweet gifts more or less into him blows;
"And chiefly him he graceth, who is mild,
"Free-hearted, Just, and not with wiles defild:
"One that adores not creatures, nor yet swells
" With Merits puff: In such a one he dwells,
"In such a mind He breathes Truths gentle gales,
"Which scorns old charms, vain legends, dreams and tales.
Thus Sanctified, with Christ incorporate,
A Bastard slip becomes Legitimate,
(...) with Christ, partaking of that Feast
Of Unity, which brings eternal Rest.
Thus is a Man borne of Immortal seed,
A Saint new-made, a Priest, a Prince indeed,
Nay, a true King commanding Lordly passions,
Which Monarchs have enthralled in fearful fashions.
Thus Saints are Crowned and thus is tendered grace
If men do not their Charters Seals deface.
But not, before the Old man be suppressed,
Shall any mortal wight be this way blessed.
O Grace more rich then Chinaes glittring Treasure,
O Love more sweet then Mahomets faign'd pleasure
Elected tby he Father without merit
At the Sons suite, and sealed by their Spirit.
This Grace, suite, and Seal of Gods Majesty
The persons working in the unity
For dust and ashes, sinful Man's Salvation,
And with New flames his Spirits inspiration
Do wonder-rap my Soul with Ecstasies,
In gazing on their Lights supremacies
With glaun^es more beseeming Prophets visions
Then those, which Arrians blurred with blind misprisions:
That to speak much of their Transcendencie,
Would me confound, half put in Jealousy,
Lest I offend my God, or go awry
With narrow bounds to stint this Mystery,
Like Lucifer, who for opposing Christ
Was thrown to Hell, to father Antichrist.
Thence with his Mates to tempt and poison such
As dare to scan Gods Secrets over much.
^ith our weak Brains can hardly apprehend
Those Axioms, which to Quadrate circles tend:
How dare we Clouded with infirmity
Rake for more Light of Heavens Trinity?
Whose knowledge long lay hid from sinful Men
For our first Parents fall, till Christ's time, when
It pleased God, three persons to reveal
By Him, which he did formerly conceal.
From Carnal wits? as from Crowned Popes he did
The Gospels use, and which as yet lies hid
From their crownd-shaven Crew, and Babels Rabble
Who darkling grope for Christ's Communion Table;
As they do likewise for that Orb of Rest,
Which for good Souls departed God has blessed.
Yet our New man sees by his rays reflection,
As through a glass, enough of Gods perfection,
And room enough without such purging flames
For Saints to sing Allelujahs Psalms
To satisfy our Faith; whilst by high mounting
Some meet with Aerie foes their strength surmounting.
Nor must we scale the Sunbeams with those Eagles
Whom glory, pride, or curious Art inveagles
To know Gods will, concealed from humane breast
Or to eat more than gluttons can digest.
This sure I know by Holy Inspirations,
"God breathes in humblest minds most Revelations;
"For when our Hearts with lofty thoughts arise,
" Fiends scrue themselves into our fantasies.
"Yea, they will tempt the most Regenerate
"And Holiest Men, as the most reprobate.
Some under Form of Art they slily Charm
With hired plots to work their Neighbors harm
That by their sowing daily Tares of strife,
The Father, Son, the Husband and the wife,
Friends, kindred, Town, and Country Folks may vary,
So as with Christ their Souls can hardly marry.
"Such sleights use Hellish Fiends, though few suspect
"Their shining Baytes, yet surely Gods Elect
"Know, that all make-bates have just cause to tremble
"As well as they, who being at Mass dissemble.
"These Members help to make up Antichrist:
"For without Parts how can the head subsist?
But chiefly Hell claims those men, who believe
They may for Gain coin doubts our Church to grieve,
To yoke weak Souls, and Faith to falsify,
Which through Christ's death alone does Justify,
Without Romes purging flames, or Humane deeds,
Trentals, Masses, or ringing more then needs,
To fool weak minds, which knew not Paradise
Was promised by Christ, where in a trice
His Spirit did arrive with the Good Thief,
And there for ought we know, might find relief
With Abram, Moses, Daniel, and the rest
Of Saints, until his Body rose releast
From Joseph's Tomb, wherein it lay interred,
As Jonas staid within the Whale as buried,
"Or, to speak plain, his Spirit without s^int
"United with his Sire in Triumph went.
As for the certain place of Paradise,
Let this our curious Intellect suffice,
That Gods high Orb has many glorious Mansions
Unlimited by Local spans dimensions;
Like as to us on Earthly Many Lands
Beyond New-Guiny, which none understands
As yet; If sundry Stars our world exceed
In compass, why do some their Fancies feed
With hopes of Limboes Rest, Elisian Groves,
Or the like Place, which none but Rome approves?
But leaving these for wits Fantastic flim-flams
More fit for Apes or Owls then Newborn Lambs,
God give me Grace the Scriptures sense to follow,
The solid Truth, without Abysses hollow,
Not daring to maintain Hels Paradox
With the old Serpent, and the Wily Fox:
That after death Christ suffered more unres^,
Since he himself said: Consummatum est.
The manner how Christ's Soul went down to hell
Before his Body rose, I dare not tell,
Nor search that depth. Yet who can safe deny,
But that his Souls Triumphant Majesty
Did there descend, or from some Higher place
By virtue of his Godhead, hell deface?
(Which whether part in sulphurd cavernes glowes,
Or at the Poles part Frozen hard, who knows?)
Christ did descend, Hels fury to assuage,
For, where his Spirit is not, fiends do rage.
So undiscerned by sense some fiends may dwell
Within the Air, as in the utmost Hell.
It Is probable a Battle might be fought
By fiends, although unknown to mortal thought
In that dark time, when Christ gave up the Ghost;
Which battle soon they through his Godhead lost
Whilst that in Spirit quickened up he went,
And preached to them in Errors prison pent;
For by his Death Christ spoiled them in a trice
Of their chief sway and Principalities;
(When in Men's hearts the Gospels buds did bloom
And at the noise Hels Oracles fell dumb.)
This moved Saint Paul to publish for Christ's glory,
Death, where is thy sting? And Hell, thy victory?
Yet my Rule is, where Holy writ, for Guide
I find obscure; when gravelled I abide,
Another Theme I take, another Lamp
I light anew, and quite forsake the dampe
Of Sulphur'd Meteours, and erroneous spells,
Which smoakt out first from blind Monasticke cells
For of Deep Gulfes a holy Ignorance
I far prefer before a curious Trance.
I now return back to my Saviors Grave,
Where yesterday I left, a Virgin-Cave
Afforded by the Arimatheans care,
Which ever since did to the Church declare
This Mystery, that as a Virgins Womb
Became his Birth, so dead a Virgin-Tombe.
When Joseph had the Body there transferred,
He decently forthwith the same enterr'd,
(...) Nichodemus aided in the Night,
To do their Master this last pious Right,
Without much pomp, or Prides solemnities,
Or Ceremonies used at Exequies,
By carnal Friends, who oftentimes consume
In Glozing shows, for Ostentations fume,
More substance to set out a Funeral,
Then would well serve to build an Hospital.
^o show the Fruits of Love at Obsequies
(...) not amiss, but not Hels Sacrifice;
^o pacify Dis or Persephone,
(...) Masses Orphean Harp, or Orgian Plea.
This Baal and Bacchus did, the One for Gain,
The other his mad Revels to maintain.
This Dives does, whilst at his Lordly Gate,
Poor Lazarus with Christ incorporate
Begges needful Alms for his dear Passions sake,
Yet cannot have them, though his Head does ache.
This Dives did, while the Prince Palatine
With Britains royal seed forced from the Rhine,
Their proper Right, as from Bohemian Prague,
Stood to our shame confined to the Hague.
This Dives did, when thousands did lament
In London streets with Fevers pestilent.
What Obeliskes with tears of Crocodiles?
What Mourning weeds with cries maskt under wiles
Do our false Christians sumptuously prepare,
Perhaps for cursed bones, with care on care?
Did Dives to his Tomb with pomp convayd
Pass Lazarus in Abrams Bosom laid?
Leave off for shame such Heathnish Sacrifice,
And for your Dead build rooms of richer price,
Nay, for your selves with lasting Royal State,
Whereby you may pass for Regenerate.
More Hives for Bees with necessary stuff
Here or abroad, to shun vain glories puff,
Ye may erect with lesser cost and charge,
Your duties in some measure to discharge,
"Redeeming Plagues, I mean the Temporal,
"Which on frail men for carnal pleasures fall.
That way will help to expiate, and to cover
Those sins, for that great vengeance which hangs over
Your heads unmarkt; Lo, how Virginea vents
Forth heavy groans, and newfound Land laments.
See how New England under noble Gorge
Against the Dragon craves a new S. George;
All three look for their Infant Age no more
Out of their Mothers rank superf^uous store
Then what she riots. There, brave Monuments,
May be set up to Christian men's contents
Far fitter, then in needless shows at home.
And these will pass old Peter's pence to Rome.
Or if you be home-tide, and wealth betide,
Christ's Members feed, but do it without Pride.
Above all things I wish you to forbear
From Burying Coarses in Gods Temple, where
His Word is Preached; O do not taint the Air
With G^lgothaes, which can not but impair
Your tender healthes by damps and exhalations
From sulphurs sweat, Earths put id oppilations.
Our Saviors deeds should for a pattern stand,
Who from the Temple, with a Whip or Wand
Drove Chapmen out, and such, who over bold
With in that sacred place wares daily sold.
My Fathers House (said he) appointed was
For Prayer, not a Money-changing place.
Why may not in the Fields a heap of stones
Serve as the Church for Graves to rotten Bones,
Resembling that, which near to Mamre sold
Dead Abrams Wife, for Sepulture did hold?
Or the Churchyard crossed by Masse-Mongers old
From G^blins haunt their Carcasses might hold?
For shall the words of that Mahumetan
Spoke at his death confound a Christian man?
To Saladine one winding Sheet is left,
Of all his state by cruel death berest.
Who then will doat on Shrines and Mauzzim^ Wares?
Give me the Quick; let Satan take his Tares,
With them in Relics who Religion place,
Besainting Bones within a Silver Case.
Let not the Church, nor glozing Epitaph
Grace my poor Corpse. From Crows the Cynicks s^^ffe
May guard me for a need. Were Martyrs bones
Quite burnt in Flames? And shall rich Marble stones
Enclose my Coarse? Far be it from my thought,
Who higher place crave then for Money bought.
That station I expect through Christ his Cross,
Which worldly minds prize less then chafe or dross.
Another kind of Body I expect,
Which like to his my Savior will erect.
This moved me my Children three to bury
In the Churchyard, whilst I saw most men hurry
Proud Carcasses into the Church, polluting
Gods house, and zeal with superstition suting
This moved me New Cambrioll to Baptize
In New found land, whilst others Idolize
Their native smoke with sloth and griping Cares,
Caught with false Pleasures baytes in Satan's snares.
This moves good wits, whilst here they make abode,
To send so often ^oud sounding B^okes abroad,
To cure or curb litigious Brains that Rave,
And by such Fruits, to build them selves a Grave,
A quickening Grave, that when their Sinews rot
The Saints for them might praise the New man's
As I do for Great Britains shining Lights,
Or them, whom Andrews Posthume now invites Lot
Andrews, that shames Beauford and Gardener,
And yet all Three were styled Winchester:
For how shall we discern another Man,
Then with bright Truth his living works to Scan?
Whether a Lamb or Wolf he led his Life?
In Peace with Christ or with Hell Fiends in strife?
What more then Swan like Songs keep Men alive?
Or can on Earth their Noble deeds revive?
Bear witness then, my twofold Epitaph,
Whilst Windy wits lie swill'd, like Swine with draffe
This Glass renewes brave Roberts Memory
Of Essex Earl, the Flower of Chevalry:
Who^ Flanders, Lisbon, Cales, Spaines Isles, nor France,
Nor Irish Force could daunt with Shot or Lance,
Home-Ostracisme this Famous man did foil,
Whom Mars durst not affront in Foreign Soil.
"But his sweet Soul, because he Sacri^^c^d,
" Christ Cleared from Guilt, and Saints him Canonized.
Or if the Seas and Land contend for Room,
The Seas will Ebb, and show us Desmonds Tomb.
"Scotland his Birth, England his Tilting Fame,
"Venice claimed his venture, Ireland his Name.
"Whilst these Four strove to build a Monument*
"For Desmonds Corpse, the Seas crossed their intent.
"Because the Seas for Worthyes might appear
"To match the Land, they took this Noble Peer.
Thus Two by Sea and Land have Lawrelles got,
While worthless Lords, like Falling Fire-drakes rot.
Thus Virtue some Crowns with a Living Tomb
Which more does them then Coronets become,
And longer will then Mausolaeans last,
When Time shall Pomp, and nine days Wonders blast.
"Hence I infer, that God hid Moses Tomb
"Lest men might Saint his Bones in time to come.
"Hence I resolve: from Graves old Folks began
"To make an Idol of a Mortal man.
Hence I conclude, to hang a Hearse with Scutcheons,
Serves for a Bait to catch our Heyrs, like Gudgeons:
For without worth Guilt honors proves but vain,
And Styles the scumme of a Fantastic Brain.
"Without the New man's Robes none are indeed
"True Noble Men, but borne of Mungrell seed.
Let men therefore besides the Cynicks Staff
Upon my Grave Engrave this Epitaph:
Taint not the Church with Skulles; O ye that mourn;
Nor with Wormes-meat; the Yard will serve my turn
Rob not the quick, a dead man to adorn,
But bury me as poor, as I was borne.
Only a Shroud for decency I crave,
Such as my Savior wrapped in Joseph's Grave.
I hated Pomp, and Drunken Sacrifice
When I breathed Air, much more in Paradise.
" Man here is but a Steward of his Pelf,
"For others bound, as well as for himself,
"To cark and care according to the Talent,
"Which so to him was on Condition lent;
"For which misspent he must one day account
"Be he a Knight, a Baron, or a Count.
"Look how Christ did, the second Adam, live,
"So must we sure, if we intend to thrive
"In Piety; we must esteem the Cross,
"Though sad, true wealth; and pamp'ring ease souls loss.
"Therefore when Honor, Gain, or worldly Pleasure
"Do thee befall, suspect the Heavens displeasure,
"Unless thou out of hand to some good use
"Convert them without Riot or Abuse,
"Look where so e're thy worldly Treasure is,
"There lies thy Bane, thy hindrance into Bliss.
" No man two Masters serves with conscience clean,
" God, and the World, but he becomes unclean
"And quickly soild with sense-alluring Toys,
"Which him bereaves of true Immortal Joys.
"For by superfluous Cares and Worldly Wealth
"The way is quite blockt up from Saving wealth.
The serious thought of which Impediments
Made wisest Men amidst their sweet Contents,
(As sometime did the Samian Tyrant fling,
To season Joys, into the Sea a Ring)
To mix some Worme-wood Cares and Objects sad,
To live, like Angels, here in Sackcloth Clad,
To fly to Celles from Wars and worldly wrath,
Like Austriaes Charles, and Turkish Amurath:
To choose a dying Life, retired from Ease
Rather like Monks, then like nice Damocles,
(Or like some Kings maligned Favorite,
That dreams not of a Fall, till Envy smite,)
To live with Lushious Cheer, and pleasing plenty;
Foreseeing that at last scarce one of twenty,
Which gives himself to Carnal Liberty,
Escapes unstung with some Calamity,
If not living, yet surely at Deaths Gasp
The Libertine shall feel the Hellish Aspe
Poison his Soul unseene with Mortal sense,
Mauger his Heirs vain Obits and expense.
(For after death all Sacrifice is vain,
Nor can Rewards redeem the Soul from Pain)
The which empoisoned thus, barred of Gods sight,
Of the least glimpse of comfortable Light
With the rich Glutton in the lowest Hell
Till Doomesday roves among the Furies fell;
And then the Body in more hideous state
Joined with his Spirit, he cries out too late
For Mercy, when the second Death is come,
Which by the first he might have smitten dumb,
And Conquered too, if like our Savior, He
Had living di'd, or living sought to be
Reborne, and formed after his Image true
With Faith and zeal (contending to eschew
His Spirits Foes, the Letts unto the Cross)
Which every Christian Soul ought to ingrosse,
As Mysticke Type, and Seal of Man's Adoption,
His Ransom lent from Lordly Sins Irruption.
"Unhappy is that Wight, that never felt
"The Crosses weight, whose Heart did never melt
"At others smart, but living all at Randon
" Gods Justice to dull ease did him abandon:
"Since it is hard to have smooth comforts twice,
"Both in this World and in the Heavens likewise.
"Yea, most unhappy He, who for his sin
"Was never Chastned, but has suffered been,
(As Epicure, not Checked by Sickness, Grief,
(As Epicures till checked by Sickness, Grief,
By Shipwreck, Fame, Friends loss, want of Relief)
By our Creator to consume amiss
His useful Talent, and to swarve from Bliss,
Without control, or maisterly reproof,
As if God slept; or slighted man's behoof.
So on the other side I count him Blessed,
Who in this World felt Sorrow and unrest,
"For we never feel the comforts of Gods Spirit,
"Till our Flesh quails, or outward troubles stir it.
"Frail Flesh and Blood may not in Heaven reside,
"Till Christ his flames the same have purified.
The Crosses sight the Carnal mind confounds,
But it looks bright, and with perfumes abounds
Within Gods sight, who thereby makes room
For his rare gifts to lodge in, with the broom
Of Discipline sweeping foul Lusts away
And the Worlds love, which bring into decay
The Heavenly Seed, choakt up with Pomp and cares,
Like Earthly Grain with Cockle, Thorns, and Tares.
What makes a Surgeon use Corroding Waters
For Festred Soars? but that they are Abaters
Of the proud Flesh? why do Physicians give
Their Bitter Pills unto the Sick that grieve
Of causes hid? but that the bodies sink
Cannot be Purged of Filth and Humors stink,
"By sweet Receipts? no more should Gods E^ect
"The Joys of New Jerusalem expect
"Without first passing through the Blood red Seas
"Of Sorrows deep, to gain perpetual ease,
"I mean not Grief for loss of worldly wealth,
"Or Carnal Friends, but loss of Saving health;
" Grief for the words eclipse, Grief for our sin,
" Grief for the Snares, which Saints are toyled in.
Who to this dying Doctrine will incline
His Heart, and to Austerity confine
His Life, he shall be crowned for his durance
With Heavens Bliss, whereof Christ gives assurance
With these true Golden Rules sealed in the Heart:
None gains the Godheads love without some Smart.
Who Christ his marks more here of Torture bears,
In Heaven be the brighter Garland wears.
A Hymn explaining the cause of our Saviors Sufferings on the Cross,
together with the effects of his Burial.
WE were the Cause, and none but we,
Why Christ was naild unto the Tree,
We were the Cause worse then the Scribes,
Nay, worse then Judas with his Bribes
Of Christ his death, and Guiltless Blood;
We tore his Flesh, like Vipers Brood;
We drunk his Blood, like Cannibals,
Who men Redeemed, when they were Thralles.
The Jews misused Him but one day,
Whereas we daily him betray,
And Crucify the Lord again,
Saints in his Limbs, for spite or Gain;
We rave far worse then did the Jews:
Our Carnal Lusts, and Ghostly stews,
Our Pride, Deceites, and Avarice,
Our Riots, Feasts, and Fopperies,
Our Healthes, Debates, and loss of Time,
Show why Christ up the Cross did climb.
Let us then weigh with Penitence
Sins fiery sting, the Crosses sense,
Let us bewail our wretchedness,
Which brought our Savior to distress,
And think upon these Rules with Fear:
"That Trees, which are both dry and sear,
"Shall sure be felled, since blooming Wood
"Has been destroyed as with a Flood;
"And that all Souls shall suffer loss,
"Unless they muse upon the Cross,
"And thereby hope for inward Peace,
" The Spirits gifts, and sins release,
"By virtue of that Costly Price,
"Which hung thereon for Sacrifice.
For which high Deed while we have breath,
We never will forget his Death,
But in our Minds we will infixe
His Merits, Love, and Crucifixe.
"His Living Rock can hide our Soars,
"As Joseph's Vault entombed his Coarse:
"We may to Bliss rise up from Bale,
"As Jonas did from out the Whale,
"If on his Wounds we fix our Souls,
"Like Doves that pitch on Rocky Holes.
The Seventh Days EXERCISE.
The Argument.
Old things made New: now is Jews Sabbath Day
Changed to the Lords, to mind our Saviors sway,
Who Rose, stayed here six Weeks, then went his way
To Heaven, and Men Inspired on Whit-sunday.
OUr two Days storm is cleared: come, let us sing,
And Tribute pay to our Triumphant King
Who trampling on our Foes has led the way
To Resurrections Port on the third Day
After his Death, which first of their Weeks Date
^ld Hebrews Calendar did Calculate.
O Blessed Day! most blessed in the Exchange!
Whilst we do not from zeal like worldlings range!
"But all with joy for this our Worlds Creation,
"And Christ his Rising, minding our vocation,
"As likewise for the Holy Ghosts descent
"On Whit-sunday, ten days from Christ's Ascent,
"We Holy keep our Lords, this Seventh day,
And in his Praise our thankful Hymns display,
Who did, because our sins the Old withstood,
Transfer a newer Feast cleared by his Blood.
Though Christ was Lord, and Sabbaths prime perfection,
The manheads Crown, yet he to make defection,
Of that Days Rest did never Condescend,
But left it us until Times final End.
He left it us to mind the Eternal Day;
When Time with baldnes never shall decay;
That Feast of Feasts, with none can parallel,
For it above all Triumphs bears the Bell,
The Harmony whereof no Tongue can tell,
And more does Our then Our the Six excel.
The which whilst we look for, let us foregoe
Our Deeds profane, and Pious duties do
On this High day. Let us congratulate
With Jubilees our Resurrections state,
And our through Christ redinte-gratious Peace
With God the Father in his Flocks increase.
Let us cheer up our Souls with Joyful Psalmes'
And show our Love by Prayers, Vows, and Alms.
Let all the Earth, let Christians all rejoice,
And hear Gods word, the Lord of Sabaoths voice,
Not in a Language strange, or Noise unknown,
But in that Tongue which men do term their own.
Let them with understanding sound his Fame,
And Glorify Jehovahs awful Name,
With Voices Music, sound, and Symphony,
With David's zeal, and Asaphs Harmony.
Unanimous let us proclaim his Glory,
Not dreaming wise, but in a real story,
To be admired of all the Sons of Men,
And Registered with adamantine Pen:
All Glory be to thee, as heretofore,
In Persons three, one God for evermore,
"Who, least that Cares might dull our Inward sight,
"Have Weekly left us one of brighter Light,
"As Well to match the Hebrews, as to raise
" New zeal on it for our Redeemers Praise.
Because Christ's Faith stood firm, not shakt at all,
His Manhead calling God, God heard his Call.
Because his Manhead spurned Hells Crown of strife,
Preferring here on Earth an Humble Life,
And constantly endured the dreadful shock
Of Perils, like a Shepherd for his Flock,
And to his Father dear did pray alone
For help; he at the last did hear his Moan:
When he his Blood had on the Altar shed,
Soon as he said: All is now finished,
His sacred Soul straight way to Paradise
Leaving the Cross and his Dead Body ^^yes.
Whence in Earths womb after two Nights repose,
Brave Gyant-like refresht with wine he Rose,
His Body Rose from Grave, from the Whales Belly,
Raised Jon^s-like to live Triumphantly;
For how could he, whom God ordained to save
Old Adams Seed, be captived in the Grave?
Thou art my Son, Men's Light, whom I begot,
Said his just Father, and here take thy lot
In choicest Soil. The H^ath^n I give to thee
For Heritage, and all the world in Fee,
To bruize or break, for thy own precious merits*
Thou by thy blood have tamed the wily Spirits,
O murdered Lamb* Henceforth on my Right hand
Sit in thy Humane shape, none shall withstand
Thy Powerful will in Heaven, Earth, or Hell,
For thou shall judge all Men and Furyes fell.
My sentence just thou have appeased alone,
For which mysterious deed we both are One.
Because the Wine Press thou alone have trod,
Thy Flock shall ever dwell with me their God.
Because for Sin thou have endured wrong
Thou shall divide the lest spoil with the strong.
And for thy love to Man bought with thy Blood,
I Cancel quite against Old Adams Brood,
Their Bodies Death excepted, my Decree
Of vengeance due, if they believe in thee,
Without adhering to Idolatry,
To their own works, and humane Foppery.
"Be thou their Patron, and sole Advocate,
"(Who trust to other Courtiers, I do hate)
"Sue thou for them in thy Humanity
"Before our Throne of endless Majesty;
"And for thy sake, I will Elect them sure,
"For unto thee all Glory I assure,
"Till The Elect come in, and thy Foes in Thrall,
"That then our God head may be all in all.
To this effect our Heavenly Father spoke,
When his dear Son his Body Raised did take
From Joseph's Tomb; when by the dawning day
Those Women came there, where his Body lay
Entombed, with mind to sacrifice their woes
For Him, whom they saw Martyred by his Foes.
To solemnize his sacred Funeral
Out of true Zeal and hearty love withal,
Thither they came, not Superstitiously,
Nor yet for Fashion sake, but really
With an intent on his Dead Corpse to power
Most precious Oils, but by the Heavenly Pow're
They were debarred. For as they did adventer
To show their Love, and in the Vault would enter,
An Angel all in white of lightning hew
Them interrupted with these Tidings true:
What would ye now, poor Souls, embalme his Coarse,
Whom late your Nation wronged without remorse?
Why seek ye here the Quick among the Dead?
"Gods living Son within an Earthly bed?
"God would not let his Son Corruption see,
Nor could his Body long enclosed be
Within this Rock. The third day now is come;
Christ Risen is from Tomb, as from earths womb.
Then go your ways, and his Disciples tell,
What News ye hear, what Lot to him befell.
The women shudder'd and distract almost
With the strange sight, as if some wondrous Ghost
Had them encountered, ran away from thence
(Such is the nature of weak mortal sense,
When they meet Objects of Immortal Frame,
Reason lies hid, as under Ashes Flame)
But Pilates watch with horror sore aghast
Forsook their charge, and fled away more fast
Then did the women at the Angels Noise,
For they (good Souls) were soon repleat with Joys;
And when their Wits they recollected had,
^hrists true Disciples they acquainted made
With these glad Tidings, who them held too good
To be so true, until in zealous mood
Christ did himself expostulate the cause
With two of them, who traveled to Emaus
The self same day, when he did Rise from Death:
O simple Souls void of Caelestiall breath,
Ought not (quoth he) Messiah to be slain
By sinners hands? and all these wrongs sustain?
Do not the Prophets all agree in one,
Which men refused should be the Corner stone?
That evermore Melchisedech's high Priest
By David sung should rule? that Jesus Christ
Messiah should be first smote with the Rod
Due for your sins, by your Dread-loving God?
Though, as Gods Son, he might have chose to feel
The Taunts and Nippes of men more hard then steel,
Yet he of mere good will, not by constraint,
Enthralled himself to sinners false complaint.
"He opened not his mouth, nor them withstood,
" But, as a Lamb before the shearer stood
Dumb, Patient, Meek, whilst for your Treacheries
He wounded was. And these perplexities
With Tortures, Stripes, and scorns he underwent
To ransom Adams seed from Punishment.
But now ye are by his Afflictions heal^d,
And through his Cross shall shortly be enseal'd
"A Gospel New, a Testament of Grace;
An easy yoke with covenants to raze
The former Curse. If ye believe that Christ
Is Gods own Son, your Savior, Prince, and Priest:
If, like to him, ye humbly live together,
As he rose up, so shall each faithful Brother.
These said, and more then my weak thoughts record
By giving thanks, and breaking Bread, the Lord
They knew, and then he vanished from their sight;
He vanished from them Twain, and in the Night
He did appear to his Apostles, where
For zeales devotion they assembled were,
And catechized them for Faith and Love,
With other points which might their Souls improve.
Nor can I overship my ready Pen
From laying down his love to Magdalen:
Whilst her confused thoughts twixt doubt and Fear
Roved what became of his Dead Corpse elsewhere;
He kindly called her by her proper name,
Showed her his person, and confirmed the same
By Message, which unto his friends he bid
Her to declare. Thus sundry times he did
Appear to them, whom formerly he knew
To be The Elect, and his Disciples true,
That they might be Eyewitnesses, and blaze
To all the world this wonder of amaze.
"And that true Flesh his Body was become,
"He eat with them Bread, Fish, and Honey-combe.
"To show himself a Perfect Man indeed,
"And not a Ghost, Christ hungered, and did feed;
" Immortal he with Mortals, as a Guest,
"Took what was next at hand, not curious dressed,
"To let men know what Nature might suffice,
"And that with Men He man did sympathize.
Among the rest when Thomas Didymus
Was absent first, and all unanimous,
Excepting him, believed what they saw:
Although the News might well his senses draw
To credit them, yet he stood off, and said,
Unless I see, I am not well appayd;
Unless these Eyes his Person shall behold,
How can these News for current true be told?
Unless my self shall feel his nailed hands
"And side late pierst by the fell soldiers Bands,
"At sight of which deep Wound by Roman Spear
"The lookers on appalled were with fear,
I will not you believe. Therefore the Lord
His wavering Creed to settle, and record
To future times his love, a sev'night after
His first appearance, he again did enter
Into the Room, where Thomas with his Mates
Were then shut up, and there Christ animates,
Commanding him to tou^h him, and to ponder
With Faith and understanding rapt with wonder
His misbeliefe, and told him for our Rest,
Who so believes what he had seen is blessed.
When Jesus had conversed forty days
On Earth, half way twixt Sions walls he stays
And Bethany, where his Disciples met
Upon the Summet of Mount Olivet,
The place where he the night before his Passion
Had powered forth bloody sweates, his antepassion,
Which over-peeres Jerusalem, and all
The Country round about with stately fall:
Where likewise some do Critickly conceive,
That all men shall their Final doom receive;
There, He full Powr' to his Disciples gives,
Their sins to loose, that vow to lead new lives:
As also those to Excommunicate,
If they offend, that were Regenerate.
"This Charge to them and Peter Christ prescribes
" Joint, as to judge hereafter Israells Tribes:
"Thus speaking in the Plural: Go your ways,
And Preach; to bind or loose ye have the keys.
Above all rules, on Faith he most insisted
And fruitful Love, both which who so resisted
With wanton spleen, or contumacious wills,
He prophesied Damnation for their Illes:
But saving-health to them, who should confess
Such faithful love, as Peter did express.
As Soon as Christ his documents had ended,
Some did presume, who on him there attended,
To ask him, whether then he would restore
To Israel the Kingdom as before?
(Forgetful so of Jesus Crucifixt
Were they, and to a Carnal Monarch fixed)
Whereto Christ answered: It concerns not you
To know the times and seasons which ensue.
Such secrecies the Father does reserve
Unto himself. Do you my words observe,
Who am your King, the Head of humane-kind,
As I to you, so to my Flock be kind;
My Gospel Preach, the weak ones Catechize;
See, that my Sheep ye feed, my Lambs Baptize,
Invoking on, as you have learned of me,
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all three;
Which Last shall shortly you Baptize with Fire,
As John with Water, and your Souls inspire,
As Gods Viceroy, or Angel of the Lord,
By Heat of what I taught, the saving word,
Until I come in Person from Above,
See that ye Watch, and one another Love.
Such or like words when Christ had fully ended,
He in a Cloud up to the Heavens ascended,
Where he as God and Man all thoughts beholds
Preferred by the Father, and there holds
As Man for Men, a Mediators place
On Gods right hand, Saints joyful to embrace
As God and Man, Paul's Fury he did fright:
As God and Man, Saint Steven saw his Light.
So did Saint John from Pathmos see his glory,
When he revealed his future Churches story.
By Visions have some others ravished been,
That they from Earth his Power there have seen:
"For had we seen him here with Carnal sight,
"Our Darkness could not comprehend his light.
Whilst his Disciples there with careful Eyes
Watched as he went, two Angels humane-wise
Apparelled white appearing to them said:
Ye Galileans, why are ye dismayed?
Why gaze ye up? This Jesus, who is hence,
To Heaven gone, shall so return from thence.
Seek not therefore his real presence here
On Earth, until as Judge he do appear:
Mean time on Gods right hand a Prince and Priest
He reigns, and does you in your vows assist.
On Whitsunday next after Christ's ascent
He ravished his Disciples with content,
Who then attended at Jerusalem
For the last promise, which he made to them:
That he would send Gods Spirit in his steed,
To rectify and aid them in their need,
And, while the world should last, his Church inform
In some or other place with wondrous Form.
When that high feast of Pentecost was come,
And for that end they meeting in one Room
With one consent: there fell a bustling noise,
Or sudden sound, replete with stirring joys,
As of a mighty Breath, and rushing Wind,
Which filled the House, and wonder-rapt the mind:
For Cloven Tongues appeared to them, like Fire;
And sat on each of them, and did inspire
Their Souls with gifts of the great Holy Ghost:
So that the Standers by of Aliens Coast
Astonished were The Apostles joys to hear,
Men of a different Tongue and Climate there,
Poor Hebrew Fishermen, that never went
Far out of Jewry Land, extatick bent
With them in their own Language to agree,
And in their zeal to God to be so free,
And fluent of their Phrase, that Babels Breach
Seemed reconciled by their harmonious speech
Some thought they were like Bardhs Enthusian rapt,
Or that strong Wine in them such Blabs had clapped;
That men before the third hour of the day
Should rave with Wine, they wondered with dismay:
They were amazed, till Peter made it known,
That for Christ's sake God sent this wonder down,
Not for Mad fits, but for Souls joyful feast,
God sent the Holy Ghost this wondrous Guest.
O Wondrous Guest, that vents forth Abbaes Cry
Within the Heart, the will, and memory!
O wondrous Guest, the Heavens Harbinger,
That scorns not to become the Messenger
Betwixt our Souls and God to bear our Love,
And our weak Faith to strengthen and improve!
That severed Earth from Chaos medley Puddle,
And raised our Orb out of the lumpish Huddle!
And though the Earth were heavy, hung it fair,
With store of stuff in the loose fleeting Air!
This is that Prime and ever quickening Mover
Of all the world, Angels and Men's approver;
That spirit, which through all Gods Prophets spoke,
Which taught the sense of Mysticks to unlock;
Which cleared the Wits of simple Fishermen
To preach those News, which Doctors fayl'd to pen:
"Which rul^d in every Age since Christ's Ascent
"The Church, and daily yields Soule-nourishment:
"Which at our feast Christ's Body does convay
"Into our Hearts by his Spiritual way:
"Which sent the gift of Printing now of late,
" Old Babels spelles and mists to dissipate;
"And by the Word to rescue Thralles from death
"As he at first the gift of Tongues did breath:
"Which animates the Saints with courage rare
"In midst of Tortures Tyrants to out dare:
"Which glads the Lowly, and the Penitent,
"And thousands does unite in one Consent
" Of Christian Faith, though sundred much in place,
"Tongues, rites, or form, yet one in sacred race.
O Holy Ghost, how strange is thy proceeding!
Angels and men's capacities exceeding!
No pen can limne thy Raptures most profound,
No humane voice can thy hid Graces sound.
One thing I blunder out; what thou conceal'st
From carnal Clerks, to Children thou reveal'st.
Then let my Soul, O Lord, be like these last,
Whilst others feast on Peacocks, let me fast,
Or taste no other Food, but what conduces
To praise thy Name without profane abuses:
And let all them, who view these humble Lines,
Prove bettered in their thoughts with contrite signs,
If the old man they labor to deface,
And do their best the new man to embrace,
Not like our modern Gulles, who grow Profane,
Lest they be marked with brand of Puritan.
Let us Gods Spirit by these Wonders seek;
These Wonders wrought the first day of the Week,
Our sevenths Light, now styled The Lords day,
Thrice hallowed and sanctified for Ay;
For this rare Bliss to Christian Souls accrewes,
That Christ his rising up their hopes renewes,
To Rise, like him, ingrafted in his stock,
To quench their thirst with him, the living Rock,
To bud a new, as Branches of his Vine,
To feed on Angels food, his word divine.
He led the way to Resurrections bliss,
And us invites to follow him in this
High flight, without diverting toward Earth,
But with due care of the new Spirits Birth,
Our former resurrection in this Life,
To gain the immortal prize through strong belief,
With those true joys, which did but Monarchs know,
They would foregoe their Crowns the same to ow;
A glimpse whereof for undestanding Souls
We read by John revealed in mystic scroules
With those delights, wreathes, and immunities;
Which God allots to Saints in Paradise:
But for the Temper, Place, Degrees, or Site
No Astrolabe, nor Brain of worldly wight
Can apprehend the height, Dimension, Rays,
Unless they fall on false Poetic ways.
Yet Paradise some to the Moon confine,
And there to be another World define
Of moving Groves by Galilees late Glass,
Where Apuleius found his Golden Ass:
Whence likewise came Dame Errors Charmed Lamp
Which kindled Legends of the Elisian Camp,
And Limboes field, which Royal James (to hit
False Dreamers home) conceived for Hauking fit.
Others more Sage in Types describe that Place:
A Starry Soil eng^rt with Crystal Glass,
Or Sea translucent with stones precious ranks,
Pearl, Amber, Beds of Coral on the Banks.
These may, as Tropes, rowze up the drowzy mind,
"But to empale Gods Mansions, were to blind
" The Artizans, and to confound the Sense,
"If curiously they break to Edens fence.
"The azur'd Sphere, whereto my hopes are bound,
"Spiritual stands, above this massy Round:
"Of lively frame, not like our mortals Land,
"Or Temples built by carnal Creatures hand;
"A Commonwealth secured from fiendes alarmes,
"Won by our Saviors blood, and Ghostly Arms,
Which long before he promised to prepare
For them that would through Faith his Foes out-dare.
"There, in the midst of Saints God reared for them
"A Metropole, the New Jerusalem,
"Not of Materialles wrought in Earthly mould,
"But of Celestial stuff more bright then Gold,
"Then Diamonds, which Liquids may deface
"Or Canker-fretting Time the Fabric raze.
The structure might be one with Fixed Stars,
Or like that Lamp, which ^^^ting stints our cares;
An Orb so far transcending Edens site,
As does the Sun the Moon, the Day the Night;
Where He, that made the Sun, more glorious spread
The New man's gifts then Schoolmen ever read:
"A Region of incomparable Light,
" The Globe or Seat whereof no Humane sight,
"Till Glorified, can pry into, nor Art
"By reason of the Luster can impart,
No more then Paul by Christ in spirit brought
Up to that Orb, of it could utter ought;
No more then we dare scan the Trinity,
Or weak Eyes see the Suns resplendencie.
Since puzzled we in Natures secrets be:
What Natures Lord concealed, how can we see?
Nay, why should we presumptuously aspire
To peep into Gods Ark? or steal his Fire?
Old Scribes Prometheus voucht of Grace bereft
For robbing Joves bright Fire (a heinous theft)
Now more then this (least Fancies me deceive)
I blaze not of that Orb what I conceive:
"Mansions of endless Joys, and sweet Repose
"God made for Men and Angels, whom he chose,
"For Men and Angels, who should side with Christ
"Against Hell-fiendes, the Beast, and Antichrist.
But whether in our Zones changed, or refined,
Or Higher Orbs, I leave it undefin'd.
"Let this suffice: no object represents
"There, more then God to Souls departed hence,
"Which honored Christ, nor can divert their Sight
"From fixing on his Beams their whole delight,
Chiefly, at that Eternal Jubilee,
When Saints shall from Hell-squadrons parted be.
"By his great Light through Christ Saints there shall shine
"So bright, that their new shape will turn Divine,
"Compacted of the purest Quintessence,
"Which Air and Flame could work in Humane sense.
The Body, which on Earth so clogged the Soul
Terrestrial, shall no more that Guest control,
But mounted up in Ovall Coach of Fire,
Elias-like, does to the Heavens aspire,
"And, like high Eagles wings, both here and there
"Comports with Christ the Manhead up to bear;
"Of Motion swift, of Strength without compare,
"Like Seraphins all Love, of beauty rare,
"Leagued with the Soul in sympathizing frame,
"Of Qualities aethereall mixed with flame,
"Of glorious mould, not subject unto sin,
"Disease, or grief, as the first man has been;
"Like Cherubins all Light, composed of Light,
Saints then shall reign in a far happier plight
Installed then Chinaes King, or Tibers Priest
With triple Crown, which cannot long subsist,
For these at death leave Corpse and States behind:
As those bear Bodies new, like Christ's refined,
With whom they reap more pleasures and content
Then Tongue can tell, Ears hear, or Fancies vent.
"No Sexes Form shall then preoccupate
"The Sense, since Fate had procreations date
"Worn out, and cancelled Lust in Evaes Race,
"Her Choicest blessed with even blooming Grace.
"Because on Earth they trusted God alone,
"And loved his Saints, he made them with Christ One.
"Both Young and Old, though maimed, burnt, or drowned,
"Shall flourish then alike with Members sound,
Of Body span'd, yet purged of Drossy Mass,
Perhaps, like Christ's (which some would force to Mass)
With Knowledge ripe of Goodness, void of Ill,
From Passions free, and rectified in Will;
"Perhaps at the same Age, when Adam fell,
"Or Christ Rose up triumphant over Hell.
There they shall sing and praise the Lord always;
Not having need at all to sue or Pray.
O how they move with mutual zealous fire
To praise the Lord for sparing in his Ire
Old Jacobs Tribes! for choosing him and them,
While he did Esau and his Brood contemn!
They see themselves culled from the Gentiles throng,
Though they deserved to sing their howling Song:
"For though God did all future things foresee,
"He did till then no Reprobates decree,
"But them reserved with Devils to partake,
"Till Christ judge them to Tophets burning Lake.
They know the state of all the damned Crew,
And thereupon their thankful shoutes renew,
Ascribing Praise with Hymns Angelical
To Alpha and Omega, God in all:
"Of one consent, one will, one yea and nay,
With the like Music, and Harmonious Lay.
Such Bliss on the eternal Sabbath day
Crowns them, when God their Bodies shall array,
Who in the Lamb believed, and did their best
By doing Good to gain his Sabbaths Rest.
As meaner Men made Lords wear Habites new,
So shall our Bodies then be changed anew,
The good invested with perfections rare:
The bad with hideous shapes, and hellish Care.
Then many, now which stalk with Peacocks Plumes,
With various Garbes, with Licks, and Baudes perfumes,
More ugly shall appear then Toades, or Bugges,
Which Children scare from screaming for the Dugges.
"Nor will the Good then pity the Distressed,
"Because Gods love had Natures Foames suppressed.
Embosom'd Couples, which on Earth embrast,
The one shall be received, the other cast:
"Where humble Saints shall surely be preferred,
"And Tenants set above their Lords that erred.
" Our Savior, Enoch, and Elias led
"The way, to show that God the Quick and Dead
"Can raise: that Mortals have regained their Breath,
Yea, from their Graves Saints rose at Christ's his Death.
This Doctrine seems to Carnal Sadduces
^carce true, although they see in Summer Trees
and Corn to sprout with other vegetalles;
though they see yearly many Animalls,
^ Swallows are, Silkwormes, and Butterflies,
^evived when the Sun does hotter rise.
Then, since Those Life by the Suns heat have won,
Why should not Men by Him that made the Sun?
Such Sotts have been, and such (I fear) there are
Too many Faithless ones, that never care
Here in this Life the certain means to gain
Of glorious Shape in time to come again,
(Like skittish Maids, who at the fairy Game
Do Dance, until their Bellies swell with shame.)
Nor how fares Truth, nor what a Christian ailes;
Will they yet learn, until the Fiend prevails,
What shall become of Body or of Soul,
So they may Feast and drink without control.
The Mirrours of the Moon are trimmed a new,
Whose Face the four Weeks Term had dimmed the Hew.
See they not bred of Putrefaction Flies?
And Barnacles from Wood or Pitch to rise?
To hear the Birth of the Arabian Bird
With Golden wings from Ashes Pile they gird.
They see huge Pompions of small seeds renew,
Yet they make doubt that men shall Rise anew.
They see the Salamander in the Flame
Unscorched lives, yet they are void of shame.
Some in our Time quite dead again have lived
By Miracle; and some by drinks revived:
Yea, when the Bird out of the Cage did roame,
The Soul reverted back into her home.
In heavy sleep they feel the Soul to range,
And yet they doubt of the Immortal change.
But thou have sent, O bright Celestial Light,
Into our thoughts a Guest to teach us right.
"O sacred Faith, our Charter, Aarons Rod,
"Great wonder-worker betwixt Souls and God,
The chiefest Bar betwixt our Sins and Hell,
The Quintessence of Flowrs of sweetest smell.
" Faith conquers all, Mountains of Sins removes,
"Makes Lions Lambs, and Kites more mild then Doves,
"And may be styled the Gospells Golden Gloss,
"To know aright the meaning of the Cross.
This is that Rock unseen with Carnal Eyes,
Whereon our Church stands firm, in spite of Spies
Late sent from Hell Christ's Building to deface,
And with false News dispersed to darken Grace.
This is our New man's sure and constant Rock,
Whose sense from Lambs old Reynard seeks to lock.
This precious Gift we gain from Grace above,
^ut flies away, if we profane Gods Love
^lipsing it on the Lords glorious day
^ith worldly mist, false Fire, or Heathnish play,
^he old Man's Tricks, his stale and stinking Leaven;
For if that Day we Rest not, we lose Heaven:
"I mean from Gain, Lust, and unlawful Plays,
"Or Work, which might be done on other days
"We must refrain, and our own Carnal ways
"Set far behind the course of Sabbath days,
"Except our Mother Church, which holds the Keys
" To bind or loose, dispense with Exercise,
"Or with some harmles Joys at vacant hours
"To sweeten Cares, and raise the vital Powers,
"Which might grow drowzie, sad, or drooping dry
"For want of Motion and due Symmetry.
"Provided that the Souls chief faculties
"Be not betwitcht too much with vanities:
"And that our sportes, or Recreations be
"From Spleen, or G^ll, Bibbing, or swearing free:
That we rejoice in presence of the Lord,
Like Man and Wife, of one mind and Accord.
Provided, that what Money we shall Play,
Or hap to win, we count it lent away,
And so Confer it to avoid Abuse,
For mending ways, the Church, or Lazars use:
"But in this Point let Saints be circumspect,
"Lest at their Play the Serpent them infect.
"Provided still, we may Advantage win
"On that set day to put down Reigning Sin,
And glorify with mutual one Accord,
And holy Hearts our Sabbaths gracious Lord
Who knows that Man is full of Imperfections,
And by degrees must climb to more Perfections.
So have I seen some Children from the Dugges
By leisure weaned, then, terrified with Bugges
From screaming loud, and afterward with Bells
Appeased, like Angry Bees, until their Yelles
They quite left off, ashamed of their Folly,
And grew in time more stayed, devout, and Holy.
So I have known, where men were most Precise,
In Foreign Parts, that some did exercise
At Buttes with Arrows, or with Bullets Play
Between the Sermon While on this High day.
The like Effects our Elders Tolerations
May bring to pass amidst our Profanations,
That when our sweaty Hobs have daunc'd their fill,
They and their Marians mount to Sions Hill;
Or else defer their Games and Alchouse Bowls,
^ill sacred Liquour has bedewed their Souls,
^or then I hope our New man will extend
^is quickening Heat, that their Old man will bend,
and stoop, like Joseph's Brethren, overcome
^ith th'Awfull splendor of succeeding Doom,
that shall inflicted be on Libertines
^or slighting Prophets, and their sacred lines,
(...) their abuse of Christian Liberty,
(...) causing scandal with Impiety;
^or keeping back Gods Tithes, and starving those,
"Who might Soul-fed our Sabbaths Foes oppose.
O would my words might pierce into the Flint,
And strike remorse with Numbers feeling dint
In them, who to support their Pride, ingrosse
The Means, whereby ensues the Churches Loss;
In them, that put no cautious difference
Betwixt the Lords and other Days in sense,
Good ends, and use, like those who sometimes fed
On the Lords Body, as on Common Bread.
But leaving these, like Achans, to themselves,
Or to be rankt among the Fairy Elves,
I hope the Gospells Light, which now shines bright
In Britains I Will, will so confound the Night
Of misty sins, that we shall shun the Rock
Of Scandal, and be grafted in one stock,
As Members of our All-puissant Head,
Whose Ten-fold Laws the greatest States must dread,
And by their Light twixt Motion, Love, and (...)
Cause Lesser Stars, like Charles his Waine, to draw
That Head and Parts may join in unity,
While Charles his Name renewes whole Charity.
Membra Caputque ligant Charites, quas Carolus ambi^
Dum (...) intus (...) renovat Rex nomen and omen.
Blessed be that Light, which late in Oxford shone,
And there Inspired fair Englands Royal Throne:
"Our Carriers, Carts, and Wayne-men to restrain,
"Who sullied Sabbath days for greedy Gain.
Blessed be that Act, which served for a Charm
Amidst our vows, to stay Gods Thundering Arm,
That scared from Westminster our Parliament
With Fiery darts and Arrows Pestilent.
No strict Edict could cease the Dismal knells:
No Judges Writ could stay sad Londons Bells.
"No Golden Fee, the Soul of Eloquence,
"Could further Suits against the Pestilence.
Our Gallants then, (so for their Outside styled,)
Thence hurryed fast away, like Creatures wild.
The Courtiers fled, so did Rich Londoners;
The Coachmen fled: so did the Waggoners.
Both Sexes fled, yea, Men of all degrees;
Grave-diggers Gain down waigh'd the Lawyers Fees,
Though sithence some complained of Fees abate:
For many weekly Graves but few of late.
Our Fashions, Beauties, and daubed Jezabels
Took then for Fiends the Noise of Tolling Bells.
Few stayed behind, save some in hope of Gain,
Or those for Christ who shrunkt not to be slain.
Nay they, who bragged of Aromatic Pots,
Cures for the Pox, and sovereign Antidotes
Against the Plague, then brookt not London streets,
Lest they might dance the winding of the Sheets.
But now attend, a Wonder great I tell,
Which thousands can as yet remember well:
"As Soon as that New Act came published,
"The Plague abated, and few perished.
This an Eyewitness of their Desolations,
Their Trades Decrease, their Woes, and Lamentations,
In that great City, where the Sickness reigned,
I then their Guest undaunted, not constrained,
Do testify for our Preservers praise
And to reclaim them, who shall read these Lays,
With Dalilaes from dallying overlong,
Their sweetest sins, I mean, Gods day to wrong;
" Gods day of Rest his Wonders to display,
" Gods day for man's best part, Souls Holy Day;
On which High day the Spirits Gate stands open,
And we may then for store of Graces hope.
I^t not absurd New sweet Wine to put in
Old Butts not first well purified within?
And is it not Profane to Sacrifice
To God, before the Soul be cleans'd of Vice?
How many ways may we redeem the Times,
If we apply our Wills thereto betimes?
The Mornings prime in Prayer to the Lord
We ought to Sacrifice, and to record
His wondrous Acts unto our Families,
Or Neighbors, whom with Charitable Ties
The Chain of Faith has linked in together,
As Fellow Saints. The Noone-tide we may either
In sober Meals, or in Almes-giving spend.
The Afternoon to gentle Walks may tend,
There, more to praise the Flowers variety,
Then Solomon in all his Royalty,
To suck the Hills, or fragrant Gardens Air;
"Or it may tend to make the Soul more fair,
"By reading Scriptures, or the Martyrs wrongs,
"Choice Catechismes, Sermons, or sacred Songs.
To show us zeal against a Graven Elfe,
Moses broke the Tables of God himself.
The like pure Flame burnt in Phinehes Soul,
When he with Steel foul Whoredom did control.
Do we contend in Lawful Wars debate?
Or in defense of our Religions state?
Who in Old time more constantly did brook
Proud Giants scorns? Or with more Patience took
Their Flouts, which did at his good Sermons bark
Then Noe, whilst he built his famous Ark?
Who better did Gods Chosen Soldiers guide
Then Abram, Josuab, and the valiant David?
Who more resolved to fight in a good Cause
Then the brave Maccabees for Moses Laws?
Would you observe a Kings, or Judges Part?
Their lawful Charge grave Moses does impart;
As Subjects Damage by their winkt at Bribes,
And Tyrannies old Samuels Book describes.
Would ye Rule well your selves? a House? or State?
These Solomon and Sirach moderate.
Ere Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego
Would Idolize, the Fire they undergo;
Nor could the Lions Den, nor Medes decree,
From serving God enforce good Daniels Knee.
Do we desire to see a harmless Mask
With Daunces, Songs, and Shoutes? Here is a Task
For our New man with David to consult
And Judaes Kings; whilst Incest does insult
On that great Baptists Life from Jordan led
To pay unto a Frisking Maid his Head.
Comforts for Grief we feel in David's Psalms,
By Jeremy, by Job, or Tobiths Alms.
What wonders do the Spirits Penmen teach
Performed by Saints beyond Dame Natures reach?
Do we affect to drink most wholesome Wine?
Go we to Cana, or to Christ the Vine,
Where without charge both White and Red abound
To cheer sad Souls, while Christ his Health goes round.
Would we see acted a rare Convertite?
Damascus shows us Paul Christ's Favorite.
Would we discern the Newman in his strength?
The Gospel paints his Portraiture at length.
Would we behold She-paragons of Beauty?
Or of that Sex some others False and Haughty?
Sara, Rebecca, Rachel, Debora,
Miriam, and she that nailed Sisera:
So Hanna, Ruth, Priscilla, Magdalen,
And Philips Nuns deserve a Prophets Pen.
So Judith, Ester, and Susanna Chaste;
And she within all Glorious, that's embraced
By Heavens King, with Sunny Robes adorned,
Maugre the plots of men by Fiendes suborned,
Whose praise we find blazed in the Canticles,
Extended then, and since by Oracles.
So for her Zeal, with them I parallel
Christ's Prophetess, the Widow Phanuel.
These Female sparks invite my Soul a Guest,
And so the Churches Type at the Lords Feast
Sweet Mary blessed in the Superlative
Cheeres me, with her whom Zachary did wive,
Who brought, like Sara, forth in Ancient Age
A Prophet to proclayme Christ's Pilgrimage.
The Elect Lady, Hulda the Prophetess,
Lydia, and Dorcas make a Holy Mess.
Then, Jezabel I read, and Babels Whore,
Both rampant bent the Church of God to gore.
Last, Athaliaes Fate from Bloody snares,
Saphiraes me from Double dealing scares;
As likewise do from Gadding Dinaes Fall,
Lots wife, and Evaes Doom good Dames recall.
These Histories, or such in Holy writ
Exemplified this sacred Day befit.
Good Books advance the Newmans Sacrifice,
But Bad to Heathnish vice soft Brains entice.
Therefore let us borne of the Spirits seed,
Immortal, scorn our Christian Minds to feed
With Tales, vain Sports, or fond Lascivious Books,
Which Fiendes suggest for Souls as shining Hooks.
Exploites belied on Patrick, Arthur, Guy,
The Peers of France, or Spaines bald knightly Fry;
To the intent, that from Gods word the Will
Might be seduced, to apprehend more Ill.
Arming our Minds, let us our Bodies too,
The Parcels of Christ's Temple, not undo
With Drunken Healthes, the Devils Sacrifice
In these last Times, nor yet Apicius-wise,
"With various kinds of Gurmandizing Cheer,
"Which dimmes with noisome Fumes the Spirits Clear,
"And the Five senses so intoxicates
"That Pulpits blush to see such Nodding Pates.
How often saw we some at this Holy Tide
More Sensual bent then any day beside?
Some haunting more the Tavern then the Church?
Some on the Spoil, some living on the Lurch?
And some far more to deck their Outside bent,
Then by Gods word to feel Soule-ravishment?
Strutting more often to Church with Painted Wings,
Then to bear thence Soule-wares and sacred things?
Yet press I not too peevishly Precise,
"But Christians may in comely modest wise
"Wear what they list, so that their glittring Port
"Cause no offense unto the weaker sort:
"So that their Pomp do not Devotion let,
"I care not how in Foreign Robes they jet.
What Hurrying Noise? what March? and rumbling Coile,
As if they went unto a Play, or Broile,
Do Gallants keep wirh Coaches in the Street?
When they at Church should Saints most humbly greet?
Since God allows to the Domestic Beast,
Which labored the six Days, our Sabbaths Rest:
How dare they then his Creatures put to Pain?
More to proclaim their Pomp, then Peace to gain?
Such Sabbath Breakers (I do greatly fear)
Before the Lamb prefer proud Lucifer.
Yet for this Clause let not the Courtly Ear
Mistake my sense: for I do not aver,
But that in their Caroach, or their Sedan,
Without Disgust to the most Puritan,
The Aged, Weak, or those of tender feet
May use what Means they please in Church to meet,
When with loud Threats tempestuous Winds do reign,
Or When the Clouds dissolve to dropping Rain;
So that their Hearts be void of swelling Pride,
And that their Journey be with Christ to side,
Who, when he did in greatest Triumph pass
On Earth as Man, rode on a Simple Ass.
Nor do I weigh such points so strict a way,
But Fishers, Cooks, and Pothecaries may
Labor, or save what would be cast away,
If on the Eve they toil not for that Day.
But I could wish good Christians not to play
The Epicures on the Lords Sabbath Day,
Causing their Cooks to dress more Choice of Meat
Then Heliogabale could digest to eat,
Whilst that ten Quails or Phesants in one Dish
His Panda^s sauc'd with Pearl and Ambergriese.
God grant, that we more suting our Vocation
May ruminate with serious Meditation
This wholesome Feast, which I have plainly dressed,
And those New Rules, which I have now expressed
For Boiling Brains swelld up with Arrogance,
That they may stoup, and feel the Spirits Trance,
To do Gods Will, to muse on Heavenly Joys,
And not to clinche those Joys through worldly Toys.
Lord, here we yield thee thanks, though soyld with Errors,
And round about beset with many Terrors,
For turning Britains Island from a Beast
To be Baptized, and of Baptized the Best,
While she does firmly to thy Pledges stick,
To thy true Seals, and Spirits Candlestick.
Praised be thou, who have to us reveald
The Certain Means, whereby we may be healed
Of Natures Spots, and those Contagious Evils
Heapt on us by the World, the Flesh, and Devils,
More in these Latter Times then heretofore,
When our Great Tempter lay enthralled more,
And of his Stings curbed by the Holy Ghost,
Till Babels Whore perk'd up, and ruled the roast.
Which sacred Means we humbly pray thy Grace
May still support us in our New-mans Race,
As we begun so with more Love to burn,
Until thy Son Incarnate shall return
With Final Doom to judge the Dead and Quick,
The Dead in Faith, and the Church Catholic.
A joyful Hymn to be sung on the Lords Day, winding up the Sevenths Days
Exercise.
Rejoice, ye Saints, hoyse up your highest Sails,
And magnify with loud Hosa^^aes hayles
The Lord, that first saluted from the Grave
Frail Adams Sons, and them their debts forgave.
Spread forth his Sabbaths Palms, sing joyful Psalms,
Attend his word, and to the Poor give Alms.
How Amiable and Cordial is thy Word
Above all Objects else, O mighty Lord!
How ravishing with Pleasures Manifold
Surmounting Music, Pomp, or heaps of Gold,
Sounds in our Hearts the Heavenly Bridgroomes voice!
How sweetly ring those Peales of Hallowed Noise,
Thrice Holy sung by Hoasts of Cherubins?
Thrice answered by Love Flaming Scraphins?
"O Unity thrice blessed in Trinity!
"O Trinity thrice blessed in Unity!
For the pursuit of which Harmonious strain,
Though fully we cannot as yet attain
To that brave Pitch by reason of our Fogges,
Thy Grace yet draws the will, and dries our Bogges.
So if we glaunce, as through a Glass, a while
At their sweet Tunes, and in thy Laud Compile
Some zealous work to testify our Love,
And ready will, which therewithal may move
Thy Saints on Earth to warble forth thy Praise,
Thou art well pleased as with the Widows Mite,
Who Abrams deed did by a Ram acquit.
Teach us, O Christ, to weigh the effect and Cause
Of this Days Rest, like those whom at Emaus
Thou made with zeal to burn the self same day,
When thou did Rise and metst them by the way;
That we with Vows, and Sabbaths true Delight
May think on thee without the least despite
Of Spleen, or Gall, which might profane the Time,
And black our Souls with a Notorious Crime,
If we neglect our Duties and thy Call,
Now to appear at this thy Feastivall.
W^thdraw our minds from Natures fond desires,
Or Ruffling shows which might put our Fires,
And make some justly call our Day of Rest
A Carnal Time, or Saturnalian Feast.
"Restrain our Longing Fits from all excess
" Of Meats and Drink, which might our Wits oppress,
"And by their mounting Fumes up to the Brain,
"Thee to neglect our Noblest Part constrain,
"And cause us, Nabal-like, the Sots to play,
"When we to Thee our Thankful vows should pay;
For on this Day thy Cabinet stands open,
And we on it for store of Jewels hope.
O let us not, like to that Thorny Ground,
Be choakt with worldly Cares, but Fruitful found,
And watchful still, attending on thy Word
At this thy Sabbaths Feast, it to record,
And edify our Neighbors as our selves,
Before our Crimes link us with frantic Elves;
Or to Conclude, before thou do remove,
As Son of Man, in Person from Above,
To judge Mankind, which shortly we expect,
And on the seventh Day, as some suspect.
Good Lord, by virtue of thy Sabbaths Rest,
According to thy will grant our Request;
That, as thou did with Body Glorified
Rise up from Death, so we Soule-purified
May Rise from Sin, and up to Heaven ascend,
And not to Hell, like damned Ghosts, descend.
All Glory be to Thee, as heretofore,
In Persons three, one God for evermore.
Amen.
Another Hymn in our Redeemers Praise.
LEt all that soiled the Precepts Ten,
New Daylight crave through Christ. Amen.
And let all Angels, Saints, and Men
For ever bless Christ's Name. Amen.
Amen, Amen sound we, like Thunder,
That at our Zeal the World may wonder,
That at our Noise the World aghast,
May turn to Christ now at the last,
To tune his Praise with Newer Tongues,
And with the Heart more then the Lunges.
Let Christ be Alpha in our Songs,
And our Omega, as belonges
To Catholics of Christian stock,
The Spirits seed, Sheep of one Flock.
Let all our Thoughts conspire in One,
To fix our Faith on Christ alone,
And with one voice aloud to Sing:
"Christ is our Head, Judge, Savior, King:
"The Prince of Angels, Gods Delight,
"The Crown of Saints, Men's only Light;
"The Woman's Seed, the Son of God,
"Which on the Head of Satan trod;
"The Lion borne of Judaes Ligne,
"The Root of Jesse, Mount Calvares Sign;
"The Glorious Star of our New Birth,
Whence springs our Peace, and sweetest Mirth.
The second part.
BOth First and Last, as we begun,
Let us applaud our Makers Son
With loud Hosannaes every day,
Like chirping Birds in Month of May;
Like Consorts Tune, or Ring of Bells,
Let us show how our Love excells,
And never cease Christ's Name to ring,
Till we meet all as in one Ring,
Or Circle round: whence no Disunion
Shall ever part our Hearts Communion.
Like Nightingales in Summers Bower,
Let us on Christ think every hour,
And never leave to blaze his Story,
Until we meet this Lord of Glory,
This Lord of Lord, that crushed the sting
Of our great Foe: for which we sing
All praise to him that conquered Sin,
And did for us the Triumph win.
Amen.
The New-mans Song, of Thankesgiving after the Receiving of the Communion.
WE took this Day Christ's Flesh and Blood
Dressed in the Form of sacred Food.
We fed on Bread surmounting Wealth,
We drank Christ's Wine of Saving Health.
O Mystic signs! O Grace Divine
Transferred from the Heavenly Vine,
And Living Bread that came from God
To warm and change our Earthly Clod!
We took those Signs, like Baskets rare,
But opening them most dainty Fare
We found to please our Spirits Taste,
We found enough to break our Fast.
We felt our Souls cast in New Mould,
And changed from the Creature Old.
Love made us all of one consent,
Faith wrought in us the Lords Intent:
To mind his Passion, Death, and Love,
Till He to Judge comes from Above.
By these two Gifts we grow to be
Christ's Body from disunion free.
By them, like Flower baked in one Loaf,
The Lord feeds us under our Roof.
By them, like Lines we meet in one
Firm Center, in Gods Truth alone,
Gods Truth, that blessed our Christian spouse
With happy Lot, like Obeds House
Blessed for the Ark, while there it stayed,
When Others were by it dismayed.
The second part.
WE yield thee Thanks, most Gracious Lord,
Who do Faiths Light to us record;
That they, who at thy Table feed,
In spirit must Christ's Passion heed.
O let us then with Holy Traun^e
From Carnal sense our Thoughts advance.
Let Christ behold us in the West,
Like to those Wise men of the East,
Greeting his Cross and his Vprising,
As they his Birth and Manger Prizing.
Let Christ our vows of Thanks behold,
Our Faith more Pure then Ophirs Gold,
Our Hearts more bruised then Myrrhes Perfume,
Our Love more sweet then Incense-fume.
This good Advise we will ingrosse
Within our Souls, and mount the Cross.
His Cross we feel. But now we hear
An Angel say, He is not here.
Christ, whom ye seek, is Risen up
Having now made your Foes to stoup.
Until Doomesday his Body none
Shall see on Earth, for he is gone
To Heaven. There, behold your Christ
On Gods Right hand, a King, a Priest,
An Advocate without a Fee
Pleading to have Faiths Household free.
Draw near his Throne, and without doubt
The Golden Scepter he holds out.
He will extend his Spirits Grace,
Whilst ye in Spirit seek his Face,
Not wresting your Soule-Feast more real
Then Paul, who terms it Christ's Memorial.
This Trance stirs up true Saints to Joy
Like Him, who, though an Embryon Boy,
Within the Womb seemed to rejoice,
Soon as his Damme heard Mary's voice.
The Babe did spring, and so do we
At our Soule-feast with Jubilee.
Unto the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
Be Praise both here and throughout every coast,
As of Old time has been, is now their due,
And ever shall in Heaven and Earth renew.
Let Heaven and Earth by Angels, Saints, and Men
To God rebound with Glories sound. Amen.
The New man's Song of Thanksgiving after our Ordinary Meals.
1.
THe Lord be Blessed, who gave us Food
In season for the Bodies Good.
Our God be praised for evermore,
Who our desires supplied with store
Of Meat and Drink more then would serve
For Natures use or we deserve.
No Need we feel, no want we know:
So does the Lord his Gifts bestow.
2.
He never leaves his Saints in need,
But Carks for them, and for their Seed.
He leaves them not with Beggars shame
To starve, if they call on his Name,
He taught them how to bless their Meat,
By giving Thanks for what they Eat,
No Need we feel, etc.
3.
Unto his Flock, just Abrams stock,
He Water gave out of the Rock:
With Manna filled their Hungry Mawes:
And Cloyd with Quayles their longing Crawes
He Cared for Ravens and their Breed,
And Ravens made Elias feed.
No need we feel etc.
4.
He David help in Banishment:
He Daniel made with Pulse content:
He with wild Fruit did John sustain,
And his Elect from Dearth maintain.
He Thousands in the Desert fed
With a few Fish and Loaves of Bread.
No need we feel etc.
5.
One Day He sends us store of Flesh;
Another time Fish salt and Flesh,
And commonly Bread, Ale, and Beer,
Milk, Fruit, and Wine, our Hearts to cheer.
Yea, Junckets fetched from Sunburned Spain,
Which do too often our Tables stain.
No need we feel etc.
6.
How Gracious is Almighty God
Unto vile Man, an Earthly Clod!
Thus to provide and Carke for him,
That often himself filles to the Brimme
With more then serves for Nourishment,
For hungers sauce, or Souls content.
No need we feel etc.
7.
God grant that we his Creatures use
Do Thankful take without abuse,
Not loathing them as over-cloyd,
Nor them devouring overjoyed;
That as of Need Saints toil for Wealth,
So we Feast not for Lust, but Health.
No need we feel, no want we know*
So does the Lord his Gifts bestow.
The New man's Triumph in English and Latin measures presented to the Kings
most excellent Majesty.
WHo Christ his Birth, Life, Death, and Rising up
From Death to Life observes, He soon shall stoup
And quash the plots of Hells black Darkened Troup,
And likewise make the Outward man to droup
With all his false Designs, and fond Conceits
Sprung from the Flesh, or from the Worlds Deceites;
For as the Morning spreades the Dawning Light:
So Faith by Teaching shines, and Daunts the Might
Of that Huge Whale, which waits with triple throat
To swallow Souls, as Preyes of Chiefest Note.
So much new Light spreades by the Gospells sound,
They now praise Christ, who were in Fetters bound;
And Sins keen Edge, wherewith the Devil was wont
To boar our Hearts, turns on the sudden blunt;
And so remains, unless they grind again
Their Augurs on the Whetstone of the Brain.
But how fares then our Soldier in that plight?
With David's sling he does the Monster smite;
Whether the Fiend within, or from without
Shootes Fire, he does for Christ stand bravely out;
For at the Broile his Inward Guardian springs,
Baptized, Fire-sindg'd, and Graced mith Burnisht wings
Of mounting zeal, who thus the Triumph sings:
O happy wight, which has escapt the stings
Of Mortal Jarres! who, though he understood
His Foes Allures, yet loathed them and their brood!
O happy Soul, which dared with Saints to side
Against Gods Foes, the Luciferian side:
Whom with Christ's Merits armed nor swelling Tide,
Nor fiery Trial could from Christ divide;
Whom neither Charms, nor yet a thousand Braves
Could terrify, nor yet the rolling waves:
But to safe Port with Joy she brings the Cross
And Christ his Ship, which Pirates did ingrosse,
Where she with Saints the Cross Triumphant reares,
That Cross, which Saints on Earth have won ^ith Tears,
Happy is he, who brooks a wrong-attaint,
For by the Cross he lives a Canon'd Saint,
A Name indeed, which overtops so far
The highest Spire, or style of worldly Star,
As does Gods Grace above men's sins abound,
Or the Lambs Blood more then our Merits sound.
Thrice happy Man, I say, whom Angels greet;
And whom Christ's Will made for that Honor meet!
So Happy be the Best of Kings,, if these
Our New man's Songs to judge he gently please:
For with our Cross there grows sweet Inward Ease
And with Our Crown of Thorns a wreath of Peace.
The same in Latin Hexameter. Novi Hominis Laurea Triumphalis.
QVi Natalitium, Vitam, Miracula, Mortem,
Et Christi Corpus Redivivum mente revolvit,
Ille tenebrosae reddet Molimina Gentis
Irrita, Conatus Hominis veterisque repellet,
Seu de Carne fluant, seu sint Phantasmata Mundi.
Sicut enim radiis Primordia Mane Diei
Dilatat, per opaca Fides sic sparsa coruscat,
Tergeminumque domat Monstrum, Caetumque Trifaucem,
Qui vorat omne pecus, Praedasque absorbet opimas.
Tantum Numen inest Fidei, ut modo Carmine Christum
Compede qui vincti quondam latuere salutant;
Quin and acuta, quibus terebrabat Pectora Demon,
Tela repentino fiunt obtusa reflexu;
Sic que hebetata manent, nisi devia forte voluntas
Illa super Cerebri renovet Terebrata molare.
Quomodo tum Miles valet in discrimine tanto?
Nempe studet monstrum Jaculis superare Davidis.
Seu vis Hostilis tonat, aut Civilis amictu.
Fraudis in orb furit, Christo Constanter adhaeret.
Nam Novus ex gemina Genius Baptismatis aura,
Numinis afflatu, Zeloque micantibus alis
Nascitur, intus agit, victoris and ille Triumphum
Sic canit: O Faelix, qui tot Certamina vidit
Illaesus! qui vafra Hostis stratagemata novit!
Et tamen haec spernit generoso pectore Miles!
O Faelix, qui sacra Dei Praedonibus aufert,
Ausus ad extremum Fidei defendere causam
Contra Luciferum Meritis innixus Jesu!
Non scloppi reboante sono, non Mart, nec art,
Non Pugnis, non mill Minis, nec territus undis,
Donec in optati Navem ferat ostia Portus!
Et Crucis abductae renovata Piacula Christo
Immolet, Aetherea Lauds resonante Caterva!
Faelix, quem signat Crux Ignea Nomine Sancti,
Nomine Pyramidas tanto exsuper ante vel Astra,
Quanto Peccatis existit Gratia major,
Quanto Hominum Meritis Sanguis praestantior Agni.
Ter Felix, inquam, quem Christi summa Potestas
Angelicos inter Coetus dignatur Honor.
Sic quoque tu Faelix, qui nostros imbibis Hymnos
Judicio sensuque pio, Rex optime Regum:
Cum Cruce nam crescit dulce Levamen. Amen* Echo.
Cum Spina Sertum fulget O vale. Vale* Echo.
FINIS.

