MAGIA ADAMICA: OR The Antiquity of Magic, AND The Descent thereof from Adam
downwards, proved.

Whereunto is added a perfect, and full Discovery of the true Coelum Terrae,
or the Magician's Heavenly Chaos, and first Matter of all Things.

By Eugenius Philalethes.

(...) Epict. in Enchirid. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for H. B LUNDEN, at the
Castle in Cornhill, 1650.

To my Learned, and much Respected friend, Mr. MATTHEW HARBERT.
SIR,
I Know you are not Great, there is a better title, you are Good. I might have
fixed this Piece to a Pinnacle, made the Dedication high: but to what purpose?
Greatness is a Thing I cannot admire in others, because I desire it not in my
self. It is a proud Folly, a painted ceremonious Raunt. There is nothing
Necessary in it, for most men live without it, and I may not apply to that,
which my Reason declines, as well as my Fortune. The Truth is, I know no use of
Hog hens and Titulados, if they are in an humor to give, I am no Beggar to
receive. I look not any thing Sir, but what the Learned are enriched withal,
Judgment, and Candor. You are a true friend to Both, and to my third self.
This Discourse I shuffl'd up for your spare-houres, for it was born in a
Vacation, when I did not so much labor, as play. I was indeed necessitated to
some Levity, for my Adversary proved so impotent, I might not draw out all my
forces, because I knew not where to employ them. You have here a simple Bedlam
corrected, and whipped for his mad Tricks. A certain Master of Arts of Cambridge,
and a Poet in the Loll and Trot of Spencer. It is supposed he is in Love with
his Fairie-Queen, and this has made him a very Elf in Philosophy. He is
indeed a scurvie, slabbie, snotty-snowted thing. He is troubled with a certain
Splenetic loosnes, and has such squirts of the Mouth, his Readers cannot
distinguish his Breath from his Breech. He is a new kind of Pythonist, speaks
no man knows what, and his Bulls have much of his Belly. But I have studied a
Cure answerable to his Disease, I have bin somewhat Corrosive, and in defiance
to the old Phrase, I have washed a Moore clean. I have put his Hog-noddle in
pickle, and here I present him to the world, a Dish of Sous'd Nonsense. This
is my Subject Sir, and now I must tell you, my Address to your self has
something of Duty in it. I had no sooner left Milk for Meat, but my first
Learning came from you. Be pleased to accept this small Acknowledgement from

Some ten days after the Press was deliverd of my Adversarie's MAURO. MANGO.

Your Pupil, and servant E. P.
From Heliopolis 1650.
TO The most Excellently accomplished, my best of Friends, Mr. THOMAS HENSHAW.
SIR,
IT was the Quaere of Solomon, and it argued the Supremacy of Eccle. 2. 3.
his wisdom, What was best for Man to do all the days of his Vanity under
the Sun? If I wish my self so Wise, as to know this great Affair of Life, it
is because you are fit to manage it. I will not advise you to pleasures, to
build Houses, and plant Vine-yards: to enlarge your private Possessions, or to
multiply your Gold and Silver. These are old Errors, like Vitriol to the
stone; So many false Receipts which Solomon has tried before you, And behold
all was vanity, and Cap. 2. ver. 11.
vexation of Spirit. I have sometimes seen Actions as various, as they were
great, and my own sullen Fate has forced me to several Courses of life, but I
find not one hitherto, which ends not in Surfets, or Satietie. Let us fancy a
man as fortunate as this world can make him; What does he do but move from
Bed to Board, and provide for the Circumstances of those two Scenes? To day he
eats and drinks, then sleeps, that he may do the like to morrow. A great
Happiness! to live by cloying Repetitions, and such as have more of Necessity,
than of a free pleasure. This is Idem per Idem, and what is held for Absurdity
in Reason, can not by the same reason be the true perfection of Life. I deny
not but Temporal blessings conduce to a Temporal Life, and by Consequence are
pleasing to the Body, but if we consider the Soul, she is all this while upon
the wing, like that Dove sent out of the Ark, seeking a place to rest: she is
busied in a restless Inquisition, and though her Thoughts, for want of true
Knowledge, differ not from Desires, yet they sufficiently prove she has not
found her Satisfaction. Show me then but a practice wherein my Soul shall rest
without any further Disquisition, for this is it, which Solomon calls Vexation
of Spirit, and you show me, What is Best for Man to do under the Sun. Surely,
Sir, this is not the Philosophers stone, neither will I undertake to define it,
but give me leave to speak to you in the Language of Zoroaster: Quaere Tu
Animae Canalem.

I have a better Confidence in your Opinion of me, than to tell you, I love
you: and for my present Boldness, you must thank your self, you taught me this
Familiarity. I here trouble you with a short Discourse, the Brokage and weak
Remembrances of my former, and more entire studies; It is no labored Piece,
and indeed no fit Present, but I beg your Acceptance as of a Caveat, that you
may see, what unprofitable Affections you have Purchased. I propose it not for
your Instruction, Nature has already admitted you to her School, and I would
make you my Judge, not my Pupil. If therefore amongst your serious and more
dear Retirements, you can allow this Trifle but some few Minutes, and think
them not lost, you will Perfect my Ambition. You will place me Sir, at my full
Height, and though it were like that of Statius, amongst Gods and Stars, I
shall quickly find the Earth again, and with the least Opportunity present my
self

Sir, Your most humble Servant, E. P.

On the Author's Vindication, and Reply to the scurvie, scribbling, scolding
Alazonomastix
'T was well he did assault thee, or thy Foe
Could not have hit to thy Advantage so.
what he styles Ignorance, is Depth in Sense;
He thinks there is no skill, but Common Fense.
Had Bacon lived in this unknowing Age,
And seen Experience laughed at on the Stage,
What Tempests would have risen in his Blood
To side an Art, which Nature has made Good?
Do think that Knowledge comes to thee Innate,
As Preaching on a sudden to thy Pate?
No sure; thou art a simpler Brother; fie!
I must Allarum thee with Hue and Cry.
What art? from Whence? a Presbyterian sure,
An Academic Ratt, holy and pure.
But for thy Soul (and Plato tells thee so)
Thou have spoiled that, and plastered Plato too.
Just like I. T. thy Poet, who does lend
Thee fancies in Cleveland from end to end,
And not one right applied; you do mistake
The Stagyrit's Philosophy, and make
His Logic Magical, what is unknown
Is Conjuration, frothie, and high-flown.
If Arguments arise, you straight grow hoarse,
Thou know st not what belongs to Topic Course.
Shall thou and I to Disputation come
Practic or Theorie, for the Total sum?
What? is it not lawful for my (learned) friend
T'improve his Reason to his greatest end?
Or shall we envy him, 'cause he has more
Of Nature's favors set upon his Score?
Tell me in earnest do thou think it is fit
To believe all that Aristotle writ?
Though he was blinded, yet Experience can
Sever the Clouds, and make a Clearer man.
If Digbie once but view thy railing Ueine,
He Will think thou art Atoms, not yet formed to brain;
Then to the Pot thou go: Oh there is the Loss!
There Is no Elixir in Thee, thou art all Dross.
Then sing another Song, thou that controules
Our Metempsychosis of Bodi'ed Souls:
Yet Platonist thou art, but can not tell
Where these mysterious spirits have their Cell.
Thus Ambrose flung dark Persius on the ground,
A blind Contempt! because he was profound.
Look nearer man, can not distinguish yet
Betwixt the highest, and the lowest wit.
When Cynthia to the watrie Tethis hies
We know not there what Treasures she espies,
What Margarits in Crystal streams; she sends
Only to us her Influence, and lends
A kind, large Light. But thou poor, trapt Rattoon!
Like Scythian Dogs, do bark against the Moon.
Great, rare Eugenius! do not thou delay
Thy Course, because his Dirt lies in thy way.
Stain thy white skin for once, and be thou not
Surprised like Ermins, by the dawbing Plot.
Mount to thy full Meridian, let thy Star
Create a Rubric to our Calendar,
And we will offer Anthems to thy shrine
So long as Date can give a Name to Time.
P. B. A. M. Oxoniens.

To the Reader.
Welfare the Dodechedron! I have examined the Nativitie of this Book by a
Cast of Constellated Bones, and Deuz Ace tells me this Parable. Truth (said the
witty Aleman) was commanded into Exile, and the Lady Lie was seated in her
Throne. To perform the Tenor of this Sentence, Truth went from amongst Men,
but she went all alone, poor and naked. She had not travailed very far, when
standing on a high mountain, she perceived a great Train to pass by: In the
midst of it was a Chariot attended with Kings, Princes and Governors, and in
that a stately Donna, who like some Queen regent, commanded the rest of the
Company. Poor Truth, she stood still whiles this pompous Squadron past by, but
when the Chariot came over against her, the Lady Lie who was there seated, took
notice of her, and causing her Pageants to stay, commanded her to come nearer.
Here she was scornfully examined, whence she came? whither she would go? and
what about? To these Questions she answered as the Custom of Truth is, very
simply and plainly: Whereupon the Lady Lie commands her to wait upon her, and
that in the Rear, and Tail of all her Troop, for that was the known place of
Truth. Thanks then not to the stars, but to the Configurations of the Dice!
they have acquainted me with my future fortunes, and what praeferment my Book
is like to attain to. I am for my part contented, though the Consideration of
this durty Rear be very nauseous, and able to spoil a stronger stomach than
mine. It has been said of old, Non est Planta veritatis super terram, Truth
is an herb, that grows not here below: and can I expect that these few seeds,
which I scatter thus in the storm and tempest, should thrive to their full
ears, and Harvest? But Reader, let it not trouble thee to see the Truth come
thus behind, it may be there is more of a Chase in it, than of Attendance, and
her Condition not altogether so bad, as her Station. If thou art one of those,
who draw up to the Chariot, pause here a little in the Rear, and before thou
do address thy self to Aristotel and his Lady Lie, think not thy Courtship
lost, if thou do kiss the lips of poor Truth. It is not my Intention to
jest with thee, in what I shall write, wherefore read thou with a good Faith,
what I will tell thee with a good Conscience. God, when he first made Man,
planted in him a spirit of that Capacity, that he might know All, adding
thereto a most fervent Desire to know, lest that Capacity should be useless.
This Truth is evident in the Posterity of Man: For little Children before ever
they can speak, will stare upon any thing, that is strange to them; they will
cry, and are restless till they get it into their hands, that they may feel
it, and look upon it, that is to say, that they may know what it is in some
Degree, and according to their Capacity. Now some ignorant Nurse will think
they do all this, out of a desire to play with what they see, but they
themselves tell us the Contrary; For when they are past Infants, and begin to
make use of Language, if any New thing appears, they will not desire to play
with it, but they will ask you, what it is? for they desire to know; and this
is plain out of their Actions; for if you put any Rattle into their hands, they
will view it, and study it for some short Time, and when they can know no
more, then they will play with it. It is well known, that if you hold a candle
near to a little Child, he will (if you praevent him not) put his finger into
the flame, for he desires to know what it is, that shines so bright; but there
is some thing more than all this, for even these Infants desire to improve
their Knowledge. Thus when they look upon any thing, if the sight informs them
not sufficiently, they will, if they can, get it into their hands, that they
may feel it: but if the touch also does not satisfy, they will put it into
their Mouths to taste it, as if they would examine Things by more senses than
one. Now this Desire to know is born with them, and it is the Besi, and most
mysterious part of their Nature. It is to be observed, that when men come to
their full Age, and are serious in their Disquisitions, they are ashamed to
Err, because it is the propriety of their Nature, to Know. Thus we see that
a Philosopher being taken at a fault in his Discourse, will blush, as if he had
committed something unworthy of himself, and truly the very Sense of this
Disgrace prevails so far with some, they had rather persist in their Error,
and defend it against the Truth, than acknowledge their Infirmities; in which
respect I make no Question but many Peripatetics are perversely ignorant. It may
be they will scarcely hear, what I speak, or if they hear, they will not
understand: howsoever I advise them not wilfully to prevent, and hinder that
glorious end and perfection, for which the very Author, and Father of Nature
created them. It is a terrible thing to praefer Aristotel to AEelohim, and
condemn the Truth of God, to justify the Opinions of Man. Now for my part I
dare not be so irreligious, as to think God so vain, and improvident in his
works, that he should plant in Man a Desire to know, and yet deny him
Knowledge it self. This in plain terms were to give me Eyes, and afterward
shutt me up in Darkness, lest I should see with those eyes. This earnest
Longing, and busy Inquisition wherein Men tire themselves to attain to the
Truth, made a certain Master of Truth speak in this fashion. Ergo liquido
apparet in hac Mundi structura, quam cernimus, aliquam triumphare Veritatem;
quae toties rationem nostram commovet, agitat, implicat, explicat; toties
inquietam, toties insomnem miris modis sollicitat, non fortuitis, aut aliunde
adventitiis, sed suis and propiis, and originariis Naturae Illicibus; quae
omnia cum non fiunt frustra, utique contingit, ut Veritatem Eorum quae sunt,
aliquo tandem opportuno tempore amplexemur. It is clear therefore (says he)
that in this Fabric of the world, which we behold, there is some Truth that
rules; which Truth so often stirrs up, puzzles, and helps our Reason; so often
sollicites her when she is restless, so often when she is watchful, and this
by strange means, not casual and adventitious, but by genuine provocations and
pleasures of nature; All which Motions being not to no purpose, it falls out at
last that in some good time we attain to the true Knowledge of those things
that are. But because I would not have you build your Philosophy on Coralls
and whistles, which are the Objects of little Children, of whom we have spoken
formerly, I will speak some what of those Elements, in whose Contemplation a Man
ought to employ himself, and this Discourse may serve as a Preface to our whole
Philosophy. Man according to Trismegistus has but two Elements in his power,
namely Earth and Water: To which Doctrine I add this, and I have it from a
Greater than Hermes, That God has made Man absolute Lord of the first Matter,
and from the first matter, and the Dispensation thereof, all the fortunes of
man both good and bad do proceed. According to the Rule, and Measure of this
Substance all the world are rich or poor, and he that knows it truly, and
withal the true use thereof, he can make his fortunes constant, but he that
knows it not, though his Estate be never so great, stands on a slipperie
Foundation. Look about thee then, and consider how thou art compassed with
infinite Treasures, and miracles, but thou art so blind, thou do not see
them: nay, thou art so mad, thou do think there is no use to be made of
them, for thou do believe that Knowledge is a mere Peripateticall Chatt,
and that the Fruits of it are not Works, but words. If this were true, I would
never advise thee to spend one Minute of thy life upon Learning, I would first
be one of those should ruin all Libraries and Universities in the world, which
God forbid, any good Christian should desire. Look up then to Heaven, and when
thou see the Celestial fires move in their swift and glorious Circles,
think also there are here below some cold Natures, which they overlook, and
about which they move incessantly to heat, and concoct them. Consider again,
that the Middle spirit, I mean the Air, is interposed as a Refrigeratorie, to
temper and qualify that Heat, which otherwise might be too violent. If thou
do descend lower, and fix thy Thoughts where thy feet are, that thy wings
may be like those of Mercury, at thy Heels; thou will find the Earth
surrounded with the Water, and that Water heated, and stirred by the Sun and
his stars, abstracts from the Earth the pure, subtle, saltish parts, by which
means the water is thickened, and coagulated as with a Rennet: out of these two
Nature generates all things. Gold and Silver, Pearls and Diamonds are nothing
else but water, and salt of the Earth concocted. Behold! I have in a few words
discovered unto thee the whole system of Nature, and her Royal Highway of
Generation. It is thy Duty now to improve the Truth, and in my Book thou
may, if thou art wise, find thy Advantages. The four Elements are the
Objects, and implicitly the Subjects of Man, but the Earth is invisible. I know
the common Man will stare at this, and judge me not very sober, when I affirm
the Earth, which of all substances is most gross and palpable, to be invisible.
But on my soul it is so, and which is more, the Eye of Man never saw the
Earth, nor can it be seen without Art. To make this Element visible, is the
greatest secret in Magic, for it is a miraculous Nature, and of all others the
most holy, according to that Computation of Trismegistus, Coelum, Ether, Aer,
and sacratissima Terra. As for this Faeculent, gross Body upon which we walk,
it is a Compost, and no Earth, but it has Earth in it, and even that also is
not our Magical Earth. In a word all the Elements are visible but one, namely
the Earth, and when thou have attained to so much perfection, as to know why
God has placed the Earth in Obscondito, thou have an Excellent Figure whereby
to know God himself, and how he is visible, how invisible. Hermes affirms,
that in the Beginning the Earth was a Quakemire, or quivering kind of Jelly, it
being nothing else but water congealed by the Incubation, and heat of the Divine
spirit; Cum adhuc (says he) Terra tremula esset, Lucente sole compacta est.
When as yet the Earth was a Quivering, shaking substance, the Sun afterward
shining upon it, did compact it, or make it Solid. The same Author introduces
God, speaking to the Earth, and impregnating her with all sorts of seeds in
these words; Cumque manus aque validas implesset rebus, quae in Natura,
Ambienteque erant, and pugnos valide constringens; Sum (inquit) o Sacra Terra,
quae Genitrix omnium es futura, ne ulla re egena videaris; and manus, quales
oportet Deum habere, expandens, demisit Omnia ad rerum Constitutionem
necessaria. When God (says he) had filled his powerful hands with those
things which are in Nature, and in that which compasses Nature, then shutting
them close again, he said; Receive from me O holy Earth! that art ordained to
be the Mother of all, lest thou should want any thing; when presently opening
such hands as it becomes a God to have, he powered down All that was Necessary
to the Constitution of things. Now the meaning of it is this; The Holy Spirit
moving upon the Chaos, which Action some Divines compare to the Incubation of a
Hen upon her Eggs, did together with his Heat communicate other manifold
Influences to the Matter; For as we know the Sun does not only dispense heat,
but some other secret Influx; so did God also in the Creation, and from him the
Sun and all the stars received what they have, for God himself is a
supernatural Sun, or fire, according to that Oracle of Zoroaster, Factor, Qui
per se operans fabrefecit Mundum,
Quaedam ignis Moles erat altera.


He did therefore hatch the Matter, and bring out the secret Essences, as a
Chick is brought out of the shell, whence that other Position of the same
Zoroaster, Omnia sub uno Igne genita esse.

Neither did he only generat 'em then, but he also preserves them now, with a
perpetual Efflux of heat and spirit; Hence he is styled in the Oracles, Pater
Hominumque Deumque
Affatim animans Ignem, Lucem, AEthera, Mundos.


This is Advertisement enough: And now Reader, I must tell thee, I have met
with some late Attempts on my two former Discourses, but truth is Proof, and I
am so far from being overcome, that I am no where understood. When I first eyed
the Libell, and its Address to Philalethes, I judge d the Author serious, and
that his Design was not to abuse me, but to inform Himself. This Conceit
quickly vanished, for perusing his forepart, his Ears shot out of his skin,
and presented him a perfect Ass. His Observations are one continued (...) and
the Oyster-Whores read the same Philosophy every day. It Is a Scurril,
senseless Piece, and as he well styles himself, a Chip of a Block-head.

His qualities indeed are transcendent abroad, but they are peers at home: his
Malice is equal to his Ignorance. I laughed to see the fools disease: A flux
of Gale, which made him still at the Chops, whiles another held the Press for
him like Porphyries Basin to Aristotle's Well. There is something in him
prodigious: his Excrements run the wrong way, for his mouth stools, and he is
so far from man, that he is the Aggravation to a Beast. These are his parts,
and for his person, I turn him over to the Dog-whippers, that he may be well
lashed, a posteriori, and bear the Errata of his front imprinted in his Rere. I
cannot yet find a fitter punishment: For since his Head could learn nothing but
Nonsense, by sequel of parts, his Tail should be taught some sense.

This is all, at this time, and for my present Discourse, I wish it the common
fortune of Truth and Honesty, to deserve well, and hear ill. As for Applause,
I fish not so much in the Air, as to catch it. It is a kind of Popularitie,
which makes me scorn it, for I defy the Noise of the Rout, because they
observe not the Truth, but the success of it. I do therefore commit this piece
to the world, without any protection but its own worth, and the AEstimat of
that Soul that understands it. For the Rest, as I cannot force, so I will not
beg their Approbation. I would not be great by Imposts, nor rich by Briefes.
They may be what they will, and I shall be what I am.

Eugen. Phila.

Magia Adamica: Or, The Antiquity of Magic, etc.
Coelum Terrae, etc.
THat I should profess Magic in this Discourse, and Justify the Professors of
it withal, is Impiety with Many, but Religion with Me. It is a Conscience I
have learnt from Authors greater than my Self, and Scriptures greater than
Both. Magic is nothing else but the Wisdom of the Creator revealed and planted
in the Creature. It is a Name (as Agrippa says) ipsi Evangelio non ingratum,
not Distastefull to the very Gospel it self. Magicians were the first
Attendants our Savior met withal in this world, and the only Philosophers,
who acknowledged Him in the Flesh before that he himself discovered it. I find
God Conversant with Them, as He was formerly with the Patriarchs; He directs
Them in their Travails with a Star, as he did the I sraelites with a Pillar of
Fire; He informs Them of future Dangers in their Dreams, that having first
seen his Son, they might in the next place see his Salvation. This makes me
believe They were Filii Prophetarum, as well as Filii Artis; Men that were
acquainted with the very same Mysteries, by which the Prophets acted before
them. To reconcile this Science, and the Masters of it to the world, is an
Attempt more plausible, than possible, the prejudice being so great, that
neither Reason, nor Authority can balance it. If I were to persuade a Jew to
my Principles, I could do it with two words (...) the Hachamim, or Wisemen have
spoken it. Give him but the Authority of his Fathers, and presently he
submits to the Seal. Verily our Primitive Galilaeans (I mean those Christians
whose Lamps burnt near the Cross, and Funer all) were most Compendious in
their Initiations. A Proselyt in those days was confirmed with a simple (...)
Believe, and no more. Nay, the solemnity of this short Induction was such,
that Julian made it the Topic to his Apostasy; (...) you have (said he)
nothing more than your Creed, to establish your Religion. Such was the
simplicity of those first Times, dum calebat cruor Christi, whiles his wounds
were as yet in their Eyes, and his blood warm at their Hearts. But Alas! those
holy Drops are frozen, our Salvation is translated from the Cross to the Rack,
and dismembered in the Inquisition-house of Aristotle. Be not angry O
Peripatetic! for what else shall I call thy Schools, where by several Sects
and Factions Scripture is so seriously murdered Pro and Con! A spleen first
bred, and afterward promoted by Disputes, whose damnable Divisions and
Distinctions have minced one Truth into a Thousand haereticall whimzies. But
the Breach is not considered: Divinity still is but Chaff, if it be not sifted
by the Engine, if it acts not by the Demonstrative Hobbyhorse. Thus Zeal
poisoned with Logic breathes out Contentious Calentures, and Faith quitting her
wings and Perspective, leans on the Reed of a Sytlogism. Certainly I cannot yet
conceive, how Reason may judge those Principles, Quorum Veritas pendet a sola
Revelant is authoritate, whose Certainty wholly depends on God, and by
Consequence is indemonstrable without the Spirit of God. But if I should grant
that, which I will ever deny: Verily, a True Faith consists not in Reason, but
in Love; for I receive my Principles, and believe Them being received Solo erga
Revelantem amore; only out of my Affection to Him that reveals them.

Thus our Savior would have the Jews to believe Him first for his own sake,
and when that failed for His Works sake; But some Divines believe only for
Aristotle's sake, if Logic renders the Tenet probable, then it is Creed, if not
it is Alcoran. Nevertheless Aristotle himself, who was first Pedlar to this
ware, and may for Sophistry take place of Ignatius in his own Conclave, has
left us this Concession: (...) That Reason is subject to Error, as well as
Opinion. And Philoponus expounding these words of his, That is, We say not
only Science, but the Principle also of Science to be something whereby we
understand the Terms.
Non solum scientiam, sed and Principium Scientiae esse aliquod duimus, Quo
Terminos cognoscimus, has this excellent and Christian observation. (...)
Taking indeca (says he) the mind, to be the Principle, or first Cause of
Knowledge, not our own, but that of God, which is above us: but taking the
Terms to be Intellectual, and Divine Forms. Thus according to Aristotle (if
you trust the Commem) the Divine mind is the first Cause of Knowledge: for if
this Mind once unfolds himself, and sheds his light upon us, we shall
apprehend the Intellectual Forms, or Types of all things that are within him.
These Forms he very properly calls (...) because they terminat, or end all
Things: For by them the Creature is defined, and has his Individuation, or to
speak with Scotus, his Haecceitie, by which he is This, and not That. This now
is the Demonstration we should look after, namely the Expansion, or opening of
the Divine Mind, not a Syllogism, that runns perhaps on all Four. If once we
be admitted to this Communion of Light, we shall be able with the Apostle to
give a Reason for our Faith, but never without it. Now you are to understand
that God unfolds not himself, nisi magno Coelo prius patefacto, unless the
Heaven of Man be first unfolded. Amovete ergo velamen Intellectus C. Agrip.
vestri, Cast of the veil that is before your faces, and you shall be no more
blind. God is not God a far off, but God at hand. Behold (says he) I stand at
the Door, and knock: Open your selves then, for it is written, If any man
opens, I will come in, and Sup with Him. This is the inward Mystical, not the
outward Typical Supper, and this is the Spiritual Baptism with Fire, not that
Elemental one with water. Truly I am much comforted, when I consider two
Things; First, that Magic did afford the first Professors of Christianity,
whose Knowledge and Devotion brought them from the East to Jerusalem. Secondly,
that this Art should suffer as Religion does, and for the very same Reason. The
main Motives, which have occasioned the present Rents, and Divisions of the
Church, are the Ceremonies and Types used in it. For without Controversy the
Apostles instituted, and left behind them certain Elements or Signs, as
Water, Oil, Salt and Lights, by which they signisied unto us some great, and
reverend Mysteries. But our Reformers mistaking these things for superstitious,
turned them all out of Doors. But verily it was ill done: for if the shadow of
Saint Peter healed, shall not these shadows of Christ do much more? The
Papist on the contrary knowing not the signification of these Types, did place
a certain Inhaerent holiness in them, and so fell into a very dangerous
Idolatry. I omit many Things which he invented of his own, as Images, Holy
Lambs, and Relics, adding these dead Bones to the Primitive, and beauteous
Body of the Church. Now to draw up the Parallel: The Magicians, they also
instituted certain Signs, as the Clavis to their Art, and these were the same
with the former, Namely Water, Oil, Salt and Light, by which they tacitly
discovered unto us their Three Principles, and the Light of Nature, which fills
and actuats all Things. The common Man perusing their Books, but not their
Sense, took Candles, Common Water, Oil, and Salt, and began to Consecrat, and
exorcise them, to make up his damnable and Devilish Magic. The Magicians had a
Maxim amongst themselves, Quod nulla vox operatur in Magia, nisi prius Dei voce
formetur, That no word is efficacious in Magic, unless it be first animated
with the word of God. Hence in their Books there was frequent mention made of
Verbum, and Sermo, which the Common Man interpreting to his own Fancy,
invented his Charms, and Vocabula, by which he promised to do wonders. The
Magicians in their writings did talk much of Triangles and Circles, by which
they intimated unto us their more secret Triplicitie, with the Rotation of
Nature from the Beginning of her Week, to her Sabbath. By this Circle also, or
Rotation they affirmed that Spirits might be bound, meaning that the Soul might
be united to the Body. Presently upon this the Common Man fansied his Triangles
and characters, with many strange Cobwebs or Figures, and a Circle to Conjure
in; but knowing not what Spirit that was, which the Magicians did bind, he
labored, and studied to bind the Devil. Now if thou will question me, who
these Magicians were? I must tell thee, They were Kings, they were Priests,
they were Prophets: Men that were acquainted with the Substantial, Spiritual
Mysteries of Religion, and did deal, or dispense the outward Typical part of
it to the People. Here then we may see how Magic came to be out of Request;
For the Lawyers and Common Divines, who knew not these Secrets, perusing the
Ceremonial, Superstitious Trash of some Scriblers, who praetended to Magic,
praescribed against the Art it self as Impious, and Antichristian, so that it
was a Capital sin to profess it, and the Punishment no less than Death. In
the Interim those few who were Masters of the Science, observing the first
Monitories of it, buried all in a deep Silence. But God having suffered his
Truth to be obscured for a great time, did at last stir up some resolute, and
active spirits, who putting the Pen to paper, expelled this Cloud, and in some
measure discovered the Light. The Leaders of this brave Body, were Cornelius
Agrippa, Libanius Gallus, the Philosopher, Johannes Tritemius, Georgius
Venetus, Johannes Reuclin, called in the Greek Capnion, with several others in
their several Days. And after all These as an Usher to the Train, and one
borne out of due time, Eugenius Philalethes.

Seeing then I have publicly undertaken a Province, which I might have
governed privately with much more Content and Advantage, I think it not enough
to have discovered the Abuses and misfortunes this Science has suffered,
unless I endeavor withal to demonstrate the Antiquity of it. For certainly
it is with Arts, as it is with Men their Age and Continuance are good Arguments
of their strength, and Integrity. Most apposit then was that Check of the
Egyptian to Solon: O Solon, Solon! Vos Graeci semper pueriestis, nullam
habentes antiquam Opinionem, nullam Disciplinam tempore canam; You Graecians
(said he) are ever childish, having no Ancient opinion, no Discipline of any
long standing. But as I confess my self no Antiquarie, so I wish some Seldon
would stand in this Breach, and make it up with those Fragments, which are so
near Dust, that Time may put them in his Glass. I know for my own part, it is
an Enterprise I cannot sufficiently perform, but since my hand is already in
the Bag, I will draw out those few Pebbles I have, and thus I sting them at the
Mark.

This Art, or rather this Mystery is to be considered several ways, and
that because of its several Subjects. The Primitive, Original Existence of it
is in God himself: for it is nothing else but the practice, or operation of the
Divine Spirit working in the matter, uniting Principles into Compounds, and
resolving those Compounds into their Principles. In this Sense we seek not the
Antiquity of it, for it is AEternal, being a Notion of the Divine Wisdom, and
Existent before all Time, or the Creation of it. Secondly, we are to Consider
it in a Derivative Sense, as it was imparted, and communicated to Man, and this
properly was no Birth, or Beginning, but a Discovery, or Revelation of the
Art. From this Time of its Revelation, we are to measure the Antiquity of it,
where it shall be our Task to demonstrat upon what Motives God did reveal it,
as also to whom, and when.

The Eye discovers not beyond that stage, wherein it is Conversant, but the
Ear receives the Sound a great way off. To give an experieuc'd Testimony of
Actions more Ancient than our selves, is a thing impossible for us, unless we
could look into that Glass, where all Occurrences may be seen, Past, Present,
and to Come. I must therefore build my Discourse on the Traditions of those
Men, to whom the Word, both Written and Mystical was entrusted, and these were
the Jews in General, but more particularly their Cabalists. It is not my
Intention to rest on these Rabbis as Fundamentals, but I will justify their
Assertions out of Scripture, and intertain my Reader with Proofs, both Divine
and Humane. Finally, I will pass out of Judaea into Egypt and Graece, where
again I shall meet with these Mysteries, and prove that this Science did
stream (as the Chimists say, their Salt-Fountain does) out of Jurie, and
watered the whole Earth.

It is the constant Opinion of the Hebrews, That before the Fall of Adam there
was a more plentiful and large Communion between Heaven and Earth, God and the
Elements, than there is now in our Days. But upon the Transgression of the
first Man. Malcuth (say the Cabalists) was cut off from the Ilan, so that a
Breach was made between both Worlds, and their Chanel of Influences
discontinued. Now Malcuth is the Invisible Archetypall Moon, by which our
visible Caelestiall Moon is governed, and impraegnated: And truly it may be
that upon this Retreat of the Divine Light from Infe riors, those Spots and
Darkness, which we now see, succeeded in the Body of this Planet, and not in her
alone, but about the Sun also, as it has been discovered by the Telescope.
Thus (say They) God to punish the Sin of Adam withdrew himself from the
Creatures, so that they were not feasted with the same measure of Influences as
formerly. For the Archetypall Moon which is placed in the (...) Haschamaim, to
receive, and convey down the Influx of the six superior Invisible Planets, was
(as the Jews affirm) either separated from the Ilan, or her Broasts were so
sealed up that she could not dispense her Milk to Inferiors in that happy and
Primitive Abundance. But because I would not dwell long on this point, let us
hear the Cabalist himself state it in a clear, and apposit phrase. Initio
Porta Lucis.
Creationis Mundi Divina Cohabitatio erat descendens in Inferiora, and cum
esset Divina Cohabitatio inferius, reperti sunt Coeli and Terra uniti, and
erant Fontes, and Canales activi in perfectione, and trahebantur a Superiore ad
Inferius, and inveniebatur Deus complens superne and Inferne. Venit Adam
primus, and peccavit, and diruti sunt Descensus, and confracti sunt Canales,
and desiit Aquae-ductus, and cessavit Divina Cohabitatio, and divisa est
Societas.

That is: In the Beginning of the Creation of the world God did descend, and
cohabitat with Things here below, and when the Divine Habitation was here
below, the Heavens and the Earth were found to be united, and the Vital Springs
and Channels were in their perfection, and did flow from the Superior to the
Inferior World, and God was found to fill all Things both Above, and Beneath.
Adam the first Man came, and sinned, whereupon the Descents from above were
restrained, and their Channels were broken, and the Watercourse was no more,
and the Divine Cohabitation ceased, and the Society was divided. Thus far my
Rabbi; Now because I have promised Scripture to my Cabalism, I will submit the
Tradition. to Moses, and truly that Rabbi also is of my side, for thus I read
in Genesis. And to Adam he said, Cap. 3. v. 17.
Because thou have eaten of the Tree, whereof I commanded I he saying, Thou
shall not eat of it: Cursed is the Ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the Days of thy Life, Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth
unto Thee, and Thou shall eat the Herb of the Field. In the sweat of thy face
shall Thou eat Bread, until thou return unto the Ground, for out of it wast
thou taken, for Dust Thou art, and to Dust shall thou return. This is the
Curse, and Adam was so sensible of it, that he acquainted his posterity with
it. For Lamech prophesying of his Son Noah, has these words. This same shall
comfort us, concerning our Cap. 5. v. 29.
work, and Toil of our Hands, because of the Ground, which the Lord has
cursed. And this indeed was accomplished in some sense after the Flood, as the
same Scripture tells us. And Cap. 8. v. 25.
the Lord said in his Heart, I will not Again curse the Ground any more for
Man's sake. Here now we are to consider two Things: First, The Curse it self,
and next the Latitude of it. To manifest the Nature of the Curse, and what it
was, you must know, that Good essentially is Light, and Evil is Darkness. The
Evil properly is a Corruption that immediately takes place upon the Removal of
that which is Good. Thus God having removed his Candlestick and Light from the
Elements, presently the Darkness and Cold of the Matter praevailed, so that the
Earth was nearer her first Deformity, and by Consequence less fruitful and
Vital. Heaven and Hell, that is Light and Darkness, are the two Extremes which
Consummat Good and Evil. But there are some mean Blessings which are but, in
ordine, or disposing to Heaven, which is their last perfection, and such were
these Blessings, which God recalled upon the Transgression of the first Man.
Again there are some Evils, which are but 'Degrees conducing to their last
Extremity, or Hell, and such was this Curse or Evil, which succeeded the
Transgression. Thus our Savior under these Notions of Blessed and Cursed
comprehends the Inhabitants of Light and Darkness: Come you Blessed, and Go you
Cursed. In a word then, The Curse was Nothing else but an Act repealed, or a
Restraint of those Blessings which God of his mere Goodness, had formerly
communicated to his Creatures: And thus I conceive there is a very fair and
full Harmony between Moses and the Cabalists. But to omit their Depositions,
though great and high, we are not to seek in this point for the Testimony of
an Angel. For the Tutor of Esdras, amongst his other Mysterious Instructions,
has also this Doctrine. Cap. 7. V. 11, 12, 13.
When Adam transgressed my Statutes, then was that decreed, which now is done.
Then were the Entrances of this World made Narrow, full of sorrow, and Travel:
They are but few and Evil, full of perils, and very painful. But the
Entrances of the Elder World, were wide and sure, and brought forth Immortal
Fruit. Thus much for the Curse it self: Now for the Latitude of it, It is true
that it was intended Chiefly for Man, who was the only Cause of it, but
Extended to the Elements in Order to him, and for his sake. For if God had
excluded him from Eden, and Continued the Earth in her Primitive Glories, he
had but turned him out of one Paradise into Another, wherefore he fits the
Dungeon to the Slave, and sends a Corruptible Man into a Corruptible World. But
in Truth it was not Man, nor the Earth alone that suffered in this Curse, but
all other Creatures also; For says God to the Serpent, Thou art Cursed above
all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field, so that Cattle and Beasts also
were cursed in some measure, but this Serpent above Them all. To this also
agrees the Apostle in his Epistle to the Cap. 8. v. 20.
Romans, where he has these words. For the Creature was made subject to
Vanity, not willingly, but by Reason of him, who has subjected the same in
hope. Because the Creature it self also, shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God. Here by the
Creature he understands not Man, but the inferior species, which he
distinguishes from the Children of God, though he allows them both the same
Liberty. But this is more plain out of the subsequent Texts, where he makes a
clear Difference between Man, and the whole Creation. For we know ( says he)
that the whole Creation groaneth, and travaileth together in pain until now.
And not only They, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the
spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption,
to wit, the Redemption of our Body. Here we see the first Fruits of the spirit,
referred to Man, and why not some second subordinat fruits of it to the
Creatures in General? for as they were cursed in the Fall of Man, for Man's
sake, so it seems in his Restitution they shall be also blessed for his sake.
But of this enough. Let us now sum up and consider the several inconveniences
our first Parent was Subject to, for they will be of some use with us
hereafter. First of all, he was ejected from the presence of God, and exposed
to the Malice and Tentations of the Devil. He was altered from Good to Bad,
from Incorruptible to Corruptible: In the Day (says the Scripture) Thou eatest
thereof, Thou shall dye the Death. He was excluded from a glorious Paradyse,
and confined to a base world, whose sickly infected Elements conspiring with
his own Nature, did assist and hasten that Death, which already began to reign
in his Body. Heaven did mourn over him, The Earth, and all her Generations
about him. He looked upon himself as a Felon, and a Murderer, being guilty of
that Curse and Corruption, which succeeded in the world because of his fall, as
we have sufficiently proved out of the Mosaicall and Cabalisticall Traditions.
He was Ignorant, and therefore hopeles of Life aeternal, and for this Temporal
present Life, he was not acquainted with the Provisions of it. The Elements of
Husbandry were not as yet known, there was neither House nor Plow, nor any of
those manual Arts, which make up a worldly providence. He was exposed to the
Violence of Rains and Winds, Frosts and Snows, and in a word deprived of all
Comforts Spiritual, and Natural. What should I say more? He was a mere stranger
in this World, could not distinguish Medicines from Poisons, neither was he
skilled in the ordinary praeparations of Meat and Drink. He had no Victuals
ready to his hands, but the crude unseasoned Herbage of the Earth, so that he
must either starve, or feed as Nebuchadnezar did, with the Beasts of the Field.
He heard indeed sometimes of a Tree of Life in Eden, but the Vegetables of this
world for ought he knew might be so many Trees of Death. I conclude therefore
that he had some Instructor to initiat him in the ways of Life, and to show
him the intricate and narrow paths of that wilderness. For without question his
outward Miseries, and his inward Despair were Motives whereupon God did
reveal a certain Art unto Him, by which he might relieve his present
Necessities, and embrace a firm Hope of a future and glorious Restitution. For
God having ordained a second aeternal Adam, did by some mysterious Experience
manifest the possibility of his coming to the First, Who being now full of
Despair, and overcharged with the Guilt of his own sin was a very fit Patient
for so Divine and merciful a Physician. But omitting our own Reasons, which we
might produce to this purpose, let us repair to the Cabalists, who indeed are
very high in the Point, and thus they deliver themselves. God (say they) having
made fast the Doors of his Paradyse, and turned out Adam, sometimes the
Dearest of his Creatures, did notwithstanding the Present Punishment, retain
his former Affection toward him still. For God is said to love his Creatures
not that there is any thing lovely in Them without their Creator, but in that
he desires their perfection: That is to say he would have them Conformable to
himself, and fit to receive his Image or Similitude, which is a spiritual
Impress of his Beauty. Now to restore this Similitude in Adam was impossible
unless God should reassume that to himself which was now fallen from him. So
transcendent, and almost incredible a Mercy had God treasured up in his secret
Will, being resolved to unite the Nature of Man to his Own, and so vindicat him
from Death, by taking him into the Deity, which is the true Fountain and
Center of Life. This Will (say the Cabalists) was first revealed to the Angels,
and that by God himself in these words; Ecce Adam sicut unus Genesis cap. 3. ver.
22.
ex Nobis: Behold an Adam like one of us, knowing Good and Evil! This speech
they call Orationem occultissimam a Creatore Mundi cum beatis Angelis in suae
Divinitatis Penetralibus habitam; A most secret Conference which God had with
the blessed Angels in the Inner-Chambers of Heaven. Now that the same Scripture
should speak one thing in the Letter, and another in the Mystery, is not
strange to me, how difficult soever it may seem to another. For verily this
Text may not concern the first Adam, who knowing Evil by Committing it, could
not be like God in respect of that Knowledge, which made him sinful, and
altogether unlike him. For God (if I may so express it) knows the Evil only
speculatively, in as much as nothing can escape his Knowledge, and therefore is
not guilty of Evil: For as Tritemius has well observed, Scientia Mali non est
Malum, sed usus; The knowledge of Evil is not Evil, but the practice of it.
It remains then, that this Speech concerned the Second Adam, Christ Jesus, who
knew the Evil, but did not commit it, and therefore was like one of us, that
is like One of the Trinity, knowing Good and Evil, and yet no way guilty of
the Evil. This primitive and Compendious Gospel was no sooner imparted to the
Angels, but they became Ministers of it, the Law (as St. Paul says) being
ordained in their hands, till Christ should take it into his own and their
Administration to Man took Beginning with this Oracle. Thus (say the Cabalists)
Raziel the Angel was presently dispatched to communicate the Intelligence to
Adam, and to acquaint him with the Mysteries of both world, AEternall, and
Temporal. For as he could not obtain the Blessings of the AEternall World,
unless by a true faith he apprehended the Three AEternall Principles of it, so
neither could he fully enjoy the benefits of this Temporal World, unless he
truly understood the Three Visible substances whereof it consists. For there
are Three above, and Three beneath, Three (as St. John says) in Heaven, and
Three on Earth; The Inferior bear witness of the Superior, and are their only
proper Receptacles. They are Signatures and Created Books, where we may read
the Mysteries of the supernatural Trinity. But to proceed in our former
Discourse: The Cabalists do not only attribute a Guardian to Adam, but to
every one of the Patriarchs, allowing Them their Praesidents and Tutors both to
assist and instruct Them in their wearisome and worldly Peregrinations. A
Doctrine in my Opinion not more Religious than Necessary, how Prodigious soever
it may seem to some Phantastic, insiped Theologicians. For Certainly it is
impossible for us to find out Mysteries of our selves, we must either have the
Spirit of God, or the Instruction of his Ministers, whereher they be Men or
Angels. And thus we see out of the Traditions and Doctrine of the Jews, how
their Cabala, and our Magic came first into the world. I shall now examine the
Scriptures, and consult with them: where (if I am not much mistaken) I shall
find some Consequences, which must needs depend on these Principles, and thus I
apply my self to the Task.

The first Harvest I read of, was that of Cain, and the first Flocks, those of
Abel. A Shepherds life in those Early Days was no difficult Profession, it
being an Employment of more Care, than Art, but how the Earth was plowed up
before the sound of Tubal's Hammers, is a piece of Husbandry unknown in these
Days. Howsoever it was a Labor performed, and not without Retribution. Cain
has his Sheaves, as well as Abel his Lambs: both of them receive, and both
acknowledge the Benefit. I find established in these Two a certain Priesthood,
they attend both to the Altar, and the first Blood was shed by Sacrifice the
Second by Murder.

Now so dull am I, and so short of Syllogismes, those strange Pumps, and
Hydragogues, which lave the Truthex Puteo, like Water, that all my Reason
cannot make these Men Levits without Revelation. For I desire to know how came
they first to Sacrifise, and by whom were they initiated? If you will say, by
Adam: The Question indeed is deferred, but not satisfied For I would know
further In what School was Adam instructed? Now that it was impossible for him
to invent these Shadows and Sacraments of himself, I will undertake to
Demonstrate and that by invincible Reason, which no Adversary shall dare to
contradict.

It is most certain that the Hope and Expectation of Man in Matters of
Sacrifices, consist in the Thing signisied, and not in the Sign it self. For
the Material Corruptible shadow is not the Object of Faith but the Spiritual,
aeternall Prototype, which answers to it, and makes the dead figure Effectual.
The Sacrifices of the Old Testament, and the Elements of the New, can be no way
acceptable with God, but inafmuch as they have a Relation to Christ Jesus, who
is the great, perfect Sacrifice offered up once for all. It is plain then that
Sacrifices were first instituted upon supernatural grounds, for in Nature there
is no reason to be found, why God should be pleased with the Death of his
Creatures. Nay the very Contrary is written in that Book, for Death both
Natural and Violent proceeds not from the pleasure, but from the displeasure of
the Creator. I know the learned Alkind builds the efficacy of Sacrifices on a
Sympathy of parts with the great world; for there is in every Animal a portion
of the star-fire; which fire upon the Dissolution of the Compound is united to
the General fire from whence it first came, and produces a sense, or Motion in
the Limbus to which it is united. This indeed is true, but that Motion causes
no Joy there, and by Consequence no Reward to the Sacrificer: for I shall make
it to appear elsewhere that the Astral Mother does mourn, and not rejoice at
the Death of her Children. Now if we look back on these two first Sacrificers,
we shall find Abel and his Oblation accepted, which could not be, had he not
offerr'd it up as a Symbol, or Figure of his Savior. To drive home my Argument
then, I say, that this knowledge of the Type, in whom all offerings were
acceptable, could not be obtained by any humane Industry, but by sole
Revelation. For the Passion of Christ Jesus was an Ordinance wrapped up in the
secret will of God, and he that would know it, must of Necessity be of his
Council. Hence it is called in Scripture the Hidden Mystery, for the Truth
and Certainty of it, was not to be received from any, but only from him, who
had both the Will, and the Power to ordain it. But if you will tell me (like
the Author of the Praedicables) that men sacrifised at first by the Instinct of
Nature, and without any Respect Porphyr. de Sacrif.
to the Type, I shall indeed thank you for my mirth, whenever you give me so
just a Reason to laugh. It remains then a most firm infallible Foundation that
Adam was first instructed concerning the Passion, and in order to that, he was
taught further, to Sacrifise, and offer up the Bloods of Beasts as Types and
Prodroms of the Blood of Christ Jesus, the Altars of the Law being but steps to
the Cross of the Gospel. Now if it be objected that several Nations have
sacrifised, who did not know God at all, much less the Son of God, who is the
Prototype and perfection of all Oblations: To this I answer, that the Custom
of Sacrificing was communicated to Heathens by Tradition from the first Man:
who having instructed his own Children, they also delivered it to their
Posterity, so that this Vizard of Religion remained, thought the Substance and
true Doctrine of it was lost. And thus in my Opinion it sufficiently appears,
that the first men did sacrifise, not by Nature as Prophrrius that Encmie of
our Religion would have it, but some by Revelation, others by Custom and
Tradition. But now I think upon it, I have Scripture to confirm me concerning
this Primitive Revelation, for Solomon numbering those serverall Blessings which
the Divine Wisdom imparted to the Ancient Fathers, amongst the rest specifies
her Indulgence to Adam. She praeserved (says he) the first formed Father of
the world, that was created alone, and brought him out of his Fall. Here I find
Adam in some measure restored, and how could that be, but by discovering unto
him the Great Restorative Christ Jesus, the second Adam in whom he was to
believe? for without Faith he could not have been brought out of his Fall, and
without Christ revealed, and preached unto him, he could have no Faith, for
he knew not what to believe. It remains then that he was instructed, for as
in these last days we are taught by the Son of God, and his Apostles; so in
those first times they were taught by the Spirit of God and his ministering
Angels. These were their Tutors, for of them they heard the Word, and verily
we are told that faith comes by hearing.

It is now (as I think) sufficiently proved, that Adam had his Metaphysics from
Above: our next Service (and perhaps somewhat difficult) is, to give some
probable. if not Demonstrative reasons, that they came not alone but had their
Physics also to attend them. I know the Scriptures are not positive in this
point, and hence the Sects will lug their Consequence of Reprobation. Truly for
my part. I desire not Coloss. 2. 8.
their Hum but their patience: I have though against the Praecept for many
years attended their Philosophy, and if they spend a few hours on my
Spermalogie it may cost them some part Act. 17. 18
of their Justice, but none of their Favors. But that we may come to the thing
in hand; I hold it very Necessary to distinguish Arts, for I have not yet seen
any Author, who has fully considered their difference. The Art I speak of, is
truly Physical in Subject, Method, and Effect But as for Arts publicly
professed, and to the Disadvantage of Truth allowed, not one of them is so
qualified: for they are mere Knacks and Bables of the Hand, or Brain, having
no firm Fundamentals in Nature. These in my opinion S^l^^o^ numbers amongst his
Vanities, when he speaks in a certain Ecclesiast. 7. 29.
place, That God had made man upright, but he had sought out many Inventions.
Of these Inventions we have a short Catalogue in Genesis, where Moses separates
the Corn from the Chaff, the Works of God, from the Whymzies of Man. Thus we
read that Jabal was the Genesis 4. 20.
Father of such as dwell in Tents, his brother Jubal the father of all such as
handle the Harp and Organ, and Tubal-Cain an Instructor of every Artificer in
Brass and Iron. What mischiefs have succeeded this Brasse-and-Iron Cyclops, I
need not tell you: if you know not the fates of former Times, you may study
the Actions of your own, you live in an Age that can instruct you. Verily, it
is worth our observation that these Arts, and their tools, proceeded not from
the Posterity of Seth, in whose Line our Savior stands, for as we shall make
it appear hereafter questionless they had a better knowledge; But they
proceeded from the Seed of Cain, who in Action was a Murderer, and in the
Circumstance of it a fratricide.

To be short, there is no Vanity to the Vanity of Sciences, I mean those
Inventions, and their Professors, which produce nothing true and Natural, but
Effects either false, or in their Ends corrupt and Violent. But it is no
Conquest to tread on Ruins, Cornelius Agrippa, has already De vanit. Scient.
laid these Rodomontados in the Dirt, and that so handsomely, they were never
since of a general Reputation. Give me an Art then, that is a perfect entire
Map of the Creation, that can lead me directly to the Knowledge of the true
God, by which I can discover those Universal invisible Essences which are
subordinat to him; An Art that is no way subject to Evil, and by which I can
attain to all the Secrets and Mysteries in Nature. This is the Art wherein the
Physics of Adam, and the Patriarchs consisted, and that this Art was revealed
to him, I will undertake to demonstrat by Scriptures, and the Practice of his
Posterity.

This Truth, I am certain, will seem difficult, if not incredible to most men,
the Providence of God being praejudic'd in this point, for they will not allow
him to instruct us in Natural things, but only in Supernaturals, such as may
concern our Souls, and their Salvation. As for our Bodies he must not
praescribe for their Necessities, by teaching us the true Physic, and
discovering the Laws of his Creation; for though he made Nature, yet he may
not tutor us in Natural Sciences: by no means, Aristotle and his Syllogism can
do it much better. Certainly this Opinion is nothing different from that of
the Epicure, Deum ad Coeli Cardines obambulare, and nulla tangi Mortalium cura,
That God takes the Air I know not in what walks and Quarters of his Heaven,
but thinks not of us Mortals, who are here under his feet. Questionless, a
most eminent Impiety, to make God as Iertullian said of old, Otiosum, Apolog.
advers.
and inexercitum Neminem in rebus Humanis, An idle, unprofitable No body in
this Gent. Cap. 24.
World, having nothing to do with our Afaires, as they are Natural, and
Humane. Sure these Men are afraid lest his Mercy should diminish his Majesty,
they suffer him to trade only with our immortal parts, not with Corruptible
bodies that have most need of his Assistance, they are base Subjects, which he
has turned over to Galen, and the Apothecaries. Not so my friend: he has
created Physic, and brings it out of the Earth, but the Galenist knows it not;
He it is, that pitties our afflictions, he is the good Samaritane that does
not pass by us in our miseries, but poures Oil and Wine into our wounds; This
I know very well and I will prove it out of his own Mouth. Did not he instruct
Noah to build an Ark, to pitch it within and without, and this to save life in
a Time, when he himself was resolved to destroy it? In a time when the world
was acquainted with no Mechanics, but a little Husbandry, and a few Knacks of
Tubal-Cain, and his brethren? But even those Inventions also proceeded from
that light which he planted in man: an Essence perpetually busy, and whose
Ambition it is to perform wonders, yet he seldom produces any thing of his
own, but what is fantastic, and monstrous. Did he not put his spirit in
Bezaleel the son of Exodus 31.
Uri, and in Aholiab the son of Ahisamach? Did he not teach them to devise
cunning Works, to work in Gold, in Silver, in Brass, in Cutting of stones, in
setting of them, in Carving of Timber, and in all manner of Workmanship? But to
come nearer to our purpose: did he not inform Moses in the Composition of the
Oil, and the Perfume? Did he not teach him the Symptoms of the Leprosy, and
the Cure thereof? Did he not praescribe a Plaster of Figs for Hezekiah, and to
use your own Term; an Ophthalmic for Tobit? Did not Jesus Christ himself in
the Days of his Flesh, work most of his Miracles on our bodies, though his
great Cure was that of our Souls? Is he not the same then to day as
yesterday? Nay was he not the same then from the Beginning? Did he care for
our Bodies then, and does he neglect them now? or being seated on the right
hand of the Majestic on high, is he become lass good, because more glorious?
God forbid to think so were a sin in Superlatives. Let us then take him for our
Praesident, for he Hebr. 4. 15.
is not (says St. Paul) such an one which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our Infirmities, but he is indeed one that looks to our present estate
as well as to our future and is as sensible of our Insirmitie. as he is
Careful of our Immortaletie. When he was on Earth, with the Dust of that
Earth he made the Blind to John 9.
see, and of mere Water he made Wine. These were the visible Elements of his
Physic, or rather (so the Notion does not offend you) of his Magic. But shall I
show you his Library, and in that his Threefold Philosophy? Observe then
first, and censure afterward. Have Salt in your selves, and again, you are the
salt of the Earth, and in a third place, salt is good. This is his mineral
Doctrine, will you know his Vegetable? It is in two little Books, a
Mustard Seed, and a Lillis. Lastly, he has his Animal Magic, and truly that is
a Scrowle Sealed up, I know not who may open it. He needed Joh. cap. 2 v. 25.
not that any should bear witness of man, for he knew what was in man. And
what of all this Blasphemy says some splenetic Sophister? Behold I will
instruct thee. First of all have Salt in thy self, for it will season thy soul
that is infected, and praeserve thy Brains that are putrified with the Dirt of
Aristotle. In the second place learn what the Salt of the Earth is, to which
the Disciples are compared, and that by a regular, solid speculation. Thirdly
come up to Experience, and by a Physical legitimat practice know in what sense
Salt is most good. Fourthly, examine the Lilies by Fire, and the Water of Fire,
that thou may see their miraculous invisible Treasures, and wherein that
speech of Truth is verified, That Solomon in all his Royalty was not clothed
like one of them. If thou will attempt a higher Magic, thou may being first
seasoned. but in this place it is not my design to lead Thee to it. Animal and
Vegetable Mysteries thou can never perfectly obtain without the Knowledge of
the first mineral secret, namely the Salt of the Earth, which is Salt and no
Salt, and the Praeparation thereof. This Discourse I confess, is somewhat
remote from that I first intended, namely that Philosophy was revealed to
Adam, as well as Divinity, but some Pates are Blocks in their own ways, and
as I told you formerly, will not believe that God dispenses with any Natural
secrets; This made me produce these few Instances out of Scripture, as
Praeparatives to the Proposition it self, and if he be any thing ingenious, to
the Reader. His Compliance to my Principles I expect not, nay I am so far from
it, he may suspend his Charity. Let him be as rigid as Justice can make him,
for I wish not to praevaile in any thing but the Truth, and in the Name of
Truth, thus I begin.

You have been told formerly, that Cain and Abel were instructed in Matters of
Sacrifice by their father Adam, but Cain having murdered his brother Abel, his
Priesthood descended to Seth, and this is confirmed by those Faculties which
attended his Posterity, for Enoch, Lamech, and Noah, were (all of them)
Prophets. It troubles you perhaps that I attribute a Priesthood to Abel but I
have besides his own practice, Christ's Testimony for it, who accounts Luke
cap. 11. ver. 15 and Math. 23. 35.
the Blood of Abel amongst that of the persecuted Prophets and Wisemen. Now to
conclude that these men had no Knowledge in Philosophy, because the Seripture
does not mention any use they made of it, is an Argument that denies something,
but proves nothing. To show the vanity of this Inference, I will give you an
Example out of Moses himself. We know very well there are no Prophecies of
Abraham extant, neither do we read any where, that ever he did Prophecy,
but notwithstanding he was a Prophet. For God reproving Abimelech King of
Gerar, who had taken Sarah from him supposing she had been his Sister, has
these words; Now therefore restore Genel. 20. 7.
the Man his Wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou
shall live. Hence we may learn, that the holy Ghost does not always mention
the secret perfections of the Soul, in the public Character of the Person.
Truly I should not be so impudent, as to expect your assent to this Doctrine,
if the Scriptures were silent in every Text, if I did not find there some
infallible steps of Magic, such as may lead me without a Lanthorn to the
Archives of the Art it self. I know the Troup, and Tumult of other Affairs are
both the Many, and the Maine in the History of Moses. But in the whole
Current, I meet with some Acts which may not be numbered amongst the fortunes of
the Patriarchs, but are performances extraordinary, and speak their Causes not
Common. I have ever admired that Discipline of Eliezer the steward of Abraham,
who when Genes. 24. 11 12.
he prayed at the Well in Mesopotamia, could make his Camels also kneel. I
must not believe there was any Hocas in this, or that the spirit of Banks, may
be the spirit of Prayer. Jacob makes a Covenant with Laban, that all the
spotted and brown Cattle in his Flocks should be assigned to him for his
wages. The Bargain is no sooner made, but he finds an Art to Multiply his own
Colors, and sends his Father-in-law almost a Woolgathering. And Jacob took him
Rods of green Poplar, and of the Hasel, Genesis 30. 37.
and Chesnut-tree, and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear
which was in the rods; And he set the rods, which he had pilled, before the
Flocks in the Gutters, in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink,
that they should conceive when they came to drink: And the Flocks conceived
before the Rods, and brought forth Cattle ring straked, speckled and spotted.
As for that which the Scripture tells us elsewhere, namely that Jacob saw in a
dream, and behold Cap. 31. v. 10.
the Rams that leaped on the Cattle were ringstraked speckled, and grisled,
This does no way impair our Assertion, or prove this generation miraculous,
and supernatural: For no man, I believe is so mad as to think those
Appearances, or Ramms of the dream, did leap, and supply the natural males of
the Flock: God using this Apparition only to signify the Truth of that Ar^
Jacob acted by, and to tell him that his hopes were effected. But I shall not
insist long on any particular, and therefore I will paste from this Dream to
another. Joseph being seventeen years old, an Age of some Discretion, propounds
a Vision to his Father, not loosly and to no purpose, as we tell one another
of our dreams, but expecting, I believe, an Interpretation, as knowing that his
Father had the skill to expound it. The wise Patriarch being not ignorant of
the Secrets of the two Luminaries, attributes Males to the Sun, and Females to
the Moon, then allows a third Signification to the minor stars, and lastly
answers his son with a Question: What is this Dream that thou have dreamed?
Shall I, and thy Mother, and thy Brethren indeed come to bow down our selves to
thee, to the Earth?

Now, I think no man will deny but the Interpretation of Dreams belongs to
Magic. and has been ever sought after as a piece of secret Learning. True it
is, when the Interpreter receives his knowledge immediately from God, as Daniel
did, then it falls not within the Limits of a Natural Science; but I speak of
a Physical Exposition as this was, which depends on certain abstruse
Similitudes, for he that knows the Analogy of parts to parts in this great
body, which we call the World, may know what every Sign signifies, and by
Consequence may prove a good Interpreter of dreams. As for Jacob's first
practice, which we have formerly mentioned, namely the Propagation of his
speckled Flocks, it is an effect so purely Magical that our most obstinat
Adversaries dare not Question it. I could cite one place more, which referrs to
this Patriarch, and points at the Fundamentals of Magic, but being annexed to
this discourse, it would discover too much, I shall therefore leave it to the
Search of those, who are Considerable Proficients, if not Masters in the Art.
The sum of all is this: Man of himself could not attain to true Knowledge it
was God in mere mercy did instruct him. To confirm this, I shall desire the
Reader to Consider his own Experience. We have in these our days many
Magical Books extant, wherein the Art is discovered both truly, and plainly.
We have also an infinite Number of Men, who study those books, but after the
Endeavors of a long life not one in Ten Thousand understands them. Now if we
with all these Advantages cannot attain to the Secrets of Nature, shall we
think those first fathers did, who had none of our Libraries to assist them,
nor any learned man upon Earth to instruct them? Could they do that without
means, which we cannot do with means, and those too very considerable? The
Peripaterties perhaps will tell me their Syllogism is the Engine that can
perform all this. Let 'em then in Barbara or Baroco demonstrate the first
matter of the Philosopher's stone. But they will tell me there is no such
thing. Behold I tell them again, and assure them too on my Salvation, there is,
but in Truth their Logic will never find it out. It is clear then, that God at
first instructed Adam from him his Children received it, and by their Tradition
it descended to the Patriarchs, every Father bequeathing these Secrets to his
Child, as his best and most lasting Legacy. I have now attended Genesis 32. 28.
Jacob, the Israel of God, both in his Pilgrimage at Padan-aram, and in his
Typical Inheritance, the Earnest of the Land of Canaan. But two Removalls
perfect not the wanderings of a Patriarch; God calls him from the Habitation of
his Fathers to the Prison of his Posterity, and provides him a plac of Freedom
in the house of Bondage. I must follow him where his Fortune leads, from I
saac's Hebron, to the Goshen of Phaaroh then back again to the Cave and Dust of
Machpelah. As for his sons and their Train, who attended his Motion thither, I
find not any Particular Remembrance of them only Moses tells me of a general
Exodus 1. ver. 6.
Exit: Joseph died, and all his brethren and all that Generation. I must now
then to prove the Continuance and Succission of this Art address m^ self to
the Court, where I shall find the Son of Levi newly translated from his Ark,
and Bulrushes. Yet, there is something may be said of Joseph, and verily it
proves how Common Magic was in those days, and the effects of it no news to
the Sons of Jacob; for having conveyed his Cup into the Sack of Benjamin, and
by that policy detained his Brethren, he asks them: What Deed is this Cap.
44. ver. 15.
that you have done? Knew ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?

In this Speech he makes his Brethren no strangers to the performances of Art,
but rather makes their familiarity therewith an Argument against them: Knew you
not? but the following words are very effectual, and tell us what qualified
persons the ancient Magi were. They were indeed (as he speaks of himself) such
as Joseph was, Princes, and Rulers of the People, not beggarly Gypsies, and
Mountebanks, as our Doctors are now. It was the Ambition of the Great in those
Days to be Good, and as these Secrets proceeded from God, so were they also
entertained by the Gods, I mean by Kings: For says the Scripture, I have said
ye are Gods: a name Communicated to them, because they had the power to do
wonders, for in this Magical sense the true God speaks to Moses: See, I have
made thee a God to Phaaroh, and Exodus cap. 7. vc. 1.
thy Brother Aaron shall be thy Prophet. And verily this true Knowledge. and
this Title that belongs to it, did that false Serpent praetend to our first
Parents; Eritis sicut Dii, You Genes. cap. 3. verse. 5.
shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. But it is not this subtle Dragon, but
Bonus ille Serpeats, that good, Crucified Serpent, that can give us both this
Knowledge, and this Title: John 1. 3.
for by him all things were made, and without him not any thing was made, that
is made; If he made them then, he can teach us also how they were made. I
must now refer my self to Moses who at his first Acquaintance with God, saw
many Transmutations: One in his own Flesh, another of the Rod in his hand, with
a third promised, and afterward performed upon Water. It is written of him,
that he was skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians: but for my part I do
much question what kind of learning that was, the Scripture assuring me, and
Exodus 7. 11. 22.
that by the Pen of Moses, their Wonders were effected by Enchantments. This is
certain, their Learning was Ancient, for I find Magicians in Egypt, four
hundred and thirty years and upwards, before Jamnes and Jambres. This is
Confirmed by Phaaroh's Dream, which his own Sorcerers, and Wizards could not
interpret, Genesis Cap. 9. ver. 41.
but Joseph alone expounded it. Verily it cannot be denied, but some Branches
of this Art, though extremely corrupted, were dispersed among all Nations by
Tradition from the first man, and this appears by more Testimonies than one.
For in the Land of Canaan, before ever Israel possessed it, Debir, which Athniel
the son of Kenaz conquered, was an Universitie, at least had in it a famous
Library, wherefore the Jews called it Kiriath-Sepharim. I might speak in this
place of the Universalitie of Religion: for never yet was there a people, but
had some confused Notion of a Deity, though accompanied with Lamentable
Ceremonies, and Super stitions. Besides, the Religious of all Nations have
always praetended to Powers Extraordinary, even to the performance of
Miracles, and the healing of all Diseases, and this by some secret means, not
known to the common Man: and verily if we examine all Religions, whether
false, or true, we shall not find one, but it praetends to something, that is
Mystical. Certainly if men be not resolved against Reason, they must grant,
these Obliquities in matters of Faith proceeded from the Corruption of some
Principles received, (as we see that Heretics are but so many false
Interpreters) but not withstanding in those very Errors there remained some
Marks and Imitations of the first Truth. Hence comes it to pass, that all
parties agree in the Action, but not in the Object. For Example: Israel did
Sacrifise, and the Heathen did Sacrifise, but the One to God, the other to his
Idol; Neither were they only Conformable in some Rites, and Solemnities of
Divinity, but the Heathens also had some Hints left of the Secret Learning,
and Philosophy of the Patriarchs, as we may see in their false Magic, which
consisted for the most part in Astrologicall Observations, Images, Charms, and
Characters. But it is my Design to keep in the Rode, not to follow these
Deviations, and misfortunes of the Art, which notwithstanding want not the
weight of Argument, the Existence of Things being proved as well by their
Miscariage, as by their Success. To proceed then, I say, that during the
Pilgrimage of the Patriarchs, this Knowledge was delivered by tradition from
the Father to his Child, and indeed it could be no otherwise, for what was
Israel in those Days, but a private Family? Notwithstanding when God appointed
them their Possession, and that this private house was multiplied to a Nation,
then these secrets remained with the Elders of the Tribes, as they did formerly
with the Father of the Family. These Elders, no doubt, were the Moysaicall
Septuagint, who made up the Sanhedrim, God having Selected some from the rest,
to be the stewards, and Dispensers of his Mysteries. Now that Moses was
acquainted with all the abstruse Operations, and Principles of Nature, is a
Truth I suppose which no man will resist. That the Sanhedrim also participated
of the same Instruction and Knowledge with him is plain out of Scripture, where
we read, That God took of the spirit that Numb. cap. 11. ver. 25.
was in Moses, and gave it to the Seventy.

But lest any Man should deny that, which we take for granted. namely the
Philosophy of Moses, I shall demonstrate out of his own Books, both by reason,
as also by his practice, that he was a Natural Magician.

First of all then it is most absurd, and therefore improbable, that he should
write of the Creation, who was no way skilled in the Secrets of God and Nature,
both which must of necessity be known before we should undertake to write of
the Creation. But Moses did write of it, Ergo. Now I desire to know what he
has written, Truth or a Lie; if Truth, how dare you deny his Knowledge? if a
Lie (which God forbid) why will you believe him? You will tell me perhaps he
has done it only in general Terms: and I could tell you that Aristotle has
done no otherwise: but think you in good earnest that he knew no more, than
what he did write? There is nothing you can say in this point, but we can
disprove it, for in Genesis he has discovered many particulars, and especially
those Secrets which have most Relation to this Art. For Instance; he has
Discovered the Minera of Man, or that Substance out of which Man, and all his
Fellow Creatures were made. This is the first matter of the Philosophers stone:
Moses calls it sometimes Water, sometimes Earth; for in a certain place I read.
thus; And God said, Let the waters bring Genesis cap. 1. ver. 20.
forth abundantly the moving. Creature that has life, and Foul that may fly
above the Earth in the open Firmament. But elsewhere we read otherwise: And
out of the Ground Cap. 2. ver. 19.
the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every foul of the Air. In
this later Text he tells us that God made every foul of the Air out of the
Ground, but in the former it is written, he made them out of the Water.
Certainly Aristotle and his Organ can never reconcile these two places, but a
little skill in Magic will make them kiss, and be friends without a Philtre.
This substance then is both Earth and Water, yet neither of them in their
Common Complexions, but it is a thick water, and a subtle Earth. In plain
terms it is a slimie, spermatic, viscous Mass, impraegnated with all powers
Celestial, and terrestrial. The Philosophers call it Water and no Water,
Earth and no Earth: and why may not Moses speak as they do? or why may not
they write, as Moses did? This is the true Damascen Earth, out of which God
made man: you then that would be Chimists, seem not to be wiser than God, but
use that subject in your Art. which God himself makes use of in Nature. He is
the best workman, and knows what matter is most fit for his work, he that
will imitate him in the Effect, must first imitate him in the Subject. Talk not
then of Flint-stones and Antimonie, they are the Poets Pin-dust, and Egshells;
Seek this Earth, this Water. But this is not all that Moses has written to
this purpose, I could cite many more Magical and mystical places, but in so
doing I should be too open. wherefore I must forbear. I shall now speak of his
Practice, and truly this is it which no Distinction, nor any other Logical
Quibble can wave, nothing but Experience can refell this Argument, and thus it
runs. And Moses took the Calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire,
and grinded it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, and made the Children
of Israel drink of it. Certainly here was a strange kind of Spice, and an Art
as strange as the Spice it self. This Calf was pure gold, the Israelites having
contributed their Eare-rings to the Fabric. Now would I gladly know by what
means so solid and heavy a Body as Gold, may be brought to such a light
powder, that it may be sprinkled on the face of the water, and afterward
drunk up. I am sure here was Aurum potabile, and Moses could never have brought
the Calf to this pass had he not plowed with our Heyfer. But of this enough:
if any man think he did it by common fire, let him also do the like, and when
he has performed, he may sell his powder to the Apothecaries. If I should
insist in this place on the Moysaicall Ceremonial Law with its several
Reverend shadows and their Significations; I might lose my self in a Wilderness
of Mysteries both Divine and Natural; For verily that whole System is but one
vast Skreen, or a certain Majestic Umbrage drawn over two Worlds, Visible, and
Invisible. But these are things of a higher speculation than the Scope of our
present Discourse will admit of. I only inform the Reader that the Law has
both a shell, and a Kernel, it is the Letter speaks, but the spirit in:
erprets. To this agrees Gregory De statu Episcop.
Nazianzen, who makes a twosold Law, (...), and (...): one literal, another
spiritual. And elsewhere he mentions, (...), (...), the hidden, and the
manifest part of the Law; the manifest part (says he) being appointed, (...),
for many men, and such whose thoughts were fixed here below but the hidden,
(...), for few only, whose Minds aspired upwards to heavenly Things. Now that
the Law being given, might benefit the people in both parts, spiritual and
literal, therefore did the Lawgiver institute the Sanhedrim, a Council of
Seventy Elders, upon whom he had poured his Spirit, that they might discern
(as Esdras did) the Deep Things of the Night, in plain Terms, the hidden
things of his Law. From these Elders the Cabala (I believe) had its Original:
for they imparted their Knowledge by word of Mouth to their Successors, and
hence it came to pass, that the Science it self, was styled Cabala, that is, a
Reception. This continued so long as Israel held together; but when their Frame
began to discompose, and the Dilapidations of that House proved desperate, then
Esdras a Prophet Incomparable (notwithstanding the brand of Apocrypha) writ
that Law in Tables of Box, which God himself had sometimes written in Tables of
stone. As for the more secret, and mysterious part thereof, it was written at
the same time in Seventy Secret Books, according to the Number of the Elders,
in whose hearts it had been sometimes written.

And this was the very first time the Spirit married the Letter; for these
Sacraments were not trusted formerly to Corruptible Volumes, but to the
aeternall Tables of the Soul. But it may be there is a blind Generation, who
will believe nothing but what they see at hand, and therefore will deny that
Esdras composed any such Books; To these Owls (though an unaequal Match) I
shall oppose the Honor of Picus, who himself affirms, that in his time he
met with the Secret Books of Esdras, and bought them with a great Price; Nor
was this all, for Eugenius Bishop of Rome ordered their Translation, but he
dying, the Translators also fell asleep. It is true indeed, something may be
objected to me in this place concerning the Cabala, An Art which I no way
approve of, neither do I condemn it as our Adversaries condemn Magic, before
I understand it; for I have spent some years in the S^earch, and Contemplation
thereof. But why then should I propose that for a Truth to others, which I
account for an Error my self? To this I answer, that I condemn not the true
Cabala, but the Inventions of some dispersed wandering Rabbis, whose brains
had more of Distraction, than their fortunes; of this thirteenth Tribe I
understand the Satyrist, when he promises so largely.

Qualiacunque voles, Judaei Somnia vendunt. These I say have produced a certain
up-start, bastard Cabala, which consists altogether in Alphabeticall knacks.
ends always in the Letter where it begins, and the Vanities of it are grown
Voluminous. As for the more Ancient, and Physical Traditions of the Cabala, I
embrace them for so many Sacred Truths, but verily those Truths were unknown to
most of those Rabbis whom I have seen, even to Rambam himself, I mean Rabbi
Moses AEgyptius, whom the Jews have so magnified with their famous Hyperbole:
A Mose ad Mosen non surrexit sicut Moses.

But to deal ingenuously with my Readers, I say the Cabala I admit of consists
of two parts, (...) and (...) the Name, and Thing. The former part is merely
Typical in reference to the later, Serving only as the shadow to the
substance. I will give you some instances. The Literal Cabala, which is but a
Veil cast over the Secrets of the Physical, has Three Principles, commonly
styled Tres Matres, or the Three Mothers: In the Masculine Complexion the Jews
call them (...) Emes, in the Foeminine (...) Asam, and they are (...) aleph,
(...) mem, (...) schin. Now I will show you how the Physical Cabala expounds
the Literal. Tres Matres (...) Emes (says the great Abraham, or as some think
Rabbi Akiba) id est, Aer, Aqua, and I gnis; Aqua Quieta, I gnis sibilans, Aer
spiritus medius. That is, the Three Mothers Emes, or Aleph, Mem and Schin, are
Air, Water, and Fire; a still Water, (mark that) a hissing Fire, and Air the
middle Spirit. Again says the same Rabbi, Tres Matres (...) Emes in Mundo,
Aer, Aqua, and Ignis. Coeli ex Igne Creati sunt, Terra ex Aqua, Aer egressus
est ex spiritu, qui stat medius. The Three Mother Emes in this world are, Air,
Water and Fire. The Heavens were made of the Fire, The Earth was made of the
Water, (mark well this Cabalism) and the Air proceeded from a middle spirit.
Now when the Cabalist speaks of the Generation of the Three Mothers, he brings
in Ten secret Principles, which I think ten men have not understood since the
Sanhedrim, such Nonsense do I find in most Authors, when they undertake to
discourse of them. The first Principle is a Spirit, which sits in Retrocessu
suo fontano, in his primitive, Incomprehensible Retreats, like Water in its
Subterraneous Chanel, before it springs. The Second Principle is the Voice of
that first Spirit, this breaks forth like a Wellspring, where the Water flows
out of the Earth, and is discovered to the eye, They call it Spiritus ex
Spiritu. The third Principle is Spiritus ex Spiritibus, a Spirit which proceeds
both from the first Spirit, and from his Voice. The Fourth Principle is Aqua de
Spiritu, a Certain Water which proceeded from the Third Spirit, and out of that
Water went Air and Fire. But God forbid that I should speak any more of them
publicly, it is enough that we Know the Original of the Creature, and to whom
we ought to ascribe it. The Cabalist when he would tell us what God did with
the Three Mothers, uses no other phrase than this, Ponderavit Aleph cum
omnibus, and omnia cum Aleph, and sic de Singulis, He weighed (says he) Aleph
with All, and All with Aleph, and so he did with the other Mothers. This is
very plain, if you consider the various mixtures of the Elements, and their
Secret Proportions. And so much for the Physical part of the Cabala, I will
now show you the Metaphysicall. It is strange to Consider what Unity of
Spirit, and Doctrine, there is amongst all the Children of Wisdom. This proves
infallibly that there is an Universal Schoolmasters, who is Present with all
Flesh, and whose Principles are ever Uniforme, namely the Spirit of God. The
Cabalists agree with all the world of Magicians, That Man in spiritual
Mysteries is both Agent and Patient. This is plain: For Jacobs Ladder is the
greatest Mystery in the Cabala. Here we find two Extremes: Jacob is one, at
the Foot of the Ladder, and God is the other, who stands above it, immittens
(says the Jew) Formas, and Influxus in Jacob, sive Subjectum Hominem, shedding
some secret Influx of Spirit upon Jacob, who in this place Typifies Man in
general. The Rounds, or steps in the Ladder signify the middle Natures, by
which Jacob is united to God, Inferiors united to Superiors. As for the Angels
of whom it is said, that they ascended and Descended by the Ladder, their
Motion proves they were not of the superior Hierarchy, but some other secret
Essences, for they Ascended first, and Descended afterward: but if they had
been from above, they had Descended first, which is Contrary to the Text. And
here Reader, I would have thee study. Now to return to Jacob, it is written of
him, that he was asleep, but this is a Mystical Speech, for it signifies
Death, namely that Death which the Cabalist calls Mors Osculi, or the Death of
the Kiss, of which I must not speak one Syllable. To be short, they agree
with us in Arcano Theologiae: That no word is efficacious in Magic, unless it
be first quickened by the Word of God. This appears out of their Semhamaphores;
for they hold not the names of Angls effectual, unless some name of God, as
(...) or (...) be united to them then (say they) in the power and virtue of
those names they may work. An Example hereof we have in all Extracted names,
as Vehu-Iah, Elem-Iah, Jeli-El, Sita-El. Now this Practice in the Letter was a
most subtle Adumbration of the Conjunction of the Substantial Word or Spirit
with the Water; See that you understand me rightly, for I mean with the
Elements and so much for the Truth. To Conclude, I would have the Reader
observe, that the false Grammatical Cabala consists only in R^^^^^tions of
the Alphabet, and a Metathesis of Letters in the Text, by which means the
Scripture has suffered many Racks, and Excoriations. As for the true Cabala,
it uses the Letter only for Artifice, whereby to obscure, and hide her
P^^^^sicall Secrets, as the Egyptians heretofore did use their Hieroglyphics.
In this Sense the Primitive Professors of this Art, had a literal Cabala. as it
appears by that wonderful, and most ancient Inscription in the Rock in Mount
Horeb. It conteines a Prophecy of the Virgin Mother, and her Son Christ Jesus.
engraven in Hieroglyphic framed by Combination of the Hebrew letters, but by
whom God only knows, it may be by Moses or Eli^ah. This is most certain, it is
to be seen there this day. and we have for it the Testimonies of Thomas
Obecinus, a most learned Franciscan, and Petrus a Valle, a Gentleman, who
travailed both of them into those parts. Now that the learning of the Jews, I
mean their Cabala, was Chimicall, and ended in true Physical performances,
cannot be better proved than by the Book of Abraham the Jew, wherein he laid
down the Secrets of this Art in Indifferent plain Terms and Figures, and that
for the Benefit of his unhappy Countrymen, when by the wrath of God they were
scattered over all the World. This Book was accidentally found by Nicholas
Flammel a Frenchman, and with the help of it he attained at last to that
miraculous Medicine, which Men call the Philosophers stone. But let us hear the
Monsieur himself describe it.

There fell into my hands ( says he) for the Sum of two Florens, a gilded
Book, very old, and large; It was not of Paper, nor Parchment, as other books
be, but it was made of delicate rindes (as it seemed to me) of Tender young
Trees: The Cover of it was of Brass, well bound, all engraven with Letters, or
strange figures, and for my part, I think they might well be Greek Characters,
or some such ancient language. Sure I am, I could not read them, and I know
well they were not Notes, nor Letters of the Latin, nor of the Gaul, for of
them I understood a little. As for that which was within it, the Bark leaves
were engraven, and with admirable diligence written, with a point of Jron in
fair and neat Latin letters colored. It contained thrice Seven leaves for so
were the leaves counted at the top and always every Seventh leaf was without
any writing, but instead thereof upon the first seventh leaf there was painted
a Virgin, and Serpents swallowing her up; In the Second Seventh a Cross where
a Serpent was Crucified; and in the last Seventh there were painted Deserts, or
Wildernesses, in the midst whereof ran many fair Fountains from whence there
issued forth a Number of Serpents, which ran up and down here and there. Upon
the first of the Leaves was written in great Capital letters of gold ABRAHAM
THE JEW, PRINCE PRIEST LEVIT, ASTROLOGER, AND PHILOSOPHER, TO THE NATION OF THE
JEWS, BY THE WRATH OF GOD DISPERSED AMONG THE GAULS SENDS HEALTH.

After this it was filled with great Execrations, and Curses (with this word
Maranatha, which was often repeated there) against every person that should
cast his eyes upon it, if he were not Sacrificer or Scribe. He that sold me
this Book, knew not what it was worth, no more than I, when I bought it. I
believe it had been stolen or taken by violence from the miserable Jews, or
found hid in some part of the Ancient place of their Habitation. Within the
Book, in the Second leaf he comforted his Nation, counselling them to fly
Vices, and above all Idolatry, attending with sweet patience the Coming of
the Messiah, who should vanquish all the Kings of the Earth, and should reign
with his people in glory aeternally. Without doubt this had been some wise,
and understanding Man. In the third leaf, and in all the other writings that
followed to help his Captive Nation to pay their Tributes to the Roman
Emperors, and to do other things, which I will not speak of, he taught them
in Common words the Transmutation of Metals; he painted the Vessels by the
sides and he informed them of the Colors, and of all the rest, except the
first Agent of the which he spoke not a word but only (as he said) in the
fourth and fifth leaves he had iutirely painted it, and figured it with very
great Cunning and Workmanship: for though it was well, and Intelligibly figured
and painted yet no man could ever have been able to understand it, without
being well skilled in their Cabala, which goes by Tradition and without having
well studied their Books. The Fourth and fifth leaf therefore was without any
writing all full of fair Figures enlightened or as it were enlightened, for the
work was very Exquisit. First he painted a young man, with wings at his Ancles
having in his hand a Caducean Rod writhen about with two Serpents, wherewith
he struck upon a Helmet which covered his head; he seemed to my small
judgment to be Mercury the Pagan Gad. Against him there came running, and
flying with open wings, a great old man, who upon his head had an Houre-glasse
fastened, and in his hands a Hook or Sith like Death, with the which in
terrible and furicus Manner, he would have cut off the feet of Mercury. On the
other side of the fourth Leaf, he painted a fair Flower on the top of a very
high Mountain, which was sore shaken with the North wind; it had the Root blew
the Flowers white and red, the leaves shining like fine Gold; And round about
it the Dragons and Grisfons of the North made their nests. On the Fifth leaf
shere was a fair Rose tree flowred in the midst of a Sweet Garden, climbing
up against a hollow Oak, at the foot whereof boiled a fountain of most white
water, which ran headlong down into the Depths, notwithstanding it passed first
among the hands of infinite people, who dug in the Earth, seeking for it;
but because they were blind, none of them knew it, except here and there One,
which considered the weight. On the last side of the fife leaf, was painted a
King, with a great Faucheon, who caused to be killed in his presence by some
Soldiers a great Multitude of little Infants, whose Mothers wept at the Feet
of the merciless Soldiers. The Blood of these Infants was afterward
gathered up by other Soldiers, and put in a great vessel, whereto the Sun
and the Moon came to bathe themselves. And thus you see that which was in the
first five leaves; I will not represent unto you that which was writien in good
and Intelligible Latin in all the other written leaves, for God would punish
me because I should commit a greater wickedness than he, who (as it is said)
wished that all the men of thn world had but one head, that he might cut it
off at one Blow. Thus far Nicholas Flammel.

I could now pass from Moses to Christ, from the Old Testament to the New: not
that I would interpret there, but request the Sense or the Illuminated. I
desire to know what my Savior means by the Key of Knowledge, which Luc. cap.
11. ver. 52
the Lawyers (as he tells me and them too) had taken away. Questionless it
cannot signify the Law it self, for that was not taken away being read in the
Synagogue every Sabbath. But to let go this: I am certain, and I could prove it
all along from his Birth to his Passion, that the Doctrine of Christ Jesus is
not only agreeable to the Laws of Nature, but is verified and established
thereby. When I speak of the Laws of Nature, I mind not her Excessive irregular
Appetites and Inclinations, to which she has bin subject since her
Corruption, for even Galen looked on those obliquities as Diseases, but studied
Nature her self, as their Cure. We know by experience that too much of any
thing weakens, and destroys our Nature, but if we live Temperately, and
according to Law, we are well, because our Course of life accords with Nature.
Hence Diet is a prime Rule in Physic, far better indeed than the Pharmacopaea,
for those sluttish Recepts do but oppress the stomach, being no fit fuel for
a Celestial fire. Believe it then, these excessive bestiall Appetites
proceeded from our Fall, for Nature of her self is no lavish insatiable Glut,
but a most nice delicat essence. This appears by those fits, and pangs she is
subject to whenever she is overcharged. In common, customarie Excesses there
is not any, but knows this Truth by Experience, indeed in spiritual sins, the
Body is not immediately troubled, but the Conscience is terrified, and surely
the body cannot be very well, when the soul it self is sick. We see then that
Corruption, and sin do not so much agree with us, as they do disturb us, for
in what sense can our Enemies be our friends, or those things that destroy
Nature, be agreeable to Nature? How then shall we judge of the Gospel? Shall we
say that the praeservation of Man is contrary to Man, and that the Doctrine of
Life agrees not with Life it self? God forbid: The Laws of the Resurrection are
founded upon those of the Creation, and those of Regeneration upon those of
Generation, for in all these God works upon one, and the same Matter, by one
and the same spirit. Now that it is so, I mean that there is a Harmony
between Nature and the Gospel, I will prove out of the Sinic Monument of Kim
Cim priest of Judaea. In the year of Redemption 1625. there was dug up in a
Village of China called Sanxuen, a square stone, being near Ten measures of an
hand-breadth long, five broad, In the uppermost part of this stone was figured
a Cross, and underneath it an Inscription in Sinic Characters, being the Title
to the Monument, which I find thus rendered in the Latin. Lapis in Laudem and
memoriam aeternam Legis Lucis, and veritatis portatae de Judaea, and in China
promulgatae, Erectus.

That is: A stone erected to the praise, and aeternal Remembrance of the Law of
Light, and Truth, brought out of Judaea, and published in China. After this
followed the body of the Monument, being a Relation, how the Gospel of Christ
Jesus was brought by one Olo puen out of Judaea, and afterward by the
assistance of God planted in China. This happened in the year of our Lord six
hundred, and thirty six. Kim Cim, the Author of this History, in the very
beginning of it, speaks mysteriously of the Creation; Then he mentions three
hundred sixty five sorts of Sectaries, who succeeded one another, all of them
striving who should get most Proselyts. Some of their vain Opinions he
recites, which indeed are very suitable with the Rudiments, and Vagari's of the
Heathen Philosophers. Lastly he describes the professors of Christianity, with
their Habit of Life, and the Excellency of their Law. Difficile (says he) est
ei Nomen Congruum reperire, cum ejus effectus sit Illuminare, and omnia
Claritate perfundere; unde Necessarium fuit eam appellare; Kim ki ao, h. e.
Legem claram and magnam. That is: It is a hard matter to find a fit name for
their Law, seeing the effect of it is to illuminat, and fill all with
Knowledge; It was necessary therefore to call it Kim ki ao, that is, the great
Law of Light. To be short, Olo puen was admitted to the Court by Tai cum veu
huamti King of China, here his Doctrine was thoroughly searched, examined, and
sifted by the King himself, who having found it most true and solid, caused it
to be proclaimed thorough his Dominions. Now upon what this Doctrine was
founded, and what aestimat the King had both of it, and it is professor, we may
easily gather from the words of his Proclamation. First then, where he mentions
Olo puen, he calls him Magnae virtutis Hominem, a man of great virtue or power;
it seems he did something more than prate and preach, could confirm his
Doctrine, as the Apostles did theirs, not with words only, but with works.
Secondly the Proclamation speaking of his Doctrine, runs thus, Cujus intentum
docendi nos a Fundamentis examinantes, invenimus Doctrinam ejus admodum
excellentem, and sine strepitu exteriori, fundatam principaliter in Creatione
Mundi: That is, The Drift of whose teaching we have examined from the very
Fundamentals, we find his Doctrine very excellent, without any worldly noise,
and principally grounded on the Creation of the world. And again in the same
place, Doctrina ejus non est multorum verborum, nec supersicie tenus suam
fundat Veritatem: His Doctrine is but of few words, not full of noise and
notions, neither does he build his Truth on superficial probabilities. Thus we
see, the Incarnation, and Birth of Christ Jesus (which to the Common
Philosopher are fables and Impossibilities, but in the Book of Nature plain
evident Truths) were proved, and demonstrated by the Primitive Apostles and
Teachers out of the Creation of the world. But instead of such Teachers, we
have in These our Days two Epidemical Goblins, a Schoole-Man, and a Saint
forsooth. The one swells with a Syllogistial pride, the other wears a broad
face of Revelation. The first cannot tell me why Grass is Green: The second
with all his Devotion knows not A. BC. yet praetends he to that Infinite Spirit
which knows all in all; and truly of them Both, this last is the worst. Surely
the Devil has been very busy, to put out the Candle, for had all written
Truths been extant, this false learning and Hypocrisy could never have
praevailed. Kim ^^m mentions seven and Twenty Books which Christ Jesus left on
Earth to further the Conversion of the world. It may be we have not one of
them: for though the Books of the new Testament are just so many, yet being all
written, at least some of them a long Time after Christ, they may not well
pass for those Scriptures which this Author attributes to our Savior, even at
the time of his Ascension. What should I speak of Those many Books cited in
the old Testament, but no where to be found, which if they were now extant, no
doubt but they would prove so many reverend, Invincible patrons of Magic. But
Ink and paper will perish, for the hand of Man has made nothing aeternall: The
Truth only is Incorruptible, and when the Letter fails, she shifts that Body,
and lives in the spirit.

I have not without some labor, now traced this Science from the very Fall of
Man to the Day of his Redepmtion; Along and solitary Pilgrimage, the paths
being unfrequented because of the Briars, and scruples of Antiquity, and in
some places overgrown with the Poppie of Oblivion. I will not deny but in the
shades and Ivy of this Wilderness, there are some Birds of Night, Owls and
Bats, of a different Feather from our Phoenix; I mean some Conjurers, whose
dark indirect Affection to the Name of Magic, made them invent Traditions more
prodigious than their Practices. These I have purposely avoided lest they
should Wormwood my stream, and I seduce the Reader thorough all these Groves
and Solitud^s to the Waters of Marah. The next Stage I must move to, is that
whence I came out at first with the Israelites, namely Egypt; here if Books
fail me, the stones will cry out; Magic having been so enthroned in this
place, it seems she would be buried here also: So many Monuments did she
hide in this Earth, which have been since dug up; and serve now to prove
that she was sometimes above Ground. To begin then, I will first speak of the
Egyptian Theology, that you may see how far they have advanced, having no
Leader, but the Light of Nature. Trismegistus is so Orthodox and plain in the
Mystery of the Trinity, the Scripture it self exceeds him not; but he being
a particular Author, and one perhaps that knew more than those of his order in
General, I shall at this time dispense with his Authority. Their Catholic
Doctrine, and wherein I find them all to agree, is This. Emepht, whereby they
express their Supreme God, and verily they mind the true One, signifies
properly an Intelligence, or Spirit converting all things into himself, and
himself into all Things. This is very sound Divinity and Philosophy, if it be
rightly understood. Now (say they) Emepht produced an Egg out of his mouth,
which Tradition Kircher expounds imperfectly, and withal Erroneously. In the
Production of this Egg was manifested another Deity, which they call Phtha,
and out of some other Natures and Substances enclosed in the Egg, this Phtha
formed all Things. But to deal a little more openly, we will describe unto
you their Hieroglyphic, wherein they have very handsomely, but obscurely
discovered most of their Mysteries. First of all then, they draw a Circle, in
the Circle a Serpent, not folded, but Diameter-wise, and at length; her head
resembles that of a Hawke, the Tail is tied in a Small Knot, and a little
below the head her wings are Volant. The Cirele points at Emepht, or God the
Father being Infinite, without Beginning, without End. Moreover it comprehends,
or Conteines in it self the Second Deity Phtha, and the Egg, or Chaos, out of
which all Things were made. The Hawke in the Egyptian Symbols signifies Light,
and Spirit; his head annexed here to the Serpent represents Phtha, or the
Second Person, who is the first Light, as we have told you in our
Anthroposophia. He is said to form all Things out of the Egg, because in him,
as it were in a Glass, are certain Types or Images, namely the Distinct
Conceptions of the Paternall Deity, according to which by Cooperation of the
Spirit, namely the Holy Ghost, the Creatures are formed. The Inferior part of
this Figure signifies the Matter or Chaos, which they call the Egg of Emepht.
That you may the better know it, we will teach you something not Common. The
Body of the Serpent tells you it is a fiery Substance, for a Serpent is full
of heat and fire, which made the Egyptians esteem him Divine: This appears by
his quick motion without feet or finns, much like that of the Pulse, for his
impetuous hot spirit shootes him on like a Squib. There is also another
Analogy, for the Serpent renewes his youth so strong is his natural heat, and
casts off his old skin. Truly the Matter is a very Serpent, for she renews
her self a thousand ways, and is never a perpetual Tenant to the same Form.
The wings tell you this Subject or Chaos is Volatile, and in the outward
Complexion Arrie, and Waterie. But to teach you the most Secret Resemblance of
this Hieroglyphic. The Chaos is a certain Creeping Substance, for it moves like
a Serpent sine pedibus, and truly Moses calls it not Water, but Serpitura
Aquae, The Creeping of Water, or a water that creepes. Lastly, the Knott on the
Tail, Tells you this matter is of a most strong Composition, and that the
Elements are fast bound in it, all which the Philophers know to be true by
Experience. As for the Assinitie of Inferiors with Superiors, and their private
Active Love, which consists in certain Secret Mixtures of Heaven with the
Matter, their Opinion stands thus. In the Vital fire of all Things here below.
The Sun (say they) is King. In their Secret Water the Moon is Queen. In their
pure Air the five lesser Planets rule; and in their Central, Hypostaticall
Earth, the fixed stars. For these Inferiors according to their Doctrine, are
Provinces, or Thrones of those Superiors, where they sit Regent, and Paramont.
To speak plainly, Heaven it self was originally extracted from Inferiors, yet
not so entirely, but some portion of the Heavenly Natures remained still below,
and are the very same in Essence and Substance with the separated stars and
skies. Heaven here below differs not from that above but in her Captivity, and
that above differs not from this below but in her Liberty. The one is
imprisoned in the Matter, the other is freed from the grossness and impurities
of it, but they are both of one and the^ same Nature, so that they easily
unite; and hence it is that the Superior descends to the Inferior to visit, and
comfort her in this sickly inf^ctious Habitation. I could speak much more, but
I am in haste, and though I were at leisure, you cannot in Reason expect I
should tell you all. I will therefore decline these general Principles to tell
you something that makes for the Egyptian Practice, and proves them
Philosophers adepted. The first Monument I read of to this purpose, is that of
Synesius, a very learned intelligent man. He found in the Temple of Memphis
(...) Books of stone, and in those hard leaves these Difficult Instructions.

(...)
(...)
(...)


That is, One Nature delights in another; One Nature overcomes another; One
Nature overrules another. These short lessons. but of no small Consequence.
are fathered on the great Hostanes. The Second Monument is that admirable, and
most Magical one mentioned by Barachias Abenesi the Arabian. This also was a
stone erected near Memphis, and on it this profound Scripture.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


That is, Heaven Above, Heaven Beneath;
Stars Above, Stars Beneath;
All that is Above, is also Beneath;
Understand this, and be Happy.


Under this were figured certain apposit Hieroglyphics, and for a Close to all,
this Dedicatorie Subscription (I find it only in the Coptic Character, but our
Founts wanting that Letter, I must give it you in the Greek.) (...) Isias the
High Priest erected this, to the Resident Gods in Egypt.

And now, though I formerly suspended the Authority of Irismegistus, I might
like the Italian, produce his weapons Sfodrato; but I love no Velitations, and
Truth is so brave, it needs no Feather. Quod est Superius (said Hermes) est
sicut id quod est Inferius, and quod est Inferius, est sicut id quod est
superius. This is his Mystery, and it is great: The Benefit that attends the
Purchase, is no loss: habebis Gloriam totius Mundi, All the Pomp, and Splendour
of the World shall be Thine. To this Language, the Dialect of I sias does so
Echo, these two, like Euphorbus and Pythagoras, might pass for Ono. Coelum
sursum, ( said he) Coelum deorsum;
Astra sursum, Astra Deorsum:
Omne quod sursum, omne id deorsum.


And then follows a reward for the Intelligent, Haec cape, and faelicitare,
understand this, and thou art fortunate, Thou have made thy self very happy.
This is enough to prove that Magic sometimes flourished in Egypt, and no doubt
but they received the Truth of it from the Hebrews, who lived amongst them to
the term of four hundred and thirty years. This is plain; for their own
Native Learning was mere Sorcerie and Witcheraft, and this appears by the
Testimony of Moses, who tells us their Magicians produced their Miracles by
Inohantments. And why I beseech you should this Instruction seem impossible?
For Joseph being married to Asenath, daughter of Potipherah Priest of On, some
of the Egyptian Priests, and those likely of his own alliance, might for that
very Relation receive a better Doctrine from him. But this is not all (...)d
say of this Nation, and their Secret (...)ing, if I were disposed to be their
Mercury. There is not any I believe who praetend to Antiquity or Philosophy,
but have seen that famous Monument, which Paul the Third bestowed on his
Cardinal Petrus Bombus, and was ever since called the Bembixe Table. No doubt
but the Hieroglyphics therein contained, were they all reduced into Letters,
would make a Volume as ample, as Mysterious. But it is not my Design to comment
on Mcmphis, that were to make Brick, and look out the straw withal, Egypt
having no complete Table but the World, over which her Monuments are Scattered.
This place then was the Pitcher to the Fountain, for they received their
Mysteries immediately from the Hebrews, but their Doctrine, like their Nilus,
swelling above its private Chanel, did at last overrun the Universe. Jamblicus
the Divine, in that excellent Discourse of his de Mysterus, tells us that
Pythagoras and Plato had all their learning ex Columnis Mercurii out of the
Pillars, or Hieroglyphicall Monuments of Trisinegistus. But the Ancient orpheus
in his Poem de Verbo Sacro. where he speaks of God, has these words. Nemo
Illu^, nisi Chaldao de Sanguine Quiddam Progenitus vidit.


None (says he) has ever seen God, but a certain Man descended of the
Chaldaean Blood. Now this was Moses, of whom it is written, That he spoke with
God face to face, as one Man speaks with another. After This he gives us a
short Character or Description of the Deity, not in the Recesse, and Abstract,
but in reference to the Incubation of his spirit upon Nature. Lastly he
acquaints us with the Original of his Doctrine, from whence it first came, and
verily he derives it from the Wellhead. Priscorum nos haec docuerunt Omnia
Vates,
Quae Binis Tabulis Deus olim tradidit Illis.


The Priests (says he) (or Prophets) of the Ancient Fathers taught us all
These things, which God delivered to them heretofore in two Tables. Thanks be
to that God, who made a Heathen speak so plainly. I need not tell you to whom
these Tables were delivered, Cavallero De epistola can inform you. I cited
this place, that it might appear, though the Philosophy of Greece came
generally out of Egypt, yet some Graecians have been disciplined by the Jews,
and this is proved by no contemptible Testimonies. Aristobulus, who lived in
the Days of the Machabies, and was himself a Jew, writes to Ptolomie
Philometor King of Egypt, and affirms that the Pentateuch, or five Books of
Moses, were translated into Greek before the Time of Alexander the Great, and
that they came to the hands of Pythagoras and Plato. Indeed Numenius the
Pythagorean calls Plato, Mosen Attica lingua loquentem, Moses speaking in the
Greek Dialect; by which he minded not a similitude of style, but a Conformity
of principles. There is a story of Clearchus the Peripatetic in his first de
somno, how true I know not, but the Substance of it is this. He brings in his
Master Aristotle relating, how he met with a very reverend and learned Jew,
with whom he had much Discourse about Things Natural and Divine, but his
special Confession is, That he was much rectified by him in his Opinion of the
Deity. This perhaps night be, but certainly it was after he writ the Organon,
and his other lame Discourses, that move by the Logical Crutch. Now if you will
ask me, what Greek did ever prosesse any Magical Principles? To this I
answer, that if you bate Aristotle and his Ushers, who are borne like the
Insecta, ex putredine, out of their Masters Corruptions; Greece yielded not a
Philosopher, who was not in some Positions, Magical. If any man will challenge
my Demonstration herein, I do now promise him my performance. To give you some
particular Instances, Hippocrates was altogether Chemicall, and this I could
prove out of his own Mouth, but at this Time his works are not by me.
Democritus who lived in the same Age with him, writ his (...) that is,
Physical and Mystical Things, in plain English, Natural Secrets. To this
mystical piece Synesius added the Light of his Comments, and dedicated them to
Dioscorus Priest of Serapis. Of this Democritus Seneca reports in his Epistles,
That he knew a secret Coction of Pebles, by which be turned them into Emeralds.
Theophrastus, a most ancient Greek Author in his Book de lapidibus mentions
another mineral work of his own, wherein he had written something of Metals.
True indeed, that Discourse of his is lost, but notwithstanding his opinion is
upon Record, namely that he referred the Original of metalls to water. This is
confirmed by his own words, ((...)) as I find them cited by Picus in his Book
De auro. But that the Art of Transmutation was in Request in. his Days, and no
late Invention or Imposture, as some think, appears by the Attempts and
practice of that Age out of the same Theophrastus; For he mentions one Callias
an Atheman, who endeavoring to make gold, brought his Materials into Cinnabar.
It were an endless labor for me to recite all the Particulars, that Greece can
afford in order to my present Design, I will Therefore close up all in this
short Summarie. There is no wisdom in Nature, but what proceeded from God, for
he made Nature, he first found out, and afterward ordained the very ways, and
method how to corrupt, and how to generate. This his own wisdom and Knowledge,
he communicated in some Measure to the first Man, from him his Children
received it, and they taught it their postcritie; but the Jews having the
spiritual Birthright, This Mystery was their Inheritance, and they possessed it
entirely, being the Anointed Nation, upon whom God had powered forth his
spirit. By Tradition of the Jews, The Egyptians came to be instructed, From
the Egyptians these secrets descended to the Graecians, and from the Graecians
(as we all know) the Romans received their Learning, and amongst other common
Arts, this Magical mysterious one; This is confirmed by some proper, genuine
Effects and Monuments thereof, namely that flexible malleable Glass, produced
in the days of Tiberius, and the miraculous Olybian Lamp. But these Times
wherein I am now, and those thorough which I have past, are like some
Tempestuous Day, they have more clouds, than Light. I will therefore enter
Christendom, and here I shall find the Art in her Infancy: True indeed, The
Cradle is but in some private hands, few know where, and many believe there is
no such Thing. The Schoolmen are high in point of Noise, and condemn all,
but what Themselves profess: It is Aristotet's Almodena, they expose his
Errors to the sale, and this continnes for a long time. But every Thing (as the
Spaniard says) has its Quando; Many years are past over, and now the Child
begins to lisp, and peeps abroad in the fustian of Arnold, and Lullie. I need
not tell you how he has thrived since, do but look upon his Train, for at
this Day who praetends not to Magic, and that so magisterially, as if the
Regalos of the Art were in his powers? I know not any Refragans, except some
sickly Galenists, whose pale tallow faces speak more Disease, than Physic.
These indeed complain their Lives are too short, Philosophy too taedious, and
so fill their Mouths with Ars longa, Vita brevis. This is true (says the
Spanish Picaro) for they cure either late, or never, which makes their Art
long: but they kill quickly, which makes life short, and so the Riddle is
expounded.

I have now, Reader, performed my promise, and according to my Posse proved the
Antiquity of Magic. I am not so much a fool as to expect a general
subscription to my endeavors, every man's Placet is not the same with mine;
but Jacta est Alea, I have done this much, and he that will overthrow it, must
know in the first place, it is his Task to do more. There is one point, I can
justly bind an Adversary too, That he shall not oppose Man to God, Heathen
Romances to Divine Scriptures: He that would foil me, must use such weapons as
I do, for I have not fed my Readers with straw, neither will I be confuted
with stubble. In the next place it is my Design to speak something of the Art
it self, and this I shall do in rational terms, a Form different from the
Ancients, for I will not stuff my Discourse like a Wilderness with Lions and
Dragons. To Common Philosophers that fault is very proper, which Quintilian
observed in some Orators: Operum fastigia spectantur, latent fundamenta; The
spires of their Babel are in the Clouds, its Fundamentals no where, they talk
indeed of fine Things, but tell us not upon what grounds. To avoid these
Flights, I shall in this my Olla (for I care not much what I shall call it)
observe this Composition. First, I shall speak of that One only Thing, which
is the Subject of this Art, and the Mother of all Things. Secondly, I will
discourse of that most admirable, and more than natural Medicine, which is
generated out of this one Thing. Lastly, though with some disorder. I will
discover the means how, and by which this Art works upon the Subject; but these
being the Keys which lead to the very Estrado of Nature. where she sits in
full Solemnity, and receives the Visits of the Philosophers, I must scatter
them in several parts of the Discourse. This is all, and here thou must not
consider how long, or short I shall be, but how full the Discovery: and truly
it shall be such, and so much, that Thou can not in modesty expect more. Now
then you that would be what the Ancient Physicians were, Manus Deorum
salutares, not Quacks and Salvos of the Pipkin; you that would perform what
you publicly profess, and make your Callings honest and Conscionable, attend
to the Truth without spleen. Remember that Praejudice is no Religion, and by
Consequence has no Reward. If this Art were damnable, you might safely study
it notwithstanding for you have a praecept to prove all Things, but to hold
fast that which is Good. It is your Duty not to be wanting to your selves, and
for my part, that I may be wanting to noae, thus I begin.

Said the Cabalist, Domus Sanctuarii, quae est hic inferius; disponitur
Secundum Domum Sanctuarii, quae est Superius, The Building of the Sanctuary,
which is here below, is framed according to that of the Sanctuary, which is
above. Here we have two worlds Visible and Invisible, and two universal
Natures Visible and Invisible out of which both those Worlds proceeded. The
Passive Universal Nature, was made in the Image of the Active Universal one,
and the Conformity of Both Worlds, or Sanctuaries, consist in the Original
Conformity of their Principles. There are many Platonics, (and this last
Centurie has afforded them some apish Disciples) who discourse very boldly of
the Similitudes of Inferiors and Superiors, but if we thoroughly search their
Trash, it is a pack of small Conspiracies; namely of the Heliotrope and the
Sun, Iron and the Lodestone, the Wound and the Weapon. It is excellent sport
to hear how they crow being roosted on these pitiful Particulars, as if they
knew the Universal Magnet, which binds this great Frame, and moves all the
Members of it to a Mutual Compassion, This is an Humor much like that of Don
Quixote, who knew Dulcinea, but never saw her. Those students then, who would
be better instructed, must first know. There is an Universal Agent, who when
he was disposed to Create, had no other Pattern or Exemplar whereby to frame
and mould his Creatures, but himself, but having infinite inward Idea's, or
Conceptions in himself as he conceived so he created, that is to say, he
created an outward form answerable to the inward Concep ion, or sigure of his
Mind. In the second place they ought to know, there is an Universal Patient,
and this Passive Nature was created by the Universal Agent. This general
Patient, is the immediate Catholic Character of God himself in his Unity, and
Trinity. In plain Terms, it is that Substance which we commonly call the
first Matter. But verily it is to no purpose to know this Notion, Matter,
unless we know the Thing it self, to which the Notion relates; we must see
it, handle it, and by experimental ocular Demonstrations know the very Ce^tral
Invisible Essences, and Propriecies of it. But of these things hear the most
excellent Capnion, who informs his Jew, and his Epicure of two Catholic
Natures Material and Spiritual: Alteram (says he) quae videri oculis, and
attingi manu possit, prope ad omne Momentum alterabilem. Detur enim venia (ut
ait Madaurensis) Novitati Verborum, rerum obscuritatibus inservienti. Haec ipsa
cum eadem and una persistere nequeat, nihilominus a tali Virtute animi hospitio
suscipitur, pro modo rectius quo est, quam quo non est, qualis in veritate res
est, id est, mutabilis. Alteram autem substantiarum Naturam incorruptam,
immutabilem, constantem, eandemque ac semper Existentem. The English of it
speaks thus One Nature is such, it may be seen with the eyes, and felt with the
hands, and it is subject to Alteration almost in every Moment. You must Pardon
(as Apuleius says) this strange Expression, because it makes for the
Obscurity of the Thing. This very Nature, since she may not continue one, and
the same, is notwithstanding apprehended of the mind under her such
Qualification, more rightly as she is, than as she is not, namely as the
Thing it self is in Truth, that is to say, Changeable. The other Nature, or
Principle of Substances, is incorruptible, immutable, constant, One and the
same for ever, and always existent Thus he. Now this Changeable Nature
whereof he speaks is the first Visible, Tangible Substance that ever God made;
it is white in Appearance, and 'Paracelsus gives you the Reason why: Omnia
(says he) in Dei Manu alba sunt, is ea tingit, ut vult: All things when they
first proceed from God, are white, but he colors them afterward, according
to his pleasure. An Example we have in this very matter, which the
Philosophers call sometimes their red Magnesia, sometimes their white, by which
Descriptions they have deceived many men; for in the first praeparation the
Chaos is Bloud-red, because the Central Sulphur is stirred up, and discovered
by the Philosophical Fire. In the Second it is exceeding white and transparent
like the Heavens. It is in Truth somewhat like Common Quicksilver, but of a
Celestial transcendent brightness, for there is nothing upon Earth like it.
This fine substance is the Child of the Elements, and it is a most pure, sweet
Virgin; for nothing as yet has been generated out of her: but if at any time
she breeds, it is by the fire of Nature, for that is her husband. She is no
Animal, no Vegetable, no Mineral, neither is she extracted out of Animals,
Vegetables, or Minerals, but she is praeexistent to them all, for she is the
Mother of them. Yet one thing I must say, she is not much short of Life, for
she is almost Animal. Her Composition is miraculous and different from all
other Compounds whatsoever. Gold is not so compact, but every Sophister
concludes it is no Simple; but she is so much One, that no man believes she is
more. She yields to nothing but Love, for her End is Generation, and that was
never yet performed by Violence. He that knows how to wanton, and toy with
her. the same shall receive all her Treasures. First, she shedds at her
Nipples a thick heavy water, but white as any snow; The Philosophers call it
Virgin-milk. Secondly, she gives him Blood from her very heart; it is a quick
heavenly fire, some impioperly call it their sulphur. Thirdly and lastly she
presents him with a secret Crystal, of more worth and lusty than the white
Rock, and all her Rosials. This is she, and these are her Favors: Catch her,
if you can.

To this Character and Discovery of my own. I shall add some more
Descriptions, as I find her ^imm'd and dressed by her other Lovers. Some few (but
such as knew her very well) have written that she is not only One and Tirce,
but withal Four and Five, and this Truth is Essential. The Titles they have
bestowed upon her, are diverse. They call her their Catholic Magnesia. and the
Sperme of the World. out of which all Natural things are generated. Her Birth
(say they) is Singular, and not without a miracle; her Complexion heavenly, and
different from her Parents. Her Body also in some sense is Incorruptible, and
the Common Elements cannot destroy it, neither will she mix with them
Essentially. In the outward shape, or figure, she resembles a stone, and yet
is no stone, for they call her their white Gum, and Water of their Sea, water
of Life most pure, and most blessed water, and yet they mind not water of the
Clouds, or Rainwater. nor water of the Well, nor Dew: but a certain thick
permanent, saltish water, a water that is dry, and wetts not the hand, a
viscous, slimie water generated out of the saltish fatness of the Earth. They
call her also their twofold Mercury, and Azoth begotten by the Influences of
two Globes, Celestial, and Terrestrial. Moreover, they affirm her to be of
that Nature, that no fire can destroy her, which of all other Descriptions is
most true, for she is fire her self, having in her a portion of the universal
fire of Nature, and a secret Celestial spirit, which spirit is animated, and
quickened by God himself, wherefore also they call her their most blessed
stone. Lastly, they say she is a middle nature between thick and thin, neither
altogether Earthy, nor altogether Fiery, but a mean aereall substance to be
found every where, and every time of the year.

This is enough: but that I may speak something my self in plain Terms, I say
she is a very salt, but extreme soft, and somewhat thin and fluid, not so
hard, not so thick as common extracted Salts, for she is none of them, nor any
kind of Salt whatsoever that man can make. She is a sperme that Nature her
self draws out of the Elements, without the help of Art: man may find it,
where Nature leaves it, it is not of his office to make the sperme, nor to
extract it, it is already made, and wants nothing but a Matrix, and heat
convenient for Generation. Now should you consider with your selves where
Nature leaves the seed, and yet many are so dull, they know not how to work,
when they are told what they must do. We see in Animal Generations, the
sperme parts not from both the Parents, for it remains with the Female, where
it is perfected. In the great world though all the Elements contribute to the
Composure of the sperme, yet the sperme parts not from all the Elements, but
remains with the Earth, or with the Water, though more immediately with the
one, than with the other. Let not your Thoughts feed now on the Phlegmatic,
indigested Vomits of Aristotle, look on the green youthful, and flowrie Bosom
of the Earth; Consider what a vast Universal Receptacle this Element is. The
Stars and Plarets overlook her, and though they may not descend hither
themselves, they shed down their golden Locks, like so many Bracolets, and
Tokens of their Love. The Sun is perpetually busy, brings his Fire round about
her, as if he would sublime something from her bosom, and rob her of some
secret, enclosed Jewel. Is there any thing lost since the Creation? Would
thou know his very bed, and his pillow? It is Earth. How many Cities do thou
think have perished by the Sword? how many by Earthquakes? and how many by the
Deluge? Thou do perhaps desire to know where they are at this present:
believe it they have one common Sepulcher, what was once their Mother, is now
their Tomb; All things return to that place from whence they came, and that
very place is Earth. If thou have but leisure, run over the Alphabet of Nature,
examine every Letter, I mean every particular Creature, in her Book. What
becomes of her Grass, her Corn, her Herbs, her Flowers? True it is, both Man
and beast do use them, but this only by the way, for they rest not till they
come to Earth again. In this Element they had their first, and in this will
they have their last station. Think (if other Vanities will give thee leave,)
on all those Generations that went before thee, and anticipate all those that
shall come after thee. Where are those Beauties, the Times past have produced,
and what will become of those that shall appear in future Ages? They will all
to the same 'Dust, they have one Common house, and there is no Family so
numerous, as that of the Grave. Do but look on the Daily sports of Nature, her
Clouds and mists, the Scaeue, and Pageantrie of the Air, Even these Momentary
Things retreat to the Closet of the Earth. If the Sun makes her dry, she can
drink as fast, what gets up in Clouds, comes down in Water, the Earth swallows
up ail, and like that Philosophical Dragon eats her own Tail. The wise Poets
saw this, and in their mystical language called the Earth Saturn, telling us
withal, she did feed on her own Children. Verily there is more Truth in their
stately Verse, than in Aristotle's dull Prose, for he was a blind beast, and
Malice made him so. But to proceed a little further with you, I wish you to
concoct what you read, to dwell a little upon Earth, not to fly up presently,
and admire the Meteors of your own Brains. The Earth you know in the Winter
time is a dull, dark, dead Thing. a contemptible frozen phlegmatic Lump. But
toward the Spring, and Fomentation. of the Sun, what rare Pearls are there in
this Dunghill? what glorious Colors, and tinctures does she discover? a pure
eternal green overspreads her, and this attended with innumerable other
Beauties; Roses red and white, golden Lilies, Azure Violets, the Bleeding
Hyacinths, with their several celestial odours, and Spices. If you will be
advised by me, Learn from whence the Earth has these invisible Treasures. This
Annual Flora, which appears not without the Complements of the Sun. Behold I
will tell you as plainly as I may. There are in the world two Extremes, Matter
and Spirit: one of these I can assure you is earth. The Influences of the
spirit animate and quicken the matter, and in the Material Extreme the seed of
the spirit is to be found. In middle Natures, as Fire, Air, and Water, this
Seed stays not, for they are but Dispenseros, or Media, which convey it from
one extreme to the other, from the Spirit to the Matter, that is to the Earth.
But stay my friend, this Intelligence has somewhat stirred you. and now you
come on so furiously, as if you would rifle the Cabinet. Give me leave to put
you back. I mind not this Common, faeculent, impure Earth, that falls not
within my Discourse, but as it makes for your Manuduction. That which I speak
of is a Mystery, it is Coelum Terrae, and Terra Coeli, not this dirt, and
dust, but a most Secret, Celestial, Invisible Earth.

Raymund Lullie in his Compendium of Alchimie, calls the Principles of Art
Magic, Spiritus fugitivos in Aere condensatos, in forma Monstrorum Diversorum,
and Animalium, etiam Hominum, qui vadunt sicut Nubes, modo huc, modo illuc,
Certain fugitive spirits condensed in the Air. in the shape of Diverse
Monsters. Beasta and Men, which move like Clouds hither and thither. As for
the Sense of our Spaniard, I refer it to his Readers, let them make the most of
it.

This is true; As the Air, and all the Volatile Substances in it, are
restless, even so it is with the first Matter. The eye of Man never saw her
twice under one and the same shape but as Clouds driven by the wind are
forced to this, and that figure, but cannot possibly retain one constant form,
so is she persecuted by the fire of Nature; for this fire, and this water are
like two Lovers, they no sooner meet, but presently they play and toy, and this
Game will not over till some new Babee is generated. I have oftentimes admired
their subtle perpetual Motion, for at all Times, and in all places these two
are busy, which occasioned that Notable sentence of Trismegistus, That Action
was the Life of God. But most excellent, and Magisterial is that Oracle of
Marcus Antoninus, who in his Discourse to himself, speaks indeed things worthy
of himself, (...) The Nature (says he) of the Universe delights not in any
Thing so much, as to alter all Things, and then to make the like again. This is
her Tick Tack, she plays one Game, to begin another. The matter is placed
before her like a piece of Wax, and she shapes it to all forms, and figures.
Now she makes a Bird, now a Beast, now a Flower, then a Frog and she is
pleased with her own Magical performances, as men are with their own fancies.
Hence she is called of Orpheus, (...) and (...) the Mother that makes many
Things, and ordaines strange shapes, or figures. Neither does she, as some
sinful Parents do, who having their pleasure, care not for their Child; she
loves them still after she has made them, has an eye over them all, and
provides even for her Sparrowes. IT is strange to consider that she works as
well privately as publicly, not only in Gardens where Ladies may smell her
perfumes, but in remote Solitudes and Deserts. The Truth is, she seeks not to
please others so much as her self, wherefore many of her works, and those the
Choysest, never come to Light. We see little Children, who are newly come from
under her hand, will be dabling in 'Dirt and Water, and other idle sports
affected by none but Themselves. The Reason is, they are not as yet Captivated,
which makes them seek their own pleasures; But when they come to Age, then Love
or Profit makes them square their Actions according to other men's Desires. Some
Cockney claps his Revenues on his back, but his Galantrie is spoiled, if his
Mistress does not observe it. Another fights, but his Victory is lost, if it be
not Printed, it is the world must hear of his Valor. Now Nature is a free
spirit, that seeks no Applause, she observes none more than her self, but is
pleased with her own Magic, as Philosophers are with their Secret Philosophy.
Hence it is that we find her busy, not only in the Potts of the Balconies,
but in Wildernesses, and ruinous places, where no eyes observe her, but the
Stars and Planets. In a word, wheresoever the fire of nature finds the Virgin
Mercury, there has he found his Love, and there will they both fall to their
Husbandry, a pleasure not subject to Surfets, for it still Presents new
Varieties. It is reported of Marc Antonie, a famous, but unfortunate Roman,
how he sent his Agent over the world to Copy all the handsome faces, that
amongst so many excellent features, he might select for himself the most
pleasing piece. Truly Nature is much of this strain, for she has infinite
beauteous patterns in her self, and all these she would gladly see beyond her
self, which she cannot do without the matter, for that is her Glass. This
makes her generate perpetually, and imprint her conceptions in the matter,
communicating life to it, and figuring it according to her Imagination. By this
Practice she places her Fancy, or Idea, beyond her self, or as the
Peripatetics say, extra Intellectum, beyond the divine Mind, namely in the
Matter; but the Idea's being innumerable, and withal different, the pleasures
of the Agent are maintained by their Variety, or to speak more properly by his
own fruitfulness, for amongst all the Beauties the world affords, there are
not two, that are altogether the same. Much might be spoken in this place
concerning Beautio, what it is, from whence it came, and how it may be defaced,
not only in the outward figure, but in the inward Idea, and lost for ever in
both worlds. But these pretty shuttles I am no way acquainted with, I have no
Mistress but Nature, wherefore I shall leave the fine Ladies to fine Lads, and
speak of my simple AElia Laelia.

It was scarce Day, when all alone
I saw Hyanthe and her Throne.
In fresh, green Damascs she was dressed,
And over a Saphir Globe did rest.
This slipperie Sphaere when I did see,
Fortune, I thought it had been Thee.
But when I saw she did present
A Majesty more Permanent,
I thought my Cares not lost, if I
Should finish my Discovery.
Sleepie she looked to my first sight,
As if she had Watched all the Night,
And underneath, her hand was spread,
The White Supporter of her head.
But at my Second, studied View,
I could perceive a silent Dew
Steal down her Cheeks; lest it should Stayne
Those Cheeks where only Smiles should reign.
The Tears streamed down for haste, and all
In Chains of liquid Pearl did fall.
Fair Sorrows; and more dear than Joys,
Which are but empty Airs and Noise,
Your Drops present a richer Prize,
For they are Something like her Eyes.
Pretty, white Fool! why have thou been
Sulli'd with Tears, and not with Sin?
It Is true: thy Tears, like Polished Skies,
Are the Bright Rosials of thy Eyes,
But such strange Fates do them attend,
As if thy Woes would never end.
From Drops to Sighs they turn, and then
Those sighs return to Drops again:
But whiles the Silver Torrent seeks
Those Flowr's that watch it in thy Cheeks,
The White and Red Hyanthe wears,
Turn to Rose Water all her Tears.
Have you beheld a Flame, that springs
From Incense, when sweet, curled, Rings
Of smoke attend her last, weak Fires,
And She all in Perfumes expires?
So died Hyanthe. Here (said she)
Let not this Vial part from Thee.
It holds my Heart, though now it is Spilled,
And into Waters all distilled.
It Is constant still: Trust not false Smiles,
Who smiles, and weeps not she beguiles.
Nay trust not Tears: false are the few,
Those Tears are Many, that are True.
Trust Me, and take the better Choice,
Who has my Tears, can want no Joys.
I know some Sophisters of the Heptarchie, I mean those, whose Learning is all
Noise, in which Sense even Py-annets, and Paraquitoes are Philosophical, will
conclude this, all Bayt and Poetry, that we are Pleasing not Positive, and
cheat even the Readers Discretion. To prevent such impotent Calumnies, and to
spend a little more of our secret Light upon the welldisposed Student, I shall
in this place produce the Testimonies of some able Philosophers concerning the
first Matter it self, as it is naturally found, before any alteration by Art;
and here verily the Reader may discover the Mark, it is most easily done, if he
will but eye the Flights of my Verse, or follow the more grave pace of their
Prose. The first I shall cite is Arnoldus de Villa nova, an absolute perfect
Master of the Art, he describes the Philosophical Chaos, in these plain
terms. Lapis est, and non lapis, Spiritus, Anima, and Corpus; Quem si
dissolvis, dissolvitur, and si coagules, coagulatur, and si volare facis,
volat; Est enim Volat ilis, ulbus ut lacryma oculi: postea efficitur citrinus,
salsus, pilis carens: quem nemo sua lingua tangere potest. Ecce ipsum jam sua
demonstravi descriptione, non tamen nominavi. Modo volo ipsum nominare, and
dico, quod si dixeris eum Aquam esse, verum dicis; and si dixeris eum Aquam non
esse, mentiris. Ne igitur decipiaris pluribus descriptionibus, and
operationibus, unum enim quid est, cui nihil alieni infertur. It is (says he)
a stone and no stone Spirit, Soul, and Body; which if thou dissolvest, it
will be dissolved, and if thou do coagulat it, it will be coagulated, and
if thou do make it fly, it will fly; for it is Volatile, or flying, and
clear as a tear; afterward it is made citrine then saltish, but without
shoots. or Chrystals, and no man may touch it with his Tongue. Behold I have
described it truly to thee, but I have not named it. Now I will name it, and I
say, that if thou say it is Water, thou do say the Truth, and if thou
say it is not water, thou do lie. Be not therefore deceived with
manifold Descriptions and Operations, for it is but one Thing, to which nothing
Extraneous may be added. Thus Arnoldus; and he borrowed this from the Turba.
Let us now hear his Disciple Raymund Lullie, who speaking very enviously and
obscurely of Seven Metallic Principles, describes the Third wherein four of
the seven are included in these words; Tertium (says he) est Aqua clara
Composita, and illa est res Argento vivo magis propingua, quae quidem reperitur
supra Terram currens and fluens. Et istud argentum vivum in omni Corpore
Elementato a materia aeris est proprie generatum, and ideo ipsius humidit as
est valde ponderosa. That is: The third Principle, is a Clear Compounded
water, and it is the next substance in Complexion to Quicksilver, it is found
running, and flowing upon the Earth. This Quicksilver is generated in every
Compound out of the Substance of the Air, and therefore the moisture of it is
extreme heavy. To these I will add Albertus Magnus, whose Suffrage in this
kind of Learning is like the Stylanx to Gold, for he had thoroughly searched
it, and knew very well what part of it would abide the Test. Mercurius
Sapientum (says he) est Elementum Aqueum frigidum, and humidum, Aqua
permanens, spiritus Corporis, vapor unctuosus, Aqua Benedicta, Aqua virtuosa,
Aqua Sapientum, Acetum Philosophorum, Aqua Mineralis, Ros coelestis gratiae,
Lac Virginis, Mercurius Corporalis, and aliis infinitis Nominibus in
Philosophorum libris nominatur, quae quidem Nomina quamvis varia sunt, sempor
tamen unam and eandem rem significant, utpote Solum Mercurium sapientum. Ex
ipso solo elicitur omnis virtus Artis Alckimiae, and suo modo Tinctura alba and
rubea. In plain English thus; The Mercury of the Wisemen is a waterie Element,
Cold and moist. This is their Permanent water, the spirit of the Body, the
anctuous vapor, the Blessed water, the virtuous water, the water of the
Wisemen, the Philosophers Vinacre, the Mineral Water the D^w of heavenly Grace
the Virgins Milk. the Bodily Mercury and with other numberless names is it
named in the Books of the Philosophers, which names truly though they are
diverse notwithstanding always signify one and the same thing, namely the
Mercury of the Wisemen. Out of this Mercury alone all the Virtue of the Art
is extracted and according to its Nature the Tincture both Red and White. To
this agrees R(...) the Persian; Sperma Lapidis (says he) est frigidum and
humidum in Manifesto, and in Occulto calidum and siccum. The Sperme, or first
matter of the stone is outwardly cold and moist but inwardly Hot and Dry. All
which is confirmed by Rhodian, another Instructor (it seems) of Kanid King of
Persia; his words are these; Sperma est album and liquidum, postea rubeum.
Sperma istud est lapis fugitivus and est Aereum and Volatile, and est frigidum
and humidum, and cali^um and siccum. The Sperm (says he) is white and Liquid,
afterward red. This Sperm is the flying stone, and it is aereal, and volatile,
cold and moist, hot and dry. To these subscribes the Author of that excellent
Tract entitled Liber trium Verborum. Hic est Liber (says he) Trium verborum,
Liber Lapidis preciosi, qui est Corpus aereum and volatile, frigidum and
humidum, aquosum and adustivum, and in eo est Calidit as and siccitas,
frigiditas and humiditas, alia virtus in occulto, alia in Manifesto. This is
the Book of Three words, meaning thereby Three Principles, The Book of the
Precions stone, which is a Body aereal and volatile cold and moist, watrie and
adustive, and in it is Heat and Drought, Coldness and Moisture, one virtue
inwardly, the other outwardly. Belus the Philosopher in that famous and most
Classic Synod of Arisleus, inverts the order, to conceal the practice, but if
rightly understood, he speaks to the purpose. Excelsum (says he) est hoc apud
Philosophos magnos Lapidem non esse lapidem, apud I diotas vile and
Incredibile. Quis enim credet Lapidem Aquam, and Aquam Lapidem fieri, cum nihil
sit diver sius? Attamen revera it a est. Lapis enim est haec ipsaper manens
Aqua, and dum Aqua est lapis non est. Amongst all great Philosophers it is
Magisterial that our stone is no stone, but amongst Ignorants it is ridiculous
and incredible. For who will believe that water can be made a stone, and a
stone water, nothing being more different than these two? And yet in very truth
it is so. For this very permanent water is the stone, but whiles it is water,
it is no stone. But in this sense the Ancient Hermes abounds, and almost
disvocers too much. Scitote Filii Sapientum, quod priscorum Philosophorum aquae
est Divisio, quae dividit ipsam in Alia quatuor. Know (says he) you that are
the Children of the wise, the Separation of the ancient Philosophers was
performed upon water, which Separation divides the water into other four
Substances. There is extant a very learned Author, who has written something
to this purpose, and that more openly than any, whom we have formerly cited.
Sicuti Mundus Originem debet Aquae, cui Spiritus Domini incubabat, rebus tam
Coelestibus, quam Terrestribus omnibus inde prodeuntibus; ita Limbus hic
emergit ex Aqua non vnlgari, neque ex Rore Coelesti, aut ex aere Condensato in
Cavernis Terrae, vel in Recipiente ipso, non ex Abysso Maris, fontibus, puteis,
fluminibusve hausto, sed ex Aqua quadam perpessa, omnibus obvia, paucissimis
cognita, Quae in se habet, quaecunque, ad totius operis Complementum sunt
necessaria, omni amoto Extrinsico. As the world (says he) was generated out
of that Water, upon which the Spirit of God did move, all things proceeding
thence, both Celestial and Terrestrial So this Chaos is generated out of a
certain Water that is not common, not out of Dew, nor Air condensed in the
Caverns of the Earth, or Artificially in the Receiver; not out of water drawn
out of the Sea, Fountains, Pitts, or Rivers, but out of a certain tortured
water, that has suffered some Alteration, obvious it is to All, but known to
very few. This water has all in it, that is necessary to the perfection of
the work, without any Extrinsecal Addition. I could produce a Thousand Authors
more, but that were tedious; I shall conclude with one of the Rosy Brothers,
whose Testimony is AEquivalent to the Best of These but his Instruction far
more Excellent. His Discourse of the first Matter is somewhat large, and to
avoid prolixitie, I shall forbear the Latin, but I will give thee his Sense in
punctual plain English.

I am a Goddess ( says he, speaking in the person of Nature) for Beauty and
Extraction famous, born out of our own proper Sea, which compasses the whole
Earth, and is ever restless. Out of my Breasts I pour forth Milk and Blood;
Boil these two, till they are turned into Silver and Gold. O most excellent
Subject! out of which all things in this world are generated, though at the
first sight thou art Poison, adorned with the name of the flying Eagle. Thou
art the first Matter, the seed of Divine Benediction, in whose Body there is
Heat and Rain, which notwithstanding are hidden from the wicked, because of thy
Habit, and virgin vestures which is scattered over all the world. Thy Parents
are the Sun and Moon, in Thee there is Water and Wine, Gold also and Silver
upon Earth, that mortal man may rejoice. After this manner God sends us his
Blessing and Wisdom with Rain, and the Beams of the Sun, to the eternal
Glory of his Name. But consider o Man, what Things God bestows upon thee by
this means. Torture the Eagle till she weeps, and the Lion be weakened, and
bleed to death. The Blood of this Lion incorporated with the Tears of the
Eagle, is the Treasure of the Earth. These Creatures use to devour and kill
one another, but notwithstanding their love is mutual, and they put on the
Propriety, and Nature of a Salamander, which, if it remains in the fire
without any detriment it cures all the Diseases of Men, Beasts and Metals.
After that the Ancient Philosophers had perfectly understood this Subject, they
diligently sought in this Mystery for the Center of the Middlemost Tree in the
Terrestrial Paradyse, entering in by Five litigious Gates. The first Gate was
the Knowledge of the true Matter, and here arose the first, and that a most
bitter Conflict. The second was the Praeparation by which this matter was to
be praepared, that they might obtain the Embers of the Eagle, and the Blood of
the Lion. At this Gate there is a most sharp fight, for it produces water and
blood, and a Spiritual bright Body. The Third Gate is the Fire, which
conduces to the Maturitie of the Medicine. The Fourth Gate is that of
Multiplication and Augmentation in which Proportions and Weights are
Necessary. The fifth and last Gate is Projection. But most glorious, full
rich, and high is he who attains to the fourth Gate, for he has got an
Universal Medicine for all Diseases. This is that great Character of the Book
of Nature, out of which her whole Alphabet does arise. The fifth gate serves
only for Metals. This Mystery existing from the Foundation of the World, and
the Creation of Adam is of all others the most ancient, a knowledge which God
Almighty by his Word breathed into Nature, a miraculous power, the blessed fire
of Life, the Transparent Carbuncle, and red Gold of the Wise men, and the
Divine Benediction of this life. But this mystery, because of the Malice and
wickedness of men, is given only to few, notwithstanding it lives, and moves
every day in the sight of the whole world, as it appears by the following
parable. I am a poisonous Dragon, present every where, and to be had for
nothing. My water and my fire dissolve and Compound; out of my body thou shall
draw the Green, and the Red Lion: but if thou do not exactly know me, thou will with my Fire destroy thy five Senses. A most pernieious quick poison comes
out of my Nostrils, which has been the Destruction of many. Separate therefore
the Thick from the Thin artificially, unless thou do delight in extreme
Poverty. I give thee faculties both Male and Female and the Powers both of
Heaven and Earth. The Mysteries of my Art are to be performed magnanimously,
and with great Courage, if thou would have me overcome the Violence of the
Fire, in which Attempt many have lost both their Labor and their Substance. I
am the Egg of Nature known only to the Wise, such as are pious and modest, who
make of me a little world. Ordained I was by the All-mighty God for men, but
(though many desire me) I am given only to few that they may relieve the
poor with my Treasures, and not set their minds on Gold that perishes. I am
called of the Philosophers Mercury: my husband is Gold (Philosophical.) I am
the old Dragon that is present every where on the face of the Earth; I am
Father and Mother; Youthful and Ancient; weak and yet most strong; Life and
Death; Visible and Invisible; Hard and Soft; Descending to the Earth and
Ascending to the Heavens; most high and most low; light and heavy; In me the
Order of Nature is oftentimes inverted, in Color, Number, Weight and Measure.
I have in me the light of Nature, I am dark and bright, I spring from the
Earth, and I come out of Heaven, I am well known, and yet a mere Nothing, all
Colors shine in me, and all Metals by the Beams of the Sun. I am the
Carbuncle of the Sun, a most noble clarified Earth by which thou may turn
Copper, Iron, Tin, and Lead into most pure Gold.

Now Gentlemen you may see which way the Philosophers move, they commend their
Secret water, and I admire the Tears of Hyanthe. There is something in the
Fancy besides Poetry, for my Mistress is very Philosophical, and in her Love
a pure Platonio. But now I think upon it, how many Rivals shall I procure by
this Discourse? Every Reader will fall to, and some fine Thing may break her
heart with Nonsense. This Love indeed were mere Luck, but for my part I dare
trust her, and ^est any man should mistake her for some things formerly named,
I will tell you truly what she is; She is not any known water whatsoever, but
a Secret Spormatic Moisture, or rather the Venus that yields that moisture.
Therefore do not you Imagine that she is any crude, phlegmatic, thin water,
or she is a fatt, thick, heavy, slimie humiditie; But lest you should think I
am grown jealous, and would not trust you with my Mistress, Arnoldus de
villanova shall speak for me, hear him. Amplius tibi dico, quod nullo modo
invenire potuimus, nec similiter invenire potuerunt Philosophi, aliquam rem
perseverantem in igne, nisi solam unctuosam Humiditatem. Aqueam humiditatem
videmus de facili evapor are, Arida remanet, and ideo separantur, quia non sunt
Naturales. Si autem eas humiditates consydereremus, quae difficulter separantur
ab his quae sunt Naturales, non invenimus aliquas nisi unctuosas, and viscosas.
I tell thee further (says he) that we could not possibly find, neither could
the Philosophers find before us, any thing that would persist in the fire, but
only the Unctnous Humiditie. A waterie HUmiditie, we see, will easily vapor
away, and the Earth remains behind and the parts are therefore separated
because their Composition is not natural. But if we consider those humidities,
which are hardly separated from those parts which are natural to them, we
find not any such but the unctuous, viscous Humidities. It will be expected
perhaps by some Flint, and Antimonie-Doctors, who make their Philosophical
Contrition with a Hammer, that I should discover this Thing outright and not
suffer this strange Bird-lime to hold their pride by the Plumes. To these, I
say, it is water of Silver, which some have called water of the Moon, but it is
Mercury of the Sun, and partly of Saturn, for it is extracted from these three
metalls, and without them it can never be made. Now they may unriddle, and
tell me what it is, for it is Truth, if they can understand it.

To the Ingenuous and modest Reader, I have something else to reply, and I
believe it will sufficiently excuse me. Raimund Lullie, a man who had been in
the Center of Nature, and without all Question understood a great part of the
Divine Will, gives me a most terrible Charge not to prostitute these
Principles. Juro Tibi (says he) supra animam meam, Theor. cap. 6.
quod si ea reveles, damnatus es. Nam a Deo omne procedit bonum, and ei soli
debetur. Quare servabis, and Secretum tenebis illud, quod ei debetur
revelandum, and affirmabis quam per rectam proprietatem subtrahis, quae eius
honori debentur. Quiae si revelares brevibus verbis illud quod longinquo
tempore formavit, in die magni Judicii condemnareris, tanquam qui perpetrator
existens contra Majestatem die laesam, nec tibi remitteretur Casus Laesae
Majestatis. Talium enim Revelatio ad Deum, and non ad Alterum spectat. That is;
I swear to thee upon my soul, that thou art damned, if thou should reveal
these Things. For every good thing proceeds from God and to him only it is
due. Wherefore thou shall reserve, and keep that Secret, which God only should
reveal, and thou shall affirm thou do justly keep back those things, whose
Revelation belongs to his honor. For if thou should reveal that in a few
words, which God has been forming a long time, thou should be condemned in
the great day of Judgment, as a Traitor to the Majesty of God, neither should
thy Treason be forgiven Thee. For the Revelation of such Things belong to God,
and not to Man. So said the wise Raymond.

Now for my part I have always honored the Magicians, their Philosophy being
both rational, and Majestic, dwelling not upon Notions, but Effects, and those
such as confirm both the Wisdom and the power of the Creator. When I was a
mere Errant in their Books, and understood them not, I did believe them. Time
rewarded my Faith, and paid my Credulity with Knowledge. In the Interim I
suffered many bitter Calumnies, and this by some envious Adversaries, who had
nothing of a Scholar, but their Gowns, and a little Language for Vent to their
Nonsense. But these could not remove me, with a Spartan patience I concocted
my Injuries, and found at last that Nature was Magical, not Peripateticall. I
have no Reason then to distrust them in Spiritual Things, whom I have found so
orthodox and faithful even in Natural Mysteries. I do believe Raymund, and
in order to that Faith, I provide for my Salvation. I will not discover, that I
may not be condemned. But if this will not satisfy Thee, who ever thou art let
me whisper thee a word in the ear, and afterward do thou proclaim it on the
housetopps. Do thou know from whom, and how that Sperme or Se^^ which men
for want of a better name call the first matter, proceeded? A certain
Illumina^ce and in his days a member of that Society, which some painted
Buzzards use to laugh at, writes thus; Deus optimus Maximus ex Nikilo aliquid
creavit, illud Aliquid vero fiebat unum aliquod, in Quo Omnia. Creaturae
Coelestes and I errestres. God See Jacob Behmen in his most excellent and
prosound Discourse of the Three Principles.
(says he) incomparable good and Great, out of nothing created something, but
that Something was made one Thing, in which all Things were contained Creatures
both Coelesliall and Terrestrial. This first Something was a certain kind of
Cloud, or Darkness, which was condensed into water. and this water is that One
Thing in which all Things were contained. But my Question is, what was that
Nothing, out of which the first Cloudy Chaos, or Something was made? Can thou
tell me? It may be thou do think it is a mere Nothing. It is indeed Nihil
quo ad Nos. Nothing that we perfectly know. It is Nothing as Dionysius says,
Nihil eorum quae sunt, and Nihil eorum quae non sunt. It is nothing that was
created, or of those things that are: and nothing of that which thou do call
nothing that is of those Things that are not, in thy empty destructive sense.
But by your leave, it is the True Thing, of whom we can affirm nothing: it is
that transcendent Essence, whose Theology is Negative, and was See Dyonys. Ar.
Th. Neg.
known to the Primitive Church, but is lost in These our Days. This is that
Nothing of Cornelius Agrippa, and in this nothing, when he was tired with
humane Things, I mean humane Sciences, he did at last rest: Nihil Scire, (said
he) est vita felilcissima, to know Nothing is the happiest Life; true indeed,
for to know this Nothing, is Life Eternal. Learn then to understand that
Magical Axiom, Ex Invisibili factum est Visibile, for all Visibles came out of
the Invisible God, for he is the Wellspring from whence all things flow, and
the Creation was a certain stupendous Metaphysicall Birth, or Deliverie. This
fine Virginwater, or Chaos, was the second Nature from God himself, and if I
may say so, the Child of the Blessed Trinity. What Doctor then is he, whose
hands are fit to touch that Subject, upon which God himself when he works,
lays his own Spirit, for verily so we read, The Spirit of Genesis c. 1.
God moved upon the face of the water? And can it be expected then, that I
should prostitute this Mystery to all hands whatsoever, that I should proclaim
it, and cry it, as they cry Oysters? Verily these Considerations, with some
other which I will not for all the world put to Papyr have made me almost
displease my dearest friends, to whom notwithstanding I owe a better
Satisfaction. Had it been my fortune barely to know this Matter, as most men
do, I had perhaps been less careful of it, but I have been instructed in all
the Secret Circumstances thereof, which few upon Earth understand. I speak not
for any Ostentation, but I speak a Truth which my Conscience knows very well.
Let me then Reader, request thy Patience, for I shall leave this Discovery to
God, who if it be his blessed will can call unto Thee, and say: Here it is,
and thus I work it. I had not spoken all this in my own Defense, had I not
been assaulted (as it were) in this very point, and told to my face I was bound
to discover all that I knew, for this Age looks for Dreams and Revelations, as
the Train to their invisible Righteousness. I have now sufficiently
discoursed of the Matter, and if it be not thy fortune to find it by what is
here written, yet thou can not be deceived by what I have said, for I have
purposely a voyded all those Terms, which might make thee mistake any Common
Salts, Stones, or Minerals for it. I advise thee withal to beware of all
Vegetables, and Animals: avoid them, and every part of them whatsoever. I speak
this because some ignorant, Sluttish Broylers, are of Opinion, that man's Bioud
is the True Subject. But Alas! is man's Blood in the Bowels of the Earth, that
Metals should be generated out of it? or was the world, and all that is
therein, made of man's Blood, as of their first Matter? Surely no such Thing.
The first Matter was existent before Man, and all other Creatures whatsoever,
for she is the Mother of them all; They were made of the first Matter, and not
the first Matter of them. Take heed then, Let not any man deceive thee. It is
totally impossible to reduce any particular to the first Matter, or to a Sperm,
without our Mercury, and being so reduced, it is not Universal, but the
Particular Sperm of its own Species, and works not any Effects but what are
agreeable to the Nature of that Species, for God has sealed it with a
particular Idea.

Let them alone then who practice upon man's blood in their Chemicall stoves,
and Athanors, or as Sendivow has it, in Fornaculis mirabilibus; they will
deplore their Error at last, and sit without Sackcloth, in the Ashes of their
Compositions.

But I have done I will now speak something of Generation, and the ways of it,
that the Process of the Philosophers upon this Matter, may be the better
understood. You must know that Nature has two Extremes, and between Anima
Magica.
them a Middle Substance, which elsewhere we have called the Middle Nature.
Example enough we have in the Creation. The first Extreme was that Cloud or
Darkness whereof we have spoken formerly; some call it the Remote Matter, and
the Invisible Chaos, but very improperly, for it was not invisible. This is the
Jewish Ensoph outwardly, and it is the same with that Orphic Night; (...)
O Night! thou black nurse of the golden stars.


Out of this Darkness all things that are in this world came as out of their
Fountain or Matrix: hence that Position of all famous Poets and Philosophers,
Omniaex Nocte Prodiisse. The middle Substance is the Water, into which that
Night or Darkness was condensed, and the Creatures framed out of the Water make
up the other Extreme. But the Magicians when they speak strictly. will not
allow of this last Extreme, because Nature does not stay here, wherefore their
Philosophy runs thus; Man (say they) in his natural state, is in the mean
Creation, from which he must recede to one of woe Extremes; either to
Corruption, as commonly all men do for they die, and moulder away in their
graves: or else to a spiritual, glorified Condition, like Enooh and Elijah,
who were translated, and this (say they) is a true Extreme, for after it there
is no Alteration. Now the Magicians reasoning with themselves, why the mean
Creation should be subject to Corruption, concluded the Cause and Original of
this disease to be in the Chaos it self, for even that was corrupted, and
cursed upon the Fall of Man. But examining Things further, they found that
Nature in her Generations did only concoct the Chaos with a gentle heat, she
did not separate the parts, and purify each of them by it self, but the
purities and impurities of the Sperme remained together in all her Productions,
and this Domestic enemy prevayling at last, occasioned the Death of the
Compound. Hence they wisely gathered, that to minister Vegetables, Animals, or
Minerals for Physic, was a mere madness, for even these also had their own
Impurities and Diseases, and required some Medicine to cleanse them. Upon this
Adviso, they resolved (God without all Question being their Guide) to practice
on the Chaos it self, they opened it, purified it, united what they had
formerly separated, and fed it with a twofold Fire, Thick, and Thin, till they
brought it to the immortal Extreme, and made it a spiritual heavenly Body.
This was their Physic, this was their Magic. In this performance they saw the
Image of that face, which Zoroaster calls Triadis Vultus ante Essentiam, etc.
They perfectly knew the Secundea, which contains all things in her naturally,
as God contains all things in himself spiritually. They saw that the Life of
all things here below, was a Thick Fire, or fire imprisoned and incorporated in
a certain incombustible Aereall moisture. They found moreover that this fire
was originally derived from Heaven, and in this sense Heaven is styled in the
Oracles, Ignis, Ignis Derivatio, and Ignis Penu.

In a word, they saw with their Eyes, that Nature was Male and Female; Ignis
ruber super Dorsum Ignis Candidi, as the Cabalists express it: A certain Fire
of a most deep red Color, working on a most white, heavy, salacious Water,
which Water also is Fire inwardly, but outwardly very cold. By this practice it
was manifested unto them that God himself was Fire according to that of
Eximidius in Turba: Omnium rerum Initium esse Naturam quandam, eamque
perpetuam, infinitam, omnia foventem, Coquentemque. The Beginning of all things
(says he) is a Certain Nature, and that eternal, and infinite, cherishing and
heating all Things. The truth is Life which is nothing else but Light, and heat
proceeded originally from God, and did apply to the Chaos, which is elegantly
called by Zoroaster, Fons fontium, and fontium cunctorum, Matrix continens
cuncta. The Fountain of fountains, and of all fountains The Matrix containing
all Things. We see by Experience that all Individuals live not only by their
own heat, but they are preserved by the outward universal heat, which is the
life of the great world. Even so truly the great world it self lives not
altogether by that heat which God has enclosed in the parts thereof, but it is
praeserved by the circumfused influent heat of the Deity; For above the
Heavens God is manifested like an infinite burning world of Light and Fire, so
that he overlooks all that he has made, and the whole. Fabric stands in his
heat and Light, as a man stands here on Earth in the Sunshine. I say then that
the God of Nature employes himself in a perpetual Coction, and this not only
to generate, but to preserve that which has been generated: for his spirit and
heat coagulat that which is Thin, rarifie that which is too gross, quicken the
dead parts, and cherish the cold. There is indeed one operation of heat, whose
method is vital, and far more mysterious than the rest, they that have use for
it, must study it. I have for my part spoken all that I intend to speak, and
though my Book may prove fruitless to many, because not understood, yet some
few may be of that Spirit as to comprehend it: Amplae mentis ampla flamma, said
the great Chaldaean. But because I will not leave thee without some
Satisfaction, I advise thee to take the Moon of the firmament, which is a
middle nature, and place her so that every part of her may be in two Elements
at one and the same time, these Elements also must equally attend her Body, not
one further off, not one nearer than the other. In the regulating of these two,
there is a twofold Geometry to be observed, Natural, and A^t^ficial. But I may
speak no more. The true Furnace is a little simple shell, thou may easily
carry it in one of thy hands. The Glass is one, and no more, but some
Philosophers have used two, and so may thou. As for the work it self. it is
no way troublesome a Lady may read the Arcadia, and at the same time attend
this Philosophy without disturbing her fancy. For my part I think women are
fitter for it than men, for in such things they are more neat and patient,
being used to a small Chimistrie of Sack-possets, and other finicall
sugar-sops. Concerning the Effects of this Medicine, I shall not speak any
thing at this time, he that desires to know them, let him read the Revelation
of Paracelsus, a Discourse altogether incomparable, and in very truth
miraculous. And here without any partiality, I shall give my Judgment of
honest Hohenheim. I find in the rest of his works, and especially where he
falls on the stone, a great many false Processes, but his Doctrine of it in
General is very sound. The truth is, he had some Pride to the Justice of his
Spleen, and in many places he has erred of purpose, not caring what Bones he
threw before the Schoolmen; for he was a Pylot of Guadalcana, and sailed
sometimes in his Rio de la recriation. But I had almost forgot to tell thee
that. which is all in all, and it is the greatest Difficulty in all the Art,
namely the fire. It is a close, ayrie, circular, bright fire; the Philosophers
call it their Sun, and the glass must stand in the shade. It makes not the
matter to vapor, no not so much as to sweat, it digests only with a still,
piercing, vital heat. It is continual, and therefore at last alters the
Chaos, and corrupts it; The Proportion and Regiment of it is very Scrupulous,
but the best rule to know it by, is that of the Synod: facite ne Easianus volet
ante Insequentem; Let not the Bird fly before the Fowler: make it sit whiles
you give fire, and then you are sure of your Prey. For a Cloze, I must tell
thee, the Philosophers called this Fire their Balneum, but it is Balneum
Naturae. a Natural Bath, not an Artificial one, for it is not any kind of
Water, but a certain subtle temperate moisture which compasses the Glass,
and feeds their Sun, or Fire. In a word without this Bath nothing in the world
is generated. Now that thou may the better understand what Degree of fire is
requisite for the work, consider the Generation of Man, or any other Creature
whatsoever. It is not Kitchen fire, nor fever that works upon the Sperm in the
Womb but a most temperate, moist, natural heat, which proceeds from the very
life of the Mother. It is just so here; Our Matter is a most delicate
Substance, and tender like the Animal sperme, for it is almost a living thing,
nay in very truth it has some small portion of life, for Nature does produce
some Animals out of it. For this very reason the least violence destroys it,
and prevents all generation, for if it be overheated but for some few minutes,
the white, and red Sulphurs will never essentially unite, and coagulat. On the
Contrary, if it takes cold but for half an hour, the work being once well
begun, it will never sort to any good purpose. I speak out of my own
Experience, for I have (as they phrase it) given my self a Box on the Ear, and
that twice or thrice, out of a certain confident Negligence, Expecting that,
which I knew well enough, could never be. Nature moves not by the Theorie of
men, but by their practice, and surely Wit and Reason can perform no Miracles,
unless the hands supply them. Be sure then to know this fire in the first
place, and accordingly be sure to make use of it. But for thy better
Security, I will describe it to thee once more. It is a dry, vaporous humid
fire; it goes round about the Glass, and is both equal and Continual. It is
restless, and some have called it the white philosophical Coal. It is in it
self natural, but the praeparation of it is Artificial, it is a heat of the
Dead wherefore some call it their unnatural, Necromantic fire. It is no part of
the Matter, neither is it taken out of it, but it is an external fire, and
serves only to stir up, and strengthen the inward oppressed fire of the
Chaos. But let us hear Nature her self, for thus she speaks in the Serious
Romance of Mehung. Post putrefactionem sit ipsa Generatio, idque per internum
incomburibilem Calorem ad Argenti vivi frigiditatem calefaciendam, quod tantum
equidem patitur, ut tandem cum sulphur suo uniatur. Omne illud uno in Vase
complexum est, I gnis, aer, and Aqua videlicet, quae in Terreno suo vase
accipio, eademque uno in Alembico relinquo; and tum coquo, dissolvo, and
sublimo, absque Malleo, forcipe, vel lima, sine Carbonibus, vapore, Igne aut
Mariae-Balneo, and Sophistarum Alembicis: Coelestem namque meum ignem habeo,
qui Elementalem, prout Materia idoneam decentemque formam habere desyderat,
excitat. That is: After Putrefaction succeeds Generation, and that because of
the inward incombustible Sulphur, that heats, or thickens the Coldness, and
Crudities of the Quicksilver which suffers so much thereby, that at last it is
united to the Sulphur, and made one Body therewith. All this namely (Fire,
Air, and Water) is contained in one Vessel; in their earthly Vessel that is
in their gross Body, or Composition I take them and then I leave them in one
Alembic, where I concoct, dissolve, and sublime them without the help of
Hammer, Tongs, or File; without Coals, Smoke, Fire, or Bath, or the Alembics
of the Sophisters. For I have my heavenly fire, which excites, or stirs up the
Elementall one, according as the matter desires a becoming, agreeable form.
Now Nature every where is one and the same, wherefore she reads the same
lesson to Madathan, who thinking in his Ignorance to make the stone without
dissolution, receives from her this Check. An tu nunc Cochleas, vel Cancros cum
Test is devorare niteris? An non prius a vetussissimo Planetarum Coquo
maturari, and praeparari illos oportet? Do thou think (says he) to eat
Oysters shells and all? ought they not first to be opened, and prepared by the
most Ancient Cook of the Planets? With these agrees the excellent Flammel, who
speaking of the Solar, and Lunar Mercury, and the Plantation of the one in the
other, has these words. Sumantur itaque, and noctu, interdiuque assidue supra
ignem in Alembico foveantur. Non autem ignis Carbonarius, vel e ligno confectus
sed clarus pellucidusque ignis sit, non secus ac Sol ipse, qui nunquam plus
justo calidus ardensque sed omni tempore ejusdem caloris esse debet. Take them
therefore (says he) and cherish them over a fire in thy Alembic: But it must
not be a fire of Coals, nor of any wood, but a bright shining fire, like the
Sun it self, whose heat must never be excessive but always of one and the same
Degree. This is enough, and too much, for the Secret in it self is not great,
but the Consequences of it are so, which made the Philosophers hide it. Thus
Reader thou have the outward Agent most fully and faithfully described. It is
in Truth a very simple mystery, and if I should tell it openly, ridiculous.
Howsoever by this, and not without it, did the Magicians unlock the Chaos, and
certainly it is no news that an Iron-key should open a Treasury of Gold. In
this Universal Subject they found the Natures of all particulars, and this is
signified to us by that Maxim: Qui Proteam non novit, adeat Pana. This Pan is
their Chaos, or Mercury, which expounds Proteus. namely the Particular
Creatures, commonly called Individualls, For Pan transformes himself into a
Proteus, that is, into all varieties of Species, into Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals; for out of the Universal Nature, or first matter, all these are
made, and Pan has their Propri^ties in himself. Hence it is that Mercury is
called the Interpreter, or Expositor of Inferiors and Superiors, under which
Notion the Ancient Orpheus invokes him. (...)
Hear me o Mercury, thou messenger of Jove, and son of Maia, the Expositor of
all Things.


Now for the Birth of this Mercury, and the Place of it, I find but few
Philosophers that mention it. Zoroaster points at it, and that very obscurely,
where he speaks of his Jynges or the I dea's in these words;

Multae quidem hae scandunt lucidos Mundos,
Insilentes: Quarum Summitates sunt Tres.
Subjectum est Ipsis Principale pratum.
This Pratum, or Meadow of the Idea's, a place well known to the Philosophers,
( Flammel calls it their Garden, and the Mountain of the seven Metals, see his
Summarie, where he describes it most learnedly for he was instructed by a
Jew) is a certain secret, but Universal Region: one calls it Regio Lucis, the
Region of Light, but to the Cabalist it is Nox Corporis, a Term extremely
apposit, and significant. It is in few words the Rendezvous of all Spirits, for
in this place the I dea's when they descend from the Bright world to the Dark
one, are incorporated. For thy Better Intelligence thou must know that Spirits
whiles they move in Heaven, which is the Fire-world, contract no impurities at
all, according to that of Stellatus; Omne quod est supra Lunam, aeternumque
bonumque
Esse scias, nec triste aliquid Coelestia tangit.


All (says he) that is above the Moon, is eternal and good, and there is no
Corruption of Heavenly Things. On the contrary, when Spirits descend to the
Elementall Matrix, and reside in her Kingdom, they are blurred with the
Original Leprosy of the Matter, for here the Curse raves and rules, but in
Heaven it is not Praedominant. To put an end to this point, let us hear the
admirable Agrippa state it; This is he, between whose lips the Truth did
breathe, and knew no other Oracle. Coelestium Occult. phil.
vires, dum in se existunt, and a Datore Luminum per sanct as Intelligentias,
and Coelos influuntur, quousque ad Lunam pervenerint: earum Influentia bona
est, tanquam in primo gradu; deinde autem quando in Subjecto viliori
suscipitur, ipsa etiam vilescit. That is; The Heavenly powers, or spiritual
Essences whiles they are in themselves, or before they are united to the
Matter, and are shower'd down from the Father of Lights thorough the holy
Intelligences and the Heavens, until they come to the Moon: Their Influence
is good, as in the first degree; But when it is received in a corrupt Subject,
the Influence also is corrupted. Thus He. Now the A stronomers pretend to a
strange familiarity with the stars, the Natural Philosophers talk as much:
and truly an Ignorant man might well think they had been in heaven, and
conversed, like Lucians Menippus, with Jove himself. But in good Earnest these
Men are no more Eagles than Sancho, their fancies are like his flights in the
Blanket, and every way as short of the Skies. Ask them but where the Influences
are received, and how; bid them by fair Experience prove they are present in
the Elements, and you have undone them; if you will trust the four Corners of
a Figure, or the three Legs of a Syllogism, you may; this is all their
Evidence. Well fare the Magicians then, whose Art can demonstrate these Things,
and put the very Influences in our hands. Let it be thy study to know their
Region of Light, and to enter into the Treasures thereof, for then thou may
converse with Spirits, and understand the Nature of invisible Things. Then will
appear unto thee the Universal Subject, and the two mineral Spermes, White,
and Red, of which I must speak somewhat, before I make an end.

In the Pythagoricall Synod, which consisted of Threescore and Ten
Philosophers, all Masters of the Art, it is thus written. I gnis Spissum in
Era cadit; Aeris vero Spissum, and quod ex igne Spisso congregatur, in Aquam
incidit; Aquae quoque Spissum, and quod ex I gnis and Aeris Spisso coadunatur,
in Terra quiescit. Ita istorum Trium spissuudo in Terra guiescit, inque ea
conjuncta sunt. Ipsa ergo Terra omnibus caeteris Elementis spissior est, uti
Palam apparet, and videre est. That is, The Thickness, or Sperm of the Fire
falls into the Air; The Thickness or Spermatic part of the Air. and in it the
Sperm of the Fire, falls into the Water; The Thickness or spermatic Substance
of the Water, and in it the two Spermes of Fire and Air fall into the Earth,
and there they rest, and are conjoined. Therefore the Earth it self is thicker
than the other Elements as it openly appears, and to the eye is manifest.
Remember now what I have told thee formerly concerning the Earth; what a
general Hospital it is, how it receives all things, not only Beasts and
Vegetables, but proud and glorious Man: when Death has ruined him, his courser
parts stay here, and know no other Home. This Earth to Earth, is just the
Doctrine of the Magi; Metalls (say they) and all things may be reduced into
that whereof they were made. They speak the very Truth, it is God's own
Principle, and he first taught it Ad. m. Dust Genesis c. 3. ver. 19.
thou art, and to Dust shall thou return. But lest any man should be Deceived
by us, I think it just to inform you, there are two reductions; One is Violent
and Destructive, reducing Bodies to their Extremes, and properly it is Death,
or the Calcination of the common Chimist. The other is Vital, and Generative,
resolving Bodies into their Sperm, or middle Substance out of which Nature made
them, for Nature makes not Bodies immediately of the Elements but of a Sperm,
which she draws out of the Elements. I shall explain my self to you by
Example. An Egg is the Sperm, or middle Substance out of which a Chick is
engendered, and the moisture of it is viscous, and slimie, a water and no water,
for such a Sperme ought to be. Suppose Dr. Coal, I mean some Broyler, had a
mind to generat something out of this Egg: Questionless he would first
distill it, and that with a fire able to roast the Hen that laid it, then would
he calcine the Caput mortuum, and finally produce his Nothing. Here you are to
observe that Bodies are nothing else but Sperm coagulated, and he that Destroys
the Body, by consequence destroys the Sperm. Now to reduce Bodies into
Elements of earth and water, as we have instanced in the Egg, is to reduce
them into Extremes beyond their Sperm, for Elements are not the Sperm, but the
Sperm is a Compound made of the Elements, and containing in it self all that is
requisite to the frame of the Body. Wherefore be well advised before you
distill, and Quarter any particular Bodies, for having once separated their
Elements, you may never generat, unless you can make a Sperm of those Elements,
but that is impossible for man to do, it is the Power of God, and Nature.
Labor then you that would be accounted wise, to find out our Mercury, so
shall you reduce things to their mean spermaticall Chaos, but avoid the
broyling Destruction. This Doctrine will spare you the vain Task of
Distillations, if you will but remember this Truth: That Sp^rmes are not made
by Separation but by Composition of Elements, and to bring a Body into Sperm,
is not to distill it, but to reduce the whole into one thick water, keeping all
the parts thereof in their first natural union. But that I may return at last
to my former Citation of the Synod All those Influences of the Elements being
united in one Mass, make our Sperm or our Earth, which is Earth and no Earth.
Take it if thou do know it, and divide the Essences thereof, not by
violence, but by natural putrefaction, such as may occasion a genuine
Dissolution of the Compound. Here thou shall find a miraculous white Water, an
Influence of the Moon, which is the Mother of our Chaos; It rules in two
Elements Earth and Water. After this appears the Sperm or influx of the Sun,
which is the father of it. It is a quick, Celestial fire, incorporated in a
thin, oleous, Aereall Moisture. It is incombustible, for it is fire it self,
and feeds upon fire, and the longer it stays in the fire, the more glorious it
grows. These are the two mineral Spermes Masculine. and Foeminine: if thou
do place them both on their Chrystalline Basis, thou have the Philosopher's
flying Fire-drake, which at the first sight of the Sun breathes such a poison,
that nothing can stand before him. I know not what to tell thee more, unless
in the Vogue of some Authors, I should give thee a flegmatic Description of the
whole process and that I can dispatch in two words. It is nothing else but a
continual Coction the Volatile Essences ascending and descending till at last
they are fixed, according to that excellent Prosopopaeia of the stone.

Non ego continuo morior, dum spiritus exit,
Nam redit assidue, quamvis and soepe recedat,
Et mihi nunc magna est Animae, nunc nulla fa
(cultas.
Plus ego sustinui, quam Corpus debuit unum;
Tres Animas habui, quas omnes intus habebam,
Discessere duae, sed Tertia poene secuta est.
I am not dead, although my spirit's gone,
For it returns, and is both off, and on,
Now I have life enough, now I have non.
I suffered more, than one could justly do;
Three souls I had, and all my own but Two
Are fled: the Third had almost left me too.
(...) I have written, what I Joh. 19. 22
have written- And now give me leave to look about me. Is there no
Powder-Plott, or practice? What Is become of Aristotel, and Galen? Where is the
Scribe and Pharisee, the Disputers of this world? If they suffer all this, and
believe it too, I shall think the General Conversion is come about, and I may
sing, Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna.


But come what will come, I have once more spoken for the Truth, and shall for
Conclusion speak this much Again. I have elsewhere called this Subject, Limus
coelestis, and the middle Nature: The Philosophers call it the Venerable
Nature, but amongst all the Praetenders I have not yet found one, that could
tell me why. Hear me then, that whenever thou do attempt this work, it may
be with reverence, not like some proud, ignorant Doctor but with less
Confidence and more Care. This Chaos has in it the four Elements, which of
themselves are contrary Natures, but the wisdom of God has so placed them
that their very order reconciles them. For Example, Air and Earth are
Adversaries, for one is hot and moist, the other cold and dry. Now to
reconcile these two, God placed the Water between them, which is a middle
Nature, or of a mean Complexion between both Extremes. For she is cold and
moist, and as she is cold, she partakes of the Nature of the Earth, which is
cold and dry, but as she is moist, she partakes in the Nature of the Air,
which is hot and moist. Hence it is, that Air and Earth which are Contraries
in Themselves, agree and embrace one another in the water, as in a middle
Nature which is proportionate to them both, and tempers their Extremities. But
verily this Salvo makes not up the Breach, for though the water reconciles two
Elements like a friendly Third, yet she her self fights with a Fourth, namely
with the Fire: For the Tire is hot and dry, but the water is cold and moist,
which are clear Contraries. To prevent the Distempers of these two, God placed
the Air between them, which is a Substance hot and moist; and as it is hot, it
agrees with the fire, which is hot and dry; but as it is moist, it agrees with
the water, which is cold and moist; so that by mediation of the Air, the other
two Extremes, namely fire and water are made friends, and reconciled. Thus you
see, as I told you at first, that Contrary Elements are united by that Order
and Textare wherein the Wise God has placed them. You must now give me leave
to tell you that this Agreement or friendship is but par^il, a very weak love,
cold and ski^tish: for whereas these Principles agree in one quality, they
differ in two, as your selves may easily compute. Much need therefore have they
of a more strong and able Mediator to confirm and preserve their weak Unity,
for upon it depends the very aternitie, and Incorruption of the Creature. This
blessed Caement, and Balsam, is the Spirit of the living God, which some
ignorant Scriblers have called a Quintessence, for this very Spirit is in the
Chaos, and to speak plainly, the fire is his Thrrne, for in the Fire he is
Seated, as we have sufficiently told you elsewhere. This was the Reason, why
Anthroposoph.
the Magi called the first Matter their Venerable Nature, and their blessed
stone, and in good earnest what think you, is it not so? This blessed Spirit
fortifies, and perfects that weak Disposition which the Elements already have
to Union and Peace, (for God works with Nature, not against her,) and brings
them at last to a beauteous specificall Fabric. Now i^f you will ask me, where
is the Soul, or as the Schoolmen abuse hwer the Form, all this while? what
does she do? To this I answer, that she is, as all Instrumentals ought to
be, subject and obedient to the will of God, expecting the persection of her
Body: for it is God that unites her to the Body, and the body to her. Soul and
Body are the work of God, the one as well as the other: the Soul is not the
Artificer of her house, for that which can make a Body, can also repair it,
and hinder death; but the Soul cannot do this, it is the Power, and Wisdom
of God. In a word, to say that the Soul formed the Body, because she is in
the Body, is to say that the Jowell made the Cabinet, because the Jewel is in
the Cabinet, or that the Sun made the world, because the Sun is in the world,
and cherishes every part thereof. Learn therefore to distinguish between
Agents and their Instruments, for if you attribute that to the Creature, which
belongs to the Creator, you bring your sleves in Danger of hellfire, for God
is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to Another. I advise my Doctors
therefore, both Divines and Physicians, not to be too rash in their Censures,
nor so Magisterial in their Discourse, as I have known some Professors of
Physic to be: who would correct and undervalue the rest of their Brethren, when
in Truth they Themselves were most shamefully ignorant. It is not ten, or
twelve years Experience in Druggs and Sopps can acquaint a man with the
Mysteries of God's Creation. Take this, and make a world: Take I know not what,
and make a Pill or Clyster, are different Recepts. We should therefore consult
with our Judgments, before we venture our Tongues, and never speak, but when
we are sure we understand. I knew a Gentleman, who meeting with a Philosopher
Adept, and receiving so much Courtesy as to be admitted to Discourse, attended
his first Instructions passing well. But when this Magician quitted my friends
known Road, and began to touch, and drive round the great Wheel of Nature,
presently my Gentleman takes up the Cudgells, and urging all the Authorities,
which in his vain judgment made for him, oppressed this noble Philosopher with a
most clamorous, insipid Ribaldrie. A goodly sight it was, and worthy our
Imitation, to see with what an admirable Patience the other received him. But
this Errant concluded at last, That Lead or Quicksilver must be the Subject,
and that Nature worked upon one of both. To this the Adeptus replied, Sir, it
may be so at this time, but if hereafter I find Nature in those old Elements,
where I have sometimes seen her very Busy, I shall at our next meeting confute
your Opinion. This was all he said, and it was something more than he did.
Their next meeting was referred to the Greek Calends, for he could never be
seen afterward, notwithstanding a thousand Solicitations. Such Talkative
babbling people as this Gentleman was, who run to every Doctor for his Opinion,
and follow like a Spaniell every Bird they spring, are not fit to receive these
Secrets, they must be serious, silent men, faithful to the Art, and most
faithful to their Teachers. We should always remember that Dotrine of Zeno:
Nature (said he) gave us one Tongue, but two Ears, that we might hear much,
and speak little. Let not any man therefore be ready to vomit forth his own
shame and ignorance: Let him first examine his knowledge, and especially his
practice, lest upon the Experience of a few violent Knacks, he presume to
judge Nature in her very Sobrieties. To make an end; If thou do know the
first Matter, know also for certain, thou have discovered the Sanctuary of
Nature; There is nothing between thee and her Treasures, but the Door: that
indeed must be opened. Now if thy Desire leads thee on to the Practice,
consider well with thy self what manner of man thou art, and what it is that
thou would do, for it is no small matter. Thou have resolved with thy self
to be a Cooperator with the Spirit of the living God, and to minister to him in
his work of generation. Have a Care therefore that thou do not hinder his
work: for if thy heat exceeds the Natural Proportion, thou have stirred the
wrath of the moist Natures, and they will stand up against the Central fire,
and the Central fire against them, and there will be a terrible Division in the
Chaos: but the sweet Spirit of Peace, the true eternal Quintessence will depart
from the Elements, leaving both them and Thee to Confusion; neither will he
apply himself to that Matter, as long as it is in thy violent, destroying
hands. Take heed therefore, lest thou turn Partner with the Devil, for it is
the Devil's design from the Beginning of the world, to set Nature at Variance
with her self, that he may totally corrupt, and destroy her. Ne tu augeas
fatum, do not thou further his Designs. I make no question but many men will
laugh at this, but on my Soul I speak nothing But what I have known by very
good Experience, therefore believe me. For my own part it was ever my desire
to bury these Things in silence, or to paint them out in shadows, but I have
spoken thus clearly, and openly, out of the Affection I bear to some, who have
deserved much more at my hands. True it is, I intended sometimes to expose a
greater work to the world, which I promised in my Anthroposophia, but I have
been since acquainted with that World, and I found it base, and unworthie:
wherefore I shall keep in my first happy Solitudes, for Noise is Nothing to
me, I seek not any man's Applause. If it be the will of my God to call me
forth, and that it may make for the Honor of his Name, in that respect I may
write again, for I fear not the Judgment of Man, but in the interim here
shall be and End.

FINIS.
ANd now my Book, let it not stop thy Flight,
That thy just Author, is not Lord, or Knight.
I can desine my self: and have the Art
Still to present one face, and still one Heart.
But for nine years some Great ones cannot see
What they have been, nor know they what to be.
What though I have no Rattles to my name,
Do hold a simple Honesty no Fame?
Or art thou such a stranger to the Times,
Thou can not know my Fortunes from my Crimes.
Go forth, and fear not: some will gladly be
Thy learned friends, whom I did never see.
Nor should thou fear thy welcome: thy small
Cannot undo'em, though they pay Excise. (Price
Thy Bulk's not great: it will not much distress
Their empty Pockets, but their Studies less.
Thou Art no Galeon, as Books of Burden be,
Which can not ride but in a Library.
Thou Art a fine Thing and little: it may Chance
Ladies will buy thee for a new Romance.
Oh how I Will envy Thee! when thou art spread
In the bright Sunshine of their Eyes, and read
With Breath of Amber, Lips of Rose, that lend
Perfumes unto thy Leaves, shall never spend:
When from their white hands they shall let thee fall
Into their Bosoms, which I may not call
Ought of Misfortune, Thou do drop to rest
In a more pleasing place, and art more blessed.
There in some silken, soft Fold thou shall lie
Hid like their Love, or thy own Mystery.
Nor should thou grieve thy Language is not fine,
For it is not my Best, though it be Thine.
I could have voye'd thee forth in such a Dress,
The Spring had been a Slut to thy Express;
Such as might file the rude, unpolished Age,
And fix the Readers Soul to every Page:
But I have used a course, and homely strain,
Because it suits with Truth, which should be plain.
Last, my dear Book, if any look on Thee
As on Three Suns, or some great Prodigy,
And swear to a full point, I do deride
All other Sects, to publish my own pride;
Tell such they lie, and since they love not Thee,
Bid them go learn some High-shoe heresy.
Nature is not so simple, but she can
Procure a solid Reverence from man;
Nor is my Pen so lightly Plumed that I
Should serve Ambition with her Majesty.
It Is Truth makes me come forth, and having writ
This her short Scaene, I would not stifle it:
For I have called it Child, and J had rather
See It torn by them, than strangled by the Father.
Soli Deo Gloria.

Amen.
Faults escaped in Magia Adamica, Page 70. line 4. for (...) read (...). p.
106. l. 23. for or, r. for. p. 126. l. 26. for doctrine, r. dictrine.

Faults escaped in the Man-Mouse. PAge 15. line 2. for fires, read fires. p.
49. l. 24. f. the, r. that. p. 82. l. 23. f. he, r. she.


