SELECT Poems, and translations by Hen: Vaughan Silurist. Flumina amo,
Sylvasque, inglorius


OLOR ISCANUS. A COLLECTION OF SOME SELECT POEMS, AND TRANSLATIONS, Formerly
written by Mr. Henry Vaughan Silurist.

Published by a Friend.

Virg. Georg.

Flumina amo, Sylvasque, Inglorius --

LONDON, Printed by T.W. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

-- O quis me gelidis in vallibus ISCAE
Sistat, and Ingenti ramorum protegat umbra!
TO The truly Noble, and most Excellently accomplished, the LORD KILDARE DIGBY.
MY LORD,
IT is a Position anciently known, and modern Experience has allowed it for a
sad truth, that Absence and time, (like Cold weather, and an unnatural
dormition) will blast and wear out of memory the most Endearing obligations;
And hence it was that some Politicians in Love have looked upon the former of
these two as a main remedy against the fondness of that Passion. But for my own
part (my Lord) I shall deny this Aphorism of the people, and beg leave to
assure your Lordship, that, though these reputed obstacles have lain long in my
way, yet neither of them could work upon me: for I am now (without adulation)
as warm and sensible of those numerous favors, and kind Influences received
sometimes from your Lordship, as I really was at the Instant of fruition. I
have no plott by preambling thus, to set any rate upon this present address,
as if I should presume to value a Return of this nature equal with your
Lordships Deserts, but the design is, to let you see that this habit I have
got of being troublesome flows from two excusable principles, Gratitude, and
Love. These inward Counselors (I know not how discreetly) persuaded me to
this Attempt and Intrusion upon your name, which if your Lordship will
vouchsafe to own as the Genius to these papers, you will perfect my hopes, and
place me at my full height. This was the Aim, my Lord, and is the End of this
work, which though but a Pazzarello to the voluminosee Insani, yet as Iezamin
and the Violet find room in the bank as well as Roses and Lillies, so happily
may this, and (if shined upon by your Lordship) please as much. To whose
Protection, Sacred as your Name, and those eminent Honors which have always
attended upon it through so many generations, I humbly offer it, and remain in
all numbers of gratitude,

Newton by Usk this 17. of December. 1647. My honored Lord, Your most
affectionate, humblest Servant VAUGHAN.

The Publisher to the Reader.
IT was the glorious Maro, that referred his Legacies to the Fire, and though
Princes are seldom Executors, yet there came a Caesar to his Testament, as if
the Act of a Poet could not be repealed but by a King. I am not Reader Augustus
vindex: Here is no Royal Rescue, but here is a Muse that deserves it. The
Author had long ago condemned these Poems to Obscurity, and the Consumption
of that Further Fate, which attends it. This Censure gave them a Gust of Death,
and they have partly known that Oblivion, which our Best Labors must come to
at Last. I present thee then not only with a Book, but with a Prey, and in
this kind the first Recoveries from Corruption. Here is a Flame has been
sometimes extinguished: Thoughts that have been lost and forgot, but now they
break out again like the Platonic Reminiscencie. I have not the Author's
Approbation to the Fact, but I have Law on my Side, though never a Sword: I
hold it no man's Praerogative to fire his own House. Thou see how Saucie I am
grown, and if thou do expect I should Commend what is published, I must tell
thee, I cry no Sivill Oranges. I will not say, Here is Fine or Cheap: that
were an Injury to the Verse it self, and to the Effects it can produce. Read
on, and thou will find thy Spirit engaged: not by the Deserts of what we call
Tolerable, but by the Commands of a Pen, that is Above it.

Upon the most Ingenious pair of Twins, Eugenius Philalethes, and the Author
of these Poems.
WHat Planet ruled your birth? what witty star?
That you so like in Souls as Bodies are!
So like in both, that you seem born to free
The starrie are from vulgar Calumny.
My doubts are solved, from hence my faith begins,
Not only your faces, but your wits are Twins.
When this bright Gemini shall from earth ascend,
They will new light to dull eyed mankind lend,
Teach the Star-gazers, and delight their Eyes,
Being fixed a Constellation in the Skies.
T. Powell Oxoniensis.
To my friend the Author upon these his Poems.
I Called it once my sloth: In such an age
So many Volumes deep, I not a page?
But I recant, and vow 'twas thriftie Care
That kept my Pen from spending on slight ware,
And breathed it for a Prize, whose powerful shine
Does both reward the striver, and refine;
Such are thy Poems, friend: for since thou have writ,
I cannot reply to any name, but wit;
And left amidst the throng that make us groan,
Mine prove a groundless Heresy alone,
Thus I dispute. Has there not reverence bin
Paid to the Beard at door, for Lord within?
Who notes the spindle-leg, or hollow eye
Of the thin Usher, the fair Lady by?
Thus I sin freely, neighbor to a hand
Which while I aim to strengthen, gives Command
For my protection, and thou art to me
At once my Subject and Security.
I. Rowlandson Oxoniensis.
Upon the following Poems.
I Write not here, as if thy last in store
Of learned friends, it is known that thou have more;
Who, were they told of this, would find a way
To rise a guard of Poets without pay,
And bring as many hands to thy Edition,
As the City should unto their May'rs Petition,
But thou would none of this, left it should be
Thy Muster rather, than our Courtesy,
Thou would not beg as Knights do, and appear
Poet by Voice, and suffrage of the Shire,
That were enough to make my Muse advance
Amongst the Crutches, nay it might enhance
Our Charity, and we should think it sit
The State should build an Hospital for wit.
But here needs no relief: Thy richer Verse
Creates all Poets, that can but rehearse,
And they, like Tenants bettered by their land,
Should pay thee Rent for what they understand,
Thou art not of that lamentable Nation,
Who make a blessed Alms of approbation,
Whose fardel-notes are Briefes in every thing,
But, that they are not licensed By the King.
Without such scrape-requests thou do come forth
Armed (though I speak it) with thy proper worth,
And need not this noise of friends, for we
Write out of love, not thy necessity;
And though this sullen age possessed be
With some strange Desamour to Poetry,
Yet I suspect (thy fancy so delights)
The Puritans will turn thy Proselytes,
And that thy flame when once abroad it shines,
Will bring thee as many friends, as thou have lines.
EUGENIUS PHILALETHIS Oxoniensis.
Olor Iscanus.
To the River Isca.
WHen Daphne's Lover here first wore the Days,
Eurotas secret streams heard all his Lays.
And holy Orpheus, Natures busy Child
By headlong Hebrus his deep Eymns Compiled.
Soft Petrarch (thawed by Laura's flames) did weep
On Tybers banks, when she ( proved fair!) could sleep;
Mosella boasts Ausonius, and the Thames
Does murmr SIDNEYS Stella to her streams,
While Severn sworn with Joy and sorrow, wears
Castara's smiles mixed with fair Sabrin's tears.
Thus Poets (like the Nymphs, their pleasing themes)
Haunted the bubling Springs and gliding streams,
And happy banks! whence such fair slowres have sprung,
But happier those where they have sat and sung!
Poets (like Angels) where they once appear
Hallow the place, and each succeeding year
Adds reverence to it, such as at length does give
This aged faith, That there their Genii live.
Hence the Ancients say, That, from this sickly air
They pass to Regions more refined and fair,
To Meadows strow'd with Lillies and the Rose,
And shades whose youthful green no old age knows,
Where all in white they walk, discourse, and Sing
Like Bees soft murmurs, or a Chiding Spring.
But Isca, whensoe'r those shades I see,
And thy loved Arbours must no more know me,
When I am laid to rest hard by thy streams,
And my Sun sets, where first it sprang in beams,
I Will leave; behind me such a large, kind light,
As shall redeem thee from oblivious night,
And in these vows which (living yet) I pay
Shed such a Previous and Enduring Ray,
As shall from age to age thy fair name lead
'Till Rivers leave to run, and men to read.
First, may all Bards born after me
(When I am ashes) sing of thee!
May thy green banks and streams (or none)
Be both their Hill and Helicon;
May Vocal Groves grow there, and all
The shades in them Prophetical,
Where (laid) men shall more fair truths see
Than fictions were of Thessalie.
May thy gentle Swains (like flowers)
Sweetly spend their Youthful hours,
And thy beauteous Nymphs (like Doves)
Be kind and faithful to their Loves;
Garlands, and Songs, and Roundelayes,
Mild, dewie nights, and Sunshine days,
The Turtles voice, Joy without fear,
Dwell on thy bosom all the year!
May the Evet and the Tode
Within thy Banks have no abode,
Nor the wily, winding Snake
Her voyage through thy waters make.
In all thy Journey to the Main
No nitrous Clay, nor Brimstone-vein
Mix with thy streams, but may they pass
Fresh as the air, and clear as Glass,
And where the wandering Crystal treads
Rojes shall kiss, and Couple heads.
The factour-wind from far shall bring
The Odours of the Scattered Spring,
And laden with the rich Aweare,
Spend it in Spicie whispers there.
No sullen heals, nor flames that are
Offensive, and Canicular,
Shine on thy Sands, nor pry to see
Thy Scaly, shading family,
But Noones as mild as Hasper's rays,
Or the first blushes of fair days.
What gifts more Heaven or Earth can add
With all those blessings be thou Clad!
Honor, Beauty,
Faith and Duty,
Delight and Truth,
With Love, and Youth
Crown all about thee And what ever Fate
Impose elsewhere, whether the graver state,
Or some toy else, may those lomd, anxious Cares
For dead and dying things (the Common ^ares
And shows of time) he'r break thy Peace, nor make
Thy reposed Arms to a new war awake!
But Freedom, safety, Joy and bliss:
United in one loving kiss
Surround thee quite, and style thy borders
The Land redeemed from all disorders!
The Charnel-house.
Bless me! what damps are here? how stiff an air?
Kelder of mists, a second Fiats care,
Front speece of the grave and darkness, a Display
Of ruined man, and the disease of day;
Lean, bloudless shamble, where I can descrie
Fragments of men, Rags of Anatomy;
Corruptions wardrobe, the transplantive bed
Of mankind, and The Exchequer of the dead.
How thou arrests my sense? how with the sight
My wintered blood grows stiff to all delight?
Torpedo to the Eye! whose least glance can
Freeze our wild lusts, and reseue headlong man;
Eloquent silence! able to Immure
An Atheists thoughts, and blast an Epicure.
Were I a Lucian, Nature in this dress
Would make me wish a Savior, and Confess.
Where are you shoreless thoughts, vast tenter'd hope,
Ambitious dreams, Aims of an Endless scope,
Whose stretched Excess runs on a string too high
And on the rack of self-extension dye?
Chameleons of state, Aire-monging band,
Whose breath (like Gunpowder) blows up a land,
Come see your dissolution, and weigh
What a loathed nothing you shall be one day,
As the Elements by Circulation pass
From one to the other, and that which first was
Is so again, so it is with you; The grave
And Nature but Complote, what the one gave,
The other takes; I think then, that in this bed
There sleep the Relics of as proud a head
As stern and subtle as your own, that has
Performed, or forced as much, whose tempest-wrath
Has levelled Kings with slaves, and wisely then
Calm these high furies, and descend to men;
Thus Cyrus tamed the Macedon, a tomb
Checked him, who thought the world too straight a Room.
Have I obeyed the Powers of face,
A beauty able to undo the Race
Of easy man? I look but here, and strait
I am Informed, the lovely Counterfeit
Was but a smoother Clay. That famished slave
Beggered by wealth, who starvea that he may save,
Brings hither but his sheet; Nay, the Ostrich-man,
That feeds on steel and bullet, he that can
Outswea: his Lordship, and reply as tough
To a kind word, as if his tongue were Buffe,
Is Chap-faln here, worms without wit, or fear
Defy him now, death has disarmed the Bear.
Thus could I run o'r all the pitteous score
Of erring men, and having done meet more,
Their shuffled Wills, abortive, vain Intents,
Phautasrick humors, perilous Ascents,
False, empty honors, traitorous delights,
And what soe'r a blind Conceit Invites;
But these and more which the weak vermins swell,
Are Couched in this Accumulative Cell
Which I could scatter; But the grudging Sun
Calls home his beams, and warns me to be gone,
Day leaves me in a double night, and I
Must bid farewell to my sad library.
Yet with these notes. Henceforth with thought of thee
I Will season all succeeding Iollitie,
Yet damn not mirth, nor think too much is fit,
Excess has no Religion, nor wit,
But should wild blood swell to a lawless strain
On Check from thee shall Channel it again.
In Amicum foeneratorem.
THanks mighty Silver! I rejoice to see
How I have spoiled his thrift, by spending thee.
Now thou art gone, he courts my wants with more,
His Decoy gold, and bribes me to restore.
As lesser lode-stones with the North consent
Naturally moving to their Element,
As bodies swarm to the Center, and that fire
Man stole from heaven, to heaven does still aspire,
So this vast crying sum draws in a less,
And hence this bag more Northward laid I guess,
For it is of Pole Star force, and in this sphere
Though th'least of many rules the master-bear.
Prerogative of debts! how he does dress
His messages in Chink? not an Express
Without a fee for reading, and it is fit,
For gold's the best restorative of wit,
O how he gilds them o'r! with what delight
I read those lines, where Angels do Indite?
But wilt have money Og? must I dispurse?
Will nothing serve thee but a Poets curse?
Wilt rob an Altar thus? and sweep it once
What Orpheus-like I forced from stocks and stones?
'I will never swell thy Bag, nor ring one peale
In thy dark Chest. Talk not of Shreives, or jail,
I fear them not. I have no land to glutt
Thy durty appetite, and make thee strutt
Nimrod of acres; I Will no Speech prepare
To court the Hopeful Cormorant, thine heir.
Yet there is a Kingdom, at thy beck, if thou
But kick this dross, Parnassus flower brow
I Will give thee with my Tempe, and to boot
That horse which struck a fountain with his foot.
A Bed of Roses I Will provide for thee,
And Crystal Springs shall drop thee melody;
The breathing shades we will haunt, where every leaf
Shall whisper us asleep, though thou art deaf;
Those waggish Nymph too which none ever yet
Durst make love to, we will teach the Loving fit,
We Will suck the Coral of their lips, and feed
Upon their spicie breath, a meal at need,
Rove in their Amber-tresses, and unfold
That glist'ring grove, the Curled wood of gold,
Then peep for babies, a new Puppet-play,
And riddle what their prattling Eyes would say.
But here thou must remember to dispurse,
For without money all this is a Curse,
Thou must for more bags call, and so restore
This Iron-age to gold, as once before;
This thou must do, and yet this is not all,
For thus the Poet would be still in thrall,
Thou must then (if live thus) my neast of honey,
Cancel old bonds, and beg to lend more money.
To his friend --.
I Wonder, James, through the whole History
Of ages, such Entailes of poverty
Are laid on Poets; Lawyers (they say) have found
A trick to cut them, would they were but bound
To practice on us, though for this thing we
Should pay (if possible) their bribes and fee.
Search (as thou can) the old and modern store
Of Rome and ours, in all the witty score
Thou shall not find a rich one; Take each Clime
And run o'r all the pilgrimage of time
Thou Wilt meet them poor, and every where descrie
A thredbare, goldless genealogy.
Nature (it seems) when she meant us for Earth
Spent so much of her treasure in the birth
As ever after niggards her, and She,
Thus stored within, beggars us outwardly.
Woeful profusion I at how dear a rate
Are we made up? all hope of thrice and state
Lost for a verse: When I by thoughts look back
Into the womb of time, and see the Rack
Stand useless there, until we are produced
Unto the torture, and our souls infused
To learn afflictions, I begin to doubt
That as some tyrants use from their chained roue
Of slaves to pick out one whom for their sport
They keep afflicted by some lingering art,
So we are merely thrown upon the stage
The mirth of fools, and Legend of the age,
When I see in the ruins of a suit
Some nobler breast, and his tongue sadly mute
Feed on the Vocal silence of his Eye,
And knowing cannot reach the remedy,
When souls of baser stamp shine in their store,
And he of all the throng is only poor,
When French apes sor foreign fashions pay,
And English legs are dressed th'outlandish way,
So fine too, that they their own shadows woo,
While he walks in the sad and Pilgrim-shooe,
I Am mad at Fate, and angry even to sin,
To see deserts and learning clad so thin:
To think how th'earthly Usurer can brood
Upon his bags, and weigh the precious food
With palsied hands, as if his soul did fear
The Scales could rob him of what he laid there;
Like Devils that on hid Treasures sit, or those
Whose jealous Eyes trust not beyond their nose
They guard the dirt, and the bright Idol hold
Close, and Commit adultery with gold.
A Curse upon their dross! how have we sued
For a few scattered Chips? how often pursued
Petitions with a blush, in hope to squeeze
For their souls health, more than our wants a piece?
Their steel-rib'd Chests and Purse (rust eat them both!)
Have cost us with much paper many an oath,
And Protestations of such solemn sense,
As if our souls were sureties for the Pence.
Should we a full nights learned cares present,
They Will scarce return us one short hours Content,
Alas! they are but quibbles, things we Poets feign,
The short-lived Squibs and Crackers of the brain.
But we will be wiser, knowing it is not they
That must redeem the hardship of our way,
Whether a Higher Power, or that star
Which nearest heaven, is from the earth most far
Oppress us thus, or angel'd from that Sphere
By our strict Guardians are kept luckless here,
It matters not, we shall one day obtain
Our native and Celestial scope again.
To his retired friend, an Invitation to Brecknock.
SInce last we met, thou and thy horse (my dear,)
Have not so much as drunk, or litter'd here,
I wonder, though thy self be thus deceast,
Thou have the spite to Coffin up thy beast;
Or is the Palfrey sick, and his rough hide
With the penance of One Spur mortifide?
Or taught by thee (like Pythagoras's Ox)
Is then his master grown more Orthodox?
What ever it is, a sober cause't must be
That thus long bars us of thy Company.
The Town believes thee lost, and did thou see
But half her sufferings, now distressed for thee,
Thou'ldst swear (like Rome) her soul, polluted walls
Were sacked by Brennus, and the salvage Gauls.
Abominable face of things! here is noise
Of banged Mortars, blew Aprons, and Boys,
Pigs, Dogs, and Drums, with the hoarse hellish notes
Of politickly-deafe Usurers throats,
With new fine worships, and the old east teame
Of Justices vexed with the Cough, and phlegm.
Midst these the Cross looks sad, and in the Shirt-
- Hall furs of an old Saxon Fox appear,
With brotherly Ruffs and Beards, and a strange sight
Of high Monumentall Hats t'ane at the sight
Of Eighty eight; while every Bargessi foots
The mortal Pavement in eternal boots.
Had thou been batc'lour, I had soon divined
Thy Close retirements, and Monastic mind,
Perhaps some Nymph had been to visit, or
The beauteous Churl was to be waited for,
And like the Greek, ever you the sport would miss
You stayed, and stroak'd the Dislosse for a kiss.
But in this age, when thy cool, settled blood
Is tied the one flesh, and thou almost grown good,
I know not how to reach the strange device,
Except ( Domitian like) thou murther'st flies;
Or is it thy piety? for who can tell
But thou may prove devout, and love a Cell,
And (like a Badger) with attentive looks
In the dark hole sit rooting up of books.
Quick Hermit! what a peaceful Change had thou
Without the noise of haire-cloth, whip, or Vow?
But is there no redemption? must there be
No other penance but of liberty?
Why two months hence, if thou continue thus
Thy memory will scarce remain with us,
The Drawers have forgot thee, and exclaim
They have not seen thee here since Charles his reign,
Or if they mention thee, like some old man.
That at each word inserts -- Sir, as I can
Remember -- So the Cyph'rers puzzle me
With a dark, cloudie character of thee.
That (certs!) I fear thou will be lost, and we
Must ask the Fathers ever 't be long for thee.
Come! leave this sullen state, and let not Wine
And precious Wit lie dead for want of thine,
Shall the dull Market-land-lord with his Rout
Of sneaking Tenants durtily swill out
This harmless liquor? shall they knock and beat
For Sack, only to talk of Rye, and wheat?
O let not such prepost'rous tippling be
In our Metropolis, may I never see
Such Tavern-sacrilege, nor load a line
To weep the Rapes and Tragedy of wine!
Here lives that Chimick, quick fire which betrays
Fresh Spirits to the blood, and warms our lays,
I have reserved against thy approach a Cup
That were thy Muse stark dead, shall raise her up,
And teach her yet more Charming words and skill
Than ever Coelia, Chloris, Astrophil,
Or any of the Thredbare names Inspired
Poor riming lovers with a Mistress sir'd.
Come then I and while the slow Isicle hangs
At the stiff thatch, and Winters frosty pangs
Benumme the year, blithe (as of old let us
'Midst noise and War, of Peace, and mirth discuss.
This portion thou wort born for: why should we
Vex at the times ridiculous misery?
An age that thus has fooled it self, and will
(Spite of thy teeth and mine) persist so still.
Let Us sit then at this fire, and while we steal
A Revell in the Town, let others seal,
Purchase or Cheat, and who can, let them pay,
Till those black deeds bring on the dark some day;
Innocent spenders we! a better use
Shall wear out our short Lease, and leave th'obtuse
Rout to their husks; They and their bags at best
Have cares in earnest, we care for a Jest.
Monsieur Gombauld.
I'Ave read thy Souls fair night-peece, and have seen
The Amors and Courtship of the silint Queen,
Her stolen descents to Earth, and what did move her
To Juggle first with Heaven, then with a Lover,
With Latmos loweer rescue, and (alas!)
To find her out a Hue and Cry in Brass,
Thy Journall of deep Mysteries, and sad
Nocturnall Pilgrimage, with thy dreams clad
In fancies darker than thy Cave, Thy Gloss
Of sleepie draughts, and as thy soul did pass
In her calm voyage what discourse she heard
Of Spirits, what dark Groves and ill-shap'd guard
Ismena lead thee through, with thy proud flight
O'r Periardes, and deep, musing night
Near fair Eurotas banks, what solemn green
The neighbor shades wear, and what forms are seen
In their large Bowers, with that sad path and seat
Which none but light-heeld Nymphs and Fairies heat;
Their solitary life, and how exempt
From Common frailty, the severe contempt
They have of Man, their privilege to live
A Tree, or Fountain, and in that Reprieve
What ages they consume, with the sad Vale
Of Diophania, and the mournful tale,
Or the bleeding vocal Myrtle; These and more
Thy richer thoughts we are upon the score
To thy rare fancy for, nor do thou fall
From thy first Majesty, or ought at all
Betray Consumption, thy full vigorous Bays
Wear the same green, and scorn the lene decays
Of style, or matter; Just so have I known
Some Crystal spring, that from the neighbor down
Derived her birth, in gentle murmurs steal
To their next Vale, and proudly there reveal
Her streams in louder accents, adding still
More noise and waters to her Channel, till
At last swollen with Increase she glides along
The Lawnes and Meadows in a wanton throng
Of frothy billows, and in one great name
Swallows the tributary brooks drowned fame.
Nor are they mere Inventions, for we
In the same piece find scattered Philosophy
And hidden, dispersed truths that folded lie
In the dark shades of deep Allegory,
So neatly weaved, like Arras, they descrie
Fables with Truth, Fancy with History.
So that thou have in this thy curious mould
Cast that commended mixture wished of old,
Which shall these Contemplations render far
Less mutable, and lasting as their star,
And while there is a People, or a Sun,
Endymions story with the Moon shall run.
An Elegy on the death of Mr. R.W. slain in the late unfortunate differences
at Routon Heath, near Chester, 1645.
I Am Confirmed, and so much wing is given
To my wild thoughts, that they dare strike at heaven.
A full years grief I struggled with, and stood
Still on my sandy hopes uncertain good,
So loath was I to yield, to all those fears
I still opposed thee, and denied my tears.
But thou art gone! and the untimely loss
Like that one day, has made all others Cross.
Have you seen on some Rivers flowrie brow
A well built Elm or stately Cedar grow,
Whose Curled tops gilt with the Morning-ray
Becken'd the Sun, and whisperd to the day,
When unexpected from the angry North
A fatal sullen whirlwind sallies forth,
And with a full-mouthed blast rends from the ground
The Shady twins, which rushing scatter round
Their sighing leafes, whilst overborn with strength,
Their trembling heads bow to a prostrate length;
So forced fell he; So Immaturely Death
Stifled his able heart and active breath.
The world scarce knew him yet, his early Soul
Had but new-broke her day, and rather stole
A sight, than gave one; as if su'bt'ly she
Would learn our stock, but hide his treasury.
His years (should time lay both his wings and glass
Unto his charge) could not be summed (alas!)
To a full score; Though in so short a span
His riper thoughts had purchased more of man
Than all those worthless livers, which yet quick,
Have quite outgone their own Arithmetic.
He seized perfections, and without a dull
And mossie gray possessed a solid skull,
No Crooked knowledge neither, nor did he
Wear the friends name for Ends and policy,
And then laid by; As those lost Youths of th'stage
Who only flourished for the Play's short age
And then retired, like Jewels in each part
He wore his friends, But chiefly at his heart.
Nor was it only in this he did excel,
His equal valor could as much, as well.
He knew no fear but of his God; yet durst
No injury, nor (as some have ^e'r pur'st
The sweat and tears of others, yet would be
More forward in a royal gallantrie
Than all those vast pretenders, which of late
Swelled in the ruins of their King and State.
He weaved not Self Ends, and the Public good
Into one piece nor with the peoples blood
Filled his own veins; In all the doubtful way
Conscience and Honor ruled him. O that day
When like the Fathers in the Fire and Cloud
I mist thy face! I might in every Crowd
See Arms like thine, and men advance, but none
So near to lightning moved, nor so fell on.
Have you observed how soon the nimble Eye
Brings the Object to Conceit, and does so vic
Performance with the Soul, that you would swear
The Act and apprehension both lodged there,
Just so moved he: like short his active hand
Drew blood, ever well the foe could understand.
But here I lost him. Whether the last turn
Of thy few sands called on thy hasty urn,
Or some fierce rapid fate (hid from the Eye)
Has hurled thee Prisoner to some distant sky
I cannot tell, but that I do believe
Thy Courage such as scorned a base Reprieve.
What ever 'twas, whether that day thy breath
Suffered a Civil or the Common death,
Which I do most suspect, and that I have
Failed in the glories of so known a grave,
Though thy loved ashes miss me, and mine Eyes
Had no acquaintance with thy Exequies,
Nor at the last farewell, torn from thy sight
On the Cold sheet have fixed a sad delight,
Yet what ever pious hand (in stead of mine)
Has done this office to that dust of thine,
And till thou rise again from thy low bed
Lent a Cheap pillow to thy quiet head,
Though but a private turffe, it can do more
To keep thy name and memory in store
Than all those Lordly fools which lock their bones
In the dumb piles of Chested brass, and stones.
Thou Art rich in thy own fame, and need not
These Marble-frailties, nor the gilded blot
Of posthume honors; There is not one sand
Sleeps o'r thy grave, but can outbid that hand
And pencill too, so that of force we must
Confess their heaps show lesser than thy dust.
And (blessed soul!) though this my sorrow can
Add naught to thy perfections, yet as man
Subject to Envy, and the common fate
It may redeem thee to a fairer date;
As some blind Dial, when the day is done,
Can tell us at midnight, There was a Sun,
So these perhaps, though much beneath thy fame,
May keep some weak remembrance of thy name,
And to the faith of better times Commend
Thy loyal upright life, and gallant End.
Nomen and arma locum servant, te, amice, nequivi
Conspicere, --
Upon a Cloak lent him by Mr. I. Ridsley.
HEre, take again thy Sackcloth! and thank heaven
Thy Courtship has not killed me; Is It not Even
Whether we dye by peecemeale, or at once
Since both but ruin, why then for the nonce
Did husband my afflictions, and cast over
Me this forced Hurdle to inflame the score?
Had I near London in this Rug been seen
Without doubt I had executed been
For some bold Irish spy, and cross a sledge
Had layn mess'd up for their sour gates and bridge.
When first I bore it, my oppressed feer.
Would needs persuade me, 'twas some leaden sheet;
Such deep Impressions, and such dangerous holes
Were made, that I began to doubt my soals,
And every step (so near necessity)
Devoutly wished some honest Cobbler by,
Besides it was so short, the Jewish rag
Seemed Circumcised, but had a Gentile shag.
Had thou been with me on that day, when we
Left craggie Biston, and the fatal Dee,
When beaten with fresh storms, and late mishap
It shared the office of a Cloak, and Cap,
To see how 'bout my clouded head it stood
Like a thick Turband, or some Lawyers Hood,
While the stiff, hollow pletes on every side
Like Conduit-pipes rained from the Bearded hide,
I know thou would in spite of that day's fate
Let loose thy mirth at my new shape and state,
And with a shallow smile or two profess
Some Sarazin had lost the Clowted Dress.
Did ever see the good wife (as they say)
March in her short cloak on the Christning day,
With what soft motions she salutes the Church,
And leaves the Bedrid Mother in the lurch;
Just so Jogged I, while my dull horse did trudge
Like a Circuit-beast plagued with a goutie Judge.
But this was Civil. I have since known mo^e
And worser pranks: One night (as heretofore
The have known) for want of change (a thing which I
And Bias used before me) I did lie
Pure Adami^e, and simply for that end
Resolved, and made this for my bosom- friend.
O that thou had been there next morn, that I
Might teach thee new Micro-cosmo graphie!
Thou would have taken me, as I naked stood,
For one of the seven pillars before the sloud,
Such Characters and Hierogliphicks were
In one night wo^n, that thou might justly swear
I Would slept in Cere-cloth, or at Bedlam where
The mad men lodge in straw, I Will not forbear
To tell thee all, his wild Impress and tricks
Like Speeds old Britans made me look, or Pitts;
His villainous, biting, Wire-embraces
Had sealed in me more strange forms and faces
Than Children see in dreams, or thou have read
In Arras, Puppet-playes, and Ginger-bread,
With angled Schemes, and Crosses that bred fear
Of being handled by some Conjurer,
And nearer thou would think (such strokes were drawn)
I Would been some rough statue of Fetter-lane,
Nay, I believe, had I that instant been
By Surgeons or Apothecaries seen,
They had Condemned my razed skin to be
Some walking Herball, or Anatomy.
But (thanks to th'day!) it is off. I Would now advise
Thee friend to put this piece to Merchandise;
The Pedlars of our age have business yet,
And gladly would against the Fayr-day fit
Themselves with such a Roof, that can secure
Their Wares from Dogs and Cats rained in ^^owre,
It shall perform; or if this will not do
'Twill take the Ale-wives sure; 'Twill make them two
Fine Rooms of One, and spread upon a stick
Is a partition without Lime or Brick.
Horned obstinacy! how my heart does fret
To think what Mouths and Elbowes it would set
In a wet day? have you for two pence e're
Seen King Harryes Chapel at Westminster,
Where in their dustie gowns of Brass and Stone
The Judges lie, and marked you how each one
In sturdie Marble-plets about the knee
Bears up to show his legs and symmetrie?
Just so would this; That I think it weaved upon
Some stiffneckt Brownists exercising loome.
O that thou had it when this Juggling fate
Of Souldierie first seized me! at what rate
Would I have bought it then, what was there but
I would have given for the Compendious h^tt?
I do not doubt but (if the weight could please,)
'Twould guard me better than a Lapland-lease,
Or a German shirt with Enchanted lint
Stuft'd through, and th'devils beard and face weaved in it.
But I have done. And think not, friend, that I
This freedom took to Jeere thy Courtesy,
I thank thee for it, and I believe my Muse
So known to thee, thou wilt not suspect abuse;
She did this, 'cause (perhaps) thy love paid thus
Might with my thanks outlive thy Cloak, and Us.
Upon Mr. Fletchers Plays, published, 1647.
I Knew thee not, not durst attendance strive
Labell to wit, Verser remonstrative,
And in some Suburb-page (scandal to thine)
Like Lent before a Christmasse scatter mine,
This speaks thee not, since at the utmost rate
Such remnants from thy piece Entreat their date;
Nor can I dub the Copy, or afford
Titles to swell the rear of Verse with Lord,
Nor politickly big to Inch low fame
Stretch in the glories of a strangers name,
And Clip those Bays I Court, weak striver I,
But a faint Echo unto Poetry.
I have not Clothes t'adopt me, not must sit
For Plush and Velvets sake Esquire of wit,
Yet Modesty these Crosses would improve,
And Rags near thee, some Reverencemay move.
I did believe (great Beaumont being dead,)
Thy Widowed Muse slept on his flowrie bed;
But I am richly Cosen'd, and can see
Wit transmigrates, his Spirit stayed with thee,
Which doubly advantaged by thy single pen
In life and death now treads the Stage again;
And thus are we freed from that dearth of wit
Which starved the Land since into Schisms split,
Wherein thou have done so much, we must needs guess
Wits last Edition is now in the Press,
For thou have drained Invention, and he
That writes hereafter, does but pillage thee.
But thou have plotts; and will not the Kirk strain
At the Design of such a Tragic brain?
Will they themselves think safe, when they shall see
Thy most abominable policy?
Will not the Ears assemble, and think it fit
Their Synod fast, and pray, against thy wit?
But they will not lyre in such an idle Quest,
Thou do but kill, and Circumvent in Jest,
And when thy angered Muse swells to a blow
It Is but for Field's, or Swansteed's overthrow.
Yet shall these Conquests of thy Bays outlive
Their Scottish zeal, and Compacts made to grieve
The Peace of Spirits, and when such deeds fail
Of their foul Ends, a fair name is thy Bail.
But (happy thou!) never saw these storms, our air
Teemed with even in thy time, though seeming fair;
Thy gentle Soul meant for the shade, and ease
Withdrew betimes into the Land of Peace;
So neasted in some Hospitable shore
The Hermit-angler, when the mid-Seas roar
Packs up his lines, and (ere the tempest raves,
Retyres, and leaves his station to the waves.
Thus thou diedst almost with our peace, and we
This breathing time thy last fair Issue see,
Which I think such (if needless Ink not soil
So Choice a Muse,) others are but thy foil;
This, or that age may write, but never see
A Wit that dares run Parallel with thee.
True, BEN must live! but bate him, and thou have
Undone all future wits, and matched the past.
Upon the Poems and Plays of the ever memorable Mr. William Cartwright.
I Did but see thee! and how vain it is
To vex thee for it with Remonstrances,
Though things in fashion, let those Judge, who sit
Their twelve pence out, to clap their hands at wit;
I fear to Sin thus near thee; for ( great Saint!)
It Is known, true beauty has no need of paint.
Yet, since a Labell fixed to thy fair Hearse
Is all the Mode, and tears put into Verse
Can teach Posterity our present grief
And their own loss, but never give relief;
I Will tell them (and a truth which needs no pass,)
That wit in Cartwright at her Zenith was,
Arts, Fancy, Language, all Convened in thee,
With those grand Miracles which deifie
The old worlds Writings, kept yet from the fire,
Because they force these worst times to admire.
Thy matchless Genius, in all thou did write,
Like the Sun, wrought with such stayed beat, and light,
That not a line (to the most Critic he)
Offends with flashes, or obscurity.
When thou the wild of humors trackst, thy pen
So Imitates that Motley slock in men,
As if thou had in all their bosoms been,
And seen those Leopards that lurk within.
The amorous Youth steals from thy Courtly page
His vowed Address, the Soldier his brave rage;
And those soft beauteous Readers whose looks can
Make some men Poets, and make any 'man
A Lover, when thy Slave but seems to dye,
Turn all his Mourners, and melt at the Eye.
Thus, thou thy thoughts have dressed in such a strain
As does not only speak, but rule and reign,
Nor are those bodies they assumed, dark Clouds,
Or a thick bark, but clear, transparent shrouds,
Which who looks on, the Rays so strongly beat
They Will brushe and warm him with a quickening heat,
So Souls shine at the Eyes, and Pearls display
Through the loose-Chrystal-streams a glaunce of day.
But what is all this unto a Royal Test?
Thou art the Man, whom great Charles so expressed!
Then let the Crowd refrain their needless humme,
When Thunder speaks, then Squibs and Winds are dumb.
To the best, and most accomplished Couple --
BLessings as rich and fragrant crown your heads
As the mild heaven on Roses sheds,
When at their Cheeks (like Pearls) they wear
The Clouds that court them in a tear,
And may they be fed from above
By him which first ordained your love!
Fresh as the hours may all your pleasures be,
And healthful as Eternity!
Sweet as the flowers first breath, and Close
As the unseen spreadings of the Rose,
When he unfolds his Curtain'd head,
And makes his bosom the Suns bed.
Soft as your selves run your whole life's, and clear
As your own glass, or what shines there;
Smooth as heavens face, and bright as he
When without Mask, or Tiffanie,
In all your time not one Jar meet
But peace as silent as his seet.
Like the days Warmth may all your Comforts be,
Untoil'd for, and Serene as he,
Yet free and full as is that sheafe
Of Sunbeams gilding every leaf,
When now the tyrant-heat expires
And his Cooled locks breath milder fires.
And as those parcell'd glories he does shed
Are the fair Issues of his head,
Which never so distant are soon known
By the heat and luster for his own,
So may each branch of yours we see
Your Coppyes, and our Wonders be!
And when no more on Earth you must remain
Invited hence to heaven again,
Then may your virtuous, virgin-flames
Shine in those Heirs of your fair names,
And teach the world that mystery
Your selves in your Posterity!
So you to both worlds shall rich presents bring,
And gathered up to heaven, leave here a Spring.
An Elegy on the death of Mr. R. Hall, slain at Pontefract, 1684.
I Knew it would be thus! and my Just fears
Of thy great spirit are Improved to tears.
Yet slow these not from any base distrust
Of a fair name, or that thy honor must
Confined to those cold relics sadly sit
In the same Cell an obscure Anchorite.
Such low distempers Murder, they that must
Abuse thee so, weep not, but wound thy dust.
But I past such dim Mourners can descrie
Thy same above all Clouds of obloquie,
And like the Sun with his victorious rays
Charge through that darkness to the last of days.
It Is true, fair Manhood has a female Eye,
And tears are beauteous in a Victory,
Not are we so high-proofe, but grief will find
Through all our guards a way to wound the mind;
But in thy fall what adds the brackish sum
More than a blott unto thy Martyrdom,
Which scorns such wretched suffrages, and stands
More by thy single worth, than our whole bands,
Yet could the puling tribute rescue ought
In this sad lofle, or were thou to be brought
Back here by tears, I would in any wise
Pay down the sum, or quite Consume my Eyes.
Thou fel^'st our double ruin, and this rent
Forc^d in thy life shak'd both the Church and tent,
Learning in others steals them from the Van,
And basely wise Emasculates the man.
But lodged in thy brave soul the book^sh seat
Serve'd only as the light unto thy heat;
Thus when some quitted action, to their shame,
And only got a discreet toward name,
Thou with thy blood made purchase of renown,
And diedst the glory of the Sword and Gown
Thy blood has hallowed Pomfret, and this blow
(Profaned before) has Church'd the Castle now.
Nor is it a Common valor we deplore,
But such as with fifteen a hundred bore,
And lightning like (not coopt within a wall)
In storms of fire and steel fell on them all.
Thou went no wool-sack soldier, nor of those
Whose Courage lies in winking at their foes,
That live at loop-holes, and consume their breath
On Match or Pipes, and sometimes peep at death;
No it were sin to number these with thee,
But that (thus poised) our loss we better see.
The fair and open valor was thy shield,
And thy known station, the defying should.
Yet these in thee I would not Voturs call.
But that this age must know, that thou had all.
Those richer graces that adorned thy mind
Like stars of the first magnitude, so shined,
That is opposed unto these lesser lights
All we can say, is this, They were fair nights.
Thy Paty and Leamme did unite,
And though with Several beams made up one light,
And such thy Judgment was, that I dare swear
Whole Counsels might as soon, and Synods err.
But all these now are out! and as some Star
Hurled in Diurnall motions from far,
And seen to droop at night, is vainly sed
To fall, and find an Occidentall bed,
Though in that other world what we Judge west
Proves Elevation, and a new, fresh East.
So though our weaker sense den'es us sight
And bodies cannot trace the Spirits flight,
We know those graces to be still in thee,
But winged above us to eternity.
Since then (thus flown) thou art so much refined,
That we can only reach thee with the mind,
I will not in this dark and narrow glass
Let thy scant shadow for Perfections pass,
But leave thee to be read more high, more queint,
In thy own blood a Soldier and a Saint.
-- Salve aetcrnum mihi maxim Palls!
AEteraumg; vale! --
To my learned friend, Mr. T. Powell, upon His Translation of Malvezzi's
Christian Politician.
We thank you, worthy Sir, that now we see
Malvezzi languag'd like our Infancy,
And can without suspicion entertain
This foreign Statesman to our breast or brain,
You have enlarged his praise, and from your store
By this Edition made his worth the more.
Thus by your learned hand (amidst the corse)
Outlandish plants thrive in our thankless soil,
And wise men after death, by a strange fate,
Lie Leiguer here, and beg to serve our State.
Italy now, though Mistress of the Bays,
Waits on this wreath, proud of a foreign praise,
For, wise Malvezzi, thou did lie before
Confined within the language of one shore,
And like those Stars which near the Poles do steer
Were but in one part of the Globe seen clear,
Provence and Nap'es were the best and most
Thou could thine in, fixed to that single Coast,
Perhaps some Cardinal to be thought wise
And honest too, would ask, what was thy price?
Then thou must pack to Rome, where thou might lie
Ever thou should have new clothes eternally,
For though so near the seav'n hills, ne'rthelesse
Thou came to Antwerp for thy Roman dress:
But now then art come hither, thou may run
Through any Clime as well known as the Sun,
And in thy several dresses like the year
Challenge acquaintance with each peopled Sphere.
Come then rare Politicians of the time,
Brains of some standing, Elders in our Clime,
See here the method: A wise, solid stare
Is quick in acting, friendly in debate,
Joint in advice, in resolutions just,
Mild in success, true to the Common trust.
It cements ruptures, and by gentle hand
Allayes the heat and burnings of a land,
Religion guides it, and in all the Tract
Designs so twist, that heaven confirms the act;
If from these lists you wander as you steer,
Look back, and Caltchile your actions here,
These are the Marks to which true Statesmen tend,
And greatness here with goodness has one End.
To my worthy friend Master T. Jews.
SEes not my friend, what a deep snow
Candies our Countries woody brow?
The yielding branch his load scarce bears
Oppressed with snow, and frozen tears,
While the dumb rivers slowly float,
All bound up in an Icie Coat.
Let us meet then! and while this world
In wild Excentricks now is hurld,
Keep we, like nature, the same Key,
And walk in our forefathers way;
Why any more cast we an Eye
On what may come, not what is nigh?
Why vex our selves with fear, or hope
And cares beyond our Horoscope?
Who into future times would peer
Looks ost beyond his term set here,
And cannot go into those grounds
But through a Churchyard which them bounds;
Sorrows and sighs and searches spend
And draw our bottom to an end,
But discreet Joys lengthen the lease
Without which life were a disease,
And who this age a Mourner goes,
Does with his tears but seed his foes.
To the most Excellently accomplished, Mrs K. Philips.
SAy witty fair one, from what Sphere
Flow these rich numbers you shed here?
For sure such Incantations come
From thence, which strike your Readers dumb,
A strain, whose measures gently meet
Like Virgin-lovers, or times feet,
Where language Smiles, and accents rise
As quick, and pleasing as your Eyes,
The Poem smooth, and in each line
Soft as your self, yet Masculine;
Where not Coorse trifles blot the page
With matter borrowed from the age,
But thoughts as Innocent, and high
As Angels have, or Saints that dye.
These Raptures when I first did see
New miracles in Poetry,
And by a hand, the^r good would miss
His Bays and Fountains but to kiss,
My weaker Genius (cr^ss^ to fashion)
Slept in a silent admiration,
A Rescue, by whole grace disguise
Pretenders often have past for wise,
And yet as Pilgrims humbly touch
Those Shrines to which they bow so much,
And Clouds in Courtship flock, and run
To be the Mask unto the Sun,
So I concluded, It was true
I might at distance worship you
A Persian Votarie, and say
It was your light showed me the way.
So Lodestones guide the duller Steel,
And high perfections are the Wheel
Which moves the less, for gifts divine
Are strung upon a Vi^al line
Which touch^d by you, Excites in all
Affections Epidemicall.
And this made me (a truth most fit)
Add my weak Echo to your wit,
Which pardon, Lady, for Assayes
Obscure as these might blast your Bays,
As Common hands soil Flowers, and make
That dew they wear, weep the mistake.
But I Will wash off the stain, and vow
No Laurel grows, but for your Brow.
An Epitaph upon the Lady Elizabeth, Second Daughter to his late Majesty.
YOuth, Beauty, Virtue, Innocence
Heavens royal, and select Expense,
With Virgin-tears, and sighs divine,
Sit here the Genii of this shrine,
Where now (thy fair soul winged away,)
They guard the Casket where she lay.
Thou had, ever thou the light could see,
Sorrows laid up, and stored for thee,
Thou suck'dst in woes, and the breasts lent
Their Milk to thee, but to lament;
Thy portion here was grief, thy years
Distilld no other rain, but tears,
Tears without noise, but (understood)
As loud, and shrill as any blood;
Thou seem a Rose bud born in Snow,
A flower of purpose sprung to bow
To headless tempests, and the rage
Of an Incensed, stormy Age,
Others, e're their afflictions grow,
Are timed, and seasoned for the blow,
But thine, as Rhumes the tenderest part,
Fell on a young and harmless heart.
And yet as Balm-trees gently spend
Their tears for those, that do them rend,
So mild and pious thou were seen,
Though full of Sufferings, free from spleen,
Thou did nor murmr, nor revile,
But d^ank'st thy wormwood with a smile.
As envious Eyes blast, and Infect
And cause misfortunes by aspect,
So thy sad stars dispensed to thee
No Influxe, but Calamity,
They viewed thee with Ecclypsed rays,
And but the backside of bright days.
These were the Comforts she had here,
As by an unseen hand it is clear,
Which now she reads, and smiling wears
A Crown with him, who wipes off tears.
To Sir William D' avenant, upon his Gondibert.
WEll, we are rescued land by thy rare Pen
Poets shall live, when Princes dye like men.
Thou Have cleared the prospect to our harmless Hill,
Of late years clouded with imputed Ill,
And thy Soft, youthful couples there may move
As chaste as Stars converse and smile above.
Thou Have taught their Language, and their love to flow
Calm as Rose-leafes, and cool as Virgin-snow,
Which doubly feasts us, being so refined
They both delight, and dignifie the mind,
Like to the watrie Music of some Spring,
Whose pleasant flowings at once wash and sing.
And where before Heroic Poems were
Made up of Spirits, Prodigies, and fear,
And showed (through all the Me^ancholy flight,)
Like some dark Region overcast with night,
As if the Poet had been quite dismayed,
While only Giants and Enchantments swayed,
Thou like the Sun, whose Eye brooks no disguise
Have Chased them hence, and with Discoveries
So rare and learned filled the place, that we
Those famed Grandeza's find outdone by thee,
And under-foot see all those Vizards hurled,
Which bred the wonder of the former world.
'I was dull to sit, as our forefathers did,
At Crumbs and Voyders, and because unbid
Refrain wise appetite. This made thy fire
Break through the ashes of thy aged Sire
To lend the world such a Convincing light
As shows his fancy darker than his sight.
Nor was it alone the bars and length of days
(Though those gave strength and starwe to his bays,)
Encountered thee, but what is an old Complaint
And kills the fancy, a forlorn Restraint;
How could thou mur'd in solitary stones
Dress BIRTH A'S simi'es, though well thou might her groans?
And, strangely Eloquent, thy self divide
'Twixt Sad misfortunes, and a Bloomie Bride?
Through all the tenor of thy ample Song
Spun from thy own rich store, and shared among
Those fair Adventurers, we plainly see
The Imputed gifts, Inherent are in thee.
Then live for ever (and by high desert)
In thy own mirror, matchless Gondibert,
And in bright Birtha leave thy love Inshrin'd
Fresh as her Emrauld, and fair as her mind,
While all Confess thee (as they ought to do)
The Prince of Poets, and of Lovers too.
Tristium Lib. 5o. Eleg. 3a. To his fellow-Poets at Rome, upon the birthday of
Bacchus.
THis is the day (blithe god of Sack) which we
If I mistake not, Consecrate to thee,
When the soft Rose we marry to the Bays,
And warmed with thy own wine rehearse thy praise,
Amongst whom (while to thy Poet fate gave way)
I have been held no small part of the day,
But now, dulled with the Cold Bears frozen seat,
Sarmatia holds me, and the warlike Gere.
My former life, unlike to this my last,
With Romes best wits of thy full Cup did taste,
Who since have seen the savage Pontick band,
And all the Choler of the Sea and Land:
Whether sad Chance, or heaven has this designed,
And at my birth some fatal Planet shined,
Of right thou should the Sisters knots undo,
And tree thy Votarie and Poet too.
Or are you God (like us) in such a slate
As cannot alter the decrees of fate
I know with much ado thou did obtain
Thy Jovial godhead, and on earth thy pain
Was no whit less, so wandering thou did run
To the Getes too, and Snow-weeping Strymon,
With Persia, Ganges, and what ever streams
The thirsly Moon drinks in the midday beams.
But thou were twice-born, and the Fates to thee
(To make all sure) doubled thy misery,
My sufferings too are many: if it be
Held safe for me to boast adversity,
Nor was it a Common blow, but from above
Like his, that died for Imitating Jove,
Which when thou heardst, a ruin so divine
And Mother-like, should make thee pity mine.
And on this day, which Poets unto thee
Crown with full bowls, ask, what is become of me?
Help bucksome God then! so may thy loved Vine
Swarm with the numerous grape, and big with Wine
Load the kind Elm, and so thy Orgyes be
With priest loud showtes, and Satyrs kept to thee!
So may in death Lycurgus never be blessed,
Nor Pentheus wandering ghost find any rest!
And so for ever bright (thy Chief desires,)
May thy wifes crown out shine the lesser fires!
It but now, mindful of my love to thee,
Thou will, in what thou can, my helper be.
You Gods have Commerce with your selves, try then
If Caesar will restore me Rome again.
And you my trusty friends (the Jollie Crew
Of careless Poets!) when, without me, you
Perform this days glad Myst'ries, let it be
Your first Appeal unto his Deity,
And let one of you (touched with my sad name)
Mixing his wine tears, lay down the same,
And (sighing) to the rest this thought Commend,
O! There is Ovid now our banished friend?
This do, if in your breasts I ever deserved
So large a share, nor spitefully reserved,
Nor basely sold applause, or with a brow
Condemning others, did my self allow.
And may your happier wits grow loud with fame
As you (my best of friends!) preserve my name.
De Ponto, Lib.3o. To his friends (after his many solicitations) refusing to
petition Caesar for his releasement.
YOu have Consumed my language, and my pen
Incensed with begging scorns to write again.
You grant, you knew my suit: My Muse, and I
Had taught it you in frequent Elegy,
That I believe (yet sealed) you have divined
Our Repetitions, and forestal'd my mind,
So that my thronging Elegies, and I
Have made you (more then Poets) prophecy.
But I am now awaked; forgive my dream
Which made me Cross the Proverb and the Stream,
And pardon, friends, that I so long have had
Such good thoughts of you, I am not so mad
As to continue them. You shall no more
Complain of troublesome Verse, or write over
How I endanger you, and vex my s^^ife
With the sad legends of a banished life.
I Will bear these plagues my self: for I have past
Through greater ones, and can as well at last
These petty Crosses. It Is for some young beast
To kick his bands, or with his neck releast
From the sad Yoke. Know then, That as for me
Whom Fate has used to such calamity,
I scorn her spite and yours, and freely dare
The highest ills your malice can prepare.
'Twas Fortune threw me hither, where I now
Rude Getes and Thrace see, with the snowie brow
Of Cloudie Amles, and if she decree
Her sportive pilgrims List bed here must be
I am content; nay more, she cannot do
That Act which I would not consent unto.
I can delight in vain hopes, and desire
That state more then her Change and Smiles, then high't
I hug a strong despair, and think it brave
To baffle faith, and give those hopes a grave.
Have you not seen cured wounds enlarged, and he
That with the first wave sinks, yielding to th'tree
Waters, without The Expense of arms or breath
Has still the easiest, and the quickest death.
Why nurse I sorrows then? why these desires
Of Changing Scythia for the Sun and fires
Of some calm kinder air? what did bewitch
My frantic hopes to fly so vain a pitch,
And thus outrun my self? Madman! could I
Suspect fate had for me a Courtesy?
These errors grieve: And now I must forget
Those pleased idoea's I did frame and set
Unto my self, with many fancyed Springs
And Groves, whose only loss new sorrow brings.
And yet I would the worst of fate endure,
E're you should be repulsed, or less secure,
But (base, low souls!) you left me not for this,
But 'cause you durst not. Caesar could not miss
Of such a trifle, for I know that he
Scorns the Cheap triumphs of my misery.
Then since (degenerate friends) not he, but you
Cancel my hopes, and make afflictions new,
You shall Confess, and same shall tell you, I
At Isler dare as well as Tyber dye.
De Ponto, lib. 4o. Eleg. 3a. To his Inconstant friend, translated for the use
of all the Iudases of this touch-stone-Age.
SHall I complain, or not? Or shall I mask
Thy hateful name, and in this bitter task
Master my just Impatience, and write down
Thy crime alone, and leave the rest unknown?
Or will thou the succeeding years should see
And teach thy person to posterity?
No, hope is not; for know, most wretched man,
It Is not thy base and weak detraction can
Buy thee a Poem, nor move me to give
Thy name the honor in my Verse to live.
Whilst yet my Ship did with no storms dispute
And tem'prate winds fed with a calm salute
My prosperous fails, thou were the only man
That with me then an equal fortune ran,
But now since angry heaven with Clouds and night
Stifled those Sunbeams, thou have taken thy flight,
Thou knows't I want thee, and art merely gone
To shun that rescue, I relied upon;
Nay, thou dissemblest too, and do disclame
Not only my Acquaintance, but my name;
Yet know (though deal to this) that I am he
Whose years and love had the same infancy
With thine, Thy deep familiar, that did share
Souls with thee, and partake thy Joys or Care,
Whom the same Roose lodged, and my Muse those nights
So solemnly endeared to her delights;
But now, perfidious traitor, I am grown
The Abject of thy breast, not to be known
In that false Closes more; Nay, thou will not
So much as let me know, I am forgot.
If thou will say, thou did not love me, then
Thou did dissemble: or, if love again,
Why now Inconstant? came the Crime from me
That wrought this Change? Sure, if no Justice be
Of my side, thine must have it. Why do hide
Thy reasons then? for me, I did so guide
My self and actions, that I cannot see
What could offend thee, but my misery.
Alas! if thou would not from thy store allow
Some rescue to my wants, at least I know
Thou could have writ, and with a line or two
Relieved my famished Eye, and eased me so.
I know not what to think! and yet I hear,
Not pleased with this, thou art witty, and do Jeare;
Bad man! thou have in this those tears kept back
I could have shed for thee, should thou but lack.
Knows't not that Fortune on a Globe does stand,
Whose upper slipprie part without command
Turns lowest still? the sportive leafes and wind
Are but dull Emblems of her fickle mind.
In the whole world there is nothing I can see
Will thoroughly parallel her ways, but thee.
All that we hold, hangs on a slender twine
And our best states by sudden chance decline;
Who has not heard of Croesus proverb'd gold
Yet knows his foe did him prisoner hold?
He that once awed Sicilia's proud Extent
By a poor art could famine scarce prevent;
And mighty Pompey ever he made an end
Was glad to beg his slave to be his friend;
Nay, he that had so often Romes Consul bin,
And forced Iugurtha, and the Cimbrians in,
Great Marius! with much want, and more disgrace
In a foul Marsh was glad to hide his face.
A divine hand swayes all mankind, and we
Of one short hour have not the certainty;
Had thou one day told me, the time should be
When the Getes bows, and the Euxine I should see,
I should have checked thy madness, and have thought
The had need of all Anticira in a draught;
And yet it is come to pass! nor though I might
Some things foresee, could I procure a sight
Of my whole destiny, and free my state
From those eternal, higher ties of fate.
Leave then thy pride, and though now brave and high,
Think thou may be as poor and low as I.
Tristium Lib. 3o. Eleg. 3a. To his Wife at Rome, when he was sick.
DEarest! if you those fair Eyes (wondering) stick
On this strange Character, know, I am sick.
Sick in the skirts of the lost world, where I
Breath hopeless of all Comforts, but to dye.
What heart (think thou) have I in this sad seat
Tormented 'twixt the Samomate and Get?
Nor air nor water please: their very sky
Looks strange and unaccustomed to my Eye,
I scarce dare breath it, and I know not how
The Earth that bears me shows unpleasant now,
Nor Diet here is, nor lodging for my Ease,
Nor any one that studies a disease;
No friend to comfort me, none to defray
With smooth discourse the Charges of the day.
All tired alone I lie and (thus) what e're
Is absent, and at Rome I fancy here,
But when then c^m'st, I blot the Any Scrowle,
And give thee full possession of my soul,
Thee (absent) I embrace, thee only voice,
And night and day holy a Husbands Joys;
Nay, of thy name so often I mention make
That I am thought distracted for thy sake;
When my tired Spirits fail, and my sick heart
Draws in that fire which actuates each part,
If any say, thou art come! I force my pain,
And hope to see thee, gives me life again.
Thus I for thee, whilst thou (perhaps) more blessed
Careless of me do breath all peace and rest.
Which yet I think not, for ( Dear Soul!) too well
Know I thy grief, since my first woes befell.
But if strict heaven my stock of days has spun
And with my life my error will be gone,
How easy then ( O Caesar!) were for thee
To pardon one, that now does cease to be?
That I might yield my native air this breath,
And banish not my ashes after death;
Would thou had either spared me until dead,
Or with my blood redeemed my absent head,
Thou should have had both freely, but O! thou
Would have me live to dye an Exile now.
And must I then from Rome so far meet death,
And double by the place my loss of breath?
Nor in my last of hours on my own bed
(In the sad Conflict) rest my dying head?
Nor my souls Whispers (the last pledge of life,)
Mix with the tears and kisses of a wife?
My last words none must treasure, none will rise
And (with a tear) seal up my vanquished Eyes,
Without these Rites I dye, distressed in all
The splendid sorrows of a Funeral,
Unpittied, and unmourn'd for, my sad head
In a strange Land goes friendless to the dead.
When thou hear'st this, O how thy faithful soul
Will sink, whilst grief does every part control!
How often will thou look this way, and Cry,
O where is it yonder that my love does lie!
Yet spare these tears, and mourn not now for me,
Long since ( dear heart!) have I been dead to thee,
Thank then I dyed, when Thee and Rome I lost
That death to me more grief then this has Cost;
Now, if thou can (but thou can not) best wise
Rejoice, my Cares are ended with my life,
At least, yield not to sorrows, frequent use
Should make these miseries to thee no news.
And here I wish my Soul died with my breath
And that no part of me were free from death,
For, if it be Immortal, and outlives
The body, as Phythagoras believes,
Betwixt these Sarmates ghosts, a Roman I
Shall wander, vexed to all Eternity.
But thou (for after death I shall be free,)
Fetch home these bones, and what is left of me,
A few Flowers give them, with some Balm, and lay
Them in some Suburb grave hard by the way,
And to Inform posterity, who is there,
This sad Inscription let my marble wear,
Here lies the loft-soul'd Lecturer of Love,
Whose envied wit did his own ruin prove.
But thou, (who ever thou be, that passing by
Lendst to this sudden stone a bastie Eye,
If ever thou knew'st of Love the sweet disease,
Grudge not to say, May Ovid rest in peace!
This for my tomb: but in my books they will see
More strong and lasting Monuments of me,
Which I believe (though fatal) will afford
An Endless name unto their ruined Lord.
And now thus gone, It rests for love of me
Thou shewst some sorrow to my memory;
Thy Funeral offerings to my ashes bear
With Wreathes of Cypress bathed in many a tear,
Though nothing there but dust of me remain,
Yet shall that Dust perceive thy pious pain.
But I have done, and my tired sickly head
Though I would fain write more, desires the bed;
Take then this word (perhaps my last to tell)
Which though I want, I wish it thee, Farewell.
Ausonii Cupido, Edyl. 6.
IN those blessed fields of Everlasting air
(Where to a Myrtle-grove the souls repair
Of deceased Lovers,) the sad, thoughtfull ghosts
Of Injured Ladies meet where each accosts
The other with a sigh, whose very breath
Would break a heart, and ( kind Souls!) love in death,
A thick wood clouds their walks where day scarce peeps,
And on each hand Cypress and Poppey sleeps,
The drowsy Rivers slumber, and Springs there
Blab not, but softly melt into a tear,
A sickly dull air fans them, which can have
When most in force scarce breath to build a wave.
On either bank through the still shades appear
A Scene of pensive flowers, whose bosoms wear
Drops of a Lever's blood, the Emblem'd truths
Of deep despair, and Love-slain Kings and Youths.
The Hyacinth, and self-enamour'd Boy
Narcissus flourish there, with Venus Joy
The spruce Adonis, and that Prince whose flower
Has sorrow languag'd on him to this hour;
All sad with love they hang their heads, and grieve
As if their passions in each lease did live;
And here ( alas!) these soft-soul'd Ladies stray,
And (oh! too late!) treason in love betray.
Her blasted birth sad Semile repeats,
And with her tears would quench the thund'rers heats,
Then shakes her bosom, as if fired again,
And fears another lightnings slaming train.
The lovely Pocris (here) bleeds, sighs, and swounds,
Then wakes, and kisses him that gave her wounds.
Sad Hero holds a torch forth, and does light
Her lost Leander through the waves and night.
Her Boateman desperate Sapho still admires,
And nothing but the Sea can quench her fires.
Distracted Phoedia with a restless Eye
Her disdained Letters reads, then casts them by.
Rare, faithful Thysbe (sequestered from these)
A silent, unseen sorrow does best please,
For her Loves sake, and last goodnight, poor she
Walks in the shadow of a Mulberrie.
Near her young Canace with Dido sits
A lovely Couple, but of desperate wits,
Both died alike, both pierced their tender breasts,
This with her Fathers Sword, that with their Guests.
Within the thickest textures of the Grove
Diana in her Silver-beams does rove,
Her Crown of stars the pi^chi^ air Invades,
And with a faint light gilds the silent shades,
Whilst her sad thoughts fixed on her sleepie I ever
To Latmos-hill, and his retirements move her.
A thousand more through the wide, darksome wood
Feast on their cares, the Maudlin-Lovers food,
For grief and absence do but Edge desire,
And Death is fuel to a Lovers fire.
To see these Trophies of his wanton bow
Cupid comes in, and all in triumph now
(Rash, unadvised Boy!) disperseth round
The sleepie Mists, his Wings and quiver wound
With noise the quiet air. This sudden stir
Betrays his godship, and as we from far
A clouded, sickly Moon observe, so they
Through the false Mists his Ecclyps'd torch betray.
A hot pursuit thy make, and though with care,
And a slow wing he softly stems the air,
Yet they (as subtle now as he) surround
His silenced course, and with the thick night bound
Surprise the Wag. As in a dream we strive
To voice our thoughts, and vainly would revive
Our Entraunc'd tongues, but can not speech enlarge
'Till the Soul wakes and reassumes her Charge,
So joyous of their Prize, they flock about
And vainly Swell with an Imagined shout.
Far in these shades, and melancholy Coasts
A Myrtle grows, well known to all the ghosts.
Whose stretched top (like a great man raised by Fate)
Looks big, and scorns his neighbors low estate;
His leavy arms into a green Cloud twist.
And on each Branch does sit a lazy mist.
A fatal tree, and luckless to the god,
Where for disdain in life (loves worst of Ods)
The Queen of shades, fair Proserpine did rack
The sad Adonis, hithet now they pack
This little God, where, first disarmed, they bind
His skittish wings, then both his hands behind
His back they tie, and thus secured at last
The peevish wanton to the tree make fast.
Here at adventure without Judge of Jurie
He is condemned, while with united fury
They all assail him; As a thief at Bar
Lest to the Law, and mercy of his Star,
Has Bills heaped on him, and is questioned there
By all the men that have been robbed that year,
So now what ever Fate, or their own will
Scor'd up in life, Cupid must pay the bill.
Their Servants falsehood, Jealousy, disdain,
And all the plagues that abused Maids can feign,
Are laid on him, and then to heighten spleen
Their own deaths crown the sum. Pressed thus between
His fair accusers, it is at last decreed,
He by those weapons, that they died, should bleed.
One grasps an airie Sword, a second holds
Illusive fire and in vain, wanton folds
Belyes a flame; Others less kind appear
To let him blood, and from the purple tear
Create a Rose. But Sapho all this while
Harvests the air, and from a thickened pile
Of Clouds like Leucas top, spreads underneath
A Sea of Mists, the peaceful billows breath
Without all noise, yet so exactly move
They seem to Chide, but distant from above
Reach not the ear, and (thus prepared) at once
She does o'rwhelm him with the airie Sconce.
Amidst these tumults, and as fierce as they
Venus steps in, and without thought, or stay
Invades her Son; her old disgrace is cost
Into the Bill, when Mars and She made fast
In their Embraces were exposed to all
The Scene of gods stark naked in their fall.
Nor serves a verbal penance, but with have
From her fair brow (O happy flowers so placed!)
She tears a Rosy garland, and with this
Whips the untoward Boy, they gently kiss
His snowie skin, but she with angry have
Doubles her strength, until bedewed at last
With a thin bloody sweat, their Innate Red,
(As if grieved with the Act) grew pale and dead.
This laid their spleen: And now ( kind souls!) no more
They Will punish him, the torture that he bore,
Seems greater then his crime; with joint Consent
Fate is made guilty, and he Innocent.
As in a dream with dangers we contest.
And fictious pains seem to afflict our rest,
So frighted only in these shades of night
Cupid (got loose) stole to the upper light,
Where ever since (for malice unto these)
The spiteful Ape does either Sex displease.
But O that had these Ladies been so wise
To keep his Arms, and give him but his Eyes!
Boet. Lib. 1. Metrum 1.
I Whose first year flourished with youthful verse,
In slow, sad numbers now my grief rehearse;
A broken style my sickly lines afford,
And only tears give weight unto my words;
Yet neither fate nor force my Muse could fright
The only faithful Consort of my flight;
Thus what was once my green years greatest glory,
Is now my Comfort, grown decayed and hoarie,
For killing Cares The Effects of age spurred on
That grief might find a fitting Mansion;
O'r my young head runs an untimely gray,
And my loose skin shrinks at my bloods decay.
Happy the man whose death in prosperous years
Strikes not, nor shuns him in his age and tears.
But O how deal is she to hear the Cry
Of the oppressed S^ule, or shut the weeping Eye!
While treacherous Fortune with slight honors fed
My first estate, she almost drowned my head,
But now since (clouded thus) she hides those rays,
Life adds unwelcom'd length unto my days;
Why then, my friends, Judged you my state so good?
He that may fall once, never firmly stood.
Metrum 2.
O In what haste with Clouds and Night
Ecclyps'd, and having lost her light,
The dull Soul whom distraction rends
Into outward Darkness tends!
How often (by these mists made blind,)
Have earthly cares oppressed the mind!
This Soul sometimes wont to survey
The spangled Zodiacks sine way
Saw the early Sun in Roses dressed
With the Cool Moons unstable Crest,
And whatsoever wanton Star
In various Courses near or far
Pierced through the orbs, he could full well
Track all her Journey, and would tell
Her Mansions, turnings, Rise and fall,
By Curious Calculation all.
Of sudden winds the hidden Cause,
And why the Calm Seas quiet face
With Impetuous waves is Curld,
What spirit wheels th'harmonious world,
Or why a Star dropped in the West
Is seen to rise again by East,
Who gives the warm Spring temperate hours
Decking the Earth with spicie flowers,
Or how it Comes (for man's recruit)
That Autumn yields both Grape and fruit,
With many other Secrets, he
Could show the Cause and Mystery,
But now that light is almost out,
And the brave Soul lies Chained about
With outward Cares, whose pensive weight
Sinks down her Eyes from their first height,
And clean Contrary to her birth
Poares on this vile and foolish Earth.
Metrum 4.
WHose calm soul in a settled state
Kicks under foot the frowns of Fate,
And in his fortunes bad or good
Keeps the same temper in his blood,
Not him the slaming Clouds above,
Nor Alita's fiery tempests move,
No fretting seas from shore to shore
Boiling with Indignation over
Nor burning thunderbolt that can
A mountain shake, can st^rre this man.
Dull Cowards then! why should we start
To see ^hese tyrants act their part?
Nor hope, no fear what may befall
And you d^sarm their malice all.
But wh^ does faintly fea^, or wish
And sets no law to what is ^^s,
Has lost the buck^er, and (poor Elfe!)
Makes up a Chain to bind himself.
Metrum 5.
O Thou great builder of this starrie frame,
Who fixed in thy eternal throne do tame
The rapid Spheres, and lest they jarre
Have given a law to every star!
Thou art the Cause that new the Moon
With full or be dulls the stars, and soon
Again grows dark, her light being done,
The nearer still she is to the Sun.
Thou in the early hours of night
Make the cool Evening-star shine bright,
And at Sunrising ('cause the least)
Look pale and sleepie in the East.
Thou, when the leafes in Winter stray,
Appointst the Sun a shorter way,
And in the pleasant Summer-light
With nimble hourses do wing the night.
Thy hand the various year quite through
Discreetly tempers, that what now
The North Wind tears from every tree
In Spring again restored we see.
Then what the winter-starrs between
The furrows in mere seed have seen
The Dog Star since (grown up and born)
Has burnt in stately, full-ear'd Corn.
Thus by Creations law controlled
All things their proper stations hold
Observing (as thou did intend)
Why they were made, and for what end.
Only humane actions thou
Have no Care of, but to the flow
And Ebb of Fortune leave them all,
Hence the Innocent endures that thrall
Due to the wicked, whilst alone
They sit possessours of his throne,
The Just are killed, and Virtue lies
Buried in obscurities,
And (which of all things is most sad)
The good man suffers by the bad.
No perjuries, nor damned pretense
Colored with holy, lying sense
Can them annoy, but when they mind
To try their force, which most men find.
They from the highest sway of things
Can pull down great, and pious Kings.
O then at length, thus loosely hurled
Look on this miserable world
Who ever thou art, that from above
Do in such order all things move!
And let not man (of divine art
Not the least, nor vilest part)
By Casual evils thus bandied, be
The sport of fates obliquitie.
But with that faith thou guid'st the heaven,
Settle this Earth, and make them even.
Metrum 6.
WHen the Crabs sierce Constellation
Burns with the beams of the bright Sun,
Then he that will go out to sow,
Shall never reap where he did plough,
But in stead of Corn may rather
The old worlds diet, Accorns gather.
Who the Violet does love
Must seek her in the flowrie grove,
But never when the Norths cold wind
The Russet fields with frost does bind.
If in the Springtime (to no end)
The tender Vine for Grapes we bend,
We shall find none, for only (still)
Autumn does the Wine Press fill.
Thus for all things (in the worlds prime)
The wise God sealed their proper time,
Nor will permit those seasons he
Ordained by turns, should mingled be;
Then whose wild actions out of season
Cross to nature, and her reason,
Would by new ways old orders rend,
Shall never find a happy End.
Metrum 7.
CUrtain'd with Clouds in a dark night
The Stars cannot send forth their light.
And if a sudden Southern blast
The Sea in rolling waves does cast,
That angry Element does boil,
And from the deep with stormy Coile
Spues up the Sands, which in short space
Scatter, and puddle his Curled face;
Then those Calm waters, which but now
Stood clear as heavens unclouded brow,
And like transparent glass did lie
Open to every searchers Eye,
Look soulely stirred, and (though desired)
Resist the sight, because bemir'd,
So often from a high hills brow
Some Pilgrim-spring is seen to flow,
And in a straight line keep her Course
Till from a Rock with headlong force
Some broken piece blocks up her way
And fo^ceth all her streams astray.
Then thou that with enlightened Rays,
Would see the truth, and in her ways
Keep without Error; neither fear
The future, nor too much give ear
To present Joys; And give no scope
To grief, nor much to flattering hope.
For when these Rebels reign, the mind
Is both a Prisoner, and stark blind.
Lib. 2. Metrum 1.
F Ortune (when with rash hands she quite turmoiles
The state of things, and in tempestuous foiles
Comes whirling like Eurious,) beats quire down
With head long force the highest Monarchs crown,
And in his place unto the throne does fetch
The despised looks of some mechanic wretch.
So Jests at tears and miseries, is proud,
And laughs to hear her vassals groan aloud.
These are her sports, thus she her wheel does drive
And plagues man with her blind prerogative;
Nor is it a favor of Inferior strain,
If once kicked down, she lets him rise again.
Metrum 2.
IF with an open, bounteous hand
(Wholly left at Man's Command)
Fortune should in one rich flow
As many heaps on him beslow
Of massy gold, as there be sands
Tossed by the waves and winds rude bands,
Or bright stars in a Winter night
Decking their silent Orbs with light,
Yet would his lust know no restraints,
Nor cease to weep in sad Complaints.
Though heaven should his vows reguard,
And in a prodigal reward
Return him all he could in plore,
Adding new horours to his store,
Yet all were nothing. Goods in sight
Are scorned, and lust in greedy flight
Lays out for more; What measure then
Can tame these wild desires of men?
Since all we give both last and first
Does but inflame, and feed their thirst;
For how can he be rich, who 'midst his store
Sits sadly pining, and believes he is poor.
Metrum 3.
WHen the Sun from his Rosy bed
The dawning light begins to shed,
The drowsy sky uncurtains round,
And the (but now bright stars all drowned
In one great light, look dull and tame,
And homage his victorious flame,
Thus, when the warm Etesian wind
The Earth's sealed bosom does unbind,
Straight she her various store discloses,
And purples every Grove with Roses;
But if the Souths tempestuous breath
Breaks forth, those blushes pine to death.
Often in a quiet sky the deep
With unmoved waves seems fast asleep,
And often again the blustering North
In angry heaps provokes them forth.
If then this world, which holds all Nations,
Suffers it self such alterations,
That not this mighty, massy frame,
Nor any part of it can Claim
One certain course, why should man prate,
Or Censure the designs of Fate?
Why from frail honors, and goods lent
Should he expect things permanent?
^^nce it is enacted by divine decree
that nothing mortal shall eternal be.
Metrum 4.
WHo wisely would sor his retreat
Build a secure and lasting seat,
Where stov'd in silence he may sleep
Beneath the Wind, above the Deep;
Let him the high hills leave on one hand,
And on the other the false sand;
The first to winds lies plain and even
From all the blustering points of heaven;
The other hollow and unsure,
No weight of building will endure.
A voyding then the envied state
Of buildings bravely situate,
Remember thou thy self to lock
Within some low neglected Rock;
There when fierce heaven in thunder Chides,
And winds and waves rage on all sides,
Thou happy in the quiet sense
Of thy poor Cell with small Expense
Shall lead a life serene and fair,
And scorn the anger of the air.
Metrum 5.
HAppy that first white age! when we
Lived by the Earths mere Charity,
No soft luxurious Diet then
Had Effeminated men,
No other meat, nor wine had any
Then the Course Mast, or simple honey,
And by the Parents care laid up
Cheap Berries did the Children sup.
No pompous wear was in those days
Of gummie Silks, or Ska^let bays,
Their beds were on some slowrie brink
And clear Spring water was their drink.
The shadie Pine in the Suns heat
Was their Cool and known Retreat,
For then 'twas not cut down, but stood
The youth and glory of the wood.
The daring Sailer with his slaves
Then had not cut the swelling waves,
Nor for desire of foreign store
Seen any but his native shore.
No stirring Drum had scarr'd that age,
Nor the shrill Trumpets active rage,
No wounds by bitter hatred made
With warm blood soiled the shining blade;
For how could hostile madness arm
An age of love to public harm?
When Common Justice none withstood,
Nor sought rewards for spilling blood.
O that at length our age would raise
Into the temper of those days!
But (worst then AEtna's fires!) debate
And Avarice inflame our state.
Alas! who was it that first found
Gold hid of purpose under ground,
That sought out Pearls, and dived to find
Such precious perils for mankind!
Metrum 6.
HE that thirsts for glories prize,
Thinking that the top of all,
Let him view th'Expansed skies,
And the Earths Contracted ball,
'Twill shame him then, the name he wan
Fills not the short walk of one man.
2.
O why vainly strive you then
To shake off the bands of Fate,
Though same through the world of men
Should in all tongues your names relate,
And with proud titles swell that story
The Dark grave scorns your brightest glory.
3.
There with Nobles beggars sway,
And Kings with Commons share one dust,
What news of Brutus at this day,
Or Fabricius the Just,
Some rude Verse Cut in stone, or led
Keeps up the names, but they are dead.
4.
So shall, you one day (past reprieve)
Lie (perhaps) without a name,
But if dead you think to live
By this air of humane fame,
Know, when time stops that posthume breath,
You must endure a second death.
Metrum 7.
THat the world in constant force
Varies her Concordant course;
That seeds jarring hot and cold
Do the breed perpetual hold;
That in his golden Coach the Sun
Brings the Rofic day still on;
That the Moon swayes all those lights
Which Helper ushers to dark nights;
That alternate tides be sound
The Seas ambitious waves to bound,
Lest o'r the wide Earth without End
Their fluid Empire should extend;
All this frame of things that be,
Love which rules Heaven, Land, and Sea,
Chains, keeps, orders as we see.
This, if the raines he once cast by,
All things that now by turns comply,
Would fall to discord, and this frame
Which now by sociall faith they tame,
And comely orders in that fight
And jarre of things would perish quite.
This in a holy league of peace
Keeps King and People with Increase;
And in the sacred nuptial bands
Ties up chaste hearts with willing hands,
And this keeps firm without all doubt
Friends by his bright Instinct found out.
O happy Nation then were you
If love which does all things subdue,
That rules the spacious heaven, and brings
Plenty and Peace upon his wings,
Might rule you too! and without guile
Settle once more this floting I Will!
Casimirus, Lib.4. Ode 28.
ALlmighty Spirit! thou that by
Set turns and changes from thy high
And glorious throne, do here below
Rule all, and all things do foreknow;
Can those blind plots we here discuss
Please thee, as thy wise Counsels us?
When thou thy blessings here do strew,
And pour on Earth, we flock and flow
With Joyous strife, and eager care
Struggling which shall have the best share
In thy rich gifts, just as we see
Children about Nuts disagree.
Some that a Crown have got and foiled
Break it; Another sees it spoiled
E're it is gotten: Thus the world
Is all to peece-meals cut, and hurled
By sactious hands, It is a ball
Which Fate and force divide 'twixt all
The Sons of men. But o good God!
While these for dust fight, and a Clod,
Grant that poor I may smile, and be
At rest, and perfect peace with thee.
Casimirus, Lib. 2. Ode 8.
IT would less vex distressed man
If Fortune in the same pace ran
To ruin him, as he did rise;
But highest states fall in a trice.
No great Success held ever long:
A restless fate afflicts the throng
Of Kings and Commons, and less days
Serve to destroy them, then to raise.
Good luck smiles once an age, but bad
Makes Kingdoms in a minute sad,
And every hour of life we drive,
H^^^ over us a Prerogative.
Then leave (by wild Impatience driven,
And rash resents,) to rail at heaven,
Leave an ^^^^^^nly, weak complaint
That De^^^^^^ and Fate have no restraint.
In the same hour hat gave thee breath,
Thou had ordained thy hour of death,
But he loves most, who here will buy
With a few tears, Eternity.
Casimirus, Lib. 3. Ode 22.
LEt not thy youth and false delights
Cheat thee of life; Those headely flights
But wast thy time, which posts away
Like winds unseen, and swift as they.
Beauty is but mere paint, whose die
With times breath will dissolve and fly,
It Is wax, it is water, it is a glass
It melts, breaks, and away does pass.
It Is like a Rose which in the dawne
The air with gentle breath does sawne
And whisper too, but in the hours
Of night is sullied with smart showers.
Life spent, is wished for but in vain,
Nor can past years come back again.
Happy the Man! who in this vale
Redeems his time, shatting out all
Thoughts of the world, whose longing Eyes
Are ever Pilgrims in the skies,
That views his bright home, and desires
To slain amongst those glorious fores.
Casimirus Lyric. Lib.3. Ode 23.
It Is not rich furniture and gems
With Cedar-roofes, and ancient stems,
Nor yet a plenteous, lasting flood
Of gold, that makes man truly good.
Leave to Inquire in what fair fields
A River runs which much gold yields,
Virtue alone is the rich prize
Can purchase stars, and buy the skies.
Let others build with Adamant,
Or pillars of carved Marble plant,
Which rude and rough sometimes did dwell
Far under earth, and near to hell.
But richer much (from death releast)
Shines in the fresh groves of the East
The Phoenix, or those fish that dwell
With silvered scales in Hiddekel.
Let others with rare, various Pearls
Their garments dress, and in forced Curls
Bind up their locks, look big and high,
And shine in robes of Scarlet-die.
But in my thoughts more glorious far
Those native stars, and speckles are
Which birds wear, or the spots which we
In Leopards dispersed see.
The harmless sheep with her warm sheet
Clothes man, but who his dark heart sees
Shall find a wolf or Fox within
That kills the Castor for his skin.
Virtue alone, and naught else can
A diffrence make 'twixt beast and man,
And on her wines above the Spheres
To the true light his spirit bears.
Casimirus, Lib. 4. Ode 15.
NOthing on Earth, nothing at all
Can be exempted from the thrall
Of peevish weariness! The Sun
Which our sore-fathers Judged to run
Clear and unspotted, in our days
Is taxed with sullen, Eclipsed rays.
What ever in the glorious sky
Man sees, his rash, andacious Eye
Dares Censure it, and in mere spite
At distance will condemn the light.
The wholesome mornings, whose beams clear
Those hills our fathers walked on here
We fancy not nor the Moons light
Which through their windows shined at night,
We change the Air each year, and scorn
Those Seats, in which we first were borne.
Some nice, affected wond'rers love
Belgia's mild winters, others remove
For want of health and honesty
To Summer it in Italic;
But to no end: The disease still
Sticks to his Lord, and kindly will
To Venice in a Barge repair,
Or Coach it to Vienna's air,
And then (to late with home Content,)
They leave this ^rilfull banishment.
But he, whose Costancie makes sure
His mind and mansion, lives secure
From such vain tasks, can dine and sup
Where his old parents bred him up.
Content (no doubt!) most times does dwell
In Countrey-shades, or to some Cell
Confines it self, and can alone
Make simple straw, a Royal Throne.
Casimirus, Lib.4. Ode 13.
IF weeping Eyes could wash away
Those Evils they mourn for night and day,
Then gladly I to cure my fears
With my best Jewels would buy tears.
But as dew feeds the growing Corn,
So Crosses that are grown sorlorn
Increase with grief, tears make tears way,
And cares kept up, keep cares in pay.
That wretch whom Fortune finds to sear,
And melting still into a tear,
She strikes more boldly, but a face
Silent and dry does her amaze.
Then leave thy tears, and redious tale
Of what thou do misfortunes call,
What thou by weeping think to ease,
Does by that Passion but Increase,
Hard things to Soft will never yield,
It Is the dry Eye that wins the field;
A noble patience quells the spite
Of Fortune, and disarms her quite.
The Praise of a Religious life by Mathias Casimirus. In Answer to that Ode of
Horace, Beatus Ille qui procul negotiis, etc.
FLaccus not so: That worldly He
Whom in the Countries shade we see
Ploughing his own fields, seldom can
Be justly styled, The Blessed man.
That title only fits a Saint,
Whose free thoughts far above restraint.
And weighty Cares, can gladly part
With house and lands, and leave the smart
Litigious troubles, and loud strife
Of this world for a better life.
He fears no Cold, nor heat to blast
His Corn, for his Accounts are cast,
He sues no man, nor stands in Awe
Of the devouring Courts of Law;
But all his time he spends in tears
For the Sins of his youthful years,
Or having tasted those rich Joys
Of a Conscience without noise
Sits in some fair shade, and does give
To his wild thoughts rules how to live.
He in the Evening, when on high
The Stars shine in the silent sky
Beholds the eternal flames with mirth,
And globes of light more large then Earth,
Then weeps for Joy, and through his tears
Looks on the fire-enamel'd Spheres,
Where with his Savior he would be
Listed above mortality.
Mean while the golden stars do set,
And the slow-Pilgrim leave all wet
With his own tears, which flow so fast
They make his sheps light, and soon past.
By this, the Sun over night deceast
Breaks in fresh Blushes from the East,
When mindful of his former falls
With strong Cries to his God he calls,
And with such deep-drawn sighs does move
That he turns anger into love.
In the Calm Spring, when the Earth bears,
And feeds on Aprils breath, and tears,
His Eyes accustomed to the skies
Find here fresh objects, and like spies
Or busy Bees search the soft flowers
Contemplate the green fields, and Bowres,
Where he in Veyles, and shades does see
The back Parts of the Deitye
Then sadly sighing says. O how
These slowres with hasty, stretched heads grow
And strive for heaven, but rooted here
Lament the distance with a tear!
The Honey-suckles Clad in white,
The Rose in Red point to the light,
And the Lillies hollow and bleak
Look, as if they would something speak,
They sigh at night to each soft gale,
And at the dayspring weep it all.
Shall I then only (wretched I!)
Oppressed with Earth, on Earth still lie?

Thus speaks he to the neighbor trees
And many sad Soliloquies
To Springs, and Fountains does impart,
Seeking God with a longing heart.
But if to ease his busy breast
He thinks of home, and taking rest
A Rural Cott, and Common fare
Are all his Cordials against Care.
There at the doure of his low Cell
Under some shade, or near some well
Where the Cool Poplar grows, his Plate
Of Common Earth, without more state
Expect their Lord, Salt in a shell,
Green Cheese, thin beer, Draughts that will tell
No Tales, a hospitable Cup,
With some fresh berries do make up
His healthful feast, nor does he wish
For the fatt Carp, or a rare dish
Of Lucrine Oysters; The Swift Quist
Or Pigeon sometimes (if he list)
With the slow Goose that loves the stream,
Fresh, various Sallads, and the Bean
By Curious Pallats never sought,
And to Close with, some Cheap unbought
Dish for digession, are the most
And Choicest dainties he can boast.
Thus seasted, to the slowrie Groves,
Or pleasant Rivers he removes,
Where near some fair Oak hung with Mast
He shuns the Souths Infectious blast.
On shadie hanks sometimes he lies,
Sometimes the open Current tryes,
Where with his line and feathered fly
He sports, and takes the Scaly fry.
Meanwhile each hollow wood and hill
Does ring with lowings long and shrill,
And shadie Lakes with Rivers deep,
Echo the bleating of the Sheep.
The Blackbird with the pleasant Thrush
And Nightingale in every Bush
Choice Music give, and Shepherds play
Unto their sticks some loving Lay;
The thirsty Reapers in thick throngs
Return home from the field with Songs,
And the Carts laden with ripe Corn
Come groaning to the well-stor'd Barn.
Nor pass we by as the least good,
A peaceful, loving neighborhood,
Whose honest wit, and Chaste discourse
Make none (by hearing it) the worse,
But innocent and merry may
Help (without Sin) to spend the day.
Could now the Tyrant usurer
Who plots to be a Purchaser
Of his poor neighbors seat, but taste
These true delights, o with what haste
And hatred of his ways would he
Renounce his Jewish Cruelty,
And those Cursed sums which poor men borrow
On use to day, remit to morrow!
Ad fluvium Iscam.
ISea parens florum, placido qui spumeus ore Lambis lapillos aureos,
Qui moestos hyacinthos and picti (...) topbi Mulces susurris humidis,
Dumque novas pergunt menses Consumere Lunas Coelumque mortale terit,
Accumulas cum Sole dies, oevumque per omne Fidelis Induras latex,
O quis Inaccessos and quali murmare lucos Mutumq; Solaris nemus!
Per te discepti credo Thracis ire querelas Plectrumque divini senis.
Venerabili viro, praeceptori suo olim and semper Colendissimo M^o. Mathaeo
Herbert.
Quod vixi, Mathaee, dedit Pater, haec tamen olim
Vita sluat, nec erit fas meminisse datam.
Vltra Curasti Solers, perituraque mecum
Nomina post Cineres das resonare meos.
'Divide discipulum: brevis haec and lubrica nostri
Pars vertat Patri, Posthuma vita tibi.
Praestrantissimo viro, Thomae Poello in suum de Elementis oplicae libellum.
VIvaces oculorum Ignes and lumina dia
Fixit in angusto maximus orb Deus,
Ille Explorantes radios dedit, and vaga lustra
In quibus Intuitus lexque modusque latent.
Hos tacitos Jactus, lususque volubilis orbis
Pingis in Exiguo, magne Poelle, libro,
Excursusque situsque, ut Lynceus opticus, edis
Quotque modis fallunt, quotque adhibenda sides.
AEmula naturae manus! and men's Conscia coeli!
Illa videre dedit, vestra videre docet.
Ad Echum.
O Quae srondosae per amoena Cubilia silvae
Nympha volas, lucoque lequax spatiaris in alto,
Annosi numen nemoris, saltusque verendi
Effatum, cui sola placent postrema velatus!
Per te Narcissi morientis verba, precesque
Per pueri Lassatam animam, and Conamina vitae
Ultima, palantisque precor suspiria linguae.
Da quo secretae haec Incaedua devia sylvae,
Anfractusq; loci dubios, and lusha repandam.
Sic tibi perpetua (meriloque) haec regna Juventa
Luxurient, dabiturque tuis, sine sine, viretis
Intactas Lunae lachrymas, and lambere rorem
Virgineum, Caelique animas haurire tepentis.
Nec cedant avo stellis, sed lucida sempet
Et satiata sacro aeterni medicamine veris
Ostendant long vegetos, ut Sydera, vultus!
Sit spiret Muscata Comas, and Cynnama passim!
Dissundat levis umbra, in funere qualia spargit
Phoenicis rogus out Panchea nubila slammae!

