THE MAN-MOUSE Taken in a Trap, and tortured to death for gnawing the Margins
of EUGENIUS PHILALETHES

-- Et mecum confertur Ulysses?

Cor. 15. 32. After the manner of men I have fought with Beasts.

Anthrop: Theo-Mag. page 27. I know my reward is Calumny.

Printed in LONDON, and Sold at the Castle in Cornhill. 1650.

THE MAN-MOVSE.
WHO is this that darkneth Counsel, by words without knowledge? Job 32. 2.
Come thou pitiful Alaz: ver. 3.
thou false Philalethes! Gird up thy loins like a Man, for I will demand of
thee, and answer thou me.

But now I think upon it, I will allow thee some time for breath, after thy
late scolding, and speak a few words to my Reader. Reader, I have met with a
thing, a name and no thing, a Presbyterian: one that pleads the Translation of
Tithes from Melchisedec to Brown, and in pure famine stands up for the Pig-plot.
He is a Gudgeon of Cham; one that builds his Faith on the Classes, on a certain
Order and Combination of Arses. There goes his Divinity, and now have at his
Philosophy. Come Sirrah! Have thou formed all these Apes and Monkies, in thy
Blew Chaos, See his interpretation of hard words annexed to his Psychodia
Platonica.
as thou do style it, and dare thou call them Observations? Could thy Alma
Matter teach thee nothing but Anticks? I will whip thee into a serious posture,
and make thee know he is the better man, who has past the Ford, not the
Bridge. But I must read first, and write afterward. Here comes a Pistle from
the son of Granta: It Is the Indorsement to the Packet, like a fine knot to a
foul Bundle. Come, let us open: in the name of Sense what say?.

To Eugenius Philalethes the Author of Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima
Magica Abscondita,
SO far you are right, Sir Harry, but what is next? Here Is a Bill of Complaint
you put in against your self, you tell me of certain imperfections you are
subject to; truly for my part, I can pity you. You are (you say) much more
willing to learn, than able to teach. Verily, I believe it, and what is
needless, you will prove it. Your Matrix you tell me, is barren; I think
(though no Chimist ever called it so before you) you mean your Brain. This is
no News to me, I knew it, since I first saw your Psychodia Platonica. Your
next whine is one of Conscience. You cannot (you say) affirm in the presence of
your glorious God, that affection and zeal to his Truth has forced you to
write. I am altogether of your Opinion, I dare swear you cannot. But oh me!
this Abstinence is Religion in you. Come hither Piety! you cannot protest, you
are such a deadly enemy to Protestants; But cannot your Brown faith for swear?
you never took any Oath,

But the two Mustachos branching at your mouth. You know the Poet, be your own
Interpreter. Come about again Iack-Ape, you must show me another Friscal.
Though you cannot protest, there is something you dare profess. You write (you
say) out of an implacable Enimity to Immorality and Fooleerie, and this is true
in the word of an honest man. Questionles your honesty breaks out at your
Breech, for it appears not in your Book. It seems indeed your Ethics are very
sound, for you are such an Enemy to Immorality as the Devil was when he
disputed about the Body of Moses. Jude 9.
I will present you with a specimen (as you word it) of your own Civilities.
See here the Courtship and addresses of your Pamphlet. Thou do call me, (who
am a Christian) one that is Simon Magus like, a heated nodle, a Mome, a Mimick,
an Ape, a mere Animal, a Snail, a Philosophic Hog, a Nip-crust, a pick pocket,
a niggard Tom fool with a Devils head, and horns, one that desires to be a
Conjurer, more than a Christian, All these good and sober Moralities I find in
your first part, which consists of one and twenty small pages, but is stuffed
with fourteen intolerable, beastly notions, besides other infinite slights and
Absurdities: But for all these Abuses you tell me in your Observations upon my
Advertisement to to the Reader, That you have been very fair with me, and
though provoked, you will continue the same Candor in your Oservations on my
following piece. And do thou think then in good earnest thou have been very
fair with me? I prithee tell me? what it is to be very foul. But I have
provoked thee? How? wherein? was it thy Body I troubled, or the Ballad of thy
soul? I will tell thee what this Provocation means. Thou did fancy thy
Psychodia for a rare profound piece, and that Timaeus was inferior to thy
Coplas. This is true my friend: but when my Book came to thy hands, thy
Ignorance and Insufficiency in the Platonic Philosophy appeared. This was it
that vexed thee, and though thou did not understand me in one Position, thou
did conceive it glory enough to rail at my Person. But I pass over to thy
second Ribaldry, where thou have promised me some Candor, and truly, I shall
find thee as Candid as a Black-Moore. Here thou do call me a Fool in a play,
a Iack-pndding, a thing wholly set in a posture to make the people laugh, a
giddy phantastic Conjurer, a poor Kitling, a Calfs-head, a vanting Mountebank,
a Pander, a sworn enemy of Reason, a shittle scull, no good Christian, an
Otter, a waterrat, Will with the Wisp, and Meg with a Lanthorn, Tom fool in the
play, and lastly, a natural Fool. Now Readers take notice of the honest Man,
and his Puritan profess, he made use of these Terms out of an implacable
Enmity to immorality. Will you believe him then in any other point, who has
lied so egregiously in this? he has professed against had manners, to make you
believe he has good, and rails against my Philosophy, to persuade you to his
Folly. Assure your selves his Ethics and his Physies are of a stamp. Cambridge!
Cambridge! what a monstrons mother art thou! I never thought the same womb
could labor with Moors and Christians. But enough of the Iakes, I am now
sirrah mastix, thorough all your Dirt and dung, and Stable of Immoralities,
come up to your Fooleries. You are (as you say) an implacable enemy to them
also. Certainly, you would be thought a very wise man: but before we part I
shall prove you the greatest friend to Foolerie in England, and leave you a
pure Coxcomb upon Record. But how now Alaz, what ailes you? have you left me
upon the sudden, to fall upon a whole Kingdom? you have observed an
Epidemicall disease, and you will be an Epidemicall Physician; you will cure a
Nation by Indignation. Be sure in your next to give me an Account of this
Disease, in what Books or persons you have found it, or I shall think your long
Observation in the Kingdom is like your short Observations on my Book, a Lie,
and a Loud one. But you go on, you tell us of high swol^ words of vanity, and I
tell you, I have found them in your Ballad, and you did well to tail it with an
Interpretation. Now at last you begin to be moral, sure Alaz, you would
instruct us, you to speak of sober Truths, motions, Cautions, purified minds,
and improved Reasons. When was your mouth made clean Sirrah? Do you Live as you
preach? No, you are a Wealthy Beggar, you have all this, and you want it. But
you are grown a Prophet, you foresee you will be my Prisoner, and you Petition
me for your freedom. Did I not tell you, you were a Beggar? But you present
sent a Reason for your Liberty, you are (you say) near a kin to me, take heed
saucinesle! no more kin than Cat, and Mouse. But you continue troublesome, and
would fain get off fairly; you would have me to allow you in your Actings, and
in that foolish Confidence you subscribe your self, A Chip of the same Block.
Come hither Chip! What do mean by this Block? the Philalethean family? In
this Sense thou art no Blockhead.

Thus Sirrah, have I returned your Complement, I have consuted the Bulls of
your Pistle, and here you may soresee the Destiny of your Observatious. They
shall be winnowed and sisted into Atoms, that you, and your fellow-fool Des
Chartes may mistake your grinded papyrs for your powdered principles. This
Correction Sir, will speak my Justice, you shall have your (...), which shall
stick unto you Mr. Mastix, (...). you observed me first, now I shall make bold
to observe you.

And art thou come then Balthazar? welcome to the Lists. I see thou do begin
to bob, but I shall pass thorough thee with a bare point. Sure Alas, I shoud
deal gently with thee, thou have an affection to be thought my Brother. Content
thy self, thou can not be, there was never a FOOL of my Fathers house. I
would now whisper thee in the ear, but that it is too late, for thou have
disgraced thy self by Proclamation. Tell me thou Woodcock, have thou
considered at any time what thou have written for all Times? was there not a
Censurer in Christ's College to whom thou might submit thy Exercise, and
request his Correction? Why how now Mastix? have thou fronted thy Discourse
with a Bull rampant, that by no shifts can be excused? see here: Let us begin
to act according to the freeness of our tempers, and play the Tom-Tell-Troths.
And you indeed have done your part already. My course is next. Thou would
have me begin to Act, when thou thy self do tell me, I have done already. But
this is a flaw, to thy next Breach. Thou would have us both play the
Tell-Troths, and for my part I have, thou say: Thy course is next. What? both
Tell-Troths, and our Tales Contradictories? Alaz, where is thy Logic? why this
is a miracle more than all Magic. Assure thy self, one of both must lie. O that
Gill lived in these Days! It were a just severity, to horse thee next time
thou do appear in Paul's Churchyard, and strip thy Buttocks of their skin.
Thou pitiful, undon Thing! I will make thee curse the hour thou did eyer
take Pen and Ink in hand. I will render thee such a perfect Ass, that when
posterity would express any thing that is over ridiculous, they shall say, A
Moore. But he proceeds, and to further his Ruin falls to again, though with
some fear, for once more he calls me his Brother. It Is a Relation, Mastix, I
can no way allow of: my Brothers were all White Boys, there was not a Moore
amongst them. Come on then Sir Bubo, for now your note is loose, and you begin
to howl. I am you say, Simon Magus-like. Sirrah! you lie, and you must needs
do so, for you never saw Simon nor my self. But I am very charitable, and wish
the Conversion of the Moors, wherefore I shall rectify your judgment in this
point: I am indeed more like Simon Peter, for I am a true Christistian, and no
Schismatic. But Alas, you have something to prove it, a Liquorsome Desire that
I have to be thought some great man in the world. And why a Liquorsome Desire?
do I desire some Liquor, when I desire Greatness? you did not learn this
Epithet in Cambridge, she poures no such Liquor out of her pocula Sacra. But I
pass by your foolings, and tell you plainly, I will be as great, as Truth can
possibly make me. I cannot indeed any further prosecute this desired Greatness,
but I must first thank thee for thy Designs, whereby it seems, it is to be
obtained. Prithee Mastix, let us hear them, for since the Projects are thine,
I believe, I never studied them before. First then I must, but as you say, I
Would be thought to have found out some new truths hitherto undiscovered. If it
be thy mind, that I have found out Truths, never known to any whatsoever before
me, it is a malicious wilful slander, for nothing is mentioned in my Books,
but I cite other authors for it, to confirm my self; but if thou say, I have
only found some secrets of Nature, which are kept in the hands of a few, but
were never publicly known, in this sense I owe the Design, and I have found
something that is hitherto undiscovered. The second Project is, to be more
learned and knowing than Aristotle, that great Light (as thou do blindly
call him) of these European parts for these many hundred years together: and
not only so, but to be so far above him, that I may be his Master, that I may
lug him, and lash him, as Harry Moore's Breech should be lashed. Pish! here is
a Project indeed, to do all this, is nothing. The Third Project is the same
with the first, I would be thought skillful in Art Magic, and what is this but
to have found out new Truths? Sirrah! you have found, not a new Truth, but a
new Trick in Arithmetic, How to divide two into three. To conclude, he ends his
Projects with a whine, he says, That Hopkins the witchfinder is a troublesome
fellow: if he has been troublesome to thee, his office tells me wherefore. But
now that we have defeated the Projector, let us put the scold again in the
Ducking-stoole, and plunge him well, it may be we shall wash the Moore clean.
The Clatter (says he) of the Title of my Book, Anthroposophia Theomagica,
sounds not much unlike some Conjuration or Charm. Say you so Sir? I prithee
tell me how many syllables more are there in Anthroposophia, then in
Antipsychopannuchia, or in Theomagica, then in Antimonopsychia? I will not
laugh in Print with thy foolish ha! ha! he! I will leave that to the Readers,
who cannot choose but laugh at thee most heartily. But he has left Eugenius,
and falls upon Zoroaster, that old reputed Magician; he is angry with his Title
too, and expounds his Oracle, like my Book. Be pleased to read what he did
write. Audi Ignis Vocem. That is in plain English, hear the Voice, or Noise
of fire. But what (says he) can this voice of fire be? This is his Question,
and I beseech you mark his Answer to it. It signifies (says this Interpreter)
Squibs and Crackers, such as the Cardinals are entertained with at Rome, for it
does not mean Carabines and Canons. This he proves by the word (...), which is
in the Context of this Oracle, and implies a subsultation, or skipping this
way, and that way. And thus Reader, he concludes, that Zoroaster in this oracle
did prognosticat of fire crackers and Squibs, rather then Canons or Carbines.
Enjoy thy own sense thou Goose of Cham! for I hope thou art none of her Swans:
much good may it do thee; Thou have spoken very wisely, and I am confuted no
man knows how. I was about to dismiss him here, but come hither Sirrah, with
your Fire-squirts, These fine Inventions have their Consequences. I wish the
Elders to be at the Charge to stuff your Breech with these Squibs and fire
crackers, then procure you a Chariot such as you mention, and convey you
invisibly to Scotland. This is a better Project than any of your Three. Iockey
will place you in Front for some miraculous Mortar-peece of the Kirk, and it is
but planting your Buttocks in the Canon-posture, you may squirt your sires (if
you squirt not something else for fear) in the face of the English Army, and
demonstrat the Presbytery a Posteriori. This is all the use I can find for
you, and now you may fall to. But bless us! the Squib is returned, he has
left Zoroaster, and skips this way; have at you Eugenius! but you are a saucy
boy, you fear him not, you know it is a mere Cracker. Well! he falls to, my
Epistle sticks in his Chops, and now my Latin is under Correction. Orator is
vestri implies a Solaecism, I am absurd, not apposit in my Expressions. And why
thou Goblin? what was my Action in that Epistle? did I not request? did I not
orare? and am I not then an Orator? may not the Action denominat the Person?
Go, read Quintilian, and he will tell thee Vim sermonis esse in Verbis,
Materiam in Nominibus. But thou have a Reason shall prove my Absurdity, the
Length of my Letter is not sufficient. Is it then their Length or Breadth that
qualisie speeches, or is it their Design and Matter? miserable Ignorant! he
cannot distinguish Rhetorie from Geometry. But I had almost forgot amidst all
this Barrenness and Non sense, we have a full Banquet from the Clouds,
Presbyterian Manna: he fills his mouth with Sugar-plums, and Carva's. Sure he
has a sweet tooth, and the Gale of the Beast is too bitter for it. Poor Alaz!
this is a Bit, and a Bob. But why should I condemn him in this? his own
Conscience has accused him, and by his self ^onfession it is Levitie. It seems
then all his, performance hitherto was false fire, but now he will shoot
Bullets, he intends to fall more closely on my bones, but questionless he will
spoil his Teeth. Dear Reader, if thou do love me, pray for me, Poor young
Eugenius! he was sometimes a notable wag, a saucie boy, but what will become of
him now, I cannot tell. Sure this great O^k will eat him up. Come you
Clod-pate, you Black-moore, what say thou to me? I fall upon the Peripatetics
(you say) as superficial Philosophasters. Why superficiciall and
Philosophasters too? will not one of both serve? learn to speak sense for
shame, you did not find this language in my Book. But you go on, and show
wherefore, Becaeuse they cannot lay open to me the very essence of the Soul.
Prithee what is the Sense of this Essence? do thou mean the very central,
inscrutable Essence, or very- being of the Soul? or do thou mean her
substance and Nature? I am very confident thou do speak thou do not know
what thy self. But thy Question is, Can I tell the very Essence of any
substantial Thing? to tell the Essence, is a barbarous form of speech, but I
believe, thou would ask me, if the Essence be intelligible or not? Thou art
indeed a fine fellow. Do thou presume to defend Aristotel, when thou do
not understand him? In good earnest, did thou ever read Logic? and have
thou not read then of a twofold Definition, Accidental, and Essential? Come
hither good man fool! put on thy spectacles, and peruse my words once more. The
Peripateties when they define the Soul, or some inferior Principle, describe it
only by outward circumstances, which every child can do, but they state
nothing Essentially. Thus Eugenius. But Alaz denies that any thing can be
stated Essentially. Tell me then to what purpose did Aristotel praescribe
Essential Definitions? Get thee gone thou great Owl, put a Gag in thy Chops,
and do not any more shame thy mother University. But now Mr. Mastix you are
transformed, you cast your skin as Serpents do, but you are not wise, as
Serpents are; you were lately a simple Philosopher, now you will be a splenetic
spider. You spin your shallow brains into some thirty small lines, which you
spend like poison on my person. Bu^ Philalethes is no Fly, to be ra^^^ with
Cobwebs: I will only break thorough, and say nothing. Would you know what is
next? Little do you think, I have the opportunity to be revenged on you. I have
found you once more troublesome, and busy with my Mistress, I mean with Nature,
and here will I kick you, and knock you as I please. Be sure I will strip you
of Hide and Flesh, I will pick your bones, and bestow you afterward on
Cambridge for a Fool's Anatomy. I tax the Peripatetics (you say) because they
fansy God to have made the world as a Carpenter, of Stone and Timber. Verily,
If I tax them for any such fancy. I have done them an Injury. But in good
earnest do I tell you, that God made the world of Stone and Timber, or that the
Peripatetics say any such Thing? put on your spectacles again, and bring your
Nose to the Book, my words are these. The Peripatetics look on God, as they do
on Carpenters, who build with Stone and Timber, without any infusion of life.
Who builds here with Stone and Timber think you? God, or the Carpenter? Fie
upon you! You cannot understand Common Sense, though written in your own native
English.

But there are some hopes of you, you speak something at last, and tell me very
boldly, this is false. Do you (...) know what I am, that you should be so
saucy with me? well Sir, you shall be met withal. You tell me the Peripatetics
give an inward principle of Motion to all Natural Bodies, and therefore look
not on God, as on Carpenters, who build without any Infusion of Life. This must
be your Consequence, if what I said is false, as you would make it. But Mr.
Mastix, do they allow an inward principle of Motion to all natural Bodies? are
you sure of it? Hold, hold! if this be true, then there is in these Europaean
parts (you know the Language) for these many hundred years together, an order
of Philosophers, which no man knows how to name, but a certain Mr. of Arts of
Cambridge. Why sure you think that we at Oxford, understand the Peripatetics no
better than you understand the Platonics. Tell me who are they, that so
stiffely affirm the Heavens to be moved by Intelligences, by outward assistent
Spirits, not by inward informing Principles, and this for no other Reason, but
to avoid their Animation? Be they not Peripatetics? Are you blind then Sirrah!
and will you judge of Colors? Cobbler, keep to thy Last. But you run on, and
still blindly. The grand fault of the Peripatetics (say you) is, that they do
not say the world is Animate. And what say you, I beseech you, for you are
faultlesse; Is the World a mere Animal, (as you call me) or is it not? The
Truth is, you durst not be Positive, and Express in this point, but I will
show you what you have granted, and afterward denied. I said the Peripatetics
looked on Gods works as on the work of a Carpenter made without Infusion of
Life. You told me this was false, they did not look on the World, which is the
work of God, as on a thing made without any Infusion of Life, for they granted
an inward principle of Motion in all natural Bodies. I take you at your word
Mr. Mastix, and say, that if they look not on the World, as on the work of a
Carpenter, they must look on it, as a Thing made with Infusion of Life, and by
Consequence your inward principle of Motion inferres Animation. And now Blind
Bayard, how can it be their grand fault to say the World is not Animate, when
you answer so wisely for them, and prove they say it is Animate? Verily Sir,
you that can rightly say nothing, must have the liberty to say any thing. Tell
me thou Scribler, did thou conceive I would not look on my Reproofs? or do
thou think any thing shall pass from thee hereafter without my Correction?
Thou have abused me basely, and assure thy self, I will persecute thee, as long
as there is Ink or Papyr in England. But I have Positively pronounced the World
an Animal, and now this Nonsense but scarce Animal, calls me to an Account for
that Tenet. I come my friend, and if I do not make thee the most ridiculous
Animal that ever was in the World, then the world is no Animal.

Here then he falls upon certain Similitudes and Analogies of mine, and
positively makes Earth Flesh, and Flesh Earth. Surely he never saw the
University, otherwise he had met with that trivial Topic, Omne Simile non est
idem; but he strictly insists upon Metaphors, and mistakes Analogies for
Positions. Prithee Mastix, go on, all these advantages shall not hinder thee to
break thy Neck. This is as irrational and incredible (says he, speaking of
Earth and Water, which I compared to Flesh and Blood) as if he should tell us
a tale of a Beast, whose blood and flesh put together bears not so great a
proportion to the rest of the more fluid parts of the Animal, suppose his
Vital and Animal spirits, as a mite in a Cheese to the whole globe of the
Earth. But hear me thou pitiful Alaz! What is all this to the purpose? for if
such an Animal there be, then I tell thee no Tale, but a true History. This were
enough to check such an impotent Adversary as thou art, but I will make thee
ridiculous Mastix, I have thee by the Snout, and I will lug thy great Log. Come
Sirrah! certainly you know those Weights and Proportions which God and Nature
use in their Buildings, and Compositions. I have, I confess, a weak faeminine
brain, if compared to your strong Curds, but give me leave like the Queen of
Sheba, to propose a few Questions, only to try your profound Experience. Does
God then compose Anatice, so much of each, or do his Scales admit of
Imparities? Answer me Positively, either in Verse of Spencer, or in Prose of
Moore. Suppose the Earth of Man were separated, and laid aside every grain by
it self, what proportion would it bear do thou think, to his fluid parts?

-- Quot Libras in duce summo
Invenies? --
Nay how many Handfulls would there be? tell me if thou can. Most excellent
was that Poetic fire in the Ashes of Hercules.

Anilis, heu me! caepit Alciden sinus.
But I will come nearer to you, I will take you by the Chops, and your own
foul mouth shall instruct you. Were you ever at the charge to take one Pipe of
Tobacco? when it is cleanly burnt, and the moist parts all evaporated, what
Quantity of Ashes, or Earth is there left? Surely not near so much as will fill
half the Bowl. How excessive then was the Proportion of the fluid parts, to
this little dust, for they filled your mouth many times, for all you speak so
broad? Now Sir, if you think there is too little Earth in the world, you must
tell me where it is wanting. In the Interim here is no more Anasarca than in a
Fat Elder.

But you have another Objection, and it proves you as wise as a Goose. How
shall this water, which I call Blood, be refreshed by the Air that is warmer
than it? Here is a Question indeed! Oh that I had the Lungs of Democritus, to
laugh at thee! Art thou not refreshed, or restored by heat, when thou art
oppressed with cold? and art thou not restored, or refreshed by cold, when thou
art oppressed by heat? All the parts of the world mutually help one another,
according to their several Natures, and Qualities. But here comes a Third
senseless Exception, and to bear it company, a Bull. That Body which we see
between the stars, namely the Inter-stellar waters, is excessive in proportion;
so thou say, but thou can not say wherefore. Do hear Mastix? Look up
and see what a number of Bone-sires, Lamps, and Torches are Kindel'd in that
miraculous, caelestiall water. I tell thee a little flame requires much Oil.
And now Sir comes in a point of your own Philosophy, at least a flash of your
wit, make it which you will; Coelum stellatum (say you) is the skin of this
great Animal: what? his skin above the Sun, and his flesh here under thy feet?
why thou have stripped, and stayed the World thou Moore's face! Indeed thy
Buttocks should be so served. O thou fool! when will thou understand? But he
is at me again, and flings another Caltrop in my way, but it will not prick,
it is smooth, and plain as a pad staff. How improperly (says he) is the air
said to be the outward refreshing spirit, when it is ever in the very midst
of the world? Reader did thou ever see such a Bundle of simples? Come Sir
Mastix, come near that I may kick thee. Do thou know what parts of the world
the Air is appointed to refresh? surely no, neither do thou consider it.
Lend me both thy Ears, I will not lug them at this Time, I will only instruct
thee. Air, and Heaven are incorruptible Essences. It is the office of the Air
to praeserve the two weak, passive Elements, out of which all things are made,
namely Earth and Water. These two (I speak what I know) may be easily
disordered by excessive heat, or by Excessive cold. But lest the piercing
swift Action of the superior fires should distemper them, the Air is commonly
stirred with cold winds, and charged with clouds to allay the Influence of the
Fire-world. On the Contrary lest too much Cold should oppress them, the same
Air does reach to the stars, and immediately receiving their heat conveys it
down hither, but Qualified. This spirit floating and moving about the Earth and
Water like a warm soft breath, does pierce and pass thorough them, for he
contains them in his silken Bosom, and is their outward refreshing spirit.
Where art thou now Mastix? what a miserable Cacofogue art thou? But I march up
to thy next Fort, and now have at thy Lunatic Argument. Here the Procupine
shoots his last Quill, and tells me the Flux and Reflux cannot be the pulse of
the Great World, because it proceeds from the Moon, not from the Sun. And is it
so? It proceeds indeed from the Moon, as much as from Fromondus his Anti-Moone.
But come hither thou Man in the Moon! I am an observator, and I observe thee
quite disarmed, thou art a bare Gentleman without sword or Buckler. In this
naked posture I scorn to kill Thee, I will only trip up thy Heels, and leave
Thee. You, and your Peripatetics (as you say) allow all Natural Bodies an
inward Principle of Motion. Is not the Sea then a natural Body? If so, it has
an inward Principle of motion, and needs not to be rockt by the Moon, which is
an outward one. But perhaps the Principle you allow the Sea, is a lame
Principle, and takes hold of the Moone-beames for Crutches; or is it not
seasick, tell me, lies a bed of a Vomit, and cannot stir? O Mastix, Mastix! O
portet Mendacem esse memorem.

And now Sirrah! your Observations on my Epistle to the Reader, which your
Ignorance calls a Praeface, are grinded into Powder. They are shattered and
battered into Atoms, and you may look your scriblings in the Chaos of
Democritus, and Des Chartes. Here is nothing more spoken, but a little dirtie
Nonsense, which you freely fling at my Person; woe to thee, thou Man-mouse! now
comes thy final and fatal Ruin; Receive it from my mouth, for I am thy
Destiny. Now art thou come from words to Matter. I have thee where I could
wish Thee, in the Mysteries of my Theomagia. Here had thou hanged thy self
like a Monkie intangl'd in his Chain, before ever I touched thee. What will
become of thee now, when I shall put thee to the Torture? I am sorry thou have
brought thy self to this unnecessarie Confusion; how dare thou ever look Day
in the face? Come, and appear you Punie! Now will I take Thee by the Beard,
pluck thee, and tuck thee, souse thee, and salt thee like a Freshman.

Reader, he has upon my Anthroposophia Forty nine Observations, for so he
calls his Oversights. In what order I find them, in the very same will I take
them. I will return him so many Knocks on the Coxcomb, and leave him a pitiful
Death's Head without Eyes or Brains.

And now my great Pike of Cham, I am come up to your Observations, to your
Spawn and Minoes, which shall no more escape my Net, than the Mouse my Trap. I
will observe thee, and conserve thee, and lay thee up in Pickle for Posterity.
But I must fall from words to blows, my Observator opens, and speaks.

Observation 1.
BUt hear you me, etc. Mr. Mastix, I do hear thee, but I can hear no Sense.
Art thou the hobling Poet, who sometimes Psyehath. Arg. lib. 1.
-- Praised with his Quill
Plato's Philosophy?


I believe thou have heard of Plato, but how can thou praise his Philosophy,
when thou do not know it? every trivial Latin Author can tell thee of
Platonicum Reminisci: that according to Plato's Doctrine, the Knowledge which
Souls attain to in the Body, is but a Remembrance of what they formerly knew,
before they were imbodied. But thy Question is, Am I in good Earnest, that all
Souls before their Entrance into the Body have an explicit, methodicall
Knowledge? Assure thy self Mastix, I am very earnest, and I wish from my Soul
thou had written something against this Truth, and not opposed thy bare
Negative. Believe me, I should have galled thy sides for it, and set Spurs to a
very Jade, but not a whit Theo-magicall.

Observation 2.
HEre Anthroposophus is turned herbalist for one whole Spring, etc. And why for
one whole Spring? who told thee so? He confesses (say thou) it was the work
of one whole Spring to find out, that the Earth, or seeds of Flowers are
nothing like the Flowers. Sirrah! my words are these, I took to task the fruits
of one Spring. This is all that I said of the Spring, either whole, or broken,
and now I prithee where is my Confession? Sure it was an Auricular one, for it
is no where to be found in my Book. But Mastix, I will discover thy Logic.
Eugenius observed the fruits of one Spring, Ergo one whole Spring was spent in
the Observation. Certainly thou have got the fool's Metaphysics, for Nonsense
is natural to thee. The fruits of a Spring cannot be studied for a whole
Spring, for Nature before ever I can find them, spends a good part of the
Spring in their production. How can I then be damned (thou do speak
devilishly) for one whole Spring to the fields? This is but thy Moorish malice
to my Person, and indeed it is eminent, page 84.
for elsewhere thou do advise me to drown my self in the river Ysca, which
is the right way to be damned. I am beholding to thee, wherefore I will teach
thee a Cure for Disgrace. Thou have already done something which Achitophel
did. When thou did Scrible thy Notes, thou did saddle thy Ass, and I shall
not fail to ride him, and spur him for thee. Now to prevent thy future shame,
thou may imitate him in the rest, dispose of what thou have, set thy house in
order and hang thy self. But before you be hanged, I will Shrieve you, you must
come to Confession of your Nonsense. Mr. Mastix, I have met with a very
strange expression of yours, to find out that the Earth or seeds of Flowers,
are nothing like the Flowers. Do you think then that the Earth is the seed of
Flowers, or that the seeds of Flowers are Earth? thou monstrous Ignorant!
There Is not any old Garden-weeder in all London, but can tell thee thou art a
fool in this, and no Philosopher. But I am forced (you say) to turn about, and
confess a Principle of Aristotel (for Matter Sirrah! is a principle of Nature)
Namely Privation. My Book is extant, any man may read it, if I have but named
Privation there, much less acknowledge it for a Principle, I will freely yield
thee the Cudgells. Privation Sirrah! is a Whim and a VVham, it is a Puritan
Princiciple, something like a Corner-conveniencie, when you kiss a Sister, and
no Protestant present to see you. Now sir you leave your privy business, and
fall on the first matter. He says (say you) and it is the wisest word he has
spoken yet, he knows it not. Indeed for all you think the word so wise, he is
so humble, he will not own it. Did I tell thee Mastix, I do not know it? there
was a time indeed when I knew it not; but assure thy self, I know the first
Matter very well. But Alaz, you will prove my Ignorance, it is Invisible, and
therefore cannot be known. I should rather think thou art blind, the first
Matter is both Visible, and Tangible, I have seen it, and felt it ten thousand
times. But the Moore replies, Why, Eugenius are you so sharp sighted, that you
can see a substance? You are all in Abstractions sir, you speak precisely, as a
Puritan should speak, you fansy a substance without Quality or Quantity, a
Thing robbed of all Acccidents, as the Schoolmen call them. This is a pure
Chimaera, and to be found no where, but in a Peripatetic's Brains. But I have
frighted my Moore, I have amazed him with a vital, celestial breath. It is a
Breath too sweet for his foul mouth, and therefore he bids me speak no more of
it, but keep my breath to cool (I know notwhat) Pottage. No Sirrah! that must
not be, I will speak on, and spend my Breath to cool your Courage.

Observation 3.
HEre is a fit of Devotion has taken him, etc. A Fit do thou call it? it
seems then Devotion is a Disease with Thee; indeed my opinion is not very wide
of thee, and I shall shortly prove thy Devotion is not very wholesome. Truth
(say you) is not to be had of God Almighty for an old song, no nor yet for a
new one. I am sorry you did not know that stripling the son of Iesse, had you
lived in his days, you had corrected him for his Psalms. I beseech you Sir,
what has put you out of Tune in my Book, for in your own you do Hymn it thus.

Lord stretch thy Tent in my strait, Breast
Enlarge it downward, that sure rest
May there be pight; for that pure fire
Wherewith thou wontest to inspire
All self-dead Souls. My life is gone,
Sad Solitude is my irksome won.
Is this an old Song, or a new? forgive me Sir! now at last I apprehend the
mystery; You are neither a Modern singer, nor yet an Ancient one; You live in
our days, but you imitate Spencer, so that your song is both old and new, and
Truth perhaps may be had for it. But you proceed Mr. Mastix, and more like a
Tailour, than a Scholar show me a certain Yard whereby to measure Wisdom
Wisdom (say you) is to be measured by unpraejudicat Reason. I think you mean
right reason, and that is very VVisdome it self, but you make them two
different Things, and the One the Rule to the other. But in such stuff you are
very rich, wherefore you present me with another Line to fathom Wisdom by.
Measure it (say you) not by Devotion, but by Humility and purity of mind. I
prithee what is true Devotion but Humility and purity of mind? wherein consists
it Mastix? Sure thy Devotion excludes these two, and as I told thee formerly,
is not very wholesome. Well! go thy ways for a wealthy Gentleman; how many
Bulls have thou? It would puzzle a Lawyer to make an Inventory of thy Cattle. I
charge the Readers to take notice of this reverend Nonsense, which he has
proposed to me for very fine Maxims. Measure thy Wisdom by unpraejudicat
reason, not by Devotion, but by Humility v nd purity of mind. Moore, Moore!
art thou a Master of Arts of Cambridge? I knew the Time when Oxford had better
Vnder-graduats. But you are full of Precepts, and bestow them them so freely, I
am afraid it will cost you something at last. You tell me that no man is wiser,
by making others seem more contemptibly foolish. A very good rule I protest,
and your self Mr Mastix, for Example. But what do I hear? Poor Aristotel and
his Orthodox Disciples. Mark Reader, I beseech thee. peg. 88.
The Disciples of Arristotel are orthodox, but the Philosophy of Des Chartes
is the most admirable that ever yet appeared in these Europaean parts since
Noah's Flood. Sure then Aristotel was before the Flood. B^t this not all. In
his Prose Aristotel is Orthodox, but in his Verse he does -- Praise with his
Quill
Plato's Philosophy.


Sure he has perused the Posthumes of Picus which Ficinus could not read, or
Leo Hebraeus has cheated him with a few loving Formalities. Indeed he may well
reconcile all Sects, since he was able at first to make Eugenius and himself
both Tell-Troths. Troths. But I must not take Sanctuary at Moses his Text;
before I may prove any thing thence, I must first make good, that Scripture is
intended for natural Philosophy, as well as a divine life. In good earnest
Mr. Mastix, I must take you by the Nose, you hold so fair for me. If I may not
use a Text of Scripture to establish my Philosophy, how may you and Scaliger
make use of Aristotel to furnish your selves with a Trinity? you must first
prove, that his Scriblings were intended for the Church, as well as for the
Schools. Thou Block-head! Thou Chubshead of Cham!

Observation 4.
WHat an Aristotelean would dispatch in a word or two, etc. I cannot think this
Fellow has read over any one of the Schoolmen, he makes them so nimble, and
compendious, a word or two, and they have done. I tell thee Mastix, they are
fumbling, drayling, taedious Scriblers, and not a whit mysterious. But he goes
on, and tells me of Life, and a natural warmth. Reader the pages he observes,
are my eighth, and my ninth; here I mentioned no Life but the Second person,
who is the true life and Light, neither did I speak of any heat, but the
Divine aeternall spirit, and both these I mentioned expressly; mark then his
Observation, wherein he makes me more Lazy than his Aristotelean. To reduce us
both to the same Principles, he makes the Holy Ghost a natural warmth, and so
clearly denies the third Person. See the Religion of a Presbyterian! Profane
Villain! will thou abuse thy God, because of thy malice to Man?

Observation 5.
THis compared with what is at the Bottom of the fourth page, etc. Here Master
Mastix, you conclude me absurd, because I tell you the Matter is an horrible
empty Darkness, but why are you angry with my Prose, when you call it so in
your own Verse?

See his Psychozoia, page 19. Lib. 2.
The last Extreme the fardest off from Light,
That Is Natur's deadly shadow, Hyle's cell.
O Horrid Cave, and womb of dredded Night.
You will tell me perhaps, you mind not the matter, but something else, you
know not what? I shall expect your Interpretation by the next, no doubt but you
will give me a very fair occasion to whip you. But you go on, and I will
follow. This Description (say you) is an hideous empty fancy; and why so? is
it more hideous than your horrid Cave, and womb of dredded Night? It seems you
were in a bodily fear when you penned this Verse. But there is another fault,
it conveys not so much to the understanding as Aristotle's Description of the
Matter, for he describes it to be the first subject out of which every thing
is. But Prithee Mastix, what is that subject? Nec Quid, nec Quale, nec Quantum?
why, this conveyes a just Nothing to the understanding. Sirrah! Aristotle's
Matter, which is nothing to the Matter, is not in Nature (...), neither is it
(...): and Prithee what is it then? I shall rack you for this, when you come to
your answer. But you proceed, and tell me: To call this Matter Primitive
waters, is but Metaphors and Poetry; if I called it so, I grant thy Argument;
but what do thou understand by Primitive waters? I believe the Darkness
formerly mentioned. I never called it water, Mastix, and yet if I had, it had
been no Rhetoric, but Philosophy with Aristotle, it was Water in Potentia, but
a Cloud Actu. Had you read my Book with Attention, as you tell me you did in
your Pistle, you had found there a first Matter, which was an horrible empty
Darkness, and after that a second, which is a primitive water into which that
Darkness was condensed. This second matter is it, who is bosom the Divine
Light pierced, and now I will see what Darkness you can find in this Light.
But Mastix, you avoid the Light, for your works are not Good, and fall into
your horrid Cave again. You tell me they must be Waters and Dark. I hope thou
do not conceive the world was made of Ink, like thy Observations. I cannot
indeed suppose thee so mad, but I will tell thee what thou do conceive. Thou
do fancy that by Primitive waters, I understand the Primitive Darkness,
and so thou do comment, where thou do not understand. But this Mistake is
necessary, they must be dark waters, that the Light may Shine in them. Does not
the Light shine then in clear waters, and that more distinctly than in Puddle?
Indeed thou may well think not, for thy Moors face, nay thy mind may be
better seen in thy Ink, than in thy Glass. But some on Sirrah! the Holy Spirit
(say you) was not able to see before the Light shined upon the waters. How then
did he find the water out, and move upon it, when there was darkness (and no
light) upon the face of the Deep, as the Scripture it self tells thee.
Blasphemous wretch! Do thou make the Spirit of God blind? He that made the
Eye, shall not he see? But this is not all your Blasphemy, your boldness to
make Observations upon Theo-Magic, has discovered your Close Impieties, and
taught me what the Religion of a Presbyterian is. Was the matter (say you) so
stiff, and clammy dark, as to be able to keep out the Divine Light? Truly the
Matter was not stiff, and what Clammie signifies, I know: but Clammie-dark is
a hard word, which you must put in the Rere of your Psychodia. But hear me
thou Ass, with thy long Ears! Do thou ask me, if the Matter was able to
keep out the Divine Light, when thou do make thy Observations on these very
words of mine, The Divine Light pierced the Bosom of the Matter? I have been
told that Cambridge is an University, but at this pass I know not what to
think of it. But here comes an Inference will pay me for all. If the matter
could not exclude the Divine Light, then (say you) the Idea's shined in the
water as soon as God was. Why how now Villain! as soon as God was? Prithee how
soon was that, do thou think? was there a Time when he was not? but I haste
to answer thy Objection. The divine Idea's could not shine in the water as soon
as God was, for God was ab aeterno, but the Water was not so. Lastly, if the
Water (as thou would have it) had been ab AEterno, yet the Divine Idea's
could not shine in it ab AEterno: for the Light was not manfested, till God
pronounced his sit Lux. This you might have found in my Book, but you were
blind, and this Light did not shine in your Eyes.

Observation 6.
IF Anthroposophus had such a Device as this in a Glass, etc. Here you tell me
Master Mastix, that if I had such an appearance in a Glass, as that of Doctor
Marci, what a fine Gew-gaw would it be for the lad! Well! since you will needs
be at the Charge to provide Rattles for me, I shall be sure to pay you for them,
the Lad is resolved to make a mere Gew-gaw of you, and to show you to all the
world for twelve pence a Man. But at last you open your mouth, and speak of
Rations seminales, though you question whither there be any such things, or
no. Take heed Sirrah, what you say; if you do but strain at these high
speculations, I shall so excoriat your Breech, you shall not be able to sit for
a good time, but move a very formal Peripatetic.

Observation 7.
YOur natural Plea, is but an Idea of your own Brain, etc. I beseech thee
Reader mark the Injustice, and baseness of this man. The words he excepts at,
are these. But you are to be admonished there is a twofold Idea, Divine, and
Natural. The Natural, is a fiery, invisible, created spirit, and properly a
mere Enclosure, or Vestiment of the true one. Here I my self make the natural
Idea no Idea at all, but properly a mere Enclosure of the true Idea. Now my
Adversary questions me for making it an absolute Idea, which is false, and so
contrary to his own promise, makes a Flaw, where he finds none. Lastly,
Mastix, thou do envy me the glory of the Text, that I have found an
Argument in Moses to prove the Divine Idea, which no man ever observed before
me. But this Learning (say you) I got from Philo Iudaeus. Cite him then and
produce his words, if thou dare.

Observation 8.
ANd the reason why the world is beholden to this Gentleman, etc. Here comes a
sweet breath amidst all your Vomits, you call me a Gentleman, Mastix. Truly if
I am one, thou art none, for thou have not used me like a Gentleman. But you
quickly lose your Civilities, and begin to jest at me. O brave Anthroposophus!
O base Negro! Theomagic is no Quibble. But now your Wit is spent, you would
fain make use of your Reason. I know not (say you) whether the Chaos be
created, or uncreated. Why! Sirrah will you presume to censure me in those
things whereof you are ignorant! do thou know what it is to create? Was the
Creation a Direct, or a Reflexive Action? Be Positive if thou dare, and I
will so hoise thy Bumme, it shall be apparent to all England, without the help
of Galileo's Tube.

Observation 9.
A Rare expression! This Magician has turned nature into a fish by his Art,
etc. Reader in this place I described the Primitive Darkness Metaphorically,
called it the fuliginous spawn of Nature. This blunt Tool argues from the
Figure, and because I said spawn, mistakes the first matter for a fish. Thou
art a mere Iack-a-lent, a lean, thin, Philosopher; but Sirrah, if it be a
fish, it is one that cannot be taken with the Hooks of Des Chartes.

Observation 10.
BEfore the matter was in an hazard of not being created, etc. Here I said the
Matter was created, which is truth, if it be understood sano sensu. But Mastix
is ready to hang himself, because I have distinguished between God and the
Creature.

Observation 11.
HEre Nature like a Childbearing woman has a Qualm comes over her stomach,
etc. I told thee once before that Magic is no Quibble, and therefore cannot be
confuted by Quibbles. But for all this Qualm he tells me that Nature will
escape well enough. And I knew it Mastix well enough, for she has been
delivered of a fair world, but thy mother Margret of a foul Beast. Here again
he is in a Relaps, Mastix is delivered of a Bull. Heat and siccity (says he)
are Aqua-vitae-Bottles. This is an Aqua sirrah, that would burn your fingers,
it is all heat and siccity, but no moisture.

Observation 12.
THis page is spent, etc. Here Mr Mastix intends to besiege me, he brings about
his Line, and threatens extremely. Sirrah, take heed how you approach, sap by
the yard, and place your Baskets before you, I have here small and great shot,
sure enough I shall knock you in the Coxcomb. Here (say you) I have so hedged
you in Mr. Anthroposophus, that you will hardly extricate your self in this
Question. The Empyreall substance encompassing all, how could there be morning
and evening till the fourth day? for the Mass was alike illumined round about
at once. Here is a hedge indeed! a Goose with a yoke would break thorough it. I
told thee Mastix, that the Bodies of Angels, and the Empyreall Heaven, were
made of that pure, sincere, innoxious Fire, which thou do call an Empyreall
substance. But the Empyreall heaven (say thou) encompassing all, (for there
was no other substance that could compass all) and illuminating the mass
round about, how could there be evening and morning till the fourth day? For on
the fourth day the Sun was made of the Empyreall Heaven, was it not Mastix? and
ever afterward there was no Empyreall Heaven to encompasse all. Here I must
put my ha! ha! he! Do thou read then, and not understand? and when thou
do not understand, do thou Censure? Had you observed my Advertisement to
the Reader, this had not been. The Light which God called Day, was not the
Empyreall substance, for for (though the substance did contribute to the first
Day, before God interposed the Body of the visible Heaven) the Empyreall
substance was a fire which had borrowed his Tincture from the Light, but not so
much that it could illuminate the mass of it self. Tell me now Mastix, as thou
art an honest man, is not this to make flawes, not to find them? But since you
are so pragmaticall as to speak of Things you do not understand, I will tell
you somewhat of those Evenings and Mornings you look after. The first Nights
and Days of the Creation Week, were not such as you see now, nor was that
week, any thing like those weeks you live in. They were terrible mysterious
Radiations of God upon the Chaos, and dark Evaporations of the Chaos toward
God. To be short, (for we would not talk much of these things) the Hebrew
Hagiographi will tell you, those Nights and Days consisted ex Vespere
Materiae, and Mane Formae. Now Mr. Mastix, your Hedge is quite broken, come on
again, and make up the Gap. But this is not all, you except at my Interstellar
waters, and I can never prove (say you) that Moses drives at any thing higher,
in the letter of his Text, than those hanging Bottles of water, the Clouds.
Alas poor Ignorant! thou talkest of Moses as if he were thy fellow, but his
Text proves him thy Master. Thus speaks that Philosopher, who was skilled in
all the Learning of the Egyptians. And God said, let there be a Firmament in
the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. This was
done Mastix, on the Second day, and do thou think there were any Clouds, or
hanging Bottles then? but because thou do insist on the Letter of the Text,
does not the letter say, it was to divide waters from waters, not waters from
Clouds? I have cracked thy neck Mastix, and now I will chop it quite off,
because thou shall never speak Nonsense in this point again. Consider these
words of the subsequent Text. And God made the Firmament, and divided the
waters which were under the Firmament, from the waters which were above the
Firmament, and it was so. This Firmament Mastix, is the Air, and the Clouds
are in the Air, not above it; but the waters whereof Moses speaks, are above
the Firment, that is above the Air; Ergo my Interstellar waters. Thou have
shipwrackt thy self my friend in these waters, from a very dry Mouse, thou art
become a drowned Rat,

Observation 13.
I Suppose you mean a rumbling Wheel-Barrow, etc. Here I called the Ptolomaick
System, a Rumbling confused Labyrinth. But tell me Mastix, if the Heavens be
solids as thou do make them, for thou deniest my Interstellar waters, could
they once move, or stir without Penetration of Bodies, or breaking one another
to a thousand pieces, if the fabric of Ptolomie be admitted. Certainly at this
Account the sky would fall, and then Moore might catch Larks. One Orb Mastix
intercepts another, so that there is no passage to a free, outright Motion, and
is not this (...)? is it not as I said a Labyrinth? But now I will come to thy
Wheel Barrow. I prithee What is there in a Wheel Barrow that can hinder its
Motion? do the Wheels intercept, cross, and knock one another? in what Sense
can thou say a Confused Wheel-Barrow? It is a Bull Mastix, but not thy first,
nor thy last. But here comes a new Question, and a very simple one. Why small
diminutive Epicycles? Prithee Mastix, where have been thus sublimed? art thou
he that bestrid the Colt-staffe, and was translated by the Gansa's to the Moon?
Come Domingo, let me hear thee speak. They are too big to be true, say thou,
so say I too, but they are Diminutives Sirrah, in Comparison to those greater
unmeasurable Orbs that support them. But I wish thee to go to Mr. Lilie, or to
Mr. Booker, they are both Learned Artists, and can instruct thee in these
Things. I dare say they will answer thee in thy own Phrase, and tell thee that
Epicycles in this respect are but a mite in a Cheese.

Observation 14.
(...), etc. Here he does abuse the Creture, and make God an Idol. The Air
(says he) is a Sive through which Jupiter does piss. This he proves out of
Aristophanes, a heathenish ^omoedian; sure Mastix, thou art one of his Frogs.

Observation 15.
See Observation the 11.
THerefore again I ask thee O Eugenius, etc. I have formerly answered to what
you ask, and I will not whip you twice for the same fault.

Observation 16.
Poetical Eugenius, etc. Thou Moore of (...)!

Observation 17.
I Tell thee Eugenius, etc. He is a professed enemy to all Elegancies, a
^lownish Scribler, that will admit of no Metaphors. But why do thou speak
Mastix, of a Lady in a Black-bag? Thou art a Presbyterian, and do look a
Tythe-pig in a Bag, not a Lady.

Observation 18.
HOw the man is frighted into Devotion, etc. Thou can not speak of my
Devotion, but thou do mistake it for thy own, which as I proved formerly, is
not very wholesome.

Observation 19.
IT IS no new-sprung Truth, etc. If there be but two Elements, namely Earth and
Water, you tell me Mr. Mastix, it is no new-sprung truth. I know it man, better
than thy self, it is a truth as ancient as the Creation. But now Doctor Moore
will confute his Hypothesis, though with some mercy on me. Seeing (says he)
that AEthereall vigor, and Celestial heat, which is egregious Nonsense, as
if he had said Celestial heat, and Celestial heat: for (...) is a burning,
heating spirit, and it comes not from (...) and (...), as your Aristotel
dreams, but from (...) ardeo, Lib de Mundo.
as Anaxagoras would have it. The Original is (...) adar, and signifies bright
or shining, for the Fire which is enclosed in the moist spirit, makes it to
shine. Now Sir Mastix, I beseech you tell me, what is the vigor of heaven, but
the heat thereof? Certainly here is one Bull more, and I charge the Reader to
drop a Counter for it. But you proceed, and tell me, that if heaven and Air
pass thorough all things (and I freely grant you that they are in all things)
then there are more Elements than two. A mad sequel my friend, and in which you
say, you will not severely tug with me, lest you should foyl me. Your meaning
is Mastix, lest you should be foiled, for you dare not say, that heaven and
Air are Elements. Get thee gone, thou have disgraced Cambridge for ever.

Observation 20.
WHy? did you ever sneak in Eugenius, and take them, etc. Here he has got two
Greek Phrases, which he does use to good purpose, He leads me to the Bawdie
house, and asks me, if I did ever see Rem in re, as the Lawyer speaks? Fie!
fie! some Rose Water for his mouth. Sure this filthy dreamer thought of a
Puritan Conventicle. I believe if you had so much clean language Mastix, you
would ask me, if I did ever see the Fire of Nature united to his moist
foeminine Principle? I did Sirrah, and now your Mouth is muzzled.

Observation 21.
NOw as you are Philalethes, tell me truly, etc. In this place Reader, I cited
Sendivow, and my Adversary asks me if I understand the Citation. I do Mastix,
I do: I am not of thy humor to speak that which I do not know.

Observation 22.
HEre I cannot but take notice, etc. You take notice Mastix, of a Back-doore,
but why an ordinary man's Back-doore? It seems an Extraordinary man's Back-doore
has a more precious Air. Sure your Nose has been there, you are so well
skilled in the Differences. This is Cambridge Philosophy, it is not worth --

Observation 23.
NOw Eugenius! you are so good natured as to give Aristotel one of his two
Elements again, etc. Here I said the Air was our Animal Oil, the fuel of the
Vital, sensual, Fire; But Mastix concludes I called it an Element, because I
called it Oil and Fuel, Thou illiterate, insipid Thing! it had been more
tolerable in thee, to think it a Compound made of Elements, for such are Oil
and Fuel.

Observation 24.
AN excellent performance, etc. My words are these, I have now in some measure
performed that which at first I promised, an Exposition of the world, and the
parts thereof. Here my Observator recapitulates, and brings his routed Pultrons
to a Rally; Mastix, Mastix, I will charge quite thorough, thou art no way able
to stand me. The first thing he observes in my performance, is a dark Mass,
and that is a clear Bull: For how can darkness, (be it never so deeply dark) be
called a Mass, when in truth it is a thin vaporous Matter? Mastix this Mass
out of which God extracted the fiery and Airie substances, was a thick
ponderous water, or sperm, into which the darkness was condensed: it was not
dark, but very white and clear. But you go on, and accuse me of Contradiction.
I make as if the Mass did contain in a far less Compass, all that was
after extracted. It is very true Sir, but where is the Contradiction? Hear me
thou Ass! did ever see any common distillations? A Glass full of Water
whiles it is Water, fills but a very narrow place, but if it be rarefied into
Clouds, then it requires more Room. All Substances in the Chaos were
condensed, but in the Act of Separation they were rarifi'd. In this sense the
Firmament is called in the Scripture expansu^, for in the Mass it was
contracted by condensation, but being separated afterward, it was extended by
Rarefaction, and filled all that space which thou do now see. Art thou then a
Master of Arts, and can not distinguish between Condensation and Penetration
of Dimensions? Can thou not admit of pure natural extractions, but presently
there must follow an unnatural Vacuum in thy Brains? Does not the Sun from
the Earth (which is the very subsidence of the Chaos) extract Clouds every day?
And does there any Vacuum succeed therefore? Have not thou thy self formerly
granted, that Heaven and Air fill all Things. How then can there be a Vacuity?
or if thou say there is, tell me Where? if it be not in thy Noddle? Thou
great ridiculous Owl! Assure thy self, I will so handle thee for thy Malice to
me, and to Magic, that I shall make thee stink, and tremble at the very name of
a Magician. This is all you could except at, in my performance, and now you
begin to rail at my Person. You make use of me in this place, that you may
abuse the Independents whom you correct here, but very closely, and cowardly.
You tell us Magisteriall stories of Larks, and I know not what else, to no
purpose. This is it Mastix, which I certainly know; Noise was no part of my
Book, and to answer thy Noise were impertinent.

Observation 25.
HE exhorts us in the foregoing page, etc. Here Mr Mastix, you fall upon the
Fundamentalls of Science, and instruct me how they should be qualified. What a
learned Tutor have I got? I have read of a Maid, that was taught by a Crow, But
I am a young Boy, and must be taught by an Owl. The Fundamentalls of Science,
(say you) should be certain, plain, real, and perspicuous to Reason. Now
Sirrah! that you have presumed to teach me, you shall find me a troublesome,
waggish Pupil. I will not believe your (...), you have Mr Mastix taken one in
hand, -- Qui fiet non sine pane satur.


I desire to know what is the Difference between plain, and perspicuous to
Reason, between a thing that is certain, and a thing that is real, for
otherwise I shall never be able to observe these Qualifications. But I will
take your Sense, and leave your Nonsense. My Fundamentalls are plain, for have
I not written in plain English? Sure I have not been barbarous in my Notions
like Paracelsus, neither have I fansied any new Term, like Aristotel's (...).
As for my Principles, (because I will pass from words to matter) they are not
mere Discourse, and Logic, they are the Principles of Nature, as well as
Science, and so far have I been from concealing them, that I have told you
what Natures and Substances they are. It is your malice, Sir, not your Reason
that persecutes me, and blinds you; You are unjust to my Person, as well as to
my Learning, for here you call me a Dog, and afterward ask me, where are my
manners?

Observation 26.
YET you tell it us in this Page, etc. That which I tell him of in this Page,
Reader, is the magnet of Nature, the mystery of Union; namely, the secret
middle Spirit. Here he condemns it, but offers not to confute it, for he
knows well enough, that he cannot. But come Mr. Mastix! you are Prince of the
Gypsies as well as my self, you know this magnet too, at lest you would be
thought to know it. Truly Anthroposophus! (say you in your Observations on my
46,47,48, and 49 Pages) These Pages are of that Nature, that though you are so
unkind to Aristotel, as to acknowledge nothing good in him, yet I am not so
inveterate a revengeful Assertor of him but I will allow you your lucida
Intervalla. Here Sir, you approve all that I have spoken in these Pages,
bateing some Rhetoric and Figures, to which you have been an Enemy all the
way. Now Mr. Mastix, in the 48th Page, Thus I deliver my self concerning the
Soul. I omit to speak of her Magnet, wherewith she can attract all Things as
well spiritual as natural. O the Ambition of this Fox! He is a Platonic
(Reader) but a pitiful one, and there is nothing that concerns the Soul, but
he would seem to know it. Here he allows of the Magnet, and elsewhere he
condemns it, as if it were his faculty to make the same Thing both false and
true. But Sirrah, your malice to this Magnet which you would seem to know, has
numbered me amongst Pick-pockets. You tell me they are my fellows, as if I were
of the Trade, and to make a dry jest, you profane the Scripture in your abuse
of Jacobs Ladder. Can this be any thing else but Malice? Didd'st thou ever
hear, or know, that I was a Pick-Pocket? I thank thee Presbyterian! thy
Pickpockets have helped me to very good Company, Isa. 53. 12.
for I know Another who was numbered amongst the Transgressors.

Observation 27.
THis Page is filled with like Gypsy gibberish, etc. If my Page be filled with
Gibbrish, yours is filled with Blasphemy, learned Mr. Mastix! you condemn me
because I call the Sun and Moon the great Luminaries. Did not the Spirit of
that God which made them, style them so by the Pen of Moses? And God made two
great Lights, says the Secretary of God. Sure Mr. Moore, you would correct the
holy Ghost, for you have made him blind already. God forgive you, if it be his
blessed will. The rest of your Page Mr. Mastix, is not filled with Reasons, but
with Monkies, and their faces very strange, ridiculous Creatures, but proper to
you, for they are not to be found but amongst Moors. And here you ask me, if I
did ever look at a Galileo's Tube? Prithee why a Galileo's Tube? Were there
more Galileo's than one that invented the Telescop? Learn for shame to speak
English. Do thou think in good earnest, I never saw these Spectacles, these
Trunks and Tricks which are grown the very Hackneys and Prostitutions of Art?
How proud the fool is of his Mathematical Bo-peep? Clap your Antlet to your
Brow, and enjoy it.

Observation 28.
COme out Tom-fool, etc. My words are, Recipe Limi Coelestis parts december, etc.
Here he is angry with me, because he knows not what the first matter is, out of
which Nature makes all Things. I have so described it in this place, and in
other passages of my Book, that nothing more can be said; but this Ignorant
apprehends nothing, and that brings him to an Absurdity, for he condemns me
for his own faults. Your Hangings, Mr. Mastix. are your Psycodia, in
consideration of that simple Ballad some weak brains thought you a
Philosopher, but now you are come out from behind the Hangings, and your
Blaspbemies have discovered your Devils Head and Horns. Believe it, Eugenius
will pluck off your Vizard, and show you to all the world for a plain, pure,
Tom-fool. But you would have me publish the subject of the Philosophical
medicine, you would have me Mastix, to be a very Villain, and do that which I
dare not do, for I fear God. Be pleased to allow me that Liberty which your
Aristotel had, suffer me to dispose of my Magic, as he did of his Acroamatics,
Edidi, and non edidi.

Observation 29.
IN this Page Magicus Prophesies, etc. So does Saint John prophecy too, as
well as Magicus; he tells you of a New heaven, and a new earth, both which
parts he does reduce afterward into one Building, namely the new Jerusalem.
And Here Mr. Mastix, he tells you that the streets of this Jerusalem, which can
signify no part, but what is inferior to his New Heaven, c. 21.
namely his new Earth, v. 21.
were like transparent Glass. But you ask me to what end is this Alteration?
it is Sir, to make things without end, a Building aeternall and Incorruptible.
Now comes in another Question of yours, and such as becomes your profound
Puritanism. Whether the Angels shall play at Bo-peep or no, in the world to
come? Let this be debated Mastix, in your next Conventicle, or else desire Des
Chartes to put it in his Metaphysics, for he has rare imaginations in his
Noddle

Observation 30.
AT the end of this Page, etc. Here you tell me that I must learn to know my
self, before I explain the knowledge of man. You shall find my knowledge, and
your Ignorance, before I have done with you. I will teach you Mastix, your
Nosce teipsum, and your Tecum habita.

Observation 31.
THis is the Philosphers stone, etc. Here he cries out for help, Ho! Dr. H. Dr.
P. Dr. R. Dr. T! and presently takes these Doctors by the stones. Sure Mastix
thou have put them into a bodily fear, for thy Ho sounds like the noise of a
Sowgelder.

Observation 32.
THis thirtieth Page teaches, that the Soul of man consists of two parts,
Ruach, and Nephesh, etc. It is true Mr. Mastix, but you tell me it does not
teach how these two differ. What mean you then by my Application of the conceit
unto marriage? Did I not tell you the one was masculine, and the other
foeminine, and can there be a greater difference? It may be it is your Custom
to put Males together, for your Sodomit Patron Aristotel allows of it in his
Politics. But I am tickled (say you) with this conceit of marriage very
feelingly and savourly. These Adverbs speak thee a very beast, I cannot mention
marriage honestly, but presenly thou do bawd in thy Construction, and apply
it to the base multiplicamini of a Puritan Conventicle.

Observation 33.
THis Page has the same Legend that the Alcoran has, etc. And what then? Do
thou not know that the Alcoran is an Olla of Sergius, and Mahomet? a thing
brewed and composed of all Religions, out of a policy to please all Factions?
There are in the Alcoran many Articles of our Paith: namely that there is a
God, That Christ Jesus was upon Earth, nay it grants he was a good man, and a
great Prophet. That there is a Judgment to come, that there is a Paradise, and
Rewards according to their several ways, to the Just, and to the Unjust.
Shall I then believe none of these things, because the Compilers of the Alcoran
stole them from the Christians? God forbid! I have as good a Title Mastix, to
any Truth in the Alcoran, as ever Godfrey of Bulloign had to Jerusalem.

Observation 34.
THis Page ridiculously places Peter Ramus amongst the Schoolmen, against all
Logic and method. etc. Here I cannot forbear from a Ha! Ha! He! Sure he has
some od Criticism or a Distinction that would turn the stomach of Keckerman.
Sirrrah! there is more difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, than
between Ramus and a Schoolman. But prithee why not amongst the Schoolmen?
because he agrees with them in his matter, or because he differs in his Method?
What other Learning has he, than what the Schools afford? Thou art an Owl, and
I tell thee so. Now Mr. Mastix, you are in a new humor, seeing that you cannot
confute my Doctrine, you will undervalue it, make it Trivial and Common. My
Theorie (say you) is so far from being new, that it is a thousand years old.
Did I not tell you it was in Trismegistus, and that the Egyptians had it from
the Hebrews, which imports a far more Reverend Antiquity? But the Truth is,
your malice would make men believe, that I claim these Doctrines for my own, as
if I made them my inventions, and concluded all the world ignorant besides my
self. This is one of your three Designs Mr. Mastix, which you falsely father
upon me in the Beginning of your Book. But This Theorie (say you) is every
where in the Christian Platonists, and in Origin. Why this Distinction between
Origin and the Christian Platonists? was not he also a Christian? was not he
the Disciple of Ammonius? Certainly you should give him too the title of
Christian to distinguish his Principles from those of his School-fellow
Plotinus. But preethee Mastix what Platonist did ever tell thee that Anima
Mundi was the forbidden fruit? They knew not what to make of that sensitive
Gust thou do talk of, neither did thou, till my Book came to thy hands.

Observation 35.
WHy is Anima Mundi a thing divisible into parts, and parcells, etc. There is a
wide difference Mastix, between division and multiplication of Parts. Thou art
such an absolute Block-head, thou do think the Anima may be cut with a
knife, or clipped like thy Mustachoes with Scissors. No Sirrah, this cannot be,
but she can multiply her self, as the flame of one Candle can light a thousand
Candles more.

Observation 36.
What impudence is this O Magicus! etc. In this very place Mastix, you have
fitted your self with an Answer. This is to rail at pleasure, not to confute.

Observation 37.
BLind men see in their sleep it seems, etc. Bid adieu to thy Reputation
Mastix! I shall prove thee the most ridiculous, malicious Fool, that ever was
in Christendom. Moore and a good-name will never meet again. It is a thing
mastix, not to be found hereafter by thee, no more than modesty when she
parted from the Air and the water. Malicious Carp! my words are these. But I
beseech you, are not the faculties of this spirit suppressed in man also, when
the Organs are corrupted, as it appears in those that are blind? But
notwithstanding the eye only is destroyed, and not the visible power, for that
remains, as it is plain in their Dreams. Here I affirm, that though the
outward Sense, or rather the Act of Sensation be lost, yet the inward faculty,
or Energie of the Soul remains. This mastix thou do deny, because it is in
my Book. Come then my friend, let me see what thou do propose in thy own
writings. In thy Preface to thy Antipsychopannuchia, thou do affirm that
the outward Sense is the very Energy of the Soul, and that the inward sense can
be but the very Energie of the Soul. From this Position you frame this
Argument against your self; Seeing that these two are but one and the same,
why is there not the same Degree of Energie in Both? To this Knot Mr. Mastix,
you apply my Wedge, for you answer with that very Truth, which you make an
Error in me. Be judged by your own words, for here they are. I say there is,
(says Harry Moore) as appears plainly in sleep, where we find all as clear,
and Energeticall, as when we wake. Thou Slave to Spleen! Have I said any thing
more than this comes to? Can thou make that a Truth in thy self, which thou
do make an Error in me? It was thy Malice thou Moore! that made thee
endeavor the Ruin of my Principles, to prefer the Whimzies of thy own
Psycodia. I leave thee and thy baseness to the Judgments of honest men, but
for my Book it sticks in thy Throat, and there it will remain thy perpetual
Choke-pear.

Observation 38.
HOw fansifull, and Poetical are you Mr. Eugenius, etc. I cannot say Mastix,
that thou art Philosophical. Do thou make the mysterious Signatures, and
Symbols of Nature, to be but fancies, and Poetry? Thou art indeed a Platonist
by thy self.

Observation 39.
DOes not this see and hear too in man? etc. Reader he questions me
concerning the rational spirit, and truly it is an od Question, whether the
Rational spirit be a sensitive spirit or not? To this Quaere he adds his own
scruple, namely how the Rational spirit can judge of what is done, if he does
not see it. Mastix I dare swear this is a Problem, all thy skill in the
Platonic Philosophy has failed to answer, and now thou do propose it to me
for satisfaction. You must know Sirrah, that the Rational Spirit has his
objects as well as the Sensitive, and by Consequence he has a sense
proportionable to those objects, otherwise he could not appehehend them. The
sense of the Animal spirit is gross, for so are his Objects, and Nature makes
all Things agree by proportion. Now this Animal or sensitive Spirit does
sentire objecta, namely the Bodies themselves, but the Species of the Bodies he
does convey, and like a Glass presents them to the Rational spirit; This
done, the Rational spirit by a more subtle sense does sentire speciem, which
is a more subtle Object, and by that species he does judge of the gross
object, whose species it is. Thus it must be Mr. Mastix, and no otherwise, for
Reason is nothing else but a Judgment past upon sensation. But you let fly
your fools Bolt. If this be true, then there are two hearing, and seeing Souls
in a man. Ha! Ha! He! The objects are different, and therefore the Senses must
be different; besides I must tell you that every Superior spirit has in him
the faculties of the Inferior, but Eminenter, as it is here, in a more
excellent way. I could Mastix, teach thee a higher Truth, That the Soul may
understand al. Things whatsoever sine Conversione ad Phantasmata, for what she
understands from without, does no way conduce to her perfection. But this
Speculation is so high, it would quite distract and destroy thy Coxcomb.

Observation 40.
TRuly Anthroposophus, these Pages are of that Nature, etc. Here you
acknowledge and would seem to know) the Magnet which you formerly denied. Then
you set up your Chair, and begin to censure me Magisterially, as if you had
overthrown me Horse and Foot. But Sirrah! you are not Cock of the game, but a
Coxcomb, and therefore do not you Crow.

Observation 41.
ANd quarrel again with the Peripatetics, etc. Here he tells me the
Peripatetics, and School Divines will not refute such crazy discourses, as mine
is, only he moved with pity toward me, will correct me. Indeed Mastix, thou
have had a fair time to correct me, three Quarters of a year have thou spent
in providing six sheets of Papyr for the Press. Here was Time enough to come
forth an Elephant, but thou do enter the Stage a mere Mouse. I will not
much threaten thee with Correction, only the Trap I say is dangerous.

Observation 42.
IN this heat all that Philalethes writes, etc. Three Designs Mastix you
observed in the very Beginning of your Pamphlet, and now you present me with a
fourth. I write mysteries (say you) to get my Book established jure Divino.
This Project you suppose is feasible, because Episcopacy, and Presbytery cannot
be settled. Have at you my friends, the Independents! Here is a jerk for you,
as well as for me. Well Sirrah Presbyter! if they rank my Books in the Canon,
then woe to thy Brown Tribe! I will punish every false Gloss with the stool of
Repentance.

Observation 43.
WHat more then to the prophets and Apostles, etc. Here I said, I owed all the
Philosophy, I had next to God, to Agrippa. What (says he) more then to the
Prophets and Apostles? Mastix you denied formerly that Scripture was intended
for Philosophy, but now you will have me to learn my Philosophy of the
Prophets and the Apostles. There is reason indeed for your Contradiction, He
must needs lie who resists the Truth.

Observation 44.
A Piping hot papyr of verses indeed, etc. Here is nothing but a stoic Pompous
severity, a Brow and no Brain. He asks me indeed a few Natural, ordinary
Questions, but if he had understood my Book, which he has proudly undertaken
to censure, he had not been to seek in such Punctilio's. But seeing his very
Quaeries are so many Acknowledgements of his Ignorance in Nature, with what
face (if you bate a Moore's face) can he judge of Nature? One thing I cannot
choose but take notice of. He asks me, If I can rule and counsel States?
Reader, he mistakes my Physics for Politics. Sure enough he would have me to
rule the Parliament, and settle the Presbytery.

Observation 45.
FRom this Page to the 62. etc. Here he says, I did bid fair for Purgatory,
because I opposed it in my Exposition of Saint Peter, then he tells me I had
rather style my self a Protestant, than a Christian. Mastix would gladly put
those asunder whom God has put together. It is an office that well becomes a
Schismatic. He goes on, and says my Industry will but vex Nature and make her
appear something else than what she really is. No Violence can do it Mastix,
much less a true Physical Process. Thou do speak Impossibilities, Bables,
and Fables. This is all Sir, and now you break off your Discourse, and fall
both from Generals and Particulars, because you know not what to say next. For
a Close, I should say for Custom, you fall on my Person, and tell me I am a
very unnatural son to my mother Oxford. Do not thou profane her name with thy
rude, illiterate Chops. I am thou know Mastix, a notable wag and a saucy
Boy, whom she has sometimes dandl'd on her Knees. She has commanded me to be
an enemy to Thee, because thou art an enemy to Truth, but to my Mother I am a
very natural loving Child. If thou can but read, here are a few sighs I
breathed over her when thy Father Presbyter destroyed her.

Dry Pumic Statues! Can you have an Eye,
And have no Tears, to see your Mother dye?
Were you not taught such Numbers to rehearse,
Might make the Marble weep, to bear your Verse?
Or those less polished Quarries, where each part
Acts by infused Malice of the Heart?
She heaved your fancies higher than the Pride
Of all her Pinnacles, and would have died
Blessed in her Martyrdom, had you but shed
A Tear to prove her Children were not dead.
Such Drops and pearls, had sent her sparkling hence
A Constellation, and your Influence
To all her woes had been a just Relief,
Because your Life was argued by your Grief.
But you keep back those Joys, which even Fate
In all her Malice thought not to translate;
You spend not one poor sigh for her last breath,
That we may say she lived before her Death.
Yet has she Comforts, which proceed from thence
Where Grief has lost the Tyranny of Sense,
When on those Relics he does cast an Eye,
Whom Death has lodged where her Foundations lie,
Their Dust (when all is gone) remains within,
Only to tell, how fertile she has been,
But I forbear: perhaps you have new Arts,
Not to spend Eyes at Funerals, but Hearts.
Who in the wash of Tears sets Oxford forth,
Mourns at a rate, and circumscribes her worth,
Such Lay-resents become not this her Day.
Twere Malice to lament the common way,
Unless we could place Knowledge in the Eye,
And thence distill it to an E^eg^e.
Who threads his tears into such learned Reads,
Is a Professor when he weeps, not reads,
Nor would our Oxford grieve to dye could she
In such a Bracelet wear her Heptarchie.
But since ( Dear Mother!) I cannot express
Thy Desolations in their own sad Dress,
Give my Soul leave to study a Degree
Of Sorrow, that may fit thy Fate and thee,
And till my Eyes can weep what I can think,
Spare my fond Tears, and here accept my Ink.
Observation 46.
Verily, nothing at all Philalethes, etc. Here he tells me, I have done nothing
at all to my own praejudice, because I have met with him who has impartially
set out my follies and faults; and so (says he) for shame amend. Why then Mr.
Mastix, you hold it no praejudice to your self, to have committed all these
faults and follies, and to have them set out to the world, by Engenius
Pilalethes. I thought indeed your Notes wou^d not end without another Bull, and
now verily you have spoken so many, you may well leave off, and as you say, for
shame amend.

Observation 47.
HOw modest you are grown, etc. Here you tell me that Rhetoric is the most
conspicuous thing in my Book, for it shines as orienty as false gold, Why
Sirrah if my Rhetoric be like false gold, then it is as I said, not good. But
you Bull it once more, and that very naturally. False gold (say you) shines
oriently. Do thou know Mastix, what Luster Orient is? Sure thou art not well
acquainted with gold, thou art not a man as such Metal.

Observation 48.
SOme young man certainly, etc. Here Mr. Mastix, you tell me, and add withal
it is certain, I had a Brother who killed himself by studying of Aristotel. Who
told thee so, thou Negro, thou Mouse, thou Moore? He did not kill himself, and
his death came not by studying of Aristotel, b^t by a far more glorious
employment. But Philalethes (say you) writ this Book, to revenge his death.
Truly this is as much to my Confutation as any thing else thou have spoken.

Observation 49.
SEe the man affects, etc. You pronounce me Mastix, an absolute Tyrant in
Philosophy, because I exposed my Book not to the mercy of man, but of God.
Prithee what reason have thou for thy Inference. I excluded not thy censure,
but thy Mercy, and art thou such an Ass thou can not distinguish between
those two? I tell thee again Sirrah! I scorn thy favors, but for thy
Judgment, if thou have any, spend it, and spare not.

I am now Mr. Mastix, come up to your Observations on my Advertisement, and the
first thing those Avertisements bind you to, is a plain positive Exposition of
all the passages in my Book, without any Injury to the sense of their Author.
In lieu of this performance you skud like a Dog by Nilus, Et bibit, and fugit
--


The Crocodile you know is under water, and you are afraid to be taken by the
snout. This makes you run along, and lap only where you think you may with
security. You skip, and frisk, and fly as if you did tread on fire-ordeall, and
you have purposely deserted the very Fundamentalls of my Discourse. As for
those few Observations you have made, they are altogether injurious to my
Sense, and you have clearly mistaken me in every place. But to be even with me,
you say that to expound my Book, is more assuredly, than I my self can do. Are
you sure of this? Do you know it is true? or can you think your Readers will
believe you? For my part, I can easily neglect your Aspersions, but certainly
your Praesumption to observe and condemn a Book, which you do not understand,
can be no satisfaction to the Learned.

My second Advertisement was, that you should not judge of Art magic, unless
you had a knowing familiarity therewith, and could by experience prove all the
secrets thereof to be false. To this you reply as formerly, that it is more than
I can do my self, and this indeed is partly true, for I cannot say that any
one Magical secret is false. Tell me O Harry Moore, thou Master of Arts! Do
thou not think thou art grown extremely ridiculous?

My third Admonition was, Not to mangle and discompose my Book with a scatter
of Observations (as you have done Sir Mastix) but to proceed methodically to
the Censure of each part. This is ridiculous (say thou) as if I should
request my enemy to smite softly, or to strike after such a fashion, and at
such a part as I will appoint him. Did I then appoint thee to strike at any one
part? did I not bid thee proceed to the Censure of each part, which is to take
the whole Body, and spare no part at all? This was it which thou durst no more
do, than hang, and indeed it had been good Discretion in thee to do nothing.
This is all you have said to my Advertisements, and now you fall agaiu to your
Jests and Censures, only you speak seriously of one Aristotel, and call him
your Grandevall Patriarch. I prithee Mastix, what is Grandevall? Is it the same
with Grandaevus? I must have thy English translated into Latin, that I may
understand it.

ANd now my Moore, I am come to the second part of your Morisco, to your
Observations on my Anima Magica Abscondita. Here indeed I shall have but small
dealings with you, you act like a Spanniel over hot pottage, you would gladly
lick, but you dare not. This Soul Mastix is not thine, she is too profound for
thee, and thy Ignorance puts thee to a soul course, thou do supply thy want
of Judgment, with excess of Spleen. My Epistle to the Reader receives his
first Charge, and here he does accuse me of Levity and boyish humors. This is
right Puritan severity. First he condemned me for being Melancholy, and now it
is unlawful to be merry. Prithee Sir John, what Humor will thou allow me? But
he goes on, and since he cannot dash me with his pen, he will fright me with
his Club. He tells us of an Assembly of Divines, but if they have any thing to
tell me Mastix, I shall answer them, as well as you. But what strange news
comes next? The Moore is turned Christian, I have here under his hand his
absolute Confeffion, and Conversion. He tells me, he will busy himself to
little purpose in the Perusal of my Anima Magica Abscondita. Readers I beseech
you take notice of it, let not his goodness be lost, it is the only Truth in
all his Book.

Observation 1.
ANd here Philalethes, etc. In this your Threshold Mr. Mastix, you thresh the
Air, and lay about you like a blind Beggar, till at last you knock your
beloved Aristotel on the Coxcomb. I did not (say you) cite his whole definition
of Nature, and therefore you conclude me unskilful. Be pleased then to take it
at large, as he himself delivers it in his second Book of Physics. Natura est
principium, and causa motus and quietis ejus in quo inest primo and per se, and
non per Accidens. Now Sir, I beseech you what is there more in this Desinition,
than in that which I cited? A Principle and a Cause are one and the same thing.
In this Text, but if you insist upon the Difference here added, namely that
Nature is an inward Principle of Motion, this I say, is but a mere Restriction
to regulate such weak Intellects as mistake Nature for an outward Accidental
Principle, which I did not. It is plain then that the Body and Substance of the
Definition is contained in these few words Principium Motus, and Quietis. But
you are very merciful to my Errors, you will wink at them Mr. Mastix. Indeed
you have got a fine Trick to wink when you are stark blind.

Observation 2.
HEre you cavil, etc. Here Mr. Mastix you go on with the Definition, and tell
me I am a pitiful Logician, I know not so much Logic as every Freshman does in
your University. I believe Sir you mean Cambridge, and you may believe me
again, there is not any man there, either fresh or stale, but I scorn to learn
of him. In the interim Sirrah I will teach you, and now that you have taken
your degree of Master in Cambridge, you shall have the honor to be a Pupil to
Oxford. You say Mastix, I have not considered the Difference added in the
Definition of Nature, but ^you say afterward my Allegation against the
Difference is Childish. Why how now man? whence comes this Faculty? Sure there
is a Science more than seven in Cambridge, namely, a Science of Bulls, and
Nonsense. But you proceed, and tell me a Form cannot be known otherwise than
by what it can do or operate. I tell thee Mastix, it is salse, her substance
and Nature may be known, wherefore provide thee a Willow garland, for Phyllis
is mine.

Observation.3
WHy! Philalethes! as I said before, etc. Here he talks as he said before, of a
naked substance, for so he calls it, a Thing without Quantity, or Quality, in
plain English a Nothing.

Observation 4.
HEre in the third place, etc. Here in the third place Mastix, I wish Gill
alive to box thy Buttocks. I have (say thou) Smothered the fitness of
Aristotels sense by my barbarous translating of his term (...), Come then my
friend, let us appeal to the Principles, whereof thou do compound it. It is
compounded say you, of (...). Tell me now Mastix, what is (...) but finis,
(...) but habere? and for your (...) or in, you may put it in your pocket, till
you have use for it. Is not all this in plain terms, Finem habere? Is not
(...) Finihabia, or the having of the end, as I most fitly translated it. Now
then Reader, if thou wouldstst study Aristotel, to know what thy Soul is, he
will tell thee, It is the Having of the End, which is such absolute, perfect,
inscrutable Nonsense, that Herm^laus Barbarus puzzled the Devil with it. But
Moore is more cunning than the Devil at Nonsense, and therefore he can make
it sense (...) (says he) singnifies these two Hemisticks of Virgil, --
totosque infusa per artus
Men's agit^t molem --
Thou illiterate, in sipid, irrational scribler! How can (...) signify any such
thing? If thou should shake the Letters thereof in a Bag (as Cicero said of
the Greek Alphabet) they would as soon settle to Homers Iliads, as to this
Sense. But he is ashamed of himself, and now he runs to Cicero, and picks
another Derivation out of his Tusculans. I can tell thee Mastix, it is
controverted amongst the Peripatetics, whether this monstrous Term be written
with a Tau or a Delta, but for my part I will allow of thy shifts, and after
all here is no News of the Sub^^ance of the Soul. To this you reply like an
Owl in a Bush, for you love not the light your self, which makes you wish
there were none. A Substance (say you) is a Thing impossible to be known. Away!
Away! Let me not hear any more of this Nonsense. Go now I prithee, to any
Plowman in the Land, and he can tell thee, he lives, and moves and understands
because of his soul, though he never was told any such thing at Oxford. I tell
thee mastix, no man can live, but he must know what his Soul does, and for my
Aunt, she knows no more than mother Bunch did know, if she knows not what the
Soul is.

Observation 5.
HEre Anthroposophus etc. Here Mastix barks, and baits, scolds and squabbles.
It is a mere Invective, and no Reason, a certain scurvy, rude Philippic, but
Marc-Antony will pay him at last.

Observation 6.
THat the Heavens are, etc. Here again he shows his teeth, he railes at a
position which he does acknowledge a very Truth, But the Fault is, I must not
write any thing that is true; who knows it not? says mastix. Not you Sirrah!
For if their Motion prodeeds from an inward principle, in what sense do thou
deny their Animation.

Observation 7.
GOod Philalethes, etc. Here he Chews the Cud, it is the same railing vomit
which he mouths over and over.

Observation 8.
A Similitude I Suppose, etc. This is still stuff of the stomach, his spleen
comes up all the way. But God be praised amongst! these mad tricks, comes a
sober Philosophical Question. Tell me, I pray thee (says he) how so subtle a
thing as this anima is, can be either barrel'd up, or bottl'd up, or tide up in
a Bag, like a Pig in a Poke (sure this is a Tythe-Pig) when as the first
material rudiments of life be so lax, and so fluid, how can they possibly
hopple, or incarcerate so thin, and agil a Substance as a Soul? He^e is
Language Reader! Do thou not think I said amiss when I said this was a
sober Question? Mastix it seems you place the difficulty in the Rudiments or
Sperms, because they are lax and fluid. I must tell you Sirah, if they were not
lax and fluid, they could never retain nor receive the Anima, for a dry
substance can retain no flame, but a moist Oily substance can. In the Center
of every sperm there is a pure, aethereall oleous moisture, which is near of
complexion to the Fire of the Anima, by this the Anima is retained, and she is
united to it, like a flame to a Candle. But Mr Mastix, had you perused my Book
with Attention, as you falsely say you did, you had not been to seek in this
point. I will give you my own words, which you have not observed as yet, yet
may be you will hereafter. There is (says my Anima Magica) in Nature a certain
Chain, or subordinate Propinquity of Complexions between Visibles, and
Invisibles, and this is it by which the Superior Spiritual Essences descend,
and converse here below with the Matter! Here you have your Question answered
without Barrel, Bottle, Bag, or Poke, but your Pig I cannot help you to, it is
the Parliament must do it.

Observation 9.
HEre Anthroposophus tells us rare my^eries, etc. Here Goodman Mastix tells me
I have abused the Authority of Virgil, as you did in your Exposition of (...),
to decide this, we will appeal to the Poet himself.

Donec longa dies, perfecto Temporis Orb,
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
AEthereu^ sensu^, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
To satisfy the ordinary Reader, I will put these Verses verbatim into English.

Till many a day, the wheel of time being turned,
Cleares the contracted spot, makes pure and fair
The AEthereall sense, and Fire of simple Air.
Here the Poet if we take him in the Letter, speaks of the Purgation of the
Soul after Death. Now Mr. Mastix tells me that this Ethereal sense and Fire of
simple Air (both which he makes to be one and the same thing) signify the
Vehiculum, as the Platonici call it, or Vestiment of the Soul. What intolerable
palpable Nonsense is this? He makes the Sense of the Soul to be the Vestiment
of the Soul, to be her outside, her smock and Pettycoat wherein she wraps her
self. What honor have I done to this Master of Bulls, not of Arts?

-- mecum certasse feretur.
But now he has got an Eel the by tail, he asks me if I do make the Soul to
be a Light or no? I do Mastix, and I grant it to be a Bodily substance that
has Dimensions too. I know thou art in a Dream, thou do think that spirits
are so many Peripatecicall Atoms, things that are in puncto Metaphysico. I tell
thee it is false, they are an intelligent Fire or Light, and if ever thou do
see this Divine created Fire, then prick up thy Puritan Ears, (...), Audi
Ignis Vocem.

Now Reader, he quits my Discourse, and runs to the Globe Tavern for Sack.
Truly, Mastix, it is a fit School for thy Philosophy, I do not think but thy
scriblings were fansied there in sot-pot-humor.

Observation 10.
IN this Page you are curiously employed etc. Here Reader, this blind,
barbarous Bungler praesumes to censure tha Chain which I described in the
twelfth Page of my Anima Magica. Sure he thinks his pretended Platonic title
is Authority enough to condemn the Rings of Plato, and his mysterious Catena
Aurea. He conceives that divine Philosopher had no Guide but Logic; but he is
extremely mistaken, Plato discovered the world in another Glass. But let us
see what this Quack can say, I believe he will be intangl'd in this Chain, and
I shall lead him about like a Prisoner in shackles. Is it not far more
reasonable (says he) that three Links of a Chain should sway down two, and two
or five one, than that one should sway two or five, or two three? I beseech
thee Reader, observe. This Cambridge Master of Arts, is such a downright
Block-head, that he thinks the Light to be a heavy Body^ Mastix, had you read
Aristotel, he would have told you the Air was a Light Body, and then you might
have judged the Light to be so a Fortiori. My Book also informs you that this
Descent of Light proceeds not from any weight, but from a Similitude and Symbol
of Natures; But you go on, and to establish your weighty Absurdity, you bring
in another argument. Do we find (say you) when we fling up a Clod of earth,
that the whole Ball of the Earth leaps up after that Clod, etc. Reader, he
would confute my descent of Light, by an impossible ascent of the Earth. I
speak of that which is Light, and he argues from that which is heavy. I speak
of the Soul, and he argues from the Body. I speak of Principles, and he argues
from Compounds. Did ever any man read such Superlative, brutish Nonsense? This
it is Mastix to deal with those things which you do not understand, to measure
Theo-Magic by your skill in the strain of Spencer. Had you observed my
Advertisement to the Reader, you had not brought your self to this extreme
shame, and Confusion.

Observation 11. and 12.
IN both these Observations he railes at my person, and indeed he mistakes me
commonly for my Doctrine, so right and absolute a Clod-pate is he, that he
cannot distinguish the Work from the Author.

Observation 13.
HE is so lavish, etc. Here Sirrah Mastix, must I lug thee by the Nose, and it
were not amiss if thy Noddle were squees'd in a Press, it may be thy sense
would come out at thy snout. I think (say you) to dash out that long and
rational dogma in Philosophy, of the particular Rations seminales. A long
Dogma is very improper Mastix, bate me the Relation to thy self, for indeed
thou art short of it. But do thou think I will permit thee to prate in
Platonic Notions, and not call thee to an account for them? What are the
Rations seminales? From what Fount do they originally proceed? In what
Principle or Limbus is their general Secondary residence? How do they apply to
the matter, and by what means? Are they Isntrumental or Principal Agents? Are
they Faculties, or are they Substances? By what Light do they act, by their
own, or by a borrowed one? In what sense are they styled (...) Are they the
Form it self, or things different from the Form? Are they specificall or
General Essences? If General how do they conduce to Individuation? If
Specificall, by what Principle are they specified? Answer if thou dare, to
any one of these Questions. You would be taken for a Platonic, would you not?
you are indeed a Platonic with an impudent broad face, not with a broad Breast.
Your Heart and your Apprehensions are too narrow for that Philosophy. But the
reasons (say you) which I produce, to prove the inward Artificer of Bodies a
knowing principle, are very slight. It is your slight mastix, to say so, but
the reasons are invincible. I am ready to justify them against all the world,
and I would gladly see his Endeavors, who dares contradict them. I shall
present them here in their Order to your Review, be pleased to toote at them
through Galileo's Tube, perhaps your Sight of it self is as weak as your Reason.

I said it was impossible for the Agent to make so many several Shapes and
Features out of one and the same matter, unless he had several different
Conceptions answerable to his different Effects, or productions. Reason for it
was this: without different inward Notions, he could not distinguish his
different intentions, but might mistake the one for the other, and so make a
mouse for a man, or a man for a mouse. Again, if he did not apprehend, and
understand his work, before he went about it, I concluded he could not work at
all, at least he worked he knew not what, nor how, nor wherefore, and by
consequence all Generations were but blind Casualties. Thirdly I urged the
knowledge of this agent from the method, and infallibility of his Actions, from
the several various Transmutations he produces in the matter, from his
Numerating and proportioning of parts to parts. All these Actions are
acknowledged for profound Sciences in Man, but in the Spirit that works in
Nature, work he never so wisely, they must be something else; and verily Mr.
Mastix you know not what. Lastly I said, that if he did not know his work, and
foresee the very End of it, then there was nothing could persuade him to work,
for the End being not seen, the Agent can not desire it, and by Consequence it
can be no Impulsive Cause, as the Peripatetics would have it. To all these
solid convincing Reasons, you have answered with a Lie, It is only said, not
proved. The Truth is, it was so soundly proved, you durst not attempt to
disprove it. You left your malicious Lie behind you, and like an ignorant
Coward fled from the face of my Arguments.

Observation 14,15,16,17,18,19.
I Told thee Reader, I should have but small Dealings with Mastix, in my Anima
Magica. From this fourteenth Observation to his Nineteenth, he rails without
Reason: But because I think it fit to pass nothing over, wherein he would but
seem to oppose my Principles, I will givee thee a Taste of his Logic, and thus
he argues against my Clavis of Magic in his sixteenth Observation.

If a ripe Apple (says he) dropped into a hollow Tree,
Then the Clavis of Magic is false:
But a ripe Apple did drop into a hollow Tree;
Ergo the Clavis, etc.
This is his Argument, and I scorn to answer it. But to this squib he has a
Dragoon, which he fires at the Philosopher's Mercury, and thus he proves it to
be no Virgin.

If Aries and Capricorn have Horns,
Then the Philosophers Mercury is no Virgin:
But Aries and Capricorn have horns;
Ergo, etc.
Did ever any man scrible such ridiculous impertinencies? I tell thee Mastix,
the Philosophers Mercury is a foeminine passive moisture, and as I said in my
Anima Macgica, it moves here in shades and Tiffanies, neither is there any
thing in Nature exposed to such a public prostitution as this is, for it
passes thorough all hands, and there is not any Creature but has the use
thereof. This is my Description of it, and there is no man living can describe
it more truly and fully, notwithstanding all thy Flouts. Now the star-fire,
which is one and the same in all the Lights of the Firmament, impraegnats this
moisture with a Masculine seed, but not without the Concurrence of God
almighty, who is the true Universal cause. The Philosophers Mastix, called not
this water a Virgin, in reference to its Impraegnation by the stars, but
because it is a Chaos, a white, Universal Nature, out of which no particular
creature has been generated. Now for your Platonic Commonwealth, and the Horns
you attribute to the Celestial signs, because of their subordination to God,
In this you are Blasphemous. The Heathen Poets made their God Jupiter an
Adulterer, and a Fornicator, but if you araign the God of Israel for sin, look
you to it. It may be this is Presbyterian Divinity, but I wish you to consider
this Divinity of Job, He that reproves God let him answer it. Cap. 40. v. 2.


Now Sirrah, I come to your Nineteenth Observation, where you tap your
Hogs-head, and present us with another Cup full of Abominations and
Blasphemies. What profane boldness is this (say you) to distort that high
Majesty of the holy Scripture to such poor and pitiful services, as to decide
the controversies of the world and Nature? Take notice Reader that he makes the
world a pitiful contemptible thing, but God himself did so love the world,
that he gave his only begotten son to redeem it. Ioh. 3.16.
I Prithee wherein was the Wisdom and Power of God manifested, but in his
Creation of the world? Thou do scorn and contemn Nature, but was the Blood
of Christ Jesus shed to any other end, 1. Cor. 15.44
but to make a Natural Body a Spiritual Body? Read the five last Chapters of
Job, and thou shall find, that God, when he would prove the Transcendency of
his Wisdom, makes use of no other Argument but the controversies of the world
and Nature, which thou do blasphemously call pitiful services. It is no
wonder indeed thou do condemn my work, when thou do slight and scorn the
works of God. Truly, if thy several horrible Blasphemies meet not with a
Christian reproof and correction, I shall say of England, as Abraham said of
Gerar, Genesis 20. 11.
Surely the fear of God is not in this place.

After this Blasphemy Mr. Mastix, you make me the stalking horse to your
malice, you fall upon the Independents, and shoot at them thorough my sides.
You tell us of strange pretenses to inspirations, which can no way concern me,
for I have told you in my Book, that I am a man of no such faculties, and your
Observation upon those words is this; I warrant you Anthroposophus! I am not so
easily deceived in you. But since you preach so fiercely against inspirations,
why do you your self praetend to them? How dare you be so impudent, as to
profess publicly, and that in a serious Philosophical discuss of the Soul,
wherein you would have us to believe you, that you have received Supernatural
instructions? Thus I read Mastix in the Argument to your Psycathanasia.

Orewhelm'd with grief and piteous woe
For fading life's decays,
How no Souls die from Lunar bow
A nympth to me displayes.
Prithee Moore, what was this Nympth, a good or a bad spirit? What did she
display to thee from Lunar Bow? Did she display her Coat of Arms or her
Petticoat? get thee gone, and trouble us no more with such Impostures.

Observation 20.
IN the former Page, etc. Here I said that in this Elementall world, and in
every star there was Uxor Solis, which is true enough, for otherwise the stars
could not receive any Light or Influence from the Sun, which is repugnant to
all the best Astrologers and Philosophers in the world. Besides this Substance
which I call Uxor Solis, is a secret natural Principle, and it is in every
Compound whatsoever, for nothing can be made without it. To confute this, he
tells me a story of some men who are very inclinable to think, that every star
is a Sun, but what he thinks himself he dares not tell me.

Observation 21.
BUt if you tell us not what this Light is, etc. Here he asks me whether Light
be Corpus or Spiritus, Substance or Accident? I told thee formerly Mastix, it
is a Substance, and a bodily one.

Observation 22.
FRom this Observation to his twenty sixth, his mouth is troubled with a Lax,
as if his Doctor had put the Suppositorie at the wrong end, he spawls and
spues, and Vomits all the way. In his twenty sixth Notable Thing he tells me
the Nature of the Medicine is not to rectify a Visible Body, but to destroy
it. This he gathers, because the more material, obscure parts are turned
inwards, and the Light or Spirit appears and shines outwardly, so that the Body
is exalted to a spiritual glorified Condition. But if the Body be not
destroyed when the matter rules and praevails, how can it be said to be
destroyed, when the very Spirit and life of it praevails? Now at last Reader,
he perceives his Error, and grants it is not Death, but a Change. But presently
springs up another Absurdity, which he calls an Argument. Then (says he) it is
no medicine, but spiritus medicus. I say Mastix you are so blind you cannot
distinguish between an absolute spirit, and a spiritual body.

Observation 27.
FRom this Observation to his two and fortieth, he is very choleric and
Rampant, he is grown stark mad, and has quite lost his Reason, for I cannot
find any. Here is nothing all the way but the Scold and his Scandalls, he
spends his mouth, indeed, very well, but runs counter to his Game. In his two
and fortieth Note, he says, the River Ysca must run under the Equator, or
somwhere between the Tropics, for otherwise Grass could not grow on the banks
of it all the year long. Ha! Ha! He! But the best jest comes at last, he
thinks Ysca runs to Heaven, though I tell him in plain English, it runs to the
Sea. Take both my Verse, and the River, Mastix, and let them run together for
thy direction.

I see thy course anticipates my Plea,
I Will haste to God as thou do to the Sea.
Is this to Heaven my friend, or to some place that is upon Earth? Thou have
discovered such a Blockish Ignorance, it would become thee to run to the
Seaside, where taking up these words of thy Aristotle to Euripus, si ego non
possum capere te, tu capies me, thou should condemn thy self to the Floods,
and rather make a drowned Rat by water, than an intrapt mouse by Land. From
this note, Reader, to the very last line, there is not one Reason brought
against me, he railes and roares, and rattles, and asks me if I did ever read
Des Chartes? Why mastix! is this Author so hard to come by? did thou ever
read a Horn book Sirrah? I tell thee Des Charles is a whim and a wham, without
one why or wherefore. A fellow that invented ridiculous principles of his own,
but has cast them into such a method, that they have a seeming dependency, and
thou do mistake his Knavery for his Reason. But I have done, and now
Mounsieur mastix, I have nothing to confute, unless I fall on your friend I. T.
your plagiarie, and Pick-poet. This is your ape, that shows knacks in Verse in
obedience to your Prose. Poor gaffer with his Sunday-suite! Such a thredbare
Thing cannot be found in London all the week. His verse is baresoot, and
himself starved, which made him run to Cleaveland and the Gibeonites, to
borrow clouted shoes, and moldy bread. But I scorn to handle this mondongo,
this simple cacatura which hangs at the posteriors of a Moor. This is all I
shall say to this Versing Thing. But my pitiful sneaking Observator! my Alaz!
and no mastix, what think you of your self? where is the Glory you expected
from your scriblings? prostravi temi pugil! I have tript up your heels Sir, --
et pronus in ipso Concidis immundoque fimo, spurcoque cruore.


You are gone Sir Bevis! and now it is time to rere up my Trophies, and look
what I have overthrown. A Colossus in good earnest! A thing of nine Acres! see
how this Title lies stretched along like Og of Basan! Harry Moore, master of
Arts, Fellow of Christ-Colledge in Cambridge, and author of the Ballad of the
Soul, which must be sung to the tune of sole Flying, for Eugenius has taken
away the Fame. Take him Readers, take him. I present you the Mouse in the Trap,
with his tail out between the wyers. Hold him fast by it, and fear not, he
will make rate sport. Here you may sometimes fright him with Catts, sometimes
you may singe his Mustachos with Candles, till you have acted over that
Comaedie, which I prophesied of in my Anima Magica.

Thus Mr. Moore, I commit you to the world, and to the Censures you shall find
in it. If you think, I have here used my Improperia, you must thank your self
for it. It is an Absurdity derived from you, for in this scurvie language you
were my Schoolmaster. Suffer me then to be your Glass at the next Dressing,
and if you hate this Humor in Me, learn also for my sake to hate it in your
self.

FINIS.

