portrait of Johannes Vaughan R. White sulp.
JOHANNES VAUGHAN Miles Capitalis Just. de Com^: Banco. An^o: 1674.


THE REPORTS AND ARGUMENTS OF THAT LEARNED JUDGE Sir JOHN VAVGHAN Knight. LATE
Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court OF Common Pleas.

BEING All of them Special Cases, and many wherein he Pronounced the Resolution
of the whole Court of Common Pleas; At the time he was CHIEF JUSTICE there.

Published by his Son EDWARD VAVGHAN Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft for Richard Marriott, to be sold by Thomas
Bassett and George Marriott, at their Shops in Fleetstreet and in
Westminster Hall. M DC LXXVII.

TO THE READER.
PRefaces to Books, if written by other Hands than the Author's own, are for
the most part Panegyricks, and lean more to Flattery than Truth; the Writers of
them taking more pains to describe themselves, than the Author of the Book. If
they write Elegantly enough, or strain sufficiently in his praise, they
captivate the Reader (or at least conceive so) into a good Opinion of
themselves; but the sufficiency of the Author must still appear from his own
Work.

This therefore shall be, First, only such a brief Account of the Author, as is
usual of Persons of his Station upon the like Occasion: And Secondly, the
Reason why these Papers see the Light; which I conjecture the Author intended
should have dyed with him; or survived him in very few Hands, and those such as
he had a particular esteem for.

He was the eldest Son of Edward Vaughan Esquire, and born on the Fourteenth of
September, in the Year of our Lord 1603. at Trowscoed in the County of
Cardigan, the Ancient Seat of his Family, himself being the Eleventh of that
House in a direct Line.

About the Tenth year of his Age he was sent to be Educated at a Public
School in the City of Worcester, and about the Fifteenth removed from thence to
Christ-Church in Oxford; where, although he had a Tutor of the said College,
yet the Education of him was more especially committed to an Uncle of his own
by his Fathers side, then a Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, who being a
person of good Learning and Prudence, omitted nothing that might cherish the
hopes he entertained of his Nephew, and improve him in all kinds of Learning
with which the University does season Youth. This Care of his Uncles he would
frequently commemorate to his Last.

About the Eighteenth year of his Age he was removed to London, and on the
Fourth of November, in the Year 1621. admitted of the Inner Temple, where I
have often heard him say, that he addicted himself to Poetry, Mathematics, and
such more alluring Studies at first, neglecting that severer of the Laws of
England, until he became acquainted with that incomparable Person Mr J. Seldom,
who discerning in him a ready Wit, and sound Judgment, did studiously afford
him Occasion of making a right use of two such excellent Ingredients, and
frequently admitted him to the Converse of himself, and other worthy Persons
his Cotemporaries, where having been instructed in the value of Civil Learning,
he soon after applied himself closely to that Course of Study, and more
particularly of the Laws of England, which he after made his Profession. His
Practice, after he was called to the Bar, was for the most part in the
Star Chamber, where he soon became Eminent.

He was elected Burgess for the Town of Cardigan, to serve in the Parliament
Convened on the Third of November, 1640. where he gave sufficient Testimony his
Learning was not confined within the Walls of Westminster Hall, but that he was
possessed of great Public Abilities likewise.

Soon after King Charles the First withdrew from White Hall to Hampton Court,
and that the Rent between Him and the Parliament was too too visible, being no
longer able to serve his Prince there, he left the House of Commons (whence he,
among other Worthy Members, was not long after Secluded by Vote of that House,
and a new Writ issued forth for the Election of a Member in his place) and he
betook himself to those Duties wherein he was capable of serving his Prince in
his proper County.

From the Year 1641. in which he retired from the Parliament, until the Year
1660. in which God blessed us with the Restoration of our present King, he did
in a manner quit his Profession: For in that time he never received a Fee from
any Person whatever, nor could be prevailed with to appear in any Court,
although exceedingly importuned to it by such as had a desire to make use of
his Abilities: And the reason I have heard him assign for it, was, That it was
the Duty of an honest Man to decline, as far as in him lay, owning
Jurisdictions that derived their Authority from any Power, but their lawful
Prince.

Private Counsel he frequently imparted, but that was either gratuitously to
such of his Acquaintance as he had a great Esteem for, or charitably to such as
were not at all, or not well able, to Fee other Council.

Thus for the most part for Twenty years together, he passed a retired Life at
his own Country House, until he was Elected to serve as Knight of the Shire for
the County of Cardigan in this present Parliament, begun the Eighth Day of May,
in the Year 1661. and on the Twentieth of May, 1668. his Majesty, whose
Goodness is ever Extensive to worthy Men, did by his Commission under the Great
Seal, constitute him Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, in which
Employment he died on the Tenth of December, in the Year 1674. Leaving these
Remains of his Labors in that Court, which having no particular Direction from
the Author to that purpose, I did for some time resolve should not have been
made Public, although I well understood the value of some of them, wherein
there are Questions handled, not familiar in any of our Reports yet extant; but
in their Nature more Public.

This Resolve of mine being imparted to some Learned Gentlemen of the Coyf, and
others who had a particular esteem for the Author, begot Importunities for
Copies of several of those Arguments then in my hands, which were procured, and
soon after, by what means I know not, dispersed further than I intended them,
and as I have been informed, Cited as Authorities.

Thus having, without my privity, become so Public, and apprehending that
things in themselves good, innocent, and useful, may by mis-application become
dangerous, and disgustful, I conceived it best to procure a License for them to
speak for themselves, that they may bear their own blame, and that such as make
use of them may have no further share in the Guilt (if any such be) than that
they have, done as others do, that is, Quoted Authority.

Which I conceive may be done with safety; most of the subsequent Cases being
not the single Opinions of the Author, but the Resolutions of the whole Court
by him delivered. If in some few other Cases it has been his Fate in any thing
to differ from his Brethren, it is no more than many of his Predecessors have
done; particularly that most Learned and Reverend Judge, the Lord Hobart, whose
single Opinions in many Cases published, being built upon excellent Reason,
carry great weight with them at this day: whether the Author may be so
fortunate, Time must determine. But I hope such as shall think fit to oppose
such of his Opinions wherein he is singular, will first Reverse the Reasons of
them; for if they be not vanquished, the Conclusions thence deduced must
prevail. So Reader, I commit him to you, heartily wishing you the benefit
designed by this Publication.

WE all knowing the great Learning, Wisdom, and Integrity of the Author, Do,
for the Common Benefit, allow the publishing of these Reports and Arguments in
the same Letter as now they are Printed.

Finch C. Ri. Raynsford. Fra. North. Tho. Twisden. W. Montagu. W. Wild. Tim.
Littleton. Hugh Wyndham. Rob. Atkyns. Edward Thurland. V. Bertie. Tho. Jones.
Will. Scroggs.


REPORTS OF Sir John Vaughan LORD CHIEF JUSTICE Of the COURT of COMMON PLEAS.
Hill. xvii. and xviii. Caroli 2. Reg. C.B. To. 1032.
John Tufton Knight and Baronet. Plaint. verse. Rich. Temple Knight of the Bath
and Bar. Chamberlain Hammersley Cl. John Bish. of Lich. and Cov.
Defen. In a Quare Impedit for hindering him to present a fit Person to the
Vicaridge of the Church of Burton-Basset in the County of Warwick, being void,
and belonging to his Gift.

THE Plaintiff sets forth, That whereas Thomas Temple Knight. and Bar. was seized
of two third Parts of the Manor of Burton Basset, to which one third Part of
the Advowson of the Vicaridge aforesaid; that is, to present a fit Person to
the same Vicaridge the first time, when the same then after should happen next
to be void: And after the same first Presentation, then every third turn of the
same Vicaridge being void for ever appertains, and did appertain, in his
Demesne as of Fee.

And one Edward Wootton Knight. Lord Wootton, was seized of one other third part of
the Manor aforesaid, and of one third part of the Rectory Impropriate of
Burton Basset: To which third parts one other third part of the Advowson of the
Vicaridge aforesaid: that is, to present a fit Person to the same Vicaridge the
second turn, when the same Vicaridge then after should happen next to be void:
And after the same second Presentation, then every third turn of the same
Vicaridge being void for ever does appertain, and then did appertain, in his
Demesne as of Fee.

That the said Thomas Temple was likewise seized of another third part of the
Advowson of the Vicaridge aforesaid, that is, to present a fit Person to the
same the third turn, when the same Vicaridge then after should happen next to
be void: And after such third Presentation, then every third turn of the same
Vicaridge being void for ever. Ut de uno grosso per se, ut de feodo and jure.

That the said Thomas Temple being seized of the two third parts of the said
Manor: To which, etc. the said Vicaridge became void by the resignation of
Thomas Freeman then last Incumbent.

That thereupon the said Thomas Temple presented in his turn to the said
Vicaridge one John Reignalds his Clerk, who was admitted, instituted and
inducted thereto, in the time of the late King James.

That the said Edw. Wootton, being seized of the said other third part of the
said Manor, and third part of the Rectory aforesaid, to which, etc. dyed
thereof so seized at Burton Basset aforesaid.

That after his death the said third Parts, to which, etc. descended to one
Thomas Lord Wootton his Son and Heir, whereby the said Thomas Lord Wootton
became thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee

That being so seized, he levied a Fine of the said third Parts, to which, etc.
in the Common Pleas 4. Car. 1. in octab. S. Martini to Nicholas Pay Esquire; and
Reignald Pay Gent. Com-Plainants, the said Lord Wootton, Mary his Wife, and one
Henry Wootton Knight deforc.

That the said Fine was to the use of the said Lord Wootton and Mary his Wife,
during their natural lives, and the longer liver of them. Then to the use of
the first Son of the body of the Lord Wootton, and the Heirs Males of the body
of such first Son begotten, and so to the sixth Son successively and the Heirs
Males of their bodies, and so to every other the Sons of the said Lord Wootton
successively.

Then for default of such issue, to the use of Margaret Wootton third daughter
of the said Lord Wootton, and Mary his Wife, and of such Husband with whom the
said Margaret should happen to marry for term of such husbands natural life (If
the said Margaret should so appoint the same per aliquod scriptum sub manu and
sigillis suis): And of the Heirs Males of her body begotten for part of her
marriage portion, then to the use of the Heirs of her body begotten: And for
default of such, to the use of the right Heirs of the said Thomas Lord Wootton
for ever.

That by the said Fine and Statute of Uses, the said Lord Wootton and Mary his
wife were seized of the said two third parts to which, etc. for their Lives
with the Remainders over as aforesaid.

That being so seized the said Vicaridge became void by the death of the said
John Reignalds: And the said Lord Wootton presented to the same in his turn one
John Cragg, who was accordingly instituted and inducted tempore Car. 1.

That the said Tho. Temple, being seized of the other third part of the said
Advowson in gross levied a Fine among other things of the said third part of
the said Advowson to Edward Peeter, and Thomas Peeter Esquires, Com-plainants,
and the said Thomas Temple and Hester his wife being deforceants

That this Fine was so levied to the use of one William Peeter Esquire; and his
Heirs.

That the said William Peeter, being seized by virtue of the said Fine and
Statute of Uses, the said Vicaridge became void by the Resignation of the said
John Cragg and the said William Peeter presented in his turn thereto one Robert
Kenrick his Clerk, who was accordingly admitted, instituted and inducted
tempore Car. 1.

That the said Tho. Temple being seized of the said two third parts of the said
Manor, to which, etc. dyed so seized at Burton Basset aforesaid.

That after his death the said two third Parts to which, etc. descended to one
Peter Temple his Son and Heir, who was thereof seized, and dyed so seized.

That after his death, the same descended to the said Richard Temple his Son
and Heir, who was, and yet is, seized of the said two third Parts

That being so seized, the said Vicaridge became void by the death of the said
Robert Kenrick, which vacancy was the third vacancy of the said Vicaridge after
the said first Presentation of the said Thomas Temple.

That the said Richard 12. Decembris anno 1654. presented to the said Vicaridge
in his turn one Richard Manfell his Clerk, who upon his Presentation obtained
the said Vicaridge, and was in actual possession thereof, and so being in
possession a Statute was made the 25th. of April 12. of the King for
confirmation and establishing of Ministers in their Ecclesiastic Possessions,
ordained by any Ecclesiastic Persons before the 25th of December, then last
past: And that the said Richard Manfell by virtue of the said Statute was real
and lawful Incumbent and Vicar of the said Vicaridge.

That the said Lord Wootton and Mary his Wife being seized of the said third
part of the said Manor and Rectory aforesaid for their lives with remainder,
as aforesaid, the said Lord Wootton so seized dyed at Burton Basset aforesaid.

That the said Mary survived him, and was thereof sole seized for term of her
life by Survivorship. And being thereof so seized with Remainder, as aforesaid.

The said Margaret married the said John Tufton, and after the 8th. day of
August 22. Car. 1. By a writing under her hand and seal produced in Court by
the said John Tufton dated the same day and year appointed, that the said Fine
leavyed as aforesaid in the 4th. year of the King should be, and the Conusees
therein named should stand seized of the said third part, to the use of the
said Margaret, and of the said John Tufton for term of his life, as by the said
writing more fully appears.

By virtue of the said Fine and Statute of uses, the remainder of the said
third part, after the death of the said Mary belonged to the said John Tufton
and Margaret for term of the said John's life with remainder as aforesaid.

That the said Mary being seized of the said third Part with remainder over as
aforesaid, the said Margaret at Burton Basset aforesaid, dyed without issue of
her body, and the said John Tufton survived her.

That the said Mary afterward at Burton Basset aforesaid dyed seized of such
her Estate, after whose death the said third part remained to the said John
Tufton, who was thereof seized for term of his life with remainder over to the
Heirs of the Lord Wootton.

That the said Tufton being so seized in a Statute made at Westminster. begun
the 8th. day of May in the 13th. year of his reign and there continued until
the 19th. of May in the 14th. year of his reign: It was among other things
enacted, That Parsons, Vicars, and other Churchmen being Incumbents of any
Ecclesiastical Living should subscribe the Declaration or Recognition set forth
in the said Act in manner as by the said Act is recited (which is set forth at
large in the Pleading) upon pain of forfeiting the said Parsonage, Vicaridge,
or other Ecclesiastical Living, and to be ipso facto deprived of the same.

And the said John Tufton in fact says, that the said Richard Mansell was in
possession of the said Vicaridge of Burton Basset, and did not, as by the Act
was required, subscribe the said Declaration, whereby he stood ipso facto
deprived, and the said Vicaridge became void.

That such vacancy of the said Vicaridge is the third vacancy thereof, after
the aforesaid Presentation of the said Lord Wootton, and therefore it belongs
to the said John Tufton to present a fit Person to the same, and that the said
Bishop, Richard Temple and Chamberlayne do hinder him so to do to his damage of
fifty Pounds.

The said Bishop and Richard Temple plead in Bar. And first the said Bishop,
That he claims nothing, but as Ordinary.

Then the said Richard Temple says, the said Tufton ought not to have his
Action against him, and taking by Protestation, that the said Tufton was not
seized in his Demesne, as of Freehold for Term of his life of the third part of
the said Manor of Burton Basset, and of the third part of the said Rectory of
Burton Basset aforesaid, for Plea says,

That he the said Richard Temple was, and yet is, seized of the said two parts
of the said Manor, and of the Advowson of the Vicaridge of Burton Basset
aforesaid, as appertaining to the said two parts of the said Manor in his
Demesne as of Fee, and right, in the time of the King that now is,

That being so seized the said Vicaridge became void by the said Deprivation of
the said Richard Manfell, by reason whereof he the said Richard Temple, being
seized of the said Advowson as aforesaid, presented to the said Vicaridge, the
said Chamberlain, as was lawful for him, then traverseth absque hoc, That one
third Part of the Advowson of the said Vicaridge, namely to present a fit
person to the same Vicaridge every third turn of the said Vicaridge does
appertain to the said one third part of the said Manor, and to the said one
third part of the Rectory Impropriate of Burton Basset, as the said John Tufton
has alleged, which he is ready to aver, and demands Judgment.

And the said Chamberlain the Clerk, taking by Protestation, that he does not
know any the matters in the Declaration to be true; and taking also by
Protestation, that before the said Vicaridge became void by the Deprivation of
the said Richard Manfell, and at the time it was so void, the said Richard
Temple was, and yet is, seized of the said two parts of the said Manor, and of
the Advowson of the Vicaridge of the said Church of Burton Basset, as
appertaining to the said two parts of the said Manor in his Demesne, as of Fee
and right: And for Plea says,

That he the said Chamberlain is Vicar of the said Vicaridge by the
Presentation of the said Richard Temple, and was thereto admitted, instituted
and inducted.

Then traverseth absque hoc, That the said Thomas Lord Wootton after the death
of the said John Reignalds, so as aforesaid presented to the said Vicaridge,
being void in his turn, the said John Cragg, as the said Tufton has alleged,
and demands Judgment.

As to the Bishops Plea, his excuse is admitted, and the Plaintiff has
Judgment with a cessat executio against him, and a Writ to admit idoneam
personam to the Vicaridge non obstante reclamatione.

To the Defendant Temples Plea the Plaintiff demurs, and the Defendant Temple
joins in Demurrer.

To the Plea of Chamberlain the Incumbent the Plaintiff replys, That the said
Thomas Lord Wootton after the death of the said John Reignalds Incumbent, as
aforesaid, presented to the said Vicaridge then vacant in his turn as
aforesaid, the said John Cragg, as the Plaintiff has formerly alleag'd, Et de
hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam.

To which the Defendant Chamberlain does not rejoyn any thing, nor joins in
issue, and therefore the Plaintiff has Judgment to recover his Presentation,
as against him, and a Writ to the Bishop non obstante reclamatione, and to
remove the Defendant Chamberlain from the Vicaridge, notwithstanding his
Admission, Institution and Induction, but with a cessat executio until the Plea
be determined between the Plaintiff and the Defendant Temple.

THIS CASE in fact cannot be put shorter than as it has been opened to be upon
the Record; It being a history of several Presentations to the Vicaridge of
Burton Basset, and of several supposed Titles, so to present in the persons,
who presented.

The Questions therefore in this Case do arise from the causes of the
Plaintiffs demurring to the Defendants Plea, which as has been insisted on,
are two.

1. The first is, That in a Quare Impedit Plaintiff and Defendant are both
Actors, and either of them, as their right happens to fall out, may have a Writ
to the Bishop to admit his Clerk, That therefore either of them must make out a
sufficient Title.

For it will be unreasonable, That a man should have a Writ to the Ordinary to
admit his Clerk, who has made no Title appear to the Court, why it should be
granted him.

That the Law is clear, the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit must in his Count
alledg a Presentation in himself, or those from whom he claims, and that
therefore the Defendant should likewise so do.

But in this Case the Defendant in his Plea has alleged no Presentation in
any from whom he claims, or in himself.

2. The second cause of Demurrer insisted on, is, That the Defendant has by
his Plea traversed the appendency alleged in the Plaintiffs Count of the third
part of the Advowson of the Vicaridge of Burton Basset to the third part of the
Manor, and third part of the Rectory of Burton Basset, whereas he ought to
have traversed the Presentation alleged by the Plaintiff in the Lord Wootton,
by whom the Plaintiff claims, and not the appendency: And diverse Authorities
have been pretended, that so is the Law.

1. As to the first cause of Demurrer: It is true, that in a Quare Impedit both
Plaintiff and Defendant may be Actors, and either have a Writ to the Bishop, as
the right falls out to be.

But it is not true, that both are always Actors in a Quare Impedit: For if the
Defendant has presented his Clerk, and he be admitted, instituted and inducted
before the Quare Impedit brought, the Defendant has then no cause to have a
Writ to the Bishop for the doing of that which is already done; and
consequently in such Case the Defendant is no Actor but a bare Defendant.

When a man has presented, and his Clerk is instituted, and inducted, he is at
the end of his work, and has no more to do than to keep what he has gotten;
for thereby he has a full possession, which is Title sufficient, if there be
not a better.

But the Plaintiff, who is to recover that which he has not, must show a good
Title before he can recover, or he shall never avoid the Defendants possession
by showing no Title, or an insufficient, which is the same with none.

It can be neither Law nor Common Reason for the Plaintiff to tell the
Defendant, you have no good Title, and thence to conclude therefore I have.

The Plaintiff must recover if at all by his own strength, and not by the
Defendants weakness, as is well urged and cleared in Digbies and Fitzherberts
Case in the Lord Hobart.

The Defendant has alleged in his Plea a Title pro forma, and that he has
presented by reason thereof, and that his Clerk is instituted and inducted,
which is sufficient for the present and future time, if no better Title be
opposed to it, without alleging any other Presentation in himself, or any from
whom he claims.

But if the Defendant were out of possession, as the Plaintiff is, he must then
make out a good Title, as the Plaintiff now must, or else the Defendant should
never have a Writ to the Bishop to admit his Clerk; and in such Case only it
hold true, That the Defendant is Actor as well as the Plaintiff.

And in such Case he is to alledg a Seisin of the Advowson, as the Plaintiff
must in himself, or those from whom he claims, which can never be done without
alleging a former Presentation, that being the only actual Seisin of an
Advowson; for the cause, why he should present to the present vacancy.

So as the not alleging a former Presentation will be no objection to the
Defendants Title, besides the Plaintiff has alleged a Presentation both in
his Ancessor Sir Thomas Temple of Reignalds, and in himself of Manfell for him,
but I make no account of that, for if the Defendant will take advantage of a
Title admitted him by the Plaintiff, he must take it as the Plaintiff gives it,
which in this Case the Defendant does not.

For the Plaintiff by his Count makes the Defendants Ancestor and himself
seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, of 2 Parts of 3 of the Manor of Burton
Basset, and of a third part of the Advowson of the Vicaridge of Burton Basset,
as appendant to the said 2 Parts.

But the Defendant by his Plea says he was seized in Fee of 2 Parts of 3 of
the said Manor, and of the entire Advowson of the Vicaridge, as appendant to
the same 2 parts, and so presented, which is another Title than that admitted
by the Plaintiff.

2. For the 2 cause of Demurrer, which is a point of more difficulty, I take it
for Law, and shall accordingly prove it, That when the Defendant traverseth any
part of the Plaintiffs Count or Declaration in a Quare Impedit, it ought to be
such part, as is both inconsistent with the Defendants Title, and being found
against the Plaintiff does absolutely destroy his Title, for if it does not so,
however inconsistent it be with the Defendants Title, the Traverse is not well
taken.

To prove this I shall make use of 2 Cases urged at the Bar for the Plaintiff:
but rightly understood, are fully against him.

The first is 10 H. 7. f. 27. 10 H. 7. f. 27.
in a Quare Impedit the Plaintiff declared, that he presented such a one his
Clerk, who was admitted, instituted and inducted, and after the Church became
void, and he ought to present, the Defendant pleaded his Ancestor was seized of
a Manor, to which the Advowson was appendant, and presented, and that the
Manor descended to him, and that the Church being void, he presented and
traversed, absque hoc, that the Advowson is in gross.

It was adjudged, that the Defendant ought to have traversed the Presentation,
and not the Seisin of the Advowson in gross.

Whence it was inferred, that in the present Case the Presentation alleged
ought by like reason to have been traversed, and not the appendency, for
traversing, the appendency in this Case differs not from traversing the Seisin
in gross in that Case.

But the reason of that Judgment, when rightly understood, is very clear.

1. The Plaintiff in the Quare Impedit (as the Case appears in the book) did
not declare, that he was seized of the Advowson in gross, and presented (though
perhaps if the Original Declaration did appear, it might be he did so declare)
but declares, that he presented, and his Clerk was admitted, instituted and
inducted, and the Church becoming void, it belonged to him to present again.

For which reason, be alleging no Seisin in gross of the Advowson, but only
his Presentation, and that his Clerk was received, the Defendant formally ought
to have traversed the Presentation, which was alleged, and not the Seisin in
gross of the Advowson, which was not alleged.

But the Case is the same, whether he did, or did not, alledg in his
Declaration, that he was seized of the Advowson in gross and presented.

For still the Plaintiffs Presentation was to be traversed by the Defendant,
and not his being seized in gross, though it were true, that the Defendant,
making Title by the appendency of the Advowson to his Manor, the Plaintiffs
Seisin in gross was absolutely inconsistent with the appendency, and therefore
speciously to be traversed by the Defendant.

But that traverse left a Title in the Plaintiff not destroyed, and therefore
was not good.

For whether the Plaintiff were seized or not of the Advowson in gross, he
presenting in the vacancy, and his Clerk being admitted, instituted and
inducted, he thereby gained a good Title by Usurpation to present, when the
Church became next void.

And that is the true reason in that Case, why the presentation which made the
Plaintiffs immediate Title to present again, was to be traversed, and not his
Seisin in gross of the Advowson, which was not material, when his Usurpation
gave him a Title, though he were not seized in gross before his Usurpation.

Ander. 1 Part f. 296. p. 276.
The next Case I shall use is as good authority out of the new Books as the
other was out of the old. It is the Lord Buckhursts Case reported in the first
part of the L. Anderson.

The L. Buckhurst brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Chichester and
T. Bickley for disturbing him to present to the Vicaridge of Westfield, and
declared that the Advowson of the Vicaridge appertained to the Rectory of
Westfield, whereof he was seized in Fee, and presented Maurice Sackvil his
Clerk, who was thereto admitted, instituted and inducted, that the Vicaridge
was a Vicaridge with Cure of the annual value of 8 l. And that the said Sackvil
accepted another Benefice with Cure, by reason whereof, and of the Statute of
21 H. 8. the Vicaridge became void, and he presented and was disturbed by the
Defendants.

The Bishop pleaded, that before the Writ purchased one Richard Bishop of
Chichester, his Predecessor, was seized of the Advowson of the said Vicaridge
in Fee as in gross, and collated to the said Vicaridge being void, one Maurice
Berkley, who was inducted thereto, and the said Richard dying, the present
Bishop was made Bishop, and became seized of the Advowson, and the Church
became void by the said Sackvil's taking another Benefice with Cure, and he
collated the said Bickley the other Defendant, and traversed absque hoc, that
the Advowson of the said Vicaridge pertained to the Rectory of Westfield modo
and forma, as the Plaintiff alleged. And Bickley, the other Defendant, pleaded
the same Plea.

Upon these Pleas it was demurred, because the traverse to the Appendency was
not good, as was alleged; and after much Argument, and many Cases cited, where
the Appendency was traversable.

The Court resolved the appendency was not traversable in the Case, nor was it
material, whether the Advowson were appendant or in gross, as the book is
express, so as nothing could be traversable in the Case then, but the Lord
Buckhursts Presentation, which after the Induction of his Clerk, though it were
by Usurpation made him a good Title to present, when the Vicaridge became next
void.

Whence it follows, that if the Defendant could not traverse the L. Buckhursts
Presentation of Sackvil, which was his immediate Title, the Defendant was
remediless, but by a Writ of Droit d'Advowson.

And in the resolution of this Case of the L. Buckhust, the Case of 10 H. 7.
before cited was principally relied on, as warranting the Judgment which it
fully does, it being adjudged for the same reason there, that the Seisin in Fee
of the Advowson in gross was not traversable, but the Presentation was, as it
was adjudged in this Case, that the appendency was not traversable by the
Defendant, but the Presentation.

And by the way I observe, Hobart. Digbies Case f. 102.
that in the Report of the Lord Buckhurst's Case it is admitted, that the
Plaintiff in the Case of 10 H. 7. did count, that he was seized of the Advowson
in gross and presented, whereas I noted the Original Case in the Book is, that
he counted only upon his Presentation, and probably it was so for the reasons
given in Digbies Case by the Lord Hobart, that a bare Presentment is only
militant, when so alleged by the Plaintiff, and may be in such a Case, as may
prove the Defendant to have right of presenting at the present avoidance, if no
right be alleged by the Plaintiff, why he should present.

Whence I collect, that in both these cases of 10 H. 7. and this of the L.
Buckhursts, though there were a manifest inconsistency in the first Case
between the Plaintiffs Count, that he was seized of the Advowson in gross, and
presented, and the Defendants Title, that he was seized of a Manor, to which
the Advowson was appendant; for it was impossible it should be appendant for
the Defendant, and in gross for the Plaintiff.

And in the L. Buckhursts Case, who counted that he was seized of the Rectory
of Westfield, to which the Advowson of the Vicaridge belonged, and the
Defendant made Title, that he was seized of the Advowson in gross, which Titles
were directly inconsistent, yet neither the Seisin in gross in the first Case,
nor the appendency in the last Case were traversable, but the Presentation of
the Plaintiffs in both, which made their immediate Titles to present at the
next avoidance, whether there were a Seisin in gross, or an appendency or not,
when they first presented.

As in these 2 Cases the true reason of the Law appears, why the Seisin in
gross of the Advowson, nor the appendency of the Advowson alleged by the
Plaintiffs were not traversable, but only the Presentation.

Hob. Digbies Case f. 103.
By these Cases the Lord Hobarts scruple in Digbies Case is satisfied, where he
thinks, that if a man has gained a Title by Usurpation at the next avoidance,
he must not declare, that he was seized in Fee, formerly of the Advowson, and
presented; but must declare specially of the true Patrons former Presentation,
and then the Church becoming void, that himself presented, lest otherwise he
declaring, that he was seized of the Advowson in Fee, the Defendant should
trice him by traversing his Seisin, which was false, when in truth he had a
right to present by Usurpation, for by these Cases it is clear, that the Seisin
in gross, nor appenden^y are traversable, though alleged by the Plaintiff,
when he has gained a Title by Usurpation, but the Presentation ought to be
traversed.

I shall for clearing this Learning show in the next place, when the Seisin in
gross, or appendency of the Advowson alleged by any Plaintiff in his Count is
traversable by the Defendant, and not the Presentation, and the true reason of
the difference.

27 H. 8. f. 29.
In a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff declared, that I.S. was seized in Fee of a
Manor, to which the Advowson was appendant, and presented, and after infeoffed
the Plaintiff of the Manor, whereby he became seized, until the Defendant
disseised him, and during the Disseisin, the Church became void, and the
Defendant presented, the Plaintiff entered into the Manor, and so recontinued
the Advowson, and the Church is again become void, whereby the Plaintiff ought
to present.

The Defendant pleads, that a stranger was seized of 4 Acres of Land, to which
the Advowson is appendant, and presented and of the four acres infeoffed the
Defendant, and the Church being void it belongs to the Defendant to present,
and takes a Traverse absque hoc, that he disseised the Plaintiff of the Manor.

This Traverse was adjudged not good; for the disseisin, or not disseisin of
the Manor was not material to entitle the Plaintiff to the Quare Impedit; but
all his Title was by the appendency of the Advowson to the Manor, and
therefore the Traverse ought to have been, and was so resolved to the
appendency, which destroyed the Plaintiffs entire Title to present, and also
inconsistent with the Defendants appendency of the Advowson to his four acres.

I shall only put one Case more to the same purpose out of the new Books
reported by the Lord Hobart.

Sir Henry Gaudy Knight. brought a Quare Impedit against the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Sir William Bird, and Humfrey Rone Clerk, Sir Hen. Gandies Case
Hob. 301.
and declared that Sir Rich. Southwell was seized of the Manor of Popenho in
Norfolk, to which the Advowson was appendant and presented, and his Clerk was
instituted and inducted, that Southwell bargained and sold the Manor to one
Barow, who being seized, the Church became void by the death of Southwels
Incumbent, and so continued for eighteen months, whereby the Queen in default
of the Patron, Ordinary and Metropolitan presented by Lapse one Snell, then by
mean Conveyances derives the Manor to which the Advowson is appendant to
himself, and that by the death of Snell it belongs to him to present, and is
disturbed by the Defendants.

The Archbishop claims nothing, but as Ordinary, Sede vacant of the Bishop of
Norwich.

Sir William pleaded ne disturba pas.

And Rone the present Incumbent pleaded, that he was Parson by the Kings
Presentation, and that long before Southwell had any thing in the Manor Queen
Eliz. was seized of the Advowson in gross in right of the Crown, and presented
Snell; that the Advowson descended to King James by the death of the Queen; and
he being seized, the Church becoming void by Snell's death, presented the
present Incumbent, who was instituted and inducted.

And traversed absque hoc, that the Advowson was appendant to the Manor of
Popenho, and thereupon Issue was joined.

In this Case also the Traverse of the appendency by the Defendant was clearly
good, and so admitted, for the Plaintiff Gaudy had no more, nor other Title to
present than by the appendency of the Advowson to the Manor, and the
Incumbents death, and the appendency to the Manor was inconsistent with the
Defendants Title by the Advowson's being in gross.

These two last Cases fully prove the Rule by me taken, and which will conclude
the Case in question, that the Traverse is well taken to the Appendency of the
Advowson, when it is all the Plaintiffs Title to present, and is inconsistent
with the Defendants.

But in this Case of Gawdys, the Jury found specially, that Southwell was
seized of the Manor with the Advowson appendant and presented, and that the
Incumbent dying 2 Feb. 1588. the Queen the 15th. of Feb. in the same year
presented Snell to the Church then void, per mortem naturalem ultimi
Incumbentis ibidem vacantem. Et ad nostram Praesentationem jure praerogativae
Coronae nostrae Angliae spectantem, and her Clerk instituted by Letters of
Institution, running per Dominam Reginam veram and indubitatam, ut dicitur,
patronam.

And after the death of Snell, King James presented Rone in these words, ad
nostram praesentationem, sive ex pleno jure, sive per lapsum temporis, sive
alio quocunque modo spectantem: and referred to the Court, whether the Advowson
were appendant to the Manor or not; It was adjudged.

1. That the Advowson remained appendant notwithstanding the Queens
Presentation.

2. That her Presentation could not be by Lapse, for her Presentation and
Institution and Induction were in the same month of Febr. wherein the voidance
was.

3. If the Queen had presented by Lapse it had made no severance of the
Advowson.

4. That the Queens Presentation made no Usurpation, because she presented, as
supposing she had a Title in right of her Crown, as appeared by the form of her
Presentation, which is very remarkable, and therefore her Presentation was
merely void; for it shall not be intended, the Queen took away another right
against her own will and declared intention.

5. For the same reason King James his Presentation of Rone, who by the form of
his Presentation supposed he had a good Title, when he had none, was also void:
and this agrees with the Resolution in Greens C. the 6th. Rep. that the Queens
Presentation made as by Lapse, when she had no such Title to present by lapse,
but another Title either in right of her Crown, or by Simony, or some other
way, was void, because she was mistaken in her presentation: So if she presents
by reason of some supposed Title in her Letters of presentation, when indeed
she had no Title at all, the Presentation is merely void, and though such
Presentation make a plenarty, so as to avoid Lapse, yet the right Patron is not
out of possession, but may present 7 years after, and if his Clark be inducted,
the former presentee is immediately outed.

Hence it is to be noted as a point very observable in this Learning, that
though the King may present by Usurpation, yet he shall never present by
Usurpation if in the Letters of Presentation, he present by some Title which he
has not; but if he present generally, making no Title at all by his
Presentation, and his Clerk be received, and dies, he has gained a Title by
Usurpation.

But if the King declare in a Quare Impedit, that he was seized of the Advowson
in gross, or as appendant to a Manor and presented, if he had presented before
by Usurpation, the Defendant shall not traverse his Seisin of the Advowson or
appendency at all.

So is it in the Case of a Common Person also, as appears in the end of the
Case, 10 H. 7. where it is said, It was agreed by the Court, that if the
Plaintiff entitle himself to an Advowson, as appendant to a Manor, and shows
a presentment, as appendant (for so are the words) and the Defendant shows
another Presentment, without that that the Advowson is appendant, this Traverse
is good, for if it be not appendant, as the Plaintiff declares, it is
sufficient to destroy his Declaration; and so there both are traversable, but
otherwise, as the Case is here, viz. the principal Case first cited.

I conceive the meaning clearly to be that in the principal case, the Seisin in
gross of the Advowson alleged in the Declaration was not traversable, but the
presentation, which might be by Usurpation, and made a good Title, though the
Plaintiff were not seized in gross of the Advowson.

But if the Plaintiff declare the Advowson to be appendant to a Manor, and
withal sets forth in his Declaration the Letters of Presentation to the Church
as appendant, there the Defendant may traverse either the appendency or the
Presentation; for though the Advowson were appendant, yet if the Plaintiff
presented not, he had no Title.

Whence I infer, that if the Plaintiff had only counted a Seisin of the Manor,
to which the Advowson was appendant without showing the presentment to be to
the Church by virtue of the appendency; the traverse of the appendency had not
been good, but it must have been of the Presentation, which might have been by
Usurpation, notwithstanding the alleging barely of the appendency, as is
resolved before in the point in the Lord Buckhursts Case in Anderson, and in
the principal Case of 10 H. 7.

But when the Count is of the appendency of the Advowson, and also of the
Presentation to it as appendant there, there could be no Usurpation according
to the Resolutions in Sir Henry Gaudies Case in the Lord Hobart before cited,
and in Greens Case in the 6th Report of the Lord Cook.

And the not observing of this difference made the Reporter at the end of the
L. Buckhursts Case deny this latter part of the Case in 0 H. 7. because it was
clearly against the reason of the principal Case in 10 H. 7. and against the
Resolution of the L. Buckhursts Case, if the words of showing the presentment
to have been as appendant had been omitted in the Case.

But those words make the latter Case in 10 H. 7. exactly to agree with the
Judgments both in Sir Henry Gaudies Case in Hob. and Greens Case in the 6th.
Rep.

15 H. 6. Fitzh. Quare Imped. number. 77.
To the 4 first Cases may be added the Case of 15. H. 6. where the Plaintiff
counts in a Quare Impedit, that his Ancestor was seized of a Manor, to which
the Advowson is appendant, and presented and dyed, and that the Manor
descended to the Plaintiff, and the Church became void, whereby he ought to
present: the Defendant pleads, that long after the Presentation alleged by the
Plaintiff, the Defendant was seized of the Advowson in Fee, and presented such
a one, and after the Church became void, and he presented the present
Incumbent, and this Plea was allowed a good plea by the Court, without
answering to the appendency alleged by the Plaintiff, which was in effect
avoided by the Defendants Presentation after: And in this Case the Plaintiff
was without remedy, unless he could traverse the Presentation alleged by the
Defendant, otherwise than by his Writ of Droit d'Advowson.

Crook 2. Car. f. 61. Sir Greg. Fenner verse. Nicholson and Pasfield.
As also the Case in Crook. If the Plaintiff make Title to present, as being
seized of an Advowson in gross, or as appendant, and the Defendant make Title,
as presented by reason of a Simoniacal presentation made by the Plaintiff, and
thereby a Devolution to present to the King, under whom the Defendant claims,
because the Defendant does admit the Advowson to be in gross or appendant in
the plaintiff, and that neither of them is inconsistent with the Title, made by
the Defendant, he shall not traverse the Seisin in gross, nor the appendency;
but because somewhat else is necessary to give the plaintiff right to present,
that is the vacancy of the Church, either by death or resignation or
deprivation, which the plaintiff must alledg, and which are inconsistent with
the Defendants Title, who claims not by vacancy, by death, resignation or
deprivation, but by the Simony; therefore he shall traverse the vacancy
alleged either by death, resignation or deprivation, as the Case falls out,
without one of which the plaintiff makes no Title, and if the present vacancy
be by either of them, the Defendant has no Title.

Now to apply these Cases to the question before us, whether the Defendant
should have traversed the Presentation of the Lord Wootton alleged by the
plaintiff, or the appendency (which he has done) to the third Part of the
Manor, and third Part of the Rectory of Burton Basset. It seems clear, That in
all Cases of Quare Impedits, the Defendant may safely traverse the Presentation
alleged in the Plaintiffs Count, if the matter of fact will admit him so to
do: for the Plaintiff has no Title without alleging a Presentation in
himself, his Ancestor, or those from whom he claims the Advowson; but the
Defendant must not traverse (that is deny) the Presentation alleged, when
there was a Presentation, for then the issue must be found against him.

The Lord Wootton therefore having presented, by what right soever it was,
there was no traversing his Presentation.

But by what right soever the Lord Wootton presented the Plaintiff has no
right to present, unless the Lord Woottons Presentation were by the appendency
to the third part of the manor, for he deriving no title to the Advowson as in
gross, nor any other way, but as belonging to the third part of the Manor,
which he derives from the Lord Wootton: Therefore nothing is traversable by the
Defendant but the appendency, which, if found against the Plaintiff, he has no
color of Title.

Pasc. 19. Car. 2. Rot. 484. C. B. Henry Edes Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit
against Walter Bishop of Oxford.
THat he was, and is, seized of the Advowson of the Church of Chymer in gross,
in Fee, and thereto presented Will. Paul his Clerk, who was instituted and
inducted accordingly, That after the Church becoming void, and so remaining by
the death of the said William Paul, and it belongs to him to present, he is
hindered by the Defendant.

The said Bishop by Protestation, saying the Church did not become void by
death of the said William Paul, pleads that the said Church was full of the
said Paul.

The said W. Paul was created Bishop of Oxford, whereby the said Church became
void, and the right of presentation devolved to the King by Prerogative.

25 H. 8. c. 21.
Then pleads the clause of the Act of 25 H. 8. which impowrs the Archbishop of
Canterbury to give faculties and dispensations as the Pope did at large.

That after and before the Writ purchased Decimo of the King the said William
Paul dyed at Oxford.

That after his death, the Defendant was elected Bishop of Oxford, and after
and before the Writ purchased, viz. the 27. of November 1665. Gilbert now
Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of all England by his Letters of
Dispensation according to the said Act, and directed to the said Walter, the
Defendant, now Bishop, under his Seal then elect, and upon the Bishops petition
of the means of his Bishopric.

Graciously dispensed with him together with his Bishopric, the Rectory of
Whitney in the Diocese and County of Oxford, which he then enjoyed; and the
Rectory of Chymer aforesaid, which he by the Kings favor hoped shortly to
have, to receive, hold, retain and possess in Commendam, as long as he lived
and continued Bishop of Oxford, with, or without Institution and Induction, or
other solemnity Canonical, and to take and receive the profits to his own use
without Residence. Quantum in eodem Archiepiscopo fuit, and jura regni
paterentur.

The Letters of Dispensation not to be effectual without the Kings
Confirmation.

That the King after the 28 of November. 17. of his Reign under the great Seal to
the said Church, so void by Cession, presented the Defendant, then as
aforesaid, Bishop Elect, and after, that is, the 28. of November. 17. Car. 2. the
King by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, dated the same day and year,
and duly enrolled in the Chancery according to 25 H. 8. did confirm the Letters
of Dispensation, and that the said Bishop might enjoy all things contained in
them according to the form and effect thereof with clauses of non obstante
aliquo Statuto, or other matter.

Then averrs, that the cause of Dispensation was not contrary to the word of
God, and that the Pope in H. 8. time did use to grant the like Dispensations to
the Kings Subjects, which he is ready to averr, etc.

The Plaintiff replys, That true it is William Paul Praedict. was elected
Bishop of Oxford, being Incumbent of Chymer, but that after his election, and
before his creation, he 2 December. 1663. obtained Letters of the Archbishop
under his seal of Faculties for causes therein mentioned of Dispensation to
hold the Church of Brightwell, and the Rectory of Chymer, both which he then
lawfully had, and to retain the same with his Bishopric, after his
consecration, etc. durant. vita sua natural. and Incumbentia sua in Episcopatu
praedict. and quamdiu eidem Episcopatui praeesset.

The King 9. December. 15. of his reign confirmed the Letters Patents under the
great Seal with non obstante according to the Ordinary form.

30. December. 15. Car. 2. was created Bishop.

Upon this Replication the Defendant demurs, and the Plaintiff joins in
Demurrer.

Note the Defendant does not show to whom he was presented.

He does not say, that he entered by virtue of the Presentation of the King in
Chymer.

In discussing the Case, as it appears, upon this Record, I take it granted.

1. If a person Incumbent of one or more Benefices with Cure be consecrated
Bishop, all his benefices are ipso facto void.

2. Upon such voidance the King, and not the Patron is to present to the
benefices so void by Cession.

3. That any Dispensation after the Consecration comes too late to prevent the
Voidance.

4. That the Pope could formerly, and the Archbishop now, can sufficiently
dispense for a Plurality by 25 H. 8.

I shall therefore first make one general Question upon the Case as it appears.

Whither William Paul, Rector of Chymer, and elected Bishop of Oxford, and
before his Consecration dispensed with by the Archbishop to retain his said
Rectory with the Bishopric, and having the said Letters of Dispensation
confirmed by the King, and enrolled Modo and forma prout by the Record, did not
by virtue of the said Dispensation and Confirmation prevent the voidance of his
said Rectory by Cession upon his Consecration?

For if he did, the Rectory became not void until his death, and by his death
the Plaintiff being Patron, has right to present.

To determine the General Question, I shall make these Questions, as arising
out of it.

1. Whether any Dispensation, as this Case is, be effectual to prevent an
avoidance after Consecration?

2. Whether the Archbishop has power, with the King's Confirmation, to grant
such a Dispensation?

3. Whether this Dispensation in particular be sufficient to prevent a voidance
of Chymer after Consecration of the late William Paul.

1. This Case differs from the Bishop of Ossory's Case in Sir J. Davies's
Reports, who had a faculty accipere in Commendam with odd power, and executed
it by collating himself into a Living void by Lapse.

2. It varies from the Case of Colt and Glover in the Lord Hobarts Reports, and
the Dispensation there to the Bishop elect of Lichfield and Coventry, which was
to retain one Benefice which he had; and propria authoritate capere and
apprendere as many as he could, under a certain value.

The defects of that Dispensation are numerous, and excellently handled by the
Lord Hobart in that Case of Colt and Glover. But in our Case there is no
affinity with the defects of those Dispensations, but is barely to retain what
legally was had before.

Per Thyrning. The Bp. of. St. David's Case. 11 H. 4. f. 37. b. 38. a. Rolls f.
358. ob. 1. 11 H. 4. f. 60. B. per Hill.
An Incumbent of a Church with cure being consecrated Bishop, his Living was
void by the Law of the Land; therefore the Pope could not prevent the voidance
after consecration, for then the Pope could change the Law of the Land, and if
the Pope could not, the Archbishop cannot.

The better opinion of that Book 11 H. 4. is contrary, and Irish Case of
Commendams, and Rolls his opinion is grounded only upon 11 H. 4.

If an Incumbent with cure take another Benefice with cure, the first is void
by the Law of the Land, and the Patron has right to present; therefore the
Pope could not grant a Dispensation, nor the Archbishop now can, to hold a
Plurality, for that were to alter the Law of the Land, and to prejudice the
Patron. But the Law was and is otherwise, therefore that reason concludes not
in the case of a Bishop.

A second reason in that case of 11 H. 4. is, that such a Dispensation 11 H. 4.
f. 59. by per Skreen.
because there is no use of it until Consecration; for before the Incumbent
retains his Living without any Dispensation, and when consecrated, his
Benefices are void, and then it is too late to dispense as is agreed.

This reason is as effectual against a Dispensation for a Plurality, a second
Living, there can be no use of it, and after by this reason it comes too late,
for the Patron has right to present.

It was in that great Case endeavored to avoid the pressure of this Argument
by saying the Dispensations in cases of Plurality were not alike with that of
retaining the former Benefice, when the Incumbent was created Bishop, because
in the case of Plurality there was no actual voidance, and consequently no
title to the Patron to present before Deprivation, and that the Dispensation
prevented the Deprivation, which was a Spiritual Act, wherewith the Patron had
not to do, and by a Consequent only prevented the voidance.

It is resolved in Holland's Case, Digby's Case, Hollands Case. 4. Rep. Digby's
Case. 4. Rep.
and many others, that the Patron may present as soon as the Incumbent is
Instituted in a second Living without deprivation, and that the Law was
anciently so, therefore that evasion is not material.

Another answer has been likewise offered, and passes in the New Books for
current, that in the case of Pluralities the voidance is by the Canon Law, and
therefore may be dispensed with by the same Law, but in the case of a Bishop
made, the voidance is by the Common Law.

If Canon Law be made part of the Law of this Land, then is it as much the Law
of the Land, and as well, and by the same Authority, as any other part of the
Law of the Land. And if it be not made the Law of the Land, then has it no
more effect than a Law of Utopia, therefore the Canon Law in force here is Law
of the Land.

Besides their meaning is to be learned, who say, an Incumbents Benefice, made
a Bishop, is void by the Common Law, and not by the Canon Law. The words of
Thyrning in that case 11 H. 4. are, (who was then Chief Justice.)

11 H. 4. f. 60. b. Da. Rep. f. 81. a. and f. 68. b.
I suppose that when a man Beneficed is made a Bishop, it is by the Law of holy
Church that his Benefice becomes void, and the same Law which gives the
voidance may cause that it shall not be void, and that concerns the power of
the Apostle. The Common Law does not prohibit Pluralities, nor make a voidance
of his Benefice when the Incumbent is Bishop, but the ancient Ecclesiastical
Law of England.

11 H. 4. f. 77. a. per Hill.
It is a Contradiction that the Incumbent being the Bishops Subject, and the
Bishop his Sovereign, should be united: the Servant, qua Servant, may as well
be Master, the Tenant, qua Tenant Lord, the Deputy the Deputor, the Delegator
the Delagated, which is impossible.

Subject, being so should not be Subject, but no contradiction that a person
Subject should cease to be so; the subjection of the Incumbent cease when the
Rectory is in the Bishop; the Deputy is not when the principal Officer executes
the office in person, and relation of Lord and Tenant destroyed, when the Lord
occupies the Land himself.

If an Act of Parliament should enable every Bishop to hold his former
Benefices, no contradiction would follow, nor does now by the Dispensation.

And note, all these Reasons deny the Popes power formerly, the Archbishops
now, and the King's also; for they are not Reasons against the power of the
party dispensing, but that the Subject matter is capable of no dispensation.

There is no inconsistence for a Bishop to be an Incumbent, for he is a
Spiritual Corporation, and being Patron of a Living, might and may have it
appropriate, that is, to be for him and his Successors perpetual Incumbents.

Da. Rep. f. 80. b.
The Rectories of Eastmeane and Hambleden are appropriate ad Mensam of the
Bishop of Winchester, and many others in England and Ireland so appropriated.

Seldom. Hist. of Tithes. ^. 6. par. 3. f. 8^. b. c. 9. par. 2. f. 253.
Every Bishop, many hundreds of years after Christ, was universal Incumbent of
his Diocese, received all the profits which were but Offerings of Devotion; out
of which he paid the Salaries of such as officiated under him, as Deacons or
Curates in places appointed.

Whether the Pope formerly used to dispense in such a case, and consequently
the Archbishop now can by the Stat. of 25 H. 8. c. 21?

1. Bishop of St. Davies Case.
The particular dispensation granted to the Bishop of St. Davies in 11 H. 4. is
a full instance, nor was it in the Argument of that case insisted, that the
Pope could not dispense with a Bishop to retain or receive a Benefice. But the
sole Question was, Whether (in that particular case, because the Benefice to be
retained belonged to the presentation of a Churchman, viz. the Bishop of
Salisbury) the Dispensation did not amount to a provision, and so was within
the Statute of Provisions, 25 E. 3.

2. By the Statute of 28 H. 8. it appears the Bishop of Rome did grant
Faculties and Dispensations to the King's Subjects, 28 H. 8. c. 16.
as Pluralities, Unions, Tryalities, Appropriations, Commendams, Exemptions;
where Commendams are enumerated: and by that Act all granted by the Pope are
made void, but to be renewed in the Chancery.

3. Procuring Commendams were so frequent in Ireland, 7 E. 4. c. 2.
that a special Act of Parliament was there made 7 E. 4. against all such as
should purchase Bulls for any Commendam, to put them out of the Kings
protection.

4. A Bastard instituted and inducted before Deprivation, 11 H. 4. f. 78. a.
and f. 60. a. 11 H. 4. f. 76. b.
a Secular Priest before he became regular, whereof many were in England (and
Thyrning says he knew that Edmond Monk of Berry, who was with Edward the
Third, held many Benefices though a Monk) and Pluralities were ordinarily
dispensed with by the Pope.

5. 11 H. 4. f. 38. a.
Hankford says he has seen that the same man was Abbot of Glastenbury, and
Bishop of another Church simul and semel.

Horton, 11 H. 4. f. 76. a.
The Pope may grant that one man may hold three Bishoprics at a time, which
Hankford agreed, if with consent of the Patrons: For if without their consent,
it was not dispensing to hold them, but granting away the property of the
Patrons, which a Dispensation could not.

Henry Beaufort, Uncle to Henry the Sixth, Da. Rep. f. 80. 77. b.
had a Dispensation to retain the Bishopric of Winchester, being Cardinal, but
it was ineffectual, because obtained after he was Cardinal.

Cardinal Woolsey obtained before he was Cardinal a Dispensation to hold the
Archbishopric of York, and the Abbey of St. Albans, together with his
Cardinalship.

Lindwood. Titulo de Praebendis cap. Audistis, Lindwood. f. 100. b.
Potestas quae secundum antiqua jura dabatur Episcopis ad dispensandum super
pluralitate Beneficiorum restricta est, saltem in dignitatibus and Beneficiis
curatis, sed circa beneficia simplicia been poterunt Episcopi dispensare. And
in the same Gloss, In dignitatibus and curatis solus Papa dispensat.

Authority in the point that a Rector of a Church dispensed with according to
25 H. 8. before he is consecrated Bishop, remains Rector, as before, after
Consecration.

^8 H. 6. f. 19. Br. Spoliation. pl. 4.
1. Where the Pope licenses one who is created a Bishop to retain his ancient
Benefice, and the Patron presents another, the elder Incumbent sues a
Spoliation in the Spiritual Court, it well lies, for both claim by the same
Patron, Quae supradicta omnes concesserunt, says the Book.

Fitz. N. B. Tit. Spoliation f. 36. b.
2. The Writ of Spoliation lies properly by one Incumbent against another
Incumbent, where the right of the Patron comes not in debate.

As if a person be created Bishop, and has a Dispensation to hold his Rectory,
and after the Patron presents another Incumbent, who is instituted and
inducted, the Bishop shall have against that Incumbent a Spoliation, this
proves the Bishop to continue Incumbent after his Consecration, and to hold his
Rectory by his former presentation.

Die. 6. El. f. 228. b. pl. 48. 6 and 7 El. f. 233. A. p. 12.
John Packhurst, Rector of Cleve in Gloucestershire, had a Dispensation to hold
it notwithstanding he were advanced to any Bishopric in the Realm, for three
years from the Feast of St. Michael, 1560. to the same Feast 1563. he was after
consecrated Bishop of Norwich, and within the three years resigned: the Queen
presented (...) one her Chaplain, supposing she had title by Cession of the
Bishop; Sir H. Sydney the Patron brought a Quare Impedit, and the Church was
found to be void by Resignation of the Bishop of Norwich, and recovered and had
Judgment.

1. This case proves the Bishop of Norwich Incumbent, as formerly,
notwithstanding his Consecration, else the Living had not voided by his
Resignation.

2. The Dispensation was only for three years, yet he was as entire Incumbent,
and might resign during those three years, as if he had not been Bishop.

3. It proves the Dispensation may be for a time only to hold his former
Benefice, and ad modum concedentis, which clears the last Question, that in
such a Commendam retinere the Dispensation is good, though it be but for as
long as he is Bishop of that See, and then determines.

An Incumbent made Bishop, and retaining by Dispensation, may have (which none
but a perfect Incumbent can have) a Writ of Spoliation, Juris Utrum, Vi Laica
Removenda, Annuity for him, or Annuity brought against him.


In the Bishop of Ossory's case, they which argued against him conclude, out of
all this difference results, viz. That a Faculty granted to one which is not
Incumbent to take a void Benefice is void, and a Faculty to one which is
Incumbent of a Benefice to retain the same is good. The other side for the
Bishop concluded the Capere in Commendam good where the Patron was not
prejudiced, as in Lapse, and consequently the Retinere to be good, consented to
by him who was to present upon voidance.

The Commendam Retinere may be for years, or any time, Colt and Glovers Case,
Hobart. f. 156.
the difference is manifest if their nature and reason be observed.

The difference between Retinere and Capere is no less than between holding
that which is already my own, and taking that which is another. I am already
beneficed by Presentation, etc. in ordinary form, I would take a Bishopric
which would void the Benefice, therefore I obtain a Dispensation to continue
holding my Benefice for three years, I remain Parson of the same benefice of no
less estate than I had before; and when the three years are past the benefice
voids, as it would have done at the first, if there had been no Dispensation.

And again, Hob. f. 158.
a Bishop by Dispensation may retain as many Benefices as he had lawfully
before, but take none of new if he had his number before, etc.

William Bradbridge being Bishop of Exeter, Cok. lib. Intr. f. 475. Heales
Case. Rolls 344. b. pl. 2.
obtained Letters of Dispensation from the Archbishop, with the Queens
Confirmation to receive any two Benefices with or without cure, and retain them
with his Bishopric within his Diocese, quamdiu Episcopatui praedict. praeesset
after he was presented to the Rectory of Newton ferris, and dyed, and the
Patron presented Simonaically, and after six Months the Bishop presented as by
Lapse, and a Quare Impedit brought against him, where the avoidance of the
Church per mortem of the Bishop of Exeter is admitted, though it be taken by
protestation in that case that the Church non vacavit per mortem.

Note, the Bishop of Exeter was presented to the Archbishop, and instituted
and inducted.

If after the death of the last Bishop, who held this Church by Dispensation,
the King may present, as the case is, the next succeeding Bishop to hold it by
Dispensation, he may so present the third, and so toties quoties there shall be
a Bishop of Oxford, and for the same reason, viz. the small Incomes of the
Bishopric.

So shall the Patron for ever loose his Presentation, omitting nothing to be
done, nor committing any thing not to be done, but doing his duty in presenting
a fit person, and who deserved to be made Bishop.

Objections.
Tr. 9. E. 3. pl. 6 18 E. 3. f. 21. Fitz. N. Br. f. 34. Letter F.
The most specious Objection is made upon the Books of E. 3. and 18 E. 3. and
the Abbot of Thorneys case there cited; That if the King recover in a Quare
Impedit, and after confirms the Incumbents estate, yet after the Incumbents
death, the King shall present, and therefore in this case.

King has recovered in a Quare Impedit, he has right to present uncontrolably
by the Record, and may at his pleasure sue forth Execution, and in the mean
time permit the Incumbent to continue in the Benefice at his pleasure: but here
it is denied that the King has any right to present.

Kings permission or grant, that the Incumbent should not be troubled during
his life, cannot be pleaded by the Patron in bar of the Kings right to present
by virtue of his Judgment, for the Kings permisson was nothing to the Patron;
and the King ought to have Execution of his Judgment when he demands it against
him.

Justice Thyrning also gives the Reason of those Books, The Cause, 11 H. 4. f.
76. b per Thyrning. 45 E. 3. f. 19.
says he, is although the King confirms the Incumbents estate, yet he had not
his estate or possession by the King, but by his Patrons presentment, and by
the Kings confirmation his right was neither executed nor extinct.

E. 3. for he does not here as there he did, intend to transfer any right of
his into the Incumbent, by continuing his possession: But his confirmation here
is only formal, and to complete the dispensation of the Archbishop, which is
not sufficient by the Rule of the Act of 25. unless confirmed by the King: It
was otherwise in the Popes case before the Act.

There are many Presidents in Mr. Noy's Book, where in like Bishop, holding in
Commendam, after his translation to another See, and after his resignation,
has presented.

All those Presidents are since the Twentieth of the Queen, which Patrons; and
doubtless there are Presidents wherein the Patrons did present, else this
Question had been earlier. But Judicandum est legibus non exemplis.

Upon Translation of a Bishop holding a Commendam in the Retinere, as long as
he continued Bishop there, the King ought to present, for the Dispensation is
determined upon his remove, and then is as if it had not been, and a
Dispensation gives no property to the Living, nor takes away any.

But where property is given to the Living, as by Presentation, Institution,
and Induction, or by Grant, as in Appropriations, Hob. Colts and Glovers Case.
and sometimes otherwise by the King, such presenting or granting for a year or
six, is to grant it during life. As an Atturnment cannot be for a time, nor a
Confirmation, nor a Denization or Naturalization, and the like, but such Acts
are perfect, Manwarings Case. 21 Jac. Crook. f. 691.
as they may be, notwithstanding Restriction to time, as is agreed well in
Manwaring's Case.

I shall say nothing of the case of Resignation, as not being in the present
Question.

Judgment was given by the Opinion of the whole Court, That the Avoidance was
by Death, not by Cession.

Hill. 19 and 20 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 1785. Baruck Tustian Tristram Plaintiff,
Anne Roper Vicountess Baltinglass Vidua, Defendant, in a Plea of Trespass and
Ejectment.
THe Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant, vi and Armis, entered into 20
Messuages, 1000 Acres of Land, 200 Acres of Meadow, and 500 Acres of Pasture,
cum pertinentiis in Thornbury, Shalston, Evershaw, Oldwick, Westbury, and
Looffield, and into the Rectory of Thornbury, which Thomas Gower Knight. and
Baronet, and George Hilliard to the said Baruck demis'd the First of October. 19
Car. 2. Habendum from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel last past, for
the term of Five years next ensuing, into which he the said Baruck the same day
entered, and was ousted and ejected by the Defendant ad damnum 40 l.

To this the Defendant pleads Not Guilty.

And the Jury have found specially, That the Defendant is not guilty in all
those Tenements, besides 5 Messuages, 400 Acres of Land, 50 Acres of Meadow,
100 Acres of Pasture, cum pertinentiis in Thornbury, Shalston, Evershaw,
Oldwick, and Westbury, and in the Rectory of Thornbury, and besides in one
Message, 100 Acres of Land, 50 Acres of Meadow, and 100 Acres of Pasture cum
pertinentiis in Looffield.

And as to the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid in the said five Messuages,
etc. and in the Rectory of Thornbury, the Jury say upon their Oath, that before
the said Trespass and Ejectment supposed 22 Junii, 12 Jac. Sir Arthur
Throgmorton Knight. was seized in Fee of the aforesaid Rectory and Tenements last
mentioned, and of the said Premises in Looffield, and so seized.

A certain Indenture Tripartite was made 22 Junii, 12 Jac. between him the said
Sir Arthur of the first part, Edward Lord Wootton, Augustine Nicholls Knight.
Francis Harvey Esquire; and Rowly Ward Esquire; of the second part, and Sir Peter
Temple, and Anne Throgmorton, Daughter of the said Sir Arthur, of the third
part.

To this effect, That the said Sir Arthur Throgmorton did covenant and promise
with the said Lord Wootton and Sir Augustine Nicholls, in consideration of
Marriage to be had between the said Sir Peter Temple and the said Anne, and
other the considerations mentioned in the said Indenture by Fine or Fines,
before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel next ensuing, or other good
Conveyance to be levied by him and the said Dame Anne his wife, to the said
Lord Wootton, etc. The site and precinct of the Priory of Looffield, the
Rectory of Thornbury, and diverse Manors, Lands, and Tenements in the said
Indenture mentioned, several yearly Rents therein mentioned; and all other his
Lands in the Counties of Northampton, Buckingham, and Oxford, at any time
belonging to the said Priory, to convey and assure

To the use of himself, for life, without Impeachment of Waste.

Then to the use of Dame Anne his Wife.

Then to the use of the said Sir Peter Temple, and the said Anne his Wife,
during their natural lives, and the longer Liver of them: and after both their
Deceases,

To the use of the first Son of the Body of Anne by the said Sir Peter
begotten; and of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said first Son, so to the
sixth Son.

Then to the use of all other Sons in succession, in like manner, of the Body
of Anne, begotten by the said Sir Peter.

And for default of such Heirs, To the use of all the Issues Female of the Body
of the said Anne by the said Sir Peter begotten; and the Heirs of the Bodies of
the said Issues Female.

For default thereof, To the first Son of the said Anne by any other Husband,
and his Heirs Males, and so to the tenth.

In like manner to the Issues Female of the Body of Anne, with diverse
Remainders over.

A Proviso, That it be lawful for Sir Arthur, at all times during his life, to
let, set, and demise, all or any the said Premises aforesaid, which at any
time heretofore have been usually letten or demised to any person or persons,
for and during the term of One and twenty years or under, in possession, and
not in Reversion; or for or during any other number of years determinable upon
one, two, or three Lives in Possession, and not in Reversion, reserving the
Rents therefore now yielded or paid, or more to be yearly due and payable
during such Lease and Leases, unto such person and persons unto whom the said
Premises, so to be demised, shall come, and be by virtue of these Presents, if
no such demise had been made, so long as the same Lessees, their Executors and
Assigns, shall duly pay the Rents, and perform their Conditions according to
the true meaning of their Indentures of Lease, and commit no waste of and in
the things to them demised.

The like Proviso verbatim for Sir Peter Temple, and Anne his Wife, to make
like Leases during their Lives, and the Life of the longer liver of them, after
the death of Sir Arthur, and Dame Anne his Wife.

That a Fine was accordingly levied, etc. to the uses aforesaid.

They find that all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Rectory in the
Declaration mentioned, are comprised in the said Indenture Tripartite

They find the death of Sir Arthur Throgmorton and Anne his Wife, 2. September. 1
Car. 1. and that Sir Peter Temple entered, and was seized for term of his life.

They find he had Issue of the Body of Anne his Wife, Anne the now Defendant,
Daughter and Heir of the Bodies of the said Sir Peter and Anne his Wife; and
that Anne, Wife of Sir Peter, died 2. Sept. 3 Car. 1.

1. They find a Demise by Sir Peter Temple to Sir Thomas Gower and Hillyard of
the Rectory of Thornbury, 9. Maii, 23 Car. 1. for 30 l. Rent.

2. They find a Demise by him to them of a Message in Thornbury, 9. March, 23
Car. 1. of Woolheads Tenement, for 16 l. 13 s. 4 d. Rent.

3. They find a Demise to them, 9. March, 23 Car. 1. of Land in Thornbury, held
by Roger Rogers, Rent 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.

4. They find a Demise, 9. March, 23 Car. 1. of Nelson's Tenement in Thornbury,
Rent 16 l. 13 s. 4 d. at Michaelmass and Lady Day.

5. They find a Demise, 13. March, 23 Car. 1. of Lands in Shalston, Eversham,
and Oldwick, held formerly by William Hughes, Rent 15 s. 4 d.

These respective Leases were made for the term of 90 Years, determinable upon
the Lives of the Lady Baltinglass the Defendant, Sir Richard Temple's, and the
Life of a younger Son of Sir Peter Temple, as long as the Lessees should duly
pay the Rents reserved, and commit no waste, according to the Limitation of the
Proviso in 12 Jac. which is recited in the respective Leases.

6. Then the Jury find, quod predicti separales reditus super praedictis
separalibus Indenturis, Dimissionis reservat. fuerint reservat. reditus de and
super premissis praedictis, 22. dii Junii, Anno Jacobi Regis 12. supradict. Et
quod praedict. separales reditus, etc. in forma praedict. reservat. ad Festum
Sancti Michaelis Arch-angeli, quod fuit 1653. debit. non solut. sive oblat.
suerint super idem Festum, sed quod iidem reditus infra unum mensem prox. post
Festum praedictum praefat. Annae Roper Defend. solut. fuerunt.

7. They find a Demise to them of the Site and Priory of Looffield, 9. March,
23 Car. 1. at the Rent of 100 l. payable equally on Lady Day and
Michaelmass-day ( demised by Sir Arthur Throgmorton, and Anne his Wife, 20th.
of May, 12 Eliz. 1570. to William Hewer for 21 years, Rent 100 l. Lady Day and
Michaelmass with some Exceptions) for the like term of 90 years, and upon like
Limitations as in the former Leases.

The Jury find quod Tenementa praedicta cum pertinentiis in Looffield
supranominat. tempore dict. Eliz. nuper Reginae Angl. fuerint dimissa ad
redditum 100 l. pro termino 21. Annorum, sed dimissio and terminus 21 Annorum
expirati fuerunt; Et dicunt quod eisdem Juratoribus non constabat, quod dicta
Tenementa in Looffield praedict. 22 die Junii, 12 Jac. aut per spatium 20
Annorum tunc antea fuerint dimissa; Et dicunt ulterius quod 50 l. pro dimidio
unius Anni de praedictis Tenementis in Looffield, ad Festum Sancti Michaelis
Arch-angeli quod fuit Anno Dom. 1653. debit. oblatae fuerint; Et quod praedicta
Anna Roper ante Festum Annunciationis prox. sequent. intravit.

They find, that Gower and Hillyard claiming the said 5 Messuages, 400 Acres of
Land, 50 Acres of Meadow, and 100 Acres of Pasture in Thornbury, Shalston,
Evershaw, Oldwick, and Westbury; As also the said Message and other the
Premises in Looffield, and the Rectory of Thornbury, before the supposed
Trespass and Ejectment, entered upon the Possession of the Lady Baltinglass, and
so possessed, made a Lease to the Plaintiff, by virtue of which he entered, and
was possessed, until outed by the Defendant, as by the Declaration. But whither
the Defendant be culpable, they refer to the Court.

Upon this Verdict the Questions are two:

1. The first, Whither the Defendants entry into the six Tenements leased to
Gower and Hillyard, for not payment of the Rent reserved upon the day of
payment, were lawful or not?

And as to that the Court is of opinion, that the Defendants Entry was lawful;
for that the Leases were not derived out of the Estate of Sir Peter Temple, who
was but Tenant for life, and had no Reversion in him, but out of the Estate of
Sir Arthur Throgmorton, by Limitation of the Proviso in the Deed, 12 Jac. so as
the Leases were not Leases upon Condition to pay the Rent at the day, to which
any Demand or Re-entry was requisite for Non-payment; but were Leases by
Limitation, and determined absolutely according to the Limitation. Littl. f.
235. a.
For this, Littleton is express, that the words quamdiu, dum, and dummodo, are
words of Limitation. As if a Lease be made to a Woman, dum sola fuerit, or dum
casta vixerit, or dummodo solverit talem reditum, or quamdiu solverit talem
reditum; so are many other words there mentioned: And if there be not a
performance according to the Limitation, it determines the Lease.

But it is otherwise where a Rent is reserved upon Condition; for there is a
Contract between the Lessor and Lessee, and the Law evens the Agreement between
them, as is most agreeable to Reason, and the supposition of their Intention.

But in the present case Sir Peter Temple had no interest in him, out of which
such Leases could be derived, but had a power only to make them by virtue of
the Proviso in Sir Arthur Throgmortons Deed, and the Lessees must be subject to
such Limitations as are thereby made.

It was agreed by the Council of the Plaintiff, That it was not a Condition for
payment of the Rent, nor could it be; but they would call it a Caution. A
Condition to determine a Lease or a Limitation, is a Caution, and a material
one; but such a Caution as has no more effect than if it were not at all, is a
thing insignificant in Law; and therefore must not supplant that, which in
proper terms is a Limitation, and has an effect.

2. The next Question is upon the Lease of Looffield, which arises upon the
words of the Proviso, That it should be lawful for Sir Peter Temple to demise
all or any the Premises, which at any time heretofore have been usually letten
or demised for the term of 21 years or under, reserving the Rent thereupon now
yielded or paid.

And the Jury finding the Lands in Looffield to have been demised 12th. of the
Queen for 21 years for 100 l. Rent, and that that term was expired, and not
finding them demis'd by the space of twenty years before at the time of the
Indenture, 12 Jac. Whither the Lease by Sir Peter Temple of them, be warranted
by the Proviso (there being reserved the Rent, reserved by the Lease in 12.
Eliz. viz. 100. l.

The Court is of opinion, that the Lease of Looffield is not warranted by that
Proviso, for these Reasons.

1. It is clear, Sir Arthur Throgmorton intended to exclude some Lands from
being demisable by that Proviso, namely, Such as at any time before were not
usually let and set to Farm: For where a man's power is limited to lease Lands
so specially qualified; that is, let and set usually at any time before, when
he could not lease at all, without such special power given him, he is
absolutely barred from leasing Land which is not so qualified.

2. It must be presumed Sir Arthur Throgmorton knew he had such Lands, as
according to his Intention were not at any time before usually set and let, and
had reason not to suffer them to be demiseable within that Proviso, to the
prejudice of those in Reversion. As for example, his Mansion House, Gardens,
Curtilages, and Lands occupied in Demesne.

For it had been vain to provide against the leasing of Land in such manner
conditioned, whereof he had none so conditioned. But if notwithstanding, it
shall be taken that any his Lands, which at any time past, how long soever
since, one, two, or three hundred years, were demised, as perhaps the site of
his House and all his Demesne were, though he knew not of it, shall therefore
now be demiseable within this Proviso.

Then is the Proviso inconsistent with it self, and repugnant to his meaning;
for he intended thereby to hinder the demising of some of his Lands: But by
that construction of the Proviso, every part of his Land might be demised; for
doubtless, at some time or other, every part of it was demised, and probably by
Records or other ancient Evidence, might appear so to be.

3. If this were the meaning of the Proviso, the word (usually) in it was to no
purpose; for it had been much clearer to say, That any Lands, at any time
heretofore demis'd, should be demiseable for 21 years by Sir Peter Temple,
which doubtless was not Sir Arthur's meaning, and consequently this Lease of
Looffield not according to his meaning.

1. Now for the literal sense of the Proviso: Rolls, Title Power. f. 261. n.
11. 2 Jac. in Ban^o.
If power be to make Leases for 3 lives, or 21 years, of Lands usually letten;
Land which has been twice letten is within the Proviso, but not Land which
has been but once letten.

Therefore this Land of Looffield letten but once, 12 Eliz. is not within the
Proviso.

But I insist not much upon this case, for the words usually demis'd may be
taken in two senses: The one for the often farming or repeated Acts of leasing
Lands, to which sense this Case does reasonably extend.

But the other sense of Land usually demis'd, is for the common continuance of
Land in lease, for that is usually demis'd; and so Land leas'd for 500 years
long since, is Land usually demis'd, that is, in lease, though it have not been
more than once demis'd, which is the more received sense of the words, Land
usually demis'd.

2. The meaning of the words, at any time, is various, and of contrary meaning.
If it be asked by way of Question, Were you at any time at York? It is the same
as, Were you ever, or sometime at York? So in the Question, Was this Land at
any time in Lease? is the same, as, Was it ever, or some time in Lease?

But when the words, at any time, are not part of a Question, but of an Answer,
they have a different and contrary meaning. As if it be asked, Where may I see
or speak with John Styles? and it be answered, You may speak with him, or see
him at any time at his House. There the words, at any time, signify at all
times, and not as in the question, at some time.

So when the words are used by way of a plain enunciation, and not as part of a
Question or Answer; As, You shall be welcome to my House at any time, signify
You shall be welcome at all times.

So in the present Case, if it-be made a Question, Was such Land heretofore at
any time usually letten and set to Farm? imports in the Question, Was this Land
ever, or at some time heretofore (how long ago soever) usually let to Farm.

But by way of enunciation if it be said, This Land was usually let to Farm at
any time heretofore; it means, This Land was commonly, at all times heretofore,
let to Farm.

So this Land was usually in Pasture at any time heretofore, signifies, this
Land was always, or commonly in Pasture heretofore.

So, you may lease any Land heretofore letten to Farm at any time, usually, is
the same with heretofore letten to Farm commonly at all times. And this
Construction of the Proviso agrees both with the words and intention of Sir
Arthur.

But what was not farmed at the time of this Proviso made, nor 20 years before,
could not be said to be at any time before commonly Farmed; for those 20 years
was a time before, in which it was not farmed.

But to come closer, The Proviso is that Leases may be made for 21 years of any
the Lands in the Deed, reserving the Rents thereupon reserved at the time of
the Deed made, viz. 12 Jac.

Which necessarily implies, that the Land demiseable by that Proviso, must be
Land which then was under Rent; for where no Rent then was, the Rent then
thereupon reserved could not be reserved. But Looffield had then no Rent upon
it, for it was not let of 20 years before, nor then, and therefore was not
demiseable by that Proviso.

The words (or more) will not at all help the Plaintiff, for the words (more or
less) are words of relation; the one of addition to what was before; the other
of diminution; for (more or less) must relate to something positive in the kind
before, and can never be a relation to nothing.

So (more wages) necessarily implies some before, (more meat) (more drink)
(more company) and, in all expressions (more) denotes a relation to somewhat
before of the kind; and in the present Case, reserving (more Rent) must imply
some before reserved. And therefore where none was at the time of the Deed made
12 Jac. there cannot, in any congruity of speech, more be reserved, or intended
to be reserved.

Quaere, If the Record be mended in the point of finding the death of Sir Peter
Temple, and when he died.

In this the Chief Justice delivered the Resolution of the whole Court.

Hill. 21 and 22 Car. II. Rot. 2259. C. B. Ralph Dixon Plaintiff, Hearts. ss.
versus Dean Harrison Defendant; In a Replevin, Quare cepit Averia ipsius
Radulphi, and ea detinuit contra vadios and plegios, etc.
Distress, 21 Maii, 21 Car. 2.
THe Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant, 21 die Maii, 21 Regis nunc, at
Sandridge, in a place called Fregmorfield, took three Cows of the Plaintiffs,
and detained them against Pledges quousque, to his damage 40 l.

The Defendant, as Bailiff of Elizabeth Rooper, Widow, Samuel Hildersham Gent.
and Mary his Wife, Michael Biddulph Esquire; and Frances his Wife, Humphrey Holden
Esquire; and Theodosia his Wife, avows and justifies the Caption; for that the
place in quo, etc. contains a Rood of Land cum pertinentiis in Sandridge
aforesaid.

That long before the Caption, Ralph Rowlett Knight, was seized of the Manor
of Sandridge in the said County, whereof the said place is and was parcel time
out of mind.

Grant of the Rent, June 26 8 Eliz.
That the said Sir Ralph, 26. June, 8 Eliz. at Sandridge aforesaid, by his Deed
in writing under his Seal, produced in Court, thereby granted and confirmed to
Henry Goodyeare then Esquire, and after Knight, and to the Heirs of his Body, a
yearly Rent of 30 l. out of all his said Manor, and other his Lands in
Sandridge aforesaid, payable at the Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, and
the Annunciation.

The first payment at such of the said Feasts which should happen after the
expiration, surrender, or forfeiture to be made after Sir Ralph Rowlett's
death, of certain terms of years, of parcel of the Premises made to one
William Sherwood and Ralph Dean severally.

With Clause of Entry and Distress to Henry, and the Heirs of his Body, if the
Rent were unpaid.

And that Sir Ralph gave the said Henry seisin of the said Rent, by payment of
a penny, as appears by the Deed.

Rowletts death, 1 Sept. 33 Eliz.
Sir Ralph Rowlett, after the First day of September, 33 Eliz: at Sandridge
aforesaid, died.

That after the Second day of September, Terms expired Sept. 2. 33 Eliz.
33 Eliz. the said terms of years expired, whereby the said Henry became seized
of the said Rent in tail.

That Henry had Issue the said Elizabeth and Mary, Hen. Good-year died 1.
October. 33 Eliz.
and one Anne, his Daughters and Coheirs, and died 1. October. 33 Eliz so seized.

That the said Coheirs, being seized of the said Rent, Mary married Samuel 1.
May 1634. and Anne the same time married John Kingston.
to them and the Heirs of their Bodies, the First of May, 1634. Mary married
the said Samuel Hildersham, and Anne married one John Kingston, whereby the
said Elizabeth and Samuel and Mary, in right of the said Mary, and John and
Anne in right of Anne, were seized of the Rent.

December 25. 1635. Anne had Issue by John her Husband, Anne had Issue Frances
and Theodofia, she and her Husband John died 1 Jan. 1635.
the said Frances and Theodosia; and John her Husband and Anne died 1.
Januarii, 1635.

That thereby Elizabeth, Samuel, and Mary, in right of Mary, Frances, and
Theodosia became seized of the Rent.

April the 10th. 1647. Frances married the said Biddulph, and Theodosia the
said Humphrey Holden, whereby Elizabeth, Samuel and Mary, in right of Mary;
Biddulph and Frances, in right of Frances; and Holden and Theodosia in right of
Theodosia, became seized of the Rent.

And for 120 l. for four years arrear after the death of John and Anne, ending
at the Feast of St. Michael, 1655. being unpaid at the time and place, etc. the
Defendant, as their Bailiff, entered, and distrained the said Cows.

The Plaintiff demands Oyer of the Deed of Grant, and has it in these words,
etc.

And then the Plaintiff replies, that before the time of the Caption, that is,
A die Paschae in quindecim dies, a Fine was levied in the Court of Common
Pleas, in the One and twentieth of the King, before the Justices there, etc.
between Richard Harrison Esquire, and the Avowants of the said Rent, with
Warranty to the said Richard and his Heirs.

And that this Fine was to the use of the Conizors and their Heirs, and demands
Judgment.

The Defendant thereupon demurrs.

WHERE the Law is known, and clear, though it be unequitable and inconvenient,
the Judges must determine as the Law is, without regarding the unequitableness
or inconveniency.

Those defects, if they happen in the Law, can only be remedied by Parliament;
therefore we find many Statutes repealed, and Laws abrogated by Parliament, as
inconvenient, which before such repeal or abrogation, were in the Courts of Law
to be strictly observed.

But where the Law is doubtful, and not clear, the Judges ought to interpret
the Law to be as is most consonant to equity, and least inconvenient.

And for this reason, Littleton in many of his Cases, resolves the Law not to
be that way which is inconvenient, which Sir Edward-Cook, in his Comment upon
him, often observes; and cites the places, Sect. 87.

In the present Case there are several Coparceners, whereof some have Husbands
seized of a Rent Charge in tail: the Rent is behind, and they all levy a Fine
of the Rent to the use of them and their Heirs.

If after the Fine levied, they are barred from distraining for the Rent
arrear, before the Fine, is the Question? It being agreed they can have no
other remedy, because the Rent is in the reality, and still continuing.

If they cannot distrain, the Consequents are,

1. That there is a manifest duty to them of a Rent, for which the Law gives no
remedy, which makes in such case the having of right to a thing, and having
none, not to differ: for where there is no right, no relief by Law can be
expected; and here, where there is right, the relief is as little, which is as
great an absurdity as is possible.

2. It was neither the Intention of the Conizors, to remit this Arrear of Rent
to the Tenant, nor the Tenants to expect it: nor could the Conizors remit it
but by their words or intentions, or both; nor did they do it by either.

3. It is both equitable in it self, and of public convenience, that the Law
should assist men to recover their due, when detained from them.

4. Men in time of Contagion, of Dearth, of War, may be occasioned to settle
their Estates when they cannot reasonably expect payment of Rents from their
Tenants for Lives, or others, and consequently not seasonably distrain them;
and it would be a general inconvenience in such case to lose all their Rents in
Arrear. So as both in Equity and Convenience the Law should be with the
Avowants.

In the next place we must examine, Whether the Avowants, that is, the Conizors
of the Fine, be clearly barred by Law to distrain for the Rent arreare before
the Fine? For it must be agreed, they have no other remedy by the Common Law,
or otherwise: to which purpose I shall open some Premises, that my Conclusion
may be better apprehended.

1. A privity is necessary by the Common Law to distrain and avow between the
Distrainor and the Distrained, that the Tenant may know to whom the Rent or
other Duty ought to be paid; and likewise know a lawful distress from a
tortious taking of his Cattle.

2. This privity is created by Attornment, either in Fact or in Law, by the
Tenant to the Lord, to the Reversioner, to the Grantee of a Remainder, or of a
Rent by Deed or by Fine: Litt. Sect. 579.
For this Sir Edward Cooe upon the 579th. Section of Littleton, and in many
other of his Sections.

The Conizee of a Fine before Attornment cannot distrain, because an Avowry is
in liew of an Action, and thereto privity is requisite; for the same cause he
cannot have an Action of Waste, nor many other Actions there mentioned, and the
Authorities cited; and so is Littleton himself expressly, Litt. Sect. 580.
Section 580.

Where a man by grant to himself, or by descent from his Ancestor, has a
Rentcharge, and might once lawfully distrain, and Avow for such Rent if
Arrear, by due Attornment made to him or his Ancestor, he may still do so
whenever the Rent is behind; unless by Law that power be some way lost.

1. That power may be lost by extinguishment of the Rent, by a perpetual union
of the tenancy to the rent, or rent to the tenancy, or in other manner, the
Grantee having no Heir.

2. It may be lost for a time by Suspension, as by such union for a time, and
after restored again.

3. It may be lost by a Grant of the Rent upon Condition, 7 H. 6.3. Br.
Extinguishment, p. 17.
and upon performance or breach of the Condition restored again; but the power
of distraining is not in this Case lost by any of these ways.

4. It may be principally lost by a sufficient granting over, and transferring
the Rent to another; which way comes nearest to the Case in question.

And therefore I shall agree the Case so much insisted on, which is said to be
agreed per Curiam, Andrew Ognell's Case, 4. Rep. f. 49.
in Andrew Ognell's Case, in the fourth Rep. That if a man be seized of a
Rent-service, or Rentcharge in Fee, and grant it over by his Deed to another
and his Heirs, and the Tenant Attorn, such Grantor is without remedy for the
Rent arrear before his Grant; for distrain he cannot, and other remedy he has
not, because all privity between him and the Tenant is destroyed by the
Attornment to the Grantee, and he has no more right than any Stranger to come
upon the Land, after such transferring over of the Rent.

I shall likewise agree another Case, That if such Grantee should regrant the
same Rent back to the Grantor, either in fee, in tail, or for life, and the
Tenant Attorn, as he must to this regrant, yet the first Grantor shall never be
enabled to distrain for Arrears due to him before he granted over the Rent; for
now the privity between him and the Tenant begins but from the Attornment to
the regrant, the former being absolutely destroyed, and the Tenant no more
distrainable for the ancient Arrears than he was upon the creation of the Rent,
for Arrears incurred before, till first attorn'd.

If the Case in question prove to be the same in effect with either of these
Cases, then the reason of Law for these Cases must sway and determine the Case
in question.

And I conceive that there is no likeness or parity between the Case in
question, and either of those Cases, either for the fact of the Cases, or the
reason of Law.

I shall therefore begin with comparing this Case with the first of those Cases.

1. In the first of those Cases, he that is seized of the Rentcharge, does
intend to transferr his Estate in the Rent to the Grantee, and it is
accordingly actually transferred by the Tenants Attornment to the Grant.

2. The Grantee by his Grant and Attornment to it, becomes actually seized of
the Rent, and may enjoy the benefit of it by perception of the Rent.

3. His Wife becomes dowable of it.

4. It is subject to Statutes, Recognizances, and Debts entered into by the
Grantee, or due from him to the King.

5. It is possible to descend to his Heir.

6. It may be Arrear, and he has a possibility to distrain and avow for it.

1. But in the Case in question, the Conizors of the Fine did never intend to
transfer their Estate in the Rent to the Conizee, nor that any Attornment be
made to him: What a man intends to pass to another, he intends to be without it
himself, at least for some time, which is not in this Case.

2. The Conizee never becomes actually seized of the Rent, and not only does
not, but never can enjoy the perception of it; for there is no moment of time
wherein the Conizors themselves are not actually in seisin of it, and
consequently may distrain if it be in Arrear, and the Conizee can never have
actually seisin, or possibility to have Attornment or distrain, his seisin
being but a mere fiction, and an invented form of Conveyance only.

3. The Conizee's Wife is never dowable of it.

4. It is not subject to any Statutes, Recognizances, or Debts of the Conizee.

5. It is never possible to descend to his Heir, for it instantly vests in the
Conizors.

6. It can never be Arrear to the Conizee, nor has he ever a possibility to
distrain for it.

To this purpose what is agreed in the Lord Cromwell's Case, L. Cromwell's
Case, 2. Rep. f. 77.
2. Rep. is applicable; Then it is to be considered what seisin Perkins had,
who was the Conizee of a Fine in that Case; and he had but a Seisin for an
instant, and only to this purpose, to make a Render; for his Wife shall not be
endowed, nor the Land subject to his Statutes or Recognizances, f. 77.

Therefore that first Case cited out of the Report of Andrew Ognell's Case,
which I admit to be good Law, has no resemblance with the present Case, in any
circumstance or consequent; but had the Fine been to a third persons use, the
consequents had been the same as in the Case cited out of Ognell's Case, not as
to the Conizee, but as to that third person to whom the rent was intended.

To conclude then this first part;

1. That whereof the Conizors were always actually and separately seized, the
same was never by them transferred to the seisin of another: But of this Rent
the Conizors were always in actual seisin; for there was no moment of time
wherein they were not seized; therefore this Rent was never transferred to the
seisin of another, nor could any other, for any moment of time, have a
separated seisin thereof; for what was mine at all times, could be another at
no time.

2. It is an impossibility in Law, that two men severally shall have several
Rights and Fee-simples in possession in one and the same Land, Dyer 28 H. 8. f.
12. a. p. 51.
simul and semel per Fitz-herbert, in the Argument of Bokenhams Case; and the
same impossibility is so to have of a Rent. Nor has this relation to the
learning of Instants in Digbie's Case, Coke 1. Rep. and Fitz-williams in the
sixth Report.

That an old Use may be revoked, and a new raised in the same time, and an old
possession ended, and a new begun; this is usual in all transmutation of
Estates and things also: For in nature, a new form introduced, does in the same
moment destroy the old, according to that, Generatio unius est corruption
alterius; but a separate possession can never be in two at the same time not
out of the one, and yet in the other, more than the same Body can be in two
several places at the same time.

3. If a Feoffee to use of me and my Heirs, make a Feoffment to another without
consideration to the use of me and my Heirs, notwithstanding there is a new
Feoffment, the words of a use to me and my Heirs, Dyer 28 H. 8. f. 12. 6. per
Baldwin Chief Justice.
yet the use being the former use, viz. to me and my Heirs, this latter is no
new use given to me, for I cannot have that use given which I had before; for
to give what I had before is no gift, as is well pressed by that Book.

And by the same necessity, where I have the possession before, a new
possession cannot be really given me by the Statute of 27 H. 8. whose operation
is properly to give to him which had not the possession, but only an use; the
possession which he wanted before to the use which he had before, in such
manner as he has the use.

But here the Statute cannot give the possession to the Conizors which they
never wanted, nor the Conizee never had, ad aliquem Juris effectum, though
perhaps fictitiously, and in order only to a form of Conveyance, which was not
the end or intention of the Statute of Uses; but an use invented after that
might be made of the Statute, in order to a general form of Conveyance, by
which the parties might execute their Intentions, wherein the Conizee is but an
Instrument or Property to execute their purpose, as in Cromwells Case is said;
L. Cromwells c. 2. Rep.
but the Statute brings the new uses raised out of a feigned possession, and
for no time, in the Conizee to the real possession, and for all times in the
Conizors, which operates according to their intent to change their Estate, but
not their possession.

Besides, it has been admitted at the Bar, that if the Fine had been levied
without consideration, and no uses expressed, the Conizors might then have
distrained for the Arrear, because the uses were the same as before, which, if
granted, it resolves the Question, for the Attornment and power to distrain
follows the possession, and not the use: And if after the supposed possession
of the Conisee, and his being seized to the old uses, when the Statute gives
the possession back to the old uses, the Conizors might distrain for the
Arrears before the Fine, as well as for those after, what hinders their
distraining for them still? For the possession which the Statute gives to the
old uses, is as new a possession as that it gives to the new uses, and the
privity is the same in both Cases in regard of the Tenant.

And it is common experience, that a Fine levied without consideration or use
expressed, Sir Moyle Finch's Case, 6th. Rep. f. 68. b.
is to the use of the Conizor and his Heirs, who may have an action of waste
after the Fine, for waste committed before, as well as he could before the
Fine. The instant possession of the Conizee notwithstanding which, differs not
from this Case.

The next enquiry is, What affinity this Case has with the second Case
proposed, viz. That if one seized of a Rent in Fee, grants it over to a
Stranger and his Heirs, and the Tenant attorns; if such Grantee regrants the
Rent back to the Grantor and his Heirs, there must be a new Attorment of the
Tenant to the Regrant; for the privity by the first Attornment was totally
destroyed, and all Arrears of Rent lost when the Tenant attorn'd to the
Grantee, which Case I take to be clear Law, for by the Regrant a total new
Estate is gained in the Rent, and thereby he who has the Rent as if he never
had any former Estate in it.

And in the present Case, the Estates after the Fine are wholly new, and other
Estates in the Conizors (to which the Tenant never attorn'd) than the Conizors
had before the Fine in these Respects:

1. Before the Fine, the Husbands had but Estates in right of their Wives, and
now they are Jointenants with their Wives.

2. The Wives, before the Fine had Estates of Inheritance absolute, and now
they are Iointenants with their Husbands, and among themselves where
Survivorship obtains.

3. The Women were Coparceners before, and the Husbands in right of their
Wives, and they are now all Jointenants.

4. Two of the Coparceners had the Inheritance of entire third parts, and the
two other of one entire third part; and now the four Women and three Husbands
are equally Iointenants, which are Estates much differing from the Estates they
had before the Fine.

I must agree, That where persons seized of a Rentcharge, by granting it over
with Attornment of the Tenant, have totally departed from their Estate, and
after retake, either such an Estate as they had before, or a differing Estate
in the Rent, they must have a new Attornment, and the former privity is wholly
destroyed, and consequently no Arrears can be distrain'd for, by reason of the
first privity which is not.

But in this Case the Conizors never were, for any moment of time, out of
possession of their first Estate, nor destroyed the first privity by any new
Attornment, which either was, or possibly could be; but only some have enlarged
their Estate, some diminish't it, others altered it, without destroying the old
privity, which may stand well with the Rules of Law; and consequently they may
distrain for Rent arrears, and avow lawfully by reason of the first privity
still continuing.

And I must observe in this Cases, that the Avowants, after the Fine, are the
same persons avowing as before. 2. That after the Fine, there is but one common
Avowry as before. 3. That there is no new person after the Fine, between whom
and the Tenant there was not a privity before the Fine.

That a man's Estate in a Rentcharge, may be enlarged, diminished, or otherwise
altered, and no new Attornment, or privity requisite to such alteration of
Estate.

Litt. Sect. 549.
A man seized of a Rent-service or Rentcharge in Fee, grants the Rent to
another for life, and the Tenant attorns after the Grantor confirms the Estate
of the Grantee in Fee-tail, or Fee-simple, this Confirmation is good, to
enlarge his Estate according to the words of the Confirmation.

Here no new Attornment to this new Estate, which now is Fee-tail or
Fee-simple, in the Rent which was before, but an Estate for life is requisite,
else the Confirmation were not good; but by Littleton it is good to enlarge the
Estate.

2. Sir Edward Cook in his Comment upon this Case, says, It is to be observed,
that to the grant of the Estate for life, Littleton does put an Attornment,
because it is requisite; but to the Confirmation to enlarge the Grantees
Estate, there is none necessary, and therefore he puts none.

No man can doubt in this Case, that if Rent had been in Arrear to the Grantee
for life, when his Estate was enlarged, needing no new Attornment or privity,
he did not thereby lose the Rent-arrear.

If two Jointenants in Fee let the Land for life, Litt. Sect. 574
reserving a Rent to them and their Heirs, if one release to the other and his
Heirs, this Release is good; and he to whom it was made shall have the Rent of
Tenant for life only, and a Writ of Waste without Attornment to such Release,
for the privity which once was between the Tenant for life and them in the
Reversion.

So is it if one Jointenant confirms the Land to the other and his Heirs. Litt.
Sect. 523.


The Law must necessarily be the same, if a man seized of a Rent-service or
Rentcharge in Fee, grant it to two and their Heirs, or to two and the Heirs of
one of them, and the Tenant attorn; if after, one Jointenant release to the
other, or he which has the Inheritance to him which has but an Estate for
life, and to his Heirs; the person to whom such Release is made, shall thereby
have a Fee-simple, whereas before he had but for life in the Rent, and an
Estate absolute, which before was joint, without any new Attornment, for the
reason of the former Case, because there was once a privity between the Tenant
and them, which was never destroyed.

So is it if there be Lessee for life, the Remainder for life, he, Litt. Sect.
573
in the Reversion releaseth to him in the Remainder, and to his Heirs, all his
right; he in the Remainder has thereby a Fee, and shall have a Writ of Waste,
and likewise the Rent of Tenant for life, if any were, without any Attornment
of the Tenant for life, for the former privity between them.

Enlargement of Estate by descent.
If a man seized of a Rentcharge in Fee, grant it for life to A. and the
Tenant attorns; after the Grantor grants the Reversion of this Rent to the
Father of A. and his Heirs, to whom A. attorns (as in this Case he may by Sir
Edward Coke's Comment) and after the Father dies, Coke's Litt. Sect. 556.
and this Reversion descends upon A. whereby he has a Fee-simple in the Rent,
no new Attornment is requisite for this enlargement of Estate.

Diminishing of Estate.
A man seized of a Rentcharge in Fee, grants this Rent for Seven years, to
commence from the time of his death, the Remainder in Fee, and the Tenant
attorns in the life time of the Grantor, 2. Rep. Sir Rowland Hayward's Case.
as he must by the Resolution in Sir Rowland Hayward's Case, 2. Rep. here the
Grantor has diminish't his Estate in the Rent, from a Fee-simple to an Estate
for life; yet it cannot be doubted but he may distrain for his Rent-arrear.

And so is the Law, where a man seized in Fee of a Rent, for good consideration
Covenants to stand seized for life, with Remainder over.

Upon these grounds upon Littleton, If a man seized of a Rentcharge in Fee,
grant it over to a Feme sole for a term of years, the Tenant attorns, and she
take Husband; and during the term the Grantor confirm the Rent to the Husband
and Wife for their lives, or in Fee; they become Jointenants for life, or in
Fee of this Rent, and need no new Attornment: This Case is proved by a Case in
Littleton, Sect.

Hence it is manifest, that where a man has a Rent for which he may once
lawfully distrain by Attornment of the Tenant (which gives sufficient privity
to avow) such Grantee or Possessor of the Rent may enlarge, or change his
Estate in the Rent to a greater or lesser, or different Estate, and needs no
new Attornment or privity; therefore to distrain and avow for such Rent
whenever Arrear, unless he become dispossessed of the Rent and the privity, to
distrain and avow thereby, be destroyed by a Right gained by some other to have
the Rent, and a Right in the Tenant to pay it to some other.

9 H. 6. f. 43. Br. Avoury. p. 123.
To this purpose there is a Case, If a man be seized of Land in Jure uxoris, in
Fee, and leaseth the Land for years, reserving Rent, his Wife dies without
having had any Issue by him, whereby he is no Tenant by the Courtesy, but his
Estate is determined; yet he may avow for the Rent before the Heir has made
his actual Entry. This Case is not adjudg'd, but it is much the better Opinion
of the Book.

Objections.
The Conizors are in possession since the Fine of another Estate Fine, that is,
according to the uses of the Fine, which they could not be without an
Alienation of the Rent to the Conizee by the Fine, to enable the raising of
that new use out of the Estate transferred to the Conizee by the Fine.

That by such Alienation the former privity between the Conizors and the
Tenant, which they had as Parceners by Attornment to the first grant of the
Rent, was destroyed; and therefore they cannot now distrain but for
Rent-arrear, since the Fine, by the possession given them by the Statute of 27
H. 8. to which no Attornment is necessary, and not for any Arrears due before
upon the old privity.

As specious as this Reason seems, it may be answered, Conizors had always an
actual and separate seisin, and possession of the Rent, and were at no time
without it; therefore the Conizee could have no several and separate possession
of it at any time; for it is not possible that two severally can possess the
same thing, simul and semel, for the same thing can no more be in two separate
possessions at the same time civilly, then the same thing can be in two
separate places at the same time naturally.

Is not the Reason then of equal force, that the Conizors were at no time out
of possession and seisin of this Rent, and consequently never lost the power to
distrain for it.

As to say the Conizee had sometime a separate possession of the Rent from the
Conizors, out of which the new uses were raised, and therefore the privity to
distrain for the old Arrears was for sometime destroyed.

Besides, if the old privity be destroyed, the greatest absurdity imaginable in
Law follows, That a man has a right to a thing for which the Law gives him no
remedy; which is in truth as great an absurdity, as to say, the having of
right, in law, and having no right, are in effect the same.

When as on the other side, the loss of the Arrears, and the Conizors right to
them, is a Consequent deduced from the destruction of the old privity between
the Conizors and the Tenant by an imaginary, and not a real possession of the
Rent by the Conizee.

Ognell's Case 4. Rep.
Nor will it serve to say, as is insinuated in Ognell's Case, that the Conizors
have dispensed with their own right in the Arrears, and therefore such Arrears
in strictness of Law, when the Fine is levied, are not due at all, but
remitted, and so no absurdity to have no remedy for a thing not due.

1. By this reason a Law should be equally good that provides no remedy for
performance of Contracts, as that which does; because all Contracts, for
performance of which the Law gives no remedy, shall in Judgment of Law be
dispensed with, released, discharged.

2. By this reason a Rent-seck, before seisin had of it, shall be no duty,
because the Law gives no Remedy before seisin: And consequently such Rent or
such Arrears, as in the present Case being paid by the Tenant, may be recovered
again, as the proper money of the Tenant, delivered to the Grantee of the Rent
without any consideration, upon an indebitatus Assumpsit, the Law creating a
promise.

So might a Debt paid after six years elapsed, for which, by the Statute of
Limitations, there was no remedy, yet that does not cease to be a Debt, as if
it had been released.

By like reason, if a man has by accident had his Bonds burned or destroyed,
whereby he had no remedy to recover the Debt by Law, it should cease to be a
Debt at all.

32 H. 8. c. 37.
To this the words of the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 37. may be added, which gives
remedy for recovery of such Debts by Executors as were due to the Testators,
and for which there was no remedy before, viz. That the Tenants did retain in
their hands such Arrearages of Rents, whereby the Executors could not therewith
pay the Debts, and perform the will of the Testator, etc. and surely no
Arrearages could be of Rent, if they were remitted in Law; nor was it fit the
Executors should pay the Debts, or perform the Testators Will with that which
was no part of the Testators Estate, either in possession, or as a credit.

If a common Recovery had been to uses of Lordships and Manors before the
Statute of 27. the Recoverors had no remedy to make the Tenants attorn (for a
quid Juris clamat would not lie upon a Recovery) before the Statute of 7 H. 8.
7 H. 8. c. 4.
c. 4. which did give remedy, and which says, That such refusal of Attornment
was to the great offense of their Conscience refusing, and not only to the
disinheritance of the Recoverors, but often to the breaking of the last Wills
of the Recoverees, and also to the disinheritance of Husbands, Wives, and
others to whose use the Recovery was had. By which it is plain, that duties for
which there is no remedy often in Law, are not therefore dispensed with, and
discharged by the party, as is superficially said in Ognell's Case.

That the Conizee of a Rent granted by Fine to uses cannot have any actual
seisin, or be in possession of such Rent, since the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10.

Before the Statute of 27 H. 8 If a Feoffment had been to uses and no Livery
given, or given by one Attorney when it ought to have been by two, the uses in
such Deed of Feoffment could never rise; so if a Reversion had been granted to
uses, and no Attornment to the Grantee, no use could rise, because there was no
sufficient Estate in possession. And when the Statute of Uses came, it could
have no operation when the Estates in possession were not sufficient.

So if an Estate for life had been granted to the use of a man and his Heirs,
an Estate in Fee could not rise out of it by the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 10.

And if before the Statute, a Reversion had been granted by Fine to Uses, and
no quid Juris clamat brought, though the Land passed by the Fine, yet the
Tenant could not be distrain'd, nor a Writ of Waste brought against him until
he attorn'd; and when the Statute came to transferr the use into the
possession, it could be but into such a possession as the Conizee had by the
Fine, without power to distrain, or bring Waste, for the words of the Statute
are,

That the Estate, Title, Right and Possession that was in such person or
persons, that were, or hereafter shall be seized of any Lands or Hereditaments,
to the use, confidence, or trust of any person or persons, be from henceforth
adjudged to be in him or them that have, or hereafter shall have such use,
confidence, or trust, etc.

And therefore if before the Statute of 27. a Fine had been levied of a
Rentcharge to uses, as this Case is, if before Attornment to, or seisin had by
the Conizee, the Statute had come and brought the possession of the Rent to the
use, the Cestuy que use could have had the Rent but as a Rent-seck, for which
he could not distrain for want of Attornment, nor have an Assise for want of
seisin, for the Conizee had no other possession of the Rent; but after
Attornment and seisin to or by Cestuy que use, his possession perhaps became
perfected.

But since the Statute, if a Fine be levied of a Reversion of Lands to uses, or
of a Rent, because the use and possession by the Statute come instantly
together, and the Conizee of the Fine has no time possible to bring, either a
quid Juris clamat, or a quem redditum reddit, Sir Moyl Finch's Case, Coke 6. f.
68. a
for, or to receive an Attornment to, perfect his possession. It was resolved
in Sir Moyl Finch's Case, that the Cestuy use should, notwithstanding distrain,
and have the same advantage, as if the Conizees possession had been perfected
by Attornment and seisin.

The intent of the Statute of 27. which was to bring together the possession
and the use, when the use was to one or more persons, and the possession in one
or more other separate persons, was soon after the Statute wholly declined,
upon what good construction or inference I know not.

For now the use (by the name of trust) which were one and the same before the
Statute, remains separately in some persons, and the possession separately in
others, as it did before the Statute, and are not brought together but by
Decree in Chancery, or the voluntary Conveyance of the possessor of the Land,
to Cestuy que trust.

So as now the principal use of the Statute of 27. especially upon Fines levied
to uses, is not to bring together a possession and use, which at no time were
separate the one from the other, but to introduce a general form of Conveyance,
by which the Conizors of the Fine, who are as Donors in the Case, may execute
their intents and purposes at pleasure, either by transferring their Estates to
Strangers, by enlarging, diminishing, or altering them, to and among
themselves, at their pleasure, without observing that rigor and strictness of
Law for the possession of the Conizee, as was requisite before the Statute.

Which I have sufficiently evidenced by showing that the Attornment of the
Lessee to the Conizee or Reversioner, or of the Tenant to him, as Grantee of
the Rentcharge, is now dispensed with, which was not before the Statute.

For if that were now requisite, the Conizors could not only not distrain for
the Rent due before the Fine, but not for the Rent due since the Fine; nor does
the Statute help the matter, because the Cestuy que use is in possession of the
Rent by the Statute, and therefore needs no Attornment, for that is true, when
the Conizee has a perfect possession, but without Attornment the Conizee had
no perfect possession impowring him to distrain; and therefore the Statute can
bring no perfect possession to the uses to that end.

And so Sir Edward Coke agrees the Law, Cok. Litt. f. 307. Sect. 55^.
that since Littleton wrote, If the Conizee of a Fine before Attornment by Deed
indented and enrolled, bargains and sells a Seigniory to another, the Bargainee
shall not distrain, because the Conizee, that is, the Bargainor, could not for
want of Attornment.

But on the other side, a man perfectly seized of a Seigniory Rent, Reversion,
or Remainder, bargains and sells by Deed indented and enrolled, according to
the Statute, the Bargainee shall distrain without Attornment by virtue of the
Statute.

And if a Fine be now levied to a man to the use of a third person, the third
person shall distrain without any Attornment made, not only to himself, by
reason of the Statute, but to the Conizee, by the Resolution in Sir Moyle Finch
his Case, for otherwise the Fine were to little purpose.

Which Case, though it make an Attornment not necessary, where it is impossible
to be had, that the Conveyance might not be useless in effect, and an intended
right to be de novo introduced, altogether hindered.

Shall it therefore destroy an old Attornment, which cannot but be had, and is
still in being, for no other use or end, but to deprive the Conizors of a Rent
and former Right justly due, to introduce a general inconvenience upon all that
have granted Leases for lives, and are occasioned to settle their Estates?

And there is great difference between a Fine levied of a Reversion, or of a
Rentcharge, to the use of a third person, and to the use of the Conizors; for
a third person can never distrain, unless either an Attornment were to the
Conizee, which is impossible, because no possession continues in him, so as to
receive an Attornment; or unless the construction of the Statute (according to
Sir Moyle Finch his Case) to make the Conveyance of effect to Cestuy que use,
made the Attornment, because it could not be had, not necessary, which is a
great strain and violence upon the true reason of Law.

That a Conveyance, which in reason could not be good without Attornment,
should be sufficient, because it could not have an Attornment, which was
necessary to make it sufficient.

And this practice has been frequent since the Statute of Uses; Sir Will.
Pelham's Case.
as in making a Recovery against his nature to be a forfeiture, because taken
as a Common Conveyance: To make Uses declared by Indenture between the parties,
made a year after the Recovery, to be the Uses of the Recovery, Downan's Case,
9. Rep.
with such Limitations as are mentioned in Downan's Case, the 9. Rep.

L. Cromwell's Case, 2. Rep. f. 72. b.
To make a Rent arise out of the Estate of Cestuy que use upon a Recovery, which
was to arise out of the Estate of the Recoveror and his possession. which is a
principal point in Cromwell's Case, and resolved; because by the intention of
the parties, the Cestuy que use was to pay the Rent.

14 Eliz. Harwell versus Lucas. Moore's Rep. f. 99. a. n. 243.
Bracebridge's Case is eminent to this purpose. Tho. Bracebridge, seized of the
Manor of Kingbury in Com. Warwick, made a Lease for One and twenty years of
Birchin Close, parcel del Manor to Moore; and another Lease of the same Close
for Six and twenty years, to commence at the end of the first Lease, to one
Curteis, rendering Rent, and after made a Feoffment of the Manor, and all other
his Lands, to the use of the Feoffees and their Heirs and Assigns, upon
Condition that if they paid not 10000 l. within fifteen days, to the said Tho.
Bracebridge or his Assigns, they should stand seized to the use of Bracebridge
and Joyce his Wife; the Remainder to Thomas their second Son in tail, with
diverse Remainders over: The Remainder to the Right Heirs of Thomas the Father;
Livery was made of the Land in possession, and not of Birchin Close, and no
Attornment; the Feoffees paid not 10000 l. whereby Bracebridge the Father
became seized, and the first Tenant for years attorn'd to him. Adjudg'd.

1. That by Livery of the Manor, Birchin Close did not pass to the Feoffees
without Attornment.

2. That the Attornment of the first Lessee was sufficient.

Moore f. 99. n. 243.
3. Though the use limited to the Feoffees and their Heirs, was determined
before the Attornment, yet the Attornment was good to the contingent use, upon
not paying the money.

In the Resolution of this Case, Wild, Archer, and Tyrrell, Justices, were for
the Plaintiff, and Vaughan, Chief Justice, for the Defendant.

Trin. 21. Car. II. C. B. Rot. 1714. The King Plaintiff, in a Quare Impedit,
per Galfridum Palmer Atturnatum suum Generalem. Robert Bishop of Worcester,
Thomas Jervis Esquire, and John Hunckley Clerk, Defendants.
THE King counts, That Queen Elizabeth was seized of the Advowson of the Church
of Norfield, with the Chapel of Coston in gross, in Fee in Jure Coronae, and
presented one James White her Clerk, who was admitted, instituted and inducted.

That from the said Queen, the Advowson of the said Church, with the said
Chapel, descended to King James, and from him to King Charles the First, and
from him to his Majesty that now is, who being seized thereof, the said Church,
with the Chapel, became void by the death of the said James White, and
therefore it belongs of right to him to present, and the Defendants disturb
him, to his damage of 200 l. which the said Attorney is ready to verify for
the King.

The Defendants plead severally, and first the Bishop, that he claims nothing
in the said Church, and the Advowson but as Ordinary.

The Defendant Jervis says, That long before the said Presentation supposed to
be made by the late Queen, one Richard Jervis Esquire, was seized of the Manor
of Norfield, with the Appurtenances in Com. praedicto, to which the Advowson,
Ecclesiae praedictae tunc pertinuit, and adhuc pertinet in his Demesne as of
Fee, and so seized, the said Church became void by the death of one Henry
Squire then last Incumbent of the said Church, and so continued for two years,
whereby the said late Queen, praetextu lapsus temporis, in default of the
Patron, Ordinary, and Metropolitan, Ecclesiae praedictae pro tempore existentis
dictae nuper Reginae devolutae by her Prerogative; afterward, that is, tertio
die Decembris, 28 Eliz. by her Letters Patents under the Great Seal, bearing
date the said year and day at Westminster, to the said Church, then being void,
presented the said James White, who was admitted, instituted, and inducted,
tempore pacis, etc.

That the said James White being so Rector of the said Church, and the said
Richard Jervis seized of the said Manor to which the said Advowson pertained,
etc. the said Richard after, at Norfield aforesaid, died so seized.

After whose death, the same descended to one Thomas Jervis Esquire, as Son and
Heir of Richard, and from him descended to one Sir Thomas Jervis Knight, who
entered, and was seized, and so seized the said Sir Thomas Jervis, 30. March.
14 Car. 1.
March the 30th. 14 Car. 1. by his Deed in writing, sealed at Norfield
aforesaid, granted to one Phineas White the Advowson of the said Church, for
the first and next avoidance only, whereby the said Phineas was possessed for
the next avoidance of the said Advowson, and so possessed, the said Church
became void by the death of the said James White, which was the first and next
avoidance after the said Grant to Phineas.

Phineas, by virtue of his said Grant, presented one Timothy White his Clerk,
who was thereupon admitted, instituted, and inducted, tempore pacis tempore
Car. 1.

The said Timothy being Rector, and the said Sir Thomas Jervis seized as
aforesaid, The said Sir Thomas died seized at Norfield aforesaid; and the said
Manor, with the Appurtenances, descended to Thomas the Defendant, as his Son
and Heir, who entered, and was, and yet is seized, and being so seized, the
said Church became void by the death of the said Timothy White, and the said
Thomas Jervis, the Defendant, presented the other Defendant, John Hunckley, who
was admitted, instituted, and inducted, long before the Writ purchased.

Then Traverseth Absque hoc, That the late Queen was seized of the said
Advowson, with the Chapel of Coston aforesaid in gross, and as of Fee, Jure
Coronae suae, Et hoc paratus est verificare, and demands Judgment si Actio.

John Hunckley the Incumbent taking by protestation, That the late Queen was
not seized, nor presented, as by the Declaration is supposed; for Plea says,
That Richard Jervis was seized of the Manor of Norfield, with the
Appurtenances, in Com. praedicto, and the Advowson of the said Church
appertained thereto, and pleads the same Plea verbatim, as to the Queens
Presentation of White, and all other things, as Jervis the Patron pleaded, and
the presentation of himself, and that he was, by the presentation of the other
Defendant Jervis, admitted, instituted, and inducted into the said Church,
September. 15. 1660. and Traverseth.

Absque hoc, that the King was seized of the said Advowson and Chapel in
Gross, as of Fee, Et hoc paratus est verificare, and demands Judgment.

The Attorney General replies, and as to the Bishop, claiming nothing, but as
Ordinary, Demands Judgment, and a Writ to the said Bishop, and has it with a
Cesset Executio, until the Plea determined between the King and the other
Defendants.

And as to the Plea of the said Thomas Jervis the Patron, the Attorney
maintains the Seisin of the late Queen, and of King James, King Charles the
First, and of the King that now is, of the said Advowson of the said Church and
Chapel, as by the Count before is declared.

And that the said Phineas White of his own wrong, by usurpation upon the late
King Charles the First to the said Church, then void by the death of the said
James White, presented the said Timothy White, and Traverseth.

Absque hoc, That the Advowson of the said Church was, or is, pertaining to the
Manor of Norfield, and demand Judgment, and a Writ to the Bishop.

And as to the Plea of the Incumbent, the Attorney replies as before to the
Patrons Plea, That the late Queen, King James, King Charles the First, and the
King that now is, were seized of the said Advowson in gross, as of Fee; and
that the said Phineas White presented the said Timothy, by usurpation upon King
Charles the First, and Traverseth the appendancy of the Advowson, Ecclesiae
praedicta, to the Manor of Norfield.

The Patron Jervis rejoyns and demurs upon the Attorney's Replication, as
insufficient, and assigns for Cause, that the Attorney has Traversed matter
not traversable, and that the Traverse ought to have been omitted out of the
Replication, as also, that the said Plea is repugnant in it self, and wants
form.

And John Hunckley the Incumbent rejoyns, That the said Advowson is pertaining
to the said Manor, as he alleged in his Plea before, Et de hoc ponit se super
Patriam, and the Attorney similiter.

Imperfections in the Pleading.
1. Upon this Quare Impedit brought, there is a good Title to present surmis'd
for the King, but no more, and there is much difference between a Title
appearing for the King, and supposed only.

2. The Defendant by his Plea in Bar, has not well Traversed the King's
Title, for it is traversed but in part, for only the Seisin of the Advowson in
the Queen is traversed, whereas properly the Seisin and Presentation of the
Queen, by reason of her Seisin, ought to have been traversed: by Absque hoc,
That the Queen was seized of the Advowson in gross, and presented.

3. The Seisin of the Advowson which makes not a Title alone, nor is not either
traversable or inquirable by the tender of a demi mark in the King's Case,
Fitz. N. Br. f. 31. Letter D. Littl. Coke 294. b.
in droit d'Advowson, is not traversable neither alone in a Quare Impedit. But
no Demurrer being thereupon, nor no Issue taken upon that Traverse, no more
shall be said of it.

4. The King may allege Seisin, without alleging any time (as Sir Edward Coke
says) in a droit d'Advowson.

26 H. 8. f. 4. a. Hob. Digby and Fitz. herb. f. 102. and Moore and Newmans
Case, f. 80. and 103. Rice and Harrisons Case, Yelverton f. 211.
5. The Defendants Traverse was not necessary, because he had confessed and
avoided the Queens Presentation, by saying it was by Lapse, if the Defendant
had rested upon avoiding the Queens Presentation.

6. The Attorney General ought to have maintained his Count, and traversed the
Queens Presentation by Lapse.

7. He does not do so, but deserts making the Kings Title appear, and falls
upon the Plaintiffs Title, that the Advowson was not appendant.

8. He offers a double Issue, that the Presentation of Phineas White was by
Usurpation, and the Advowson not appendant to the Manor.

Certain Premises.
If a man Counts or Declares in a Quare Impedit, That he, or his Ancestors, or
such from whom he claims, were seized of the Advowson of the Church, but
declares of no Presentation made by him or them, such Count or Declaration is
not good; and the Defendant may Demurr upon it, so is the express Book
following.

1. A man shall not have a Quare Impedit, Fitzh. Not. Br. f. 33. Letter H.
if he cannot allege a Presentation in himself, or in his Ancestor, or in
another person, through whom he claims the Advowson, and that in his Count,
unless it be in a special Case. Then puts that special Case, As if a man at
this day, by the Kings License, makes a Parochial Church, or other Chantry,
which shall be presentable, if he be disturbed to present to it, he shall have
a Quare Impedit, without alleging any presentment in any person, and shall
Count upon the special Matter.

And the Law in this, is the same in Case of the King with a Common Person, by
all the Books and Presidents in the Books of Entry.

To this add the Lord Hobarts Judgment, which is always accurate for the true
reason of the Law. Know that though it be true, that a Presentation may make a
Fee without more (as a Presentation by Usurpation does) that you never have a
Declaration in a Quare Impedit, L. Hobart Digby's Case, f. 101.
that the Plaintiff did present the last Incumbent without more; but you
declare that the Plaintiff was seized in Fee, and presented, or else lay the
Fee-simple in some other, and then bring down the Advowson to the Plaintiff,
either in Fee, or some other estate.

The reason is, That the Presentment alone is militant and indifferent, and may
be in such a Title as may prove, that this new Avoidance is the Defendants, and
therefore you must lay the Case so, as by the Title you make, the Presentation
past joined to your Title, shall prove that this Presentation is likewise
yours, as well as the last.

Whence it follows, That to Count of an Estate and Seisin without a
Presentation, or of a Presentation without an Estate, are equally vicious and
naught, be it in the Case of the King, or of a Common Person, and was never in
Example or President.

2. A second necessary Premise is this, and is both natural and manifest; When
you will recover any thing from me, it is not enough for you to destroy my
Title, but you must prove your own better than mine.

For it is not rational to conclude, you have no right to this, and therefore I
have; for without a better right melior est conditio possident is regularly.

Hobar 1. f. 162. Colt and Glovers Case ad sinem paginae.
3. Every Defendant may plead in a Quare Impedit the General Issue, which is ne
disturba pas, because that Plea does but defend the wrong wherewith he stands
charged, and leaves the Plaintiffs Title, not only uncontroverted, but in
effect confessed; and the Plaintiff may, upon that Plea, presently pray a Writ
to the Bishop, or at his choice maintain the Disturbance for damages.

Hob. Digby versus Fitzherbert f. 103. 104.
But if a man will leave the General Issue, and controvert the Plaintiffs Title,
he must then enable himself, by some Title of his own, to do it; but yet that
is not the principal part of his Plea, but a formal Inducement only: And
therefore there is no sense, if you will quarrel my possession, and I to avoid
your Title effectually, do induce that with a Title of my own, that you shall
fly upon my Title, and forsake your own; for you must recover by your own
strength, and not by my weakness.

The Lord Hobart goes further, in giving the reason of this course of Pleading,
in Colt and Glovers Case, in the place before cited, of this form of pleading
in Law, there is one reason common to other Actions, wherein Title is contained
to the Land in question specially, which is, that the Tenant shall never be
received to Counter-plead, but he must make to himself, by his Plea, a Title to
the Land, and so avoid the Plaintiffs Title alleged by Traverse, or confessing
and avoiding -- But in the Quare Impedit there is a further reason of it, for
therein both Plaintiff and Defendant are Actors one against another; and
therefore the Defendant may have a Writ to the Bishop as well as the Plaintiff,
which he cannot have without a Title appearing to the Court: And so are the
Presidents, Rastal L. Intratio f. 484. a.b.
when a Quare Impedit is brought against the Patron for disturbance of his
Clerk, not being in possession.

The Case in brief, and the Question upon it.
Upon the Record, as it has been opened, and the pleading therein between the
King and the Patron, upon which all the Question arises first, I shall not
make the Question to be, Whether there may be a Traverse taken upon a Traverse
(though that Question be in truth in the Case) for that is a Question rather
upon terms of Art, than a Question Forensis, and rising upon the naked fact of a
Case depending in Judgment.

I shall therefore make the Question upon this Case, such as nakedly it is,
without involving it in any difficulty of terms.

The King brings a Quare Impedit, and declares, That Queen Elizabeth was seized
of the Advowson of the Church of Norfield in gross, as of Fee, and presented,
and derives the Advowson to himself, and the Church became void by the death of
the Queens Presentee; and he is disturbed to present by the Defendant Jervis.

The Defendant says, That before the Queen presented, R. Jervis, his Ancestor,
was seized in Fee of the Manor of Norfield, to which the Advowson of this
Church is appendant, that it became void by the death of one Squire, and
continued so for two years, and that the Queen then presented White her Clerk
by lapse: That the Manor and Advowson descended from Richard to Thomas Jervis,
from Thomas to Sir Thomas Jervis, who granted the next avoidance to one Phineas
White, who presented, upon the death of James White, one Timothy White, who was
instituted and inducted, and then derives the Manor and Advowson to himself;
and that the Church becoming void, upon the death of the said Timothy, he
presented the other Defendant Hunckley, and Traverseth the Queens Seisin of the
Advowson in gross.

The Law in Case of a Common Person.
If a Common Person brings a Quare Impedit, and counts his Title to present,
and that he is disturbed: The Defendant, to counter-plead the Plaintiffs Title,
makes (as he must) a Title to himself to present, and confesses and avoids, or
Traverseth the Plaintiffs Title.

1. The Plaintiff shall never desert his own Title, and by falling upon, and
controverting the weakness only of the Defendants Title, ever recover or obtain
a Writ to the Bishop, though the Defendants Title do not appear to the Court to
be sufficient for the unanswerable Reasons given by the Lord Hobart in the
first place.

2. If you will recover any thing from another man, it is not enough for you to
destroy his Title, but you must prove your own better than his.

3. There is no sense, if you will quarrel my Possession or Right, and I, to
avoid your Title effectually, either by Traversing it, which is denying, or
confessing and avoiding it, do induce that with a Title of mine own, that you
shall fly upon my Title to impeach it, and forsake your own, as I said before.

4. Though I should, being Plaintiff, make it appear to the Court, That the
Defendants Title is not good, but no way making it appear that my own Title is
good, what inducement can the Court have to judge for me, and against the
Defendant, when no more right appears for the one than the other; and not only
so, but no right appears for either? For in such Case sure, Melior est Conditio
possidentis, I ought not to be sued by him I have not wronged; and he which
has no right, can suffer no wrong.

5. It is to no end the Plaintiff should set forth any Title at all, if he be
not to make it good; but it should serve his turn only to impeach the
Defendants Title, and conclude so unreasonably, That if I can make it appear
the Defendant has not a good Title, therefore I have and must have Judgment
for me.

How far, in the King's Case, the Law differs not from a Common Persons Case.
1. And where the King's Title, in a Quare Impedit brought by him, appears to
be no more than a bare suggestion, the King can no more than a Common Person
(and for the same reasons) forsake his own Title, and endeavor only the
destroying of the Defendants Title; for the weakening of the Defendants Title
without more, can no more make a good Title to the King, than it can to a
Common Person.

2. If the King, or his Predecessor, has presented by reason of Wardship, of
Lapse, of the Temporalties of a Bishop, in his hands, of Outlawry, and in many
other Cases, when the Church becomes void next after the Wards Age, and suing
his Livery, after the death of him presented by Lapse, Restitution of the
Temporalties, and Reversal of the Outlawry.

In all these Cases, if the King brings a Quare Impedit, and counts that he was
seized of the Advowson in gross, and presented. When the true Patron shall
confess his Presentation, and avoid it by showing in their several Cases, That
his Presentation was in right of the Ward, by Lapse, by reason of Outlawry, or
of Temporalties, being in his hands; The King shall desert his own Title, and
controvert the Defendants respective Titles, in whose Right he did formerly
present; and if their Title happen to appear not good, recover the second
Presentation against those manifest Rules of Law delivered.

3. If this should be Law generally, then though the King have no Title to
present, nor pretend to any, for it differs not, not to pretend at all, and not
to be obliged to make good the Title pretended; it were a more compendious way,
when any Patron presented, That the King should, by Scire Facias, compel him to
set forth his Title, and Demurr upon it, or Traverse it, and recover the
Presentation, if the Patrons Title were any way defective.

Wherein the Law differs in the Kings Case from a Common Persons Case.
But it must be agreed there are Cases in which the King may desert his own
Title, and not join Issue upon the Defendants Traversing the King's Title, or
avoiding it, but Traverse the Title made by the Defendant in his Bar, which is
directly taking a Traverse upon a Traverse, which regularly a Common Person
cannot do; nor I think in any Case, Long 5 E. 4. in Waste for cutting so many
Trees, and selling them. f. 100. b.
but where the first Traverse tendered by the Defendant is not material to the
Action brought, as in the Case of Waste in Long, 5. E. 4. Hob. Digby and
Fitz-herbert's Case, and Woodroffe and Codford's Case, 37 Eliz. Hob. f. 105.

13 E. 4. f. 8. a. 3 H. 7. f. 3. Stamford Praerogative, f. 64. b.
The King counting of a Title to himself by Office found, or by other matter of
Record, which is another thing than only surmising a Title, as in the Case at
Bar, may choose to maintain his own Title found by Office, and Traversed by the
Defendant, or otherwise appearing of Record, and take a Traverse to the Title
made by the Defendant.

The Reason is manifest; for the Office of it self is a Title appearing for the
King, and he shall never lose his Possession, having a Title, but where the
Defendants Title does appear a better. But what is this that the King should
Relinquish his own Title only surmis'd, and controvert the Defendants, So is 13
E. 4. f. 8. and many other Books.
whose Title, though it should appear naught, leaves no Title in the King: But
when an Office is found, or a Title for the King appears by other matter of
Record, if the Defendant have no Title, the King has one by his Office, or
other Record.

Some Books, prima facie, seem to make for that Opinion, That the King may
generally desert his own Title, and take a Traverse to the Defendants.

Br. Prerogative, pl. 65. 7 E. 6.
Brook Title Prerogative, pl. 65 Where a man Traverseth the Office of the King,
and makes to himself a Title (ut oportet) Traversing the Title of the King
contained in the Office, the King may choose to maintain his own Title, or to
Traverse the Title alleged; for the King is not bound to stand to the first
Traverse which tenders an Issue, but may Traverse the matter of the Plea of his
Adversary: For this no ancient Book is cited.

But dicitur Hillar. 7 E. 6. quod sic utitur, in an Information put by the
Subject for the King, in Scaccario, that where the Defendant pleads a Bar, and
Traverseth the Information, the King may Traverse the matter of the Bar, if he
will, 7 E. 6.
and is not bound to maintain the matter contained in the Absque hoc.

This Case, as appears in the first part of it, was in the Case of an Office,
and therefore makes not at all against my Diversity: In the latter part the
Assertion seems more general, as if the King could in any Case desert to
maintain the matter of his Information, and Traverse the Bar of the Defendant;
but there is nothing in this part of the Case positive enough to overruled my
Difference, and is no more but Sic utitur ut dicitur in Scaccario, which may be
a mistaken Report.

The other Case is likewise in Brook, Br. Travers per sans ceo. p. 369. 38 H. 8.
but no ancient Book-Case cited, but only 38 H. 8. and no more.

An Information in the Chequer, the Defendant pleads, and Traverseth a material
point in the Information, whereupon they are at Issue; there the King cannot
waive this Issue, as he may in other Cases, where the King alone is party,
without an Informer ut supra per Attornatum Regis, and alios legis peritos.

This Case seems likewise to conclude, That when the Information is only for
the King, and a material point Traversed, upon which Issue is joined, that the
King is not bound to that Issue, but may take another. This dis-affirms the
former Case, when the Information is by an Informer, the King must maintain his
Information.

Note the close of this Case, Ut supra per Attornatum Regis, and alios legis
peritos, I shall give the Case here mentioned in this ut supra, which will, I
think, determine the Question, and clearly establish the Law according to the
Difference taken.

That Case is likewise in Br. and cited to be as in 34 H. 8. whereof there is
no Year-book, neither some four years before the last Case I mentioned. It is
thus:

Br. Prerogative p. 116. 34 H. 8.
Nota by Whorhood Attornatum Regis, and alios, When an Information is put into
the Chequer upon a penal Statute, and the Defendant makes a Bar, and
Traverseth, that there the King cannot wave such Issue tendered, and Traverse
the former matter of the Plea, as he can upon Traverse of an Office, and the
like, when the King is sole party, and entitled by matter of Record; for upon
the Information there is no Office found before, and also a Subject is party
with the King for a moiety, Quod nota been.

Here it is most apparent, That upon an Information, when the King has no
Title by matter of Record, as he has upon Office found, the King cannot waive
the Issue tendered upon the first Traverse, though the Information be in his
own name, which disaffirms the second Case in that point: And for the
Supernumerary reason, That the King is not the sole party in the Information,
it is but frivolous, and without weight; but the stress is where the King is
sole party, and entitled by matter of Record.

I shall add another Authority out of Stamford Praerogative.

If the King be once seized, his Highness shall retain against all others who
have not Title, nothwithstanding it be found also that the King had no Title,
but that the other had possession before him, 37 Ass. pl. 11.
as appears in 37. Ass. p. 35. which is pl. 11. where it was found, That
neither the King nor the party had Title, and yet adjudg'd that the King should
retain; for the Office that finds the King to have a Right or Title to enter,
Stamford Praerogative f. 62. b.
makes ever the King a good Title, though the Office be false, etc. and
therefore no man shall Traverse the Office, unless he make himself a Title; and
if he cannot prove his Title to be true, although he be able to prove his
Traverse to be true, yet this Traverse will not serve him.

Stamford Prerogative, f. 64. b.
It is to be noted, That the King has a Prerogative which a Common Person has
not; for his Highness may choose whether he will maintain the Office, or
Traverse the Title of the party, and so take Traverse upon Traverse.

If the King take Issue upon a Traverse to an Office, he cannot in another Term
change his Issue, by Traversing the Defendants Title, for then he might do it
infinitely.

But the King may take Issue, and after Demurr; 13 E. 4. expressly, and several
other Books. 28 H. 6. f. 2. a.
or first Demurr, and after take Issue, or he may vary his Declaration; for in
these Cases, as to the Right, all things remain, and are as they were at first;
but this ought to be done in the same Term, otherwise the King might change
without limit, and tie the Defendant to perpetual Attendance.

Judgment pro Defendente.

Hill. 21 and 22. Car. II. C. B. Rot. 606. Thomas Row Plaintiff, and Robert
Huntington Defendant, in a Plea of Trespass and Ejectment.
THE Plaintiff declares, That Thomas Wise, 1. April, 21 Car. 2. at Hooknorton
in the County of Oxford, by his Indenture produced, dated the said day and
year, demis'd to the said Thomas Row the Manor of Hooknorton, with the
Appurtenances, 4 Messuages, 100 Acres of Land, 50 Acres of Meadow, 400 Acres of
Pasture, and 50 Acres of Wood, with the Appurtenances, in Hooknorton aforesaid.
As also the Rectory and Vicaridge of Hooknorton, and the Tithes of Grain, Hay,
and Wool, renewing in Hooknorton aforesaid; To have and to hold the Premises
from the Feast of the Annunciation of the Virgin, then last past, to the end
and term of Seven years then next ensuing.

That by virtue thereof, the said Thomas Row the Plaintiff, into the said
Manor and Tenements entered, and of the said Rectory, Vicaridge, and Tithes,
was possessed.

That the said Robert Huntington the Defendant, the said First of April, with
Force and Arms, into the said Manor, Rectory, Vicaridge and Tithes, entered,
and him Ejected against the Peace, to his great damage, and whereby he is
endamaged 100 l.

The Defendant Huntington pleads not Culpable. And thereupon Issue is Joined.

The Jury give a Special Verdict, That as to the Trespass and Ejectment in the
said Manor and Tenements, and in the said Rectory, Vicaridge, and Tithes
aforesaid, excepting 200 Acres of Pasture, parcel of the said Manor of
Hooknorton, That the Defendant Huntington is not Culpable. And as to the said
200 Acres, they say, that long before the said Trespass and Ejectment,

That is, the 14th. day of October, 1. Mar. one Robert, then Bishop of Oxford,
was seized in his Demesne, as of Fee in Right of his Bishopric of the said
Manor, whereof the said 200 Acres are parcel, and so seized the said 14th. of
October, 1 Mariae, at Hooknorton aforesaid, by his Indenture of Demise, sealed
with his Episcopal Seal, Dated the said day and year, and showed in Evidence to
the Jury, made between the said Bishop of the one part, and John Croker of
Hooknorton Esquire; of the other part, for Considerations in the said Indenture of
Demise mentioned, had demis'd, and to farm let, to the said Croker; Among
other things, the said Manor with the Appurtenances, whereof the said 200
Acres are parcel, To have and to hold, to the said Croker and his Assigns, from
the end and expiration, prioris Dimissionis in eadem Indentur. Mentionat. for
and during the term of Ninety years then next following.

The tenor of which Indenture of Demise follows, in haec verba:

This Indenture made the Fourteenth day of October, 1 Mariae, etc. Between the
said Bishop and the said John Croker, etc witnesses, That where the said
Bishop, by the name of the Reverend Father in God, Robert King, Abbot of Tame,
and Commendatory of the late Monastery of Oseney, in the County of Oxford, and
the Covent of the same, by their Deed Indented, Dated 6. April, 29 Hen. 8. with
the Consent of their whole Chapter, Have demis'd, and to farm let,

All that their Mansion or Farm of Hooknorton, with the Appurtenances in the
said County, and all the Mansion and Farm Demesne, Lands, Meadows, Leasowes and
Pastures, with all Commodities and Profits to the said Manor belonging or
appertaining, and the customary works of all the Tenants, not granted nor
remitted before the Date of the Deed; And the Parsonage of Hooknorton, and all
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Tithe Corn and Grain, Hay and Wool, and all Profits
to the said Parsonage belonging; And also the Vicaridge of Hooknorton
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances; And all Lands, Tithes, Profits, to the said
Vicaridge belonging.

And also a Pasture called Prestfield, with the Appurtenances in Hooknorton
aforesaid; And all Commons of Sheep, called by the name of their Founders
Flock; And the Hay of a Meadow, called Brown-mead, with the customary works
thereto pertaining; And the Tithe and Duty of a Mead, called Hay-mead in
Hooknorton aforesaid.

Except and reserved to the said Abbot and Covent, and their Successors, All
Tenants and Tenantries, then, or after to be set by Copy of Court-Roll, All
Fines, Reliefs, Escheats, Herriots, Amerciaments, Pains, Forfeits, and all
Perquisites of Courts Barons and Leets.

To have and to hold the said Farm or Manor, and all other the Premises, with
the Appurtenances, Except before excepted to the said Croker, his Executors and
Assigns, from the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady last past before the
Date of the said Deed, Indented for the term of Eighty years, rendering to the
said Abbot, Covent, and their Successors yearly, during the said term.

For the said Manor and Farm 9 l. For the said Parsonage 22 l. 2 s. For the
Common of Sheep, Hay and Custom-works of Brown-Mead 5 l. For the Wool 12 l. For
Prest-field 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. For the Vicaridge 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. of lawful money,
etc. at the Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, the Annunciation of our Lady,
by equal portions, As by the same Deed Indented, amongst diverse other Covenants
and Grants, more plainly appears.

And where also, as the said Bishop, by his other Deed Indented, Dated 8.
October, 1 Edw. 6. has demis'd and to farm let, unto the said John Croker,
all that his Manor of Hooknorton aforesaid, with all Messuages, Tofts,
Cottages, Orchards, Curtilages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures,
Feedings, Commons, waste Grounds, Woods, Underwoods, Waters, Mills,
Courts-Leets, Fines, Herriots, Amerciaments, Franchises, Liberties, Rents,
Reversions, Services, and all other Hereditaments whatsoever they be, set,
lying, and being in Hooknorton aforesaid, in the said County, with the
Appurtenances.

Except certain Lands and Tenements in the said Town in the Tenure of the said
John Croker, for certain years then enduring.

To have and to hold, All the said Manor of Hooknorton, and all other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, Except before excepted to the said John
Croker and his Assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel last past,
before the Date of the said latter Deed Indented, to the full end of the term
of Ninety years from thence next ensuing.

Rendering to the said Bishop and his Successors yearly, during the said term,
Eleven pounds, four shillings, and nine pence, at the Feasts of the
Annunciation and St. Michael the Archangel, by equal portions, as by the said
latter Deed, among other Covenants and Grants, more plainly appears.

The Reversion of all which Premises are in the said Bishop, and to him and
his Successors do belong, as in Right of his Church.

Now witnesses, That the said Bishop has demis'd, Ind. 1 Mar.
and to Farm let, and by these Presents does demise, etc. to the said John
Croker, All the said Manor and Farm of Hooknorton, together with all
Messuages, etc. And all and singular other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, in the said several Indentures specified and contained.

To have and to hold the said Premises contained in the said first Indenture,
to the said John Croker, his Executors and Assigns, from the end, expiration,
and determination of the said term specified in the said first Indenture, unto
the end and term of Ninety years next ensuing, yielding therefore yearly to the
said Bishop and his Successors, for the said Premises, specified in the said
first Indenture, such and like Rents as in the said first Indenture are
reserved, at the same days and times; and

To have and to hold, All the Premises specified in the said latter Indenture,
from the end, expiration, and determination of the said term specified in the
said latter Indenture, until the end and term of Ninety years then next
ensuing: Rendering yearly for the Premises in the said latter Indenture
specified, such and like Rent as is reserved by the said latter Indenture, and
at the same days and times.

Then follows a Clause of Distress if the Rent be behind for a Month.

And if the said several yearly Rents reserved by these Indentures, or any of
them be unpaid in part, or in all, by the space of one quarter of a year after
any the said Feasts, at which the same ought to be paid, and be lawfully
demanded, and no sufficient Distress upon the Premises, whereupon the same is
reserved to be found; Then to be lawful for the said Bishop, and his
Successors, into such of the Premises, whereupon such Rents being behind, is,
or are reserved, to re-enter, and to have as in their former estate.

And the said Jurors further say, That the aforesaid Indenture of Demise
afterward, the Tenth of May, Anno 1 Mar. aforesaid, by the then Dean and
Chapter of Oxford, under their Common Seal, was confirmed, and find the tenor
of the Confirmation in haec verba.

They further find, That the said Two hundred Acres of Pasture, at the time of
making the said Indenture, and at the time of the Trespass and Ejectment, were,
and yet are parcel of the said Manor of Hooknorton.

They further find, That the Rent for all the said demis'd Premises, reserved
by the said Indenture for one whole half year, ended at the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, 1643. was behind and unpaid; and that Robert, late
Bishop of Oxford, the Nine and twentieth and Thirtieth Day of December, 1643.
into the Parsonage House then, and by the Space of Forty or Fifty years before,
reputed and called the Mannor-house; And that he then, at the said
Parsonage-house, by the space of One hour next before the Sunsetting of both
the said two days, remained and continued until, and by the space of One hour
after Sunsetting of both days, demanding, and then did demand the Rent for
the half of the year aforesaid.

They further say, That there was no sufficient Distress upon the Premises at
the time of the demand of the said Rent thereupon; And that the said Bishop,
the said Thirtieth Day of December, 1643. aforesaid, into the said Premises
entered.

They further say, That all the Right, State, and Title, term of Years, and
Interest of, and in the Manor, Tenements, Rectory, and other the said
Premises, by virtue of the said Indenture of Demise by the said late Bishop,
as aforesaid, granted to the said John Croker, by mean Assignments came to the
said Thomas Wise.

That by virtue of the said several Assignments, the said. Thomas Wise
afterward, the Fourth of January, 1667. into the Premises entered, and was
possessed for the Residue of the term of years, prout Lex postulat. That he so
possessed, afterward the said First Day of April, 21 Car. 2. at Hooknorton
aforesaid, demised to the said Thomas Row the said Manor and Tenements,
Rectory and Vicaridge whereof the said Two hundred Acres are parcel.

To have and to hold, to the said Row and his Assigns, from the Feast of the
Annunciation last past, for the term of Seven years then next ensuing: That by
virtue thereof, the said Row entered, and was possessed, until the said Robert
Huntington, the said First of April, 21 of the King, by Force and Arms, by the
command of the foresaid Robert, late Bishop of Oxford, into the said Two
hundred Acres, upon the Possession of the said Thomas Row, to him demised by
the said Wise, as aforesaid, for the said term, not yet past, entered and
Ejected him. But whether upon the whole matter, the said Robert be Culpable of
the said Trespass and Ejectment, they refer to the Court.

By this Verdict, in the recited Indenture, if any such were, of 29 H. 8. the
Farm of Hooknorton, and the Manor of Hooknorton, were the same thing; and the
Manor known and demis'd by the name of the Farm, as well as the Farm by name
of the Manor. The Manor of Hooknorton being called the Farm of Hooknorton,
because it was let to Farm, and rented out; and the Farm called the Manor,
because it had the Requisits of a Manor, viz. Demesne and Services.

Therefore where it is recited in the Deed 1 Mar. That the Abbot and Covent of
Osney, had by their Deed of 29 H. 8. demis'd to John Croker, All that their
Farm of Hooknorton, it was the same, as if it had been the Manor of Hooknorton.

1. For that the next words are, And all that Mansion Demesne, Lands, Meadows,
Leasowes, and Pastures to the said Manor belonging, and no Manor is named
before, but the Farm which was known to be the Manor.

2. The Habendum of the Premises demised, is, To have and to hold the said
Farm or Manor of Hooknorton, which also shows they were the same.

3. In the render of the Rent, it is yielding and paying for the said Manor
and Farm Nine pounds.

4. By the Demise of 1. Mar. subsequent, the said Manor or Farm is demis'd.

And the 200 Acres in question, being found to be parcel of the said Manor,
consequently they are recited to be demis'd by that Indenture supposed of 29 H.
8. But the Jury find not the Manor and Farm to be the same.

The next thing to be noted is, That by that recited Indenture of 29 H. 8. if
any such were, several Rents were reserved upon several particulars, and not
one entire Rent upon the whole, namely 9 l. upon the Manor or Farm; Another
Rent upon the Parsonage, another on the Vicaridge; and so upon several other
particulars.

And by the Lease of 1 Mariae, it is yielding and paying such, and the like
Rents, in the Plural Number, as are reserved by the said first Indenture. So as
the Rents were several in the first Indenture, by the meaning of that of 1 Mar.

And yielding and paying such and like Rent, as is reserved by the latter
Indenture, for the Premises therein contained. Here it is such Rent, in the
singular number, as is reserved, not as are reserved, as in the former.

Then in the Clause of Re-entry for Non-payment, it is that the Re-entry should
be into such of the Premises, whereupon such Rent being behind was reserved,
therefore not into all the Premises.

Whence it follows, That there being several Rents, several Demands were
respectively to be made before Re-entry, as well for those reserved in the
first Indenture, as for that in the second Indenture recited.

And it being found, That the Demand made by the Bishop at the Parsonage-house
in Forty three, was for the half years Rent reserved of all the Premises
demis'd by the Indenture of 1 Mar. it follows, That more Rent was demanded than
was payable in any one place, consequently the Demand not good, nor the
Re-entry pursuing it; and thus far the Case is clear against the Defendant: For
the Lease of 1 Mar. could not be avoided by that Re-entry, in all, nor in part,
if the Leases of 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. were well and sufficiently found by the
Jury to have been made.

Note, The Jury finding that the Rent reserved for all the Premises, was
behind for half a year, ending at Michaelmas, 1643. not expressing the Sum of
the Rent, is no more than to find, That no Rent was paid for the said half year.

And their finding, That the Bishop did demand the said half years Rent,
finding no Sum by him demanded, is no more than to find, That he demanded such
Rent as was due for the said half year. So as notwithstanding the Juries
finding, That no Rent was paid for the said half year, and their finding of the
Bishop's demanding of what was due for the said half year; It does not
therefore follow, That they find any Rent to be reserved by the said Lease of
1. Mar. or that there was a Demand of any Rent admitted to be so reserved.

But if the Leases of 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. be not well and sufficiently found
by the Jury to have been made; The Consequent then is, That in Law there are no
such Leases; for de non apparentibus, and non existentibus eadem est ratio ad
omnem juris effectum.

And then it follows, That the Lease of 1 Mar. of all the Premises specified
in the Indenture of 29 H. 8. and of all specified in the Indenture of 1 E. 6.
for Ninety years Habendum, from the respective Expirations of the terms
specified, and under the respective Rents reserved by those Indentures, will be
void as to the terms intended to be granted, and the Rents reserved, because
the beginning of the terms and particulars of the Rents can be known, but from
the Demises 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. when no such Demises are, because the Jury
has found no such.

For this the Case of 3 E. 6. reported by the Lord Brooks, in his Title of
Leases, N. 62. is clear, and in several Cases since adjudg'd, is admitted for
good Law.

The Case is, Br. tit. Leases, N. 66. 3 E. 6.
If a man Leases Land for certain years to J. S. Habendum post dimissionem inde
factam to J. N. finitam, and J. N. has no Lease of the Land, the Lease to J.
S. shall commence immediately for the term of years granted him.

So in our Case, the Lease of 1 Mar. of the Manor and other the Premises
granted to Croker for Ninety years, Habendum, as to some particulars, from the
expiration of a former Lease granted 29 H. 8. And as to other particulars, from
the expiration of a Lease granted 1 E. 6. when no such Leases were granted,
because not found to be granted. Therefore the Lease of 1 Mar. for Ninety
years, shall commence immediately from the Sealing, and consequently ended
about the 21 or 22 of King Charles the First.

And then the Defendant Huntington's Entry, the First of April, 21 Car. 2. by
command of the Bishop, was lawful, the term of Ninety years granted 1 Mar. and
then beginning, being long before expired.

And by the same Reason, If a Lease be granted to J. S. for Forty years, to
commence after the expiration of the term granted to J. N. and under the same
Rents as are reserved in the Demise to J. N. (who in truth had no Demise) The
term of Forty years to J. S. shall commence immediately, because the number of
years are expressed, but without any Rent; because the reservation of such Rent
as was reserved in the Demise to J. N. who had no Demise, must be no
Reservation of Rent.

And consequently in the present Case, though the Lease for Ninety years, which
number of years is expressed, be a good Lease, to commence immediately from 1
Mar. yet the Reservation of the Rent being such thereupon as was reserved by
the Leases of 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. when in truth there are no such Leases, must
be a void Reservation upon the Lease of 1 Mar. because there is no expression
of any Rent, but that which was reserved in Leases, which are not all Ad omnem
Juris effectum in this Case, because they are not found.

So as the sole Question is reduced to this, Whether by this Verdict the Jury
have well and sufficiently found any Leases 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. or either of
them were made to Croker?

1. And it seems clear, That the Jury have not in express terms, and positively
found, either of those Leases to have been made, for then they must have found
that the Abbot Commendatory of Osney, and the Covent there, had made such Lease
to Croker, dated 29 H. 8. etc. and in like manner that the said Abbot being
then Bishop of Oxford, had made 1. of E. 6. a Lease to Croker for such a term
of years, and under such Rents and Reservations, etc. but there is no such
finding in this Verdict.

2. The second Inquiry is, Whether the Jury having found (as they have) that
the then Bishop of Oxford did by Indenture, dated 1. Mar. Lease to Croker the
Manor of Hooknorton for Ninety years, which Indenture they find in haec verba,
in which there is a recital of a Lease made 29 H. 8. and of another 1 E. 6. to
the said Croker (but neither in haec verba) be not a good and sufficient
finding of such recited Leases, to have been actually made, because recited in
the Lease of 1 Mar. which is expressly found to have been made.

But certainly, it can never follow that the reciting of the Deeds of 29 H. 8.
and 1 E. 6. to have been made in the Deed of 1 Mar. which is expressly found to
have been made, is a sufficient finding of those two other Deeds to have been
actually, and re vera made; for the strange consequence of that would be,

1. That no Deed really sealed and delivered between the parties to it, and so
agreed to be, could make recital of a thing which was false, or which was not
according to the recital, which is a senseless Assertion.

2. By that reason all Fables recited, nay, all sorts of recited lies, at least
(all such as had possibility of being true) would become truths, whether orally
recited, or in Books, Letters, or other Writings; for the difference of recital
any other way, and recital in a Deed, will not vary the Case, because the
recital in a Deed may as equally be false, as in other ways of recital; unless
a man think that any false recital in a Deed shall be a conclusion against the
parties, and such as claim from them, which I shall anon make appear to be
false.

3. It were perniciously dangerous, That Recitals in a true Deed, that other
Deeds were sealed and delivered, should make such Deeds recited in Law, to be
true Deeds; for then by feigned Recitals of other Deeds in a true Deed, men
might make what Titles they pleased.

4. It would be worse than actual forging of such recited Deeds, because the
forgery of Deeds is punishable, and thereby such Deeds made ineffectual; but
false Recitals are neither punishable, nor the effect of them destroyed, if
they should be admitted: But this is so clear, that I shall say no more in it.

If then those two Deeds be neither directly found, nor the finding a Recital
of such Deeds in the Deed of 1 Mariae, be a sufficient finding of them, it
remains, if they be found at all, they must be found by Inference and Argument
only. And as for that, though in a general Verdict, finding the point in Issue,
by way of Argument, for the Plaintiff or Defendant, be never permitted, not
though the Argument be necessary and concluding.

As in an Action of Debt brought for 20 l. the Defendant pleaded payment, and
issue thereupon. The Jury found that the Defendant debet the 20 l. this was no
good Verdict; for the matter in issue, payment or not, was not directly found,
but by way of Argument, though the Argument was necessary there, Rolls 693.
Barry and Phillips, N. 30.
that the Defendant did not pay the 20 l. which he did owe, for he could not
both pay it, and yet owe it. And this Case was affirmed in Error.

Yet I confess in a Special Verdict, That strictness is not rigidly observed,
where the Jury find only the matter of Fact, when in a general Verdict they
find both Fact and Law, that is, the whole matter in issue; yet in a special
Verdict they must find the Case in Fact clear, and without Equivocation to
common intent, else they find nothing whereupon the Court can determine what
the Law is.

There are no words in this Special Verdict that can be strained to a finding
of the Deeds of 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. by way of Inference and Collection, but
these.

They find that Robert, Bishop of Oxford, by Indenture dated the 14th. of
October. 1 Mar. demis'd to Croker the Manor of Hooknorton, with the
Appurtenances, inter alia Habendum, to the said Croker, and his Assigns, from
the end and expiration, prioris dimissionis in eadem Indentur. mentionat. for
and during the term of 90 years then next following: The tenor of which
Indenture follows in haec verba, and so find the Indenture of 1 Mar. verbatim,
but not the tenor dictae prioris dimissionis, for if they had so found, it had
varied the Case.

Which finding only of the Deed of 1. Mariae, verbatim, and that thereby the
Manor of Hooknorton was demised for Ninety years, a fine prioris dimissionis
in the Indenture of 1. Mariae mentioned, it cannot be made out by any rational
Inference, That they have clearly found such a former Demise, or otherwise than
as recited to have been by the Indenture of 1. Mariae.

For to find that such a Letter was written, or such a Book made by J. S. is
not to find that all things, or any thing contained or mentioned in that Letter
or Book, are, or is true.

No more finding a certain Deed, as that of 1 Mariae, to be sealed and
delivered by J.S. is not a finding that every thing mentioned or recited in
that Deed, is true.

The Context of the Verdict explained.
I find it conceived by some, That by the words of the Verdict, Habendum a fine
prioris dimissionis in Indentura praedict. mentionat. the Jury have found two
things.

The first from the words Habendum a fine prioris dimissionis, That there was a
former Demise from the Expiration of which the term granted 1 Mariae begins.

The second from the words In Indentura praedict. mentionat. That such former
Demise is mentioned in the Indenture 1 Mar.

And thence conclude, That a former Demise, mentioned in the Indenture of 1
Mar. is by the Jury found to have been actually made: And consequently the
sense of the words of the Verdict, and Iury's meaning must be, as if they had
been Habendum, from the Expiration of a former Demise, and which former Demise
is mentioned in the Indenture of 1 Mar.

But surely there is a clear difference between the Iuries finding a former
Demise to be, and their finding a former Demise mentioned to be: For a former
Demise may be found mentioned to be, which notwithstanding never was.

The words therefore of the Verdict, genuinely read and expounded, are,
Habendum from the Expiration of a former Demise (not which positively was) but
Habendum from the Expiration of a former Demise mentioned in the Indenture of 1
Mar. to be.

But a Demise may be mentioned in the Indenture of 1 Mar. to be, which yet
never was.

And then the meaning of the words and Jury will evidently be Habendum, from
the Expiration of a former demise which the Indenture of 1 Mar. mentions,
recites, or says to be formerly made.

And by this the Jury do not find, That any former demise, mentioned in the
Indenture of 1 Mar. was really made.

I must agree, That as a Witness may prove the Contents of a Deed or Will, so
may a Jury find them, the Deed or Will it self not being found in haec verba.

But if a Jury, by their Verdict, shall take upon them to collect the Contents
of a Deed, and yet by the same Verdict find that Deed in haec verba, the Court
is not to regard the Collection they have made of the Substance of the Deed,
but the Deed it self.

As for instance, If a demise should be made to J. S. for a certain term of
years, Habendum, from the day of the making the demise, and the Jury should
find the Deed made to J. S. for the term Habendum from the making of the
demise, Cujus quidem Indent. fact. to J. S. tenor sequitur in haec verba.

By this Verdict, it both appeared what Collection the Jury made in their
Judgment of the Habendum, of the Deed to J. S. and also what the Deed it self
syllabically was, which varied from what the Jury conceived it to be; for the
Habendum in the Deed appears to be from the day of making of the demise; but
the Jury collected it to be from the making. Here the Court shall not regard
the Collection by the Jury, but the Deed it self, as to the Commencement of the
Term.

1. So in the present Case, the Jury finding, That the Bishop of Oxford, by his
Indenture of 1 Mar. demis'd the Manor of Hooknorton Habendum, from the
Expiration of a former demise therein mentioned, for Ninety years, and then
setting forth the Indenture verbatim; is not a finding at large; and as if no
lease verbatim, were found that the Bishop made a lease for Ninety years, to
begin from the Expiration of a former demise, made 29 H. 8 or 1 E. 6. for a
certain term, but is a Collection of the Substance, as they conceived of the
Deed of 1. Mar which immediately they find in haec verba.

And consequently, the Deed it self being syllabically found, the Court is not
to regard their Collection of the purport of it.

2. Another Reason is, That if those words in the Verdict, Habendum from the
end of a former Demise mentioned in the said Indenture, had been omitted, and
they had only found the Bishop had Sealed and Executed the Indenture, 1 Mariae,
to Croker, Cujus quidem Indent. tenor sequitur in haec verba, etc. all that is
pretended to be found by this Verdict, had been as fully, and more clearly
found, by finding the Indenture of 1 Mar. only.

For finding that Indenture in haec verba, they had found that the Bishop had
demis'd the Manor of Hooknorton, Habendum, from the Expiration of a former
Demise therein mentioned for Ninety years; which is all they have now found.
Therefore the finding by way of redundance, over and besides finding the Deed
it self, what was equally found in finding the Deed only, is not to be
regarded, but as over-doing and impertinent.

3. Besides, such a construction of the Verdict makes it absolutely equivocal
and uncertain; for if the words, Habendum a fine prioris dimissionis in
Indentura predict. mentionat. be but their Summary Collection of what the
Indenture 1 Mar. contains, then it is but finding a recital of a former Demise;
but if otherwise, it is finding a former Demise really and positively, which do
toto coelo differ, and confound the Judgment of the Court.

4. Put the Case any other person, having seen the Deed of 1 Mar. should be
asked, What the effect of it was? his Answer would be, as the Jury have found,
That it was a Demise by the Bishop of Oxford to Croker, of the Manor of
Hooknorton, and other things Habendum for Ninety years, from the Expiration of
a former lease mentioned in that Demise.

But such Answer did not assert, That there was actually such a former Demise,
as is mentioned in that Deed of 1 Mar.

Why then must the Jury, asserting but the same thing in the same words, be
strained to assert more, viz. That there actually was such a former Demise as
is recited in the Indenture 1 Mariae?

5. Either this Habendum a fine prioris dimissionis in the Indenture of 1.
Mariae, said to be mentioned, is intended by the Jury to be the Habendum of the
Deed of 1 Mariae, or not; if the Habendum of that Deed, then nothing is found
by it, but what is found by finding the Deed it self of 1 Mariae, and then it
is Habendum a fine dimissionis of a Deed only recited in that of 1 Mariae, and
no more; but if not, and that by finding this Habendum, more be found than by
finding the Deed of 1 Mariae barely, then two Habendums of the same thing are
found for the Deed of 1 Mar.

6. Beyond all this, if the Juries finding that the then Bishop of Oxford, by
his Indenture 1 Mariae, did, inter alia, demise to Croker the Manor of
Hooknorton, Habendum a fine prioris dimissionis in Indentura praedict.
mentionat. shall be (as is contended) an absolute and positive finding of a
former Demise made, to whose expiration the Indenture 1 Mariae referrs, it must
be either the demise 29 H. 8. or that of 1 E. 6. for no other are mentioned in
the Indenture 1 Mar. and it can be but a finding of one of them; for the words,
a fine prioris dimissionis in Indentur. praedict. mentionat. cannot possibly
extend to both.

Be it then understood the Demise 1 E. 6. for in that the Manor is clearly
named; the Consequence must be, That the Deed of 1 Mar. which is an entire
lease, as well of the Manor, as of the Vicaridge, Parsonage, and of other
things under several Rents, for Ninety years, commencing, as to the Manor,
from the Expiration of the supposed Demise 1 E. 6. shall be a good lease for
Ninety years thence forwards, because that recited Demise is also supposed to
be positively found by the Jury, by those words of their Verdict.

But as to the Vicaridge, Parsonage, and other things, and the Rents thereupon
reserved, which are demis'd by the Indenture of 1 Mar. for Ninety years, to
commence from the Expiration of the other recited Demise, supposed in 29 H. 8.
the lease of 1 Mar. must commence immediately from the Date, because the Jury
have not found that recited Demise positively, but only as recited, and
therefore not found it to be a real Demise, and consequently the lease of 1
Mariae, as to those particulars, referring the term to commence from the
Expiration of a term granted 29 H. 8. not in esse, because not found, must
begin from 1. Mar. which, doubtless, the Jury never intended.

But now for Authority, I will resume the Case formerly cited of 3 E. 6. in the
Lord Brook. If A. makes a Lease to B. Habendum for Forty years, from the
expiration of a former Lease made of the Premises to J. N. and this be found
occasionally, by special Verdict, as our Case is; but the Jury in no other
manner find any Lease to be made to J. N. then as mentioned in the Lease to B.
By the Resolution of that Book, the Lease to B for Forty years, shall begin
presently.

And who will say in this Case, That because the Jury find a Lease made to B.
for Forty years Habendum, from the Expiration of a former Lease made to J. N.
that therefore they find a Lease made formerly to J. N. when in truth J. N. had
no such Lease; for they only find what the Habendum in the Lease to B. is,
which makes a false mention of a former Lease to J. N. but had no Evidence to
find a Lease which was not.

Exactly parallel to this is our present Case; the Jury find the Bishop of
Oxford, by a Lease dated the Fourteenth of October, 1 Mariae, demised to Groker
the Manor of Hooknorton, Habendum, to him and his Assigns for Ninety years,
from the Expiration of a former Demise, mentioned in the said Indenture of
Lease 1 Mariae: But do not affirm or find, explicitly or implicitly, any former
demise made when they only find summarily the Habendum of the Lease, 1 Mariae,
which mentions such a former Demise.

Cr. 10 Car. 1. f. 397.
Another Case I shall make use of, is the Case of Miller and Jones versus
Manwaring, in an Ejectment brought in Chester, upon the Demise of Sir Randolph
Crew: The Jury in a Special Verdict found, That John Earl of Oxford and
Elizabeth his Wife, were seized in Fee in Right of Elizabeth, of the Manor of
Blacon, whereof the Land in question was parcel, and had Issue John; the said
John, Earl of Oxford, by Indenture dated the Tenth of February, 27 H. 8.
demis'd the Manor to Anne Seaton for Four and Thirty years, Elizabeth died 29
H. 8. And the said Earl of Oxford died March 31. H. 8.

Afterward John the Son, then Earl of Oxford, the Thirtieth of July, 35 H. 8.
by Indenture reciting the Demise to Anne Seaton, to be dated the Tenth of
February, 28 H. 8. demis'd the said Manor to Robert Rochester Habendum, after
the End, Surrender, or Forfeiture of the said Lease to Anne Seaton for Thirty
years.

It was adjudged first in Chester, and after, upon Error, brought in the Kings
Bench; It was resolved by all the Judges (who affirmed unanimously the first
Judgment) That the Lease to Rochester began presently at the time of the
Sealing, for several Reasons.

1. Which is directly to our purpose, because there was no such Lease made to
Anne Seaton, having such beginning and ending as was recited in Rochester's
lease.

2. Because the lease made by John, first Earl of Oxford, was determined by his
death, Three years before Rochester's lease, and consequently no lease in esse
when the lease was made to Rochester; which Reasons are in effect the same,
viz. That a lease made to commence from the end of any lease supposed to be in
esse, which indeed is not, the lease shall commence presently.

From this Case these Conclusions are with clearness deducible.

1. That if a lease be found specially by a Jury, in which one or more other
leases are recited, the finding of such lease is not a finding of any the
recited leases: Therefore the finding of the lease made to Rochester, was not a
finding of the lease therein recited, to be made to Anne Seaton in any respect.

2. The second thing clearly deducible out of this Case, is, That although the
Jury, by their Special Verdict, did find that John the Son, Earl of Oxford, did
by his Indenture demise to Rochester for Thirty years, the Manor of Blacon,
Habendum, from the End, Surrender, or Forfeiture of a former lease thereof made
to Anne Seaton, dated the Tenth of February, 28 H. 8. yet this was not a
finding of any such lease made to Anne Seaton, but only a finding of the
Habendum, as it was in the lease made to Rochester, which mentioned such a
lease to be made to Anne Seaton.

So in our present Case, the Jury finding that the Bishop of Oxford, 1 Mariae,
did demise the Manor of Hooknorton to John Croker Habendum, for Ninety years,
from the Expiration of a former Demise mentioned in the Indenture of 1 Mar. is
not a finding of any such former Demise to be made; but a finding, that in the
Indenture 1 Mariae, it is suggested there was such a former Demise, and no more.

And if any man shall object, That in Rochester's Case the Reason why no such
lease is found to be made to Anne Seaton, in 28 H. 8. to be, because it is
found that the lease made to Anne Seaton was in 27 H. 8. that is not to the
purpose, because the Jury might find, and truly, that a lease was made to her,
Dated the Tenth of February, 27 H. 8. but that was no hindrance; but that
another lease was made to her in 28 H. 8. as is mentioned in Rochester's lease,
which had been a Surrender in Law of that made in 27 H. 8.

Therefore it is manifest, That the sole Reason why no such lease was admitted
to be in 28 H. 8. is no other than, because the Jury find no such to have been
made, but find a suggestion of it only in Rochester's lease: And it is the same
exactly in our present Case.

The third thing deducible from the Case, is, That a Demise by Indenture for a
term Habendum, from the Expiration of another recited or mentioned term
therein, 35 H. 6. 34 Br. Tit. Faits. p. 4. 12 H. 4. 23 Br. Faits 21.
which is not (or not found to be, which is the same thing) is no Estoppel or
Conclusion to the Lessee or Lessor, but that the Lessee may enter immediately,
and the Lessor demise or grant in Reversion after such immediate lease.

There is another Case, resolved at the same time, between the same Persons,
and concerning the same Land, and published in the same Report, and specially
found by the same Jury. Edward Earl of Oxford, Son of John, the Son of John
Earl of Oxford, by Indenture between him and Geoffry Morley, Dated the
Fourteenth of July, 15 Elizabethae, reciting, That John his Father, by
Indenture the Thirtieth of July, 35 H. 8. had demised to Robert Rochester the
said Farm or Manor of Blacon, Habendum for Thirty years, from the end or
determination of the lease made to Anne Seaton, the Tenth of February, 27 H. 8.
which is a false recital; for the lease to Rochester was to commence from the
end or determination of a lease made to Anne Seaton, that is recited to be made
the Tenth of February, 28 H. 8. and that afterward, the said John Earl of
Oxford, had granted by Indenture, Dated the Six and twentieth of March, 35 H.
8. reciting the lease to Anne Seaton, the Tenth of February, 27 H. 8. to
Hamlett Freer, the Reversion of the said Manor of Blacon, Habendum, the said
Manor and Premises from such time as the same shall revert, or come to the
possession of the said Earl, or his Heirs, by Surrender, Forfeiture, or
otherwise, for Sixty years, for so is the Case put in one part of the Report;
but in another part of it, it seems to be, That the Demise to Freer was when it
should revert, after the Expiration, Surrender, or Forfeiture, omitting the
words, or otherwise of the Lease made to Anne Seaton, which will nothing vary
the Case. The said Edward, Earl of Oxford (...) demised the said Manor or Farm
of Blacon, to the said Geoffry Morley, Habendum, from the end of the said
Leases for Fifty years.

The Question was, Whether any of these leases, made either to Hamlett Freer or
Morley, be good, or were in esse at the time of the lease, made by Sir Randolph
Crew to the Plaintiff: Sir Randolph Crew claiming the Inheritance from the Earl
of Oxford, and Sir William Norris the Leases from Freer and Morley, and under
him the Defendant. And Judgment was given in Chester for the Plaintiff.

And upon a Writ of Error of this Judgment brought in the Kings Bench, wherein
the Error assigned was, The giving of Judgment for the Plaintiff. After several
Arguments at Bar, and at the Bench, Seriatim by the Justices, it was
unanimously agreed, The Judgment in Chester for the Plaintiff should be
affirmed.

And that neither the Lease to Freer, nor that to Morley, was good to avoid the
Plaintiffs Title.

As for the lease to Freer, it being a grant of a Reversion nominally, and by
Agreement of Parties, there being no Reversion, because no lease, at the time
of the Grant, was in esse, either of Seatons or Rochesters, upon a point of
Rasure in Rochester's Demise found in the Case, and for that Land in
possession, could not pass by the name of a Reversion, though by the name of
Land a Reversion may pass; for he who will grant Land in possession, cannot be
thought not to grant the same, if only in Reversion, L. Chandoes Case, 6. Rep.
according to the doctrine of Throgmorton's Case in the Commentaries.

And for that Morley's lease was to commence after the lease granted to
Rochester, which was to commence after that granted to Seaton the Tenth of
February, 27 H. 8. whereas no such lease was granted to Rochester, but a lease
to commence after one granted to Seaton, in 28 H. 8. It was resolved, None of
those leases were in esse, and that Morley's lease commenced therefore
presently.

The words of the Resolution are these, as to Morley's Lease; It was Resolved
that Morley's Lease was not in esse; for that misrecites the former Leases, and
so has the same Rule as the former, where it recites Leases and there be none
such; Therefore it shall begin from the Date, which being in the Fifteenth of
the Queen, for Fifty years, ended 1623. which was before the Lease made to the
Plaintiff; for these Reasons Judgment was affirmed.

The same Conclusions are deducible from this lease to Morley, as from the
former to Rochester, and therefore I will not repeat them: But here are two
Judgments in the very point of our Case, and affirmed in a Writ of Error
unanimously in the Kings Bench.

And where it is thought material that the Jury have found a half years Rent to
have been behind at Michaelmas, 1643. and thence inferred, the Jury have found
the leases by which that Rent was ascertained, namely, the leases of 29 H. 8.
and 1 E. 6.

Surely if a lease be for a term of years, to commence from the end of a former
term, and for such Rent as is reserved upon such former Demise that never was;
as no term can commence from the end of another which never was, so no Rent can
be behind, which cannot appear but by a Demise which was never made, that is,
which is never found to be made.

Add further, That if the Jury had found the Leases of 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. to
have been made, as is mentioned in the lease of 1 Mar. that had not been a
sufficient finding of them.

For a Deed is not found at all, nor a last Will, when only the Jury find but
part of the Deed or Will, for the Court cannot Judge but upon the whole, and
not upon part.

It it be found in Assise the Defendant was Tenant, and disseis'd the
Plaintiff, nisi verba contenta in ultima voluntate W. M. give a lawful Estate
from W. M. to R. M. and find the words contained in the Will, but not the Will
at large; the Court cannot judge upon this Verdict, 38. 39 El. B.R. West and
Mounsons C. Rolls 696. Tit. Trial.
whose Office it is to judge upon the whole Will which is not found. 38, 39 El.
B. R. West and Mounsons Case, Rolls 696. Title Trial.

So for the same reason, finding but part of a recited Deed, and not the whole,
is as if no part were found, and it appears by the Deed of 1 Mariae, that both
Deeds of 29 H. 8. and 1 E. 6. are recited therein but in part; for after as
much as is recited of either Deeds respectively is said, as more plainly
appears among other Grants and Covenants in the said Deed.

And if other Grants were in the Deed of 29 H. 8. besides those recited, then
the express Grant of the very Manor of Hooknorton, might be one of those
Grants which is urged not to be granted, because not recited in 29 H. 8.
nominally, and if so, here being two former demises of the Manor mentioned in
the Indenture 1 Mar. and for different terms; the one 29 H. 8. for Eighty
years, the other 1 E. 6. for Ninety years, and so expiring at different terms,
it is uncertain from which Expiration the demise of the Manor 1 Mar. shall
Commence, and consequently the demise having no certain Commencement, will be
void by the Rector of Chedington's Case, 1. Rep.

But admitting the Manor not demis'd by 29 H. 8. yet the Jury finding the
demise 1 Mar. Habendum a fine prioris dimissionis, and not prioris dimissionis
ejusdem Manerii, it is uncertain still, Whether the Habendum a fine prioris
dimissionis, as the Jury have found it, shall referr to the end of the demise
29 H. 8. or to that of 1 E. 6. both of them being prior demises mentioned in
the Indenture 1 Mar. for if only the demise 29 H. 8. had been mentioned in that
of 1 Mar. the demise 1 Mar. for its Commencement, must of necessity have
referred to the Expiration of the demise by 29 H. 8. though the Manor passed
not by it, and it will not then change the uncertainty, because the demise 1 E.
6. is mentioned.

Nor shall you, to this finding of the Jury, suppose a different finding from
their finding barely the Indenture of 1 Mar. call in aid any thing from the
Recitals in 1 Mar. and so make up a Medley Verdict, partly from what the Jury
find expressly, and partly from what is only recited, and not otherwise found.

As for instance, The Jury find the Manor demis'd for Ninety years, Habendum,
from the end of a former demise mentioned 1 Mar. This Verdict in it self, finds
no Commencement of the term, by not finding from the Expiration of which term
it begins, nor find no Rent reserved. But the demise of 1 Mar. as to them, must
be made out from the recitals of Deeds not found to be real, which is a way of
confounding all Verdicts.

When the Jury say, The Manor of Hooknorton was demis'd a fine prioris
dimissionis in Indentura predict. mentionat. for Ninety years, they do not say,
a fine prioris dimissionis ejusdem Manerii.

So as if nothing else were, the former Indenture mentioned might be of the
Vicaridge, or any other thing, and not at all of the Manor; and yet by the
Indenture of 1 Mar. the demise of the Manor was to Commence from the
Expiration of such former demise, whatever was demis'd by it.

But the Indenture of 1 Mar. demiseth all the Premises contained in the first
Indenture, Habendum from the Expiration of the term.

Ergo, If the Manor be not comprised in the first Indenture, it cannot be
demis'd by 1 Mar. from the Expiration of the first term in the first Indenture.

But admitting this, Who can say the Manor of Hooknorton is not comprised in
the first Indenture.

For first, What if only part of the first Indenture is recited, and not all,
in the Deed of 1 Mar. and so the Manor omitted in the recital, though it were
comprised in the Indenture of 29 H. 8. and perhaps the Jury might, if that
Indenture were produced to them, see it was comprised in the Indenture, though
not recited to be so.

2. What if the Indenture of 29 H. 8. were mis-recited in 1 Mar. and instead of
the Manor, the word Mansion recited?

3. It is apparent, That the Indenture of 29 H. 8. was not recited, nor
pretended to be recited verbatim in that of 1 Mar.

Because after so much of the Indenture of 29 H. 8. as is recited in that of 1
Mar. it is said, as by the said Indenture, viz. 29 H. 8. among diverse other
Covenants and Grants, more plainly appears.

So as there were other Grants in the said Indenture of 29 H. 8. than are
recited in 1 Mar. and the Grant of the Manor by name might be one of them.

4. How can it appear to us, but that the Jury did find the Manor of
Hooknorton to be expressly demis'd by the first Indenture, if any thing were
demis'd by it.

If then the Jury did conceive the Manor of Hooknorton was demis'd by the
first recited Indenture, as most probably they did:

When they find, That by the Indenture of 1 Mar. the said Manor was conveyed a
fine prioris dimissionis in Indentur. praedict. mentionat. And there are
mentioned in the Indenture of 1. Mar. two former demises of the Manor, viz.
that of 29 H. 8. for a term of Eighty years, and that of 1 E. 6. for a term of
Ninety years, there is no certain Commencement of the term of 1 Mar. because it
is as uncertain from which of the two former demises it takes his Commencement,
as if ten former demises were mentioned, and for different terms, and then it
could Commence from neither of them.

But admit it should be taken to Commence from the end of the term of 1 E. 6.
and not from the other, because in that term (if any such were) the Manor is
without scruple demis'd; yet we must remember, the present Question is not of
the Manor, but of Two hundred Acres, parcel of the Manor. And in the Lease of
1 E. 6. though the Manor be demis'd, yet there is an Exception of certain
Lands and Tenements in the Town or Vill of Hooknorton, which Croker then held
for certain years enduring.

How does it appear, That the Two hundred Acres in question, were not those
Lands excepted out of the demise of 1 Mariae? For though they were parcel of
the Manor, they might be severally demis'd and excepted; and though it be
found, Cok. Litt. 325. a.
That at the time of the Demise, and at the time of the Trespass, the Two
hundred Acres were parcel of the Manor, it is not found that they were not
part of the Lands in the Vill of Hooknorton, at the time of the demise made 1
Mar. then in Lease to Croker, and excepted out of the said demise of 1 Mar. for
if they were, the Plaintiff makes no Title to them.

If the Issue be, 15 Jac. B.R. between Ven^ and Howel.
whether by Custom of the Manor a Copyhold is grantable to Three for the Life
of Two, and it be found that by the Custom it is grantable for Three Lives,
that is not well found, for it is but an Argument, Rolls 693. Title Trial.
That because a greater Estate may be granted, a less may, and a new Venire
Facias granted, because the matter in Fact, whereupon the Court was to judge,
and was the point of the Issue, was not found.

Hill. 10 Car. 1. B. R. Wilkinson and Meriams Case, Rolls 700. and 701. Tit.
Trial.
If a Jury find that J.S. was seized in Fee of Land, and possessed of certain
Leases for years of other Land, made his Will in writing, and thereby devised
his Leases to J.D. and after devised to his Executors the residue of his
Estate, Mortgages, Goods, etc. his Debts being paid, and funeral Expenses
discharged. It being referred by the Jury to the Court, Whether by this devise
the Executor has an Estate in Fee, or not? This is no perfect special Verdict;
because the Jury find not the Debts paid, and the Funeral Expenses discharged,
which is a Condition precedent to the Executors having an Estate in Fee, and
without finding which the Court cannot resolve the matter to them referred by
the Jury; Therefore a Venire facias de novo was awarded.

Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Trin. 22. Car. II. C. B. Rot. 461. Richard Edgcomb Knight of the Bath,
Executor of Pierce Edgcomb Esquire, his Father, is Plaintiff. Rowland Dee
Administrator of Charles Everard Esquire, during the Minority of Charles
Everard, Son of the Intestate, Defendant.
In an Action of the Case upon an Assumpsit.
THE Plaintiff declares, That the Intestate, the Thirteenth of July, 1664. at
London, in the Parish of St. Mary Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, in consideration
that the said Pierce Edgcomb would, at his request, lend him 500 l. promised
the said Pierce to repay it within Seven days after demand with Interest,
after the rate of 4 l. per Centum.

That thereupon the said Pierce Edgcomb after, at the time and place aforesaid,
did lend the said Intestate 500 l.

That the said Pierce, the Testator, afterward, the Fourteenth of July, 17
Car. 2. at the place aforesaid, required the Intestate to pay the said 500 l.
with Interest, after the rate aforesaid, both which amounted to the Sum of 520
l.

He lays further, That the said Intestate was indebted to Pierce the Testator,
the Fourteenth day of July, 1664. in the Sum of 500 l. for money before that
time to him lent by the said Pierce.

And in Consideration thereof, the said Fourteenth of July, 1664. in the said
Parish and Ward, promised to pay when required.

But that neither the Intestate in his life time, nor the Defendant, to whom
the Administration of his Goods were committed, during the Minority of Charles
Everard, Son of the said Intestate, at London, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, did pay the said Sums, nor either of them, amounting to 1020 l. to
the said Pierce Edgcomb in his life time, nor to the said Richard, the
Plaintiff, after his death; Though required by the Intestate afterward in his
life time, that is, upon the First of August, 17 Car. 2. And the said
Defendant, after the death of the Intestate, viz. the Tenth day of March, 18
Car. 2. and often after, at the said Parish and Ward, by the Testator Pierce
were required. And the said Defendant, after the death of the Testator, the
First day of January, 21 Car. 2. was required, at the place aforesaid, by the
Plaintiff, to pay the said money, which he did not, and still refuses, to his
damage of 800 l.

The Defendant pleads payment after the Plaintiffs Writ purchased, of several
great debts due by Bond and Bills obligatory from the Intestate, to several
persons at his death, in number One and thirty.

That the Intestate, the Two and twentieth of December, 16 Car. 2. became bound
in a Recognizance in the Chancery to Sir Harbottle Grimstone Baronet, Master of
the Rolls, and to Sir Nathaniel Hobart, one of the Masters of the Chancery, in
2000 l.

And that the said 2000 l. is still due and unpaid, and the said Recognizance
in its full force, unsatisfied or discharged.

He pleads, the City of London is an ancient City, and that within it, time out
of mind, has been held a Court of Record of the Kings, etc. before the Mayor
and Aldermen of the said City, in Camera Guild Hall ejusdem Civitatis, of all
personal Actions arising and growing within the said City.

That the Intestate, at the time of his death, was indebted apud London
praedict. in the Parish and Ward, praedict. to one William Allington in 2670 l.
17 s. 7 d. And who, after the purchase of the Plaintiffs Writ, the Tenth of
March, the Eighteenth of the King, came to the said Court, before Sir Thomas
Bludworth then Mayor, and the Aldermen in the said Chamber, according to the
Custom of the said City, held, used, and approved.

Et praedictus Willielmus Allington tunc and ibidem in eadem Curia secundum
consuetudinem praedictae Civitatis, affirmabat contra praedictum Rolandum Dee
ut Administratorem, etc. quandam Billam originalem de placito debiti super
demand. Mill sexcentarum and septuaginta librarum, and december and septem
solidorum, and septem denariorum legalis monetae, etc.

And that it was so proceeded, according to the Custom of the said City, that
the said William Allington had Judgment to recover against the Defendant the
said Debt, and 85 l. 16 s. for damages, etc.

And that after, the Defendant, in full satisfaction of the said Judgment, paid
to the said William Allington the Sum of 2670 l. and 17 s.

Then pleads about Four and twenty Recoveries and Judgments thereupon in the
Kings Bench, in Pleas of Debt without Specialties, all satisfied but one of
7000 l. and more, due to one Cornwallis.

Then pleads Plene administravit, all the Goods of the Intestate, at the time
of his death, to be administered, and that he had not die Impetrationis brevis
Originalis praedicti, nec unquam postea aliqua bona seu cattalla predict. Car.
Everard, tempore mortis suae in manibus suis administrand. praeterquam bona and
cattalla ad valentiam separalium denariorum summarum per ipsum sic, ut
praefertur solutarum in exonerationem, separalium Judiciorum, scriptorum
obligatori orum, and billarum obligatoriarum predict.

Ac praeter alia bona and cattalla ad valentiam december solidorum, quae
executioni Recognitionis praedict. ac Judicii praedicti per praefatum Carolum
Cornwallis versus ipsum, ut praefertur recuperat. onerabilia and onerata
existunt.

Et quod ipse Rolandus modo non habet aliqua bona seu cattalla quae fuerunt
praedict. Caroli tempore mortis suae administrand. praeter praedicta bona and
catalla ad valentiam praedictorum december solidorum quae executioni recognitionis
praedict. ac Judicii praedict. per praefatum Carolum Cornwallis recuperat. sic
ut praefertur onerata and onerabilia existunt. Et hoc paratus est, etc. Et
petit Judicium. Then

Averrs the debts, so as aforesaid by him paid, to be bona fide paid, and pro
veris and justis debitis, owing and unpaid by the Intestate at the time of his
death.

And that the several Judgments aforesaid, against him recovered, were for true
and just debts of the Intestate, owing by him at the time of his death.

The Plaintiff taking, by protestation, that nothing alleged by the Defendant
was true, Demurrs upon the Plea.

The Causes offered to maintain the Demurrer, are these:

1. That one of the Judgments pleaded in Bar obtained by William Allington in
the Court of London, before the Mayor, etc. against the Defendant for 2670 l.
17 s. 7 d. due to the said Allington by the Intestate Everard, was not duly
obtained, and is insufficient to Bar the Plaintiff.

2. That the Defendants special Plea in Bar appearing in any part of it to be
false and insufficient, the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment for his whole debt.

1. For the first Cause, it was urged as an Exception to the Defendants Plea,
That by the Plea it appears, that time out of mind a Court has been held in
the City of London, before the Mayor and Aldermen, of all personal Actions
arising and growing within the said City.

And that the Intestate was, at the time of his death, indebted to the said
Allington at London, within the Parish and Ward of St. Mary Bow and Cheapside.

But it is not alleged, That the said debt did arise and grow due in London,
within the said Parish and Ward; for wheresoever the debt did arise and grow
due, yet the debtor is indebted to the creditor in any place where he is, as
long as the debt is unpaid.

And therefore to say, The Intestate was indebted to Allington in the said Sum
apud London, etc. affirms not that the debt did arise and grow due at London;
and if not, the Court had no Jurisdiction of the Cause.

The effect of the Defendants Bar is only to show, That such a Judgment was
obtained in such a Court against him, and not to set forth the whole Record of
obtaining it; for it were vast Expense of time and money so to do, as often as
occasion is to mention a Record; and referrs to the Record, prout per Recordum
before liquet, where the Plaintiff may take advantage of any defect therein.
But if that were necessary, it is well set forth; for his Plea is,

Et praedictus Willielmus Allington tunc and ibidem in eadem Curia secundum
consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae, affirmabat contra praedictum Rolandum Dee
ut Administratorem, etc. quandam billam originalem de placito debiti, etc.

And the Custom being to hold Plea of personal Actions arising within the
City, if he affirmed a Bill of Debt, according to the Custom,

It must be of a debt arising and growing due within the City.

2. A second Exception was, That it is not set forth for what the debt was,
whereby the Court may judge whether it were payable or not by the Administrator.

To this it was answered, That the course in London is for the Plaintiff to
declare that the Debtor being indebted to him at such a time and place,
Concessit solvere, such a Sum to him, at such a time, for they enter not there
at large, as at Westminster, all the pleading; and the City Customs have been
often confirmed by Parliament, and if Exception be taken to the Jurisdiction,
it must come from the Defendant.

However that will not avoid the Judgment, and is but Error.

3. A third Exception was, It is not set forth that the Intestate was indebted
to Allington in his own right.

But it must be intended if he were indebted to him by Law, that it was in his
own right.

4. A fourth Exception was, That the Defendant pleads Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff, quod recuperaret debitum praedictum; where the Judgment should
be quod recuperet.

It is not the Defendants concern to recite the words of the Judgment, as it
was given by the Court, but the effect of it relating to the Defendant, and so
it is more proper to say Judgment was given quod recuperaret. The Court say,
ideo consideratum est per Curiam; but he who relates what they did, says, ideo
consideratum fuit per Curiam. But my Book is quod recuperet.

5. A fifth Exception was, That the Plea sets forth the Action was brought
against the Defendant Dee in London, as Administrator of the Intestate,
omitting durante minori aetate Caroli Everard filii.

That will not avoid the Judgment, Rolls, Good and Pincents Case, Tit.
Executors f. 910. 14 Car. 1. B.R. Piggots Case, 5 Rep.
though the Minor were of Age sufficient to administer himself; nor is it of
prejudice to any, as was resolved in the Case of one Pincent.

But if an Administrator, durante minori aetate, brings an Action, he must
averr the Administrator or Executor to be under the Age of Seventeen years.

6. Sixthly, it was urged as resolved in Turners Case, Turners Case 8. Rep. f.
132.
That the Recital of Allingtons Declaration in London, not mentioning the Debt
to be per scriptum obligatorium, it shall not be intended to be so.

And it was urged as resolved in that Case of Turner also, That it being a Debt
but by simple Contract, the Administrator was not chargeable with it.

That is a Resolution in Turners Case supernumerary, and not necessary to
support the Judgment given, and consequently no Judicial Resolution for the
Judgment given in Turners Case was well given, because the Judgments given
before the Mayor of Cicester, pleaded in bar of the Plaintiffs Action were
resolved to be coram non Judice, because it appeared not that the Mayor of
Cicester had any Jurisdiction to hold Plea by Patent or Prescription.

But admitting that an Executor or Administrator, according to that Resolution,
is not chargeable (if by chargeable be meant compellable) at the Common Law in
an Action of Debt brought upon a simple Contract of the Testator or Intestate,
to pay such Debt; what would it avail the Plaintiff in that Case, or can in
this Case, unless the Resolution had been, That though the Jurisdiction of the
Court of Cicester had been well set forth, yet a Judgment there obtained
against the Executor, upon a simple Contract of the Testators, had been no Bar
in an Action of Debt brought upon an Obligation of the Testators (But there is
no such Resolution there) for a Judgment obtained upon such a simple Contract,
is as much a Judgment when had, as any other, upon Obligations, and the Books
and use are clear, That Judgments must be satisfied before Debts due by
Obligation. It is true, it is a Waste of the Goods of the Dead in the Executor,
to pay voluntarily a Debt by simple Contract before a Debt by Obligation
whereof he had notice (and not otherwise) in that Case. But no man ever thought
it a Devastavit in the Executor, to satisfy a Judgment obtained upon a simple
Contract, before a Debt due by Obligation.

Yet I shall agree, the Executor by the Common Law, might have prevented this
Judgment, by abating the Plaintiffs Writ at first, which he had power lawfully
to do, but he had equal power lawfully not to abate it, and used that last
lawful power, and not the first, and wronged none in using it.

To this may be added, That the Judgment upon a simple Contract is the Act of
the Court, and compulsory to the Executor, and he has then no Election, but
must obey the Judgment.

In conclusion though it were agreed, That in the Action of Debt brought by
Allington upon a simple Contract, Judgment ought not to have been given against
the Defendant being Administrator, but the Writ should have abated, because the
Administrator was not chargeable. And though the Judgment given were erroneous,
and for that cause reversible, yet standing in force unrevers'd; It is a good
Bar to the Plaintiffs Action.

But lest this should countenance Judges abating the Writ ex officio, in such
Actions brought, or Plaintiffs to bring Error upon Judgments given in such
Actions, I conceive the Law is clear, That Judges ought not, ex officio, to
abate such Writ, nor otherwise than when the Executor or Administrator,
Defendant in such Action demurrs, and demands Judgment of the Writ, and that
Judgment given against such Defendants not demurring to the Writ, is not
Erroneous, unless for other cause.

If it be urged further, That though a Judgment obtained upon a simple
Contract, be a bar to an Action of Debt brought after upon an Obligation, or
to an Action of the Case upon an Assumpsit to pay money, as the present Case is.

Yet it should not bar, if the Action upon which it was obtained, were
commenced pending a former Action upon an Obligation, or upon an Assumpsit for
money, in which the Intestate could not have waged his Law.

The answer is as before, such Judgment bars until reversed, if admitted to be
reversible; as it is not.

But the Law is settled, That wheresoever an Action of Debt, upon Bond or
Contract, is brought against a man, he may lawfully confess the Action, and
give way to a Judgment, if there be no fraud in the Case, although he have
perfect notice of such former Suit depending; nor is there any restraint or
limit of time for confessing an Action brought upon a simple Contract, more
than upon a Bond.

And to satisfy any Debt upon Obligation, 5 H. 7. f. 27. b. Moore, Scarle^
Case. f. 678. Crook. 38 El. f. 462. Green and Wilcocks Case.
before a Judgment so obtained, is a Devastavit in the Executor or
Administrator, and so it is to satisfy any latter Judgment, if there be not
assets to satisfy the first also. So are the express Books; to those points of
5 H. 7. per Curiam: and Scarles his Case in Moore and Green, and Wilcock's Case
in Crook. Eliz.

Yet in 25 Eliz. when an Action of Debt for 100 l. was brought against an
Executor in C. B. and pending that, Debt was brought against him in B. R. for
100 l. which latter he confessed, and the Judgment there had, pleaded in Bar
to the first Action.

And upon Question if the Plea were good, Fenner and Walmesley held it good,
but Anderson, Mead, Wyndham, and Periam argued to the contrary, and that he
ought to have pleaded the first Action pending to the second Action brought.
The Arguments of both sides you may see in Moore, f. 173. Moore, 25 El. f. 173.
where it is left a Quere, the Judges doubting the Case; but since the Law is
taken, That the Judgment is a good bar to the first Action.

It will be still objected, That if the Law be that Executors or Administrators
may pay debts upon simple Contracts of the deceased, to which they are not
bound, and thereby prevent the payment of a debt to which they are bound; It is
repugnant to Reason, and consequently cannot be Law; for that is in effect, at
the same time to be bound, and not bound to pay: For he who may not pay being
bound, is not bound at all. For clearing this we must know,

Though Executors or Administrators are not compelled by the Common Law to
answer Actions of Debt for simple Contracts, yet the Law of the Land obliges
payment of them. For,

1. Upon committing Administration, Oath is taken to administer the Estate of
the dead duly, which cannot be without paying his debts.

2. Oath is taken to make true account of the Administration to the Ordinary,
and of what remains, after all Debts, Funeral Charges, and just Expenses of
every sort deducted.

3. This appears also by the Statute of 31 E. 3. c. 11. That Administrators are
to administer and dispend for the Soul of the Dead; and to answer to other to
whom the dead persons were holden and bound, which they cannot better do, than
by paying their debts.

And as this was the ancient Law and practice before in the Spiritual Court, so
by the new Act in 22 and 23 of the King, for the better settling of Intestates
Estates, It is enacted accordingly, that upon the Administrators account,
deductions be made of all sorts of debts.

This appears to be the ancient Law by the Great Charter, c. 18. and long
before by Glanvill in Henry the Second's time, and Bracton in Henry the Third's
time.

4. And by Fitz-herbert in the Writ de rationabili part bonorum, the debts are
to be deducted before division to the wife and children. And upon the Executors
account all the Testators debts are to be allowed before payment of Legacies,
which were unjust, if the payment of them were not due, as appears by Doctor
and Student.

Executors be bound to pay Debts before Legacies by the Law of Reason, and by
the Law of God; for Reason wills that they should do first that is best for the
Testator, that is, to pay debts, which he was bound to pay before Legacies,
which he was not bound to give.

2. It is better for the Testator, his Debts should be paid, Doct. and Stud. l.
2. c. 11.
for not payment of which his Soul shall suffer pain, but none for not
performing his Legacy.

The Ordinary upon the account, L. 2. c. 10. f. 158
in all the Cases before rehearsed, will regard much what is best for the
Testator. And I conceive the Ordinary may enforce the payment of Debts upon
Contracts, as well as Legacies or Marriage money, and no Prohibition lies.

An Executor or Administrator may retain for his own satisfaction a Debt by
single Contract, due from the Testator or Intestate, which he could not do,
unless the payment were lawful.

If at the Common Law, the Executors payments of Debts, upon simple Contracts
were not just, Why have the Judges, in all Ages, given Judgment for the
Plaintiffs, unless the Defendant either Demurrs in the Commencement of the
Plea, or avoids the Debt by special matter pleaded, and put in issue; but he
shall never, in such case, either Arrest the Judgment, or bring Error after
Judgment for that Cause.

And so it is agreed for Law in Read and Norwoods Case in Plowden, where the
Judges had view of numerous Judgments in that kind, as there appears.

And if such Debts were not justly to be so demanded and paid, it had been
against the Judges Oath to pass such Judgments; for the Defendant is not bound
to Demurr, but leaves the Justice of the Plaintiffs demand to the Court.

In Decimo H. 6. Cotsmore, 10 H. 6. f. 24. b. 25. a.
who gave the Rule in the Case in question, has these words; The Law will not
charge Executors with a duty due by a simple Contract made by the Testator.
Then if such Action be brought against Executors upon a simple Contract made by
the Testator, and they will not take advantage at the beginning of the Pleas in
abatement of the Writ, but plead other matter which is found against them, they
never shall have advantage to show that before Judgment (that is in Arrest of
Judgment) and that I have known adjudg'd in this place once before this time.

Here is not only his own Opinion, but a Judgment by him cited in that Court
formerly in the point.

I shall add another Case to this purpose. A man brought a Writ of Debt against
another, 15 E. 4. f. 29. 2.
and counted that he sold certain Goods to his Testator for the Sum in demand.
Littleton caused the Attorney of the Plaintiff (as printed) but should be
Defendant, to be demanded, and so he was; and Littleton demanded of him, Si'l
voyl avoyder son Suite, not his own, but his who counted against him que dit
que voyl, and after Littleton said to the Attorney of the Plaintiff, The Court
awards, that you take nothing by the Writ; for know, that a man shall never
have an Action against Executors, where the Testator might have waged his Law,
in his life time, quod nota.

It was not proper to ask the Plaintiffs Attorney, Whether he would avoid his
Clyents Suit, and an unlikely answer of his to say, Yes; but a rational demand
to the Defendants Attorney, Whether he would avoid his Suit who counted against
him? and probably he should answer Yes; and after Littleton said to the
Attorney of the Plaintiff, the Court awards you take nothing by your Writ: If
he had been the person to whom the question was first asked, and who
immediately before had answered, Yes; the Book had not been that after
Littleton said to the Attorney of the Plaintiff, but that Littleton said to him
who was the same he discoursed with.

The Print thus rectified, this Case agrees with the Law delivered by Cotsmore.
An Executor is sued, and declared against in Court, for so was the Course then,
upon a simple Contract of his Testators, the Judge asks his Attorney, Whether
he had a mind to avoid the Suit? who answered, Yes. If the Judge had thought
fit, he might have avoided the Suit without making any question, but knowing it
was not consonant to Law to avoid a Suit upon a simple Contract, unless the
Executor himself desired it; He therefore asked him the Question, and finding
he did desire it; the Judge presently told the Plaintiffs Attorney, He could
take nothing by the Writ. Else you see the Consequence of this Judgment, That
the Judges, ex officio, should prevent any Judgment for the Plaintiff in Debt,
brought upon a simple Contract against an Executor, whether the Executor would
or not, against former and subsequent usage.

Brook in Abridging this Case, and not reflecting upon it rightly, abridges it,
that Littleton demanded the Plaintiffs Attorney, If he would avow his Suit;
whereas the word is clearly avoid, not avow: and to what purpose should he ask
that Question; for sure it was avowed as much as could be, when counted upon at
the instant in Court.

Then Brook makes a Note, Br. Executor pl. 80.
Nota cest Judgment ex officio.

And this Note of Brooks misled the Lord Anderson once to the same mistake, if
the Report be right; but the like has not been before or since. Rob. Hughson's
Case. Gouldsboroughs Rep. 30 Eliz. f. 106. and 107.
An Action was brought against an Administrator upon a Contract of the
Intestates, who pleaded fully administered, and found against him. Anderson said
that ex officio, the Court was to stay Judgment, and did so, because the
Administrator was not chargeable upon a simple Contract.

But since that Case of Hughson, one Germayne brought an action of Debt against
Rolls, as Executor of Norwood, for Fees, as an Attorney in the Common Bench,
and for soliciting in the Queens Bench, Germayne versus Rolls, 37 and 38 El.
Cro. 425. pl. 24.
and for money expended about a Fine for Alienation. Rolls pleaded Ne unque
Executor, which was found against him, and Judgment given: Upon which Rolls
brought a Writ of Error, and the Error assigned was, That the Action lay not
against an Executor, because the Testator could have waged his Law. But it was
resolved, That for Attorney's Fees, the Testator could not wage his Law, but
for the rest he might; and that the Executor might have demurred at first, but
pleading a Plea found against him, it was said he was Concluded; some
difference of Opinion was.

But agreed, That the Executor confessing the Action or pleading, nil debet, in
such Case, and that found against him, he has no remedy.

And Popham remembered Hughson's Case in the Common Pleas, and would see the
Roll, for he doubted, that both in that Case, and this of Germayne, the
Executor had not confessed the Debt in effect.

But after it was moved again, and all the Judges, Hill. 38 Eliz. Cro. 459. pl.
4.
but Gaudy, were of Opinion that the Judgment was well given, as to that Cause;
but it was reversed for a Cause not formerly moved, which was,

That an Action of Debt would not have layn against the Testator himself for
part of the money in demand and recovered; that is, for the money for soliciting,
which was not a certain Debt, but to be recovered by Action on the Case.

Some Cases in the Old Books may seem to color this Opinion, That the Judges,
ex officio, in an Action of Debt brought against an Executor or Administrator
for a simple Contract of the Testators or Intestate, ought to abate the Writ.

25 E. 3. f. 40.
The first is 25 E. 3. f. 40. where an Action was brought against an Executor
upon a Tally struck by the Testator. The Judges said, Nil Capiat per breve, if
he have no better specialty.

12 H. 4. f. 23.
The like Case is 12 H. 4. f. 23. where a like Action was brought against the
Executor or Administrator upon a Tally of the Testators, and there it appears
the Defendants Council would have demurred, and the Cause is mentioned, That
the writing of the Tally might be washed out by water, and a new put in the
place, and the Notches changed, and the Judgment was Nil capiat per breve.

This being the same Case with the former, the reason of the Judgment was the
same of grounding an Action upon a Specialty not good in Law.

Besides, it appears in the latter Case, the Executor opposed the Action by
offering to demurr, and for any thing appearing, he did so in the first.

41 E. 3. f. 13.
The other Case is 41 E. 3. f. 13. where an Action upon the Testators simple
Contract was brought against an Executor, and the Executor of a Co-executor to
him, the Writ was abated for that Reason, and said withal, There was no
Specialty showed but the first reason abating the Writ necessarily, it no ways
appears the Judges would, ex officio, have abated the Action for the last
Cause, if the Executor desired it not.

So as when the Executor or Administrator has once pleaded to an Action of
Debt, upon a single Contract, he is equally bound up for the event, as in any
Action wherein the Testator or Intestate could not have waged Law.

It is therefore an ill Consequence for the Plaintiff to say, I have brought an
Action upon a simple Contract, wherein the Intestate could not have waged his
Law.

Therefore I must be paid before another Creditor, by simple Contract, bringing
an Action wherein the Intestate might wage his Law, for it is in the
Administrators power, by omitting to abate the Writ at first, to make the Debt
demanded by Action in which the Intestate might have waged his Law, to be as
necessarily and coercively paid, as the other Debt demanded by Action, wherein
he could not wage his Law.

And if the Executor believes the Debt by simple Contract demanded by Action of
Debt to be a just Debt, it is against honesty, conscience, and the duty of his
Office to demurr, whereby to delay, or prevent the payment of it.

Besides, though since that illegal Resolution of Slade's Case, grounded upon
Reasons not fit for a Declamation, much less for a Decision of Law,

The natural and genuine Action of Debt, upon a simple Contract, be turned into
an Action of the Case, wherein a man is deprived of waging his Law; It is an
absurd Opinion, to think that therefore Debt demanded by it, ought to have
precedence for payment of a Debt due by simple Contract, but quite the contrary.

For Actions of the Case are all Actiones injuriarum, and contra pacem, and it
is not a Debt certain, in reason of Law, that can be recovered by those
Actions, but damage for the injury ensuing upon the breach of promise, which
cannot be known until a Jury ascertain what the damage is: Therefore a man did
never wage his Law for a demand uncertain; for he could not make Oath of paying
that, which he knew not what it was, as consisting in damage.

Now although the Jury give in damages regularly, the money promised to be
paid, yet that changes not the reason of the Law, nor the form, for still it
is recovered by way of damage, and not as a Debt is recovered.

Which show the Action much inferior and ignobler than the Action of Debt,
which by the Register is an Action of property, and no reason a damage
uncertain in its own nature should be paid before a certain Debt by simple
Contract, which were the first Debts, and will probably be the last of the
World, for Contracts by writing were much later; and there are many Nations
yet, where Letters are unknown, and perhaps ever will be.

And that which is so commonly now received, That every Contract executory
implies a promise, is a false Gloss, thereby to turn Actions of Debt into
Actions on the Case: For Contracts of Debt are reciprocal Grants. A man may
sell his black Horse for present money, at a day to come, and the Buyer may, the
Day being come, seize the Horse, for he has property then in him, which is the
reason in the Register, that Actions in the Debet, and also in the Detinet, are
Actions of Property; but no man has property by a breach of promise but must
be repaired in damages.

The last Exception was, That a Recognizance in the nature of a Statute Staple
of 2000 l. in the Chancery, is pleaded in Bar.

And it is not said, That it was per scriptum Obligatorium, or sealed, as the
Statute of 23 H. 8. requires, nor that it was secundum formam Statuti.

Cr. 10 Car. 1. f. 362. Goldsmiths Case, versus Sydnor.
And Goldsmith and Sydnors Case was urged to be adjudg'd in the point, which
Case is so adjudg'd by the Major part of the Court.

But in that Case it is pleaded, that Sydnor, before the Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, concessit se teneri Ed. Hobert in 400 l. to be paid at Pentecost
next ensuing, and si defecerit, etc. voluit and concessit per idem scriptum
quod incurreret super se haeredes and Executores poena in Statuto Stapulae.

So as it appears, The Recognizance was taken before the Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and that the Conuzor was to incurr the penalty of the Statute
Staple, and therefore a Recognizance in the nature of a Statute Staple, was
there intended to be pleaded, but it was not pleaded that it was taken secundum
formam Statuti in general, nor specially per scriptum Obligatorium under Seal,
as it ought to be.

But here it is not pleaded, That the Conuzor was to incurr the penalty of the
Statute Staple; nor that it was taken before any person authorized to take a
Recognizance in the nature of a Statute Staple, by the Statute of 23 H. 8. c.
6. for the Chancellor is not so authorized.

But that it was a bare Recognizance entered into in the Court of Chancery,
which all Courts of Westminster have power to take, and that it remains there
enrolled. And that the said Sum of Two thousand pounds should, for default of
payment, be levied of the Conuzors Lands, Goods, and Chattels, and Execution of
such Recognizances are to be made by Elegit of the Lands as well as Goods.

And it appears by the Statute of Acton Burnell 13 E. 1. which is the Law for
the Statute Merchant, That such Recognizances for Debt were before the Statute
Merchants taken by the Chancellor, the Chief Justices, and Judges Itinerant,
but the Execution of them not the same as of the Statute Merchant, nor are they
hindered by that Statute from being as before expressly.

And in 4 Mariae, upon a great search of Presidents, Br. Recognizance p. 20.
Hill. 4 Mar.
It was resolved, That every Judge may take a Recognizance in any part of
England, both in Term and out of Term.

The like Resolution was in the Lord Hobart's time. Hob. f. 195. Hall and
Wingfields Case.


So as the Recognizance here pleaded, is not a Recognizance in the nature of a
Statute Staple, nor so pleaded, but a Recognizance entered into in the Court of
Chancery, as Recognizances are entered into in the Court of Common Pleas, or
Kings Bench, and as they were entered before Recognizances by Statute Merchant
or Staple. But

Such Recognizances are to be satisfied before Debts by simple Contracts, and
before Debts by Obligations also, Rolls, Executors f. 925. 14 Jac. B.R. Robson
and Francis Case.
which avoids the Exception.

Now as to the Second Question.

Admitting the Judgment in London as pleaded, be no sufficient bar of the
Plaintiffs Action; or if it be, that the Recognizance as pleaded, is no
sufficient bar: For if those will bar, there is no further Question.

If then, Judgment ought to be for the Plaintiff, upon the Defendants Plea to
the whole matter? And I conceive it ought not.

I shall agree, That if the Defendant plead several Judgments against the
Intestate, or himself as Administrator, and Statutes entered into by the
Intestate, and concludes his Plea, That he has not, nor at any time had,
assets in his hand of the Intestates Estate, praeterquam bona and cattalla
sufficient. to satisfy those Judgments and Statutes, and averrs they are
unsatisfied, and which assets are chargeable with the said Judgments and
Statutes, that this is a good Plea in bar of the Plaintiffs Action, and so it
is admitted to be in Meriel Treshams Case; Meriel Treshams Case, 9. Rep.
and the Plaintiff must reply, That he has assets ultra, what will satisfy
those Judgments and Statutes, as is there agreed.

But if the Plaintiff reply, That any one of those Judgments was satisfied by
the Intestate in his life time, saying nothing to any of the rest. And the
Defendant demurr upon this Replication, the Plaintiff must have Judgment, for
the Plea was false, and the falsehood detrimental to the Plaintiff, and
beneficial to the Defendant; for having pleaded, he had no more assets than
would satisfy those Judgments, one of them being satisfied before, he has
confessed there is more assets than will satisfy the other Judgments, by as
much as the Judgment already satisfied amounts unto, which would turn to his
gain, and the Plaintiffs loss, if his demurrer were good.

Turners Case 8. Rep.
But to plead, That he has not bona and cattalla praeterquam bona quae non
attingunt, to satisfy the said Judgments and Statutes is not good for the
incertainty; for if the Judgments and Statutes amount to 500 l. 20 l. are bona
quae non attingunt, to satisfy them; so is 40 l. so is 100 l. so is 200 l. and
every Sum less than will satisfy; so as by such Plea there is no certain Issue
for the Jury to enquire, nor no certain Sum confessed toward the payment of
any Debt, as is well resolved in Turners Case.

So if a man pleads he has not assets ultra, what will satisfy those
Judgments, the Plea is bad for the same reason, for 20 l. is not assets ultra,
that will satisfy them, nor 40. nor 100. nor 200. nor does that manner of
pleading confess he has assets enough to satisfy: As to say, I have not in my
pocket above 40 l. is not to say, I have in my pocket 40 l.

But in this Case, the Defendant has pleaded payment of several Bonds, Bills,
and Judgments, and pleads one Recognizance of 2000 l. and one Judgment of 7000
l. wholly unsatisfied, and concludes his Plea with plene administravit.

And that he had not, die impetrationis brevis, nec unquam postea aliqua bona
seu cattalla, of the Intestates, in manibus suis administranda praeterquam bona
and catalla, ad valentiam separalium denariorum summarum per ipsum, sic ut
praesertur solutarum, in discharge of the said several Judgments, Bonds, and
Bills

Et praeterquam alia bona and catalla ad valentiam december solidorum quae
executioni recognitionis praedict. and judicii praedict, per praefat. Car.
Cornwallis recuperat. onerabilia existunt.

Now upon this Plea, if Allington's Judgment of 2670 l. or the Statute of 2000
l. or both, be avoided, yet the Plaintiff has no right to be paid, until the
Judgment of 7000 l. be so satisfied, and that some assets remain after the
satisfaction of it in the Administrators hands, for before the Plaintiff has
no wrong, nor the Administrator does none, nor has any benefit by not
satisfying the Plaintiff.

That spungy Reason that the Defendants Plea is all entire, and therefore if
any part be false, as either in that of Allington's Judgment, or the
Recognizance, the Plea is bad, is not sense; for if the falsehood be neither
hurtful to the Plaintiff, nor beneficial to the Defendant; why should the
Plaintiff have what he ought not, or the Defendant pay what he ought not.

Suppose the Defendant pleaded a Judgment obtained against the Intestate, or
himself, and that the Intestate or himself were married at the time of the
Judgment obtained (which in truth was false, for that the one or the other was
unmarried at that time) his Plea being otherwise good; Should this falsness
cause the Plaintiff to recover? surely no, for the falsness is not material,
nor any way hurtful to the Plaintiff.

Besides, the usual pleading, as appears both by Turners and Treshams Case, is
that the Plaintiff must avoid all payments pleaded in bar, until some assets
appear in the Administrators hands remaining, and then he is to have Judgment.

Much noise has been about this Case, and without Reason, as I suppose, though
there were no precedent Judgment in the point, but there is a Judgment per
Curiam.

An Action of Debt was brought against Executors, 9 E. 4. f. 12. b.
who pleaded a former Recovery against them of 200 l. and Execution issued, and
pleaded likewise another Recovery against them of 100 l. and traversed, that
they had no assets but to satisfy that Execution of 200 l. the Plea was
adjudged good by the Court, and that the Plaintiff must reply, They had assets
in their hands, ultra the said 200 l. and ultra the said 100 l. for before the
100 l. were also satisfied the Plaintiff was not entitled to his Debt, as the
Book is.

Hill. 18 and 19 Car. II. C. B. Thomas Price is Plaintiff, against Richard
Braham, Elizabeth White, Elianor Wakeman, and Richard Hill Defendants, In an
Action of Trespass and Ejectment.
THE Plaintiff declares, That one Henry Alderidge, the First of November, 18
Car. 2. at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, demis'd to the Plaintiff
and his Assigns, an Acre of Land, with the Appurtenances, in the Parish of St.
Margarets aforesaid.

Habendum from the Thirtieth of October then last past, for the term of Five
years next ensuing; by virtue whereof he entered, and was possessed, until the
Defendants afterward, the same day entered upon him, and did Eject him, to his
damage of 20 l.

To this the Defendants pleaded, That they are not Culpable.

Special Verdict is found. By which it is found, That the Defendants are not
Culpable of Entry and Ejectment in the said Acre, excepting a piece thereof,
containing One hundred and Eighty Foot thereof in length, and Eight and twenty
Foot in breadth.

And as to that piece they find, that the same, time out of mind, was a Pool,
until within Twenty years last past, during which Twenty years it became filled
with Mudd.

They find, That before the Trespass supposed, that is, the First of August,
1606. King James was seized, in right of the Crown, of the said Pool, and three
Gardens, with the Appurtenances, in St. Margarets aforesaid, in his Demesue as
of Fee.

They find again, That the same First Day of August, 1606. A Water-work was
built in the said Gardens, and the said Pool was thence used, with the said
Water-work, until the Twelfth Day of March, in the Eleventh year of King James.

That King James so seized, the said Twelfth of March, by his Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the said Twelfth of May, 11 Jac.
in consideration of 70 l. 10 s. of lawful money of England, paid by Richard
Prudde, and for other considerations him moving, at the nomination and request
of the said Richard. Et de gratia sua speciali, ex certa scientia and mero motu
for him, his Heirs and Successors, granted to the said Richard Prudde and one
Toby Mathews, Gent. and to their Heirs and Assigns; among other things the said
Three Gardens and Water-work thereupon erected, to convey water from the River
of Thames to diverse houses and places in Westminster, and elsewhere, with all
and singular the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances, of what nature and kind
soever.

They further find, That the said King James, by his said Letters Patents, for
the consideration aforesaid, for him, his Heirs and Successors, granted to the
said Richard Prudde and Toby Matthew, their Heirs and Assigns (inter alia) Omnia
and singula stagna, gurgites aquas, aquarum cursus, aquaeductus, to the said
Premises, granted by the said Letters Patents, or to any of them, or to any
parcel of them, quoquo modo spectantia, pertinentia, incidentia, vel
appendentia, or being as member, part, or parcel thereof, at any time
thentofore had, known, accepted, occupied, used, or reputed, or being together
with the same, or as part, parcel, or member thereof, in account or charge,
with any of his Officers, as fully and amply as the same were formerly held by
any Grant or Charter, Ac adeo plene libere and integre, ac in tam amplis modo
and forma, prout idem nuper Rex aut aliquis progenitorum sive predecessorum
fuorum premissa praedict. per easdem Litteras Patent. prae-concess. and
quamlibet seu aliquam inde partem, sive parcellam habuerunt, habuissent, vel
gavisi fuissent, and habuissent vel habere uti and gaudere debuiffent aut
debuit.

They further find, That the said Pool was necessary for the Water-work
aforesaid, and that it could not work without the said Pool.

They further find, That the King, who now is, by his Letters Patents dated at
Westminster the Fifteenth of February, the Eighteenth of his Reign enrolled in
the Exchequer, in consideration that Henry Alderidge Gent. a piece of Laud, and
other the Premises granted by the said Letters Patents, covered with water and
hurtful mudd, would fill up at his proper charges, and perform the Covenants
and Agreements in the Letters Patents contained, for him, his Heirs and
Successors, granted the aforesaid piece of Land, containing as aforesaid in
length and breadth, by the name of All that piece of Land or broad Ditch, lying
and being in the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, with particular
Boundaries thereto expressed,

To have and to hold from the Feast of the Annunciation last past, for the term
of One and twenty years thence next ensuing.

They find, That the said Henry Alderidge entered into the Premises, then in
the possession of the Defendants, and so possessed, made the Lease to the
Plaintiff, Habendum to him and his Assigns, as in the Declaration.

That the Plaintiff entered by virtue thereof into the said piece of Land, and
was possessed, till the Defendants Ejected him.

And if upon the whole matter, the Defendants be Culpable, they assess damages
to 12 d. and costs to 40 s. And if they be not, they find them not culpable.

The first Question is, What can pass by the name of Stagnum or Gurges? for if
only the water, and not the soil, passes thereby, the Question is determined,
for the piece of Land containing such length and breadth, cannot then pass.

Fitzh. N. Br. 191. b. Let. H.
By the name of Gurges, water and soil may be demanded in a precipe.

34 Ass. pl. 11. Coke Litt. f. 5, 6. ad finem.
By the name of Stagnum the soil and water is intended.

1. Where a man had granted to an Abbot, totam partem piscariae suae, from such
a Limit to such a Limit, reservato mihi Stagno molendini mei. And the Abbot,
for a long time after the grant, had enjoyed the fishing of the Pool. It was
adjudg'd, the Reservation extended to the water and soil; but the Abbot had the
fishing by reason of long usage after the Grant, which showed the Intent.

1606. 4 Jac.
The next Question is, When the soil may pass by the word Stagnum, whether it
may, as belonging and pertaining to the Water-work erected 6 Jac. and granted
away with the Pool, as pertaining to it in 11 Jac. as it is found: or to the
Gardens, which seems a short time, especially in the Case of the King, to gain
a Reputation, as belonging and appertaining.

As to this Question, things may be said pertaining in Relation only to the
extent of the Grant. As an ancient Message being granted, with the Lands
thereto appertaining, and if some Land newly occupied, and not anciently with
that Message, shall pass as appertaining, is a proper Question; but that is a
Question only of the extent of the Grant, and what was intended to pass, and
not of the nature of the Grant.

Four Closes of Land, part of the possessions of the Priory of Lanceston, came
to King Henry the Eighth, and after to Queen Elizabeth, usually called by the
Name of Drocumbs, or Northdrocumbs. A House was built 21 Eliz. as the Book is,
by the Farmers and Occupiers of these Closes upon part. In 24 Eliz. she
granted, Totum illud Messuagium vocat. Drocumbs, ac omnia terras and tenementa
dicto messuagio spectantia in Lanceston.

After King James made a Lease of the Four Closes called Northdrocumbs, or
Drocumbs; Gennings versus Lake, 5 Car. 1. Crook 168.
and upon question between the Queens Patentee and the Kings, Judgment was
given for the Queens Patentee: Because, though the House was newly erected
before the Queens Grant, yet the Land shall be said belonging to it, and it
shall pass by such name as it was known at the time of the Patent; and that was
a stronger Case than this, there being but Three or Four years to give
Reputation of belonging or appertaining.

Another meaning of the words belonging or appertaining, is, when they relate
not to the extent or largeness of the Grant, but to the nature of the thing
granted. As if a man newly erect a Mill in structure, and has no Watercourse
to it, if he grants his Mill with the Appurtenances, nothing passes but the
structure. But if he, after the structure, acquire or purchase a Watercourse
to it, and grant it with the Appurtenances, the Watercourse passes, because
the Mill cannot be used without it. So it is for the Mill-damm or Bank, or the
like. So if he acquire an enlargement or bettering of his Watercourse, that
additional water shall pass as pertaining, how lately soever acquired.

So if a man grants his Saddle, with all things thereto belonging, Stirrops,
Girths, and the like pass.

So if a man will grant his Viol, the Strings and Bow will pass.

And the Pool was belonging and appertaining to the Water-work in this last
sense, as pertaining to the nature of the thing granted, without which it could
not be used; for the Jury find,

Quod Stagnum praedictum fuit necessarium pro structura (Anglice Water-work)
praedict. quodque eadem structura sine eodem Stagno operare non potuit.

And where a thing is so pertaining to the nature of the thing granted, it is
belonging and pertaining immediately as soon as the thing is erected, and it is
annexed to it.

And note, the Jury do not find that aqua Stagni praedict. but the Stagnum it
self, was necessary for the Water-work. Nor do they find that the Water-work
could not operare sine aqua Stagni, but sine Stagno praedict. And thereby they
find that the Water and Soil, which Stagnum signifies, was necessary for the
work, and it could not work without it.

Pasch. 19 Car. II. Henry Styles Plaintiff; Richard Coxe Baronet, Richard Coxe
Esquire, John Cromwell, Thomas Merrett, and Charles Davies Defendants; In an
Action of Trespass, of Assault, Battery, and False Imprisonment.
1. THE Plaintiff declares, That the Defendants, the last day of December, in
the Seventeenth year of the King, in the Parish of St. Mary Bow in the Ward of
Cheap in London, assaulted, wounded, and kept him in Prison by the space of two
days next following, to his Damage of One hundred pounds.

2. The Defendants plead, They are not Culpable of the Trespass, Assault,
Battery, etc. aforesaid.

3. The Jury find Richard Coxe Esquire, and Charles Davies, not Culpable
accordingly.

4. And as to the rest of the Defendants they find specially, That before the
supposed Trespass, that is, the Eight and twentieth day of September, in the
Seventeenth year of the King, one Richard Baughes Esquire, one of the Justices
of the Peace of the County of Gloucester, issued his Warrant under his Hand and
Seal to the Constable and Tithingmen of Dumbleton in the said County, to
apprehend and bring before him the Plaintiff Henry Styles, and others, to
answer to such matters of Misdemeanour, as on his Majesty's behalf, should be
objected against them by Sir Richard Coxe Baronet, then high Sheriff of the
said County.

They find the Warrant in haec verba.

5. That the said Warrant was afterward, and before the Trespass, delivered to
one Samuel Williams, Constable of Dumbleton, to be executed, and that upon the
said last day of December, mentioned in the Declaration, being Sunday,
immediately before Divine Service, the Plaintiff sitting in a Seat of the said
Church of Dumbleton, by order of Richard Dasney Esquire, his Master, who
claimed right to the said Seat, the said Plaintiff being no Parishioner there,
nor dwelling in the said Parish, the said Samuel being then Constable, arrested
the said Plaintiff.

6. That the said Plaintiff at first resisted, and refused to obey the said
Warrant, and after obeyed it. That the said Samuel the Constable, required the
said Defendant Thomas Merret, to assist him to convey him before a Justice of
the Peace. But the said Samuel, Thomas Merret, and John Cromwell, conveyed him
to the House of the said Samuel in Dumbleton.

7. Et tunc, the aforesaid Richard Coxe Miles, sent for the said Samuel; at the
House of the said Samuel in Dumbleton aforesaid, Et praecepit eidem Samueli, to
lay the Plaintiff in the Stocks, and thereupon the said Samuel, John, and
Thomas, conveyed the Plaintiff fromwards the way to the said Richard Baughes
Justice of the Peace, and about Eleven of the Clock of the same day in the
morning, put the Plaintiff in the Stocks.

8. They find the Act of 21 Jac. particularly cap. 12. And the Recital therein
of the Act of 7 Jac. cap. 5. being an Act entitled, An Act for easy pleading
against troublesome and contentious Suits against Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Constables, etc.

9. And find particularly. That it was Enacted by the said Parliament, Quod si
aliqua Actio, Billa, etc.

10. But whether upon the whole matter by them found, the said Sir Richard Coxe
Baronet, John, and Thomas are Culpable, they know not. Et petunt advisamentum
Curiae in Praemissis.

11. And if upon the whole matter so found, the Court shall think quod actio
praedicta possit commensari in London. Then they find the said Richard Coxe
Baronet, John, and Thomas Culpable of the Trespass, and assess damages to One
hundred Marks, and Costs to Three and fifty shillings and four pence.

12. But if the said Court be of Opinion, That the aforesaid Action could only
be laid in the County of Gloucester, then they find the said Richard Coxe
Baronet, John, and Thomas not Culpable.

The words of the Act of 21 Jac. cap. 12. and which are particularly found by
the Jury, are

1. That if any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit upon the Case, Trespass, Beating,
or False Imprisonment, shall be brought against any Justice of the Peace,
Mayor, or Bailiff of City, or Town Corporate, Headborough, Portreeve,
Constable, Tithingman, etc. or any of them, or any other, which in their Aid or
Assistance, or by their Commandment, shall do any thing touching or concerning
his or their Office or Offices, for or concerning any matter, cause, or thing,
by them or any of them, done by virtue or reason of their, or any of their
Office or Offices. That the said Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit, shall be laid
within the County where the Trespass or Fact shall be done and committed, and
not elsewhere.

2. And that it shall be lawful to every person and persons aforesaid, to plead
the general Issue, and to give the special matter in evidence. As by the Act of
7 Jac. cap. 5.

3. That if upon the Trial of any such Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit, the
Plaintiff therein shall not prove to the Jury, Trespass, Beating, Imprisonment,
or other Fact or cause of Action, Bill, Plaint, etc. was or were had, made, or
committed within the County wherein such Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit, shall
be laid, That then the Jury shall find the Defendant or Defendants, in every
such Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit, Not guilty, without having any regard or
respect to any Evidence given by the Plaintiff touching the Trespass, or other
cause of the Action, Bill, Plaint or Suit, etc.

4. If Verdict shall pass with the Defendant or Defendants, or if the Plaintiff
therein become Nonsuit, or suffer any discontinuance thereof, the Defendant or
Defendants, shall have such double Costs and other Advantages, as by the Act of
7 Jac. cap. 5. is provided.

The first Question upon this Special Verdict, is

Whether if any Officer in the Act mentioned, or any in his assistance, shall
do things, by color of their Office, not touching or concerning their said
Office, and shall be therefore impleaded? Or if they, or any of them shall be
impleaded for or concerning any matter, cause, or thing by them, or any of
them, done by pretense of their Offices, and which is not strictly done by
virtue or reason of their Office, but is a misfeasance in Law, shall have the
benefit of this Act, of having the matter tried in the County where the Fact
was done, and not elsewhere?

If so,

1. They shall not have the Trial for any matter touching their Offices in the
County where the Fact was done, unless the Plaintiff please to lay it there,
and if he so pleased, it might have been laid there before the Act of 21. which
was purposely made to compel the laying of the Action where the Fact was done.

2. By such Exposition of the Act, the Action shall never be laid where the
Fact was done; for if it may be laid elsewhere at all, if it be found upon the
Trial, That the Officers questioned did not according to their Office, there
will be no cause to lay the Action in the proper County; for the Jury where the
Action is laid, will find for the Plaintiff for the Misfeazance; and if it be
found the Defendants have pursued their Office, wherever the Action is laid,
the Jury will find for the Defendants, and then no cause to lay an Action in
the County where the Fact was done; So Quacunque via data, the Act will be
useless.

3. If it can be laid in another County, without hearing Evidence, it cannot be
known whether the Officer has misdone, or not. How then can the Jury (as the
Act directs) find the Defendants Not guilty, without regard or respect to the
Plaintiffs Evidence; for then the Jury must regard the Evidence, to find
whether the Officer has mis-done, and not regard the Evidence at all, to find
the Officers Not guilty, as the Act does order.

Nor is there any inconvenience, because by the Intention of Law, whether the
Officers have done justifiably, or not, without this Act of 21. the Action
ought to be laid where the Fact was done; and the Act is but to compel the
doing of that where an Officer is concerned, that otherwise fieri debuit,
though factum valet not being done.

The second Question is, Whether upon the special points referred to the Court
by the Jury, they have found all the Defendants, or any of them, and whom, Not
guilty?

It has been admitted at the Bar, That the Defendants, excepting Sir Richard
Coxe, cannot be found culpable by this Act of 21. and it being a Trespass, that
some may be guilty, and not others; which is true.

But the Question is not, Whether some of the Defendants might have been found
guilty, and others not? but whether, as this Verdict is, all or none must be
Culpable.

1. The Jury referr to the Court, Si actio praedicta potuit commensari in
London, then they find all the Defendants culpable. And if actio praedicta
potuit commensari tantummodo in the County of Gloucester, then they find all
the Defendants by name, Not Culpable.

So as the matter is, Whether this individual Action brought jointly against
all the Defendants, might be laid in London? For that is the Actio praedicta,
not whether an Action might be laid in London for the Trespass against any of
these Defendants? and in that first sense, Actio praedicta, could not be in
London; for it could not be there laid, as to some of the Defendants.

2. Secondly, they referr to the Court, Whether Actio praedicta, which is this
Action, jointly brought against all the Defendants, could only be laid in the
County of Gloucester; and if so, they find for the Defendants; to which the
Court must answer, That this Action, so jointly brought, could only be laid
according to Law, ad omnem Juris effectum, in the County of Gloucester.

3. Thirdly, if the Court should be of Opinion, That the Action was well laid,
as to Sir Richard Coxe, but not the rest, the Jury find not him Guilty, and not
the rest; for they find all equally Guilty, or equally not Guilty.

4. Fourthly, That which differs his Case from the rest, is, That he was not
assistant or aiding to the Constable; for he bad, that is, praecepit, or
commanded the Constable to put the Plaintiff in Cippis.

But as to that, the ancient Law was both adjudg'd in Parliament, and allowed,
That it was contra consuetudinem Regni, that a man should be condemned in a
Trespass, De praecepto or auxilio, if no man were convicted of the Fact done.

It was the Case in Parliament of Bogo de Clare, 18 E. 1. John Wallis Clerk,
entered his House, and brought Letters of Citation from the Archbishop of
Canterbury: Some of the Family of Bogo made Wallis eat the said Process and Wax
thereto affixed, Et imprisonaverunt and male tractaverunt: For which, and the
Contempt to the King, he brought his Action against Bogo; who pleaded, That he
named no persons in certain, nor alleged that the Fact was done by his
command, and demanded Judgment thereupon, and was discharged.

Notwithstanding, by the Kings pleasure, for so enormous a Trespass, done in
Contempt of the Church, for the Contempt done within the Verge, and in time of
Parliament, and for the bad Example,

Bogo was commanded to answer the King of the Trespass done in his House, Et
per Manupastos and Familiares suos; and a day given him to produce before the
King and his Council, those of his Family: which was accordingly done, but they
who were said to have done the Fact, were fled.

Et super hoc idem Bogo perit Judicium, si de Praecepto, missione vel assensu,
si sibi imponeretur ad sectam Domini Regis respondere debeat, antequam factores
principales, aliquo modo de facto illo convincantur. Whereupon Judgment was
given. Et quia per consuetudinem and legem Angliae, Nullus de praecepto vi and
auxilio aut missione respondere debeat antequam factores aliquo modo
convincantur; Consideratum est quod praedictus Bogo ad praesens eat inde
sinedie, and praedictus Jo. le Wallis sequatur versus factores principales
prout sibi viderit expediri si voluerit, and six persons manuceperunt
praedictum Bogonem ad habendum ipsum coram Domino Rege ad respondendum ipsi
Domino Regi ad voluntatem suam, cum praedicti factores de facto illo fuerint
convicti, si Dominus Rex versus eum inde loqui voluerit.

A Judgment in Parliament, at the Kings Suit, That it was against the Custom
and Law of the Kingdom, to convict a man, de praecepto, auxilio, aut missione,
in a Trespass, before some, who did the principal Trespass, were convicted.

And the reason of that Law is very pressing, for else a man may be found
Culpable of aiding or precepting a Trespass to be done, when the doers of the
Trespass are acquitted, and not Culpable, which is to be Culpable of aiding the
doing of a thing never done, which is impossible.

It will be said, The Law in that Case is since altered, and otherwise
practiced. But who could alter a Law affirmed by Judgment in Parliament, to be
the Custom and Law of the Kingdom, without an Act of Parliament to alter it,
which was not; or at least an Error in another Parliament, if that might be,
which is not so clear.

For this is not like a Judgment given in one Court, and after contraried in
another, or in the Chequer Chamber. Any Law of the Kingdom might as well be
altered without Act of Parliament, as this:

5. However letting that pass; but as the Law is now taken, no man can be
guilty of aid or assistance to a Trespass not done, and which is the same
whereof the Actors are acquitted.

But in this Case, They that put the Plaintiff in the Stocks are found not
Guilty, and another Defendant found Guilty for bidding him be put in the Stocks.

6. Another reason is, That Coxe cannot be Culpable of a Trespass, which
cannot, or must not be proved (which is the same) But by the Statute no regard
or respect is to be had of the Evidence proving the Trespass, if the Fact be
not proved to be done where the Action is laid: Therefore there can be no
Evidence against Coxe, for Evidence not to be regarded, and not at all, is the
same.

7. If the other Defendants cannot by the Statute be found Culpable, because
they were aiding and assisting the Constable, though in an undue execution of
his Office, no more can Coxe: For aid or assistance may be by direction or
precept, as well as by corporal strength: And therefore, if they be free for
assisting to put the Plaintiff in the Stocks forcibly, Coxe is free for
advising and bidding him be put there directively.

8. Lastly, the Statute intends like benefit to the Defendants, when the Fact
is not proved to be done where the Action is laid; as if the Plaintiff became
Nonsuit, or suffered a discontinuance. But in case of Nonsuit or
Discontinuance, all the Defendants were to have their double Costs both by 7
and 21 Jac. for a Nonsuit or Discontinuance cannot be against some of the
Defendants, for the Nonsuit and Discontinuance are of the entire action.
Therefore here all the Defendants shall have double Costs.

And if the Jury had not meant the Defendants equally free, or equally faulty,
they would have added in their Verdict, That if upon the whole matter found,
the Court should think that Actio praedicta would lie in London against some of
the Defendants, and not others, then they found such against whom it might be
laid in London Culpable, and the rest not Culpable.

The Record is, Et praedictus Richardus Coxe Miles, Except.
accersivit the Constable, whereas there is no praedictus Richardus Coxe Miles,
but Baronettus; and there is another praedictus Richardus Coxe Arm^ger, which
makes the Verdict uncertain in this point.

Quaerens nil Capiat, etc.

Pasch. 21 Car. II. in Banc. William Hayes Plaintiff, and Charles Bickerstaff
Defendant, In Arrest of Judgment.
CHarles Bickerstaff being possessed of a long term of years in certain
Woodlands and Copces in Cobham, in the County of Kent, Demis'd, Set, and to
Farm let the same for Six years, parcel of his term to the Plaintiff, under a
Rent and other Reservations, and Covenanted; The Plaintiff keeping and
performing the Agreements of his part to be kept and performed.

Quod praedictus Willielmus Hayes legitime haberet, teneret, and gauderet, and
habere, tenere, and gaudere, potuisset praedicta, dimissa, praemissa juxta
conventionem praeantea; in and per Indenturam praedict. dimiss. absque aliquo
impedimento, perturbatione, evictione, vel interruptione quibuscunque de vel
per dictum Carolum Bickerstaff Executores, Administratores, vel Assignatos
suos, aut aliquem eorum prout per Indenturam praedictam before apparet.

That by virtue of the said Demise he entered, and was possessed, and that after,
the Defendant being possessed for a longer term, granted the Reversion to
Charles Duke of Lenox, to whom the Plaintiff atturn'd; and that afterward the
said Duke, and others by his command, entered upon the Plaintiff, although he
observed all Agreements of his part, and carried away many Loads of Faggots and
Wood, and kept, and still keeps him out of Possession, to his Damage of Eight
hundred pounds.

And brings his Action for breach of the Covenant aforesaid.

The Defendant pleads Enjoyment according to the Demise, and Traverseth the
Grant of the Reversion to the Duke, Modo and Forma.

All Covenants between a Lessor and his Lessee, are either Covenants in Law, or
Express Covenants.

By Covenant in Law, the Lessee is to enjoy his Lease against the lawful Entry,
Eviction, or Interruption of any man, but not against tortious Entries,
Evictions, or Interruptions, and the reason of Law is solid and clear, because
against tortious acts the Lessee has proper Remedy against the wrong doers.

So are the express Books of 22 H. 6. 22 H. 6. f. 52. b. 32 H. 6. f. 32 b. N.
Br. ^45. b. Letter L.
where a man leas'd by Deed-poll without express Covenant, and 32 H. 6. where
the Lease was by Deed Indented.

If the Lessor seaseth the term by Deed-poll, Not. Br.
and outeth the Lessee, he shall have a Writ of Covenant upon that Deed-poll,
although he has no Indenture of it. But if a stranger, who has no right, outs
the Lessee, then he shall not have a Writ of Covenant against the Lessor,
because he has remedy by Action against the stranger; but if a stranger enter
by elder Title, then he shall have a Writ of Covenant, for he has no other
Remedy.

This shows the Law gives not Remedy to the Lessee upon the Covenant, when he
has a proper and natural Remedy against another who does the wrong.

By the same Reason, if the Lessee be by express Covenant to enjoy his term (or
enjoy it against all men, which is the same) he shall not have an Action of
Covenant against the Lessor, unless he be legally outed or evicted: For if he
be outed tortiously by any stranger, he has his Remedy.

So is the express Book of 26 H. 6. f. 3. b. where it is agreed, That the
warranty of a Lease for years, is but an Action of Covenant, which extends not
to tortious Entries for the former Reason.

Yet I agree, If the Lessor expressly Covenants that the Lessee shall hold and
enjoy his term without the Entry or Interruption of any, whether such Entry or
Interruption be lawful or tortious? There the Lessor shall be charged by an
Action of Covenant for the tortious Entry of a stranger, because no other
meaning can be given to his Covenant.

Accordingly the new Authorities run grounded upon that sound and ancient
Reason of Law, That the Lessor shall not be charged with an Action upon his
express Covenant for enjoyment of the term against all men, where the Lessee
has his proper Remedy against the wrong doer.

Against this Truth there is one Book that has, or may be pretended, which I
will cite in the first place, because the Answer to it may be more perspicuous
from the Authority I shall after deliver to redargue that Case.

Dyer, 15, 16 Eliz. 328. a. pl. 8.
It is the Case of Mountford and Catesby in the Lord Dyer. Catesby, in
consideration of a Sum of money and a Horse, made a Lease to Mountford for term
of years, Et super se assumpsit, quod the Plaintiff Mountford pacifice, and
quiet haberet and gauderet, the Land demis'd durante termino sine evictione
and interruptione alicujus personae; after Catesby's Father entered upon him and
so interrupted him; whereupon Mountford brought his Action upon this Assumpsit,
and Catesby pleaded he did not assume, and found against him. It was moved in
Arrest of Judgment for the Defendant, That the entry might be wrongful, for
which the Plaintiff had his Remedy, but disallowed, and Judgment affirmed for
the Plaintiff; because, says the Book, it is an express presumption and
assumption, that the Plaintiff should not be interrupted: And this Case is not
expressly denied to be Law in Essex and Tisdales Case in the Lord Hobart, as
being an express Assumption.

Though the Lord Dyers Case be an Action of the Case upon an Assumpsit, and out
Case an Action of Covenant; yet in the nature of the Obligation there seems no
difference, but in the form of the Action: For to assume that a man shall enjoy
his term quietly, without interruption, and to covenant he shall so enjoy it,
seems the same undertaking.

But if the reason of Law differ in an Assumpsit from what it is in a Covenant,
as seems employed in Tisdales Case, then this Case of the Lord Dyer makes
nothing against the Case in question, which is upon a Covenant, not an
Assumpsit.

Hob. f. 34, 35.
1. Elias Tisdale brought an Action of Covenant against Sir William Essex, and
declared, That Sir William convenit, promisit, and agreavit, ad and cum
praedict. Elia quod ipse idem Elias haberet, occuparet, and gauderet, certain
Lands for Seven years, into which he entered, and that one Elsing had Ejected
him, and kept him out ever since. Resolved because no Title is laid in Elsing,
he shall be taken to enter wrongfully, and the Lessee has his Remedy against
him. Therefore adjudg'd for the Defendant Essex.

Here is a Covenant for enjoying during the term, the same with enjoying
without interruption; (for if the enjoyment be interrupted, he does not enjoy
during the term) the same with enjoying without any interruption, the same with
enjoying without interruption of any person; which is the Lord Dyers Case, but
here adjudg'd the interruption must be legal, or an Action of Covenant will not
lie, because there is remedy against the Interrupter. So is there in the Lord
Dyer's Case.

And a Rule of that Book is, That the Law shall never judge that a man
Covenants against the wrongful acts of strangers, unless the words of the
Covenant be full, and express to that purpose: which they are not in our
present Case, because the Law defends against wrong.

Brocking brought an Action upon an Assumpsit against one Cham, and declared,
Brocking versus Cham, Cr. 15 Jac. f. 4. 5. p. 10.
That the Defendant assumed the Plaintiff should enjoy certain Lands according
to his Lease, without the let, interruption, or encumbrance of any person; and
shows in Fact, That this Land was extended for Debt due to the King by process
out of the Exchequer, and so encumbered. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, That no good breach was assigned, because he did
not show that the Encumbrance was a lawful Encumbrance, for else he might have
his Remedy elsewhere, and Judgment was given for the Defendant.

This Case was upon an Assumpsit, as the Lord Dyers was, and by as ample words;
for the Land was to be enjoyed without any let, which is equivalent to the
words of quiet and pacifice, in the Lord Dyers Case; which is a Case in
terminis, adjudged contrary to that in the Lord Dyer, and upon the same reason
of Law in an Assumpsit, as if it had been a Covenant, viz. because the
Plaintiff had his Remedy against the wrong doer.

Chauntfloure brought an Action of Covenant against one Pristly and Doctor
Waterhouse, as Executors of John Mountfitchett, Cr. 45 El. f. 914. pl. 4.
and declared, That the Testator had sold him Nine and twenty Tuns of Copras,
and agreed, That if the Testator faild of payment of a certain Sum of money upon
a day certain, That the Plaintiff might quietly have and enjoy the said Copras,
that the money was not paid at the day, and that he could not have and enjoy
the said Nine and twenty Tuns of Copras; Judgment was given by Nihil dicit
against the Defendants, and upon a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, 260 l. Damages
given: Upon motion in Arrest of Judgment, It was resolved by the whole Court,
That the breach of Covenant was not well assigned, because no lawful
disturbance was alleged, and if he were illegally hindered or disturbed of
having the Copras which he had bought, he had sufficient remedy against the
wrong doers.

Dod was bound in an Obligation to Hammond, conditioned that Hammond and his
Heirs might enjoy certain Copyhold Lands surrendered to him. The Defendant
pleaded the Surrender, and that the Plaintiff entered, and might have enjoyed
the Lands: To which the Plaintiff replied, That after his Entry, one Gay entered
upon him, and outed him; It was adjudg'd the Replication was naught, because he
did not show that he was evicted out of the Land by lawful Title; for else he
had his Remedy against the wrong doer.

This was in an Action of Debt upon a Bond, conditioned for quiet enjoyment: So
as neither upon Covenant, upon Assumpsit, or Bond conditioned for quiet
enjoying, unless the breach be assigned for a lawful Entry or Eviction, (and
upon the same reason of Law, because the lessee may have his Remedy against the
wrong doers) an Action of Covenant cannot be maintained.

Cok. 4 Rep. Nokes's Case.
To these may be added a Resolution in Nokes his Case in the fourth Report,
where a man was bound by Covenant in Law, That his Lessee should enjoy his
term, and gave Bond for performance of Covenants, in an Action of Debt brought
upon the Bond; the breach was assigned, in that a stranger had recovered the
Land leas'd in an Ejectione firmae, and had Execution, though this Eviction
were by course of law, yet for that an elder and sufficient Title was not
alleged upon which the Recovery was had, it was no breach of the Covenant.

Inconveniences if the Law should be otherwise.
1. A man's Covenant, without necessary words to make it such, is strained, to
be unreasonable, and therefore improbable to be so intended; for, it is
unreasonable a man should Covenant against the tortious acts of strangers,
impossible for him to prevent, or probably to attempt preventing.

2. The Covenantor, who is innocent, shall be charged, when the Lessee has his
natural Remedy against the wrong doer: And the Covenantor made to defend a man
from that from which the Law defends every man, that is, from wrong.

3. A man shall have double Remedy for the same injury against the Covenantor,
and also against the wrong doer.

4. A way is opened to damage a third person (that is the Covenantor) by
undiscoverable practice between the Lessee and a stranger, for there is no
difficulty for the Lessee secretly to procure a stranger to make a tortious
Entry, that he may therefore charge the Covenantor with an Action.

Application of the Reason of Law to the Case in Question.
1. When a man Covenants his Lessee shall enjoy his term against all men, he
does neither expressly covenant for his enjoyment against tortious Acts, nor
does the Law so interpret his Covenant.

So here, when the Lessor Covenants the Lessee shall enjoy against his Assigns,
he does not covenant expressly against their tortious acts, nor ought the Law to
interpret that he does, more than in the other Case.

2. It is as unreasonable he should Covenant against the tortious Entries of
his Assigns, as against the tortious Entries of all other strangers; For he
has no prospect, who of his Assigns may wrongfully Eject his Lessee, more than
what other stranger may do it, nor any power to prevent the tort of the one,
more than of the other, as being equally unknown to him. Nor is there any
sensible difference to be found, where a man Covenants his Lessee shall enjoy
quietly against all the John's and all the Thomasses in the world, than where
against all men; for though the one Covenant be narrower than the other, yet
the Covenantor can no more prevent the wrongs may be done by the John's and
Thomasses, than he can the wrongs may be done by any man: Nor can the
Covenantee fear more a wrong to be done by them, than by any other person not
so named.

3. If the Assignee of the Lessor enters tortiously upon the Lessee, he has
his proper and natural Remedy equally against him, as against any other
stranger that so does.

4. If the Lessee may charge the Covenantor with an Action in this Case, for
his Assignees tortious Entry, then he may be doubly satisfied for the same
Damage; viz. by the Covenantor upon his Covenant, and by the Assignee for his
Trespass, which the Law permits not, but in rare Cases, and upon special
Reasons.

5. The Lessee may as well combine with some remote Assignee of the Lessors to
make a wrongful Entry, to the end to charge the Covenantor therewith upon his
Covenant, as with any other stranger.

6. Lastly, by the very words of this Covenant, the Lessor cannot be charged
with breach of Covenant for the tortious Entry or Interruption of his Assignee.
The words are, That the Lessee should lawfully, legitime haberet, teneret, and
gauderet, and tenere, and gaudere potuisset, the Premises without the Let,
Interruption, etc. of the Defendant, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns.

If the Lessor were to be charged with the tortious Acts of his Assigns, there
needed no more (if those words would do it) than to say, That the Lessee should
have, hold, and enjoy the Lands demis'd, without interruption of the Lessor,
his Executors, Administrators; and the word lawfully was useless and senseless
in the Covenant also.

But when it is said, That he should and might lawfully have, hold, and enjoy
it against the Lessor, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, What other
meaning can be given the words, than that he might, according to Law, enjoy it,
and that the Lessor, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, should not have
power lawfully to hinder him?

For a man then is said to enjoy a thing lawfully, when no man lawfully can
hinder his enjoying it.

So as by all the Authorities cited by all the Reasons of Law anciently and
modernly, and by the particular words of the Covenant in question, the
Defendant cannot be charged with breach of his Covenant for the tortious Entry
of his Assignee upon the Plaintiff.

A Replevin brought, and the beasts retorn'd Elongata, whereupon there was a
Capias in Withernam, and Nine Oxen taken, the Plaintiff in the Replevin gave
the Sheriff's Bailiff a Bond of Ten pounds to save him harmless for those Oxen;
the Defendant in the Replevin, whose Beasts they were, brought a Detinue
against the Bailiff, and thereupon he sued his Bond for his Damage, in being
distrain'd in the Detinue; this appearing to the Court, and Judgment demanded
in the Action of Debt. Brintsley said, Quides vous que il doit Defender
encounter touts le Mond, non ferra ne encounter null Action, aut quel vous
poies aver droiturel defense sans luy per la ley per que avises vous, and so
was the general Opinion, but it was not adjudg'd.

The Difference between this Covenant and a general Covenant against all men.
1. It is said this is not a general Covenant to enjoy against all men, wherein
the Law is clear, but rather a Covenant against particular men.

2. That there is Authority, That if a man Covenant for quiet Enjoyment against
a particular person, that Covenant shall extend to the tortious, as well as
legal Entries, of such particular person.

The Covenant in question is no particular Covenant, though it be not the most
general; no more is a Covenant to enjoy against all of the names of Thomas and
John, or against all men now living, or against all claiming under the
Covenantor, yet no man conceives it more rational to charge the Covenantor for
tortious Entries done by such, than for the tortious Entries of men of any
other name. And it is as uncertain to the Covenan^or and Covenantee, who, are
Assignees; or what Assignee of the Lessor will make a tortious Entry, as what
other man will do it.

But not so of a particular person, who is in the Covenantors prospect, to
prevent, and the Covenantees to fear.

1. In a Covenant for Enjoyment against all men, a man Covenants for enjoyment
against himself, Executors, Administrators and Assigns (for they are a part of
all men) but not against their tortious Entries, more than against all other
men's tortious Entries.

If a man Covenant for enjoyment against his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, and all others, it is not a different Covenant from that of enjoyment
against all men; for a man's Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and all
others, are all men.

So if a man Covenants for enjoyment against A. B. and C. and all others, it is
the same as to Covenant for enjoyment against all men; for A. B. and C. and all
others, are all men: Therefore that difference that this is not a general
Covenant, is, Differentia soni non ponderis, and has no reason of Law to
diversity it from a general Covenant.

Objections.
It was smartly objected by my Brother Broom, If the Lessor shall not be
charged upon his Covenant for the tortious Entry of his Assignee by this
express Covenant, then is the Covenant useless; for by a Covenant in Law upon
the Lease it self, he was to be charged for a legal Entry made by his Assignee,
if this Covenant had not been at all.

I Answer, It is not necessary the Lessor and Lessee should understand what are
Covenants in Law, and therefore they might impertinently make an express
Covenant which they understood, which was already supplied by an employed
Covenant, which they understood not.

As where a Feoffment is made by Dedi and concessi, which is a warranty in Law,
it is not rare to have an express warranty of the same extent with the warranty
in Law.

But there is a more close and solid reason why they are named in the Covenant;
for if they had not been expressed, the Demise it self had been a Covenant in
Law against the legal Interruptions, both of them, and all men else. But by
expressing a Covenant against them, the general Covenant against all men, is
thereby restrained, and not enlarged against them; for now the Lessor has
covenanted for enjoyment against the legal Evictions of himself, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and of no other.

This was clearly resolved in Nokes his Case, where a man by his Deed granted
and demis'd certain Lands for years, which Demise imported in it self a
Covenant in Law, and he further expressly Covenanted for Enjoyment against
himself, and all others, claiming from or under him, which express Covenant was
narrower than his Covenant in Law and gave Bond for performance of Covenants.
Two points were resolved:

1. That this Bond extended to the Covenant in Law.

2. That by the express Covenant the Covenant in Law was restrained, by
Popham's Opinion, and all the Court.

3. It was agreed that the same had been resolved before about 14 El. in the
Case of one Hamond. And Sir Ed. Coke in the close of the Case, says, Much
inconvenience would else happen against the intention of parties. The express
Covenants in Deeds being different from the Covenants in Law usually.

4. It is there agreed, That it is not so in real Warranties as in Covenants,
but it is at choice to take the Warranty in law, or the express Warranty.

Another Objection is upon the Case in 46 E. 3. 46 E. 3. f. 4.
where the Lessor outed his Lessee for years, and infeoffed another of the
Land, who held him out. It is agreed, That the Lessee may have a quare ejecit
infra terminum against the Feoffee, yet his Action was good against his Lessor:
But this Case makes nothing to the present Case.

For at the Common Law the Lessee had no Action but of Covenant against his
Lessor, or an Ejectione firmae, at his choice.

The Quare Ejecit infra terminum is given by the Statute of Westminster 2. cap.
24. for recovery of his term against the Feoffee; for an Ejectione firmae lies
not against him because he came to the Land by Title of Feoffment, and not by
tort: And this new Remedy by Statute takes not away the ancient at Common Law,
but the Common Law gives not two Satisfactions for the same Injury, as it would
if the Covenantor and the Trespassor were both charged to answer the Lessee,
and so the Book resolves.

The Book of 2 E. 4. f. 15. may be objected, A man infeoffed another, and
entered into Bond to warrant and defend the Land for twelve years: Two Judges,
the Court rising, seemed to doubt whether the word defend might not extend to
defend from Entries, etc.

The difference some take of a Covenant to enjoy against one or more particular
men, and to enjoy against all men; as if in the first Case the Covenantor were
to be charged for the tortious Entries of particular men, but not where the
Covenant is against all men, I understand not. As if all particular men, could
they be enumerated, were not the same with all men; and as if some particular
men were not a part of all particular men; and the reason of Law is the same
for one as for all; the party has his Remedy against the wrong doer, and the
Covenant meaning no more whether against one or all, than that the Lessee
should have an indefeasible Title in Law, and being but in nature of a Warranty.

The Case which gave color to this Opinion, That if a man covenants for
enjoyment against a particular person or persons, that he covenants as well
against their tortious Entries as legal.

The Case of Wilson and Foster against Leonard Mapes 32 El. remembered in
Tisdels Case in the L. Hob. and reported by Crook. Hob. f. 35. Cro. 32 El. f.
212. pl. 4.


Mapes made a Lease of the Parsonage of Brankister to Wilson and Foster for a
year, and covenanted to save them harmless for that years profits, against one
Blunt then Parson of Brankister; who entered upon them, and took the Tithes.

In an Action of Covenant brought against Mapes by Wilson and Foster, though
they did not set forth any good Title in Mr. Blunt for that years profits, it
was judged for the Plaintiffs, because, says the Lord Hobert, the Covenant was
to save them harmless for that years profits, against such a man particularly.

Which imported they should not be damnified in that years profits by Blunt,
which was more than to warrant the Title, for Blunt might go beyond the Seas,
dye insolvent, and so prevent them of their Remedy for the profits.

So in Crook it is said, That the Covenant being against a particular man, it
extends to his tortious Entries arguendo, but there it appearing that Blunt was
Parson of the Rectory, the Court was of Opinion that his Entry was legal and
good, and therefore the Covenantor, in that Case, was charged for a legal
Entry, and not a wrongful. So is the Book express in the end of the Case.

If a man upon sale of Land refuses to give a general Warranty against all men,
but narrows his Warranty, and gives only against him and his Heirs, this alters
not the nature of the Warranty (as to make him any way answer for tortious
Entries, or to subject him to any thing more than his Warranty against all men
subjected him: So in a Covenant upon a Lease for Enjoyment against him and his
Assigns, which (is in the nature of a Warranty for a Chattel) he shall not
otherwise be charged by his Covenant, than if he had covenanted, that is,
warranted, against all men.

Hill. 22 and 23 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 680. William Shute Plaintiff, John Higden
Defendant, In Trespass and Ejectment.
THE Plaintiff declares, That Hugh Ivy Clerk, the Tenth of May, 22 Car. 2. at
Wringlington demis'd to the said William, One Message, Twenty Acres of Land,
Twenty Acres of Meadow, Twenty Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in
Wringlington; And also the Rectory and Parish Church of Wringlington, Habendum
to the said William and his Assigns, from the Fifth day of May aforesaid, for
the term of Five years next ensuing.

By virtue whereof he entered into the said Tenements and Rectory, and was
possessed, until the Defendant the said Tenth day of May, in the said year,
entered upon him, and Ejected him, to his Damage of Forty pounds.

The Defendant, by words of course, pleads he is not Culpable, and Issue is
joined, and the Verdict was taken by Default of the Defendant, and the Jury
find specially.

Upon the Special Verdict, the Case appears to be this,

John Higden the Defendant, was lawfully presented, admitted, instituted, and
inducted into the Rectory of Wringlington in the County of Somerset, and Dioces
of Bath and Wells, in February 1664. being a Benefice with Cure of Souls, and
of clear yearly value of Fifty pounds per Annum, and in the King's Books of no
more than Five pounds yearly, and that the Premises demis'd were time out of
mind, and yet are, parcel of the said Rectory.

That the said John Higden, being lawful Incumbent of the said Church and
Rectory of Wringlington, the One and thirtieth of March, 1669. was lawfully
presented, admitted, instituted, and inducted into the Rectory of Elm in the
said County and Dioces, being a Benefice with Cure of Souls also of clear
yearly value, ultra reprisas, of Forty pounds per Annum, and of the value of
Ten pounds per Annum in the King's Books, and subscribed the Articles of
Religion according to the Act of the Thirteenth of the Queen, 13 El. cap. 12.
and was lawful Incumbent of the said Rectory of Elm, but after did not read
the Articles of Religion within two Months after his Induction in the Church of
Elm, according to the Act of 13 Eliz.

Primo Maii 1669. Hugh Ivy, Lessor of the Plaintiff, was lawfully presented,
admitted, instituted, and inducted into the Rectory of Wringlington, as
supposed void, and performed all things requisite for a lawful Incumbent of the
said Rectory to perform, both by subscribing and reading the Articles of
Religion, according to the Statute of 13 Eliz.

And that he entered into the said Rectory and Premises, and made the Lease to
the Plaintiff, as in the Declaration.

That the said Higden the Defendant, did enter upon the Plaintiff the said
Tenth of May, 1669. as by Declaration.

The Questions spoken to at the Bar, in this Case, have been two.

1. Whether the Rectory of Wringlington, being a Benefice with Cure, and of
clear yearly value of Fifty pounds, and but of Five pounds in the King's Books,
shall be estimated according to Fifty pounds per Annum, to make an Avoidance
within the Statute of 21 H. 8. by the Incumbents accepting another Benefice
with Cure?

But that is no Question within this Case; for be it of value or under value,
the Case will be the same.

2. Whether not reading the Articles according to the Statute of 13 Eliz.
within two Months after induction into the Church of Elm, shall exclude Higden
not only from the Rectory of Elm, but from the Rectory of Wringlington? which
is no point of this Case: For whether he read or not read the Articles in the
Church of Elm, he is excluded from any right to the Church of Wringlington.

For this Case depends not at all upon any Interpretation of the Statute of 21
H. 8. of Pluralities; but the Case is singly this,

Higden being actual and lawful Incumbent of Wringlington, a Benefice with
Cure, be it under the value of Eight pounds yearly, or of the value, or more,
accepts another Benefice with Cure (the Rectory of Elm) and is admitted,
instituted, and inducted lawfully to it, be it of the value of Eight pounds or
more, or under.

The Patron of Wringlington within one month after admission institution, and
induction of Higden, the Incumbent of Wringlington to the Rectory of Elm,
presents Hugh Ivy, the Plaintiffs Lessor to Wringlington, who is admitted,
instituted, and inducted thereto the same day, and after, as by the
Declaration, enters and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff, who is Ejected by the
Defendant Higden.

The Doubt made by the Jury, is, if Higdens Entry be lawful.

It has been resolved in Holland's Case, and likewise in Digby's Case, in the
Fourth Report, and often before, since the Council of Lateran, Anno Dom. 1215.
Under Pope Innocent 3. Digby's Case. Vid. Bon. C. pur Pluralities. Anderson 1.
part. f. 200. b.p. 236 Vid. Moore's Rep. a large Case to the same effect, viz.
Holland and Digby's Case.
That if a man have a Benefice with Cure, whatever the value be, and is
admitted and instituted into another Benefice with Cure, of what value soever,
having no qualification or dispensation, the first Benefice is ipso facto, so
void, that the Patron may present another to it if he will.

But if the Patron will not present, then if under the value, no lapse shall
incurr until deprivation of the first Benefice, and notice; but if of the value
of Eight pounds, or above, the Patron, at his peril, must present within Six
months, by 21 H. 8.

As to the Second Question, Whether the Defendants, not reading the Articles in
the Church of Elm, within two months after his induction there, have excluded
him not only from being Incumbent of Elm, but also from Wringlington? The
Answer is,

First, His not reading the Articles in the Church of Elm, according to the
Statute of 13. is neither any cause of, nor does contribute to his not being
still Incumbent of Wringlington; though, as his Case is, he has no right to
the Rectory of Wringlington, since the admission, institution, and induction of
Hugh Ivy, the Plaintiffs Lessor, into it, as has already appeared.

Secondly, As for the Rectory of Elm, although it does not appear that the
Patron of Elm has presented, as he might have done, or perhaps has, any
other Clerk; or that any other is admitted and instituted into that Church, yet
Mr. Higden can be no Incumbent there, nor can sue for Tithes, nor any other
Duty; because, by not reading the Articles, he stands deprived ipso facto.

For clearing this, certain Clauses of the Act of 13 Eliz. are to be opened.

The first is;

Every person, after the end of this Session of Parliament, to be admitted to a
Benefice with Cure, except that within two Months after his induction, he
publicly read the said Articles in the same Church whereof he shall have Cure,
in the time of Common Prayer there, with Declaration of his unfeigned assent
thereto, etc. shall be upon every such Default, ipso facto, immediately
deprived.

There follows, relative to this Clause,

Provided always, That no Title to conferr or present by lapse, shall accrue
upon any deprivation, ipso facto, but after six Months after notice of such
deprivation given by the Ordinary to the Patron.

By these Clauses immediately upon not reading the Articles, according to the
Statute, the Incumbent is deprived ipso facto.

And the Patron may presently, upon such Deprivation, present if he will, and
his Clerk ought to be admitted and instituted, but if he do not, no lapse
incurrs until after six months after notice of the Deprivation given to the
Patron by the Ordinary, who is to supply the Cure until the Patron present.

Another Clause of the Statute is, No person shall hereafter be admitted to any
Benefice with Cure, except he then be of the Age of Three and twenty years at
the least, and a Deacon, and shall first have subscribed the said Articles in
the presence of the Ordinary, etc.

And relative to this Clause there is a third, That all Admissions to
Benefices, Institutions, and Inductions of any person, contrary to any
provision of this Act, shall be utterly void in Law, as if they never were.

Now though the Church of Wringlington became void immediately, of what value
soever it were, by admission and institution of the Defendant into the Church
of Elm, by the ancient Canon Law received in this Kingdom, which is the Law of
the Kingdom in such Cases, if the Patron pleased to present.

And for that the Patron accordingly did within a month after the Defendants
Admission and Institution into the Rectory of Elm, present his Clerk, Hugh
Ivy, to the Church of Wringlington, who was thereto Admitted, Instituted, and
Inducted within that time, which was a month before the Defendant was deprived
for not reading the Articles in the Church of Elm.

Whereby any Interest the Defendant had to Wringlington, was wholly avoided, as
the Case is.

Yet if the Church of Wringlington had been under value, and the Patron had not
presented to it his Clerk before Higden's Deprivation of the Church of Elm, he
might not have still continued Parson of Wringlington, as if never Admitted,
Instituted, or Inducted to the Rectory of Elm.

But if he had not subscribed the Articles before the Ordinary, upon his
Admission and Institution to the Rectory of Elm, he had never been Incumbent
of Elm, and consequently never accepted a second Benefice to disable him of
holding the first.

And so it is resolved in the last Case of the Lord Dyer, 23 of the Queen,
where a man having a Living with Cure under value, accepted another under value
also, having no Qualification or Dispensation, and was Admitted, Instituted,
and Inducted into the Second, but never subscribed the Articles before the
Ordinary, as the Statute of 13. requires. Upon question, whether the first
Living, vacavit per mortem, of him, or not? the Court resolved, That the first
Living became vacant by his death, and not by accepting the second, because he
was never Incumbent of the second, for not subscribing the Articles before the
Ordinary, whereby his Admission, Institution, and Induction into the second
Living became void, as if they had never been.

This Case was urged at the Bar for the Defendant, as if his not reading the
Articles within two months after his Induction into Elm, had still (as in the
Lord Dyers Case) left him Incumbent of the first Living.

But that was mistaken; for not subscribing the Articles, made that he never
was Incumbent of the second Living, and consequently then there was no cause to
lose the first.

But the Defendant having subscribed the Articles upon his Admission and
Institution, was perfect Incumbent, pro tempore, of the second Living, and
thereby lost the first, and afterward lost the second, for not reading the
Articles within two months after his Induction, so as he was complete Incumbent
by Admission, Institution, and Induction of the second Living, full two months
before he lost it.

It was upon this Clause of the Statute smartly urged by my Brother Baldwyn,
That if the Statute makes the Defendants Admission, Institution, and Induction
to the second Living, void, as if they had never been; For what reason does he
not still retain his first? The Answer is as before.

1. That his not retaining the first, is no effect nor consequent of his losing
the second.

But the first was lost because he accepted a second, and the right Patron
thereupon presented to the first; so as he lost the first, whilst he was, and
for being, lawful Incumbent of the second: And therefore could be no effect nor
consequent at all proceeding from his loss of the second, by not reading the
Articles after, more than if he had lost the second by Deprivation for Heresy,
or other cause.

2. The Clause of 13. is not, That all Admissions, Institutions, and Inductions
to Benefices, where any person is deprived by virtue of that Act, shall be void
as if they never were; for so should the Clause have been to warrant the
Objection made at the Bar.

But the Clause is, That all Admissions, Institutions, and Inductions made
contrary to any provision of the Act, shall be void, as if they never were.

But Higden's Admission, Institution, and Induction to the Church of Elm, was
not contrary to any provision of the Act, but every way legal; but had he not
subscribed the Articles before the Ordinary, then his Admission, Institution,
and Induction had been contrary to the provision of the Act, and so void, as if
they never were.

The Chief Justice delivered the Opinion of the Court, and Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

Bushell's Case.
THE King's Writ of Habeas Corpus, Dat. 9 die Novembris, 22 Car. 2. issued out
of this Court, directed to the then Sheriffs of London, to have the Body of
Edward Bushel, by them detained in Prison, together with the day and cause of
his Caption and Detention, on Friday then next following, before this Court, to
do and receive as the Court should consider; as also to have then the said Writ
in Court.

Of which Writ, Patient Ward and Dannet Forth, then Sheriffs of London, made
the Retorn following, annexed to the said Writ.

That at the Kings Court of a Session of Oyer and Terminer, held for the City
of London, at Justice Hall in the Old Baily, London, in the Parish of St.
Sepulchers in Farringdon Ward without London, on Wednesday 31 die August. 22
Car. 2. before Sir Samuel Sterling then Mayor of London, and diverse other his
Majesty's Justices, by virtue of his Majesty's Letters Patents, under the Great
Seal of England, to them, any four or more of them, directed to enquire, hear,
and determine, according to the tenor of the said Letters Patents, the Offenses
therein specified: And amongst others, the Offenses of unlawful Congregating
and Assemblies, within the limits appointed by the said Commission within the
said City, as well within Liberties as without. Edward Bushel, the Prisoner at
the Bar, was committed to the Goal of Newgate, to be there safely kept, under
the Custody of John Smith Knight, and James Edwards, then Sheriffs of the said
City, by virtue of a certain Order, then, and there made by the said Court of
Sessions, as follows:

Ordinatum est per Curiam hic quod Finis 40 Marcarum separatim ponatur super
Edwardum Bushel, and other Eleven persons particularly named, and upon every
of them, being the Twelve Jurors, then, and there sworn, and charged to try
several Issues, then, and there joined between our Lord the King, and William
Penn and William Meade, for certain Trespasses, Contempts, unlawful Assemblies
and Tumults, made and perpetrated by the said Penn and Mead, together with
diverse other unknown persons, to the number of Three hundred, unlawfully and
tumultuously assembled in Grace Church Street in London, to the disturbance of
the Peace, whereof the said Penn and Mead were then Indicted before the said
Justices. Upon which Indictment, the said Penn and Mead pleaded they were Not
guilty. For that they, the said Jurors, then, and there, the said William Penn
and William Mead, of the said Trespasses, Contempts, unlawful Assemblies and
Tumults, Contra legem hujus Regni Angliae, and contra plenam and manifestam
evidentiam, and contra directionem Curiae in materia legis, hic, de and super
praemissis eisdem Juratoribus versus praefatos Will. Penn and Will. Mead, in
Curia hic aperte datam, and declaratam de praemissis, iis impositis in
Indictamento praedicto acquietaverunt, in contemptum Domini Regis nunc,
legumque suarum, and ad magnum impedimentum and obstructionem Justitiae, necnon
ad malum exemplum omnium aliorum Juratorum in consimili casu delinquentium. Ac
super inde modo ulterius ordinatum est per Curiam hic quod praefatus Ed.
Bushel, capiatur and committatur Gaolae dicti Domini Regis de Newgate, ibidem
remansurus quousque solvat dicto Domino Regi 40 Marcas pro fine suo praedicto,
vel deliberatus fuerit, per debitum legis Cursum. Ac eodem Edwardo Bushel ad
tunc, and ibidem capto and commisso existente ad dictam Gaolam de Newgate, sub
custodia praefat. Johannis Smith and Jacobi Edwards adtunc Vic. Civitatis Land.
praedict. and in eorum Custodia in Gaola praedict. existente and remanente
virtute ordinis praedict. iidem Johannes Smith and Jacobus Edwards, postea in
eorum exitu ab officio Vic. Civitatis Land. praedict. scilicet 28 die
Septembris, Anno 22. supra dicto eundem Edwardum Bushel in dicta Gaola dicti
Domini Regis adtunc existentem, deliberaverunt nobis praefatis nunc
Vicecomitibus Civitatis praedict. in eadem Gaola, salvo custodiendum secundum
Tenorem, and effectum ordinis praedictae. Et quia praedictus Edwardus, nondum
solvit dicto Domino Regi praedictum finem 40 Marcarum, nos iidem nunc
Vicecomites Corpus ejusdem Edwardi in Gaola praedicta, hucusque detinuimus, and
haec est causa captionis and detentionis praefati Edwardi, cujus quidem Corpus
coram praefatis Justitiariis paratum habemus.

The Writ of Habeas Corpus is now the most usual Remedy by which a man is
restored again to his Liberty, if he have been against Law deprived of it.

Therefore the Writ commands the Day, and the cause of the Caption and
Detaining of the Prisoner to be certified upon the Retorn, which if not done,
the Court cannot possibly judge whether the cause of the Commitment and
Detainer be according to Law, or against it.

Therefore the cause of the Imprisonment ought, by the Retorn, to appear as
specifically and certainly to the Judges of the Retorn, as it did appear to the
Court or Person authorized to commit; else the Retorn is insufficient, and the
consequence must be,

That either the Prisoner, because the cause retorn'd of his Imprisonment is
too general, must be discharged; when as if the cause had been more
particularly retorn'd, he ought to have been remanded; or else he must be
remanded, when if the cause had been particularly retorn'd, he ought to have
been discharged: Both which are Inconveniences not agreeing with the dignity of
the Law. (There is a specious Exception to this Rule, but does not materially
vary it, as shall appear.)

In the present Case it is retorn'd, That the Prisoner, being a Jury-man, among
others charged at the Sessions Court of the Old Baily, to try the Issue between
the King, and Penn, and Mead, upon an Indictment, for assembling unlawfully and
tumultuously, did contra plenam and manifestam evidentiam, openly given in
Court, acquit the Prisoners indicted, in contempt of the King, etc.

The Court has no knowledge by this retorn, whether the Evidence given were
full and manifest, or doubtful, lame, and dark, or indeed Evidence at all
material to the Issue, because it is not retorn'd what Evidence in particular,
and as it was delivered, was given. For it is not possible to judge of that
rightly, which is not exposed to a man's Judgment. But here the Evidence given
to the Jury is not exposed at all to this Court, but the Judgment of the Court
of Sessions upon that Evidence is only exposed to us; who tell us it was full
and manifest. But our Judgment ought to be grounded upon our own inferences and
understandings, and not upon theirs.

It was said by a Learned Judge, If the Jury might be fined for finding against
manifest Evidence, the retorn was good, though it did not express what the
Evidence particularly was, whereby the Court might Judge of it, because
retorning all the Evidence would be too long. A strange Reason: For if the Law
allow me remedy for wrong Imprisonment, and that must be by judging whether the
cause of it were good, or not, to say the cause is too long to be made known,
is to say the Law gives a remedy which it will not let me have, or I must be
wrongfully imprisoned still, because it is too long to know that I ought to be
freed? What is necessary to an end, the Law allows is never too long. Non sunt
longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis, is as true as any Axiom in Euclid.
Besides, one manifest Evidence retorn'd had sufficed, without retorning all the
Evidence. But the other Judges were not of his mind.

If the retorn had been, That the Jurors were committed by an Order of the
Court of Sessions, because they did, minus just, acquit the persons indicted.

Or because they did, contra legem, acquit the persons indicted.

Or because they did, contra Sacramentum suum, acquit them.

The Judges cannot upon the present more judge of the legal cause of their
commitment, than they could if any of these causes, as general as they are, had
been retorn'd for the cause of their commitment. And the same Argument may be
exactly made to justify any of these retorns, had they been made as to
justify the present retorn, they being equally as legal, equally as certain,
and equally as far from possessing the Court with the truth of the cause: and
in what condition should all men be for the just Liberty of their persons, if
such causes should be admitted sufficient causes to remand persons to prison.

To those Objections made by the Prisoners Council against the Retorn, as too
general.

1. It has been said, That Institutum est quod non inquiratur de discretione
Judicis.

2. That the Court of Sessions in London, is not to be looked on as an
inferior Court, having all the Judges Commissioners. that the Court having
heard the Evidence, it must be credited, that the Evidence given to the Jury of
the Fact was clear, and not to be doubted.

As for any such Institution pretended, I know no such, nor believe any such,
as it was applied to the present cause; but taking it in another, and in the
true sense, I admit it for truth: that is, when the King has constituted any
man a Judge under him, his ability, parts, fitness for his place, are not to be
reflected on, censured, defamed, or vilified by any other person, being allowed
and stamped with the Kings Approbation, to whom only it belongs to judge of the
fitness of his Ministers.

And such scandalous Assertions or Inquiries upon the Judges of both Benches,
is forbidden by the Statute of Scandalum Magnatum, 2 R. 2. c. 5. Nor must we,
upon supposition only, 2 R. 2. c. 5.
either admit Judges deficient in their Office, for so they should never do any
thing right; nor on the other side, must we admit them unerring in their
places, for so they should never do any thing wrong.

And in that sense the saying concerns not the present Case.

But if any man thinks that a person concerned in Interest, by the Judgment,
Action, or Authority exercised upon his person or fortunes by a Judge, must
submit in all, or any of these, to the employed discretion and unerringness of
his Judge, without seeking such redress as the Law allows him, it is a
persuasion against common Reason, the received Law, and usage both of this
Kingdom, and almost all others.

If a Court, Inferior or Superior, has given a false or erroneous Judgment,
is any thing more frequent than to reverse such Judgments by Writs of False
Judgment, of Error, or Appeals, according to the course of the Kingdom.

If they have given corrupt and dishonest Judgments, they have in all Ages been
complained of to the King in the Starr-Chamber, or to the Parliament.

Andrew Horn, in his Mirror of Justices, Horns Mirror, f. 296.
mentions many Judges punished by King Alfred before the Conquest, for corrupt
Judgments, and their particular Names and Offenses, which could not be had but
from the Records of those times.

Our Stories mention many punished in the time of Edward the First, our
Parliament Rolls of Edward the Third's time, of Richard the Second's Time, for
the pernicious Resolutions given at Nottingham Castle, afford Examples of this
kind: In latter times, the Parliament Journals of 18 and 21 Jac. the Judgment
of the Ship-mony in the time of Charles the First, questioned, and the
particular Judges impeacht. These Instances are obvious, and therefore I but
mention them.

In cases of retorns too general upon Writs of Habeas Corpus, of many I could
urge, I will instance in two only.

One Astwick brought by Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench, 9 El. Moore, f. 837.
was retorn'd to be committed, per Mandatum Nicholai Bacon Militis, domini
Custodis magni Sigilli Angliae virtute cujusdam Contemptus in Curia Cancellar.
facti, and was presently bailed.

13 Jac. Moore f. 839.
One Apsley, Prisoner in the Fleet, upon a Habeas Corpus, was retorn'd to be
committed, per considerationem Curiae Cancellar. pro contemptu eidem Curiae
illato, and upon this retorn set at liberty.

In both these Cases, no inquiry was made, or consideration had, whether the
Contempts were to the Law Court, or equitable Court of Chancery, either was
alike to the Judges, lest any man should think a difference might arise thence.

The reason of discharging the Prisoners upon those retorns, was the generality
of them being for Contempts to the Court, but no particular of the Contempt
expressed, whereby the Kings Bench could judge, whether it were a cause for
commitment or not.

And was it not as supposeable, and as much to be credited, That the Lord
Keeper and Court of Chancery, did well understand what was a Contempt deserving
commitment, as it is now to be credited, that the Court of Sessions did
understand perfectly what was full and manifest Evidence against the persons
indicted at the Sessions, and therefore it needed not to be revealed to us upon
the retorn?

Hence it is apparent, That the Commitment and Retorn pursuing it, being in it
self too general and uncertain, we ought not implicitly to think the Commitment
was re vera, for cause particular and sufficient enough, because it was the Act
of the Court of Sessions.

And as to the other part, That the Court of Sessions in London is not to be
resembled to other inferior Courts of Oyer and Terminer, because all the
Judges are commissioned here (which is true) but few are there, at the same
time, and as I have heard, when this Trial was, none of them were present.
However persons of great quality are in the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer,
through the Shires of the Kingdom, and always some of the Judges; nor does one
Commission of Oyer and Terminer differ in its Essence, Nature, and Power from
another, if they be general Commissions; but all differ in the Accidents of the
Commissioners, which makes no alteration in their actings in the eye of Law.

Another fault in the retorn is, That the Jurors are not said to have acquitted
the persons indicted, against full and manifest Evidence corruptly, and knowing
the said Evidence to be full and manifest against the persons indicted, for how
manifest soever the Evidence was, if it were not manifest to them, and that
they believed it such, it was not a finable fault, nor deserving imprisonment,
upon which difference the Law of punishing Jurors for false Verdicts
principally depends.

A passage in Bracton is remarkable to this purpose concerning Attainting
Inquests.

Committit Jurator perjurium propter falsum Sacramentum, Bracton, l. 4. c. 4.
f. 288. b.
ut si ex certa scientia aliter Juraverit quam res in veritate se habuerit, si
autem Sacramentum fatuum fuerit licet falsum, tamen non committit perjurium
licet re vera res aliter se habeat quam juraverat, and quia jurat secundum
conscientiam eo quod non vadit contra mentem. Sunt quidam qui verum dicunt.
mentiendo, sed se pejerant -- quia contra mentem vadunt.

The same words* and upon the same occasion, Fleta, l. 5. c. 22 f. 336. n. 9.
are in effect in Fleta. Committit enim Jurator perjurium quandoque propter
falsum Sacramentum, ut si ex certa scientia aliter juraverit quam res in
veritate se habuerit secus enim propter factum quamvis falsum; and lest any
should think that these passages are to be understood only of Jury-mens
perjuries in foro conscientiae, it is clearly otherwise by both those Books,
which show how, by the discreet Examination of the Judge, the Error of the Jury
not wilful, may be prevented and corrected, and their Verdict rectified.

And in another place of Bracton, in the same Chapter: Judex enim sive
Justiciarius ad quem pertinet examinatio, si minus diligenter examinaverit,
occasionem prebet perjurii Juratoribus. And after,

Et si examinati cum justo deducantur errore dictum suum emendaverint, hoc b^ne
facere possunt, ante judicium and impune, Bract. l. 4. f. 289. a.
sed post judicium non sine poena.

After these Authorities,

I would know whether any thing be more common, than for two men Students,
Barristers, or Judges, to deduce contrary and opposite Conclusions out of the
same Case in Law? And is there any difference that two men should infer
distinct conclusions from the same Testimony? Is any thing more known than that
the same Author, and place in that Author, is forcibly urged to maintain
contrary conclusions, and the decision hard, which is in the right? Is any
thing more frequent in the controversies of Religion, than to press the same
Text for opposite Tenants? How then comes it to pass that two persons may not
apprehend with reason and honesty, what a witness, or many, say, to prove in
the understanding of one plainly one thing, but in the apprehension of the
other, clearly the contrary thing? Must therefore one of these merit Fine and
Imprisonment, because he does that which he cannot otherwise do, preserving his
Oath and Integrity? And this often is the Case of the Judge and Jury.

Of this mind were Ten Judges of Eleven, the Chief Baron Turnor gave no
Opinion, because not at the Arguments.
I conclude therefore, That this Retorn, charging the Prisoners to have
acquitted Penn and Mead, against full and manifest Evidence first and next,
without saying that they did know and believe that Evidence to be full and
manifest against the indicted persons, is no cause of Fine or Imprisonment.

And by the way I must here note, That the Verdict of a Jury, and Evidence of a
Witness are very different things, in the truth and falsehood of them: A Witness
swears but to what he has heard or seen, generally or more largely, to what
has fallen under his senses. But a Jury-man swears to what he can infer and
conclude from the Testimony of such Witnesses, by the act and force of his
Understanding, to be the Fact inquired after, which differs nothing in the
Reason, though much in the punishment, from what a Judge, out of various Cases
considered by him, inferrs to be the Law in the Question before him. Therefore
Bracton,

Bract. f. 289. a.
Et licet narratio facti contraria sit Sacramento, and dicto praecedenti, tamen
falsum non faciunt Sacramentum licet faciunt fatuum Judicium, quia loquuntur
secundum conscientiam quia falli possunt in Judiciis suis, sicut ipse
Justitiarius.

There is one Objection which has been made by none, as I remember, to
justify this general Retorn, I would give Answer to.

A man committed for Treason or Felony, and bringing a Habeas Corpus, has
retorn'd upon it, That he was committed for High Treason or Felony; and this is
a sufficient Retorn to remand him, though in truth this is a general Retorn:
For if the specifical Fact for which the party was committed, were expressed in
the Warrant, it might then perhaps appear to be no Treason or Felony, but a
Trespass, as in the Case of the Earl of Northumberland, 5 H. 4. questioned for
Treason in raising power. The Lords adjudg'd it a Trespass; for the Powers
raised were not against the King, but some Subjects.

Why then by like Reason may not this Retorn be sufficient, though the Fact for
which the Prisoners stood committed particularly expressed, might be no cause
of Commitment?

Treason or Felony, the Prisoner (the cause appearing) may press for his Trial,
which ought not to be denied or delayed, and upon his Indictment and Trial, the
particular cause of his Imprisonment must appear, which proving no Treason or
Felony, the Prisoner shall have the benefit of it. But in this Case, though the
Evidence given were no full nor manifest Evidence against the persons indicted,
but such as the Jury upon it ought to have acquitted those indicted, the
Prisoner shall never have any benefit of it, but must continue in Prison, when
remanded, until he has paid that Fine unjustly imposed on him, which was the
whole end of his Imprisonment.

We come now to the next part of the Retorn, viz. That the Jury acquitted those
indicted against the direction of the Court in matter of Law, openly given and
declared to them in Court.

1. The words, That the Jury did acquit, against the direction of the Court, in
matter of Law, literally taken, and de plano, are insignificant, and not
intelligible; for no Issue can be joined of matter in Law, no Jury can be
charged with the trial of matter in Law barely, no Evidence ever was, or can be
given to a Jury of what is Law, or not; nor no such Oath can be given to, or
taken by, a Jury, to try matter in Law; nor no Attaint can lie for such a false
Oath.

Therefore we must take off this vail and color of words, which make a show of
being something, and in truth are nothing.

If the meaning of these words, finding against the direction of the Court in
matter of Law, be, That if the Judge having heard the Evidence given in Court
(for he knows no other) shall tell the Jury, upon this Evidence, the Law is for
the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, and you are under the pain of Fine and
Imprisonment to find accordingly, then the Jury ought of duty so to do; Every
man sees that the Jury is but a troublesome delay, great charge, and of no use
in determining right and wrong, and therefore the Trials by them may be better
abolished than continued; which were a strange newfound conclusion, after a
trial so celebrated for many hundreds of years.

For if the Judge, from the Evidence, shall by his own Judgment first resolve
upon any Trial what the Fact is, and so knowing the Fact, shall then resolve
what the Law is, and order the Jury penally to find accordingly, what either
necessary or convenient use can be fancied of Juries, or to continue Trials by
them at all?

But if the Jury be not obliged in all Trials to follow such Directions, if
given, but only in some sort of Trials (As for instance, in Trials for Criminal
matters upon Indictments or Appeals) why then the consequence will be, though
not in all, yet in Criminal Trials, the Jury (as of no material use) ought to
be either omitted or abolished, which were the greater mischief to the people,
than to abolish them in Civil Trials.

And how the Jury should, in any other manner, according to the course of
Trials used, find against the direction of the Court in matter of Law, is
really not conceptible.

True it is, if it fall out upon some special Trial, that the Jury being ready
to give their Verdict, and before it is given, the Judge shall ask, whether
they find such a particular thing propounded by him? or whether they find the
matter of Fact to be as such a Witness, or Witnesses have deposed? and the Jury
answer, they find the matter of Fact to be so; if then the Judge shall declare,
The matter of Fact being by you so found to be, the Law is for the Plaintiff,
and you are to find accordingly for him.

If notwithstanding they find for the Defendant, this may be thought a finding
in matter of Law against the direction of the Court; for in that case the Jury
first declare the Fact, as it is found by themselves, to which Fact the Judge
declares how the Law is consequent.

And this is ordinary, when the Jury find unexpectedly for the Plaintiff or
Defendant, the Judge will ask, How do you find such a Fact in particular? and
upon their answer he will say, then it is for the Defendant, though they found
for the Plaintiff, or e contrario, and thereupon they rectify their Verdict.

And in these Cases the Jury, and not the Judge, resolve and find what the Fact
is.

Therefore always in discreet and lawful assistance of the Jury, the Judge his
direction is Hypothetical, and upon supposition, and not positive, and upon
coercion. viz. If you find the Fact thus (leaving it to them what to find) then
you are to find for the Plaintiff; but if you find the Fact thus, then it is
for the Defendant.

But in the Case propounded by me, where it is possible in that special manner,
the Jury may find against the Direction of the Court in matter of Law, it will
not follow they are therefore finable; for if an Attaint will lie upon the
Verdict so given by them, they ought not to be fined and imprisoned by the
Judge for that Verdict; for all the Judges have agreed upon a full conference
at Sergeants Inn, in this case. And it was formerly so agreed by the then
Judges in a Case where Justice Hide had fined a Jury at Oxford, for finding
against their Evidence in a Civil Cause. That a Jury is not finable for going
against their Evidence, where an Attaint lies; for if an Attaint be brought
upon that Verdict, it may be affirmed and found upon the Attaint a true
Verdict, and the same Verdict cannot be a false Verdict, and therefore the Jury
fined for it as such by the Judge, and yet no false Verdict, because affirmed
upon the Attaint.

Another Reason that the Jury may not be fined in such case, is, because until
a Jury have consummated their Verdict, which is not done until they find for
the Plaintiff or Defendant, and that also be entered of Record; they have time
still of deliberation, and whatsoever they have answered the Judge upon an
interlocutory Question or Discourse, they may lawfully vary from it if they
find cause, and are not thereby concluded.

Whence it follows upon this last Reason, That upon Trials wherein no Attaint
lies, as well as upon such where it does, no case can be invented; wherein it
can be maintained that a Jury can find, in matter of Law, nakedly against the
direction of the Judge.

And the Judges were (as before) all of Opinion, That the Retorn in this latter
part of it, is also insufficient, as in the former, and so wholly insufficient.

But that this Question may not hereafter revive if possible, It is evident by
several Resolutions of all the Judges, That where an Attaint lies, the Judge
cannot fine the Jury for going against their Evidence or Direction of the
Court, without other Misdemeanour.

For in such case, finding against, or following the direction of the Court
barely, will not bar an Attaint, but in some case the Judge being demanded by,
and declaring to, the Jury, what is the Law, though he declares it erroneously,
Ingersalls C. Cr. 35 El. f. 309. n. 18.
and they find accordingly, this may excuse the Jury from the Forfeitures; for
though their Verdict be false, yet it is not corrupt, but the Judgment is to be
reversed however upon the Attaint; for a man loses not his right by the Judges
mistake in the Law.

Therefore if an Attaint lies for a false Verdict upon Indictment not Capital
(as this is) either by the Common or Statute Law, by those Resolutions, the
Court would not fine the Jury in this case, for going against Evidence, because
an Attaint lay.

But admitting an Attaint did not lie (as I think the Law clear it did not) for
there is no Case in all the Law of such an Attaint, nor Opinion, but that of
Thirnings 10 H. 4. Attaint 60. and 64. for which there is no warrant in Law,
though there be other specious Authority against it, touched by none that argued
this Case.

The Question then will be, Whether before the several Acts of Parliament,
which granted Attaints, and are enumerated in their order in the Register, Reg.
f. 122. a.
the Judge by the Common Law, in all Cases, might have fined the Jury, finding
against their Evidence and direction of the Court, where no Attaint did lie, or
could so do, yet if the Statutes which gave the Attaints were repealed.

If he could not in Civil Causes before Attaints granted in them, he could not
in Criminal Causes, upon Indictment (wherein I have admitted Attaint lies not)
for the fault in both was the same, viz. finding against Evidence and Direction
of the Court, and by the Common Law; the Reason being the same in both, the Law
is the same.

That the Court could not Fine a Jury at the Common Law, where Attaint did not
lie (for where it did, is agreed he could not) I think to be the clearest
position that ever I considered, either for Authority or Reason of Law.

After Attaints were granted by Statutes generally; As by Westminster the
First, c. 38. in Pleas Real, and by 34 E. 3. c. 7. in Pleas Personal, and where
they did lie at Common Law (which was only in Writs of Assise) The Examples are
frequent in our Books of punishing Jurors by Attaint.

But no Case can be offered, either before Attaints granted in general, or
after, That ever a Jury was punished by Fin^ and Imprisonment by the Judge, for
not finding according to their Evidence, and his Directtion, until Popham's
time, nor is there clear proof that he ever fined them for that Reason,
separated from other Misdemeanor. If Juries might be fined in such Case before
Attaints granted, why not since? for no Statute has taken that power from the
Judge. But since Attaints granted, the Judges resolved they cannot Fine where
the Attaint lies, therefore they could not Fine before. Sure this latter Age
did not first discover that the Verdicts of Juries were many times not
according to the Judges opinion and liking.

But the Reasons are, I conceive, most clear, That the Judge could not, nor can
Fine and Imprison the Jury in such Cases.

Without a Fact agreed, it is as impossible for a Judge; or any other, to know
the Law relating to that Fact, or direct concerning it, as to know an Accident
that has no Subject.

Hence it follows; That the Judge can never direct what the Law is in any
matter controverted, without first knowing the Fact; and then it follows, That
without his previous knowledge of the Fact, the Jury cannot go against his
Direction in Law, for he could not direct.

But the Judge, qua Judge, cannot know the Fact possibly, but from the Evidence
which the Jury have, but (as will appear) he can never know what Evidence the
Jury have, and consequently he cannot know the matter of Fact, nor punish the
Jury for going against their Evidence, when he cannot know what their Evidence
is.

It is true, if the Jury were to have no other Evidence for the Fact, but what
is deposed in Court, the Judge might know their Evidence, and the Fact from it,
equally as they, and so direct what the Law were in the Case, though even then
the Judge and Jury might honestly differ in the result from the Evidence, as
well as two Judges may, which often happens.

But the Evidence which the Jury have of the Fact is much other than that; For,

1. Being returned of the Vicinage, whence the cause of Action arises, the Law
supposes them thence to have sufficient knowledge to try the matter in Issue
(and so they must) though no Evidence were given on either side in Court, but
to this Evidence the Judge is a stranger.

2. They may have Evidence from their own personal knowledge, by which they may
be assured, and sometimes are, that what is deposed in Court, is absolutely
false; but to this the Judge is a stranger, and he knows no more of the Fact
than he has learned in Court, and perhaps by false Depositions, and
consequently knows nothing.

3 The Jury may know the Witnesses to be stigmatized and infamous, which may be
unknown to the parties, and consequently to the Court.

4. In many Cases the Jury are to have View necessarily, in many, by consent,
for their better information; to this Evidence likewise the Judge is a stranger.

5. If they do follow his direction, they may be attainted, and the Judgment
reversed for doing that, which if they had not done, they should have been
fined and imprisoned by the Judge, which is unreasonable.

6. If they do not follow his direction, and be therefore fined, yet they may
be attainted, and so doubly punished by distinct Iudicatures for the same
offense, which the Common Law admits not.

Chevin and Paramours Case, 3 El. Dyer 201. a. n. 63.
A Fine reversed in Banco Regis for Infancy, per inspectionem and per
testimonium del. 4. fide dignorum. After upon Examination of diverse Witnesses
in Chancery, the supposed Infant was proved to be of Age, tempore finis levati,
which Testimonies were exemplified, and given in Evidence after in Communi
Banco, in a Writ of Entry in the quibus there brought. And though it was the
Opinion of the Court, That those Testimonies were of no force against the
Judgment in the Kings Bench, The Progress in this Writ of Right till Judgment
for Paramour the Defendant, is at large 13 El. Dyer f. 301. n. 40.
yet the Jury found, with the Testimony in Chancery, against direction of the
Court, upon a point in Law, and their Verdict after affirmed in an Attaint
brought, and after a Writ of Right was brought, and battle joined.

7. To what end is the Jury to be retorn'd out of the Vicinage, whence the
cause of Action arises? To what end must Hundredors be of the Jury, whom the
Law supposes to have nearer knowledge of the Fact than those of the Vicinage
in general? To what end are they challenged so scrupulously to the Array and
Pole? To what end must they have such a certain Freehold, and be probi and
legales homines, and not of affinity with the parties concerned? To what end
must they have in many Cases the view, for their exacter information chiefly?
To what end must they undergo the heavy punishment of the villainous Judgment,
if after all this they implicitly must give a Verdict by the dictates and
authority of another man, under pain of Fines and Imprisonment, when sworn to
do it according to the best of their own knowledge:

A man cannot see by another Eye, nor hear by another Ear, no more can a man
conclude or infer the thing to be resolved by another Understanding or
Reasoning; and though the Verdict be right the Jury give, yet they being not
assured it is so from their own Understanding, are forsworn, at least in foro
conscientiae.

9. It is absurd a Jury should be fined by the Judge for going against their
Evidence, when he who fineth knows not what it is, as where a Jury find without
Evidence in Court of either side, so if the Jury find, 14 H. 7. f. 29. per
Vavasor in Camer. Scace. without contradiction Hob. f. 227.
upon their own knowledge, as the course is if the Defendant plead Solvit ad
diem, to a Bond proved, and offers no proof. The Jury is directed to find for
the Plaintiff, unless they know payment was made of their own knowledge,
according to the Plea.

And it is as absurd to fine a Jury for finding against their Evidence, when
the Judge knows but part of it; for the better and greater part of the Evidence
may be wholly unknown to him; and this may happen in most Cases, and often
does, as in Graves and Shorts Case.

Error of a Judgment in the Common Bench, Graves verse. Short, 40 El. Cro. f.
616.
the Error assigned was, The Issue being, whether a Feoffment were made? and
the Jurors being gone together to conferr of their Verdict, one of them showed
to the rest an Escrow pro petentibus, not given in Evidence by the parties per
quod, they found for the Demandant upon Demurrer adjudg'd no Error; for it
appears not to be given him by any of the parties, or any for them, it must be
intended he had it as a piece of Evidence about him before, and showed it to
inform himself and his Fellows, and as he might declare it as a witness, that
he knew it to be true. They resolved, If that might have avoided the Verdict,
which they agreed it could not, yet it ought to have been done by Examination,
and not by Error.

That Decantatum in our Books, Ad quaestionem facti non respondent Judices, ad
quaestionem legis non respondent Juratores, literally taken is true: For if it
be demanded, What is the Fact? the Judge cannot answer it: if it be asked, What
is the Law in the Case, the Jury cannot answer it.

Therefore the parties agree the Fact by their pleading upon Demurrer, and ask
the Judgment of the Court for the Law.

In Special Verdicts the Jury Inform the naked Fact, and the Court deliver the
Law; and so is it in Demurrers upon Evidence, in Arrest of Judgments upon
Challenges, and often upon the Judges Opinion of the Evidence given in Court,
the Plaintiff becomes Nonsuit, when if the matter had been left to the Jury,
they might well have found for the Plaintiff.

But upon all general Issues; as upon not Culpable pleaded in Trespass, Nil
debet in Debt, Null tort, Null disseisin in Assize, Ne disturba pas in Quare
Impedit, and the like; though it be matter of Law whether the Defendant be a
Trespassor, a Debtor, Disseisor, or Disturber in the particular Cases in Issue;
yet the Jury find not (as in a Special Verdict) the Fact of every Case by it
self, leaving the Law to the Court, but find for the Plaintiff or Defendant
upon the Issue to be tried, wherein they resolve both Law and Fact
complicately, and not the Fact by it self; so as though they answer not singly
to the Question what is the Law, yet they determine the Law in all matters,
where Issue is joined, and tried in the principal Case, but where the Verdict
is Special.

Hob. f. 227.
To this purpose the Lord Hobart in Needler's Case against the Bishop of
Winchester, is very apposite -- Legally it will be very hard to quit a Jury
that finds against the Law, either Common Law, or several Statute Law, whereof
all men were to take knowledge, and whereupon Verdict is to be given, whether
any Evidence be given to them or not. As if a Feoffment or Devise were made to
one imperpetuum, and the Jury should find cross, either an Estate for Life, or
in Fee-simple against the Law, they should be subject to an Attaint, though no
man informed them what the Law was in that Case.

The legal Verdict of the Jury to be recorded, is finding for the Plaintiff or
Defendant, what they answer, if asked to questions concerning some particular
Fact, is not of their Verdict essentially, nor are they bound to agree in such
particulars; if they all agree to find their Issue for the Plaintiff or
Defendant, they may differ in the motives wherefore, as well as Judges, in
giving Judgment for the Plaintiff or Defendant, may differ in the Reasons
wherefore they give that Judgment, which is very ordinary.

I conclude with the Statute of 26 H. 8. c. 4. That if any Jurors in Wales do
acquit any Felon, Murderer, or Accessory, or give an untrue Verdict against the
King, upon the Trial of any Traverse, Recognizance, or Forfeiture, contrary to
good and pregnant Evidence ministered to them by persons sworn before the Kings
Justiciar. That then such Jurors should be bound to appear before the Council
of the Marches, there to abide such Fine or Ransom for their Offense, as that
Court should think fit.

If Jurors might have been fined before, by the Law, for going against their
evidence in matters criminal, there had been no cause for making this Statute
against Jurors, for so doing in Wales only.

Objections out of the Ancient and Modern Books.
1. A Juror kept his Fellows a day and night, 8 Ass. pl. 35.
without any reason or assenting, and therefore awarded to the Fleet.

This Book rightly understood is Law, That he staid his Fellows a day and a
night, without any reason or assenting, may be understood, That he would not in
that time intend the Verdict at all, more than if he had been absent from his
Fellows, but wilfully not find for either side: In this sense it was a
Misdemeanor against his Oath, For his Oath was truly to try the Issue, which he
could never do, that resolved not to conferr with his Fellows.

And in this sense it is the same with the Case 34 E. 3. where Twelve being
sworn, and put together to treat of their Verdict, 34 E. 3. Bra. Title Jurors
n. 46.
one secretly withdrew himself, and went away, for which he was justly fined
and imprisoned; and it differs not to withdraw from a man's duty, by departing
from his Fellows, and to withdraw from it, though he stay in the same Room, and
so is that Book to he understood.

But if a man differ in Judgment from his Fellows for a day and a night, though
his dissent may not be as reasonable as the Opinion of the rest that agree, yet
if his Judgment be not satisfied, one disagreeing can be no more criminal than
four or five disagreeing with the rest.

2. A Juror would not agree with his Fellows for two days, 41 Ass. p. 11.
and being demanded by the Judges, If he would agree; said, He would first die
in Prison; whereupon he was committed, and the Verdict of the Eleven taken; but
upon better advice the Verdict of the Eleven was quasht, and the Juror
discharged without Fine, and the Justices said, the way was to carry them in
Carts, until they agreed, and not by fining them; and as the Judges erred in
taking the Verdict of Eleven, so they did in imprisoning the Twelfth; and this
Case makes strongly that the Juror was not to be fined, who disagreed in
Judgment only.

Much of the Office of Jurors. in order to their Verdict, is ministerial, as
not withdrawing from their Fellows, after they are sworn, not withdrawing after
challenge, and being tried in before they take their Oath, 36 H. 6. f. 27. Br.
Jurors. 18.
not receiving from either side Evidence after their Oath not given in Court,
not eating and drinking before their Verdict, refusing to give a Verdict, and
the like; wherein if they transgress, they are finable; but the Verdict it
self, when given, is not an Act ministerial, but judicial, and according to the
best of their judgment, for which they are not finable, nor to be punished, but
by Attaint.

3. The Case of 7 R. 2. Title Coronae Fitz. 108. was cited, where upon
acquittal of a Common Thief, the Judge said, The Jury ought to be bound to his
good behavior, during his life: But says the Book, quere per quel ley, but
that was only gratis dictum by the Judge, for no such thing was done, as
binding them.

Hob. f. 114.
4. Bradshaw and Salmons Case was urged, where a Jury had given excessive
Damages upon a Trial in an Action of Covenant, and the Court of Star Chamber
gave Damages to the Complainant almost as high as the Jury had given upon the
Trial: But the Jury, who gave the Damages, were not questioned: Though, says
the Book, they might have been, because they received Briefs from the
Plaintiff, for whom they gave Damages, which was a Misdemeanor; but the express
Book is, That the Jury could not be punished by Information for the excessive
Damages, but only by Attaint, therefore not for their false Verdict without
other Misdemeanor; which answers some other Cases alleged.

Nor can any man show (though it was said) That a Jury was ever punished upon an
Information, either in Law, or in the Star Chamber, where the charge was only
for finding against their Evidence, or giving an untrue Verdict, unless
Imbracery, Subordination, or the like, were joined.

5. It was said, A Perjury in facie Curiae, is punishable by the Judge; and
such is it if Jurors go against their Evidence; perhaps a Witness may be
punished for Perjury in facie Curiae (which I will not maintain to be Law) But a
Jury can never be so punished, because the evidence in Court is not binding
evidence to a Jury, as has been showed.

6. Some Records were cited, of Fines pro Concelamento; no doubt it is an
Article inquirable in every Oyer and Terminer, and one Jury may find it upon
another.

7. Brains Case was urged, 42 El. Cr. 778.
but the Jurors were there fined for a manifest Combination to delude the
Court, by agreeing upon two Verdicts, and concealing the latter, if the Court
would be satisfied with the former.

8. Wharton's Case, reported by two Reporters, Yelverton says, That the
Judges, whereof Popham was one, and a Privy Counselor, were very angry, and
fined the Jury for their Verdict, and finding against direction.

In those Reports that pass under the Name of Noy's, the same Case is reported
with this, That the Judges conceived the Jury had been unlawfully dealt with to
give that Verdict; which, if true, the fining was lawful, and the Case therein
reported, short by Yelverton.

9. Wagstaff's Case, in the Kings Bench lately, was the same with the present
Case; but by the Record it is reasonable to think the Jurors committed some
fault besides going against their Evidence, for they were unequally fined.

But however, All the Judges having, upon this Retorn, resolved, That finding
against the Evidence in Court, or Direction of the Court barely, is no
sufficient Cause to fine; the Jury answers all these Cases, if not answered
before.

10. There remains Southwell's Case, reported by Leonard; Lannoys C. Moore 730.
some Cases out of the Court of Wards in Lannoy's Case, reported by Sergeant
Moore, f. 730. where Jurors were sent to the Fleet, or threatened to be sent,
for not finding Offices according to direction of the Court.

1. An Inquest of Office is not subject to an Attaint.

2. It neither determines any man's right, nor does any party put any Trial upon
them.

3. They are only to find naked matter of fact, 3 H. 7. f. 10. b. 2 H. 4. f. 5.
a.
as the Books are of 3 H. 7. f. 10. b. and 2 H. 4. f. 5. a. but principally an
Office for the King is in many Cases, as necessary, as an Entry for a common
person, without which he can never come by, or try his right, nor can the King,
without an Office, know whether he has right to a Ward, a Morimain, or the
like; and as it is an injury to hinder a man from his Entry, whereby his right
may be tried, so it is not to find an Office for the King, whereby his right
may be tried, which concludes no man, but enables the King to a Trial of his
right, and in truth is only a finding of matter of fact, and no more.

Therefore perhaps it may be an Offense, as of a Witness refusing his
Testimony, not to find an Office for the King, when clear proof is made of the
matter of Fact; but if proof be not made at all, or be altogether doubtful, or
that the matter be matter of Law, the Inquest may find an Ignoramus, which a
Jury, upon a Trial, can never do: But of this I shall say no more, it
concerning not the Case in question.

Presidents. That the Court of Common Pleas, upon Habeas Corpus, has
discharged Persons imprisoned by other Courts, upon the insufficiency of the
Retorn only, and not for Privilege.
5 Jac. Sir Anthony Ropers Case, 12 Rep. Sir William Chanseys C. and Edward
Thicknes C. 12 Rep. 8 Jac.
Sir Anthony Roper, committed by the High Commission Court, discharged
absolutely in the Common Pleas, as unlawfully committed and detained, without
any mention of Privilege.

George Milton, imprisoned for Contempt, scandalous Words of the Court, and
convicted of Drunkenness; the Causes resolved insufficient, and therefore
dimittitur a Prisona, and the Jailer discharged of him; but he gave Bayl to
attend the pleasure of the Court.

4 Car. 1.
Elizabeth Ash committed by the High Commission, pro lenocinio, in like manner
discharged; the Cause being insufficient to detain her in Prison, or to hinder
her from the privilege of that Court, but no other mention of Privilege put
in Bayl.

7 Jac.
Richard Hayes, for refusing to do Penance, as enjoined, committed by the High
Commission, the Cause judged insufficient to commit, but gave Bayl as before;
he demanded a Habeas Corpus by reason of Privilege.

But it is to be observed, That Privilege lies only where a man is Officer of
the Court, or has a prior suit in the Common Pleas depending, and is elsewhere
arrested to answer, and molested, that he cannot prosecute his Suit, he is then
privileged justly, and without wrong, because his Prosecutor elsewhere might
have sued, if he pleased, in the Common Pleas.

All Privilege is either for Officers, Clerks, or Attorneys of the Court, not
to be sued elsewhere; or for persons impleading or impleaded, having priority
of Suit in the Common Pleas, arrested or fued in other Jurisdictions; or for
the Menial Servants of such Officers.

These Privileges are not detrimental to any, because whoever has occasion to
sue an Officer, or any other, having priority of Suit as before, is not
restrained to sue them in the Common Pleas, but is restrained from suing
elsewhere. And this is the true Privilege of the Court.

And the way of enjoying this Privilege, was, by Writs of Privilege to
Supersede the proceeding of other Courts against such, who had the Privilege
of the Common Pleas, as is yet ordinary in the Cases of Attorneys, Officers,
and Clerks.

And in such Writs the cause of Privilege is mentioned, 21 H. 6. f. 20. 22 H.
6. f. 38. 34 H. 6. f. 15.
and as to their Menial Servants, if not true, may be Traversed. As 22 H. 6.
38. Debt was brought against Baron and Feme, and a Supersedeas out of the
Chancery, Vide Dyer 12 El. f. 287. pl. 48. Vid. the Supersed. for Clerks of the
Court, and for Attorneys anciently, and their great difference. Reg. Jud. f.
84. a. But now Attorneys are enrolled as well as Officers.
was cast for the Baron, as Menial Servant to an Officer of Chancery; whereupon
the Plaintiff said it was contained in the Writ that the Husband was Menial
Servant to R. J. del Chancery, whereas he was not his Menial Servant, and
thereupon Issue was taken. But Quere of the Officers appearing of Record in the
Court may be Traversed.

Hence it follows, Though proceeding in other Courts against a person
privileged in Banco, might be Superseded, yet it was when the matter proceeded
upon in such Courts, might as well be prosecuted in the Common Bench; But if a
priviledg'd person, in Banco, were sued in the Ecclesiastical Courts, or before
the High Commission, or Constable and Marshal, for things whereof the Common
Pleas had no Conuzance, they could not Supersede that proceeding by Privilege.
And this was the ancient reason and course of Privilege.

1. Another way of Privilege, by reason of Suit depending in A Superior
Court, is, when a person impleading or impleaded, as in the Common Bench, is
after arrested in a Civil Action or Plaint in London, or elsewhere, and by
Habeas Corpus is brought to the Common Pleas, and the Arrest and Cause
retorn'd; if it appear to the Court, That the Arrest in London was after the
party ought to have had the Privilege of the Common Pleas; he shall have his
Privilege allowed, and be discharged of his Arrest, and the party left to
prosecute his cause of Action in London, in the Common Pleas, if he will.

2. If the cause of the Imprisonment retorn'd, be a lawful cause, but which
cannot be prosecuted in the Common Pleas, as Felony, Treason, or some cause
wherein the High Commission, Admiralty, or other Court, had power to imprison
lawfully, then the party imprisoned, which did implead, or was impleaded in the
Common Bench before such imprisonment, shall not be allowed Privilege, but
ought to be remanded.

3. The third way is, when a man is brought by Habeas Corpus to the Court, and
upon retorn of it, it appears to the Court, That he was against Law imprisoned
and detained, though there be no cause of Privilege for him in this Court, he
shall never be by the Act of the Court remanded to his unlawful imprisonment,
for then the Court should do an act of Injustice in imprisoning him, de novo,
against Law, whereas the great Charter is, Quod nullus liber homo imprisonetur
nisi per legem terrae; This is the present case, and this was the case upon all
the Presidents produced and many more that might be produced, where upon Habeas
Corpus, many have been discharged and bailed, though there was no cause of
Privilege in the Case.

This appears plainly by many old Books, if the Reason of them be rightly
taken, For insufficient causes are as no causes retorn'd; and to send a man
back to Prison for no cause retorn'd, seems unworthy of a Court.

9 H. 6. 54. 58. Br. n. 5. 14 H. 7. f. 6. n. 19. 9 E. 4. 47. n. 24. 12 H. 4. f.
21. n. 11. Br.
If a man be impleaded by Writ in the Common Pleas, and is after arrested in
London upon a Plaint, there upon a Habeas Corpus he shall have Privilege in
the Common Pleas, if the Writ, upon which he is impleaded, bear date before the
Arrest in London, and be retorn'd, although the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas
be Nonsuit, essoin'd, or will not appear, and consequently the Case of
Privilege at an end before the Corpus cum causa retorn'd; but if the first
Writ be not retorn'd, there is no Record in Court that there is such a
Defendant.

The like where a man brought Debt, in Banco, and after for the same Debt
arrested the Defendant in London, and became Nonsuit in Banco; yet the
Defendant, upon a Habeas Corpus, had his Privilege, because he had cause of
Privilege at the time of the Arrest, 14 H. 7. 6. Br. Privilege, n. 19.

The like Case 9 E. 4. where a man appeared in Banco, by a Cepi Corpus, and
found Mainprise, and had a day to appear in Court, and before his day was
arrested in London, and brought a Corpus cum causa in Banco Regis, at which day
the Plaintiff became Nonsuit, yet he was discharged from the Sergeant at
London, because his Arrest there was after his Arrest in Banco, and
consequently unlawful, 9 E. 4. f. 47. Br. Privilege 24. and a man cannot be
imprisoned at the same time lawfully in two Courts. Coke Mag. Chart. f. 53, and
55.


The Court of Kings Bench cannot pretend to the only discharging of Prisoners
upon Habeas Corpus, unless in case of Privilege, for the Chancery may do it
without question.

And the same Book is, That the Common Pleas or Exchequer may do it, if upon
Retorn of the Habeas Corpus, it appear the Imprisonment is against Law.

An Habeas Corpus may be had out of the Kings Bench or Chancery, though there
be no Privilege, Mic. C. 2. Coke f. 55.
etc. or in the Court of Common Pleas, or Exchequer, for any Officer or
priviledg'd Person there; upon which Writ the Jailer must Retorn by whom he was
committed, and the cause of his Imprisonment; and if it appears that his
Imprisonment be just and lawful, he shall be remanded to the former Jailer; but
if it shall appear to the Court that he was imprisoned against the Law of the
Land, they ought, by force of this Statute, to deliver him; if it be doubtful
and under consideration, he may be bayl'd. -- The Kings Bench may bayl, if they
please, in all cases; but the Common Bench must remand, if the cause of the
Imprisonment retorn'd be just.

The Writ de homine replegiando, is as well retornable in the Common Pleas, as
in the Kings Bench.

All Prohibitions for incroaching Jurisdiction Issue as well out of the Common
Pleas as Kings Bench.

Quashing the Order of Commitment upon a Certiorari, which the Kings Bench may
do, but not the Common Pleas, is not material in this Case.

1. The Prisoner is to be discharged or remanded barely upon the Retorn, and
nothing else, whether in the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas.

2. Should the Kings Bench have the Order of Commitment certified and quashed,
before the Retorn of the Habeas Corpus, or after, what will it avail the
Prisoners; they cannot plead Null tiel Record, in the one case or the other.

3. In all the Presidents showed in the Common Pleas, or in any that can be
showed in the King's Bench, upon discharging the Prisoner by Habeas Corpus,
nothing can be showed of quashing the Orders or Decrees of that Court, that
made the wrong Commitment.

Glanvill's C. Moore f. 836.
4. It is manifest, where the Kings Bench has, upon Habeas Corpus, discharged
a Prisoner committed by the Chancery, the person has been again re-committed
for the same Cause by the Chancery, and re-deliver'd by the Kings Bench; but no
quashing of the Chancery Order for Commitment ever heard of.

5. In such Cases of re-commitment, the party has other and proper remedy
besides a new Habeas Corpus; of which I shall not speak now.

6. It is known, That if a man recover in Assise, and after in a Re-disseisin,
if the first Judgment be reversed in the Assise, the Judgment in the
Re-disseisin is also reversed. So if a man recover in Waste, and Damages given,
for which Debt is brought (especially if the first Judgment be reversed before
Execution) it destroys the Process for the Damages in Debt, though by several
Originals. But it may be said, That in a Writ of Error in this kind, the
foundation is destroyed, and no such Record is left.

Drury's Case 8. Rep.
But as to that in Drury's Case, 8. Rep. an Outlawry issued, and Process of
Capias upon the Outlawry, the Sheriff retorn'd, Non est inventus; and the same
day the party came into Court and demanded Oyer of the Exigent, which was the
Warrant of the Outlawry; and showed the Exigent to be altogether uncertain and
insufficient, and consequently the Outlawry depending upon it to be null. And
the Court gave Judgment accordingly, though the Record of the Outlawry were
never reversed by Error; which differs not from this Case, where the Order of
Commitment is Iudicially declared illegal, though not quasht or reversed by
Error, and consequently whatever depends upon it, as the Fine and Commitment
does, and the Outlawry in the former Case was more the Kings Interest, than the
Fine in this.

The Chief Justice delivered the Opinion of the Court, and accordingly the
Prisoners were discharged.

Hill. 23 and 24 Car. II. B. C. Rot. 615. Edmund Sheppard Junior, Plaintiff, In
Trespass, Suff. ss.
against George Gosnold, William Booth, William Haygard, and Henry Heringold,
Defendants.
THE Plaintiff declares for the forcible taking and carrying away, at Gyppin in
the said County, the Eight and twentieth of January, 22 Car. 2. Five and twenty
hundred and Three quarters of a hundred of Wax of the said Edmunds there found,
and keeping and detaining the same under Arrest, until the Plaintiff had paid
Forty nine shillings to them the said Defendants, for the delivery thereof, to
his Damage of 40 l.

The Defendants plead Not Culpable, and put themselves upon the Country, etc.
The Jury find a Special Verdict.

1. That before the Caption, Arrest and Detention of the said Goods, and at the
time of the same, Edmund Sheppard the younger, was, and is Lord of the Manor
of Bawdsey in the said County, and thereof seized in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and that he, and all those whose Estate he has, and had at the time of the
Trespass, supposed in the said Manor, with the Appurtenances, time out of mind
had, and accustomed to have all Goods and Chattels wrecked upon the high Sea,
cast on shore upon the said Manor, as appertaining to the said Manor.

2. They further say, The said Goods were shipped in Foreign parts, as
Merchandise, and not intended to be imported into England, but to be carried
into other Foreign parts.

3. That the said Goods were wrecked upon the high Sea, and by the Sea-shoar,
as wrecked Goods cast upon the Shore of the said Manor, within the same
Manor, and thereby the said Edmund seized as wreck, belonging to him as Lord
of the said Manor.

They further find, That at the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and
Twentieth of April, the Twelfth of the King, and continued to the Nine and
Twentieth of December following, there was granted to the King a Subsidy,
called Poundage.

Of all Goods and Merchandises of every Merchant, natural born Subject,
Denizen, and Alien, to be exported out of the Kingdom of England, or any the
Dominions thereto belonging, or imported into the same by way of Merchandise,
of the value of Twenty shillings, according to the particular Rates and Values
of such Goods and Merchandises, as they are respectively rated and valued in
the Book of Rates, entitled, The Rates of Merchandise, after in the said Act
mentioned and referred to, to One shilling, etc.

Then they say, That by the Book of Rates, Wax inward, or imported, every
hundred weight containing One hundred and twelve pounds, is rated to Forty
shillings, and hard Wax the pound Three shillings four pence.

They find, at the time of the Seizure of the Goods, That the Defendants were
the King's Officers, duly appointed to collect the Subsidy of Poundage, by the
said Act granted; and that for the Duty of Poundage, not paid at the said time,
they seized and arrested the said Goods, until the Plaintiff had paid them the
said Fine of Forty nine shillings.

But whether the Goods and Chattels aforesaid, so as aforesaid wrecked, be
chargeable with the said duty of Poundage, or not, they know not?

And if not, They find the Defendants Culpable, and Assess Damages to the
Plaintiff to Nine and forty shillings, ultra misas and custagia.

And if the said Goods be chargeable with the said Duty, they find the
Defendants not Culpable.

It is clear, Dyer 31 H. 8. 43. b. n. 22.
That formerly in the times of Henry the Eighth, Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth, it was supposed that some Customs were due by the Common Law
(wherein the King had an Inheritance) for certain Merchandise to be transported
out of the Realm; and that such Customs were not originally due by any Act of
Parliament: so is the Book 31 H. 8.

It was the Opinion likewise of all the Justices in the Chequer Chamber, when
Edward the Sixth had granted to a Merchant Alien, That he might Transport or
Import all sorts of Merchandise, not exceeding in the value of the Customs and
Subsidies thereof Fifty pounds, paying only to the King, his Heirs and
Successors, pro Custumis, Subsidiis, and oneribus quibuscunque, of such
Marchandises, so much, and no more, as any English Merchant was to pay.

That this Patent remained good for the old Customs, Dyer 1 Mar. f. 92. a. n.
17.
wherein the King had an Inheritance by his Prerogative, but was void by the
Kings death, as to Goods customable for his life only, by the Statute of
Tunnage, etc.

So upon a Question raised upon occasion of a new Imposition laid by Queen Mary
upon Clothes, Dyer 1 Eliz. f. 165. a. b. n. 57
the Judges being consuited about it 1 Eliz. The Book is,

Nota, That English Merchants do not pay at Common Law any Custom for any
Wares or Merchandises whatever, but Three, that is, Woolls, Woolfells, and
Leather; that is to say, pro quolibet sacco lanae continent. 26 pierres, and
chescun pierr 14 pound, un demi mark, and for Three hundred Woolfells half a
Mark, and for a Last of Leather Thirteen shillings four pence, and that was
equal to Strangers and English Merchants.

This was, in those several Reigns, the Opinion of all the Judges of the times;
whence we may learn how fallible even the Opinion of all the Judges is, when
the matter to be sesolved must be cleared by Searchers not common, and depends
not upon Cases vulgarily known by Readers of the Year Books.

For since these Opinions, it is known, those Customs called the Old, or
Antiqua Custumae, were granted to King Edward the First, in the Third year of
his Reign, by Parliament, as a new thing, and was no Duty belonging to the
Crown by the Common Law.

But the Act of Parliament it self, by which this custom was granted, is no
where extant now, but undeniable Evidence of it appears.

For King Edward the First, by his Letters Patents, Dated November, the Third
of his Reign, recites, Cum Praelati, Magnates, and tota communitas quandam
novam consuetudinem nobis, and haeredibus nostris de Lanis, Pellibus and
Coriis, viz. de sacco Lanae dimidium Marcae de 300 pellibus dimidium Marcae,
and de lasto Corii 13 s. 4 d. concesserint, etc. whence Sir Edward Coke rightly
observes, the Grant was to Edward the First himself, and his Heirs, from the
words, Nobis and haeredibus nostris, in the Patent.

Coke Mag. Chart. c. 30. f. 58, 59.
2. That no such Custom was before, from the words, quandam novam custumam,
and some other pertinent Observations he makes.

And he cites the year of the Letters Patents truly, to be the Third year of
Edward the First, which was the year of the Statute of Westminster the First;
but he makes the Date of the Letters Patents to be November the Tenth of that
year, which in truth was November the Fifteenth: He cites likewise the Patent
Rolls of Edward the First, for it M. 1. but omits the n, which is n. 1. also:
He also cites the Fine Roll of 3 E. 1. to the same purpose, M. 26.

Rot. Pat. 3 E. 1. M 1. n. Rot. finium 3 E. 1. M. 24.
But his citation differs in remarkable things from the Patent Roll, 3 E. 1.
which runs, Cum Praelati and Magnates, and tota Communitas Mercatorum Regni
nostri, and not tota Communitas, nobis concesserint quandam novam consuetudinem
de lanis, pellibus, and Coriis, tam in Anglia, quam in Hibernia, and Wallia,
Regnum nostrum exeuntibus (which are omitted also in Sir Edward Coke) in
perpetuum nobis, and haeredibus nostris capiendam sicut in forma inde provisa,
and communiter concessa before continetur; and the particulars are mentioned
of the Grant.

It appears by the Preface of it, the Statute of Westminster the First was made
3 E. 1. A son primer Parliament general apres son coronment, lendemaine de la
clause de Paschae, that is on the Monday of Easter utas, in the Third year of
his Reign; so as there was no Parliament of Edward the First before this his
Third year. The antiquae custumae upon Wools, Woolfells, and Leather, were
granted to Edward the First, by Parliament, as appears both by the Patent, and
Fine Rolls of 3 E. 1. Dated November the Fifteenth, which must be by a
Parliament before the Date of the Letters Patents; whence it follows they were
granted by the Statute of Westminster the First, or by the same Parliament, and
probably therefore it was by a Rider (as Proviso's now usually are) annexed, by
tacking to the Bill or Law of Westminster the First, and from it after casually
lost.

So as it is now clear, That Antiqua Custuma, upon Woolls, Pells, and Leather
was not by the Common Law, but by Act of Parliament 3 E. 1.

And if any scruple remained of a power at Common Law to charge Merchandise in
any other manner, the Act of the Twelfth of the King, which grants him Tunnage
and Poundage, clears it from question in these words, And because no Rates can
be imposed upon Merchandise Imported or Exported by Subjects or Aliens, but by
common consent in Parliament, it Enacts that Rates upon Merchandise shall be
according to the Book of Rates, established by the Act, etc.

Upon this Supposition, That by the Common Law Merchandise might be charged
with Custom, as Woolls, Pells, and Leather were. Queen Mary by her Absolute
Prerogative, Dyer 1 Eliz. f. 165. b.
laid an Imposition of Fourteen pence upon a Cloth Transported by Natives, and
One and twenty pence by Strangers, as appears in Dyer, 1 Eliz.

And upon the same ground King James, about the Twelfth of his Reign, laid an
Imposition upon Currants: but these obtained not for Law; and so possibly like
Impositions might be laid on Wax, or any other Merchandise, but no such were
laid de facto, unless by the Grants of Tunnage and Poundage to the Kings for
life by Parliament.

Nor is it a true Inference, That if the Antiquae Custumae were at Common Law
(as every thing in one sense is taken for Common Law, if it be Law, when it
appears not to be by Act of Parliament) therefore it was by Arbitrary
Imposition of the King, for it might be by Act of Parliament not extant, as
this of 3 E. 1. and in truth, most of the Common Law cannot be conceived to be
Law otherwise than by Acts of Parliament, or Power equivalent to them, whereof
the Rolls are lost; for always there was a power and practice of making new
Laws.

1. But it is not pretended that any Custom is laid upon Wax in any manner by
the Common Law, nor by Statute, but by that of Tunnage and Poundage the Twelfth
of this King.

2. This Seizure and Arrest appears by the Special Verdict to be for Poundage,
according to the Book of Rates, by the Statute made the Twelfth of the King,
cap. 4. which gives Two shillings to the King for every hundred weight of Wax,
and therefore not for any other Duty.

3. At the Common Law, wrecked Goods (as these are found to be) could not be
chargeable with Custom (if other Goods were) for at the Common Law all wreck
was wholly the Kings, and he could not have a small Duty of Custom out of that
which was all his own: West. 1. c. 4. Vid. Stat.
And by Westminster the First, where wreck belongs to another, than to the
King, he shall have it in like manner, that is, as the King has his.

It remains clear then, That Wax is a Merchandise subject to pay the duty of
Poundage by, and according to, the Act of the Twelfth of this King, and not
otherwise.

The Question then before us (being narrow'd) will be, Whether Wax, or any
other Goods subject to the Duty of Tunnage and Poundage by the Act and Book of
Rates, the Twelfth of the King, shipped in Foreign parts, as Merchandise, not
intended for England, but for other Foreign parts, proving to be wreck, and
cast by the Sea upon a Manor, to which wreck belongs by Prescription, ought to
answer the Duty of Tunnage and Poundage, as if Imported, as Merchandise, in
Ships, and not as wreck; for if any kind of Merchandise wrecked, be subject to
the Duty, all Merchandise mentioned in the Book of Rates is?

To resolve this Question I shall observe, That all wreck cast on shore in the
Kingdom, must be conceived as Goods Imported; for though Goods Exported may be
wrecked at Sea equally as Goods to be Imported, yet Goods Exported, if wrecked,
are not cast upon any shore of the Kingdom as wreck, under the notion of being
Exported, but under the notion of being some way Imported.

So as in this Question of wreck, to speak of any Goods or Merchandise,
quatenus Exported, will be useless.

And because the Resolution of this Case depends upon the words and intendment
of the Act of Twelfth of the King, c. 4. And that if any Merchandise in kind,
subject to the Duties by that Act, proving wreck, cast on shore, may be charged
with the Duty, every Merchandise within the Act, proving wreck, will be charged
with it; and if any wrecked Goods be free, all wrecked Goods are free; for the
Act makes no difference in the kinds or species of the Merchandise.

I shall therefore recite some Clauses of the Act. 12 Car. 2. c. 4
The first is, That there is given to the King, of every Tun of Wine of the
growth of France, or of any the Dominions of the French King, that shall come
into the Port of London, and the Members thereof by way of Merchandise by your
natural born Subjects, the Sum of Four pounds and Ten shillings, of current
English money, and so after that rate. And by Strangers and Aliens, Six pounds
of like money.

And of every Tun of like Wines, which shall be brought into all and every the
other Ports and Places of this Kingdom, and the Dominions thereof, by way of
Merchandise, by your natural born Subjects, the Sum of Three pounds; and by
Aliens Four pounds and Ten shillings.

From those words I observe, That Wines liable to pay Tunnage by the Act; must
have these properties.

1. They must be Wines which shall come, or be brought into the Ports and
Places of the Kingdom.

2. They must come, or be brought into such Ports or Places, as Merchandise,
that is for sale, and to that end; for no other conception can be of Goods
brought as Merchandise.

3. They must come and be brought as Merchandise, and for sale, by the Kings
natural born Subjects, or by Strangers and Aliens, as distinguished from the
natural Subjects.

4. The Duty payable to the King, is to be measured by the quality of him that
imports the Commodity; that is, if the Importer be a natural Subject, he pays
less to the King, and if an Alien, more.

5. All those Wines, charged with the Duty by the Act, so to come or be brought
into the parts or places of the Kingdom, are to be Foreign; As of the growth
of France, the Levant, Spain, Portugal, Rhenish Wines, or of the growth of
Germany.

1. Whence it follows, That Wines of Foreign growth, and which by their kind
are to pay Duty, if they shall come or be brought into the parts or places of
the Kingdom, neither by the Kings natural Subjects, nor by Aliens, they are not
chargeable with the Duties of this Act.

2. If they be not brought into the Ports and Places of the Kingdom as
Merchandise, viz. for sale, they are not chargeable with the Duty.

But Wines, or other Goods, coming, or brought into the Realm, as wreck, are
neither brought into the Kingdom, by any the Kings natural Subjects, nor by any
Strangers, but by the Wind and Sea, for such Goods want a Proprietor, until the
Law appoints one.

3. Wrecked Goods are not brought into the Kingdom, being cast on shore, as
Merchandise, viz. for sale, but are as all other the Native Goods of the
Kingdom, indifferent in themselves for sale, or other use, at the pleasure of
the Proprietor.

4. All Goods Foreign or Domestique, are in their nature capable to be
Merchandise, that is, to be sold; but it follows not thence, That wheresoever
they are brought into the Kingdom, they are brought as Merchandise, and to be
sold, or should pay Custom, for they are transferred from place to place, more
for other uses than for sale.

Nor are Goods which are brought to the Markets of the Kingdom to the end to be
sold, therefore to pay Custom; for so all the Goods of the Kingdom would be
customable: but they must be Goods brought ab extra, within the intention of
the Act, or for Exportation to be carried out of the Kingdom.

5. All Goods charged with the Duties of the Act, must be proprieted by a
Merchant natural born, or Merchant Alien, and the greater or less Duty is to be
paid, as the Proprietor is an Alien or Native Merchant; for so are the words of
the Act in the Clause for Poundage of all manner of Goods and Merchandise of
every Merchant natural born Subject, Denizen and Alien, to be brought into the
Realm, of the value of every Twenty shillings of the same Goods, according to
the Book of Rates.

But wrecked Goods are not the Goods of any Merchant natural born, Alien or
Denizen, whereby the Duty payable should be either demanded, distinguished, or
paid.

Therefore a Duty impossible to be known, can be no Duty; for civilly what
cannot be known to be, is as that which is not.

And it is a poor shift to say, The Lord of the Manor, who has the wreck, is
Merchant Proprietor; For if so, I ask, Is he an Alien Merchant Proprietor, or a
Native?

If he be a natural Subject (as he must be, having his Manor) he cannot be an
Alien, and consequently the King can have no Alien Duty of wrecked Goods, but
Goods intended by the Act to be charged with the Duty, might be indifferently
the Goods of Aliens or Natives: But to clear this more, put the Case.

The Act had only charged Merchandise imported by Aliens, and not by Natives,
with the Duty;

Then the King could have had no Duty from wrecked Goods at all, for they could
not be the Goods of an Alien Merchant; Nor is wreck brought into the Manor by
the Lord, more than a Waif or Estray is, which if brought thither by him, is no
Waif or Estray.

Besides, it is clear, The Lord of a Manor is no more a Merchant, Native or
Alien, by reason of the property he has in wreck Goods, than he is a Merchant,
Native or Alien, by the property he has in his Horses or Cows; for his
property in a wreck is not qua Merchant of any kind, but qua Lord of his
Manor; and every Proprietor of Goods, by what Title soever, is as much
Merchant as he.

6. All Goods subject to the Duty of Tunnage and Poundage, may be forfeited by
the Disobedience and Mis-behaviour of the Merchant Proprietor, or those trusted
by him, by the Act: The words are, If any Merchandise, whereof the Subsidies
aforesaid shall be due, shall at any time be brought from the parts beyond the
Sea into any Port, Place, or Creek of this Realm, by way of Merchandise, and
unshipped to be laid on Land, the Duties due for the same, not paid, nor
lawfully tendered, nor agreed for, according to the true meaning of this Act,
then the same Goods, and Merchandises shall be forfeit to your Majesty.

1. But wrecked Goods cannot be imported into any Creek or Place of the Realm,
by way of Merchandise, and unshipped to be laid on Land; for if so imported and
unshipped, to be laid on Land, it is no wreck, and therefore are not Goods
forfeitable by the Mis-behaviour of any within the Act, and consequently not
Goods intended to be charged with the Duties by the Act.

2. By this Clause the Owner or Proprietor of Goods chargeable with the Kings
Duty, is to pay or agree for the Duty with the Customers before the unshipping
or landing of the Goods, else they are forfeited.

Et sunt alia quaedam quae in nullius bonis esse dicuntur sicut W^eccum Maris,
grossus piscis, etc. Bract. l. 3. de Coron. f. 120. c. 3. n. 4. Constables C.
5. Rep. f. 108. b.
But wrecked Goods are cast on Land, and consequently landed, having no Owner or
Proprietor, and therefore the Duty impossible to be paid or agreed for, before
their landing, and when so landed, and not before, the Law makes the King, or
Lord of the Manor their Proprietor, but not fully neither, until after a year
and a day allowed to the first Owners to claim them, if any such be, by Stat.
Westminster the First, c. 4.

Whence it follows, That wrecks should be rather forfeited to the King (which
is not pretended) as Goods landed (the Kings Duty not paid or agreed for) then
seized until payment were according to the Act.

3. By this Clause, Imported Goods, intended to be charged by the Act, are
Goods to be brought from the parts beyond the Seas.

And therefore also wrecked Goods are not to pay the Duty for the Native
Commodities of the Kingdom Shipwrackt in their passage by Sea, for
Exportation, may be Imported into the Realm as wreck, yet never brought from
the parts beyond the Sea, as the Clause intends Goods charged should be.

4. Goods cast into the Sea to unburthen a Ship in a storm, and never intended
for Merchandise, are wreck, when cast on shore without any Shipwreck.

Bract. l. 2. f. 41. b.
5. Goods derelicted, that is, deserted by the Owners, and cast into the Sea,
which happens upon various occasions, as coming from infected Towns or Places,
and for many other respects, will be wreck if cast on shore afterward, though
never purposed for Merchandise; Bract. l. 2. f. 41. b. n. 3. Constables C. 5.
Rep. Bract. l. 3. de Coron. c. 3. n. 5 f. 120. a. more fully.
(But Goods cast overboard to lighten a Ship, are not by Bracton, nor from him
in Sir H. Constables Case, esteemed Goods derelicted; which is a Question not
thoroughly examined) Si autem ea mente ut nolit esse Dominus, aliud erit per
Bract.

But by all the Clauses of the Act, Goods Imported into the Realm as
Merchandise only, are to pay the Kings Subsidy, therefore not wreck Imported,
and not as Merchandise.

6. If a Law were made, That Horses and Oxen, brought to Market to be sold,
should pay the King a Poundage of their value, and a Horse or Ox coming to
Market, happen to stray, and be seized in a Manor that had Strayes, and there
used according to the Law for Strayes, until a year and a day were past,
without claim of the Owner, whereby the property of the Horse or Ox was
altered, and the Lord of the Manor had gained it; will any man say Poundage
should be paid for this Horse or Ox to the King, for being brought to Market to
be sold? and the Case is the same, or harder, to pay Poundage for wreck.

It remains that some Objections be cleared.

First, It is said, That by fraud of the Merchant or his Agents, and the Lord
of the Manor, Goods not shipwrackt at all may be cast overboard, so as to be
cast on shore on the Manor by the Tide, and so the Kings Duty avoided by
confederacy.

1. This Supposal is remote, and cannot be of some wrecks possible; as of
wrecks of derelicted Goods, or of Goods cast into the Sea to unburthen a Ship.

2. If the fraud appear, there is no wreck, and the King will be righted. But
to charge a legal property which the Lord of the Manor has in a wreck with
payments, because a fraud may be possible, but appears not, will destroy all
property, for what appears not to be, must be taken in Law as if it were not.

The Second Objection is, That the Kings Officers by usage have had in several
Kings times, the Duties of Tunnage and Poundage from wrecks.

1. We desired to see ancient Presidents of that usage, but could see but one
in the time of King James, and some in the time of the last King, which are so
new that they are not considerable.

2. Where the penning of a Statute is dubious, long usage is a just medium to
expound it by; For Jus and Norma loquendi is governed by usage. And the meaning
of things spoken or written must be, as it has constantly been received to be
by common Acceptance.

But if usage has been against the obvious meaning of an Act of Parliament, by
the Vulgar and Common Acceptance of the Words, then it is rather an Oppression
of those concerned, than an Exposition of the Act, especially as the usage may
be circumstanc'd.

As for instance, The Customers seize a man's Goods, under pretense of a Duty
against Law; and thereby deprive him of the use of his Goods, until he regains
them by Law, which must be by engaging in a Suit with the King rather than do
so, he is content to pay what is demanded for the King. By this usage all the
Goods in the Land may be charged with the Duties of Tonnage and Poundage; for
when the Concern is not great, most men (if put to it) will rather pay a little
wrongfully, than free themselves from it over-chargeably.

And in the present Case, The genuine meaning of the words and purpose of the
Act, is not according to the pretended usage, but against it, as has been
showed: Therefore usage in this Case weighs not.

The Third Objection is from the words Imported and brought into the Realm, or
Dominions thereof, and that wrecks are Goods and Merchandises imported into the
Realm, and therefore chargeable with the Duty.

There are no Goods (as has been said) but may in a sense be termed
Merchandise, because all Goods may possibly be sold, and when sold, or intended
to be, they are Merchandise; and in that sense wrecked Goods are Merchandise,
and so are all Goods else.

It is also true, That the Goods in question are by the Verdict found to be
shipped in Foreign parts, as Merchandise, but not intended to be brought into
England, but to be carried to some other Foreign parts (so are the words).

But by the words, or some other Foreign parts, they might be intended to be
carried as Merchandise into some Foreign parts, which are of the Kings
Dominions, or of the Dominions of the Kingdom of England, for the Act mentions
both.

And the Act limits the Duty, not upon Goods in the former sense, but upon
Goods brought by way of Merchandise, by Natives or Aliens into any the Kings
Dominions, which must be intended his Dominions, as of the Crown of England,
for nothing could be enacted here concerning his Dominions, not of the Crown of
England.

But the Verdict is uncertain, Whether they were to be carried to Foreign
parts of the Dominions of England, or into parts not of the Dominion of
England; nor follows it, because Goods were intended to be sold (that is, as
Merchandise) in a place where good market was for them, that they were intended
to be sold at any other place, where no profit could be made, or not so much,
or where such Goods were perhaps prohibited Commodities, therefore the words of
the Act, brought as Merchandise, must mean that the Goods are for Merchandise
at the place they are brought unto.

And Goods brought or imported any where as Merchandise, or by way of
Merchandise, that is, to be sold, must necessarily have an Owner to set and
receive the price for which they are sold, unless a man will say, That Goods
can sell themselves, and set and receive their own prises.

But wreck Goods imported or brought any where, have no Owner to sell or prize
them at the time of their importation, and therefore are not brought by way of,
or as Merchandise to England, or any where else.

Secondly, Though in a loose sense, inanimate things are said to bring things;
as, in certain Seasons, Rain to bring Grass; in other Seasons, some Winds to
bring Snow and Frost; some Storms to bring certain Fowl and Fish upon the
Coasts.

Yet when the bringing in or importing, or bringing out and exporting, has
reference to Acts of Deliberation and Purpose, as of Goods for sale, which must
be done by a rational Agent, or when the thing brought, requires a rational
bringer or importer; as be it a Message, an Answer, an Account, or the like. No
man will say, That things to be imported or brought by such deliberative
Agents, who must have purpose in what they do, can be intended to be imported
or brought by casual and insensible Agents, but by Persons, and Mediums, and
Instruments, proper for the actions of reasonable Agents.

Therefore we say not, That Goods drowned or lost in passing a Ferry, a great
River, an arm of the Sea, are exported, though carried to Sea; but Goods
exported are such as are conveyed to Sea in Ships, or other Naval Carriage of
man's Artifice; and by like reason Goods imported, must not be Goods imported by
the Wind, Water, or such inanimate means, but in Ships, Vessels, and other
Conveyances used by reasonable Agents; as Merchants, Mariners, Sailors, etc.
whence I conclude, That Goods or Merchandise imported within the meaning of the
Act, can only be such as are imported with deliberation, and by reasonable
Agents, not casually, and without reason; and therefore wrecked Goods are no
Goods imported within the intention of the Act, and consequently not to answer
the Kings Duties; for Goods, as Goods, cannot offend, forfeit, unlade, pay
Duties, or the like, but men whose Goods they are. And wrecked Goods have not
Owners to do these Offices, when the Act requires they should be done;
Therefore the Act intended not to charge the Duty upon such Goods.

Judgment for the Plaintiff. The Chief Justice delivered the Opinion of the
Court.

Hill. 23 and 24 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 695. Richard Crowley Plaintiff, In a
Replevin, against Thomas Swindles, William Whitehouse, Roger Walton, Defendants.
THE Plaintiff declares, That the Defendants the Thirtieth of December, 22 Car.
2. at Kings Norton, in a place there called Hurley field, took his Beasts, four
Cows and four Heifers, and detained them, to his damage of Forty pounds.

The Defendants defend the Force; And as Bailiffs of Mary Ashenhurst, Widow,
justify the Caption; and that the place contains, and did contain when the
Caption is supposed, Twenty Acres of Land in Kings Norton aforesaid.

That long before the Caption, one Thomas Greaves Esquire, was seized of One
hundred Acres of Land, and of One hundred Acres of Pasture in Kings Norton
aforesaid, in the said County of Worcester; whereof the Locus in quo is, and at
the time of the Caption, and time out of mind, was parcel in his demesne, as of
Fee, containing Twenty Acres.

That he long before the Caption, that is, 18 die December. 16 Car. 1. at Kings
Norton aforesaid, by his Indenture in writing under his Seal, which the
Defendants produce, dated the said day and year, in consideration of former
Service done by Edmond Ashenhurst to him the said Thomas, did grant by his said
Writing to the said Edmond, and Mary his Wife, one yearly Rent of Twenty
pounds, issuing out of the said Twenty Acres, with the Appurtenances, by the
name of all his Lands and Hereditaments, situate in Kings Norton aforesaid.

Habendum the said Rent to the said Edmond and Mary, and their Assigns, after
the decease of one Anne Greaves, and Thomas Greaves, Uncle to the Grantor, or
either of them, which first should happen, during the lives of Edmond and Mary,
and the longer liver of them, at the Feasts of the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the Arch angel, by equal portions: The first
payment to begin at such of the said Feasts as should first happen next after
the decease of the said Anne Greaves, and Thomas the Uncle, or either of them.

That if the Rent were behind in part or in all, it should be lawful for the
Grantees, and the Survivor of them, to enter into all and singular the Lands in
King's Norton of the Grantor, and to distrain and detain until payment. By
virtue whereof the said Edmond and Mary became seized of the said Rent in their
Demesne, as of Free hold, during their Lives, as aforesaid.

The Defendants say further in Fact, That after, that is to say, the last day
of February, in the Two and twentieth year of the now King, the said Anne
Greaves, and Thomas the Uncle, and Edmond the Husband, died at King's Norton.

That for Twenty pounds of the said Rent for one whole year, ending at the
Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, in the Two and twentieth year of the
King, unpaid to the said Mary, the Defendants justify the Caption, as in
Lands, subject to the said Mary's Distress, as her Bailiffs; And averr her to
be living at King's Norton aforesaid.

The Plaintiff demands Oyer of the Writing Indented, by which it appears, That
the said Annuity was granted to Edmond and Mary, and their Assigns, in manner
set forth by the Defendants in their Conuzance.

But with this variance in the Deed; And if the aforesaid yearly Rents of Ten
pounds, and of Twenty pounds, shall be unpaid at any the days aforesaid, in
part or in all, That it shall be lawful for the said Edmond and Mary, at any
time during the joint natural Lives of the said Anne Greaves, and Thomas
Greaves the Uncle, if the said Edmond and Mary, or either of them, should so
long live, and as often as the said Rents of Twenty pounds, or any parcel
should be behind, to enter into all the said Thomas Greaves the Grantors Lands
in King's Norton aforesaid, and to Distrain.

Upon Oyer of which Indenture, the Plaintiff demurrs upon the Conuzance.

Two Exceptions have been taken to this Conuzance made by the Defendants.

The first, for that it is said, The Rent was granted out of the Twenty Acres,
being the Locus in quo, by the Name of all the Grantors Lands and Hereditaments
in King's Norton, and that a per nomen in that Case is not good.

The Case of Gray and Chapman was urged, 43 Eliz. Cro. f. 822.
where by Indenture S. one Prudence Cousin let a House, and Twenty Acres of
Land, by the Name of all her Tenements in S. But it was not alleged in what
Vill the Acres were.

The Court was of Opinion in Arrest of Judgment, that the naming of the Vill in
the per nomen was not material.

Another Case to the same purpose was urged of Gay against Cay, where a Grant
in possession was pleaded, 41 Eliz. Cro. f. 662. pl. 10.
and not as in Reversion: And upon view of the Record, the Grantor had granted
Tenementa praedicta per nomen, of a Mesuage which A. P. held for life, where
the per nomen was adjudg'd not to make good the Grant.

The Court is of Opinion, notwithstanding these Cases, That in the present Case
the per nomen is well enough, because it is alleged the Grantor was seized of
Two hundred Acres of Land in Kings Norton, whereof the locus in quo being
Twenty Acres, is parcel: By reason whereof, the Rent being granted out of every
parcel of the Two hundred Acres, it is well enough to say it was granted out of
the Twenty Acres per nomen of all his Lands in Kings Norton; because the Twenty
Acres are alleged to be parcel of all his Lands there, being Two hundred Acres.

But in Chapman's Case, It is not alleged that the Twenty Acres of Land
demis'd were parcel of all the Tenements in S. per nomen, of which the Twenty
Acres were to pass.

As for the second Case of Gay, it was not possible that Lands granted, as in
possession should pass, per nomen, of Land, that was in Reversion.

The second Exception is, Because the Clause of Entry and Distress in the Deed
upon Oyer of it, differs from the Clause of Entry and Distress alleged in the
Conizance. For in the Conizance it is said, It should be lawful to Enter and
Distrain if the rent were unpaid and behind after any of the Feasts whereon it
was due, that is, at any Feast that should first happen after the death of Anne
or Thomas Greaves, for the Rent did not commence before.

But by the Deed, If the Rent were behind at any the Feasts, the Entry and
Distress is made to be lawful for it, during the joint Lives of Anne and Thomas
Greaves the Uncle, and during their joint lives, it could not be behind, for it
commenced not till one of them were dead.

Scarplus and Handkinson 37 El. Cro. f. 420. words repugnant and senseless to be
rejected.
So as the sense must run, That if the Rent were behind, it should be lawful to
distrain during the joint Lives of Anne and Thomas Greaves, which was before it
could be behind; for it could not be behind till the death of one of them.
Therefore those words, during their joint natural lives, being insensible,
ought to be rejected. For words of known signification, but so placed in the
Context of a Deed, that they make it repugnant and senseless, are to be rejected
equally with words of no known signification.

Judgment pro Defendent. The Chief Justice delivered the Opinion of the Court.

Trin. 16 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 2487. But Adjudg'd Mich. 20 Car. II. Bedell
versus Constable.
BY the Act of 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. It is among other things Enacted, That where
any person has, or shall have, any Child or Children under the Age of One and
twenty years, and not married at the time of his death, It shall and may be
lawful to and for the Father of such Child or Children, whether born at the
time of the decease of the Father, or at that time in ventre sa mere; or
whether such Father be within the Age of One and twenty years, or of full Age,
by his Deed executed in his life time, or by his last Will and Testament in
writing, in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses, to dispose of the
custody and tuition of such Child or Children, for, and during such time as he
or they shall respectively remain under the Age of One and twenty years, or any
lesser time, to any person or persons in possession or remainder, other than
Popish Recusants: And such disposition of the Custody of such Child or Children
made since the Four and twentieth of February, 1645. or hereafter to be made,
shall be good and effectual against all and every person or persons claiming
the custody or tuition of such Child or Children as Guardian in Soccage or
otherwise: And such person or persons to whom the custody of such Child or
Children has been, or shall be so disposed or devised as aforesaid, shall and
may maintain an Action of Ravishment of Ward, or Trespass, against any person
or persons which shall wrongfully take away or detain such Child or Children,
for the Recovery of such Child or Children, and shall and may recover Damages
for the same in the said Action, for the use and benefit of such Child or
Children.

And such person or persons to whom the custody of such Child or Children has
been, or shall be, so disposed or devised, shall and may take into his or their
custody to the use of such Child or Children, the profits of all Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of such Child or Children; and also the custody,
tuition, and management of the Goods, Chattels, and personal Estate of such
Child or Children, till their respective Age of One and twenty years, or any
lesser time, according to such Disposition aforesaid; and may bring such Action
or Actions in relation thereto, as by Law a Guardian in Common Soccage might do.

By the Will is devised in these words,

I do bequeath my son Thomas to my Brother Robert Towray of Rickhall, to be his
Tutor during his Minority.

Before this Act, Tenant in Soccage of Age might have disposed his Land by
Deed, or last Will, in trust for his Heir, but not the Custody and Tuition of
his Heir; for the Law gave that to the next of Kinn, to whom the Land could not
descend.

But Tenant in Soccage under Age, could not dispose the Custody of his Heir,
nor devise or demise his Land in trust for him in any manner. Now by this
Statute he may grant the Custody of his Heir, but cannot devise or demise his
Land in trust for him for any time directly; for if he should, the devise or
demise were as before the Statute (as I conceive) which is most observable in
this Case.

I say directly he cannot, but by a mean and obliquely he may; for nominating
who shall have the Custody, and for what time, by a consequent the Land
follows, as an incident given by the Law to attend the custody, not as an
Interest devised or demis'd by the party.

This difference is very material; for if the Father could devise the Land in
trust for him until his Son came to One and twenty, as he can grant the Custody
then, as in other Cases of Leases for years, the Land undoubtedly should go to
the Executor or Administrator of him whom the Father named, for the tuition,
and the trust should follow the Land, as in other Cases, where Lands are
conveyed in trust.

But when he cannot, ex directo, devise the Land in trust, then the Land
follows the Custody, and not the Custody the Land; and the Land must go as the
Custody can go, and not the Custody as the Land can go.

Coke Litt. f. 49. a. 1 H. 7. 28. 8 H. 7. 4.
As where a House or Land belongs to an Office, or a Chamber to a Corody, the
Office or Corody being granted by Deed, the House and Land follows as incident,
or belonging without Livery, because the Office is the principal, and the Land
but pertaining to it.

A second Consideration is, That by this Act no new custody is instituted, but
the office of Guardian, as to the duty and power of the place, is left the
same, as the Law before had prescribed and settled of Guardian in Soccage.

But the modus habendi of that office is altered by this Act in two
Circumstances. The first,

1. It may be held for a longer time, viz. to the Age of the Heir of One and
twenty, where before it was but to Fourteen.

2. It may be by other persons held, for before it was the next of Kindred, not
inheritable, could have it, now who the Father names shall have it.

So it is, as if an Office grantable for life only before, should be made
grantable for years by Parliament, or grantable before to any person, should be
made grantable but to some kind of persons only.

The Office, as to the Duty of it, and its essence, is the same it was: But the
Modus habendi altered.

If therefore this new Guardian is the same in Office and Interest with the
former Guardian in Soccage, and varies from it only in the Modus habendi, then
the Ward has the same legal Remedy against this Guardian as was against the
old. But if this be a new Office of Guardianship, differing in its nature from
the other, the Heir has no remedy against him at all in Law; For though this
new Guardian be enabled to have such Actions as the old might have, yet this
Act enables not the Heir to have like Actions, or any other against him, as he
might against the Guardian in Soccage.

The Intent of this Statute is to privilege the Father against common right to
appoint the Guardian of his Heir, and the time of his Wardship under One and
twenty: But leaves the Heirs of all other Ancestors Wards in Soccage, as
before: Therefore I hold,

1. That such a Special Guardian cannot transferr the Custody of the Ward by
Deed or will to any other.

2. That he has no different Interest from a Guardian in Soccage, but for the
time of the Wardship.

1. When an Act of Parliament alte^s the Common Law, the meaning shall not be
strained beyond the words, except in Cases of public Vtility, when the end of
the Act appears to be larger than the enacting words. But by the words the
Father only can appoint the Guardian, therefore the Guardian so appointed,
cannot appoint another Guardian.

2. The Mother has the same concern for her Heir, as the Father has; But she
cannot by the Act name a Guardian, therefore much less can the Guardian named
by the Father.

3. The Father cannot by the Act give the custody to a Papist, but if it may be
transferred over by him whom the Father names, or by Act in Law go to his
Executor or Administrator, it may come to a Papist, against the meaning of the
Act.

4. Offices or Acts of personal Trust cannot be assigned; for the Trust is not
personal which any man may have.

Dyer 2 and 3 Eliz. f. 189. b.
5. At the Common Law none could have the Custody and Marriage of a man's Son and
Heir apparent from the Father, yet the Father could not grant or sell the
Custody and Marriage of his Heir apparent, though the marriage was to his own
benefit, as was resolved by the greater number of the Judges in the Lord Bray's
Case, who by Indenture had sold for Eight hundred pounds the Custody and
Marriage of his Son and Heir apparent, in the time of Henry the Eighth, to the
Lord Audley, Chancellor of England. Lord Cromwell, Lord Privy Seal. Sir William
Paulett, Treasurer of the Household. The Marquis of Winchester, Lord Treasurer.


Dyer supra f. 190. b. pl. 19.
The Reason given is, That the Father has no Interest to be granted or sold to
a Stranger in his eldest Son, but it is inseparably annexed to the person of
the Father.

Two Judges differed, because an Action of Trespass would lie for taking away a
man's Heir apparent, and marrying him, whence they conclude he might be granted
as a Chattel.

11 H. 4. f. 23. a. Fitz. N. Br. Tresp. f. 90. b. Let. G. f. 89. Let. O.
But an Action of Trespass will lie for taking away ones Servant.

For taking away a Monk, where he was cloistered in Castigationem.

Pro Uxore abducta cum bonis Viri; yet none of these are assignable.

West. 1. c. 48.
By the Statute of Westminster the First, If the Guardian in Chivalry made a
Feoffment of the Wards Lands in his Custody during his Minority, the Heir might
forthwith have a Writ of Novel Disseisin against the Guardian and Tenant, and
the Land recovered should be delivered to the next of kinn to the Heir, to be
kept and accounted for to him at his full Age.

This was neither Guardian in Soccage nor Chivalry, Coke 2. Inst. f. 260. b. By
4, 5 P.M. c. 8. No woman child under 16. can be taken against his will whom the
Father has made Guardian by Deed or Will, yet this is no Lease of the Custody
till 16. nor is it assignable. Ratcliffs C. 3. Rep. Shoplands C. 3 Jac. Cr. f.
99.
but a special Guardian appointed by the Statute, and such a Guardian could not
assign over, nor should it go to his Executors by the Express Book.

This Case likewise, and common Experience proves, That Guardian in Soccage
cannot assign, nor shall the Custody go to his Executors; though some ancient
Books make some doubt therein.

For expressly by the Statute of 52 H. 3. the next of kin is to answer and be
accomptable to the Heir in Soccage, as this special Guardian is here by
Westminster the First.

These several sorts of Guardians trusted for the Heir, could neither assign
their Custody, nor did it go to their Executors, because the Trust was
personal, and they had no Interest for themselves.

The Trust is as personal in this new Guardian, nor has he any Interest in it
for himself; and therefore he shall not assign it.

A Guardian in Soccage cannot transferr his Custody, because it is a personal
Trust, but the Trust of this special Guardian is more personal; therefore that
he shall transferr it, concludes strangely.

The Office of a Philizer is an Office of personal Trust to do the business of
the Court, and not assignable, 28 H. 8. f. 7. Dyer.
no Execution can be upon it.

Sir George Reynels Case, an Office of Trust and Confidence cannot be granted
for years, because then it might go to persons (that is, to Executors or
Administrators) never trusted or confided in.

So is Littleton expressly, That all Offices of Trust, Sect. 379.
as Steward, Constable, Bedlary, Bailiffwick, must be personally occupied,
unless they be granted to be occupied by a Deputy, and are not assignable.

And a more near or tenderer Trust cannot be, than the Custody and Education of
a man's Child and Heir, and preservation of his Estate.

It may be said, That in these Cases the Law does particularly appoint the
Guardians, and therefore no others can be. But in the Case at Bar the Father
appoints the person, not the Law.

It is true, there is a difference in the Cases, but not to make the Trust more
assignable in the one Case, than the other.

Where the Law appoints who shall be trusted, the Trust cannot be refused, as
in the several Guardians before mentioned.

But where the Person names the Trustee, the Trust may be refused; but once
accepted, it cannot be transferred to others, more than where the Law names the
Trustee.

An Executor has a private office of Trust (for we speak not of public) and
is named by the Testator, not by the Law; therefore he may refuse, but cannot
assign his Executorship.

But it is true, an Executor may make an Executor (due Circumstances observed)
who shall discharge the first Testators Trust, but the reason is, that after
Debts paid, and Legacies, the Surplus of the Goods belongs to the Executor,
proprio jure.

An Administrator has a private Office of Trust, he cannot assign nor leave it
to his Executor, he is not named by the Intestate, but by the Law in part for
him, but not peremptorily, he may not claim it if he will, because it must pass
through the Ordinary.

A man's Bailiff or Receiver are Offices of personal Trust, and not assignable;
so is the Office of every Servant.

An Arbitrator, or one authorized to sell a man's Land, to give Livery, or
receive it, cannot assign; it is a personal Confidence,

1. A Custody is not in its nature Testamentary, it cannot pay Debts nor
Legacies, nor be distributed as Alms.

2. It is not accomptable for to the Ordinary, as Intestates Goods are.

3. The Heir ought to have a Guardian without interruption but an Executor may
be long before he proves the Will, and may at length refuse. An Administration,
long before it be granted, and after, may be suspended by Appeal; and in these
times the Ward has no certain Guardian responsal for his Estate or Person.

Shopland's C. 3 Jac. Cr. f. 99.
And where it may be said, That these are naked Authorities, and the persons
have no Interest, but a Guardian has Interest, he may let and set the Wards
Land during minority, Avow in his own name, Grant Copyhold Estates, and the
like.

It is an Interest conjoined with his trust for the Ward, (I speak not here of
equitable trusts, without which Interest he could not discharge the trust) but
it must be an Interest for himself, which is transferrable, or shall go to his
Executor.

All Executors and Administrators have Interest and Property necessary to their
Trusts; for they may sell the Goods or Leases of the Testator or Intestate,
without which they could not execute the Trust.

A Monk made an Executor might do the like, who in his own right could have no
Interest or Property.

But such Interest proves not that the Executors or Administrators may assign
their Trust, Guardian in Soccage may demise his Guardianship and grant over his
Estate. N. Br. f. 145. b. Letter H. quod nota.
or that it shall go to their Executors; for it is agreed in that Case of
Shopland, That such Interest as a Guardian in Soccage has, shall not go to his
Executor, but is annexed to his Person, and therefore not transferrable.

So as I take the sense of the Act, collected in short, to be,

Whereas all Tenures are now Soccage, and the next of kinn, to whom the Land
cannot descend, is Guardian until the Heirs Age of Fourteen; yet the Father, if
he will, may henceforth nominate the Guardian to his Heir, and for any time,
until the Heirs Age of One and twenty, and such Guardian shall have like remedy
for the Ward, as the Guardian in Soccage by the Common Law has.

Another Exposition of this Act has been offered, as if the Father did devise
his Land by way of Lease, during the minority of the Heir, to him to whom he
gave the Custody in Trust for the Heir, and so the Land was assignable over,
and went to the Executors, but followed with the Trust.

1. This is a forced Exposition to carry the Custody to any Stranger, to the
Father, or to the Child, or to any that may inherit the Land contrary to the
ancient and excellent policy of the Law.

2. By such an Exposition the Heir should have no Account of such a Lessee, as
he may against a Guardian, but must sue in equity, for this Statute gives
Actions, such as Guardians might have to him, who has the Custody, but gives
none against him.

3. If such Lessee should give the Heirs marriage, Coke Litt. f. 896.
the Heir has no Remedy, but the Guardian in Soccage shall account for what
the marriage was worth.

Stat. Malbridge c. 17.
The Statute only says, That such person nominated by the Father may take to
his Custody the Profits of all Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of such
Child and Children, and also the Custody, Tuition, and Management of the Goods,
Chattels, and personal Estate of such Child or Children; And may bring such
Action in relation thereto, as a Guardian in Soccage might do.

None of which words will charge him with the value of the Marriage, if he had
nothing for it.

Na. Br. f. 139. b Let. H.
4. If the Heir be in custody of such a Lessee, and be Guardian by nearness of
kinn to another Infant. The Guardian of the Heir by Law is Guardian to both;
but such a Lessee has no pretense to be Guardian of the second Infant by any
word of the Act; For he is neither an Hereditament, or Goods, or Chattels of
the first Infant.

As to the second part;

If the Father, being of Age, should devise his Land to J. S. during the
Minority of his Son and Heir, in trust for his Heir, and for his Maintenance
and Education, until he be of Age.

This is no devising of the Custody within this Statute, for he might have done
this before the Statute.

If the Father, under Age, should make such a Devise, it were absolutely void;
for the same syllables shall never give the Custody of the Heir by the Father
under Age, which do not give it by the Father which is of Age.

But in both Cases a Devise of the Custody is effectual, and there is no reason
that the Custody devised shall operate into a Lease, when a Lease devised shall
not operate into a Custody, which it cannot do.

If a man devise the Custody of his Heir apparent to J. S. and mentions no
time, either during his Minority, or for any other time, this is a good devise
of the Custody within the Act, if the Heir be under Fourteen at the death of
the Father, because by the Devise the Modus habendi Custodiam is changed only
as to the person, and left the same it was as to the time.

But if above Fourteen at the Fathers death, then the Devise of the Custody is
merely void for the incertainty.

For the Act did not intend every Heir should be in Custody until One and
twenty, Non ut tamdiu sed ne diutius, therefore he shall be in this Custody but
so long as the Father appoints; and if he appoint no time, there is no Custody.

If a man have power to make Leases for any term of years, not exceeding One
hundred, and he demises Land, but expresses no time, shall this therefore be a
Lease for One hundred years? There is no Reason it should be a Lease; for the
greatest term he could grant, more than for the least term he could grant, or
indeed for any other term under One hundred: Therefore it is void for
incertainty; and the Case is the same for the Custody.

For if the Father might intend as well any time under that, no Reason will
enforce that he only intended that.

And to say he intended the Custody for some time, therefore since no other can
be, it must be for that, will hold as well in the Lease, and in all other Cases
of incertainty. If a man devises Ten pounds to his Servant, but having many,
none shall have it for the incertainty.

It may be demanded, If the Father appoint the Custody until the Age of One and
twenty, and the Guardian dye, what shall become of this Custody?

It determines with the death of the Guardian, and is a Condition in Law; and
the same as if a man grant to a man the Stewardship of his Manor for Ten
years, or to be his Bailiff: It is employed by way of Condition, if he live so
long.

A Copyholder in Fee surrenders to the Lord, Dyer 8 Eliz. f. 251. pl. 90.
ad intentionem, that the Lord should grant it back to him for term of life,
the Remainder to his Wife, till his Son came to One and twenty, Remainder to
the Son in tail, Remainder to the Wife for life. The Husband died: The Lord at
his Court granted the Land to the Wife till the Sons full age. The Remainders,
ut supra; The Wife marries and dies Intestate; The Husband held in the Land;
The Wives Administrator, and to whom the Lord had granted the Land, during the
Minority of the Son, enters upon the Husband.

This Entry was adjudg'd unlawful, because it was the Wives term; but otherwise
it had been, if the Wife had been but a Guardian, or next Friend of this Land.

The like Case is in Hobart. Balder and Blackburn f. 285. 17 Jac.


If it be insisted, That this new Guardian has the Custody, not only of the
Lands descended or left by the Father, but of all Lands and Goods any way
acquired or purchased by the Infant, which the Guardian in Soccage had not.

That alters not the Case; for if he were Guardian in Soccage without that
particular power given by the Statute, he is equally Guardian in Soccage with
it, and is no more than if the Statute had appointed Guardian in Soccage to
have care of all the Estate of the Infant, however he came by it.

Besides that proves directly that this new Guardian does not derive his
interest from the Father, but from the Law; for the Father could never give him
power or interest of or in that which was never his.

The Court was divided, viz. The Chief Justice, and Justice Wild for the
Plaintiff; Justice Tyrrell and Justice Archer for the Defendant.

Hill. 19 and 20 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 506. Holden versus Smallbrooke.
IN Trover and Conversion, and not Guilty pleaded, Robinson.
the Jury gave a Special Verdict to this Effect, That Doctor Mallory Prebendary
of the Prebend of Wolvey, founded in the Cathedral of Litchfield, seized of the
said Prebend and one Message, one Barn, and the Glebe appertaining thereto,
and of the Tithes of Wolvey in right of his Prebend, 22 April. 13 Car. 2. by
Indenture demised to Giles Astly, and his Assigns, the said Prebend, together
with all Houses, Barns, Tenements, Glebe Lands and Tithes thereto belonging for
three Lives, under the ancient Rent of Five pounds ten shillings, Astly (being
one of the Lives) died seized of the Premises; at whose death one Taverner was
Tenant for one year (not ended) of the Demise of Astly, of the Message, Barn,
and Glebe Lands, and in possession of them, whereupon the Plaintiff entered into
the Message and Glebe, and was in the possession of the same and of the Tithes
as Occupant. And afterward Frances Astly, the Relict of the said Giles Astly
enters upon the Message, and claims the same as Occupant, in haec verba,
Frances Astly, Widow of Giles Astly, enters upon the House, and claims the
same, with the Glebe and Tithe, as Occupant; Taverner attorns to Frances Astly,
and afterward grants and assigns all his Estate in the Premises to the
Plaintiff; afterward Conquest, the Husband of Frances Astly, took one Sheaf of
Corn in the name of all the Tithes, and afterward demised the Tithes to the
Defendant: The Tithes are set forth, and the Defendant took them, whereupon the
Plaintiff brought this Action.

Before I deliver my Opinion concerning the particular Questions before opened,
arising upon this Record, I shall say somewhat shortly of Natural Occupancy and
Civil Occupancy.

First opening what I mean by those terms, then briefly showing their
difference, as far only as is material to the Questions now before me,

I call Natural Occupancy the possession either of such natural things as are
immovable, fixed, and permanent; as Land, a Pool, River, Sea (for a Sea is
capable of Occupancy and Dominion naturally, as well as Land, and has
naturally been in Occupancy, as is demonstrated in Mr. Selden's Mare Clausum at
large; which lie unpossess'd, and in which no other has prior right.

Or of things natural and moveable, either animate as a Horse, a Cow, a Sheep,
and the like, without number, or Inanimate, as Gold, precious Stones, Grain,
Honey, Fruit, Flesh, and the like, numberless also, wherein no man, until the
possession thereof by Occupancy, had any other right than every man had (which
is as much as to say) wherein no man had right, for that which is equally every
man's right, is no man's right.

Whence it follows (for I shall not speak of the usage or extent of such a
possession by natural Occupancy, it being a subject too large, and not
necessary for my present purpose)

1. That there can be no Occupancy natural of any thing wherein another than
the Occupant has right: For by the definition made, natural Occupancy is the
first right.

2. A Claim, without actual possession, cannot make a man a natural Occupant:
For,

1. When a Claim is, cannot be possibly known to all concerned in the Occupancy
of a natural thing, and what cannot be known, is (as to all effect of right) as
if it had not been; nor is there any Character of a natural Claim, but the
possession and use of the thing, but civilly there may, either by word or other
sign, agreed on.

2. The end of a natural Right, to any natural thing, is the separate use of
the thing to a part of Mankind, which cannot be used by all Mankind; but if
Claim only would give a Right to the things of nature, they might still remain,
as much without use after the Claim as before, which agrees not with the end of
Nature in giving a Right to natural things.

3. If Claim could give a Natural Right, one might claim all things in the
Universe, not already appropriated, and might have done so in the beginning of
time, when nothing almost was appropriated.

4. A natural Occupant has no Estate of Fee, Freehold, or the like, which are
Estates formed and raised by municipal Laws, but has only a bare possession to
keep or forsake.

5. That Land possessed by a natural Occupant must be without any sort of
Vassallage of Service, Rent, Condition, or other Charge whatsoever, for those
servitudes upon the Land cannot be conceived without a former right in him that
laid them, but natural Occupancy of things wherein none had any former right,
or having any, have deserted it; for naturally a man can have nothing against
his own will.

6. Two or more cannot, at the same time, have severally plenary possession,
that is, Occupancy, of the same thing; therefore none can have right to that by
reason of possession, whereof another is already possessed, for then there
would be two plenary Possessors severally of the same thing at the same time,
which is impossible.

And although every Nation has, by Consent and Agreement among the people of
it, its proper Laws to guide and determine men's Properties to all things
capable of property and ownership, yet the ancientest Nations of the World have
no other right against each other to their own Countries and Territories, than
this original and natural occupancy, and that Nation that will not admit a
right by occupancy to another Nation in the Land so possessed by it, must at
the same time confess they have no right to their own, which they hold but in
like manner.

They who would be further satisfied concerning this kind of occupancy, may
resort, for exactness above other Books upon this Subject, to Mr. Selden's Mare
Clausum, Seldeni Mare Clausum, l. 1. Grotius de Jure Belli. l. 1. c. 3, 4.
lib. 1. and to Hugo Grotius his first Book, de Jure Belli and Pacis, c. 3. de
acquisitione originaria rerum; etc. 4. de derelictione praesumpta, and eam
secuta occupatione, etc.

1. By Civil Occupancy I mean such an occupancy, either of things immovable,
as Lands; or of things moveable, as is according to institution and the law of
the place, and particularly according to the Law of England, as to the decision
of the Question before us.

2. By the Law of England, there is no occupancy by any person, of any thing
which another has a present right to possess, wherein the Law of the Land
agrees with that of natural occupancy.

Occupancy by the Law must be of things which have natural existence, as of
Land, or of other natural things, not of things which have their being and
creation from Laws and Agreements of men; for there is no direct and immediate
occupancy of a Rent, a Common, an Advowson, a Fair, a Market, a Remainder, a
Dignity, and the like.

Cok. Litt. f. 41. b. Cr. 41 El. f. 721. Crauleys C. p. 50. no Occupancy of a
Rent.
There can be no Occupant of any thing that lies in grant, and cannot pass
without Deed, because every Occupant must claim by a que estate, and averr the
life of Cestuy que vie.

And in this the Civil Occupancy with us of Land agrees with Natural Occupancy,
which must be of a thing that has natural existence, and not only legal.

But although the Occupancy be always of a natural thing, yet the Occupant does
thereby by the Law enjoy several things, many times, that have their being by
Law only, as an Occupant of Land may thereby enjoy a Common Occupant of a House
Estovers, of the demesne Lands of a Manor, the Services and Advowsons
appendant, which are not themselves natural things, but things created by Law,
nor are they immediately and by themselves capable of Occupancy, but with
reference to, and as adjuncts of the Land; and herein the civil Occupany
differs from the natural.

And the reason is clear, because the occupancy of the Land, which ought not to
lie void, does not sever or separate any thing from the Land which the Law has
joined with it; and if it does not separate from it that which is joined with
it by Law, though that be not capable of Occupancy in it self, as an Advowson
or Common, it must follow that such things continue joined or belonging to the
Land as before, notwithstanding the occupancy of the Land.

Cok. Litt. f. 41. b.
In civil occupancy the Land in occupancy is charged with all the servitude
imposed by the first Lessor or by the Law. As 1. to the payment of Rent, 2. to
be subject to waste, 3. to forfeiture, 4. to other Conditions, wherein it
differs from Land whereof a man is a natural occupant.

As to the civil occupancy of moveable things, which are commonly termed
personal things or goods, there are few of those in our Law that have not a
Proprietor (and consequently no Occupant can be of them) those which fall under
occupancy of that kind, are for the most part found in things, ferae naturae,
whose acquisition is either per piscationem, Bract. l. 2. c. 1.
as in Fish, or per aucupium, as in Fowl, or per venationem, by hunting: These
do cedere occupanti communi Jure.

1. Hence it follows by way of Inference and Corollary, That there can be no
primary and immediate Occupancy of a Tithe, for it is not in its own nature
capable of Occupancy more than a Rent or Common is, and is in truth in its
nature but a Rent, it cannot pass by it self, but by Deed, and as other things
which lie in grant.

A second thing that follows out of the former Premises, is, That the
Freehold, qua Freehold, is not the thing whereof there is an Occupancy; for the
Freehold is not a natural thing, but has its essence by the positive Municipal
Law of the Kingdom, it cannot abstract from the Land in this matter of
Occupancy, he either entered into, or possessed. The Freehold is an immediate
consequent of the possession; for when a man has gotten the possession of Land
that was void of a Proprietor, or other thing capable of Occupancy, the Law
forthwith does cast the Freehold upon the Possessor, to make a sufficient
Tenant to the Precipe. Therefore

As to the first Question, Whether Holden the Plaintiffs Entry Taverner's
possession, into the House, Glebe, and Barn the First of March, 1666. and
openly saying, I enter and take possession of this House, Glebe, and Barn, and
the Ground thereto belonging, and the Tithes of Woolney, in my own Name and
Right, as Occupant upon a Lease made to Giles Astly and his Assigns for three
Lives, by Dr. Mallory, Prebend of Woolney, did make him Occupant of the House,
Land, and Tithe, or either of them, the Lessee Taverner not having made any
Claim as Occupant to any of them?

I hold clearly, this Entry and Claim did not make Holden Occupant of the
House, Land, or Tithe, or of any of them.

To every Occupant of Land, or other thing capable of Occupancy, two things are
requisite. 1. Possession of the Land which was void and without Owner. 2. The
having of the Freehold to avoid an obeyance, which is had as well where the
possession is not void, as where it is.

The first, that is the possession, is acquired by the party, and his Act, but
the Freehold is acquired by the Act of Law, which casts it upon the possession
as soon as there is a Possessor, or where it finds a Possessor when the Freehold
is in none.

1. This Claim and Entry was in Order to gain the first possession of the Land
which was void; but that was impossible to be had, for the Lessee Taverner had
the possession before he held it then; therefore the Claim was to no end.

2. Secondly, A man cannot be an Occupant but of a void Possession, or of a
Possession which himself has; but here was no void Possession when Holden
entered and claimed as Occupant, for the Lessee was in lawful possession of the
House and Barn and Land at the time of the entry and claim.

3. Thirdly, If this Entry and Claim should make Holden a legal Occupant, which
cannot be without gaining the possession, then there would be two plenary legal
possessors of the same thing at the same time, Holden by his Entry and Claim,
and Taverner the Lessee by virtue of his lease; but that is impossible there
should be two plenary possessors of the same thing at the same time: Therefore
Holden can be no Occupant by such Entry and Claim.

Skeleton and Hay, 17 Jac. Cr. 554. b.
4. This very Case in every point has been resolved in the Case of Skeleton and
Hay, 17 Jac. where upon an Ejectment brought, a Special Verdict found, That the
Bishop of Worcester made a lease to Sir William Whorehood of certain land for
his own, and the lives of two of his Sons. Sir William did let the land to John
Mallett at will, rendering Rent, and dyed; Mallett continued the possession, not
claiming as Occupant; one of Sir William's Sons entered as Occupant, and made a
lease to the Plaintiff in the Action: It was adjudg'd that Mallett the
Defendant, being in possession, the Law cast the Freehold upon him without
Claim; and had he disclaimed to hold as Occupant, Chamberlayn and Ewes C. Rolls
2. part. f. 151. Let. E.
keeping the possession, he must have been the Occupant, for where one entered
to the use of another, he that entered was adjudg'd the Occupant.

Which Case proves one may be an Occupant against and besides his own
intention, and therefore a Claim to denote his intention.

5. To be an Occupant is not necessary; and Tenant for years, as well as at
will, is Occupant by that Case.

Besides claiming to be Occupant, is to claim to be in possession, or to claim
the Freehold, or both; but the Law binds not a man to claim that which he has
already; and therefore he that has possession, and does occupy the land, is
not to claim possession, or to be Occupant of it; no more is he to claim a
Freehold which he already has, for the Law has cast it where it finds the
possession; so having both possession and Freehold, the Law binds him not to
claim what he has.

6. Claim is never to make a Right which a man has not, but to preserve that
which he has from being lost: As Claim to avoid a Descent, whereby a man had
lost his right to enter, so a man makes no Claim to be remitted, when by act of
law he is in his Remitter.

As to the second Question, Whether Frances Astly, the Relict Giles, entering
the Five and twentieth of March, 1667. upon the Lessee Taverner's possession,
and claiming the House, Glebe and Tithe, as Occupant, and the Lessee Taverner
attorning to her, makes her an Occupant of the House, Land, or Tithe? The
Question has nothing in it differing from the former, but only the Attornment;
and it is clear, the Attornment of Taverner the Lessee does not disclaim his
possession, but affirms it; for Attornment is the Act of a Tenant, by reason of
his being in possession. Besides, admitting the Tenant a perfect Occupant, he
might, continuing so, attorn to whom he pleased, as well as Astly might have
done in his life time, yet still continue the Estate that was in him.

It follows then that Taverner was the undoubted Occupant, after Astly's death,
of the House, Land, and Barn; but whether he had the Tithe of Woolney by such
his Occupancy, whereof Astly died seized, is the difficult Question?

Another Question will arise, when Taverner the Lessee, who had by lease the
House, Barn, and Land, and so found, and was Occupant certainly of those, when
afterward Taverner the Lessee, 12 June 1667
concessit and assignavit totum statum suum de and in praemissis to Holden the
Plaintiff, and gave him Livery and Seifin thereupon, what shall be understood
to pass by the word praemissis? if only what was leas'd, and his Estate therein
as Occupant, and likewise the Tithe, if the Tithe accrued to him by reason of
being Occupant of the land?

For if he were Occupant of the Tithe by Act in Law, by being Occupant of the
land, it follows not that if he past all his Estate to Holden in the House and
Land, and gave him Livery, that therefore he past his Estate in the Tithe, nor
is such passing found to be by Deed.

To clear the way then toward resolving the principal Question.

1. At the time of Giles Astly's death, the Tithes and the House and Lands were
severed in Interest; for the Lessee Taverner had a Lease of the House, Glebe,
and Barn, and the Tithe continued in Astly.

2. This severance was equally the same, as if the Tithe had been demis'd to
Taverner, and the House and Land had remained still in Astly's possession.

3. Though the Freehold of both remained still in Astly at his death,
notwithstanding the divided Interest in the Land and Tithe; yet the Freehold
being a thing, quatenus Freehold, not capable in it self of Occupancy, nor no
natural, but a legal thing, which the Law casts upon him that is Occupant, that
will not concern the Questions, either who was Occupant, or of what he was
Occupant?

Cok. Litt. f. 41. b.
4. I take it for clear, That a naked Tithe, granted by it self pur auter vie,
and the Grantee dying without assignment, living Cestuy que vie, is not capable
of Occupancy, more than a Rent, a Common in gross, and Advowson in gross, a
Fair, or the like are, it being a thing lying in Grant equally as those others
do. Coke's Littleton; There can be no Occupant of any thing which lies in
Grant, and cannot pass without Deed. I cited the place at full before with
other Authorities against Occupancy of a Rent.

5. If a man dye seized of Land which he holds pur auter vie, and also dies
seized of Rent held pur auter vie, or of an Advowson or Common in gross, held
by distinct Grants, pur auter vie, and the same Cestuy que vie, or the several
Cestuy vies (for that will not differ the Case) living: Though the Grantee died
seized of a Freehold in these several things, I conceive that he which enters
into the Land first, after his death, will be Occupant of the Land which was
capable of Occupancy; but neither of the Tithe, Advowson, nor Common, which are
not capable of Occupancy, and have no more coherence with, dependence upon, nor
relation to, the Land, than if they had been granted pur auter vie, to another,
who had happened to dye in like manner as the Grantee of the Land did.

And that which has intricated men in this matter, has been a Conception
taken up, as if the Occupant had for his object in being Occupant, the Freehold
which the Tenant died seized of, which is a mistake; for the subject and object
of the Occupant are only such things which are capable of Occupancy, not things
which are not, and not the Freehold at all, into which he neither does, nor can
enter; but the Law casts it immediately upon him that has made himself
Occupant of the Land or other real thing whereof he is Occupant, that there may
be a Tenant to the Precipe. But, as was well observed by my Brother Wilmott, No
Precipe lies for setting out Tithe at Common Law; and I doubt not, by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 7. though Sir Edward Coke in his Litt. f. 159. a. seems
to be of opinion, Coke Litt. 159. a.
that a man may at his Election have remedy for witholding Tithe, after that
Statute, by Action or in the Ecclesiastical Court, by that Statute doubtless he
has for the title of Tithe as for title of Land, or for the taking of them
away, but not perhaps for not setting them out.

6. When a Severance therefore is once made of the Land and Tithe, it is as
much severance of them, though the Tithe remain in Astly's possession, as if he
had leas'd the Land to Taverner, and the Tithe to another, if then Taverner
becoming Occupant of the Land, should have had nothing in the Tithe leas'd to
another, as the Land was to him, no more shall he have the Tithe remaining in
Astly himself at his death.

Still we must remember the ground insisted on, That no Occupancy begins with
the Freehold, but begins by possessing the Land, or other real thing, which was
void and ownerless, and that by Act of Law the Freehold is cast upon the
Possessor, either entering where the possession was void, or being in possession
when Tenant pur auter vie died, either as Lessee for years, or at will to
Tenant pur auter vie, for the Law equally casts the Freehold upon him, as was
resolved in Chamberleyne and Eures Case, reported by Sergeant Rolls and others,
Second Part. f. 151. Letter E. and in Castle and Dods Case, 5 Jac. Cr. f. 200.

Therefore after such Severance made by the Tenant pur auter vie, the Land and
Tithe are as distinct and sunder'd from each other, as if Tenant pur auter vie
had held them by distinct Grants, or leas'd them to distinct persons.

In the next place I shall agree,

That the Occupant of a House shall have the Estovers, or way pertaining to
such House, the Occupant of the Demesne of a Manor, or of other Land, shall
have the Advowson appendant, or Villain regardant to the Manor or Common
belonging to the Land, and the Services of the Manor not severed from the
Demesne before the occupancy.

For a Possessor of a House, Land, Demesne of a Manor, as Occupant, does not
by such his possession sever any thing belonging to the Land, House, or
Demesne, more than the Possessor by any other title than occupancy does; and if
they be not severed, it follows they must remain as before to the Possessor of
that to which they pertain.

So if a Manor, being an entire thing, consisting of Demesnes and Services,
which are parts constituent of the Manor; the possessing and occupancy of the
Demesns, which is one part, can make no severance of the Services from the
entire, and therefore the Occupant has all. And these things, though primarily
there can be no occupancy of them, being things that lie in Grant, and pass not
without Deed; yet when they are adjuncts, or pertaining to Land, they do pass
by Livery only, without Deed.

Coke Litt. f. 121. 8. Sect. 183.
Whatsoever passes by Livery of Seisin, either in Deed or in Law, may pass
without Deed, and not only the Rent and Services, parcel of the Manor, shall,
with the Demesns, as the more principal and worthy, pass by Livery without
Deed; but all things regardant, appendant, or appurtenant to the Manor, as
Incidents or Adjuncts to the same, shall, together with the Manor, pass
without Deed, without saying cum pertinentiis. And if they pass by Livery,
which must be of the Land, they must likewise pass by any lawful Entry made
into the Land, and such the Entry of the Occupant is.

But as by occupancy of the demesne Lands of a Manor, the Services are not
severed; so if they be severed at the time when the occupancy happens, that
shall never of it self unite them again.

Now in the Case before us, The Tithe is neither appendant or appurtenant, or
any sort of Adjunct to the Glebe or House, nor are they to the Tithe, nor will
a lease and livery of the Glebe simply, with the appurtenances, pass the Tithe
at all, nor a Grant of the Tithe pass the Glebe; nor are either of them
constituent parts of the Prebendary or Rectory, as the Services are of a
Manor; for a total severance of the Services and Demesne destroy the Manor,
but a severance of the Tithe or Glebe will not destroy the Rectory, more than
the severance of a Manor, parcel of the possessions of a Bishopric, will
destroy the Bishopric; for the Glebe and the Tithe are but several possessions
belonging to the Rectory.

But it is true, that in the Case before us, and like Cases, a Grant of the
Prebendary, or of the Rectory, una cum terra Glebali, and decimis de Woolney,
The Tithe, which alone cannot pass without Deed, does pass by Livery of the
Rectory, Browlow, part. 2. f. 201. Rowles and Masons Case.
and so pass, that though the Deed mentions the Tithe to be passed, yet if
Livery be not given, which must be to pass the Land, the Tithe will not pass by
the Deed, because the intention of the parties is not to pass them severally,
but una cum, and together.

Therefore the Tithe in such Case must pass in time by the Livery, which did
not pass without it, though granted by the Deed.

Yet it is a Question, Whether in such Case the Tithe passes by the Livery or
by the Deed? For though the passing it by Deed is suspended by reason of the
intention to pass the Land and Tithe together, and not severally, it follows
not, but that the Tithe passes by the Deed where Livery is given, though not
until Livery given.

If a man be seized of a Tenement of Land, and likewise of a Tithe, and agrees
to sell them both, and without Deed gives Livery in the Tenement to the
Bargainee in name of it, and of the Tithe, I conceive the Tithe does not pass
by that Livery.

But a Prebend or Church man cannot now by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 10.
make a Lease of the possessions of his Prebendary without Deed. 13 Eliz. c. 10.


A Prebendary or Rectory is in truth neither the Glebe nor Tithe, nor both, for
the one or the other may be recovered, and might at Common Law have been
aliened; the Rectory remaining. But the Rectory is the Church Parochial,
whereof the Incumbent takes the Cure and Seisin by his Induction after his
Institution, which is his Charge, and without other Seisin then of the Ring or
Key of the Church-door, by Induction into the Rectory the Parson is seized of
all the possessions belonging to his Rectory, of what kind soever.

But though by the name of the Rectory the possessions belonging to it, of what
nature soever, actually vest in the Incumbent upon Induction, and may pass from
the Prebendary by Livery of the Prebend or Rectory to his Lessee, according to
the parties intention.

Yet it follows not, That therefore an Occupant, who can be Occupant but of
some natural and permanent thing as Land is, should, by being Occupant of that
whereof occupancy may be, have thereby some other thing heterogene to the
nature of Land, and not capable of occupancy, as a Tithe is, being neither
appendant or appurtenant, or necessary part of that whereof he is Occupant; nor
will it follow, that because by giving Seisin of the Rectory, the Tithe and
Glebe belonging to it will pass, that therefore giving Livery of the Glebe will
pass the Tithe. For it is observable, That if a man be Tenant in tail of a
Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, or of a Tenement to which a Common is
belonging, and discontinue the Issue in tail, shall never have the Advowson or
Common, until he has recontinued the Manor or Tenement.

But if a man be seized in tail of a Rectory, consisting of Glebe and Tithe,
and discontinue it; after the death of Tenant in tail, the Heir in tail shall
have the Tithe which lay in grant, but must recover by Formedon the Rectory and
Glebe. This was agreed in this Court in a Case between Christopher Baker and
Searl in Ejectment, Cr. 37 El. f. 407. p. 19. Baker and Searls Case.
upon a Demise by the Earl of Bedford of the Rectory of D. and de decimis inde
provenientibus for Lives of three other persons, and that Case seems to admit
an occupancy of the Tithe, the Question being concerning the Tithe only.

Question will be, That if Taverner, being Occupant of the House and Land,
shall not have the Tithe whereof Astly was in possession at the time of his
death, what shall become of this Tithe, during the lives of the Cestuy que
vies? which is the hard question.

And as to this Question;

If a Rent be granted to A. for the life of B. and A. dies, living B I conceive
this Rent to be determined upon the death of A. equally, as if granted to him
for his own life. I say determined, because it is not properly extinguished,
nor is it suspended.

For Extinguishment of a Rent is properly when the Rent is absolutely conveyed
to him, who has the Land out of which the Rent issues; or the Land is conveyed
to him to whom the Rent is granted.

And Suspension of a Rent is when either the Rent or Land are so conveyed, not
absolutely and finally, but for a certain time after which the Rent will be
again revived.

The Reasons why it is determined are, because a thing so granted, as none can
take by the Grant, is a void Grant, that is, as if no such Grant had been.
Therefore a Grant to the Bishop of L. and his Successors, when there is no
Bishop in being at the time, or to the Dean and Chapter of Paul's, or to the
Mayor and Commonalty of such a place, when there is no Dean or Mayor living at
the time of the Grant, is a void Grant, that is, as if it had not been, though
such a Grant by way of Remainder may be good. By the same Reason it follows,
That when any thing is so granted, that upon some contingent happening, none can
take by the Grant, nor possibly have the thing granted, both the Grant, and
thing granted, must necessarily determine; for what difference is there between
saying that Rent can no longer be had, when it is determined by his death for
whose life it was granted, and saying none can longer have this Rent when it
determines by the death of the Grantee pur auter vie? For there is no Assignee,
Occupant, or any other, can possibly have it; and it is therefore determined.

In an Action of Trover and Conversion brought by Salter against Boteler,
Salter versus Boteler. 44 El. Cr. 901.
the Defendant justifies for that one Robert Bash was seized in Fee of Twenty
Acres in Stansted, and granted a Rentcharge to another Robert Bash, his
Executors and Assigns, during the life of Frances the Grantees Wife, of Sixteen
pounds per Annum. The Grantee dies, and Frances his wife takes Letters of
Administration; and the Defendant, as her Servant, and by her command took a
Distress in the said Twenty Acres for Rent arrear, and impounded them; And
Traverseth the Conversion and taking in other manner.

Upon Demurrer to this Plea, all the Court held the Plea to be bad, and gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

1. Because the Rent was determined by the death of the Grantee, because no
Occupant could be of it.

2. Because the Feme was no Assignee by her taking of Administration.

3. None can make title to a Rent to have it against the terr Tenant, unless he
be party to the Deed, or make sufficient title under it.

Moore 664. p. 907. Salter verse. Boteler.
The same Case is in Moore, reported to be so adjudg'd, because the Rent was
determined by the death of the Grantee; and Popham said, That if a Rent be
granted pur auter vie, the Remainder over to another, and the Grantee dies,
living Cestuy que vie, the Remainder shall commence forthwith, because the Rent
for life determined by the death of the Grantee; which last Case is good Law:
For the particular Estate in the Rent must determine when none could have it;
and when the particular Estate was determined the Remainder took place.

And as the Law is of a Rent, so must it be of any thing which lies in Grant,
as a several Tithe does, whereof there can be no Occupant, when it is granted
pur auter vie, and the Grantee dies in the life of Cestuy que vie.

20 H. 6. f. 7, 8.
This is further cleared by a Case in 20 H. 6. A man purchased of an Abbot
certain Land in Fee-farm, rendering to the Abbot and his Successors, Twenty
pounds yearly Rent; If all the Monks dye, this Rent determined, because there
is none that can have it: It lies not in Tenure, and therefore cannot Escheat;
and though new Monks may be made, it must be by a new Creation wholly.

In vacancy of a Parson or Vicar, the Ordinary, ex officio, shall cite to pay
the Tithes. Fitz. N. Br. Consultation Let. G.
This Case agrees exactly with the Grant of a Rent or other thing which lies in
Grant, pur auter vie, the Grantee dying, the Rent determines, though it were a
good Grant, and enjoyed at first, yet when after none can have it, it is
determined. So was the Rent to the Abbot, and his Successors, a good Rent, and
well enjoyed. But when after all the Covent died, so as none could have the
Rent, for the Body Politic was destroyed, the Rent determined absolutely.

By this I hold it clear, That if a man demise Land to another, and his Heirs
habendum pur auter vie, or grant a Rent to a man and his Heirs, pur auter vie,
though the Heir shall have this Land or Rent after the Grantees death, yet he
has it not as a special Occupant (as the common expression is) for if so, such
Heir were an Occupant, which he is not, for a special Occupant must be an
Occupant, but he takes it as Heir, not of a Fee, but of a descendible Freehold;
and not by way of limitation, as a Purchase, to the Heir, but by descent,
though some Opinions are that the Heir takes it by special limitation; as when
an Estate for life is made, the Remainder to the right Heirs of J. S. the Heir
takes it by special limitation, if there be an Heir when the particular Estate
ends. But I see not how, when Land or Rent is granted to a man and his Heirs,
pur auter vie, the Heir should take by special limitation after the Grantees
death, when the whole Estate was so in the first Grantee, that he might assign
it to whom he pleased, and so he who was intended to take by special limitation
after the Grantees death, should take nothing at all.

But to inherit as Heir a descendible Freehold, when the Father or other
Ancestor had not disposed it, agrees with the ancient Law, as appears by
Bracton, which obiter in Argument is denied in Walsinghams Case.

Si autem fiat donatio sic, Bract. l. 2. de acquirendo rerum dominico, c. 9.
Ad vitam donatoris donatorio and haeredibus suis si donatorius praemoriatur
haeredes ei succedent, tenendum ad vitam donatoris, and per Assisam mortis
Antecessoris recuperabunt qui obiit ut de feodo.

Here it is evident, That Land granted to a man and his Heirs for the life of
the Grantor, the Grantee dying in the life of the Grantor, the Heirs of the
Grantee were to succeed him, and should recover by a Writ of Mordancester in
case of Abatement (which infallibly proves the Heir takes by descent) who died
seized as of a Fee, but not died seized in Fee.

1. Hence I conclude, That if a man dye seized, pur auter vie, of a Rent, a
Tithe, an Advowson in gross, Common in gross, or other thing, whereof there can
be no Occupancy, either directly or by consequence, as adjuncts of something
else by the death of the Grantee, in all these Cases the Grant is determined,
and the Interest stands as before any Grant made.

2. If any man dye seized of Land, pur auter vie, as also of many of these
things in gross, pur auter vie, by distinct Grant from the Land. The Occupant
of the Land shall have none of these things, but they are in the same state,
and the Grants determine as if the Grantee had died seized of nothing whereof
there could be any occupancy.

But I must remember you, that in this last part of my Discourse, where I said,
That if a Rent, a Tithe, a Common or Advowson in gross, or the like, lying in
Grant, were granted pur auter vie, and the Grantee died, living Cestuy que vie
that these Grants were determined, my meaning was, and is, where such Rent,
Tithe, or other things, are singly granted, and not where they are granted,
together with Land, or any other thing out of which Rent may issue, with
Reservation of a Rent out of the whole.

For although a Rent cannot issue out of things which lie in Grant, as not
distrainable in their nature, yet being granted together with Land, with
reservation of a Rent, though the Rent issue properly and only out of the Land,
and not out of those things lying in Grant, as appears by Littleton; yet those
are part of the Consideration for payment of the Rent, Cok. Litt. f. 142. a.
144. a.
as well as the Land is.

In such case when the Rent remains still payable by the Occupant, it is
unreasonable that the Grant should determine as to the Tithe, or as to any
other thing lying in Grant, which passed with the Land as part of the
Consideration for which the Rent was payable, and remain to the Lessor as
before they were granted; for so the Lessor gives a Consideration for paying a
Rent which he enjoys, and has notwithstanding the Consideration given back
again.

And this is the present Case, being stripped and singled from such things as
intricate it: That Doctor Mallory, Prebend of the Prebendary of Woolney,
consisting of Glebe-land, a House, Barns, and Tithe of Woolney, and thereof
seized in the right of his Prebendary, makes a Lease to Astly of the Prebend.
una cum the Glebe, House, Barn, and Tithe for Three Lives, rendering the
accustomed and ancient Rent of Five pounds Twelve shillings: Astly demiseth to
Taverner the House, Glebe, and Barn for a year, reserving Twenty shillings, and
dies, the Cestuy que vies living.

As I concluded before, Taverner is Occupant of the House, Barn, and
Glebe-land, and consequently liable to pay the whole Rent, being Five pounds
twelve shillings yearly, though the Land, House, and Barn be found of the
yearly value of Twenty shillings only; but because the Rent cannot issue out of
Tithes, or things that lie in Grant, it issues only out of the House, Barn, and
Land which may be distrain'd on.

2. If Taverner, being Occupant of the Land, shall not have the Tithes which
remained in Astly, according to his Lease for three Lives at the time of his
death, and whereof by their nature there can be no direct Occupancy. It
follows, that the Lease made by Doctor Mallory is determined as to the Tithe,
for no other can have them; yet continues in force as to the Land and House,
and all the Rent reserved, which seems strange, the Land and Tithe being
granted by the same Demise for three Lives, which still continue: yet the Lease
to be determined as to part.

3. Though the Rent issue not out of the Tithe, yet the Tithe was as well a
Consideration for the payment of the Rent, as the Land and Houses were; and it
seems unreasonable that the Lessor, Doctor Mallory, should by act in Law have
back the greatest Consideration granted for payment of the Rent, which is the
Tithe, and yet have the Rent wholly out of the Land by act in Law too, which
cannot yield it.

4. Though Doctor Mallory could not have reserved a Rent out of the Tithe only,
to bind his Successor upon a Lease for Lives, more than out of a Fair, though
it were as the ancient Rent, and had been usually answered for the Fair; as is
resolved in Jewel Bishop of Sarum's Case: Jewell's Case 5 Rep.
Yet in this Case, where the Tithe, together with Land, out of which Rent could
issue was demis'd; for the accustomed Rent, the Successor could never avoid the
Lease, either in the whole, or as to the Tithe only.

13 Eliz. c. 10.
This seems clear by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 10. which says, All Leases
made by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical persons, having any Lands, Tenements,
Tithes, or Hereditaments, parcel of the Possessions of any Spiritual Promotion,
other than for One and twenty years, or three Lives, whereupon the accustomed
yearly Rent, or more, shall be reserved, shall be void.

Cokes Litt. f. 142. a. f. 144. a.
Whence it is apparent, this Statute intended that Leases in some sense might be
made of Tithes for One and twenty years, or Three Lives, and an ancient Rent
reserved; but of a bare Tithe only a Rent could not be reserved, according to
Jewell's Case: for neither Distress nor Assise can be of such Rent, though an
Assise may be de Portione Decimarum, as is clear by the Lord Dyer, 7 E. 6. and
the difference rightly stated.

Therefore a Lease of Tithe and Land, out of which a Rent may issue, and the
accustomed Rent may be reserved, must be good within the intention of the
Statute, or Tithe could in no sense be demis'd.

5. Taverner the Lessee being Occupant here by his possession becomes subject
to the payment of the Rent, to Waste, to Forfeiture, Conditions, and all things
that Astly the Lessee, or his Assignee, if he had made any, had been subject
to: Also

Coke's Litt. 41.
He must claim by a que Estate from Astly, he must averr the Life of Cestuy que
vie, so as he becomes, to all intents, an Assignee in Law of the first Lessee.

6. Without question, the Occupant being chargeable with the Rent, shall by
Equity have the Tithe, which was the principal Consideration for payment of the
Rent, when no man can have the benefit of the Tithe but the Lessor, Doctor
Mallory, who gave it as a Consideration for the Rent, which he must still have.
Therefore

I conceive the Reason of Law here ought necessarily to follow the Reason of
Equity; and that the Occupant shall have the Tithe, not as being immediate
Occupant of the Tithe whereof no occupancy can be, but when by his possession
of the Land he becomes Occupant, and the Law casts the Freehold upon him, he
likewise thereby becomes an Assignee in Law of Astly's Lease and Interest, and
consequently of the Tithe.

An ancient Rent reserved within the Statute of 1. or 13. of the Queen upon a
Lease of One and twenty years, or Three Lives, is by express intention of that
Statute a Rent for public use and maintenance of Hospitality by Churchmen,
as is resolved in Elsemere's Case, Elsmers C. 5. Rep.
the 5. Rep. and therefore if the Lessee provide not an Assignee to answer the
Rent to the Successors of the Lessor for the ends of that Law, the Law will do
it for him, and none fitter to be so than the Occupant, in case of a Lease pur
auter vie, as this is.

And if the Occupant, being Assignee, has passed all his Estate and Interest
to the Plaintiff has good cause of Action for the Tithe converted by the
Defendant.

Pasch. 22 Car. II. Judgment for the Defendant. Three Justices against the
Chief Justice.

Trin. 20 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 2043. Harrison versus Doctor Burwell. In a
Prohibition, for his Marriage with Jane, the Relict of Bartholomew Abbot, his
Great Uncle.
The Questions are;

Thomas Harrison the Plaintiff, with Jane his now wife, being the Relict of
Bartholomew Abbot his great Uncle, that is, his Grandfathers Brother by the
Mothers side, be a lawful marriage within the Act of 32 H. 8. cap. 38?

Act, Whether the Kings Temporal Courts are properly Judges of it, because the
unlawfulness, or lawfulness of it, by that Act, does depend upon its being a
marriage within or without the Levitical Degrees? For if within those Degrees,
it is not a lawful marriage by that Act. And the right knowledge of marriages
within or without those Degrees, must arise from the right knowledge ot the
Scriptures, of the Old Testament, specially the Interpretation of which has
been, and regularly is of Ecclesiastic Conizance, and not of Lay or Temporal
Conizance in regard of the Language wherein it was writ, and the received
Interpretations concerning it in all succession of time.

Temporal Courts have by that Act of 32. or any other, special Conizance of the
Levitical Degrees, and of marriages within them: And though this be no marriage
within the Levitical Degrees (it being articled in general to be an Incestuous
marriage) Whether the Temporal Courts of the King can take Conizance in
general, that it is not an Incestuous marriage, by the Act of 32 H. 8. and
consequently prohibit the questioning of it in the Ecclesiastical Courts?
Because the words of that Act are, That no marriage shall be impeached (Gods
Law except) without the Levitical Degrees, and therefore within the meaning of
that Act: Some marriages might be impeached according to Gods Law, though such
marriage were out of the Levitical Degrees, whereof this may be one.

As to the first Question, The marriage of Harrison and Jane Act of 32 H. 8.
cap. 38.

As to the Second, I hold the Judges of the Temporal Courts Acts of Parliament,
full Conizance of marriages within or without the Levitical Degrees.

As to the Third, I hold that, as the Law stands at this time, Temporal Courts
at Westminster have full Conizance what marriages are incestuous, or not,
according to the Law of the Kingdom, and may prohibit the Ecclesiastic Courts
from questioning marriages, as Incestuous, which the said Courts in their
Judgment shall conceive not to be so. Yet I shall agree, the Ecclesiastic
Courts may proceed in order to Divorcement and punishment concerning diverse
marriages, and the Kings Courts at Westminster ought not to prohibit them,
though such marriages be wholly without the Levitical Degrees.

I shall begin in some measure, first to clear the Second Question, viz.
Whether the Kings Temporal Courts have any Conizance of the Subject matter,
namely, what marriages are within or without the Levitical Degrees? Questions
of that nature being (as must be confessed) regularly to be decided by the Law
Divine, whereof the Ecclesiastic Courts have generally the Conizance: For it
were improper for us to resolve a Question in a Law, when it was left to an
after Inquiry, whether we had any Conizance of, or skill in that Law, by which
the Question was to be determined.

There was a time when the Temporal Courts had no Conizance of lawful or
unlawful marriages; so was there a time when the Ecclesiastical Courts had no
Conizance of matters Testamentary and probat of Wills, Hensloes C. 9. Rep.
but the Law-making power of the Kingdom gave them that which they had not
before, and the same has given the Temporal Courts this now, which they had
not in former times. By Conizance in this sense, I intend Jurisdiction and
Judicial Power, as far as it extends, concerning the lawfulness of marriages,
which an Act of Parliament has given them.

Notwithstanding it will be said, They want knowledge or skill in the Law by
which it must be determined what are, or are not, the Levitical Degrees; for
they are not studied in that Divine Law, they want skill in the Original in
which it was written, and in the History by which it is to be interpreted.

As specious as this seems, it is a very empty Objection; for no man is
supposed necessarily ignorant of a Law which he is bound to observe. It is
irrational to suppose men necessarily ignorant of those Laws, for breach of
which they are to be punished, and therefore no Canon of Divine or Human Law,
ought to be supposed unknown to them, who must be punished for transgressing
them. We are obliged not to marry in the prohibited Degrees, not to be
Heretical, or the like; therefore we are supposed to know both.

Nor is it an Exception to disable a man of having any Church Dignity whatever,
that he is not knowing in the Hebrew or Greek Tongue. All States receive the
Scriptures in that Language wherein the several States think fit to publish
them for common use; and it is but very lately that the Christian Churches have
become knowing in the Original Tongues wherein the Scriptures were written;
which is not a knowledge of obligation, and required in all, or any, but
acknowledged accidental, and enjoyed by some.

If it were enacted by Parliament, That matters of Inheritance of Theft and
Murder, should be determined in the Courts of Westminster, according to the
Laws of Moses, this Objection would not stand in the way, no more can it in
this particular concerning Incestuous marriages.

The Laws of one people have frequently been transferred over and become the
Laws of another: As those of the Twelve Tables from Greece to Rome; in like
manner those Laws of the Rhodians for Maritime Affairs, made the Law of the
Romans; the Laws of England into Ireland: and many such might be instanced.

As another lymn of this Objection, it is said, This Act 13 H. 8. seems rather
a directing Act, how the Courts Ecclesiastical should proceed touching
marriages out of the Levitical Degrees, than an Act impowering the Temporal
Courts to prohibit their proceeding.

When the King's Laws prohibit any thing to be done, there are regular ways to
punish the Offender: As for common Offenses by Indictment or Information.
Erroneous Judgments are remedied by Writs of Error or Appeal. Incroaching
Jurisdiction by Courts where no Writ of Error lies, is corrected by the King's
Writs of Prohibitions. It is most proper for the King to hinder the violating
of his Laws, by impeaching of marriages which the Law will not have impeached,
by incroaching Jurisdiction, as to hinder them from impeaching or drawing into
question Contracts for Lands, or other things whereof they have not Conizance.
And the King has never otherwise remedied that fault against his Laws, but by
his Prohibitions out of his Courts of Justice.

Nor is it consonant to Law or common Reason, That they who offend, by
incroaching Jurisdiction against Law, should be the redress allowed by Law only
against such incroachment, which were to provide against doing wrong by him who
does it.

By the Act, no person of what estate or condition soever, Rep. 1, 2. p.m. but
that was Rep. again 1 El. c. 1.
is to be admitted to any of the Spiriual Courts, and to any Process, Plea, or
Allegation, contrary to the Act.

This Act therefore never intended the Ecclesiastic Courts should have any
Judicial power to determine or judge what marriages were within or without the
Levitical Degrees, contrary or not contrary to the Act, when it admits not any
Process, Plea, or Allegation in a Spiritual Court, contrary to the Act.

For it is impossible that Court should have Conizance to determine the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of a marriage, which is forbid to admit Process,
Plea, or Allegation against such marriage, if it be lawful.

1. This marriage not prohibited in the 18. of Leviticus, nor the same degree
with any there prohibited.

2. If marriages, neither prohibited in terminis in Leviticus, nor being in the
same degree with a marriage there prohibited should be unlawful, there would be
no stop or terminus of unlawful marriages.

3. The 20. of Leviticus prohibits no other marriages than the 18. of Leviticus
does, but appoints the punishments, which the Eighteenth does not.

4. Not now to determine, Whether the marriages mentioned within Leviticus 18.
be only prohibited, or marriages within the degrees there mentioned: The
Talmudists hold the first; the Karaits the second strongly: who in most concur
with our Parochial Table.

5. This marriage not prohibited by the Canons 1 Jac. Can. 99. nor contained in
the Parochial Table.

6. Marriages between the Children and Parents in the ascending line
intermediately prohibited; and for what Reasons.

7. How the words (Gods Law except) in the Act of 32 H. 8. and the words (or
otherwise by Holy Scripture) in the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 16. are to be intended.

8. The Defendant does not Article, That the Uncle, Bartholomew Abbot, did
carnally know Jane his wife, and then the marriage is not against Gods Law, by
28 H. 8. c. 7

The mischief by the Act of 32 H. 8. was, That the Bishop of Rome had always
troubled the mere Jurisdiction and Regal Power of the Realm of England, and
unquieted the Subject by making that unlawful, which by Gods word is lawful,
both in marriages and other things.

Therefore it is thought convenient for this time, that two things be with
diligence provided for.

The first was against dissolution of marriages consummate with bodily
knowledge, upon pretense of Pre-contracts.

The other by reason of other prohibitions, to marry than Gods Law admits;
As in Kindred or Affinity between Cosen Germans, and so to the fourth and fifth
Degree; which else were lawful, and be not prohibited by Gods Law. -- Again,
that freedom in them was given by Gods Law.

To remedy these two mischiefs, All marriages consummate with bodily knowledge
between lawful persons, and all persons are declared to be lawful to marry
which be not prohibited by Gods Law, are made lawful by Authority of
Parliament, notwithstanding any Prae-contract, etc.

But this part of the Clause to make good marriages notwithstanding
pre-contracts, is repealed, 2 E. 6. c. 23. 1 El. c. 1.

The other Clause remains, which declares all persons lawful to marry who are
not prohibited by Gods Law, but is of no use to remedy the second mischief.

For if the Pope shall expound what persons of Consanguinity or Affinity are
prohibited by Gods Law to marry, he will expound Gods Law as the Canons and
Popes formerly did.

That by the Word of God no man is to uncover the nakedness of the Kindred of
his Flesh, and therefore marriage is prohibited as far as there are names of
Kindred and memory, which is the reason of the Old Canon Law to prohibit to the
Seventh Degree, for further they had not names of Kindred. And if it would have
remedied the Inconvenience, to say in the Act, That all marriages were lawful,
not prohibited by Gods Law, and leave the Pope then to resolve what was
prohibited by Gods Law, it was to no purpose to have added more words to the
Act, but to have ended there, and the inconvenience of prohibiting marriages,
for Consanguinity or Affinity, when God did not prohibit, had still remained.

But the Act goes on, And that no Prohibition or Reservation (Gods Law except)
should impeach any marriage for Consanguinity or Affinity, for so it must be
understood without the Levitical Degrees, for that was the second thing
specially to be provided for; as the Act says.

Not that no marriage should be impeached without the Levitical Degrees, which
the Act intended not at all, nor was it the thing to be provided for, but not
to be impeached for Kindred or Affinity without the Levitical Degrees; as in
Cosen Germans, and so forth.

For who will say, That by those words no marriage shall be impeached without
the Levitical Degrees, the Act intended that no marriage for natural Impotency,
for plurality of Husbands or Wives for Adultery, and the like, should not be
impeached, though it were out of the Levitical Degrees.

For the Act had no aspect upon such marriages, but to hinder impeaching
marriages for Consanguinity or Affinity, without the Levitical Degrees, which
was the second thing by the Act, to be at that time diligently provided for.

Therefore those words, Gods Law except, must referr to such other marriages,
as by Gods Law might be impeached, and not to any for Consanguinity or
Affinity, for had not those words been the generality of the Expression, No
marriage shall be impeached without the Levitical Degrees, had excluded the
impeaching marriages for plurality of Wives or Husbands, at a time for
Impotency and for Adultery, as Sir Edward Coke observes, at the end of his
Comment upon this Statute in his Second Institutes.

But if those words, No marriage shall be impeached, Gods Law except, shall be
understood, That no marriage should be impeached, not prohibited by the
Scripture, viz. Gods Law. Then

1. There was no use of naming the Levitical Degrees at all.

2. The Pope would have interpreted the Scripture (which belonged to him) to
have prohibited all marriages between Kindred, as anciently, and then the end
of the Act had been frustrate.

3. Wherein was the Kings Jurisdiction and Regal Power righted, if prohibiting
of marriage for Consanguinity or Affinity, were to be proceeded in as formerly.

But all marriages without the Levitical Degrees, being made lawful, because
the Secular Judges by the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 7. had certain Conizance of them
both expressly, and in Consequence they were no more of Ecclesiastical Conizance
than Contracts concerning Land or Lay Chattels were, and therefore the
questioning of them to be prohibited as the other.

This was to complain of the Pope as a wrong doer against the Law of God, viz.
Holy Scripture, and diligently to provide remedy for it according to the
Scripture, whereof the wrong doer was the only decisive and infallible
Interpreter, as the Church then believed: which is redressing a wrong by the
Judgment of the wrong doer.

Anciently, before any Act of Parliament altered the Law, the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of marriages, and which were incestuous, which not, were only of
Ecclesiastical Conuzance, and the Temporal Courts meddled not to ratify or
prohibit any marriage.

The Statute de Circumspecte agatis.

13 E. 1.
Circumspecte agatis de Negotiis tangentibus Episcopum Norwic. and ejus Clerum
non puniendo eos, si placitum tenuerint in Curia Christianitatis de his quae
mere sunt spiritualia, viz. de Correctionibus quas faciant pro mortali peccato,
viz. pro fornicatione, adulterio, and hujusmodi.

Mag. Chart. Cok. f. 488. upon that Statute.
Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon this Statute, and those words, viz. pro
fornicatione, adulterio, and hujusmodi, which by the express words of the
Statute are said to be mere Spiritualia, says, and truly, That the word
hujusmodi must be understood of offenses of like nature with Fornication and
Adultery; as for solicitation of a woman's Chastity, which is less than
Fornication or Adultery; and for Incest, which is greater. So as the Conuzance
of Incest was merely Spiritual, and concerned not the lay Law at all originally.

2. There was no time wherein some marriages were not lawful, and others
unlawful, but the Judgment of both was merely Ecclesiastic; insomuch, That if
a man were questioned in the Spiritual Court for a lawful marriage, the
Temporal Law would afford him no Remedy by Prohibition, or otherwise, because
they neither had any Jurisdiction of that Subject matter, nor were presumed to
have any knowledge in those Laws, by which such matters were to be determined,
which were the Laws of God, contained in the Scriptures and the Canon Law,
either by Councils, or the Popes Decretals admitted in the Kingdom.

3. Although the Canon Law had been formerly relaxed, and the lawfulness of
marriage enlarged by Councils and Decretals, as they might be, and were, so as
sundry marriages became lawful, which were before Canonically prohibited.

Thus it happened in the Council of Lateran, Council. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3.
1215. Seld. de Jure Nature. f. 608.
under Pope Innocent the Third; In quo Sancitum prohibitionem Copulae
Conjugalis quartum Consanguinitatis and Affinitatis gradum, non excedere,
quoniam in ulterioribus gradibus, jam non potest absque gravi dispendio
hujusmodi prohibitio generaliter observari; (for before many Degrees beyond the
fourth were forbid) yet could the Common Law take no notice of this enlargement
of lawful marriages, nor did not.

Because the lawfulness still depended upon the Law Divine, and the Canon Law,
as then it stood by that alteration whereof the Secular Judges had no Conuzance
or Skill to Judge; nor is there any Prohibition in the Register, or elsewhere
to be found, concerning the questioning of any marriage in the Spiritual Court,
in all the time preceding the Acts of Parliament, nor long after some of them.

But if at the time of this Council it had been enacted by Parliament, That all
marriages should be lawful after the fourth Degree from Cosen Germans
inclusively, then if such marriages had been questioned in the Spiritual
Courts, a Prohibition had lain, because a marriage was questioned which an Act
of Parliament had expressly made lawful, and whereof the Secular Judges were the
most Conuzant.

But if then, by an Act of Parliament, all marriages had been made lawful, not
prohibited by Gods Law, or not prohibited in the Old or New Testament, though
by that Act all marriages prohibited by Canon Law, and not by Scripture, had
been made lawful; yet the Temporal Courts had thereby no manner of Jurisdiction
in Cases of Marriage, because the lawfulness of them were still to be measured
by a Law out of their Conuzance, that is, by the Divine Law: And such an Act of
Parliament was directory only to the proceeding of the Spiritual Judges in
Cases of Matrimony, and no way advancing the Jurisdiction of the Temporal
Courts, nor enabling them to prohibit the questioning of any marriage.

The Law and Reason of it being thus stated before the Acts of Parliament of 25
H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 28 H. 8. c. 16. 32 H. 8. c. 38. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 28
H. 8. c. 7. 28 H. 8. c. 16. 32 H. 8. c. 38.
We will see what alteration was induced by these respective Statutes in order.
And first the Act of 25 H. 8. has these words -- Since many inconveniences
have fallen, as well within this Realm, as in others, by reason of marrying
within the Degrees prohibited by Gods Law.

(That is to say)

The Son to marry the Mother.

The Son to marry the Stepmother.

The Brother to marry the Sister.

The Father to marry his Sons daughter.

The Father to marry his Daughters daughter.

The Son to marry his Fathers daughter, procreated and born by his Stepmother.

The Son to marry his Aunt, his Fathers Sister or Mothers Sister.

The Son to marry his Uncles Wife.

The Father to marry his Sons Wife.

The Brother to marry his Brothers Wife.

A man to marry his Wives daughter.

His Wives Sons daughter.

His Wives Daughters daughter.

His Wives Sister.

Which Degrees 1. are the Degrees expressly mentioned in the Eighteenth Chapter
of Leviticus, and were for matter and language by this Act first made of Lay
Conizance.

It declares those Marriages to be plainly prohibited by Gods Law, that
notwithstanding they have sometimes proceeded by color of Dispensation by man's
power, which ought not to be; For no man can dispense with Gods Law, as the
Clergy in the Convocation, and most of the famous Universities of Christendom,
have affirmed, etc.

Then it enacts a Separation by definitive Sentence in the Spiritual Courts of
the Kingdom, without Prohibition from, or Appeal to, Rome of such marriages.

The next Act of Parliament concerning marriages prohibited, 28 H. 8. c. 7.
is 28 H. 8. c. 7.

By which Act the former Act of 25. is repealed, not for the matter of the
marriages there prohibited, as is said in that Act, and therefore

In the same words, The marriages within those Degrees are recited again, and
declared to be prohibited by Gods Law.

But with these differences, that in the Prohibition,

1. Of the Sons marrying the Stepmother, is added, Carnally known by his
Father.

2. In the Prohibition of marrying his Uncles Wife, is added, Carnally known by
his Uncle.

3. In the Prohibition of the Father to marry his Sons Wife, is added, Carnally
known by his Son.

4. In that of the Brother to marry his Brothers Wife, is added, Carnally known
by his Brother.

5. In those of marrying a man's Wives daughter, So Sir Edw. Coke referrs the
Levitical Degrees to this Act. Second Inst. f. 683.
or her Sons daughter, or her Daughters daughter, is added, having the Carnal
knowledge of his Wife. By this Act these Degrees were the second time made of
Lay Conizance.

Another alteration in this Act from the former, is, That if any man carnally
know any woman, all persons, in any Degree of Consanguinity or Affinity of the
parties so offending, shall be adjudg'd to be within the said Prohibitions, in
like manner as if the parties so carnally knowing one another had been married.
For example, If a man carnally know a woman, not marrying her, he is prohibited
to marry her Daughter, or Daughters daughter, and e converso.

In all other Clauses this Act, and the former of 25. are verbatim the same,
and this Act is in force.

Observations upon those two Acts 25 and 28 H. 8.
1. That by neither of these Acts, no marriage prohibited before, either by
Gods Law, or the Canon Law, differenced from it is made lawful.

2. That the marriages particularly declared by the Acts to be against Gods
Law, cannot be dispensed with; but other marriages, not by the Acts declared in
particular to be against Gods Law, are left, statu quo prius, as to
dispensations with them.

3. That neither of these Acts gave any Jurisdiction to the Temporal Courts,
concerning marriages, more than they had before, but were Acts directory only
to the Ecclesiastic proceeding in matters of marriage.

4. Neither of these Acts say or declare, That the Degrees rehearsed in the
said Acts, and thereby declared to be prohibited by Gods Law, are all the
Degrees of marriage prohibited by Gods Law.

For take the words at most advantage for that purpose, viz. Since many
inconveniences have fallen by marrying within the Degrees prohibited by Gods
Law. That is to say,

The Son to marry the Mother, the Brother the Sister, etc. and that the
enumeration in the Act of prohibited Degrees, had gone no further than to the
Degrees of Consanguinity, not enumerating any Degrees of Affinity; as then it
had been no Inference to conclude that there were no more prohibited Degrees by
Gods Law intended by the Statute, than the Degrees of Consanguinity only.

So now no Degrees being mentioned in the Statute to be prohibited by Gods Law,
but those which are expressed, it cannot thence be concluded, That the Statute
intended no other than those to be prohibited by Gods Law.

For those are therefore mentioned to be prohibited, because they were Degrees
signally expressed, and concerning which no question or doubt could be made.

In the same manner is it if a Statute should say, Since many Inconveniences
have happened, by doing things prohibited by the Kings Laws; that is to say, By
Depopulation of Farms, by subtracting of Tithes, by committing Dilapidations,
and of many other things forbidden by the Law.

It would not be concluded, That the things so enumerated, were all the things
prohibited by the Kings Laws, no more can it that the enumerated Degrees of
prohibited Marriages in the Act by Gods Law, are all the Degrees by Gods Law
prohibited.

The next Statute is an Act of the same Parliament, 28 H. 8. c. 16
28 H. 8. c. 16. making invalid Licenses, Dispensations, Bulls, and other
Instruments purchased from Rome: Which Act has these words;

That all Marriages solemnized within this Realm, By this Act the Levitical
Degrees are made the third time of Lay Conizance.
or in any the Kings Dominions, before the Third day of November, in the Six
and twentieth year of the King, whereof there is no Divorce had by the
Ecclesiastic Laws of the Realm, and which be not prohibited by Gods Law,
limited and declared in the Act made this present Parliament, for establishing
the Kings Succession, or otherwise by Holy Scripture, shall be lawful and
effectual by Authority of this present Parliament.

1. By this Law all Marriages made before that Third of November, 26 H. 8. no
divorce being had, are made good and lawful.

2. All Marriages made before that time, and not prohibited in the Degrees
limited and declared in the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 7. if the Act had rested there,
and gone no further, had been made good; and if any of them had been
questioned, a Prohibition would have lain out of the Temporal Courts, because
the unlawfulness of marrying was restrained to the Degrees limited in 28 H. 8.
c. 7. whereof the Temporal Judges had perfect Conizance, as of a lay Law,

But the Act going further, and saying, Prohibited by Gods Law, limited in the
Act of 28. or otherwise by Holy Scripture, leaves, as is objected, all
Conuzance of Marriages as before, to the Ecclesiastic Courts, though not so
amply.

So by those added words, Or otherwise by holy Scripture, the Act made all
Marriages solemnized before that time, not prohibited by Holy Scripture, good
and lawful; by which Act, though Marriages prohibited only by the Canon Law,
divided from Scripture, were made good.

Yet the trial was, Whether the Marriage was prohibited by Holy Scripture?
which being only of Ecclesiastic Conizance, they only could judge of the
lawfulness.

And that the Temporal Courts could by that Act no more judge what Marriage was
lawful or Incestuous by the Holy Scripture, than what was Schism or Heresy by
the Holy Scripture.

3. By this Act it is evident, The Lawmakers thought some Marriages were, or
might be prohibited by Gods Law, not limited in the Act of 28 H. 8.

So if the Act had limited all Marriages lawful, but those forbidden in the
Five Books of Moses, or in the Book of Moses called Leviticus; though the
unlawfulness of Marriage had been more restrained under that expression, than
under the general expression of Holy Scripture. Yet

Those Books being part of Holy Scripture, the Secular Judges had no more
Conuzance of the parts than of the whole.

And so would it have been if the Act had restrained the unlawfulness of
Marriage to the Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus, that being a part of the Book
called Leviticus, the Temporal Courts could have no more Conuzance of that part
or Chapter of the Book, than of the whole Book. This I think is the full of the
Objection.

The last Law, and which is Cardo Questionis, as being pleaded by the Plaintiff
Harrison in the Books, is the Act of 32 H. 8. cap. 38. consisting of several
parts, 32 H. 8. c. 28.
some whereof are Repealed; as the branch concerning Pre-contracts. I shall
therefore examine that Act as it stands in force.

1. Marriages between Cosen Germans, and all Marriages onwards between
Collateral Cosens, which were prohibited very far, before the Council of
Lateran, and since it, those to the fourth Degree, to the making of this Act,
are made lawful, and declared not to be against the Law of God, viz, in these
words, -- And be not prohibited by Gods Law.

2. Restraining of Marriage by reason of Carnal Knowledge within any of those
Degrees, is expressly taken away, Coke's Mag. Chart. f. 6. 84.
and the Marriages declared not to be against the Law of God. In these, Sir
Edward Coke in his Comment upon this Statute in his Magna Charta, is express.

So if any Marriage within those Degrees shall be questioned as Incestuous in
the Spiritual Courts, a Prohibition will lie upon this Act, because the
Marriages, by one part of the Act, are declared expressly,

1. Not to be against the Law of God.

2. By another, All Marriages contracted between lawful persons, as we declare
all persons to be lawful that are not prohibited by Gods Law to marry, are
lawful.

Joining then those two Clauses together, That all Marriages are lawful, not
prohibited by the Law of God; and that such Marriages of Cosen Germans, and so
onwards, are not prohibited by Gods Law: It is manifest that Prohibitions will
lie in such Cases.

But these Marriages concern not the Case in question.

The next Clause in the Act, and upon which the present Case stands,

That no Reservation or Prohibition (Gods Law except) shall trouble or impeach
any Marriage without the Levitical Degrees.

The clear sense of which Clause must be, That all Marriages are lawful, which
are not prohibited within the Levitical Degrees, or otherwise by Gods Law.

So as the prohibiting of Marriages within the Levitical Degrees, and within
Gods Law, whereof the Levitical Degrees are a part, is no more or less in
effect, than to say, All Marriages shall be lawful that Gods Law does not
prohibit.

Whence is collected, That of Gods Law in general, or of the Levitical Degrees
in particular, being a part of that Law, the Temporal Judges had no Conuzance
after this Act more than before, and that this Act, excepting in the matter of
Marriages to the fourth Degree, and onwards, which it declares not to be
against Gods Law, was only directory to the Ecclesiastic Courts, as the former
Statutes were, and gave the Temporal Courts no Jurisdiction to prohibit
questioning any Marriage but those of Cosen Germans and onwards.

But the Judges of the Temporal Courts have long since, and often, after the
Act of 32 H. 8. granted Prohibitions for questioning marriages out of the
Levitical Degrees, and thereby determined the lawfulness of such Prohibitions.

So as many Parliaments having past since Prohibitions granted in that kind,
without complaint of it, as is likely, but certainly without redress for it. It
is not safe, in a Case of public Law, as this is, between the Spiritual and
Temporal Jurisdiction, to change the received Law, nor do I think it is
expected.

That being taken then as settled, That the Spiritual Courts may be prohibited
to question marriages out of the Levitical Degrees.

The first question will be,

Whether any marriages be against Gods Law, but those within the Levitical
Degrees? for if none else be, the Temporal Courts, having Conuzance of
marriages within those Degrees, have consequently Conuzance of all marriages
against Gods Law. Then must the words of the Statute,

No marriage shall be impeached (Gods Law excepted) without the Levitical
Degrees, be understood thus:

No marriage shall be impeached (Gods Law excepted,) viz. his Law of the
Levitical Degrees.

Cok. Litt. f. 235. a.
The Authority which makes for this Exposition, is Coke in his Littleton, where
these words are;

For by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 38. it is declared, That all persons be
lawful (that is, may lawfully marry) that be not prohibited by Gods Law to
marry; that is to say, that be not prohibited by the Levitical Degrees.

By which evidently he makes all the Law of God which prohibits marriages, to
be only the Levitical Degrees.

But I conceive clearly, There are other Laws of God prohibiting marriages to
be made; and if made, warranting their Dissolution; and so intended to be by
this Statute of 32 H. 8. besides the Law of God in the Levitical Degrees.

1. For persons pre-contracted to another, are prohibited by Gods Law to marry
against such pre-contract.

2. Persons of natural Impotency for Generation, are prohibited to marry: For
marriage being to avoid Fornication, 1 Cor. 7. v. 2.
if it be useless for that purpose, as natural Impotency is, it is as null.

So is the Case of Sabell, and another Case of one Bury, Dyer 2 El. 178
divorced at the Suit of their Wives for Impotency.

3. Plurality of Wives or Husbands is prohibited by Gods Law, the first being
not prohibited by the Levitical Degrees.

And Sir Edward Coke, Cok. Mag. Chapter f. 687. a.
in the end of his Comment upon this Statute, notwithstanding the passage
before in his Littleton, says expressly, That marriages made with a person
pre-contracted, or with an Impotent person, could not have been questioned in
order to a Divorce, by reason of this Statute, but because such marriages are
against Gods Law; yet are they all without the Levitical Degrees. This is the
reason of the words, Gods Law except, for these marriages may be impeached,
though out of the Levitical Degrees; this answers the words, or otherwise by
Holy Scripture in 28 H. 8. c. 16. also.

In what sense any Marriages and Copulations of Man with Woman, may be said to
be Natural, and in what not.
In the first place, to speak strictly what is unnatural, it is evident that
nothing which actually is, can be said to be unnatural, for Nature is but the
production of effects from causes sufficient to produce them, and whatever is,
had a sufficient cause to make it be, else it had never been; and whatsoever is
effected by a cause sufficient to effect it, is as natural as any other thing
effected by its sufficient cause. And in this sense nothing is unnatural but
that which cannot be, and consequently nothing that is, is unnatural, and so no
Copulation of any man with any woman, nor an effect of that Copulation by
Generation, can be said unnatural; for if it were, it could not be, and if it
be, it had a sufficient cause.

There are other Males and Females, differing in their Species, which never
have Appetite of Generation to each other, and consequently can never have the
effect of that Appetite, the kinds whereof are innumerable.

Between these the acts of Generation are so unnatural, that they are
impossible, and no restraint is necessary to such by Laws, or by other Industry.

Marriages forbidden in Leviticus lawful before.
Those marriages and carnal knowledge which are amongst the most Incestuous
enumerated in Leviticus the Eighteenth, were so far from being unnatural in
primordiis rerum, that they were not only natural, but necessary, and commanded
in that Command of Increase and Multiply, that is, the Carnal knowledge between
Brothers and Sisters.

For the World could not have been peopled, but by Adams Sons going in to their
Sisters, being Brothers and Sisters by the same Father and Mother, or by a more
incestuous coupling than that; and if such Carnal knowledge had been absolutely
unnatural in any sense, it had never been either lawful or necessary: For
whatsoever is simply and strictly unnatural at any time, was always unnatural
and unchangeable.

Marriages lawful after restoring the World in Noah.
After the peopling of the World, first from Adam, then from Noah, and to the
time of Moses giving the Levitical Law: Many other marriages prohibited in the
Levitical Degrees. were not only lawful, but prosecuted with the most signal
benedictions and promises of God.

Genesis 20. v. 12.
As the marriage of Abraham with Sarah, who was his Sister, that is, the
daughter of his father, but not the daughter of his mother.

So is his answer to Abimelech, and so is the Tradition of her Genealogy.

But by the Eighteenth of Leviticus, the marriage of the Sister by the Father
is prohibited to the Son, viz.

Lev. 18. v. 9.
Thou shall not discover the shame of thy Sister, the Daughter of thy Father,
or the Daughter of thy Mother, whether she be born at home, or born without,
etc.

The next instance is of Amram, the Father of Moses and Aaron, who married
Jochobed his Fathers Sister, namely the Sister of Roath.

And Amram took Jochebed his Fathers sister to his Wife, Exodus 6. v. 20.
and she bare him Aaron and Moses.

Which marriage is prohibited in the 18. of Leviticus, viz.

Thou shall not uncover the shame of thy Fathers Sister, Lev. 18. v. 12.
for she is thy Fathers Kinswoman.

Jacob had two Wives at the same time, Leah and Rachel, Genesis c. 29. etc.
being Sisters; which is a known Story.

But by the Eighteenth of Leviticus -- Thou shall not take a Wife with her
Sister, during her life, Lev. 18. v. 18.
to vex her in uncovering her shame upon her.

Before the Prohibitions in the Eighteenth of Leviticus, and then, and after, a
man not only might, but ought, in some cases, to marry his Brothers wife, that
was, if his brother died childless, as appears in the History of Tamar and
Judah before the Levitical Law.

Then Judah said to Onan, Go into thy Brothers wife, Genesis 38. v. 8, 9
and do the Office of a Kinsman unto her, and raise up Seed unto thy Brother.

Onan would not (after a strange manner) wherefore the Lord slew him. Lev. 18.
v. 16.


But in the Eighteenth of Leviticus it is said, Deuteronomy. 25. v. 5.
Thou shall not discover the shame of thy Brothers wife, for it is thy Brothers
shame.

The sequel of that History is well known, and these Instances fully prove,
That those several marriages before instanced, and which are prohibited in the
Eighteenth of Leviticus, were lawful before, and practiced by the most
remarkable men for holiness of life.

Nachor, the brother of Abraham, married Milcah, his brother Harans daughter;
so the Uncle married the Niece; Genesis c. 11. v. 29, 30.

To this may be added, That children from nature know not their parents or
kindred from other people, and therefore their Acts, whatever they be, whether
of marriage or otherwise, are (regarding nature only) as indifferent toward
their Parents and Kindred, as toward any other men or women.

The Parents may possibly know their Children, and more especially the Mother,
by a knowledge that is natural, but it is impossible the Children should
naturally know their Parents. Therefore they cannot naturally know that they do
transgress toward their Parents.

But the knowledge of our Parents is subsequent to nature, and not coequal with
her, and arises from Civil Laws, Education, and common Reputation, not from
Nature; we take those for our Parents whom the Laws denote to be so.

The Theban Story of Oedipus and Jocasta his Mother, is an obvious Example in
this kind, where both ignorantly married each other, and had Issue between
them. Of the marriage with the Mother, Seld. de Jure naturali and gentium juxta
disciplinam Ebraeorum l. 5. c. 11.
the Sister, the Stepmother, anciently permitted in Persia, Greece, Egypt, and
other places of the East. Vide.

Besides, what is unnatural to man, qua man, must be so to all men, and at all
times: But what is unnatural to this or that individual man, is unnatural only
to him, and only for the time it is so, and not to other men.

How things become unnatural by Custom.
A second way by which men's Acts are said to be unnatural (and are so in some
measure) is, When Laws Divine or Humane, do supervene upon man's original nature
with great penalty for transgressing them. Men's education, a teneris Annis, to
observe those Laws, the infamy attending their violation, and the religious
customary observance of them, implant a horror and aversness to break them; so
that by long custom they are not observed, only to avoid the punishment, and
as things which were otherwise indifferent, but are observed, from an aversness
and loathing, begot by Custom, to transgress them. That though men were secure
from the punishment, if they broke them, yet Nature denies all appetite and
inclination to violate them.

This kind of secondary Nature is eminently seen in men's aversness from some
things for Food, which Custom had made detestable. As eating the Flesh of Men,
Bears, Horses, Dogs, Cats, and many other things which nauseate men, and are
offfensive upon no other account than that Custom has made them so, not
primitive Nature, and which upon trials of Famine have been found both eatable
and nourishing; and by contrary Custom among some other Nations or People, are
as desirable as other Food, as is exampled in the Anthropophagi, the Canibals
or Men-eaters.

In this secondary way, the Copulation with the Mother, Sister, and the like,
do become odious and reluctant to Nature, and generally are so where Humanity
is well planted, which in the original state of nature, and without those
induced Laws, Education, and Custom of Manners, had been as indifferent as
with other women. To this purpose there is a passage, and a true one, in
Simplicius, speaking when the Grecians began to desert their Incestuous
marriages. -- Jam cum lex and consuetudo, Seld. de Jure naturali, c. 11. f 605.
sororis and fratriae consuetudine interdicat, Appetitiones non secus ac ab
ipsius naturae Imperio suppressae, ita prorsus sunt immobiles, nisi forte
aliquos furoris Intemperies, and dirae scelerum ultrices agitarent.

So Lucan of Incest with the Mother, Luc. l. 8.
-- Cui fas implere parentem
Quid reor esse nefas? --


To this secondary Nature, 1 Cor. c. 11. v. 13, 14, 15.
has that of St. Paul to the Corinthians reference, where he says,

Does not Nature it self teach you, That if a man have long hair, it is a shame
unto him? Where no other Nature can be understood but Manners and Custom.

And for this are the Egyptians upbraided in the Prophets Isaiah and Jeremy for
their Bestiality, in Copulation with their nearest Relations; as is most
frequent in Story.

That their Flesh was like the Flesh of Horses, and their Issue as the Issue of
Asses. They not observing any order of Coitus, other than was found in Horses
and Asses; which is the true meaning of that place. In this way it is true,
that such Incestuous marriages are unnatural, and so never made by those in
whom Custom has begot a horror and aversion to them; but on the other side,
to them which have it not, there is no unnaturalness in them; for Nature
originally has not implanted that aversness in them, nor Custom prevailed to
beget it, as it has in the others.

Of transgressing natural Laws, and in what sense that is to be understood.
A third way of men's acting unnaturally is, when they violate Laws coeval with
their original being, though the Laws be but positive Divine, or positive Human
Laws, and not of nature, primarily, nor in any other sense, intelligible to be
Natural Laws. But that they bind men as soon as men can be bound, and no Law
can possibly precede them.

A second reason of their being natural Laws properly, is, because man's nature
must necessarily assent to receive them as soon as it is capable of assenting,
and has no power to dissent from them; for a man has no power to dissent
from, or not to assent to his own preservation, or not to dissent from his own
destruction: But not to assent to the will, that is, to the Laws, of an
Infinite Power, to hurt and benefit, is, to assent to his own destruction and
infinite hurt, and to dissent from his own preservation and infinite benefit;
for infinite power can hurt or benefit as it pleases. Therefore to assent to
the Laws of the Deity is natural to man.

The Jews, with great constancy, speak of such Laws as given to all mankind in
this particular matter of marriage, and carnal mixture, and derive them
traditionally through all antiquity, as binding all Nations and People by Gods
Precept, and therefore call them, among others so given, Leges Noachidarum, or
the Laws of all the Sons of Noah, by which men were from the beginning
prohibited.

1. Marriage or Copulation with their Mother.

2. With the Fathers wife.

3. With a Sister by the same Mother, or with a Soror uterina.

4. With the Wife of another man.

5. Man with man.

6. Man or Woman with Beast.

From these Laws they justify Abrams marrying his Sister by the same Father,
Amrams marrying his Fathers Sister, Jacob marrying two Sisters at the same
time, Thamars endeavoring to marry her Husbands brother, as not prohibited,
before the Levitical Law, or any other marriage, those before mentioned
excepted.

And as to Adams Sons marrying their Sisters by the same Mother, the Law was
given in the beginning prohibiting it, but God dispensed with it until the
World was competently peopled, as they receive it.

And it is observed by Mr. Seldom, That upon the Tradition of this general Law,
1 Cor. 5. v. 1.
St. Paul rebukes the Corinthians for permitting among them such a Fornication,
that is, such an Incest as was not named among the Gentiles, That a man should
have his Fathers wife. Some Examples of which were in Syria, as in Antiochus
and Stratonice.

In this sense it is said, A man is a natural Subject when he is so born, and
is bound by the Law of his Allegiance as soon as he is, and that a Prince is
that Subjects natural Sovereign, because he is bound to protect him as soon as
he can be protected. Of which kind of Law of Nature, much is said in Calvin's
Case, but confusedly, and without clearness of conception: For these Laws of a
man's subjection as soon as he is born, being the immediate means of his
preservation and good, cannot but be assented to as soon as it is possible to
assent, and in that are called Natural Laws.

Of the Natural Laws, in this sense given to all Mankind by the Deity, from the
beginning of time, concerning Marriage and bodily knowledge, See excellent
matter in that incomparable Work of Mr. Seldom, De Jure Naturali and Gentium
Juxta disciplinam Ebraeorum.

And under this sense of Natural Laws has he titled that Book, De Jure
Naturali and Gentium Juxta disciplinam Ebraeorum; for so the Jews accounted the
Laws, or Leges Noachidarum, given in the beginning to all Mankind, Natural
Laws, though they were in truth but positive Divine Laws, because with relation
to Mankind, there was no time wherein they obliged not.

In what sense a man is said to act unnaturally against Civil Laws or Agreement.
There is a fourth way whereby a man is said to act unnaturally, which acting
is subsequent to Human Laws and Contracts between man and man, which is, when
after Laws made, and Contracts civilly settled, a man shall oblige himself
diametrally repugnant, and contrary to his former Obligation. As when

A Subject shall by Oath promise, or otherwise bind himself, to judge or force
his King, when by his Obligation to his King, he is bound to obey him, and be
judged by him.

When a Servant shall command and compel his Master, by whom he ought to be
commanded.

To contract marriage with two Husbands, when plenary duty and obedience is to
be paid to each; and therefore impossible to be performed to both. So is it
with a Servant who contracts his absolute Service to two Masters at the same
time; those things are unnatural, as not consisting with the nature of the
Obligation a man or woman is under, whereof much has been already said.

The Levitical Prohibitions of Marriage are no general Law, but particular to
the Israelites.
1. All the Prohibitions of the Levitical Degrees were not coeval with mankind,
as some were, viz. Marriage with the Mother, the Soror uterina, the Stepmother.

2. They were not in the restoration of mankind declared to Noah, as a Law for
mankind: Both these appear by the marriages of the holy men before mentioned,
within many of those Degrees.

3. They were undoubtedly delivered by Moses to the Jews, but not to mankind;
for Moses neither did, nor could, publish them as the World was then peopled,
to mankind. And a Law not published, is no more obligative than a Law only
concealed in the mind of the Lawgiver is obligative.

4. As they were delivered to the Jews only by Moses, they bind other Nations
no more than other laws of the Jews do, concerning other Subjects, as the laws
of succession and inheriting lands or goods.

5. They must then be made obligative, if at all, to the generality of
Christians by the New Testament (but by what medium can that be proved)?

6. They are not obligative to Christians any where, as to the Jews, which
appears by the law of raising seed to the Brother: vid. Canon to that purpose
de Divortiis; And by the marriage of two Sisters successively, but not together.

7. Were they obligative to Christians, as to the Jews, then all Christians
would be bound to the same punishment as the Jews were for transgressing them,
which was never heard. It remains then that Christians are bound to them upon
another account.

Besides, it is manifest in the Fifteenth Chapter of the Acts, that when diverse
taught, That if the Gentiles would be saved, they must keep the Law of Moses.

It was upon that very Question resolved in a Council of the Apostles, It was a
yoke, neither they, nor their Fathers, were able to bear.

It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to them, to lay no more burden on the
Gentiles, than to abstain from some necessary things: that is, 1. From things
offered to Idols. 2. From things Strangled. 3. From Blood. 4. From Fornication.


Which necessary things, are after clearly expounded by St. Paul to the
Corinthians, not to be things unlawful simply, but convenient, to keep a
Communion between the Jews and Gentiles, that is, the Old Church and the New.

It is further cleared, That this law was no more (than the other Judicial
laws) given to the Gentiles.

For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, Romans 2. v. 14.
do by nature the things contained in the Law.

What is then the preferment of the Jew? or what is the profit of Circumcision?

Romans 3. v. 1, 2.
Much every manner of way, chiefly, because unto them were committed the
Oracles of God.

There is no color of Argument, That the Prohibitions in the Eighteenth of
Leviticus, were universal laws; but that it is said,

Lev. 18. v. 24.
Ye shall not defile your selves in any of these things; for in all these
things the Nations are defiled which I cast out before you.

Lev. 18. v 27.
For all these Abominations have the men of the Land done, etc.

How could the Land be defiled? or the men of the Land? Or,

How could they be Abominations, if not prohibited?

To the 24. and 27. Verses of the Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus, the Answer
is, That those words referr to those universal laws of the Leges Noachidarum,
wherein Egypt and Canaan were defiled: As Incest with the Mother, Soror
uterina, the Fathers wife; and to those horrid offenses of lying with man or
beast, prohibited to all mankind from the beginning. And if the Levitical
Incest were prohibited to the people of Egypt or Canaan, by some extraordinary
publication (which is not probable) it follows not therefore they were
prohibited to all mankind, the words before referring but to those Nations, or
to one of them.

Concerning universal Obligation to the Levitical Prohibitions in Cases of
Matrimony and Incest.
Though it be generally received by the Christian Churches from the primitive
times of Christianity, That all Christians are obliged to observe those
Prohibitions, as such which Human Authority cannot dispense with; yet by what
Law that Obligation was introduced upon the Gentiles, converted to
Christianity, is not known with any satisfactory clearness. For,

1. It is evident they are not bound by them, as they were Laws promulged by
Moses to the Hebrews, both because a Law delivered to a particular man, or men,
or to a particular Nation, or Nations, is not universal to mankind, nor binding
them under any reason of a Law; for every Precept or Prohibition is but to him
or them to whom it is given.

2. There being many several States, who had their Civil Power and Jurisdiction
separate from that of the Jews, the promulging of a Law by Moses to the Jews,
could be no promulgation of it to different Nations, under other Civil Powers,
and though the Jews believed Moses a Messenger of God's (and so were bound to
what he delivered, as by that office) other Nations, who believed not so of
him, were not bound by his Testimony, had he testified to other Nations the
same things to be the will of God to them, as he did to the Jews, which he
never did, nor could. Nor are other Nations bound to the Decalogue, quatenus
published by Moses, for the same reason, but are bound only to what is moral of
it.

3. Without a sufficient promulgation of a Law, it obliges no more than a Law
conceived only in the mind of the Lawgiver.

4. If Moses his Laws, in cases of Incest, extended to mankind, quatenus
revealed to the Jews, mankind were equally bound to all other the Mosaic Laws
(whereof no alteration had been made upon the coming of the Messiah) which is
contrary to the persuasion and practice of all the Gentile Nations converted to
Christianity at the beginning of it, and ever since.

5. It is likewise contrary to the determination of the Holy Ghost, and the
Apostles, at the great and first Council of Antioch, mentioned in the Fifteenth
of the Acts, where the Gentiles were directed to observe but four Particulars
of the Mosaic Law, as necessary for them, but upon what reason more necessary
than the rest observed by the Christian Jews, is not clear.

6. It is true, That by some of our Statutes many of the Levitical Prohibitions
are affirmed to be Gods Law, obligative to us, yet the Particulars are not
therein named the Levitical Prohibitions, or to be according to the Mosaic
Law; and many Levitical Prohibitions are omitted in the enumeration of the
marriages against Gods Law, made by those Statutes.

And though such declaration of them to be by Divine Law, be concluding, as to
any gainsaying of ours, yet, as to others not subject to the same Authority
with us, such declaration may not only be of no authority, but may be accounted
senseless and absurd.

I shall therefore endeavor to show in what notion some of those Prohibitions
may be obligative, as universal positive Law, and some obliging as moral Laws,
and so universal and of Divine Obligation; the residue obliging not, quatenus
delivered to the Jews, but as the same Laws delivered to them, are made
universal by a new Obligation.

1. And first, All those Prohibitions mentioned in the Eighteenth of Leviticus,
were positive Laws of God to them, quatenus they relate to, and terminate in
degrees of Kindred therein specified; and the breach of them punishable by the
punishments ordained to that end in the Mosaic Law. And in these respects none
of them are binding to any other people than the Hebrews.

2. Diverse of those Prohibitions are likewise of moral prohibition, and in that
sense binding all men, as in the descending and ascending Line of Generation.

As the Father is prohibited to marry his Daughter, his Sons daughter, and his
Daughters daughter, and further, the Levitical Prohibition for nearness of Kin,
and for the respects before, extends not.

But the Father is likewise morally (and universally therefore) prohibited, not
only those persons, but all others descended from them interminately, that is,
as far as may be known.

So in the Ascending Line, the Son is prohibited his Mother and Grandmother,
and no further, by the Mosaic Law; but morally not only them, but all other
his great Grand-mothers interminately, as far as may be known; and so, as well
as the Son, are all Males descended lineally from him. The reason of this Moral
Obligation is well given by the Learned Grotius, in these words;

Grot. de Jure belli, l. 2. c. 5. Sect. 12. pars. 2.
Ab hac generalitate eximo matrimonia parentum cujuscunque gradus cum liberis
quae quo minus illicita sint ratio ni fallor satis apparet, nam nec maritus qui
superior est lege matrimonii, eam reverentiam praestare potest matri quam
natura exigit, nec patri filia, quia quanquam inferior est in matrimonio, ipsum
tamen matrimonium talem inducit societatem, quae illius necessitudinis
reverentiam excludat, etc. And again,

Grot. de Jure belli, l. 2. c. 5. Sect. 13. pars. 3.
Ut de parentibus and liberis nihil jam dicam, quippe quos, ut existimo, etiam
sine expressa lege, ratio naturalis jungi satis vetat.

By the same reason, by the Moral Law the Father or Mother cannot be Servants
to their Sons or Daughters; for as Father or Mothers, honor is due to them
from those they serve; but as Servant, honor is due from them to those they
serve, that is; their Children, who are their Masters and Superiors. As
Parents, their Children, whom they serve, ought to obey and reverence them. As
Servants, they are to obey their Children, who are their Masters and Superiors,
and to reverence them. So as this office and relation is inconsistent and
repugnant between Parents and Children, and unnatural, therefore morally
unlawful.

3. There are other of the Levitical Prohibitions, that by the constant
tradition of the Jews were delivered to mankind in the beginning, and which
they term praecepta Noachidarum, to which they conceived all the sons of Adam
obliged; and these Precepts seem warranted by several places of Holy Scripture.
These are,

That a man is prohibited his Mother, his Fathers wife, his Sister by the same
venture, positively from the beginning; but a dispensation was, as to the
Sisters, until a competent peopling of the world; they add the prohibition of
another man's wife, which is also Moral, as that of the Mother is.

4. How the rest of the Levitical Prohibitions, in the matter of marriage, came
to be so generally received by Christians, as being authorized and prescribed
by God, seems to have no foundation so warrantable as that Council of the
Apostles in the Fifteenth of the Acts.

Where the Gentiles are directed to observe, as necessary only, four
particulars of Moses his Law, among which they are required to abstain from
Fornication, which if it had been rendered from the Septuagint, from Incest or
Turpitude of Copulation, which answered the Original best; it had much
facilitated the solution of this Inquiry.

For it has no color, That Fornication there should signify the same with
Stuprum and Scortum, and that it should be abstained from, as a special
particular of the Law of Moses, being an Offense, not only prohibited by him
(yet not at all among the Prohibitions in the Eighteenth of Leviticus) but by
all the Nations of the Gentiles respectively, as well as by Moses. And it is
plain, the word (...) there rendered Fornication, most frequently signifies in
the Septuagint, both Adultery and Incest; and indeed any unlawful Copulation of
man and woman.

The ends and reasons of this general Law to Christians, might be, First.

1. If the State of the Jews (as many particular men of that State did) had
embraced Christianity, yet the Law of Moses had still been obliging to them, as
to their Civil Government, as far as it could consist with Christianity, and
had been an eternal Law, not to be abrogated but by God himself, who was the
Lawgiver. Therefore if the Gentiles observed not such of their Laws which
preserved their Communion with the Gentiles from being odious and abominated by
them. The Gentiles and the Jews, though both had embraced Christianity, must
never have had Communion; the Jews being bound by God still to observe Moses's
Law.

2. This detestation among them could not sort with the Precepts of
Christianity, newly received by both.

3. Marrying at what remoteness of Kindred they thought fit, was in the power
of the Gentiles for the future, at their own election, without transgressing
their local and native Laws: And therefore induced no inconvenience to observe
that Precept.

4. Since all Nations of the Gentiles had some restraint of marriages by humane
prudence, the Apostles conceived these dictated to the Jews, to be the most
convenient restraints to be voluntarily practiced among Christians.

5. Other the restraints directed by that Council, all which concerned Meats,
which were necessary Mediums to make Communion between men, are prohibited upon
the same ground, though in themselves indifferent, and of no obligation, if not
made use of in a Jew's presence, who was bound from them. But Incest being a
lasting offense and scandal to the Jews, could not be concealed from them, as
the eating of Meats might, and therefore was to be abstained from, with
resolution to continue it, or not at all.

The three other Precepts by that Council, by Authority of the Holy Ghost, as
the words import, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, are only
concerning Meats, that is, First, of things offered to Idols; Secondly, of
Blood; And thirdly, of things strangled; without abstinence from which, no
Communion could be between the converted Jews and Gentiles. For,

1. Generally, in all Nations, eating together is the most signal instance and
proof of Fellowship and Communion; and if the meat prepared be desirable by
some, and odious to others of the Company, the fellowship must break.

2. Among the Primitive Christians, at their Sacramental Communion, which was
essential to the Christian Religion, they had their Agapae, or Love Feasts,
wherein, 2 Cor.
if the Food were such as the Christian Gentiles approved, and was abominable
to the Christian Jews, a dissolution of the Communion between them must
necessarily follow, and consequently the Precepts of Christianity be
frustrated, both as to form and Christian kindness.

And this Fraction must have continued as long as the Hebrews Commonwealth
lasted, which might have been perpetual; but by the dissolution of that State
and Government, their Laws likewise vanished, which were peculiar to that
Nation, as it will fall out in the Cases of all States, when dissolved.

If the State of England, France, or Spain, or of any other Nation, be
dissolved, their respective Laws end with their dissolution; nor is it, as to
this purpose, material, whether the Laws of a Nation proceed from Divine
Dictates and Authority, or Humane.

For the State being dissolved, there is no lawful Coercion left for keeping,
nor punishment for violating the Laws and where that is not, there is no Law
common to that people: For without coercion and punishment, every man is free,
that is, he is not bound to any Law of Community, at least. But perhaps Laws
may be to particular men, as to Abraham to sacrifice his Son, to which he was
bound, under the displeasure of the Numen.

And thus, by the dissolution of the Hebrew Commonwealth, the Gentiles were
freed from those Obligations touching Meats, because the Jews were so too. The
observation of them being, after the dissolution of the State, but the pleasure
of a particular person or persons, and more than in order to preserve Communion
between the people of the Jews and Gentiles, those particular Precepts were of
no sanctity to oblige universally, more than any other the Mosaical
Institutions.

2. As before the dissolution of the Hebrew Commonwealth, it was against
Christian Charity and Love, to give scandal and offense to an Hebrew, by eating
Meat detestable to him, because God had bound him from it; and the Christian
Gentile might, without offending any Law, abstain from the Meat, and decline
giving scandal.

So after the dissolution of the Israelitish State, when the Jew was equally
free as the Christian Gentile, it grew a scandal to the Gentile, That the Jew
should abhor or despise Meats which God had made lawful to the Gentile.

It has been observed by learned men, That it may be collected from the last
part of the Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus, that there was some universal
preceding Law given, to abstain from those Carnal Mixtures forbid by Moses.

Defile not your selves in any of these things, for in all these the Nations
are defiled which I cast out before you, verse 24. And many of the subsequent
Verses are to the same purpose. And these things are called Abominations.

Whence it is inferred, The people could not be faulty of transgressing, had
there not been a Law, for without Law there can be no transgression.

But many Answers may be given to this, as First,

1. From the Eighteenth of Leviticus no pretense can be of an universal
Prohibition of Carnal knowledge in all the Degrees there specified, though such
Prohibitions might be to the particular Nations mentioned in Leviticus and
Deuteronomy, to be therein defiled; but that is most improbable too.

2. The defiling there mentioned may be intended of Sodomy, Buggery, Incest
with the Mother, the Fathers wife, the Soror uterina, Adultery, agreed by the
Jews to be universally prohibited, which they term Leges Noachidarum, and which
are the Offenses last mentioned in the Eighteenth of Leviticus before, verse.
24. before cited.

3. The marriages of many persons eminently in Gods favor, before the Mosaical
Law, as Abraham's marrying Sarah his Sister by the Father; Jacob's marrying two
Sisters; Amram's, Moses his Father, marrying Jochebed his Fathers Sister;
Marrying the Brothers wife, as in the Story of Onan before the Mosaical
Prohibitions; Nachor's, Abraham's Brother, marrying Milcah his Brother Harams
daughter; and the strong Opinion that Judah himself married Thamar his Daughter
in law, as well as he had Coition with her, etc. permits not to believe many
Copulations mentioned in Moses his Prohibitions, to have been before
universally prohibited.

4. If among the Nations cast out before the Jews, as defiled in these things,
Humane Laws had been made among them, as in every Nation of the Gentiles was
usual to prohibit some marriages for nearness of Cognation; and those Nations
had not observed, but transgressed their own Laws, as is usual in all places,
to offend against their known Laws, God might therefore punish them, as daily
he does, and did always the Gentiles for not keeping their own Laws, vid. Paul
to the Romans per totam Epistolam.

5. Though men cannot justly make people suffer, but for transgressing Laws
which they might have kept; yet the Numen, who is just when he exercises
absolute Dominion over his Creatures, may inflict sufferings upon a Nation for
doing things he likes not, and therefore call such things abominable; as there
is an Ill which begets the making of Laws to obviate and prevent it, as well as
an Ill in transgressing Laws when they are made. And he which does contrary to
natural prudence, and his own persuasion of what is best, may incur the
displeasure of the Numen, as well as for transgressing a Rule or Law which he
might have kept. And though this way of punishing is not proper to men, it is
as proper, as the other to the Deity, to whom man's thoughts, purposes, ends,
and means, are open.

That the abstaining from Incestuous marriages, according to Moses his Law, was
a part of the Mosaical Law, precepted to be observed by the Gentiles at that
Council, I think can be little doubted, and not the abstaining from what is
accounted simple Fornication, which even by Moses his Law was often satisfied
by marriage of the woman, and often by money.

But it seems difficult, How that Precept, or the observance of it, could
either cause, or preserve Communion between the Jews and the Gentiles, as those
others did concerning abstinence from Meats prohibited to the Jews, and not to
the Gentiles.

For first, Alliance and Affinity between the Jews and the Gentiles, before,
and by the Law of Moses, was absolutely forbid, though the Gentiles (as many of
them did for many prohibited marriages) had abstained by their own peculiar
Laws from all those marriages prohibited the Jews. Therefore their Communion by
Alliance or Affinity had received no advancement by abstaining from Mosaical
Incests in that respect.

But besides the general Interdict of Alliance with the Gentiles, the Jews were
interdicted in a special manner, any alliance or conversation with the Nations,
whose Land they were to enjoy and inherit, and who were cast out before them,
as being defiled in all those Copulations of Kindred, prohibited the Jews, Lev.
18. v. 24, etc.
as appears from Verse the Four and twentieth to the end of the Eighteenth
Chapter of Leviticus, and which Iniquity was visited by making the Land vomit
out the Inhabitants.

2. Verse the Thirtieth, the Jews are charged not to commit any one of those
abominable Customs committed before them; and if they did, they were punished
by death, as appears Leviticus the Twentieth. This was enough to cause a
particular detestation and abhorrency in the Jews, of such who accustomed
themselves to such marriages, or any of them, above others, of the Gentiles.

3. The Nations cast out of their Land for committing those things, Deuteronomy. 7. v.
1.
appear to be Seven; The Hittite, the Girgashite, the Amorite, the Canaanite,
the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, whose names they were commanded to
destroy from under Heaven, Verse the Four and twentieth of that Chapter;
accordingly it appears they did so. Deuteronomy the Second and Third Chapters,
The Amorite, and those under Og, King of Bashan, were, Man, Woman, and Child,
destroyed.

Chapter the Seventh, Verse second and third, no Covenant was to be made with,
nor marriage between them.

Of the Cities of these people which the Lord thy God gives thee for an
inheritance, Deuteronomy. 20.
Thou shall save alive nothing that breaths, but thou shall utterly destroy
them, which shows their destruction was not for transgressing a Law given them
by God, as their Law maker, for they were destroyed which had not offended
against the Law, as well as they which had. But it was an Act of Gods absolute
dominion over his Creatures, as the Potter may do what he lists with his
Clay, which must not say why have thou made me thus.

Whereas they had differing commands concerning Cities far from them; As, 1. To
offer them peace; 2. If they accepted it, to make them Tributaries; 3. If they
refused it, to kill the Males with the Sword, but to spare the women and
children, Deuteronomy. 20. from verse 10. to verse. the Fifteenth.

It is hence not improbable the Jews had great aversness to the Communion of
such, whose mixtures in marriage were alike to these Nations, though they were
not of these Nations; for the vengeance ordained against them appears not to be
for other causes (than for those incestuous Copulations) which were not common
to all other the Nations of the Gentiles, as well as to them, that is Idolatry:
And for this reason

The Apostles might direct the Gentiles to abstain from marriages that would
render them odious to the Jews, and which the Christians ever after continued
as most conformant to Gods will in the fitness of marriage.

But this is not reason enough to make all these marriages to be prohibited to
the Gentiles absolutely by Divine Institution, as unholy in themselves, without
relation to the communion with the Jews, so as to make it absolutely unlawful
to change them by any Humane Law upon any occasion. But it is never prudent to
change a Law which cannot be bettered in the subject matter of the Law.

Accordingly if we examine well, perhaps dispensations will be found given by
the Christian Churches for marriages, within most of those Mosaical Degrees,
and particularly in those marriages instanced in which were lawful before the
Law of Moses, and which have not a moral inconsistency with them, and so a
natural iniquity, and which therefore are prohibited among all civilized
Nations, whether ancient or modern, as well as among the Jews, for the most
part.

Seldom de Jure Gentium.
In some places some particular examples may be to the contrary, for special
reasons of Revelation or Prophecy believed, as the Mother to marry the Son.

Accordingly it is affirmed by the Statutes of 28 H. 8. c. 7. and 25 H. 8. c.
22. That the marriages enumerated in both those Acts to be prohibited by Gods
Law, were notwithstanding allowed by color of Dispensations by man's power. The
words of the Statute of 28. are, after the recital of the prohibited marriages,
All which marriages, albeit they be plainly prohibited and detested by the Laws
of God, yet nevertheless, at some times, they have proceeded under colors of
Dispensations by man's power, which is but usurped, and of right ought not to be
granted, admitted, nor allowed.

The same words are in the Statute of 25. but instead of, All which marriages,
the words are, Which marriages, etc.

The second Question, What are the Levitical Degrees, I omit, because the
marriage in question is in no sort in the Degrees.

Observation.
And by the way it is very observable, That as we take the Degrees of Marriage,
prohibited by Gods Law, to be the Levitical Degrees expressed, or necessarily
employed in the Eighteenth of Leviticus, upon parity of reason, or by Argument,
a fortiori.

So there are some in Leviticus, which by the Act of 28 H. 8. cap. 7. and
otherwise in our enumeration of the Levitical Degrees, we admit as absolutely
prohibited, which in the Levitical Law, and in the meaning of the Eighteenth of
Leviticus, were not absolutely, but circumstantially prohibited; that is,

1. The marriage of a man with his Brothers wife, which by 28 H. 8. cap. 7. is
absolutely prohibited, and commonly received to be absolutely prohibited by the
Levitical Degrees.

But was not so by the Levitical Law, nor by the meaning of the Eighteenth
Chapter of Leviticus, but when the dead brother left Issue by his wife.

But if he did not, the surviving Brother was, by the Law, to marry his wife,
and raise Issue to his Brother.

This Law was so known, that by all the Evangelists, a Woman, who had Seven
Brothers successively, our Savior was asked, Whose Wife she should be at the
Resurrection?

2. The second of this kind is, A man is prohibited by 28 H. 8. and by the
received Interpretation of the Levitical Degrees, absolutely to marry his Wives
sister: but within the meaning of Leviticus, and the constant practice of the
Commonwealth of the Jews, a man was prohibited not to marry his Wives Sister
only during her life, after he might. So the Text is.

Thou shall not take a Wife with her Sister, during her life, to vex her, by
uncovering her shame upon her.

This perhaps is a knot not easily untied, how the Levitical Degrees are Gods
Law in this Kingdom, but not as they were in the Commonwealth of Israel,
where first given.

Third Question.
The third Question, and chiefly concerning the Case in question, is, Whether
Harrison's marriage with his great Uncles (that is, his Grandfathers Brothers
wife) be a marriage by good and sound deduction of Consequence within the
Levitical Degrees not particularly expressed? For, I think it evident, it is
not among those that are expressed, neither in the Greek nor Latin
Translations, nor in the British names of Kindred, where my Fathers Cosen
German has the appellation of my Uncle; nor helped by the gloss of being
prohibited in the Twentieth of Leviticus, though not in the Eighteenth.

1. The word Uncle is an equivocal expression, and in several places signifies
several Relations; as in the British, the Father or Grandfathers Cosen German
is accounted an Uncle to the Son.

2. The Fathers Brother has in Latin a specifique term of Relation to the Son
or Daughter, viz. Patruus. But the Stat. of 28 H. 8. c. 7. recites this
prohibition to be, To marry his Uncles Wife.
So has the Mothers brother, Avunculus; but in the Greek it has not, and is
expressed only by the word Kinsman.

3. In Junius and Tremellius's Translation, done with regard to the Septuagint
and the Original, the Twentieth of Leviticus, verse the twentieth, is rendered
Quisquis cubaverit cum Amita sua nuditatem patrui sui retexit, where expressly,
instead of, and uncovered his Uncles shame, it is uncovered his Uncle, his
Fathers Brothers shame, which makes it the same with the Eighteenth of
Leviticus, verse the fourteenth.

I shall therefore first agree, That marriage with the Grandmother,
Great-grand-mother, and with the Great-grand-father, and so upwards, without
limit; is, though not expressed, equally prohibited in Leviticus, as marriage
with the Father, Mother, or Grandfather, to the Son or Daughter: So as in the
right Ascending Line of Generation there can be no lawful marriage.

1. The Father and Mother are the immediate natural Causes of the being of
their Children, and the Grandfather and Grandmother are natural mediate
causes of their being, and so upwards, in the right ascending Line
interminately; for a man could no more be what he is, without his Grandfather
and Grandmother, and so upwards, than without his Father or Mother: Therefore
they are really Parents, and necessary mediate causes of bringing the Children
to have being, and consequently what is due of reverence or acknowledgment for
his being, from the Child to Father or Mother, is likewise due to those other
Relations in the Ascending right Line.

But the Uncle, quatenus Uncle, etc. does no more contribute to the natural
being of the Nephew or Niece, than as if he had not at all been.

The marriage of the Son or Daughter with Grandmother or Grandfather, and so
with any Ancestor, Male or Female, in the right Ascending Line, is, after Laws
determining the knowledge and reverence due to Parents, unnatural and repugnant
in it self.

For there is unnaturalness in Civil things, when constituted, sometimes;

Though there be no Master or Servant originally in nature, but only parity,
yet after Laws have constituted those Relations,

A. cannot at the same time be both Master and Servant to B. there is a
repugnancy in the nature of those two Offices, to be consistent in the same
persons at once.

A Father or Mother cannot be Servant to their Son or Daughter; for under the
relation of Father or Mother, the Son is to obey them, but in that of Servant,
they to obey him, which is repugnant, and against the nature of those Relations.

Under the Law it was not forbidden a man to Curse his Servant, but Death to
Curse his Father or Mother. A man might correct and chastise his Servant qua
such, but penal alike to chastise his Father or Mother in this sense.

The marriage of the Son with his Mother, or the Daughter with her Father, are
unnatural.

For as a Husband to her, the Son is both to command and correct the Mother as
his wife, but as a Son, to be commanded, and endure her Correction as Mother.

So between the Father and Daughter, there is a Reverence from the Daughter to
the Father, inconsistent with the parity between man and wife; and Laws give
often a power over the daughter, which they forbid over the wife.

And the reverence and obedience from the Grandchild to the Grandmother, in
what degree soever, is the same as to the Mother, and the same consequences
follow.

For if the Mother or Father have power absolute, or in tantum, over the Son or
Daughter, to create reverence to them; the same has the Grandmother, or
Grandfather, and so forwards.

For if B. the Father have absolute or qualified power over A. the Son, and C.
the Grandfather has the same over B. the Father, then has C. the
Grandfather the same over A. the Son, not immediately but mediately by the
Father.

To this purpose the Case put in Platt's Case in the Com. is most opposite. A
woman Guardian of the Fleet marries her Prisoner in Execution, he is
immediately out of Execution, for the Husband cannot be Prisoner to his Wife,
it being repugnant, that she, as Jailer, should have the Custody of him, and
he, as Husband, the Custody of her.

To this purpose also, it is remarkable what that great Scholar and Lawyer,
Hugo Grotius has; Eximo ab hac generalitate matrimonium parentum cujuscunque
gradus cum liberis quae quo minus licita sint ratio, ni fallor, satis apparet.
Grot. de Jure belli, l. 2. c. 5: Paragr. 12.
Nam nec maritus qui superior est lege matrimonii eam reverentiam praestare
potest matri quam natura exigit, nec patri filia, quia quanquam inferior est in
matrimonio; ipsum tamen matrimonium talem inducit societatem, quae illius
necessitudinis reverentiam excludat.

But as to other Relations, the same Author, in the same place,

De Conjugiis eorum qui sanguine aut affinitate junguntur satis gravis est
quaestio, and non raro magnis motibus agitata; nam causas certas, ac naturales
cur talia conjugia, ita ut legibus aut moribus vetantur illicita sint assignare
qui voluerit, experiendo discet quam id sit difficile, imo praestari non
possit.

I add only, That as the mutual duties of Parents and Children consist not with
their marrying one another; so the Procreations between them will have a
necessary and monstrous inconsistence of Relation.

For the Son or Daughter, born of the Mother, and begot by the Son, as born of
the mother, will be a Brother or Sister to the Father, but as begot by him,
will be a Son or Daughter.

So the Issue procreate upon the Grandmother, as born of the Grandmother,
will be Uncles or Aunts to the Father, as begot by the Son, they will be Sons
or Daughters to him, and this in the first degrees of Kindred.

Besides, by the Laws of England Children inherit their Ancestors without limit
in the right ascending Line, and are not inherited by them. But in the
Collateral Lines of Uncle and Nephew, the Uncle as well inherits the Nephew, as
the Nephew the Uncle.

In the Civil Law the Agnati, viz. the Father, or Grandfathers Brother, are
loco parentum; and the Canons borrow it thence, but that is because they were
Legitimi Tutores, or Guardians by Law to their Nephews; with us the Lord, of
whom the Land is held, is Guardian, or the next of Kin to whom the Land cannot
descend, and by the same reason they should be loco parentum.

In a Synod or Convocation holden in London, in the year 1603. of the Province
of Canterbury, by the Kings Writ, and with License under the Great Seal to
consent and agree of such Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastic as they should
think fit.

Several Canons were concluded, and after ratified under the Great Seal, as
they ought to be; among which the Ninety ninth Canon is this:

No person shall marry within the Degrees prohibited by Gods Law, and expressed
in a Table set forth by Authority, Canons 1 Jac. 1603. Can. 99.
in the year of our Lord, 1563. and all marriages so made and contracted, shall
be adjudg'd incestuous and unlawful: And the aforesaid Table shall be in every
Church publicly set up and fixed, at the charge of the Parish.

This Table was first published in Archbishop Parker's time, in 1563. I know
not by what Authority then, and after made a Canon of this Convocation, with
the Kings License under the Great Seal, and so confirmed, and since continually
set up in Parishes.

By which expressly the Degrees by Gods Law prohibited, are said to be expressed
in that Table, and is the same as. No person shall marry within the Degrees
prohibited by Gods Law, and which are expressed in the Table. Any other
Exposition of the Canon will be forced and violent, and the Table set up for
the Peoples direction from Incest, but a snare and a deceit to them.

And this marriage is not prohibited in that Table.

There is an Objection, That by the Canon and Civil Law this Degree of Marriage
in question is prohibited.

It is true; but by the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 38. All Prohibitions by the
Canon or Civil Law, quatenus Canon or Civil Law, are wholly excluded, and
unless the marriage be prohibited by the Divine Law, it is made lawful.

But suppose the Canon or Civil Law were to be taken as a measure in the
subject of marriage of what were lawful.

With the Canon Law, of what time would you begin, for it varies as the Laws
Civil of any Nation do, in successive Ages. Before the Council of Lateran, it
was another Law than since, for marriages before were forbid to the Seventh
Degree from Cosen Germans inclusively, since to the Fourth.

Every Council varied somewhat in the Canon Law, and every Pope from the
former, and often from himself, as every new Act of Parliament varies the Law
of England, more or less; and that which always changes can be no measure of
Rectitude, unless confined to what was the Law in a certain time, and then no
reason will make that a better measure than what was the Law in a certain other
time: As the Law of England is not a righter Law of England in one Kings Reign,
than in another, yet much differing.

Nerva forbad it; Heraclius permitted it. Grot. Annot. 167.
So does the Civil Law, before the marriage of Claudius the Emperor with
Agrippina his Brothers daughter, the marriage of the Uncle with his Niece, was
not allowed among the Romans. But by a Law of the People and Senate upon that
Occasion, such marriages were permitted. Many others of the like kind.

Nor did the Canon Law, and perhaps truly, take more persons to be prohibited
within the Levitical Degrees, than are there expressed: What else is the
meaning of that place in Levitico vero prohibitae fuerunt fere duodecim
personae, etc. in the Exposition of the Arbor Consanguinitatis and Affinitatis.

Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum ex Authoritate primum Regis Henrici 8.
inchoata, deinde per Regem Edwardum 6. provecta, de gradibus in Matrimonio
prohibitis.
Deus in his gradibus certum jus posuit Levitici 18. and 20 Capite, quo Jure
nos, and omnem posteritatem nostram teneri necesse est. Nec enim illorum
capitum praecepta veteris Israelitarum Reipub. propria fuerunt, ut quidem
somniant, sed idem authoritatis pondus habent quod Religio nostra Decalogo
tribuit, ut nulla possit humana potestas quicquam in illis, ullo modo
constituere.

Hoc tamen in illis Levitici capitibus diligenter animadvertendum est, minime
ibi omnes non legitimas personas nominatim explicari, nam Spiritus Sanctus
illas ibi personas evidenter, and express posuit ex quibus similia spatia
reliquorum graduum, and differentiae inter se facile posuit conjectari and
inveniri. Exempli causa, cum filio non datur uxor matter, Consequens est, ut ne
filia quidem patri conjux dari potest, and si patrui non licet uxorem in
matrimonio habere, nec cum Avunculi conjuge nobis nuptiae concedi possunt.

Admitting this marriage out of the Levitical Degrees, whether it be so pleaded
as that we ought to deny a Consultation.

Faults in the Pleading.
The Plaintiff sets forth the Act of 32. and particularly, That all Marriages
are thereby lawful, contracted between lawful persons, and that all persons are
lawful, not prohibited by Gods Law to marry. Then he sets forth another Clause,
That no marriage shall be impeach't (Gods Law excepted) made out of the
Levitical Degrees.

Then sets forth his marriage with his Wife, being formerly married to
Bartholomew Abbot, his Grandfathers brother (and consequently his great Uncle)
there being no pre-contract of either side which was lawful, Secundum Jura
Divina, and Humana.

And that he was libelled for his marriage in the Spiritual Court, as
incestuous and unlawful, and sets forth the Articles of the Libel in
particular, and the prosecution for a Divorce.

But does not averr, That the marriage is without the Levitical Degrees, as he
should have done.

Upon which Declaration, the Defendant demurrs, and prays a Consultation.

Whereas, In such case the Defendant must have showed how it was against Gods
Law, according to Speccotts C. 5. Rep.
if the Plaintiff had aver'd the marriage to be without the Levitical Degrees,
the Defendant must either have demurred upon that single point, or have been
forced to have confessed that it was out of the Levitical Degrees, but was
notwithstanding against Gods Law, upon the words of the Act, No marriage shall
be impeached, Gods Law excepted, that is, without the Levitical Degrees.

So as by his manner of Pleading, the Court is now to Judge, not whether the
marriage be without the Levitical Degrees, but whether it be against Gods Law
in general. The Defendant has not articled, That Abbot knew the wife carnally;
and then it is not a marriage against Gods Law by 28 H. 8. cap. 7. nor that it
is within the Levitical Degrees.

And upon this manner of Pleading, after a Prohibition granted, a Consultation
was awarded in Mann's Case.

Mann had married his first wives sisters daughter, Cr. 33 El. 228. Manns Case.
and was sued before the High Commissioners; for although this was not
prohibited within the Levitical Degrees, yet because degrees more remote are
forbidden, they gave sentence of Divorce. And he grounded his Prohibition upon
the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 38. And a Consultation was prayed and granted,
because the Prohibition is not to be, if it be not without the Levitical
Degrees, and here it was general, and therefore not good.

Mann's Case. Moore f. 907. a.
The same Case is in Moore, who Reports the Grant of a Prohibition in the Case,
but mentions not the Consultation which was moved for long after the
Prohibition; and therefore alters nothing of Crook's Report. But the Record of
this Case cannot be found.

Cok. Litt. f. 235. a.
There is another Case of one Richard Pearson, not Parsons, wherein a
Prohibition was granted out of this Court in the like case as Manns, for
marrying his wives sisters daughter, in Trinity Term 2 Jac. Rot. 1032.

Sir Edward Coke says, he was drawn into question in the Ecclesiastical Court
for the Marriage, alleging the same to be against the Canons.

And that it was resolved by the Court of Common Pleas, upon Consideration of
the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 38. that the Marriage was not to be impeached,
because declared by the said Act to be good, in as much as it was not
prohibited by the Levitical Degrees. This Case is again remembered by Sir Edward
Coke in his Comment upon this Statute of 32 H. 8. in the latter Editions of his
Littleton it is not printed, but it seems omitted, not by his consent, because
he remembers it in his Magna Charta upon that Statute, long after printed.

But I find there was a Consultation granted in Hillary Term after the
Prohibition granted, but find no appearance or Plea of the Defendant.

But by the Record of that Case, the Plaintiff declares, Qui quidem Richardus
and Anna fuerunt, and sunt legales personae insimul maritari per legem Dei
minime prohibitae ac extra leges Leviticales.

Quidam tamen machinans matrimonium praedictum secundum legem Dei and Hominum
legitime celebratum dissolvere, Praetendens matrimonium illud fore incestuosum
eosdem Henricum and Annam, etc. in placitum trahi procuravit.

Then sets forth the Articles of the Libel, whereof 1. is,

Item quod praemissorum ratione praefat. Anna fuit ac est Affinis tui praefati
Richardi, and in gradu de Jure prohibito pro aliquo matrimonio inter te, and
eandem contrahendo aut habendo notorie constituta, videlicet filia naturalis,
and legitima de Johanne Gardener, alias Lucas, sorore dictae Janae Gardener,
alias Pearson, uxore tua praedicta.

Nor is it material that he says after, Ac licet praedict. Richardus and Anna
Matrimonium praedictum fore legitimum, and per leges Leviticales minime
prohibitum, and per Stat. praedict. fore bonum coram praefato Judice
placitaverunt and allegaverunt, and illa inevitabili veritate probari,
praedictus tamen Judex placitum illud, and allegationem admittere penitus
recusavit.

For that is not an Averment, That the Marriage was out of the Levitical
Degrees to the Temporal Judges; for they can take no Issue, nor try what Plea
was before the Spiritual Judge.

Then upon this pleading, it no way appears that the Libel was for marrying
against the Law of God; and if it were not, then the Spiritual Gourt had no
Conizance, though it were against the Canons which the Act of 32. had excluded.

Therefore the Prohibition might well be awarded, especially because the Libel
was, That the marriage was Incestuous.

Next, a Consultation might be granted, unless cause were showed, for it was no
otherwise. Because the Suggestion was not, That the marriage was out of the
Levitical Degrees, but that the persons married were extra leges Leviticales,
which was as if they had said, They were not under the Jewish Commonwealth.

And then a Consultation might be granted upon this Prohibition, as upon that
of Mann's Case, because the Plaintiff did not averr the marriage to be extra
gradus Leviticus, and ground his Prohibition thereupon.

As those two Prohibitions were for marrying the Wives Sisters daughter, that
is, the Wives Niece by the Sister. So there is a Case in the Lord Hobbard,
Hobbard f. 181. a. Keppington.
where one Keppington married his Wives Sisters daughter, was questioned for
Incest by the High Commissioners, and sentenced, and entered into Bond to
abstain from her Company, but was not divorced, and therefore the Wife
recovered a Wives Widows Estate in a Copyhold, notwithstanding the Sentence;
but no Prohibition was in the Case.

The same Case is in the Reports which pass for Mr. Noye's, f. 29. but
mistaken, for there in place of his Wives sister, it is Fathers sister.

Hill. 21. Car. II. This Case was, by the King's Command, adjourned for the
Opinion of all the Judges of England, Trin. 22. Car. II. The Chief Justice
delivered their Opinions, and accordingly Judgment was given, That a
Prohibition ought to go to the Spiritual Court for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 20 Car. II. C. B. Sir Henry North Plaintiff, William Coe Defendant.
SIR Henry North has brought an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit,
against William Coe, in a Close upon the new Assignment, called Westrow-hills,
containing Fifty Acres, a Close called the Heyland, containing One hundred
Acres, and another called the Delf and Brink, containing One hundred and fifty
Acres in Milden-hall.

The Defendant pleads, That the said places are part of the Manor of
Milden-hall, whereof the Plaintiff was seized, tempore transgressionis
suppositae, and that he was then, and yet is seized of an ancient Message,
with the Appurtenances in Milden-hall, being one of the free Tenements of the
said Manor, and held of the said Manor, by Rents and other Services, in his
demesne as of Fee.

That there are diverse freehold Tenements, time out of mind, in the said
Manor, held by several Rents and Services, parcel of the said Manor, and that
there were, and are, infra candem Villam, diverse customary Tenements, parcel of
the said Manor, grantable Ad voluntatem Domini, by Copy.

That all the Tenants of the free Tenements, time out of mind, habuerunt, and
usi fuerunt, and all the Tenants of the Customary Tenements, Per consuetudinem
ejusdem Manerii in eodem Manerio, a toto tempore supradict. usitat. and
approbat. habuerunt and habere consueverunt solam and separalem Pasturam
praedict. Clausi vocat. Westrow-hills, cum pertinen. for all their Cattle
(Hogs, Sheep, and Northern Steers except) levant and couchant upon their
respective Messuages and Tenements every year, for all times of the year,
except from the Feast of St. Edmond to the Five and twentieth of March next
following, as belonging and pertaining to their several Tenements.

And likewise had, and used to have, solam and separalem Pasturam praedict.
Clausi vocat. Westrow-hills, from the Feast of St. Edmund every year, to the
Five and twentieth of March, for feeding of all their Cattle (Hogs, Sheep, and
Northern Steers except) levant and couchant, etc. Excepted that the Tenants of
the Demesne of the Manor every year, from the said Feast to the Five and
twentieth of March, by custom of the said Manor depastured their Sheep there.

That at the time of the Trespass, the Defendant put in his own Cattle, levant
and couchant, upon his said Message, Prout ei been licuit, and averreth not
that none of his said Cattle were, Porci, Oves, or Juvenci, called Northern
Steers, but Petit Judicium.

The like Plea he makes for the Closes called the Haylands Delf and Brink, but
that the free Tenants, as before, and customary Tenants, had solam and
separalem Pasturam pro omnibus averiis (Porcis, Ovibus, and Juvencis, called
Northern Steers, excepted) for all times of the year.

And that he put in Averia sua, levantia and cubantia, super tenementum
praedictum prout ei been licuit, and Petit Judicium.

Cum hoc quod verificare vult quod nullus bovium praedict. ipsius Willielmi
suerunt Juvenci, vocat. Northern Steers.

Whereas no mention is of putting in Oxen, but Averia sua in general, and no
averment that no Sheep were put in.

The Plaintiff demurs upon this Plea.

Exceptions to the Pleading.
The Defendant says he was seized de uno antiquo Messuagio, being one of the
freehold Tenements of the said Manor, and that there are diverse freehold
Tenements within the said Manor, and that omnes Tenentes of the said
Tenements, have had solam and separalem pasturam for all their Cattle, levant
and couchant, except Porcis, Ovibus, and Juvencis, called Northern Steers, in
the place called Westrow-hills, and that he put his Cattle, levant and
couchant, prout ei been licuit.

1. That he was seized, de uno antiquo Messuagio, and of no Land, is not
proper; for Cattle cannot be levant in common intention, upon a Message only.

2. He says he put in his Cattle levant and couchant, but avers not as he
ought, That none of them were Porci, Oves, or Northern Steers; for Porci there
is a Rule of Court.

3. He pleads in like manner as to the Hayland Delf and Brink, That he put in
his Cattle, and avers that non Bovium praedict. were Northern Steers; when as
there is no mention of putting in Oxen, but Averia generally, and no averment
that there were no Sheep.

4. The Plea does not set forth the Custom of the Manor, but implicity that
the Freehold and customary Tenants have had and enjoyed per consuetudinem
Manerii solam and separalem pasturam for all their Cattle, which is a double
Plea, both of the custom of the Manor, and of the claim by reason of the
custom, which ought to be several, and the Court should judge and not the
Jury, whether the claim be according to the custom alleged.

The custom may be different from the claim per consuetudinem Manerii, if
particularly alleged.

Lastly, the matter in difference is not before the Court formally by this way
of pleading; for the matter in question must be, Whether the Lord of the Manor
be excluded from pasturing with the Tenants in the place in question, or from
approving the Common? If the Defendant had distrained Damage feasant, and the
Plaintiff brought his Action, and the Defendant avowed propter solam and
separalem pasturam, the Lords right to depasture had come properly in question,
and by natural pleading.

Or if the Lord, upon the Tenants plea, had taken no notice of sola and
separalis pastura, but had confessed that the Land was a Common, and that he
had approved the places in question, leaving sufficient Pasture for the
Tenants, if then the Tenant had demurred upon his Plea of Sola and separalis
pastura, the right of approving had properly come in question.

A man has no right to any thing for which the Law gives no remedy.

This must be a Common or Nothing.

1. If disseis'd, the Assise is Quare disseisivit eum de Communia pasturae suae.

If surcharged, an Admensuratio pasturae is Quare Superoneravit Communiam
pasturam suam.

22 Ass. p. 48. Cok. Litt. 4. b.
Trespass lies not for a Common, but does for Sola and separalis pastura granted
to one or more jointly; But not here, where all cannot join in Action, and
several Actions would cause several Fines to the King for the same offense,
which the Law permits not.

He cannot avow but for Damage done to his Common, not for his Sola and
separalis pastura.

2. No Common or Pasture can be claimed by Custom within the Manor, that may
not be prescribed for out of the Manor, for what one might grant another
might. Foyston and Cratchrod's Case, 4. Rep. f. 31.
But no Prescription can be for Sola and separalis pastura out of the Manor to
such Common. Therefore they shall not claim it by Custom in the Manor.

For Copyholders must prescribe out of the Manor that the Lord for himself,
and his Tenants at will, has always had Common in such a place, which
Prescription gives the Lord what this Custom would take from him.

3. No man enjoys a Real profit, conveyed from the Lord, which he cannot
re-transfer again to the Lords benefit; but a Commoner of such a Common cannot
Release, Surrender, Extinguish, or otherwise Convey this Common to the Lords
benefit.

Smith and Gatewoods Case. 3 Jac. Cr. f. 152 6. Rep. f. 59. 15 E. 2. Title
Prescript. pl. 51.
Which is the reason in Gatewood's Case, That Inhabitants not corporate cannot
prescribe in a Common; none of them can extinguish or release that Common he
claims.

A man prescribed in the sole Pasture, after carrying of the Hay, to a certain
time of the year.

So tempore E. 1. a Prescription for all the Pasture, and the Owner of the Soil
could only plough, Fitz. pl. 55. super.
sow, and carry his Corn, but not depasture the Grass at all.

But no Case, where different persons had by different Title, as here, in the
same ground, Solam and separalem pasturam.

Nor no Case where Sola and separalis pastura is granted to a man and his
Heirs; which seems the same as granting omne proficuum terrae: For where it is
alleged there may be Mines, Woods, and the like, notwithstanding the Grant of
Solam and separalem pasturam, these are casual, and not constant profits; they
may be, or not be at all.

When a man brings an Action, as an Entry sur Disseisin, or the like, where he
must allege Esplees, the profit of a Mine will not serve, but for the Mine it
self, which may be a divided Inheritance from the Soil.

So may Woodland be a divided Inheritance from the Soil, and the profit or
cutting of that is not Esplees of the Land generally, but of the Woodland, but
the profits of all and every part, are the Esplees of the Land, and proves
seisin of the whole Land, which are in the form of pleading the Corn, Grass,
and Hay, which are profits pour moy and pour tout, and where Sola and separalis
pastura is granted generally away, Seisin cannot be alleged in taking any of
these.

It is agreed generally for Law, Cok. Litt. f. 122. a.
That a Prescription to have Solam and separalem Communiam uncertain Land, does
not exclude the Owner of the Soil to have Pasture or Estovers.

But by that Book a man may prescribe to have Solam vesturam terrae from a
certain day, to a certain day in the year, and so to have Solam pasturam
terrae. And so are the Books of 15 E. 2. pl. 51. and of E. 1. pl. 55. in
Fitz-herbert, Title Prescription, but they go no further, nor determine what
Estate he has who claims Solam and separalem pasturam to him and his Heirs,
excluding the Lord wholly from any Pasture, Hay, or Corn.

In granting or prescribing to have Solam and separalem Communiam, why the Lord
is not excluded, is not clear by that Book, or any other. For,

There are two notions or senses of the word Communia, the one, as it signifies
that Interest in the Common which one Commoner has against another, not to
have the Common surcharged. And is that Interest, Fitz. Na. Br. de
Admensuratione pasturae, f. 125. a.
to which the Writ De Admensuratione pasturae relates, which only lies for
Commoner against Commoner, and not for a Commoner against the Lord, or for the
Lord against a Commoner, as is clear by Fitz-herbert.

And in this sense there may be Sola and separalis Communia, for only one may
have right of Common, and no more, either by Grant or Prescription. So in this
sense one part of the Tenants of a Manor may have the sole right of Commoning
in a certain place, excluding the other part of the Tenants, Foyston's C. 4.
Rep.
and may claim there Solam and separalem Communiam a caeteris Tenentibus
Manerii.

The other notion of Communia is, when one or more has right to Pasture with
the Owner of the Soil; and in this sense it is impossible for a man to have
solam and separalem Communiam, for one cannot have that alone which is to be
had with another, nor do that alone which is to be done with another.

So as a man may have Solam and separalem Communiam in that sense, that none is
to be a Commoner but himself, but not in that sense that none else should
depasture the Land but he; for Communia cannot signify an absolute several.

As it is a Contradiction, that a Common, which is to more than one, can be a
several, and belong but to one.

So it is an equal Contradiction, That what in its nature is to be the right of
one only, can be Common, and the right of more than one.

Others cannot have what is only to be had by me, more than I can have only
what is to be had by others with me.

Therefore Sola and separalis Pastura may be enjoyed by one, or by many
jointly, and by way of Survivor, but not by many by different Titles, as
belonging to several Free-holds, for Sola and separalis pastura can be, but
Soli and separatim.

Na. Br. f. 231. a. l. c. 8 E. 4. f. 17. Br. grants. pl. 95.
If the King had a Corody from an Abbey of two or three loaves of Bread per diem,
and of so many measures of Drink, this might be granted to two or three several
persons. But if he had a Corody of one Meal a day, or Sustentationem unius
Valecti per diem, this could not be granted but to one, because its nature was
confined to one.

A man cannot have an Assise of Common in his own Soil, nor an Admensuratio
pasturae, and a Common being a thing that lies in grant, he cannot grant it to
himself, and no other can grant it in his Soil to him.

So as I conclude, one or more may have Solam and separalem Communiam from
other Commoners, but not from the Lord, who is no Commoner.

I cannot discern the use of this kind of Prescription for the Tenants; for if
it be to hinder the Lord from approving the Common, I think they are mistaken.

The Statute of Merton gives the Owner of the Soil power to approve Common
Grounds appendant, Cok. 2. Instit. f. 86.475. West. 2. c. 46.
or appurtenant, by Prescription, as this is, if sufficient Pasture be left for
the Commoners, without considering whether the Commoners had the Common solely
to themselves, excluding the Lord, or otherwise. For as to Approvement (which
the Statute provided for) the Lord was equally, bound pasturing with his
Tenants, or not pasturing with them. Therefore the Statute considered not that,
but that the Lord should approve his own ground, so the Commoners had
sufficient, whatever the nature of the Common were.

To prescribe to have in such a part of the Lord's Lands Communiam for their
Cattle, excludes not the Lord.

To prescribe to have their Pasturam Communem for their Cattle, is the same
thing, and excludes not the Lord.

To prescribe to have solam and separalem Communiam, is naught by Admittance.

Why then to prescribe to have solam and separalem Pasturam Communiam, which is
agreed to be the same with Communiam, is naught also.

Now, to express another way that they have solam and separalem Pasturam Common
to them, or wherein they Common, changes not the matter in the meaning, but
order of the words.

The Statute of Merton is, cap. 4.
1. The Lords could not make their profit de Vastis, Boscis, and Pasturis
Communibus, when the Tenants had sufficientem pasturam quantum pertinet ad
tenementa sua.

2. Si coram Justiciariis recognitum sit quod tantum pasturae habeant quantum
sufficit, etc.

3. Et quod habeant liberum ingressum and egressum de tenementis suis, usque ad
pasturam suam, tunc recedant quiet.

4. And that then the Lords faciant commodum suum de terris vastis and pasturis.

5. Et si per Assisam recognitum fuerit quod non habent sufficientem pasturam.

6. Tunc recuperent Seisinam suam per visum Juratorum, ita quod per Sacramentum
eorum habeant sufficientem pasturam.

7. Quod si Recognitum sit quod habeant sufficientem pasturam, etc.

Communibus pasturis is once named, Pastura sua for Communia sua, seven times;
and the word Communia not named in this Act, but where it mentions.

8. The Writ of Novel disseisin de Communia pasturae suae, which makes eight
times.

1. The granting solam and separalem Pasturam of or in Black-acre, may signify
an exclusion only of having Pasture in White-acre, or any other place than
Black-acre.

2. The granting solam and separalem pasturam of or in Black-acre, may signify
the exclusion of any other person to have Pasture in Black-acre, but the
Grantee, in which sense the word Solam signifies as much as totam pasturam.

3. If the Grant be of all the Pasture, the Grantor reserves nothing to himself
of that which he grants, but all passes into the Grantee; but if the Grantor
restrains the Grant, after general words of granting all the Pasture, the
Restriction is for the benefit of the Grantor.

Therefore when the Grant is of Solam and separalem pasturam of or in
Black-acre, all the Pasture is supposed to pass, without restriction, to the
Grantee; but if words follow in the Grant, pro duabus vaccis tantum, or pro
averiis levantibus and cubantibus super certum tenementum, that is a
restriction for the benefit of the Grantor; for a man cannot in the same Grant
restrain for his own benefit the largeness of his Grant, and yet have no
benefit of his restriction.

The Court was divided; The Chief Justice, and Justice Tyrrell for the
Plaintiff. Justice Archer and Justice Wild for the Defendant.

Hill. 20 and 21 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 1552. Adjud'gd 23 Car. II. C. B. Gardner
verse. Sheldon. In Ejectione Firmae for Lands in Sussex. Upon not Guilty pleaded,
IT is found by the Special Verdict, that long before the supposed Trespass and
Ejectment,

One William Rose was seized of the Land in question in his Demesne, as of Fee,
and so seized, made his last Will and Testament, November the Second, 13 Jac.
prout sequitur, and sets forth the Will; wherein among other things,

As touching the Lease which I have in my Farm, called Easter-gate, and all my
Interest therein, I do give and assign the said Lease, and all my Interest
therein, unto my Friends John Clerk, George Littlebury, and Edward Rose, to the
intent that, with the Rents and Profits thereof, they may help to pay my Debts,
if my other Goods and Chattels shall not suffice. And after my Debts paid, my
will is that the Rents and Profits of the said Land shall wholly go for and
toward the raising of Portions for my two Daughters, Mary and Katherine, for
each of them Six hundred pounds, and for my Daughter Mary Two hundred pounds
more, which was given her by my Father, her Grandfathers Will. And those Sums
being raised, my will is the Rents and Profits of the said Land shall be wholly
to the use and benefit of my Son George, etc.

Item, I give to my daughter Mary my greatest Silver Bowl.

Item, I give to my daughter Katherine one plain Silver Bowl, etc.

My will and meaning is, That if it happen that my Son George, Mary and
Katherine my daughters, to die without Issue of their Bodies lawfully begotten,
then all my Free-lands, which I am now seized of, shall come, remain, and be to
my said Nephew William Rose, and his Heirs for ever.

They find that the said William Rose, the Testator, before the Trespass, viz.
the First of June, 14 Jac. died at Easter-gate, in the said County of Sussex,
seized as aforesaid.

That at the time of his death, he had Issue of his body lawfully begotten,
George Rose his only Son, and Mary and Katherine his two Daughters.

That George, the Son, entered into the Premises the First of July, 14 Jac. and
was seized prout Lex postulat.

Then after, and before the time of the Trespass, viz. June the Eight and
twentieth, 14 Car. 2. George died so seized of the Premises at Easter-gate
aforesaid.

That at the time of his death he had Issue of his body two Daughters, Judith
now wife of Daniel Sheldon, one of the Defendants, and Margaret now wife of Sir
Joseph Sheldon, the other Defendant.

That after the death of George their Father, the said Judith and Margaret
entered, and were seized before the Trespass supposed, prout Lex postulat.

That Mary, one of the daughters of the said William Rose, July the First, 1
Car. 2. died, and that Katherine her Sister survived her, and is still living.

That the said Katherine, October the First, 20 Car. 2. at East-Grimsted,
entered into the said Tenements, and was seized prout Lex postulat, and the same
day and year demis'd the same to the said Thomas Gardner, the Plaintiff, from
the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel then last past, for the term of Five
years then next following; By virtue whereof the said Thomas Gardner entered,
and was possessed, until the said Joseph and Daniel Sheldon, the same First day
of October, 20 Car. 2. entered upon him and Ejected him.

If upon the whole matter the Justices shall think the said Joseph and Daniel
Sheldon culpable; they find them culpable, and assess Damages to Six pence, and
Costs to Twenty shillings. But if the Justices shall conceive them not
culpable, they find them not culpable upon the words, My will is, if it happen
my Son George, Mary and Katherine my Daughters, do dye without Issue of their
Bodies lawfully begotten, then all my Free Lands, which I am now seized of,
shall come, remain, and be to my said Nephew William Rose and his Heirs for
ever.

The first Question is, Whether by this Will any Estate be

If any Estate be devised, what Estate is so devised to them,

The third Question is, What Estate is by this Will devised

1. As to the first, it is clear, That no Estate is devised to the Son or
Daughters, or any of them by express and explicit devise; but if any be, it is
devised by implication only, and collection of the Testators intent.

2. If any Estate be given by this Will by Implication to the Son or Daughters,
or any of them, it must be either a Joint Estate to them for their lives, with
several inheritances in tail, or several Estates tail to them in Succession,
that is to one first, and the Heirs of his or her body, and then to another,
and so successively.

3. Such an Intail in Succession cannot possibly be, because it appears not by
the Will who should first take and have such Estate, and who next, etc. and
therefore such an Intail were merely void, for the incertainty of the person
first taking, as was rightly observed, and assented to at the Bar.

It remains then, That the Estate devised by this Will (if any be) to the Son
and his two Sisters, must be a joint Estate for their lives, with several
Inheritances to them in tail, by implication only.

And I am of Opinion, That no such Estate is devised by this Will to the Son
and two Daughters; and I shall first observe, That the Law does not, in
Conveyances of Estates, admit Estates to pass by implication regularly, as
being a way of passing Estates not agreeable to the plainness required by Law,
in transferring Estates from one to another. And for that the Case is,

A man according to the Custom of the Manor, Seagood and Hones Case, 10 C. 1.
Cr. f, 336.
surrendered to the use of Francis Reeve, and of John, Son of the said Francis,
and of the longest liver of them; and for want of Issue of John lawfully
begotten, the Remainder to the youngest Son of Mary Seagood, John had only an
Estate for life, and no Estate tail by implication, it being by conveyance.
Though (as the Book is) it might perhaps be an Estate tail by Will; which
shows, Estates by implication are not at all favored in Law, though in men's
last Wills they are allowed with due restrictions.

In a Will Estates are often given by implication. But I shall take this
difference concerning Estates that pass by implication, though it be by Will.

An Estate given by implication of a Will, if it be to the disinheriting of the
Heir at Law, is not good, if such implication be only constructive and
possible, but not a necessary implication.

I mean by a possible implication, when it may be intended that the Testator
did purpose, and had an intention to devise his Land to A. but it may also be
as reasonably intended, that he had no such purpose or intention to devise it
to A.

But I call that a devise by necessary implication to A. when A. must have the
thing devised, or none else can have it.

And therefore if the implication be only possible, and not necessary, the
Testators intent ought not to be construed to disinherit the Heir, in thwarting
the Dispose which the Law makes of the Land, leaving it to descend, where the
intention of the Testator is not apparently, and not ambiguously to the
contrary.

Spirt and Bences C. 8 Car. 1. Cro. 368.
To this purpose the Case is 8 Car. 1. where Thomas Cann devised to Henry his
youngest Son; Item, I give to the said Henry my Pastures in the South-fields,
and also I will that all Bargains, Grants, and Covenants, which I have from
Nicholas Welb, my Son Henry shall enjoy, and his Heirs for ever; and for lack
of Heirs of his Body, to remain to my Son Francis for ever.

It grew a Question, Whether this were an Intayl to Henry of the South-fields,
or only of the Bargains and Grants which the Testator had from Welb, which was
a very measuring Case; and in determining this Case

All the Four Judges agreed, That the words of a Will, which shall disinherit
the Heir at Common Law, must have a clear and apparent intent, and not be
ambiguous, or any way doubtful, (So are the very words of the Book) and
therefore they resolved in that Case, That only the Bargains and Grants had
from Welb were intayl'd to the youngest Son, and that he had only an Estate for
life in the Pastures in the South-fields.

1. I shall therefore now clear the difference I have taken, That the Heir
shall never be disinherited by a devise in a Will by implication, and not
explicit, where the implication is only a possible implication, and not a
necessary implication.

2. In the second place I shall show, That the words of this Will do not import
a devise to the son and the two daughters for their lives jointly, with
respective Inheritances in tail to the Heirs of their several bodies, by any
necessary implication, but only by an implication that is possible by
construction.

3. In the third place I shall show, That being so as to the Case in question,
it is not material whether the devise by way of Remainder to the Nephew, be
void or not.

4. In the fourth place, ex abundante, and to make the Will of the Testator not
ineffectual in that part of the Will, I shall show, That the Nephew has not
the Land devised to him, when the son and the two daughters dye without Issue
of their respective bodies, by way of Remainder, which cannot be but by way of
Executory devise, which well may be.

5. That by such Executory devise no perpetuity is consequent to it; or if it
were, such a perpetuity is no way repugnant or contrary to Law.

To manifest the difference taken between an implication in a Will that is
necessary, and implication that is only possible, the first Case I shall cite
is that known Case 13 H. 7. which I shall exactly put as it is in the Book at
large. 13 H. 7. f. 17. Br. Devise pl. 52.


A man devised his Goods to his wife, and that after the decease of his wife,
his son and heir shall have the House where his Goods are: The son shall not
have the House during the wives life; for though it be, not expressly devised to
the wife, yet his intent appears, the son shall not have it during her life;
and therefore it is a good devise to the wife for life, by implication, and the
Devisors intent, Quod omnes Justitiarii concesserunt. Here I observe,

1. That this was a devise of the House to the wife by necessary implication;
for it appears by the Will that the Testators son and heir was not to have it
until after the death of the wife, and then it must either be devised to the
wife for life by necessary implication, or none was to have it during the wives
life, which could not be.

2. I observe upon this Case, That though the Goods were by particular devise
given to the wife, and expressly, that was no hindrance to the wives having the
House devised to her, also by her husband by implication necessary: which I the
rather note, because men of great name have conceived, That where, the devisee
takes any thing by express devise of the Testator, such devisee shall not have
any other thing by that Will devised, only by implication.

Which difference, if it were according to Law, it makes clearly against the
Plaintiff, because his Lessor being one of the Daughters of the Testator, had
devised to her expressly for a Portion, and therefore she should not have any
Estate in the Land by the same Will, by a Devise by Implication, as is
pretended.

But the truth is, that is a vain difference that has been taken by many, as I
shall anon evince, and therefore I shall not insist upon any Aid from it to my
conclusion.

3. I note that this Devise being before the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Wills, the
House devised must be conceived devisable by Custom at the Common Law.

Before I proceed further, I must take notice that Brook, in abridging the Case
of 13 H. 7. in the same numero, says,

Devise Br. n. 52.
It was agreed, tempore H. 8. per omnes, That if a man will that J. S. shall
have his Land in Dale, after the death of his wife, the wife shall have the
House for her life by his apparent intent. I note first, That this Case is
imperfectly put in Brook, for it mentions a devise of the Land in Dale to J. S.
after the death of his wife, and then concludes that the wife shall have the
House for her life by his apparent intent; whereas no mention is made of a
House, but of the Land in Dale in the devise. And this Case seems to be only a
memory of another Case, Br. Devise 29 H. 8. n. 48.
not abridg'd by Brook out of any other Year-book, but reported in his
Abridgment in the Title Devise, as a Case happened in 29 H. 8. which is,

That if a man will that J. S. shall have his Land after the death of his wife,
and dies, the wife of the Devisor shall have those Lands for term of her life
by those words, ratione intentionis voluntatis. Which Cases being in truth but
one and the same Case, seem to go further than the Case of 13 H. 7. for there,
as I observed before, the wife was to take by necessary implication, because
the Heir was excluded expressly by the Will, during the life of the wife.

But by this Case in Br. Title Devise n. 48. and 52. there is no excluding of
the Heir, and yet it is said the wife shall have the Land during her life by
implication, which is no necessary implication, as in the Case of 13 H. 7. but
only a possible implication, and seems to cross that difference I have taken
before.

But this Case of Br. has many times been denied to be Law, and several
Judgments have been given against it. I shall give you some of them, to
justify the difference I have taken, exactly as I shall press the Cases.

Trinity 3 E. 6. A man seized of a Manor, part in Demesne, 3 E. 6. Moore. Rep.
f. 7. n. 24.
and part in Services, devised all the demesne Lands expressly to his wife,
during her life; and devised to her also all the Services and chief Rents for
Fifteen years, and then devised the whole Manor to a stranger after the death
of his wife.

It was resolved by all the Justices, That the last devise should not take
effect for any part of the Manor, but after the wives death; but yet the wife
should not have the whole Manor by implication during her life, but should
have only the demesnes for her life, and the Rent and Services for Fifteen
years, and that after the Fifteen years ended the Heir should have the Rents
and Services as long as the wife lived: Here being no necessary Implication
that the wife should have all the Manor during her life, with an exclusion of
the Heir; she had no more than was explicity given her by the Will, viz. the
Demesnes for life, and the Rents and Services for Fifteen years; but after the
Fifteen years the Heir had the Rents and Services, for it could be no more at
most but a possible Implication that the wife should have the whole Manor,
during her life.

But with a small variance of this Case if the demesnes had been devised to the
wife for life, and the Services and Rents for Fifteen years, and the whole
Manor after the wives life to J. S. and that after the wives life, and the
life of J. S. his Heir should have had the Demesnes, and Services, and Rents,
in that Case it had been exactly the same with the Case of 13 H. 7. because the
Devisors intent had been then apparent that the Son was not to have the Manor,
or any part, until the wife and stranger were both dead, and as it was
adjudg'd, the stranger had nothing in the Manor until the wifes death;
therefore in that case, by necessary implication, the wife must have had both
Demesnes and Services during her life, notwithstanding the explicit devise to
her of the Rents and Services for Fifteen years, otherwise none should have had
the Rents and Services after the Fifteen years, during the wives life, which
was not to be intended.

15 El. Moore f. 123. n. 265.
Another Case I shall make use of, is a Case Paschae 15 El. A man seized of a
Message, and of diverse Lands occupied with it, time out of mind, leased part
of it to a stranger for years, and after made his last Will in these words, I
will and bequeath to my wife my Message, with all the Lands thereto belonging
in the occupation of the Lessee, and after the decease of my Wife, I will that
it, with all the rest of my Lands, shall remain to my younger Son.

The Question in that Case was, Whether the wife should have the Land not
leased by implication for her life, because it was clear, the younger Son was
to have no part, until the death of the wife. And the Lord Anderson at first,
grounding himself upon that Case in Brook (as it seems) of 29 H. 8. twice by
Brook remembered in his Title Devise n. 28. and after n. 52. was of opinion,
That the wife should have the Land not leased by implication: But Mead was of a
contrary opinion, for that it was expressly devised, That the wife should have
the Land leas'd; and therefore no more should be intended to be given her, but
the Heir should have the Land not in lease, during the wives life. To which
Anderson, mutata opinione, agreed. Hence perhaps many have collected, That a
person shall not take Land by Implication of a Will, if he takes some other
Land expressly by the same Will; but that is no warrantable difference.

For vary this Case but a little, as the former case was varied, That the Land
in lease was devised to the wife for life, and after the death of the wife, all
the Devisors land was devised to the youngest Son, as this Case was; and that
after the death of the wife, and the youngest son, the Devisors Heir should
have the Land both leas'd, and not leas'd: it had been clear that the Heir
(exactly according to the Case of 13 H. 7.) should have been excluded from all
the Land leas'd, and not leas'd, until after the death of the wife and the
younger son. And therefore in such case the wife, by necessary implication,
should have had the Land not leas'd, as she had the Land leas'd by express
devise, and that notwithstanding she had the leas'd Land by express devise, for
else none could have the Land not leas'd during the wives life.

Horton verse. Horton. 2 Jac. Cr. f. 74. and 75.
Wadham made a Lease for years, upon condition the Lessee should not alien to
any besides his Children. The Lessee devises the term to Humphrey his son,
after the death of his wife, and made one Marshall and another his Executors,
and died: The Lessor entered, as for breach of the Condition, supposing this a
devise to the wife of the term by implication. The opinion of the Judges was,
It was no devise by implication, but the Executors should have the term until
the wives death, but it was said, If it had been devised to his Executors after
the death of his wife, there the wife must have it by implication, or none
could have had it. But Popham denied that Case, because if the devise had been
to the Executors after the wives death; the Executors should, when the wife
died, have had the term, as Legatees, but until her death they should have it
as Executors generally, which by all opinions fully confirms the difference
taken, That a devise shall not be good by implication, when the implication is
not necessary; and in this Case all agreed the Case in 13 H. 7. to be good Law,
because the implication there was necessary.

Edward Clatch being seized of two Messuages in Soccage tenure, Dyer 15 and 16
El. 4. 330. b.
and having Issue a Son and two Daughters by three several Venters. His Son
being dead in his life time, and leaving two Daughters, who were Heirs at Law
to the Father, devised one of the Messuages to Alice his Daughter, and her
Heirs for ever; and the other to Thomazine his Daughter, and her Heirs for
ever, with limitation, That if Alice died without Issue, living Thomazine,
Thomazine should then have Alice's part, to her and her Heirs; and if Thomazine
died before the Age of Sixteen years, Alice should have her part in Fee also.
And if both his said Daughters died without Issue of their bodies, then the
Daughters of his Son should have the Messuages. The youngest daughter of the
Testator died without Issue, having past her Age of sixteen years, It was
resolved, That the words in the Will, If his two Daughters died without Issue
of their Bodies, did not create, by implication, cross remainders in tail to
the Devisors Daughters, whereby the eldest should take the part of the
youngest, but her part should go to the Heirs at Law, according to the
Limitation of the Will; and those words were but a designation of the time when
the Heirs at Law should have the Messuages.

Note, That one of the Daughters dying without Issue, the Heirs at Law by the
Will had her part, without staying until the other Daughter died without Issue.

1. From these Cases I first conclude, That only possible implication by a
Will, shall not give the Land from the right Heir, but a necessary implication
which excludes the right Heir, shall give it.

2. That the difference taken is not sound, That one shall not take, by
implication of a Will, any Land where the same person has other Land or Goods
expressly devised by the same Will; for if the implication be necessary, the
having of Land, or any other thing, by express devise, will not hinder another
taking also by implication, as appears in the three Cases by me made use of,
viz. 13 H. 7. 3 E. 6. 15 Eliz. cited out of Moore.

3. Whether any thing be given expressly by Will, or not, a possible Implication
only shall not disinherit the Heir, where it may as well be intended that
nothing was devised by implication, as that it was. But if any man think that
to be material, in this Case the Daughters had respective Portions expresty
devised them, viz. Six hundred pounds to each of them, and therefore shall not
have the Land also by implication only possible to disinherit the right Heir.

second point, These words (My Will is, if it happen my Son George, Mary and
Katharine my Daughters, to dye without Issue of their Bodies lawfully begotten,
then all my Free-lands shall remain and be to my said Nephew William Rose and
his Heirs for ever) are so far from importing a devise of the Land to the Son
and Daughters for their lives, with respective Inheritances in tail by any
necessary implication, that both Grammatically, and to common intendment, they
import only a designation and appointment of the time when the Land shall come
to the Nephew, namely when George, Mary, and Katherine happen to dye Issuless,
and not before.

And where the words of a Will are of ambiguous and doubtful construction, they
shall not be interpreted to the disinheriting of the right Heir, as is already
showed.

This being clear, That there is no devise by this Will of the Land by
implication in any kind to the Son and Daughters, it follows that Katherine,
the surviving Daughter of the Testator, and Lessor of the Plaintiff, had no
Title to enter and make the Lease to the Plaintiff Gardner; and then as to the
Case in question before us, which is only, Whether the Defendants be culpable
of Ejecting the Plaintiff? It will not be material whether

The devise to the Nephew, William Rose, be void or not; and if not void, how
and when he shall take by the devise, which may come in question perhaps
hereafter.

But to that point ex abundante, and to make the Will not ineffectual in that
point of the devise to the Nephew, if no Estate for lives, or other Estate, be
created by this Will by Implication to the Son and Daughters, it follows, That
the Nephew can take nothing by way of Remainder, for the Remainder must depend
upon some particular Estate, and be created the same time with the particular
Estate. Cok. Litt. f. 49. a.
The Remainder is the residue of an Estate in Land depending upon a particular
Estate, and created together with the same, and the Will creating no particular
Estate, the consequent must be, That the Land was left to descend in Fee-simple
to the heir at law, without creating either particular Estate or Remainder upon
it.

Sir Edward Coke has a Case, Cok. Litt. f. 18. a.
but quotes no Authority for it; If Land be given to H. and his heirs, as long
as B. has heirs of his body, the Remainder over in Fee, the Remainder is void,
being a Remainder after a Fee-simple, though that Fee-simple determines when no
heirs are left of the body of B. whether that case be law or not, I shall not
now discuss; in regard that when such a base Fee determines for want of Issue
of the body of B. the Land returns to the Grantor and his heirs, as a kind of
Reversion, and if there can be a Reversion of such Estate, I know not why a
Remainder may not be granted of it, but for the former reason, this can be no
Remainder, because no particular Estate is upon which it depends; and if the
Lord Coke's Case be law, it is the stronger, Cok. Litt. f. 18. a. Sect. 11.
that no Remainder is in this Case.

But without question, a Remainder cannot depend upon an absolute Fee-simple by
necessary reason; For when all a man has of Estate, or any thing else, is
given, or gone away, nothing remains but an absolute Fee-simple, being given or
gone out of a man, that being all, no other or further Estate can remain to be
given or disposed, and therefore no Remainder can be of a pure Fee-simple.

To this purpose is the Case of Hearne and Allen in this Court. 2 Car. 1. Cr.
f. 57.
Richard Keen seized of a Message and Lands in Cheping-Norton, having Issue
Thomas his Son, and Anne a Daughter by the same Venture, devised his Land to
Thomas his Son, and his heirs for ever; and for want of heirs of Thomas, to
Anne and her heirs, and died.

It became a Question, Whether Thomas had an Estate in Fee or in Tail by this
Will, for he could not dye without heir if his Sister outlived him, who was to
take according to the intent of the Devisor? Two Judges held it (and with
reason) to be an Estate tail in Thomas, and the Remainder to the Daughter, who
might be his heir, showed, That the Devise to him and his heirs could be
intended only to be to him and the heirs of his body; But three other Judges
held it to be a devise in Fee, but all agreed, if the Remainder had been to a
Stranger it had been void, for then Thomas (which is only to my purpose) had
had an absolute Estate in Fee, after which there could be no Remainder, which
is undoubted law.

The Case out of Coke's Littleton, and this Case, are the same to this purpose,
That a Remainder cannot depend upon a Fee-simple; yet in another respect they
much differ: For in this last Case, after an Estate in Fee devised to Thomas,
and if he died without heir, the Remainder to a Stranger or Sister of the half
blood, not only the Remainder was void as a Remainder, but no future devise
could have been made of the land by the Devisor; for if Thomas died without
heir the land escheated, and the Lords Title would precede any future devise.

But in that Case of Sir Edward Coke, which he puts by way of Grant, if it be
put by way of devise, That if land be devised to H. and his heirs as long as B.
has heirs of his body, the Remainder over, such later devise will be good,
though not as a Remainder, yet as an Executory devise, because somewhat
remained to be devised when the Estate in Fee determined upon B. his having no
Issue of his Body.

And as an Executory Devise, and not as a Remainder, I conceive the Nephew
shall well take in the present Case. And the intention of the Testator, by his
Will, will run as if he had said, I leave my Land to descend to my Son and his
Heirs, according to the Common Law, until he, and both my Daughters, shall
happen to dye without Issue; And then I devise my Land to my Nephew William
Rose, and his Heirs. Or as if he had said, my Son shall have all my Land, To
have and to hold, to him and his Heirs, in Fee-simple, as long as any Heirs of
the bodies of A.B. and c. shall be living, and for want of such Heirs, I devise
my Land to my Nephew William Rose and his Heirs. The Nephew shall take as by a
future and Executory Devise.

And there is no difference, whether such devise be limited upon the contingent
of three Strangers dying without Heirs of their bodies, or upon the contingent
of three of the Devisors own Children, dying without Heirs of their Bodies; for
if a future devise may be upon any contingent, after a Fee-simple, it may as
well be upon any other contingent, if it appear by the Will the Testator
intended his Son and Heir should have his Land in Fee-simple.

This way of Executory devise after a Fee-simple of any nature, was in former
Ages unknown, as appears by a Case in the Lord Dyer, 29 H. 8. f. 33. concerning
a Devise to the Prior of St. Bartholomew in West-Smithfield, by the clear
Opinion of Baldwin and Fitz herbert, the greatest Lawyers of the Age.

But now nothing more ordinary. The Cases are for the most part remembered in
Pell and Browns Case, that is, Dyer f. 124. Ed. Clatch his Case, f. 330. b. and
354. Wellock and Hamonds Case cited in Borastons Case, 3. Rep. Fulmerston and
Stewards Case, etc.

I shall instance two Cases. The first is Haynsworths and Prettyes Case, Where
a man seized of Land in Soccage, having Issue two Sons and a Daughter, devised
to his youngest Son and Daughter Twenty pounds apiece, to be paid by his eldest
Son, and devised his Lands to his eldest Son and his Heirs, upon Condition if
he paid not those Legacies, that his Land should be to his second Son and
Daughter, and their Heirs. The eldest Son failed of payment. After Argument
upon a Special Verdict, It was resolved by the Court clearly, That the second
Son and Daughter should have the Land.

1. For that the devise to his Son and his Heir in Fee, Hill. 41. El. Cr. 833.
a.
being no other then what the Law gave him was void.

2. That it was a future devise to the second Son and Daughter, upon the
contingent of the eldest Sons default of payment.

3. That it was no more in effect than if he had devised, That if his eldest
Son did not pay all Legacies, that his land should be to the Legatories, and
there was no doubt in that Case, but the land, in default of payment, should
vest in them.

Which Case, in the reason of law, differs not from the present Case, where the
land is devised by devise future and executory to the Nephew, upon a contingent
to happen by the Testators Son and Daughters having no issue.

18 Jac. Pell and Browns C. Cro. f. 590.
The second Case is that of Pell and Brown, the Father being seized of certain
land, having Issue William his eldest Son, Thomas and Richard Brown, devised
the land to Thomas and his Heirs for ever; and if Thomas died without Issue,
living William, then William should have the lands to him, his Heirs and
Assigns.

1. This was adjudg'd an Estate in Fee-simple in Thomas.

2. That William by way of Executory devise, had an Estate in Fee-simple in
possibility, if Thomas died without Issue before him.

And it being once clear, That the Estate of Thomas was a Fee-simple,
determinable upon a contingent, and not an Estate tail, and so in the present
case it being cleared, that George, the Testators Son, had the land descended
to him in Fee from the Testator, and took no Estate tail expressly, or by
implication from the Will, it will not be material whether the Contingent which
shall determine that Fee-simple proceeds from the person which has such
determinable Fee, or from another, or partly from him, and partly from another,
as in Haynsworth's Case, the Son determined his Fee-simple by not paying the
Legacies; in Pell and Brown's Case, Thomas his Fee-simple determined by his
dying without Issue, living William, the Fee-simple vested in George the Son by
descent, determines when he and his two Sisters dye without Issue; and upon
such determination in every of these Cases, the future and executory devise
must take effect.

But the great Objection is, That if this should be an executory devise to the
Nephew, upon the contingent of George the Son, and both his Sisters dying
without Issue. It will be dangerous to introduce a new way of perpetuity; for
if a man have several Children, and shall permit his Estate to descend, or by
his Will devise it to his Heir, so as he may therein have an unquestionable
Fee-simple (which is the same with permitting it to descend) he may then devise
it futurely, when all his Children shall dye without Issue of their bodies to
J. S. and his Heirs, as long as A. B. and C. strangers, shall have any Heirs of
their bodies living, and then to a third person by like future devise: For if
he should devise it futurely to J. S. and his Heirs, as long as J. S. had any
Heirs of his body, it were a clear Estate tail in J. S. upon which no future
devise could be, but it would be a Remainder to be docked.

This Objection was in some measure made by Doderidge in Pell and Browns Case,
and the Judges said there was no danger, Vid. Styles Rep. Gay and Gaps Case,
258, 275.
because the Estate in Fee of Thomas did not determine by his dying without
Heir of his body generally, but by dying without Issue, living William; for if
the land had been given to Thomas and his Heirs for ever, and if he died
without Heirs of his body, then to William and his Heirs, Thomas his Estate had
been judged an Estate tail with the Remainder to William, and not a Fee, upon
which no future or executory devise can be. So was it adjudg'd in Foy and Hinds
Case 22 Jac. Cr. f. 695. and 6. and anciently 37 Ass. p. 18. 5. H. 5. f. 6. and
to be within the reason of Mildmay and Corbets Case of Perpetuities.

But in Pell and Browns Case, the Judges said it was more dangerous to destroy
future devises, than to admit of such Perpetuities as could follow from them
any way by determinable Fee-simples, which is true; for a Fee simple,
determinable upon a contingent, is a Fee-simple to all intents, but not so
durable as absolute Fee-simples. And all Fee-simples are unequally durable, for
one will escheat sooner than another by the failer of Heirs. An Estate of
Fee-simple will determine in a Bastard with his life, if he want Issue. An
Estate to a man and his Heirs as long as John Styles has any Heir, which is no
absolute Fee-simple, is doubtless as durable as the Estate in Fee which John
Styles has to him and his Heirs, which is an absolute Fee-simple. Nor do I
know any Law simply against a Perpetuity, but against Intails of Perpetuity,
for every Fee-simple is a perpetuity, but in the accident of Alienation, and
Alienation is an incident to a Fee-simple determinable upon a contingent, as to
any more absolute or more perdurable Fee-simple.

The Chief Justice, Justice Archer, and Justice Wild for the Defendant.
Justice Tyrrell for the Plaintiff.

Judgment for the Defendant.

Hill. 21 and 22 Car. II. C. B. Craw versus Ramsey. Philip Craw is Plaintiff,
and John Ramsey Defendant, In an Action of Trespass and Ejectment.
THE Plaintiff declares, That Lionel Tolmach Baronet, and Humphrey Weld
Esquire, January the Twentieth, the Sixteenth of the King, demis'd to the
Plaintiff the Manor of Kingston, with the appurtenances, in the County of
Surrey, one Message, two Barns, one Dove-house, two Gardens, eighty Acres of
Land, and ten Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances in Kingston aforesaid,
and other places, and also the Rectory of Kingston aforesaid, To have and to
hold to the said Philip and his Assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity last
past, for five years next ensuing. By virtue whereof he entered into the
Premises, and was possessed, until the Defendant, the said Twentieth of
January in the Sixteenth year of the King, entered upon him, and Ejected him
with force, to his Damage of Forty pounds.

To this the Defendant pleads he is not Culpable.

Upon a Special Verdict it appeared, That

Robert Ramsey, Alien, Antenatus, had Issue 1. Robert 2. Nicholas 3. John 4.
George
Antenatos

Robert the son, had Issue Margaret Isabel Jane
Antenatas, living the First of October. 14 Car. 1. and now have Issue at
Kingston.

John naturalized, 9. Maii, 1 Jac.
John, the third son, by the name of Sir John Ramsey, was naturalized by Act of
Parliament, holden at Westminster, May the Ninth, 1. Jac. and after made Earl
of Holdernes.

George Ramsey, the fourth Son, George naturalized, 7 Jac.
was naturalized in the fourth Session of Parliament held at Westminster, begun
by Prorogation, 19 Febr. 17 Jac. and after had Issue John primogenitum filium,
Quodque idem Johannes had Issue John the now Defendant, primogenitum suum
filium, but finds not where either of these were born, nor the death of George.

Nicholas the second Son, had Issue Patrick his only Son, Nicholas had Issue
Patrick a Native, 15 Jac.
born at Kingston, after the Union, 1 Maii, 1618. about 15 Jac.

John the third Son, Earl of Holdernes, seized of the Manors, Rectory, and
Premises in the Declaration mentioned, with other the Manors of Zouch and
Taylboys, John covenanted to levy a Fine de Premissis, 1 Jul. 22 Jac.
and diverse other Lands in the County of Lincoln in Fee, by Indenture
Tripartite between him on the first part, Sir William Cockayne and Martha his
Daughter of the second part, etc. Dated the First of July, 22 Jac. Covenanted
to levy a Fine before the Feast of St. Andrews next ensuing to Sir William of
all his said Lands, To the use of himself for life, then to the use of Martha,
his intended Wife, for life, with Remainder to the Heirs Males of his body
begotten on her, Remainder to such his Heirs Females, Remainder to his right
Heirs.

The Marriage was solemnized the Seven and twentieth of Sept. 22 Jac. John
married 29 Sept. 22 Jac. He levied the Fine Octab. Michael. 22 Jac. John died 1
Car. 1. Jan. 24.


The Fine accordingly levied in the Common Pleas Octabis Michaelis, 22 Jac. of
all the Lands and Premises among other in the Declaration mentioned.

The Earl, so seized as aforesaid, with the Remainder over at Kingston
aforesaid, died the Four and twentieth of January, 1 Car. 1.

His Countess entered into the Premises in the Declaration mentioned, and
received the Profits during her life.

After the Earls death a Commission issued, Inquisition after his death capt.
29 Febr. 7 Car. 1.
and an Inquisition taken at Southwark in Surrey the Nine and twentieth of
February, 7 Car. 1.

By this Inquisition it is found the Earl died seized of the Manor of Zouch
and Taylboys, and diverse Land thereto belonging in Com. Lincoln, and of the
Manor of Westdeerham, and other Lands in Com. Norfolk, and of the Rectory of
Kingston, and of the Advowson of the Vicaridge of Kingston in Com. Surrey, but
no other the Lands in the Declaration are found in that Office. And then the
Tenures of those Manors are found, and that the Earl died without Heir. But it
finds that the Earl so seized, levied a Fine of the Premises to Sir William
Cockayne, per nomina Maneriorum de Zouches and Taylboys, and Rectoriae de
Kingston, cum omnibus Decimis dictae Rectoriae pertinentibus, and finds the
uses ut supra, and so finds his dying without Heir, etc. It finds the Fine
levied in terminis Michaelis, 22 Jac. but not in Octabis Michaelis, as the
Special Verdict finds, but between the same persons.

The Irish Act to naturalize all Scots, 4 Jul. 10 Car. 1.
The general Act of Naturalizing the Scottish Antenati in the Kingdom of
Ireland, was made in the Parliament there, begun at the Castle of Dublin the
Fourth of July, 10 Car. 1.

Nicholas died 1 Sept. 10 Car. 1.
Nicholas died the First of September, 10 Car. 1. Leaving Issue Patrick.

Murrey's Pat. 25 October. 10 Car. 1.
King Charles the First, by his Letters Patents dated the Five and twentieth of
October, the Tenth of his Reign, under the Great Seal, granted to William
Murrey, his Heirs and Assigns, in Fee-farm, All the said Manors, Lands, and
Rectory, mentioned in the Declaration, with the Reversion depending upon any
life, lives, or years.

Patrick conveys to the Earl of Elkin 16 Febr. 1651.
Patrick and Elizabeth his wife, by Indenture dated the Sixteenth of February
1651. Covenant with the Earl of Elkin and Sir Edward Sydenham in consideration
of Eleven hundred pounds, and bargained and sold the Premises in the
Declaration to them and their Heirs, and covenanted at the Earls charge to levy
a Fine with proclamation, Patrick and Uxor. levy a Fine a die Paschae in
fifteen days.
to the use of the Earl and his Heirs, of the Premises, before the end of
Easter Term next, and accordingly did levy it with warranty against them, and
the Heirs of Patrick, by force whereof, and of the Statute of Uses, the said
Earl and Sydenham were seized, etc.

The Earl and Sydenham convey to the Countess Dowager, 10 Mar. 1652.
The Earl of Elkin and Sydenham, by Indenture of Lease, dated the Tenth of
March, 1652. and by Deed of Release and Confirmation, conveys the Premises to
Amabel Dowager of Kent, and the Lady Jane Heart, viz. the Eleventh of March,
1652. by way of Bargain and Sale to them and their Heirs, who entered by the
Lease, and were in quiet possession at the time of the Release.

The Dowager conveys to Pullayne and Neale.
The Dowager and Lady Heart by like Conveyance of Lease and Release, bargained
and sold to Pullayne and Simon Neale, dated the First and Second of November,
1655. who entered, and were in possession as aforesaid.

John Ramsey the now Defendant, entered in 15 Car. 2. and kept possession.

Dat. 25 Sept. 1656. Pullayne and Neale convey to Talmuch and Weld by Bargain
and Sale. 20 Jan. 16 Car. 2.
John Pullayne and Simon Neale, by Deed of Bargain and Sale, duly enrolled,
conveyed the Premises to Lionel Talmuch and Humphrey (...) their Heirs and
Assigns.

Lionel and Humphrey demis'd to Philip (...) the Plaintiff having entered, and
being in possession by Indenture, dated the Twentieth of January, 16 Car. 2.
John then in possession, and John reentred upon the Plaintiff, and Ejected him.

The Questions upon this Record will be three.
1. Whether a Naturalization in Ireland will naturalize the person in England?
If it will not, all other Questions are out of the Case.

2. If it will, then whether by that Act for naturalizing the Antenati of
Scotland any, his brothers, had title to inherit the Earl of Holdernes in the
lands in question? By reason of the Clause in the Act of Naturalization, That
nothing therein contained should extend to avoid any Estate or Interest in any
Lands or Hereditaments, which have already been found, and accrewed to his
Majesty, or to King James, for want of naturalization of any such person, and
which shall and does appear by Office already found and returned, and remaining
of Record, or by any other matter of Record.

An Office was found, as appears by the Verdict 7 Car. before the Act, by which
it is found he died seized of the Rectory of Kingston in Reversion, and of the
Advowson of the Vicaridge, and died without Heir, and that the same escheated
to the King; and if all the lands in question were held of the King, it being
found he died without Heir, the proviso will save all to the King.

3. Whether Nicholas Ramsey, under whom the Plaintiffs claim, be the person who
had title to the lands in question, if any had? Because

1. The death of Robert the elder Brother, is not sufficiently found before the
Act of Naturalization, for then he, and not Nicholas, was heir to John.

2. Because if Robert the elder were dead before, yet he left Issue three
Daughters, who were naturalized as well as Nicholas by the Act, and are the
heirs to the Earl, being the Issue of his elder Brother.

If Robert had died after the Irish Act made, this Verdict had been as true as
now it is: Therefore it is not sufficient to find him dead before the Act.

Et Juratores ulterius dicunt quod praedictus Robertus filius primogenitus, and
natu maximus praedicti Roberti patris postea obiit, tempore mortis suae habens
and relinquens tres filias de corpore ipsius Roberti filii legitime procreatas,
viz. Margaret. Isabel. and Janam Alienigenas natas in Regno Scotiae ante
accessionem praedict. Quae quidem Margaret. Isabella, and Jana, primo die
Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Caroli nuper. Regis Angliae primi, quarto decimo,
in plena vita fuerant, and habent exitus de carum corporibus exeuntes modo
superstites, and in plena vita existentes apud Kingston super Thames praedict.

As to the second part, in the Case of Aliens, nothing interrupts the common
course of Descents, but Defectus Nationis, as Bracton terms it. Therefore that
being taken away by naturalization, they shall inherit as if it had not been,
and then the eldest Brothers Issue had inherited before the second Brother.

1. It is admitted, and will easily appear, That one naturalized in Scotland
since the Union, cannot inherit in England.

2. Ireland then differs from Scotland, in a common difference with Gernsey,
Jersey, Isle of Man, Berwick, and all the English Plantations, for that they
are Dominions belonging to the Crown of England, which Scotland is not.

3. If this difference, which was never discussed in Calvin's Case, alter not
the Case from a naturalizing in Scotland, it remains, whether by Act of
Parliament of England, though not extant, Ireland in this matter be not
differenced from other Dominions belonging to England?

1. He that is priviledg'd by the law of England to inherit there, must be a
Subject of the Kings.

2. He must be more than a local Subject, either in the Dominion of England, or
out of the Dominion of England; for mere Aliens, when locally in England, or
any other Dominions of the Kings, are local Subjects.

3. He must be otherwise a Subject than any Grant or Letters Patents of the
King can make him; 7 Rep. Calvin's C. f. 7. a. 36 H. 6. Tit. Deniz. Br. 9.
Therefore a Denizen of England by Letters Patents for life, in tail, or in
fee, whereby he becomes a Subject in regard of his person, will not enable him
to inherit in England, but according to his Denization, will enable his
Children born in England to inherit him, and much less will his Denization in
any other Dominion.

Whence it follows, That no Laws made in any other Dominion acquired by
Conquest, or new Plantation, by the King's Lieutenants, Substitutes,
Governors, or People there, by virtue of the King's Letters Patents, can make
a man inherit in England, who could not otherwise inherit: For what the King
cannot do by his Letters Patents, no delegated power under him can do by his
Letters Patents.

It follows likewise upon the same reason, That no tenure of Land, by Homage,
Fealty, or other Service in any other Dominion of the Kings, acquired by
Conquest, or otherwise by any Grant or Letters Patents, can make a man inherit
in England, who could not otherwise inherit, Calvin's Case, f. 6. b.
for that is not Homagium ligeum, but Feodale, as is rightly distinguished.

4. A man born a Subject to one that is King of England, cannot therefore
inherit in England, for then the Antenati in Scotland had inherited in England;
they were born Subjects to King James, who was King of England; but not born
when he was King of England.

5. A Subject born in any Dominion belonging to the Crown of England, is
inheritable in England as well as native Englishmen. So the natural born
Subjects of Ireland, Gernsey, Jersey, Berwick, and all the English Plantations
inherit; but the specifique reason of their inheriting in England, is not
because they are born in Dominions belonging to the Crown of England, for if
so, none could inherit who wanted that, and then the Postnati of Scotland
should not inherit; for Scotland is not a Dominion belonging to the Crown of
England, but to the King of England.

It remains then, according to the Resolution and Reasons of Calvin's Case,
That the specifique and adequate cause, why the Kings Subjects of other his
Dominions than England, do inherit in England, is, because they are born his
natural Subjects as the English are, he being actually King of England at the
time of their birth, when their subjection begins; Cok. Rep. Calvin's Case.
and so are born Liege-men to the same King.

But then, since all Liegeance and Subjection are acts and obligations of Law
(for a man owes no liegeance excluding all Civil Law) but a man is said a
natural Subject, because his Subjection begins with his birth, that is, as soon
as he can be subject, and a King is said to be a man's natural Prince, because
his Protection begins as soon as the Subject can be protected, and in the same
sense, that a Country where a man is born, is his natural Country, or the
Language he first speaks, is his natural Tongue; why should not an Act of Law,
making a man as if he had been born a Subject, work the same effect as his
being born a Subject, which is an effect of law?

1. The Reason is, That naturalization is but a fiction of Law, and can have
effect but upon those consenting to that fiction: Therefore it has the like
effect as a man's Birth has, where the Lawmakers have power, but not in other
places where they have not. Naturalizing in Ireland gives the same effect in
Ireland as being born there, so in Scotland as being born there, but not in
England, which consents not to the fiction of Ireland or Scotland, nor to any
but her own.

2. No fiction can make a natural Subject, for he is correlative to a natural
Prince, and cannot have two natural Sovereigns (but may have one Sovereign, as
a Queen Sovereign and her Husband in two persons) no more than two natural
Fathers, or two natural Mothers. But if a fiction could make a natural Subject,
he has two natural Princes, one where he was born, and the other where
naturalized.

3. If one naturalized in Ireland should in law make him naturally born there,
then one naturalized in Scotland, after the Union, should make him naturally
born there, consequently inheritable in England, which is not contended.

4. A naturalized person in a Dominion belonging to England, is both the King's
Subject when he is King of England, and inheritable in that his Dominion, when
naturalized.

So the Antenati of Scotland are the King of England's Subjects when he is King
of England, and inheritable in that Dominion of his, yet cannot inherit in
England; and being his Subjects before, does not make them less his Subjects
when King of England; Or if it did, Nicholas Ramsey, before he was naturalized
in Ireland, and became there a Subject to the King of England, was a Subject in
Scotland of the Kings.

There are four ways by which men born out of England may inherit in England,
besides by the Statute of Edward the Third, De Natis ultra Mare.
1. If they be born in any Dominion of the Kings when he is actually King of
England.

2. If they be made inheritable by Act of Parliament in England, as by
naturalization there.

3. If they be born Subjects to a Prince, holding his Kingdom or Territories as
Homager and Liegeman to the King of England, Calvin's Case, f. 21. b.
during the time of his being Homager. So the Welsh were inheritable in England
before 12 Ed. 1. though Subjects to the Princes of Wales, who were Homagers to
the King of England. So were the Scotch in Edward the First's time, during the
King of Scotlands Homage to him, and to other Kings of England, as long as it
continued. And that is the reason of the Case in 14. of Eliz. in the Lord Dyer,
Dyer 14 Eliz. f. 304. pl. 51.
where a Scotch-man being arraigned for a Rape of a Girl under Seven years of
Age, and praying his Trial per medietatem Linguae, because he was a Scot born,
it was denied him by the Opinion of the Judges of both Benches, for that, among
other reasons, a Scot was never accounted an Alien here, but rather a Subject
(So are the words of the Book) But they did not consider that the Homage was
determined then, as it was considered after in Calvin's Case, when only the
Postnati of Scotland were admitted inheritable in England. Upon the same ground
one Magdulph, Subject to the King of Scots, appealed from his Judgment to
Edward the First, Pl. Parl. 21 E. 1. f. 152. and 157.
ut Superiori Domino Scotiae.

But this is to be understood where such Prince is Homager. Subjectionis, and
not only Infeodationis; for another King may hold of the King of England an
Island, or other Territory, by Tenure, and not be his Subject.

4. If the King of England enter with his Army hostilly the Territories of
another Prince, and any be born within the places possessed by the Kings Army,
and consequently within his Protection, such person is a Subject born to the
King of England, if from Parents Subjects, and not Hostile.

5 Eliz. Dyer f. 224. pl. 29.
So was it resolved by the Justices 5 Eliz. That one born in Tourney in France,
and conquered by Henry the Eighth, being a Bastard between persons that were of
the King's liegeance, was enabled to purchase and implead within the Realm, and
was the same as if a Frenchman and French-woman should come into England, and
have a Son born there. The like law if he had been born of French Parents in
Tourney, for it was part of the Dominions belonging to England pro tempore, as
Calice was.

Those under the King's Power, as King of England, in another Prince his
Dominions, are under his Laws.

Fleta. l. 2. c. 3. 14 E. 1.
King Edward the First being at Paris 14 E. 1. one Ingelram de Nogent stole
silver Dishes in the King's House there, and after dispute about his Trial with
the King of France and his Council, he was convicted before the Steward of the
King of England's House, and executed, though the Felony was done in France, in
Aliero Regno.

Fleta. l. 2. c. 3. 12 E. 1.
So Edmund de Murdak brought an Appeal in Gascoigne, coram Seneschallo Hospitii
Regis Angliae against one William de Lesnes of Robbery done to him, 12 E. 1.
infra metas Hospitii Regis infra quas invenit ipsum. And the Defendant, non
potuit appellum illud per exceptionem alterius Regni declinare.

1. Regularly who once was an Alien to England, cannot be inheritable there,
but by Act of Parliament, which is Common Experience.

But Ramsey was an Alien to England, being Antenatus of Scotland, and therefore
cannot inherit here but by Act of Parliament.

If it be said there is an Exception to that, viz. unless he be naturalized in
Ireland; that Exception must be well proved, not supposed: For the Question
being, Whether one naturalized in Ireland do thereby become as a Native of
England? must not be resolved by saying, That he does become as a Native of
England, otherwise it is proved only by begging the Question.

2. The being no Alien in England belongs not to any made the King of Englands
Subject by Act of Law, when he is King of England, but to such as are born so.

Natural legitimation respects actual Obedience to the Sovereign at the time
of the birth, Calvin's Case, f. 27.
for the Antenati remain Aliens, because they were born when there were several
Kings of the several Kingdoms; not because they are not by act of law
afterward become Subjects to the King of England by the Union of the Crowns:
But he that is naturalized in Scotland or Ireland, is not a Subject born to the
King of England, but made by a subsequent Act in law.

3. And chiefly the manner of subjection of a Stranger naturalized in Scotland
or Ireland, does exactly agree with that of the Antenatus, and not of the
Postnatus. For,

1. The Antenatus was another Prince his Subject, before he was the King of
Englands.

2. The Antenatus might have been an Enemy to England, by a war between the
several Kings before the Union.

So a Stranger naturalized in Scotland or Ireland, was the natural Subject of
some other Prince necessarily before he was naturalized, and then might have
been an Enemy to the King of England, by a war between his natural Sovereign
and the King of England, before he was naturalized.

But the Postnatus was never subject to any before he was the King of Englands,
nor ever in possibility of being an enemy to England, both which are the
properties of subjection in the native English Subject, and is the reason why
the Postnatus in England is as the Natives of England.

No fiction of Law can make a man a Natural Subject that is not, for a Natural
Subject and a Natural Prince are Relatives, and if an Act of Naturalization
should thereby make a man a natural Subject, the same Subject would have two
natural Sovereigns. one when he was born, the other when naturalized, which he
can never have more then two Natural Fathers, or two Natural Mothers, except
the Sovereigns be subordinate, the Inferior holding his Kingdom as Liege
Homager from the Superior.

And perhaps in the Case of Severing the Kingdoms, Calvin's Case 27.
as Sir Edward Coke says.

Nor can an Act of Parliament in one place take away the natural subjection due
to another Prince for want of power.

And the Law of England being, That an Antenatus shall not inherit, because an
Alien, without an Act of Parliament making him none: The fiction of an Act in
another Kingdom, to which England never consented, shall not alter the law
here, because he is made in Ireland as if born there.

If there were an Act of Parliament in England, That persons naturalized in
Ireland or Scotland, should be no Aliens in England, no man thinks that thereby
Scotland or Ireland could naturalize a man in terminis in England. But a man
naturalized there, would by consequent be naturalized in England, because the
law of England did warrant that consequent.

But to say, That a man naturalized in Ireland is not directly naturalized in
England, but by consequent, when the question is, Whether one naturalized in
Ireland be thereby naturalized in England? is to beg for a proof that which is
the question.

Therefore it must be first proved, That there is a Law of England to warrant
that consequent.

Inconveniences.
The Law of England is, That no Alien can be naturalized but by Act of
Parliament, with the assent of the whole Nation.

1. Now if this naturalization in Ireland should be effectual for England, then
a whole Nation should become Natives in England, without Act of Parliament, of
what Country, Religion, or Manners soever they be, by an Act of Ireland.

2. If the Parliament of England should refuse to naturalize a number of men,
or Nation, as dangerous or incommodious to the Kingdom, yet they might be
naturalized, whether the Houses of Parliament would or not, by an Act of
Ireland.

3. By this invention the King may naturalize in England without an Act of
Parliament, as well as he may Denizen; for if the Parliament of Ireland enact,
That the King, by Letters Patents, shall naturalize in Ireland, then they so
naturalized in Ireland by Patent, will be naturalized in England by consequent,
so they may enact the Deputy or Council of Ireland to naturalize.

4. If an Alien has Issue an Alien Son, and the Father be denizen'd in
England, and after has a Son born in England, the Law has been taken, That
the youngest Son shall inherit the Fathers Land. Co. Litr. f. 8. a. Doct Stud.
l. 1. Cr. 17 Jac. f. 539. Godfrey and Dixons C.
So is Sir Edward Coke Litr. f. 8. a. and other Books; yet if the elder be
naturalized in Ireland, the Estate which the youngest has, by the Law of
England, will be plucked from him.

Having thus opened the Inconveniences consequent to this Irish Naturalization,
the next is, That Judges must judge according as the Law is, not as it ought to
be. But then the Premises must be clear out of the established Law, and the
Conclusion well deduced before great Inconveniences be admitted for Law. But if
Inconveniences necessarily follow out of the Law, only the Parliament can cure
them. 1. I shall begin with the admitted Doctrine of Calvin's Case. By that
Case, He that is born a Subject of the King of England in another Dominion than
England, is no Alien in England. So the Scots, born when the King of Scots was
King of England, are no Aliens; those born before in Scotland are. Therefore
Nicholas Ramsey, who is not born the Kings Subject of Ireland, must be an Alien
in England, whose Law, by the Rule of that Case, makes only Subjects born, and
not made of another Dominion, not to be Aliens in England.

2. It is agreed to my hand, That an Alien naturalized at this day in Scotland,
remains an Alien in England notwithstanding.

3. By the Doctrine of Calvin's Case, a natural born Subject to the Kings
person of a Foreign Dominion, is not priviledg'd in England from being an
Alien, else the Antenati of Scotland were priviledg'd, for they are natural
born Subjects to the Kings person, as well as the Postnati.

4. It stands not with the Resolution of that Case, That the natural born
Subjects of the Dominions belonging to the Crown of England (qua such) should
be no Aliens in England, which was the principal matter to have been discussed,
but was not, in Calvin's Case, and chiefly concerns the point in question.

The Case relied on to justify the Judgment in Calvin's Case are several
Authorities, That the King of England's Subjects formerly were never accounted
Aliens in England, though they were all out of the Realm of England, and many
within the Realm of France. But all these are admitted in that Case (as most of
them were) Dominions belonging to the Crown of England; and if so, Of Normandy,
Britain, Aquitain, Anjou, Gascoigne, Guien, Calais, Jersey and Gernsey, Isle
of Man, Berwick and other Parts of Scotland. Ireland, Tourney, etc.


What Inference could be made for the Resolution of Calvin's Case? That because
the Kings natural Subjects of Dominions belonging to the Crown of England, as
these did, were no Aliens in England: Therefore that Subjects of a Dominion not
belonging to the Crown, as the Postnati of Scotland are, should be no Aliens in
England, Non sequitur.

Therefore it is for other reason then, because natural Subjects of Dominions
belonging to the Crown of England, they were no Aliens by the meaning of that
Resolution. And the Adequate Reason being found out, why they are not Aliens,
will determine the point in question.

1. It was not because they were natural Subjects to him that was King of
England, for then the Antenati of Scotland would be no Aliens, they being
natural Subjects to him that is King of England, as well as the Postnati.

2. It was not because they were natural Subjects of Dominions belonging to the
Crown of England; for then the Postnati would be Aliens in England, for they
are not Subjects of a Dominion belonging to the Crown of England.

3. It remains then, the Reason can be no other, but because they were born
under the same Liegeance with the Subjects of England, which is the direct
reason of that Resolution in Calvin's Case. Calvin's Case, f. 18. b. a.
The words are, The time of the birth is of the essence of a Subject born, for
he cannot be a Subject to the King of England (that is, to be no Alien) unless
at the time of his birth he was under the Liegeance and Obedience of the King
(that is) of England. And that is the reason that Antenati in Scotland (for
that at the time of their birth they were not under the Liegeance and Obedience
of the King of England) are Aliens born, in respect of the time of their birth.

The time of his birth is chiefly to be considered, for he cannot be a Subject
born of one Kingdom, that was born under the Liegeance of a King of another
Kingdom, albeit afterward one Kingdom descend to the King of the other.

Therefore Ramsey, being not under the Liegeance of the King of England at the
time of his birth, must still continue an Alien, though he were naturalized in
Ireland.

Notwithstanding all this, it may be urged,

A person naturalized in England is the same as if he had been born in England,
and a person naturalized in Ireland is the same as if he had been born in
Ireland.

But a person born in Ireland is the same as if he had been England.

Therefore a person naturalized in Ireland, is the same as if he had been born
or naturalized in England. This seems subtle and concluding.

Syllogism may be made of a person naturalized in Scotland after the Union, viz.

A person naturalized in England, is the same with a person born in England;
and a person naturalized in Scotland, after the Union, is the same with a
person born in Scotland after the Union.

But a person born in Scotland, after the Union, is the same with a person born
or naturalized in England.

Therefore a person naturalized in Scotland, after the Union, is the same with
a person born or naturalized in England.

Yet it is agreed, That a person naturalized in Scotland, since the Union, is
no other than an Alien in England; Therefore the same Conclusion should be made
of one naturalized in Ireland.

To differ these two Cases, it may be said, That the naturalizing Scotland can
never appear to England, because we cannot write to Scotland to certify the
Act of Naturalizing, as we may to Ireland, out of the Chancery, and as was done
in the present Case in question, as by the Record appears.

This is a difference, but not to the purpose, and then it is the same as no
difference; For I will ask by way of Supposition:

Admit an Act of Parliament were made in England for clearing all Questions of
this kind,

That all persons inheritable, in any Dominion whatsoever, whereof the King of
England was King, whether naturalized, or Subjects born, should be no Aliens in
England, it were then evident by the Law, That a naturalized Subject of
Scotland were no Alien in England; yet the same Question would then remain as
now does, How he should appear to be naturalized? because the Chancery could
not write to Scotland, as it can to Ireland, to certify the Act of
Naturalizing.

Syllogism consists in this. It is true, that a person naturalized in Ireland,
is the same with a person born in Ireland, that is by the Law of Ireland. But
when you assume, That a person born in Ireland is the same with a person born
or naturalized in England, that is not by the Law of Ireland, but by the Law of
England. And then the Syllogism will have four terms in it, and conclude
nothing.

Certiorari, or any other ordinary Writ.

42 E. 3. f. 2. b. An Act of Parliament of Scotland may be evidence as a
Sentence of Divorce or Deprivation, and Foreign Laws for raising or abasing
Money or Customs upon account between Merchants, but not as Records.
In the Case of the Lord Beaumond, 42 E. 3. a Question grew, Whether one born in
Ross in Scotland were within the Kings Liegeance? because part of Scotland then
was, and part not, in his Liegeance, the Court knew not how to proceed until
Thorpe gave this Rule; That doubtless the King had a Roll, what parts of
Scotland were in his Liegeance, what not, upon the Treaty or Conclusion made,
that therefore they must address themselves to the King to have that certified.
The like may now happen of Virginia, Surenam, or other places, part of which
are in the Kings Liegeance, part not. So the King has, or may have, Rolls of
all naturalized Subjects; and upon petition to him, where the occasions require
it, may cause the matter in his name to be certified. The like may happen upon
emergent Questions upon Leagues or Treaties, to which there is no common
access, but by the Kings permission.

For illustration, a feigned Case is as good as a Case in fact. Suppose a Law
in Ireland, 5 El. c. 4. f. 957
like that of 5. of the Queen, That no man should set up Shop in Dublin, unless
he had served as an Apprentice to the Trade for Seven years; and suppose a Law
in England, That whosoever had served Seven years as an Apprentice in Dublin,
might set up Shop in London. If by a particular Act of Parliament in Ireland J.
S. be enabled to set up Shop in Dublin, as if he had served an Apprentiship for
Seven years, by this fiction he is enabled in Ireland to set up, but not in
London, unless he have really served for Seven years, as the Law in England
requires.

Considerations.
That an Act of Parliament of Ireland should so operate, as to effect a thing
which could not, by the Laws of England, be done without an Act of Parliament
in England regularly, seems so strange, that it is supposed an Act of
Parliament of England, did first empower the doing of it, though it be not
extant by an Act of Parliament.

The Argument then is,

1. A man is naturalized in Ireland, and thereby no Alien in England, which
could not lawfully be done without an Act of Parliament in England to empower
the doing it.

Which in effect is to say, a thing was done which could not lawfully be done
without an Act of Parliament to warrant it, Ergo, it being done, there was an
Act of Parliament to warrant it.

2. This Supposition seems rather true, because other things relating to
Ireland, and admitted to be Law, could not be but by Act of Parliament in
England, yet no such Act is extant; that is, that a Writ of Error lies in the
Kings Bench to reverse a Judgment given in the Kings Bench in Ireland.

3. That this must be by Act of Parliament, not by Common Lew, because such a
Writ did not lie in Wales or Calais at Common Law to reverse an Error there.

Still the Argument is no better then before: Some things are of known Law,
through many successions of Ages, which could not commence without an Act of
Parliament, which is not extant.

Therefore a thing wholly new, not warranted by any Testimony of former time,
because it cannot be lawful without an Act of Parliament, must be supposed,
without other proof, to be lawful by an Act of Parliament.

If the lawfulness of any thing be in question, suppose the Laws of Ireland
were made the Laws of England by Act of Parliament here, only Two were material
to this Question, 1. That a Postnatus of a Foreign Dominion of the Kings
should be no Alien, the Law is so in Ireland. 2. That persons naturalized in
England are naturalized for all the Dominions belonging to England; if the Law
were so in Ireland, it follows not, That one naturalized there must be
naturalized in England thereby; for England is not a Dominion belonging to
Ireland, but e contrario.

Fitz. Assise pla. 382.18 E. 2
A Writ of Error lies to reverse a Judgment in any Dominions belonging to
England; Breve Domini Regis non currit in Wallia, is not to be intended of a
Writ of Error, but of such Writs as related to Trials by Juries; those never
did run in Foreign Dominions that most commonly were governed by different
Laws. Error of a Judgment in Assize of Gower's Land, in B. R. 18 E. 2.

21. H. 7. f. 31. b.
A Writ of Non molestando issued out of the Chancery to the Mayor of Calais,
retornable in the Kings Bench; and by the whole Court agreed, That there are
diverse Presidents of Writs of Error to reverse Judgments given in Calais;
though it was Objected, They were governed by the Civil Law.

7. Rep. f. 20. a. Calvin's Case.
And Sir Edward Coke cites a Case of a Writ directed to the Mayor of Bordeaux, a
Town in Gascoigny, and takes the difference between Mandatory Writs, which
issued to all the Dominions, and Writs of ordinary remedy, relating to Trials
in the Kingdom.

7 Rep. Calvin's Case, f. 18. a.
And speaking of Ireland among other things, he says, That albeit no
Reservation were in King John's Charter, yet by Judgment of Law a Writ of Error
did lie in the Kings Bench of England, of an Erroneous Judgment in the Kings
Bench in Ireland.

A Writ of Error lies not therefore to reverse a Judgment in Ireland by Special
Act of Parliament, for it lies at Common Law to reverse Judgments in any
Inferior Dominions; and if it did not, Inferior and Provincial Governments, as
Ireland is, might make what Laws they pleased; for Judgments are Laws when not
to be reversed.

Pla. Parl. 21 E. 1. f. 152, 157.
Magdulph appealed from the Court and Judgment of the King of Scots before King
Edward the First, Ut Superiori Domino Scotiae.

And by the Case in 2 R. 3. f. 12. all the Judges there agree, 2 R. 3. f. 12.
assembled in the Exchequer Chamber, That a Writ of Error lay to reverse
Judgments in Ireland, and that Ireland was subject as Calais, Gascoigne, and
Guyen, who were therefore subject as Ireland: And therefore a Writ of Error
would there lie as in Ireland.

Another Objection, subtle enough, is, That if naturalizing Ireland, which
makes a man as born there, shall not make him likewise as born (that is no
Alien) in England, That then naturalizing in England should not make a man no
Alien in Ireland (especially without naming Ireland) and the same may be said,
That one denizen'd in England should not be so in Ireland.

England now do, and always did, consist of Native Persons, Naturalized
Persons, and Denizen'd Persons; and no people, of what consistence soever they
be, can be Aliens to that they have conquered by Arms, or otherwise subjected
to themselves, (for it is a contradiction to be a stranger to that which is a
man's own, and against common reason and public practice).

Therefore neither Natives, or Persons Naturalized or denizen'd of England, or
their Successors, can ever be Aliens in Ireland, which they conquered and
subjected. And though this is De Jure Belli and Gentium, observe what is said,
and truly, by Sir Edward Coke in Calvin's Case, in pursuance of other things
said concerning Ireland.

In the Conquest of a Christian Kingdom, 7. Rep. Calvin's C. f. 18. a.
as well those that served in War at the Conquest, as those that remained at
home for the Safety and Peace of their Country, and other the Kings Subjects,
as well Antenati as Postnati, are capable of Lands in the Kingdom or Country
conquered, and may maintain any real Action, and have the like Privileges
there as they may have in England.

Another Objection has been, That if a person naturalized in Ireland, and so
the Kings natural Subject, shall be an Alien here, then if such person commit
Treason beyond the Seas, where no local Liegeance is to the King, he cannot be
tried here for Treason, contra ligeantiae suae debitum, 26 H. 8. c. 13. 33 H.
8. c. 23. 35 H. 8. c. 2. Treason by an Irish man in Ireland or elsewhere, may
be tried in England by those Statutes. 33 El. Andersons Rep. f. 262. b. Orurks
Case. Calvin's Case, f. 23. a.
by the Statute of 26 H. 8. or 35 H. 8. or any other Statute to that purpose.

1. To that I answer, That his Trial must be as it would have been before those
Laws made, or as if those stood now repealed.

2. His Trial shall be in such case as the Trial of a person naturalized in
Scotland, after the Union, who is the Kings Subject, but an Alien in England.

Ireland.
Though Ireland have its own Parliament, yet is it not absolute, and sui juris,
for if it were, England had no power over it, and it were as free after
Conquest and Subjection by England, as before.

That it is a conquered Kingdom, is not doubted, but admitted in Calvin's Case
several times: And by an Act of Parliament of Ireland, Stat. Hib. 11, 12. and
13 Jac. c. 5.
appears in express words, Whereas in former times, after the Conquest of this
Realm by his Majesty's most Royal Progenitors, Kings of England, etc.

What things the Parliament of Ireland cannot do.
1. It cannot Alien it self, or any part of it self, from being under the
Dominion of England, nor change its Subjection.

2. It cannot make it self not subject to the Laws of, and subordinate to, the
Parliament of England.

3. It cannot change the Law of having Judgments there given, reversed for
Error in England, and others might be named.

4. It cannot dispose the Crown of Ireland to the King of Englands second Son,
or any other, but to the King of England.

Laws made in the Parliament of England binding Ireland.
A Law concerning the Homage of Parceners, 14 H. 3.
called Statutum Hiberniae.

A Statute at Nottingham, 17 E. 1.
called Ordinatio pro Statu Hiberniae.

Laws for Ireland made by E. 3. Pat. Roll. 5 E. 3. pars 1. m. 29. pla. Parl. f.
586
per advisamentum Concilii nostri in ultimo Parliamento nostro apud Westminster.
tento.

An Act that no Archbishop, Bishop, or Prior should be chosen, 4 H. 5. c. 6.
who were Irish, nor come to Parliaments with Irish Attendants.

The late Acts made in 17 Car. 1. and many others. 17 Car. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 20,
21.


The Resolution of all the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber, That they were
bound by, and subject to the Laws of England, as those of Calais, Gascoign, and
Guien, in the Case of the Merchants of Waterford, for shipping Staple Goods for
Sluice in Flanders, to which they pleaded the Kings License and Dispensation,
not pretending freedom from the Statute of 2 H. 6. c. 4. whereupon they were
questioned.

Ireland received the Laws of England by the Charters and Commands of H. 2.
King John, H. 3. etc.
I know no Opinion that Ireland received the Laws of England by Act of
Parliament of England, nor had it been to purpose, having also a Parliament of
their own, that might change them.

Sir Edward Coke is of Opinion, Cok. Litt. f. 141. b. Patt. 12 H. 3.
That they received them by a Parliament of Ireland, in several Books, in the
time of King John, and grounds his Opinion upon the words of several Patents of
H. 3. which mention King John to have gone into Ireland, and carried with him
discretos viros quorum communi Concilio and ad instantiam Hiberniensium, he
appointed the Laws of England to be there observed.

Pat. 18 H. 3.
Another Patent of 18 H. 3. he there cites, wherein it is said, That King John,
de communi omnium de Hibernia consensu, ordained the English Laws to be there
observed: And the like in effect in 30 H. 3.

Cok. 4. Inst. f. 349.
The same Charters he mentions, but not in the same words, especially that of 12
H. 3. 1. and to the same purpose that King John, by a Parliament in Ireland,
established the Laws of England there, in his 4. Institutes.

That which occasioned the mistake were the words, De communi omnium assensu,
in the Patents, which he conceived to be a Parliament.

But the Original Act and Command of King John to this purpose, and the Charter
of 12 H. 3. at large (whereof Sir Edward Coke had only short Notes) will clear
how the English Law came into Ireland, and what that Communis assensus meant;
for they were not received by Act of Parliament in those times.

Tempore Regis Johannis.
Pat. 6. Johan. m. 6. n. 17.
Rex dat. potestatem Justic. suis Hiberniae, quod brevia sua current per totam
terram nostram, and potestatem nostram Hiberniae quae ibidem nominantur.

Pat. 6. Johan.
Johannes Dei Gratia, etc. Justiciariis, Baronibus, Militibus, and omnibus
fidelibus suis Hiberniae, etc. Sciatis quod dedimus potestatem Justic. nostro
Hibern. quod brevia sua current per totam terram nostram, and potestatem
nostram Hiberniae, scilicet breve de Recto de feodo dimidii Militis and infra,
and de morte antecessoris similiter de feod. Domini Milit. and infra. Et erit
terminus de morte antecessor. post transfretationem H. Regis patris nostri de
Hibernia in Angl. Et breve de Nova diss. cujus erit terminus post primam
Coronationem apud Cant. Et breve de fugitivis and nativis in quo erit terminus
post captionem Dublin. Et breve de divisis faciend. inter duas villas exceptis
Baron. Et ideo vobis mandamus, and firmiter praecipimus, quod haec ita fieri
and firmiter tener. per totam potestatem nostram Hiberniae faciatis. Test
meipso apud Westmonasteriium secundo die Novembris. 17.

Claus. 7. Johannis.
Rex M. filio Henr. Justitiar. Hiberniae, etc. Sciatis quod Deremunt exposuit
nobis ex part Regis Connaciae, quod idem Rex exigit tenere de nobis tertiam
partem terrae de Connacia per C. Marcas per Annum, sibi and haeredibus suis
nomine Baroniae.

Pat. 6. Johan. m. 6. n. 17.
Rex, etc. Justic. Baronibus, Militibus, and omnibus fidelibus suis Hibern.
etc. Sciatis quod dedimus potestatem Justic. nostro Hiberniae, quod brevia sua
current per totam terram nostram, and potestatem nostram Hiberniae, scilicet
breve de Recto de feodo Dimidii Mil. and infra, and de morte Antecessor. and
similiter de feod. dimid. Mil. and infra. Et erit terminus de morte Antecessor.
post transfretationem Henr. Regis patris nostri de Hibern. in Angl. Et breve de
Nova Disseisina cujus erit terminus post primam Coronationem nostram apud Cant.
Et breve de Fugit. and Nativis, and ejus erit terminus post captionem Dublin.
Et breve de divisis faciend. inter duas villas, except. Baron. Et ideo vobis
Mandamus and firmiter praecipimus quod haec ita fire. and firmiter teneri per
totam potestatem nostram Hiberniae faciatis. Test meipso apud Westmonast. ij.
die Novembris.

Claus. 12 H. 3. m. 8.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Richardo de Burgo Justic. suo Hibern. salutem, De
legibus and consuetudinibus observandis in Hibernia.
Mandamus vobis firmiter Praecipientes quatenus certo die and loco faciatis
venir. coram vobis Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Comites, and
Barons, Milites and Libere tenentes and Ballivos singulorum Comitatuum, and
coram eis public legi faciatis Chartam Domini J. Regis patris nostri cui
Sigillum suum appensum est, Pat. 6. Joh. n. 17. Dat. apud Westminster. 2 die November.
quam fieri fecit and jurari a Magnatibus Hibern. de Legibus and
consuetudinibus Angl. observandis in Hibernia. Et praecipiatis eis ex part
nostra quod Leges illas and consuetudines in Charta praed. contentas de cetero
firmiter teneant and observent. Et hoc idem per singulos comitatus Hibern.
clamari faciatis and teneri prohibentes firmiter ex part nostra, and super
forisfacturam nostram ne quis contra hoc mandatum nostrum venire praesumat. Eo
excepto quod nec de morte, nec de Catall. Hiberniensium occisorum nihil
statuatur ex part nostra circa quindecim dies a die Sancti Michaelis, Anno
Regni nostri xij. super quo respectum dedimus magnatibus nostris Hiberniae
usque ad terminum praed. Test meipso apud Westmonast. 8. die Maii, Anno xij.

Patentes 30 H. 3. m. 1.
Quia pro communi utilitate terrae Hibern. and unitate terrarum Regis, Rex vult
and de communi Consilio Regis provisum est, quod omnes Leges and consuetudines
quae in Regno Angliae tenentur, in Hibern. teneantur and eadem terra eisdem
Legibus subjaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut Dominus Johannes Rex cum
ultimo esset in Hibernia Statuit and fieri mandavit. Quia etiam Rex vult quod
omnia brevia de Communi jure quae currunt in Angl. similiter current Hibernia
sub novo Sigillo Regis.

Mandatum est Archiepiscopis, etc. quod pro pace and tranquilitate ejusdem
terrae per easdem Leges eos regi, and deduci permittant, and eas in omnibus
sequantur. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Wadestocks ix die Septembris.

Out of the Close Rolls of King Henry the Third his Time.
Clause 1 H. 3. dorso. 14.
The Kings thanks to G. de Mariscis, Justice of Ireland. The King signifies
that himself, and other his Lieges of Ireland, should enjoy the Liberties which
he had granted to his Lieges of England, and that he will grant and confirm the
same to them.

Clause 3. H. 3. m. 8. part 2.
The King writes singly to Nicholas, Son of Leonard Steward of Meth, and to
Nicholas de Verdenz, and to Walter Purcell Steward of Lagenia, and to Thomas
the son of Adam, and to the King of Connage, and to Richard de Burgh, and to J.
Saint John Treasurer, and to the other Barons of the Exchequer of Dublin, That
they be intendant and answerable to H. Lord Archbishop of Dublin, as to the
Lord the King's Keeper and Bailiff of the Kingdom of Ireland, as the King had
writ concerning the same matter to G. de Mariscis, Justice of Ireland.

Clause 5. H. 3. m. 14.
The King writes to his Justice of Ireland, That whereas there is but a single
Justice itinerant in Ireland, which is said to be dissonant from the more
approved custom in England, for Reasons there specified, two more Justices
should be associated to him, the one a Knight, the other a Clerk, and to make
their Circuits together, according to the Custom of the Kingdom of England.
Witness, etc.

The Close Roll. 5 H. 3. m. 6. Dorso.
The King makes a Recital, That though he had covenanted with Geoffrey de
Mariscis, That all Fines, and other Profits of Ireland, should be paid unto the
Treasure, and to other Bailiffs of the Kings Exchequer of Dublin, yet he
received all in his own Chamber, and therefore is removed by the King from his
Office: Whereupon the King, by advise of his Council of England, establishes*
that H. Archbishop of Ireland be Keeper of that Land, till further order. And
writes to Thomas, the son of Anthony, to be answerable and intendant to him.
After the same manner it is written to sundry Irish Kings and Nobles there
specially nominated.

Clause 7. H. 3. m. 9.
The King writes to the Archbishop of Dublin, his Justice of Ireland, to
reverse a Judgment there given, in a Case concerning Lands in Dalkera, between
Geoffrey de Mariscis, and Eve his wife Plaintiffs, and Reignald Talbott Tenant.
By the Record of the same Plea returned into England, the Judgment is reversed
upon these two Errors. The first, because upon Reignald's showing the Charter
of King John, the King's Father, concerning the same Land, in regard thereof
desiring peace, it was denied him.

The second, Because the Seisin was adjudged to the said Geoffrey and Eve,
because Reynald calling us to warranty, had us not to warranty at the day set
him by the Court, which was a thing impossible for either Geoffrey, or the
Court themselves to do, our Court not being above us to summon us, or compel us
against our will. Therefore the King writes to the Justice of Ireland to
re-seise Reynald, because he was disseised by Erroneous Judgment.

Clause 28. H. 3. m. 7.
The King writes to M. Donenald, King of Tirchonill, to aid him against the
King of Scots, Witness, etc. The like Letters to other Kings and Nobles of
Ireland.

Clause 40. E. 3. m. 12. Dorso.
The King takes notice of an illegal proceeding to Judgment in Ireland, Ordered
to send the Record and Process into England.

It was objected by one of my Brothers, That Ireland received not the Laws of
England by Act of Parliament of England, but at the Common Law by King John's
Charter. If his meaning be that the Fact was so, I agree it; but if he mean
they could not receive them by Act of Parliament of England (as my Brother
Maynard did conjecturally infer for his purpose) then I deny my Brothers
Assertion; for doubtless they might have received them by Act of Parliament.
And I must clear my Brother Maynard from any mention of an Union, as was
discoursed of England and Ireland: Nor was it at all to his purpose.

If any Union, other than that of a Provincial Government under England had
been, Ireland had made no Laws more than Wales; but England had made them for
Ireland, as it does for Wales.

As for the Judgment,
George Ramsey, the younger Brother, inheriting John Earl of Holdernes, before
the naturalization of Nicholas, Whether Nicholas, as elder Brother, being
naturalized, should have it from him? Doubtless he should, if his Naturalizing
were good. He says, the Plaintiff cannot have Judgment, because a third
person, by this Verdict, has the Title.

King, the Court, ex Officio, ought to give Judgment for him, though no party.
But if a man have a prior Possession, and another enters upon him without
Title, I conceive the priority of Possession is a good Title against such an
Entry equally when a Title appears for a third, that is no party, as if no
Title appeared for a third.

But who is this third party? For any thing appears in the Verdict, George
Ramsey died before the Earl. 2. It appears not that his Son John, or the
Defendant, his Grandchild, were born within the Kings Liegeance. Patient
appears to be born at Kingston, and so the Daughters of Robert by the Verdict.

The Acts of Ireland except all Land whereof Office was found before the Act to
entitle the King, but that is in Ireland, for the Act extends not to England,
If Nicholas have Title, it is by the Law of England, as a consequent of
Naturalization.

So it may be for the Act of 7 Jac. cap. 2. he that is Naturalized in England,
since the Act, must receive the Sacrament; but if no Alien, by consequent then
he must no more receive the Sacrament than a Postnatus of Scotland.

Ireland is a distinct Kingdom from England, and therefore cannot make any Law
Obligative to England.

England being a distinct Kingdom, should make no Law to bind Ireland, which is
not so: England can naturalize, if it please, nominally a person in Ireland,
and not in England. But he recovered by saying, That Ireland was subordinate to
England, and therefore could not make a Law Obligatory to England, True; for
every Law is coactive, and it is a contradiction that the Inferior, which is
civilly the lesser power, should compel the Superior, which is greater power.

Secondly, He said England and Ireland were two distinct Kingdoms, and no
otherwise united than because they had one Sovereign. Had this been said of
Scotland and England, it had been right, for they are both absolute Kingdoms,
and each of them Sui Juris.

But Ireland far otherwise; For it is a Dominion belonging to the Crown of
England, and follows that it cannot be separate from it, but by Act of
Parliament of England, no more than Wales, Gernsey, Jersey, Barwick, the
English Plantations, all which are Dominions belonging to the Realm of England,
though not within the Territorial Dominion or Realm of England, but follow it,
and are a part of its Royalty.

Thirdly, That distinct Kingdoms cannot be united, but by mutual Acts of
Parliament. True; if they be Kingdoms sui Juris, and independent upon each
other; as England and Scotland cannot be united but by reciprocal Acts of
Parliament. So upon the Peace made after Edward the Third's war with France,
Gascoign, Guien, Calais were united and annexed to the Crown of England by the
Parliaments of both Nations, which is a secret piece of Story, and mistaken by
Sir Edward Coke, who took it as a part of the Conquest of France, and by no
other Title.

But Wales, after the Conquest of it by Edward the First, was annexed to
England, Jure Proprietatis, 12 Ed. 1. by the Statute of Ruthland only, and
after more really by 27 H. 8. and 34. but at first received Laws from England,
as Ireland did; but not proceeded by Writs out of the English Chancery, but had
a Chancery of his own, as Ireland has; was not bound by the Laws of England,
unnamed until 27 H. 8. no more than Ireland now is.

Ireland in nothing differs from it, but in having a Parliament, Gratia Regis,
subject to the Parliament of England, it might have had so, if the King
pleased; but it was annexed to England. None doubts Ireland, as conquered, as
it; and as much subject to the Parliament of England, if it please.

The Court was divided, viz. The Chief Justice and Tyrrell for the Plaintiff.
Wild and Archer for the Defendant.

Trin. 25 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 1488. Thomas Hill and Sarah his Wife are
Plaintiffs. Thomas Good Surrogat of Sir Timothy Baldwyn Knight, Doctor of Laws,
and Official of the Reverend Father in God, Herbert Bishop of Hereford is
Defendant, In a Prohibition.
THE Plaintiffs, who prosecute as well for the King, as themselves, set forth,
That all Pleas and Civil Transactions, and the Exposition and Construction of
all Statutes and all Penalties for the breach of them pertain only to the King
and his Crown.

Then set forth the time of making the Act of 32 H. 8. c. 38. and the Act it
self at large, and that thereby it was enacted, That from the time limited by
the Act, no Reservation or Prohibition (Gods Law excepted) should trouble or
impeach any marriage without the Levitical Degrees. And that no person shall be
admitted after the time limited by the Act, in any the Spiritual Courts within
this Kingdom, to any Process, Plea, or Allegation contrary to the Act.

They set forth, That after the making of the said Act, and the time thereby
limited, the Plaintiffs being lawful persons to contract marriage, and not
prohibited by Gods Law, and being persons without the Levitical Degrees, the
Twentieth day of September, in the Four and twentieth year of the King, at
Lemster in the County of Hereford, contracted matrimony in the face of the
Church, and the same consummated and solemninized, with carnal knowledge and
fruit of Children, at Lemster aforesaid.

That by reason thereof the said Marriage is good and lawful, and ought not to
be nulled in Court Christian.

That notwithstanding, the Defendant, praemissorum non ignarus, fraudulently
intending to grieve and oppress the Plaintiffs, unduly draws them into question
before him in the Court Christian for an unlawful marriage, as made within the
Degrees prohibited by Gods Laws, and there falso, caute and subdole libelling,
and supposing, that whereas by the Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical of this
Kingdom, it is ordained, That none should contract matrimony within the Degrees
prohibited by Gods Law, and expressed in a certain Table set forth by Public
Authority, Anno 1563. and that all marriages, so contracted, should be esteemed
incestuous and unlawful, and therefore should be dissolved, as void, from the
beginning.

And also, That whereas by a certain Act of Parliament made and published in
the Eight and twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, It is enacted, That no
person or persons, subject or residing within the Realm of England, or within
the Kings Dominions, should marry within the Degrees recited in the said Act,
upon any pretense whatsoever: And

That whereas the said Thomas Hill had taken to wife one Elizabeth Clark, and
for several years cohabited with her, as man and wife, and had carnal kdowledge
of her.

He, the said Thomas, notwithstanding, after the death of the said Elizabeth,
had married with, and took to wife the said Sarah, being the natural and lawful
Sister of the said Elizabeth, against the form of the said last mentioned
Statute, and them the said Thomas and Sarah had caused unjustly to appear
before him in Court Christian, to Answer touching the Premises, although the
said marriage be lawful, and according to Gods Law, and without the Levitical
Degrees. And

That although the Plaintiffs have, for their discharge in the said Court
Christian, pleaded the said first recited Act, yet the Defendant refuses to
admit the same, but proceeds against them, as for an incestuous marriage,
against the form of the Statute.

And that notwithstanding he was served with the Kings Writ of Prohibition to
desist in that behalf, in contempt of the King, and to the Plaintiffs damage of
One hundred pounds.

The Defendant denies any prosecution of the Plaintiffs, contrary to the Kings
Writ of Prohibition, and thereupon Issue is joined, and demurrs upon the matter
of the Declaration, and prays a Consultation, and the Plaintiffs join in
Demurrer.

In the Argument upon Harrisons Case, I said, and still say, That if granting
Prohibitions to the Spiritual Courts in Cases of Matrimony, were res integra
now, I saw no reason why we should grant them in any Case. The matter being
wholly of Ecclesiastic Conizance, my Reasons were and are

1. Because in all times some marriages were lawful, and others prohibited by
Divine and Ecclesiastic Laws or Canons, yet the Temporal Courts could not
prohibit the impeaching of any marriage, how lawful soever, nor take notice of
it.

2. If by Act of Parliament anciently, all marriages not prohibited by Gods
Law, or Canons of the Church, had been declared lawful, the Temporal Courts
thereby had no power to prohibit the questioning of any marriage more than
before, for it had said no more than what the Law was, and did say before such
Act.

So had it been enacted, That all marriages should be lawful, not prohibited by
the Levitical Law, the Church had retained the judging which were against the
Levitical Law, as they did when the unlawfulness was not confined only to the
Levitical Law.

And the Question now concerning what are the Levitical Degrees? (whereof we
assume the Conizance) is but the same as the question would be concerning what
marriages were prohibited in the Eighteenth of Leviticus.

For though such Acts of Parliaments had been, yet they had given no new
Jurisdiction or Conizance in matrimonial matters to the Temporal Courts, but
had been only directory to the Courts which had the Conizance; and if any
Judgment had been given amiss in them, it was to be rectified by appeal,
according to those Statutes, or by Commissions of Delegacy.

But I then said, That since 32 H. 8. many Prohibitions have been granted to
the Spiritual Courts concerning marriages without the Levitical Degrees in
several Ages. And that therefore in a Case concerning the Extent of the
Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdiction, and after so many Parliaments wherein no
complaint has been made, or certainly no redress given, it cannot be expected
we should, against so many judicial Presidents, take upon us to alter the Law
so long practiced, specially after Harisons Case, in which all the Judges were
advised with.

Therefore taking it for granted, That the Temporal Courts can prohibit the
impeaching of marriages without the Levitical Degrees, by the Statute of 32 H.
8. (for before no Prohibition was ever granted in that kind: The Question is,

Whether the marriage of the Husband with his Wives Sister, after the Wives
death, be such a marriage as by the Act of 32. the Temporal Courts may prohibit
the impeaching or drawing it into question in the Spiritual Courts, in order to
a Divorce or separation of the parties? And I conceive they cannot for these
Reasons,

1. I affirm this marriage to be expressly prohibited within the Eighteenth of
Leviticus, and then it must be within the Levitical Degrees.

2. If it were not so prohibited, yet it is not a marriage without the
Levitical Degrees, but within them, and therefore no Prohibition will lie for
impeaching it; for marriages not to be impeached must be without the Degrees,
and for that some marriages within the Degrees may be lawful.

3. That if this marriage be without the Levitical Degrees, yet it is a
marriage prohibited by Gods Law, and therefore to be impeached, notwithstanding
the Statute of 32. whose words are, No marriage (Gods Law excepted) shall be
impeached without the Levitical Degrees.

As to the first,

1. When a Law is given to any people, it is necessary that it be conceived and
published in words which may be understood, for without that the Law cannot be
obeyed; and a Law that cannot be obeyed, is no Law.

2. The meaning of words in any Law are to be known, either from their use and
signification, according to common acceptance before the Law made, or from
some Law or Institution declaring their signification.

3. The Interdicts of marriage and carnal knowledge in the Levitical Law were
directed formally to the men, not to the women, who are interdicted but by
consequent; for marriage and carnal knowledge being a reciprocal Act, and
impossible to be done by one party, it follows that the woman being interdicted
to the man, the man must also consequently be interdicted to the woman, for a
man cannot marry a woman, and she not marry him.

4. The Reasons why the Interdict is ever formally to the man, are, 1. Because
in the prohibited Act of uncovering the nakedness, the man properly is the
primary Agent, and the woman but patient and consenting; for a woman can no
more uncover the man's nakedness naturally, than she can ravish him. 2. The man,
after marriage, has the deduction of the woman, ad Domum and Thalamum, and all
the civil power over her, and not she over him; but the woman's consent to have
her nakedness uncovered is forbid, and makes her consenting an equal offense
with the man's; for by the Twentieth of Leviticus the man and woman offending in
that kind were to dye, which had not been but that both were Transgressors.

5. The first and most express Law prohibiting the carnal knowledge of certain
persons in the Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus, Verse. 6.
is, -- None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to
uncover their nakedness.

6. Near of kin are words of relation, and have no positive certainty, nor are
intelligible, but relatively to remoter kin; for all the posterity of Adam
being of kin in some degree;

A person of kin to a man within two Degrees, is nearer of kin than one within
four Degrees; and one within four Degrees nearer than one within eight Degrees;
and so interminately.

Whence it follows, That the Law before cited, -- Not to approach to any near
of kin, to uncover their nakedness, had been useless, without knowing the
persons accepted and accounted to be the near of kin.

Those persons were known to the Jews to whom the Law was given by the Law it
self declaring them precisely.

Lev. 21.1, 2.
The words are -- There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people, but
for his kin that is near unto him; that is, for his mother, and for his father,
and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother, and for his sister.
And without this declaring Law, it is evident that these persons are a man's
next of kin, in the ascending and descending, and in the collateral line. And
they which are next of kin to him must be a man's near kin necessarily, although
others more remote may be also denominated a man's near kin by custom of speech.

Upon this foundation all the Prohibitions concerning incestuous marriages, are
grounded by the Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus.

The first and most general Levitical prohibition in that kind, is in the same
words as this Law, prohibiting being defiled for the dead, but for a man's kin,
that is near unto him.

None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their
nakedness. And after Instances are given of the persons comprehended under
those words, Near of kin, as is done in the other Law concerning the dead.

As in the father, the brother, the son, whose nakedness appears to consist and
terminate in their Wives: For a man cannot otherwise uncover the nakedness of a
man but in his wife, which is the man's nakedness, as appears in the Text; and
those are three of the persons comprehended under the words near of kin.

The nakedness of thy father shall thou not uncover, Lev. 18. v. 7. v. 8.
which is explained as before in the next verse, -- The nakedness of thy
Fathers wise shall thou not uncover: It is thy Fathers nakedness,

Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law, v. 15.
she is thy sons wife.

The nakedness of thy brother wife shall thou not uncover; v. 16.
it is thy brothers nakedness.

Which is the same as to say, Thy father, thy brother, thy son, are thy near of
kin, therefore thou shall not uncover their nakedness by uncovering the
nakedness of their wives.

Then as to the nakedness of the females terminating in their own persons.

The nakedness of thy mother shall thou not uncover, v. 7. v. 9.
she is thy mother. -- The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father,
or the daughter of thy mother, thou shall not uncover: which is to say, Thy
mother and sister are thy near of kin, therefore shall thou not uncover their
nakedness. So express Instances are made in five of the six sorts of persons
declared to be near of kin.

But as Instance is made in the daughter, though she be as immediately as the
son near of kin to the father, and eminently comprehended under that Law of not
approaching to a man's near of kin, and by all both reason and exposition within
it; which made Sir Edward Coke, Cok. Inst. 2. f. 683.
by mistake in his Table of Prohibited Marriages in his Comment upon the
Statute of 32 H. 8. to set down the daughter as nominally prohibited by the
Eighteenth of Leviticus, and then in the Margent to say, those Degrees are
truly set down in the Statutes of 25 and 28 H. 8. whereas the daughter is
mentioned in neither of them, nor in the Eighteenth of Leviticus.

The use I make of this, is to show, That the extent of the prohibiting Law is
not to be measured from the persons instanced in Leviticus; for should it be so
estimated, the Law would be narrower than it self, the Instances comprehending
only five prohibited persons: But the Clause of not approaching to a man's near
of kin comprehending six, and so the Law would be inconsistent with it self.

The second General Law.

Besides those six Degrees of persons before mentioned, who are past question a
man's next of kin, and consequently his near of kin, and declared by the
Levitical Law so to be, there are other degrees of kin prohibited, which are
also undoubtedly a man's next of kin after the former six kinds, and are denoted
also in Leviticus as a man's near kin; and who are instanced in as, and indeed
are, the next, and so the near of kin to a man's near of kin, as before, and
prohibited for that reason, beyond which kindred no prohibition is found in
Leviticus.

Whence a seond general Law is deduced from Leviticus the Eighteenth, That no
man shall discover their nakedness who are the near of kin to his near of kin,
or of them who are propinqui propinquis suis, which they draw from these words,

Lev. 18. v. 12.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy fathers sister, she is thy fathers
near kinswoman. v. 13. v. 14. v. 10.
Nor of thy mothers sister, for she is thy mothers near kinswoman. Nor of thy
fathers brother, which must be for the same reason, he being his fathers near
kinsman. Nor of thy sons daughter, or of thy daughters daughter, for the like
reason, they being near of kin to his son and daughter, as his son and daughter
are to him.

All which are instanced in, in Leviticus, as prohibited for that reason, and
many others are of the same relation not instanced in, as a man's mothers
brother, his fathers father, his mothers father, his fathers mother, his
mothers mother, his brothers daughter, his sisters daughter, and others who are
equally near of kin to his near of kin, as his immediate near of kin are to
himself, and were never doubted to be prohibited within the Levitical Degrees
by any.

Whence also it appears, That the Instances given in this second Rule drawn out
of Leviticus, are not the Law it self, nor comprehend the extent of it, but are
examples only of another, or second degree of kindred, comprehended under the
general Law of not approaching to those near of kin, and which are particularly
specified by the Karait Rabbis.

That all persons near of kin strictly, to any the six persons first
interdicted, are likewise interdicted by that Law, None shall approach to any
near of kin to him to uncover their nakedness, within the meaning of the words,
near of kin, is further proved by these Reasons:

1. When the Law has denominated the Relations to be accounted near of kin;
(as is done in this case) none comprised under that denomination can be more or
less near of kin than others so denominated. As when the Law denominates a man
an Attorney, Sergeant, or the like, no Attorney is more or less an Attorney,
and no Sergeant more or less a Sergeant, than any other Attorney or Sergeant.
And so is it in all orders of men of the same denomination.

Therefore it appearing by the Law to be the reason of interdicting a person,
because near of kin to a man's father or mother, and none of those six Relations
being more or less near of kin than the other, the nearness of kin to any of
them is as much reason of interdicting, as the nearness of kin to the father or
mother, or any other of them instanced in.

Another reason is, because the Law forbidding the approach to any near of kin,
forbids in that expression the near of kin to any of the six persons strictly
denominated near of kin, as well as those six persons themselves: For in
Leviticus a man is interdicted his wives daughter, and his wives sons daughter,
and her daughters daughter, because they are his wives near kinswomen, whereas
her daughter only is the near kinswoman to the wife in the strictest sense, and
the other but near of kin to her near of kin, that is, to her daughter; yet all
of them are said to be the wives near kinswomen. So, Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy mothers or fathers sister, Lev. 20.19.
for he uncovereth his near kin: before they were said to be the near kin to
the mother and father, and here to be the sons near kin.

The third General Law.

The third prohibiting Rule drawn out of Leviticus, is, A man is prohibited to
take a wife, and any other near of kin to her, which is grounded upon these
words, Lev. 18.17.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter; neither
shall thou take her sons daughter, or her daughters daughter, to uncover their
nakedness, for they are her near kinswomen.

None of the wives near kinswomen are here clearly instanced in but her
daughter, not her mother, not her sister, who are equally her near kinswomen,
and comprised in this prohibition, and in the reason of it, as well as the
daughter: For the reason of prohibiting these persons instanced in, being, 1.
Because they are the wives near kinswoman, it is evident that the wives mother
and the wives sister are by the same reason prohibited, for they are her near
kinswomen in the strictest sense of nearness.

His wives daughter is literally forbidden the husband, and so is (but not so
obviously) his wives mother. For example,

If he marry the mother, the words forbid him her daughter, and if he marry the
daughter, he is prohibited the mother, else he would marry a woman and her
daughter, which the words forbid, and accordingly by the Karaits Doctrine,
grounded upon clear exposition, as I conceive of the Levitical prohibitions,
the husband is forbidden, as near of kin to his wife, Her mother, Her daughter,
Her sister.


And as the mother and daughter of his wife are expressly forbidden him in that
Seventeenth verse, so is his wives sister in the next following Verse; Neither
shall thou take a wife to her sister to vex her, during her life. They add
also, as prohibited the husband by this Rule, His wives fathers wife, Her
brothers wife, Her sons wife.


From the same Verse they deduce a fourth Rule, For these Rules vid. Seldens
ux. Ebraica, c. 4, 5.
That the Husband is prohibited the near of kin to his wives near of kin, as
before in the prohibitions of consanguinity; for he is literally prohibited the
daughter of his wives son, and her daughters daughter, and by necessary
inference also his wives grandmother by father and mother, who are the near of
kin to his wives daughter and her mother, who are his wives near of kin, which
they thus strongly prove.

A man is forbidden to take a woman and her sons daughter, or her daughters
daughter.

Therefore if a man marry his wives grandmother, he has taken a woman and her
sons daughter, or her daughters daughter, which is expressly forbid.

And in these are express instances given of prohibiting the near of kin to his
wives near of kin, and are also termed his wives near kinswomen, as well as
those which strictly are so.

By the same reason all others near of kin to his wives father, brother, or
sister, are prohibited the husband, as well as those near of kin to her mother,
her daughter, or son, and are equally in terminis within the words, his wives
near kinswomen, of which sort they number Sixteen, the same with those
prohibited in the second Rule for Consanguinity.

And it is observable, That the Parochial Matrimonial Table, in use in England,
agrees in its prohibitions of marriages, which are Thirty in number, for
Consanguinity and Affinity, with the Levitical Prohibitions, according to the
Doctrine of the Karait Rabbis in the four former Rules.

But the Karaits prohibit Eleven Degrees of Affinity (much of the same nature)
more than the Table does in their two last Rules; that is, The wives fathers
wife, Her brothers wife, Her sons wife, Her Grandfathers wife by the father
Her Grandfathers wife by the mother, Her fathers brothers wife, Her mothers
brothers wife Her brothers sons wife, Her sisters sons wife, Her sons sons
wife, Her daughters sons wife.


And they have Seven other Prohibitions by a fifth Rule, whereof our Table
receives none.

And this harmony between our Matrimonial Table and the Karaits exposition of
the Levitical Degrees, is more perhaps than has been observed, to justify the
persons prohibited by the Table, for as many as they are, to be the same
levitically prohibited.

To this may be added, That by our Vulgar Translation, and also by the
Septuagint (as I conceive) the words, Neither shall thou take a wife to her
sister to vex her, Lev. 18.18.
to uncover her nakedness, besides the other, during her life, may be
understood to prohibit the husband his wives sister absolutely, as well as to
prohibit her during his wives life; For the words (during her life) may relate
either to the words, Thou shall not take a wife to her sister, viz. during her
life, and in that sense the meaning will be, That a man is not prohibited to
marry his wives sister absolutely, Seld. de Jure naturali and Gentium, l. 5. c.
10. f. 591.
but only until his wives death, and is consonant to the exposition of that
place in Leviticus, by the Scribes and Talmudical Rabbis.

Or the words may be read thus, Thou shall not take a wife to her sister to vex
her, during her life, or as long as she lives, that is, to cause jealousy and
vexation to thy wife, during the whole time of her life; which sense and
reading squares with the Doctrine of the Karaits upon Leviticus: and I think
may well be defended by the Septuagint Translation.

The next thing I shall insist on, is, The Authority of the Canons of the
Apostles so styled; Whether they were re vera the Apostles, or not, doubtless
they are of great, both Antiquity and Authority.

Of those Canons the Eighteenth has these words, as they are published in the
Canon Law.

Can. Apost. 18
Qui duas sorores duxit aut consobrinam clericus esse non potest.

1. This Canon cannot be understood of having two Sisters for wives at the same
time, for the Christians never admitted two wives, or more, at one time; and
therefore interdicting of two sisters, qua sisters, at a time, was to no
purpose.

2. The other part of the Canon, which is aut consobrinam, that is, his brother
or sisters daughter taken to wife, shows the Canon respected only the nearness
of Relation.

That cleared, I reason thus, either marrying the wives sister, after the wives
death, was lawful when the Canon was made, or unlawful, for it relates to an
offense done, qui duxit, not to a new made offense. If lawful, why then was any
punishment (namely exclusion from the Clergy) inflicted for a lawful Act? If it
were unlawful in the Apostles time, how is it become now lawful?

It is true, as the Learned Grotius observes on this Subject, Grot. de Jure
Belli. l. 2. c. 5. Sect. 14.
A marriage may be unlawful in many respects, and yet the marriage stand good,
and the vinculum matrimonii not dissolved, but punishable some other ways, if
made unlawful by Humane Authority.

But this Precept of the Apostles cannot be said of Humane Authority only, nor
a new Institution, as is already noted; nor was there any Divorce for Incest
among the Jews, as is noted after, but was always among the Christians in
Christian States.

2. In that time the Apostles and Primitive Christian Church had no
Jurisdiction or Power of Legal Divorce, Separation, and Bastarding the Issue,
how incestuous soever the marriage were, for those were Acts of Jurisdiction
and Coercion, and could not be done but by the power of Laws, to which the
parties were locally subject. But the Apostles and Church power was only to
forbid them communion with the rest of their brethren Christians, and to deny
the Offenders such things as were in their power, namely, to be of the Clergy,
as was done by this Canon.

This appears by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 5 1.
It is reported there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not
so much as named among the Gentiles, That one should have his Fathers wife;
which was an Incest of the highest degree, although denoted by the word (...).

Yet St. Paul could do no more but direct the Corinthians from Communion with
that man, and to put away from among them that wicked person: He could neither
null his marriage, nor illegitimate his Issue, if he had any, nor put the
Offender to death, according to the Mosaical Law, for these are effects of the
Civil Power; and among the Hebrews no Divorce was for Incest, but the marriage
was void, and the Incest punished, Seld. Ux. Ebraica, l. 1. c. 12. f. 87. 89.
as in persons unmarried.

The next thing observable from this Canon, is, That the Makers were of opinion
that the marriage with the Consobrina, or brother or sisters daughter, was
equally unlawful as marriage with two sisters, and the punishment by the Canon
is equal.

Whence it follows, That the Makers of the Canon, Apostles or others, did in
those two Cases follow the exposition of the Karaits, and not of the
Talmudists: The Karaits holding both marriages unlawful, but the Talmudists
holding neither unlawful by Moses's Law.

But by what Law Divine the primitive and succeeding Christian Churches
conceived themselves obliged (as generally they did, and do) in the matter of
marriage, to observe the Levitical prohibitions strictly and indispensably, is
a question of great difficulty: But surely they took their measures of those
Prohibitions from the Doctrine of the Karaits, more than from the Scribes and
Pharisees, though the last were of more Authority in the Hebrews Commonwealth,
as appears by that of Matthew cap. 23. v. 2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses his Seat, all therefore they bid you observe, that observe and do. Nor
was it without reason done, for such of those degrees which are not
particularly specified in the Eighteenth of Leviticus (for in those the Scribes
and Karaits agree) but are deduced by Argument to be prohibited. Seld. Uxor
Ebraica, l. 1. c. 3, 4. Uxor Ebraica, l. 1. c. 1, 2.
The Karaits conclude in their Prohibitions of Marriage from the Scripture it
self, but the Scribes in theirs from the Tradition and Sanctions of the Elders,
which Traditions the Christians often heeded not, as introduced frequently
against Gods Law, as appears in the Tradition of Corban against Gods Precept of
honoring the Father and Mother, Mark 7.11. Mat. 15.3, 4, 5, 6.
most signally.

Nor is it strange that the Opinions of private men prevail above the public
in process of time. So happened it in Luther, Calvin, and others, in the
beginning of the Reformation, whose Opinions in time grew more authentic,
both in Doctrine and Discipline here, and in many other States, than the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which was the public before in both kinds:
Many like Examples might be given, ancient and modern, which I purposely omit.

By a Canon of another very ancient Provincial Council, called Concilium
Eliberinum, under Pope Silvester, Three hundred and fourteen years after
Christ, and before the Council of Nice, by the Sixteenth Canon of that Council
-- Si quis post obitum Uxoris suae sororem ejus duxerit per quinquennium a
communione abstineat. Grot. l. 2. c. 5. p. 256. Sect. 14.


By this so ancient Council, marrying the wives sister was accounted unlawful
but for the same reasons as before; they could punish it no otherwise than by
ways in the power of the Church, which was to hinder the Offender from
Communion for five years.

And in this Council they followed the exposition of the Karaits also
concerning marriages, and not of the Talmudists; nor is it rational to
conceive, that Canons then forbidding any sort of marriage, proceeded from an
Arbitrary power, assumed by those who made them, as Law makers, to which they
could no way pretend, but because it was unlawful by the Principles and
Persuasion of all Christian Believers.

Vide for these Rules Selden's Uxor Ebraica, l. 1. cap. 4, 5.
By the first Rule is interdicted to a man his near of Kin By the Matrimonial
Table of England interdicted The fathers wife The fathers wife or Stepmother
f. 11 The mother The mother f. 10 The brothers wife The brothers wife f. 18 The
sister The sister f. 16 The sons wife The sons wife f. 15 The daughter The
daughter f. 13

By the second Rule is interdicted to a man the near of kin to his near of kin.
The Grandfathers wife by the father The Grand fathers wife by the father f. 2
The Grandfathers wife by the Mother The Grandfathers wife by the mother f. 2
The Grandmother by the Father The Grandmother by the father f. 1 The
Grandmother by the mother The Grandmother by the mother f. 1 The fathers
brothers wife The fathers brothers wife f. 6 The fathers sister The fathers
sister f. 4 The mothers brothers wife The mothers brothers wife f. 7 The
mothers sister The mothers sister f. 5 The brothers sons wife The brothers sons
wife f. 27 The brothers daughter The brothers daughter f. 25 The sisters sons
wife The sisters sons wife f. 28 The sisters daughter The sisters daughter f.
26 The sons sons wife The sons sons wife f. 21 The sons daughter The sons
daughter f. 19 The daughters sons wife The daughters sons wife f. 22 The
daughters daughter The daughters daughter f. 20

By the third Rule is interdicted to the husband his wives near of kin.
From a woman and her fathers wife Omitted. From a woman and her mother From a
woman and her mother f. 12 From a woman and her Brothers wife Omitted. From a
woman and her sister A woman and her sister f. 17 From a woman and her sons
wife Omitted. From a woman and her daughter A woman and her daughter f. 14

By the fourth Rule is interdicted to a man the near of Kin to his wives near
of Kin.
A woman and her grandmother by the mother A woman and her grandmother by the
mother f. 3 A woman and her grandmother by the father A woman and her
grandmother by the father f. 3 A woman and her fathers brothers wife O. A
woman and her fathers brothers wife f. 6 A woman and her mothers brothers wife
O. A woman and her mothers brothers wife A woman and her brothers sons wife
Omitted. A woman and her brothers daughter A woman and her brothers daughter f.
29 A woman and her sisters daughter A woman and her sisters daughter f. 30 A
woman and her sisters sons wife Omitted. A woman and her sons sons wife
Omitted. A woman and her sons daughter A woman and her sons daughter f. 23 A
woman and her daughters sons wife Omitted. A woman and her daughters daughter A
woman and her daughters daughter f. 24 A woman and her fathers sister A woman
and her fathers sister A woman and her mothers sister A woman and her mothers
sister A woman and her grandfathers wife by the father Omitted. A woman and
her grandfathers wife by the mother Omitted.

These last four Degrees are not mentioned under the fourth Rule by Mr. Seldom,
but referred to by the words, and reliquis quae supersunt ex iis quae in regula
secunda propinquorum sunt propinquae; but the two first of these last four are
forbid in our Matrimonial Table, not the two last, as several others of the
same kind; for the husband is not forbid by the Table the wives of his wives
Grandfathers, nor her Fathers, nor Brothers wife, nor sons wife, nor her
fathers brothers, nor mothers brothers wife, nor her brothers sons wife, nor
sisters sons wife, nor her sons sons wife, nor her daughters sons wife.

By the fifth Rule is interdicted that two near of Kin marry two other near of
Kin.
A man and his father from a woman and her daughter O. A man and his father
from a woman and her sons wife O. A man and his father from a woman and her
brothers wife O. A man and his father from a woman and her sister O. A man and
his brother from a woman and her brothers wife O. A man and his brother from a
woman and her daughter O. A man and his brother from a woman and her sons wife
O.
None of those comprised in this fifth Rule are prohibited by the Matrimonial
Table, but all the persons interdicted by the Doctrine of the Karaits or
Scripture Rabbis, are also interdicted by the Matrimonial Table of England,
excepting eleven persons before mentioned, not interdicted to the wives husband
by the Table, who are interdicted by the Karaits enumeration, but in this paper
are marked with Ciphers, as to the Matrimonial Table, in the first four Rules
of the Karaits Doctrine. So as all the persons prohibited in those first four
Rules of the Karaits, being in number Four and forty, are also prohibited by
the Matrimonial Table, which, together with Eleven persons ciphered in the
Table, as excepted, make up the like number of Four and forty, from which if
you deduct Eleven, as excepted, there will remain Three and thirty, wherein the
Table and the Karaits agree.

And whereas the enumeration of the prohibited marriages to a man are in the
Table but Thirty, and by consequence so many to the woman; for where the man is
prohibited to marry the woman, the woman must reciprocally be prohibited to
marry the man; the reason is, because in the number of degrees in the Table,
the Grandfathers wife, the Grandmother, and the wives Grandmother, make but
three degrees: But in the enumeration of the Karaits, the Grandfathers wife by
the father, the Grandfathers wife by the mother, the Grandmother by the
father, and the Grandmother by the mother, the wives Grandmother by the
father, and the wives Grandmother by the mother, are severally enumerated, and
so make Six persons, Three more than are enumerated in the Table, and so the
Numbers agree.

The second Assertion.
And as to the second Assertion, That admitting this marriage is not within the
Levitical Prohibitions, yet the Temporal Courts cannot prohibit the impeaching
or drawing it into question by the Spiritual Court.

There is a great difference between marriage within the Levitical
prohibitions, and marriage within the Levitical degrees, which commonly are
taken to be the same. For marriage within the Levitical prohibitions was always
unlawful to the Hebrews by Gods Law, that is, the Mosaic Law: But marriage
within the Levitical degrees was not always unlawful; for marriage between
persons of the same nearness in Affinity or Consanguinity, which only makes the
degree, was in some case and circumstance unlawful, in others lawful: So a
marriage unlawful, and a marriage lawful, as the Circumstance varied in the
same degree, that is, the same nearness of Relation.

The Levitical degrees, qua such, are set forth by no Act of Parliament; but
marriages which fall within some of those degrees, are said to be marriages
within the degrees prohibited by Gods Law, by 28. H. 8. c. 7. and 28 H. 8. c.
16.

Nor is it said in any Act of Parliament, That all marriages within the
Levitical degrees are prohibited by Gods Law.

Sir Edward Coke in the first Edition, but not in the rest, Cok. Litt. f. 235.
a. Edit. 1.
of his Littleton, has, I confess, these words; By the Statute of 32 H. 8. it
is declared, That all persons be lawful, that is, may lawfully marry, that are
not prohibited by Gods Law to marry, that is to say, that be not prohibited by
the Levitical degrees.

By which he makes all Gods Law, by which any marriage is prohibited to be the
Levitical degrees, which is not so; nor does he constare sibi, for in his
Comment upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. he says expressly,

That marriage made with a person pre-contracted, or with a person naturally
impotent, could not have been impeached in order to a Divorce, by reason of the
Statute of 32 H. 8. but because such marriages are against Gods Law. Yet they
are not marriages within the Levitical degrees.

This marriage in question therefore, though by way of Admission not within the
Levitical prohibitions, if it be within the Levitical degrees at all, and
whether unlawful or lawful within them, and by what Law soever so unlawful or
lawful, cannot be prohibited to be impeached by the Spiritual Courts, by the
Statute of 32 H. 8.

For that Act prohibits the impeaching of marriages only which are absolutely
without the Levitical degrees, leaving all other to the Spiritual Jurisdiction
as before the Act of 32. Now

The Levitical degrees are to be reckoned by the persons whose carnal knowledge
is forbidden a man in respect of Consanguinity or Affinity by the Law of Moses.
As the carnal knowledge of the mother, the fathers wife, the sons wife, etc. in
respect of Consanguinity of the wives daughter, her daughters daughter, her
mother, etc. in respect of Affinity. And it is plain, the wives sister is
prohibited in some respect of Affinity, by the words, Neither shall thou take a
wife to her sister, to vex her: Therefore her marriage with her sisters husband
is a marriage within the Levitical degrees.

And agreed on all sides to be unlawful within the degrees, if during the wives
life; but doubted if unlawful after her death.

Next, it is certain the wives husband was restrained from taking his wives
sister as he might take another woman, that is, either during his wives life,
or after: Therefore his marriage with her was within the Levitical degrees.

But it must be clearly without those degrees, if the impeachment of it may be
prohibited by the Act of 32 H. 8.

This marriage permitted lawful by the Canon Law, where used. Decret. Greg. l.
4. Tit. de Divortiis, c. 9.
If a man marry his brothers wife, none will deny that marriage to be within the
Levitical degrees; yet in some case that marriage was lawful by the Mosaic
Law, that is, if the deceased brother died issuless. But that will not hinder
the impeachment of such a marriage by the Statute of 32 H. 8.

So if a man marry his fathers brothers wife, it is a marriage within the
Levitical degrees. Yet if the fathers brother were by the half blood only of
the mothers side, the Rabbis and Scribes held such marriage not unlawful by
the Levitical Law, but by the Sanctions of the Elders. Seld. Uxor Ebraica, l. 1
c. 2. f. 8.
Many such cases may be found to prove a marriage may be lawful, though it be a
marriage within the Levitical degrees: But none of those can therefore be
prohibited to be impeached, for they are not marriages without the Levitical
degrees, as the Statute requires.

Accordingly Sir Edward Coke commenting upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. in his
second Institutes, Cok. Inst. 2 f. 683.
sets forth a Scheme of the Levitical degrees, as necessary to the exposition
of that Statute, and therein enumerates the marriage of the wives husband with
her sister to be both within the Levitical degrees, and prohibited by the
Eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus.

One Man was sued before the High Commissioners, Man's Case, Moore's Rep. f.
907. a.
33 Eliz. for marrying his wives sisters daughter, and a Prohibition was
granted, as Moore Reports the Case, because the marriage was not prohibited by
the Levitical Law, which was no Reason.

Crook reports the same Case, Crook. 33 El. f. 228. Man's Case.
and that a prohibition was granted, but that a consultation was after granted,
and that a sentence of Divorce was given.

In reporting this Case of Man's, Justice Crook's words are, A Consultation was
granted, because the Prohibition is not to be, if the marriage be not within
the Levitical degrees.

Which is a great mistake; for if the marriage be within the Levitical degrees,
no prohibition ought to issue; for it ought not to be but when the marriage is
without the Levitical degrees.

Then he adds, But here the prohibition was general, and therefore not good;
which is not intelligible, whatever he intended by it.

For by the Libel it must necessarily appear to the Court, That the marriage in
question was either without the Levitical degrees, or within them.

If it were without the degrees, the Court did most unjustly to grant the
Consultation, for it ought not to have been granted.

If the marriage were within the Levitical degrees, it had been unjust not to
grant a Consultation.

But a Consultation was granted, therefore the Court conceived the marriage of
the husband with his wives sisters daughter to be a marriage within the
Levitical degrees, and not without them, though it be not specified in the
Eighteenth of Leviticus to be prohibited.

Cok. Litt. Edit. 1. f. 235. a. Peirsons Case not Parsons.
Sir Edward Coke, in the first Edition of his Littleton, says, That one Peirson
was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for marrying his first wives sisters
daughter against the Canons of the Church; and that the Court of Common Pleas,
upon consideration taken of the Statute of 32 H. 8. granted a prohibition,
because the marriage was not prohibited by the Levitical degrees. And these two
Cases have been principally insisted on to prove no marriage is within the
Levitical degrees, if the degree be not particularly mentioned in the
Eighteenth of Leviticus. But upon occasion of Harrison's Case, lately adjudg'd
in this Court, I made search for the Records of those two Cases, but no Record
could be found of Man's Case; but by Crook a Consultation was granted in it.

Trin. 2 Jac. Rot. 1032.
By the Record of Pierson's Case, which was in Trinity 2 Jac. it appears that in
Hillary Term following a Consultation was granted, which Sir Edward Coke
mentions not in his Littleton. And in the Second Edition of his Littleton, and
all the subsequent Editions, that Case is omitted.

Hob. f. 181. a. Howard verse. Bartlet. Rennington's Case.
I find likewise in the Lord Hobarts Reports, That one Rennington was questioned
by the High Commissioners for marrying his wives Niece, and was sentenced to
Penance, and bound to abstain from her Company, but they were not divorced a
vinculo Matrimonii, though there was cause, says the Book, and therefore the
wife had her Dower, nor was there any prohibition in the Case.

So as by all these Cases the marriage of the husband with his wives sisters
daughter, is a marriage prohibited within the Levitical degrees, for nearness
of kindred to the wife; Then of necessity the wives sisters marriage (who is
nearer to the wife) with the wives husband must be prohibited a fortiori; So I
conceive these three Cases full against the Plaintiff.

It is not strange, That at first Prohibitions were granted upon the Statute of
32. in Cases which were not specifically mentioned in the Eighteenth of
Leviticus, but after discussions of the Levitical degrees upon Consultations
prayed, It was manifestly found, That diverse marriages must be prohibited
within the Levitical degrees, not nominally expressed in the Eighteenth of
Leviticus; As the marriage of the father with his own daughter, Of the Grandson
with his Grandmother or Grandfathers wife, Of the Son with his Mothers
brothers wife, Of the Uncle with his brothers or sisters daughter, Cok. Inst.
2. f. 683, 684.
which since appears by Sir Edward Coke to be a prohibited marriage, and others
upon like reason.

And was resolved in Archbishop Laud's time, in the Case of Sir Giles
Alington, who was deeply fined, and a Sentence of Divorce given for marrying
his brother or sisters daughter, which I heard at Lambeth House.

And no prohibition was granted, though moved for, as was very probable, and
commonly reported; but we find no Record of Prohibitions denied, for there is
no Entry made of Motions not granted, but of Prohibitions granted there is,
which makes the granting of a Prohibition of no great Authority, unless upon
Action brought a Consultation be denied upon Demurrer.

So of the husband with his wives sisters daughter.

The third Assertion.
As to the third Assertion, That admitting this marriage be without the
Levitical degrees, yet it is prohibited by Gods Law, and therefore to be
impeached notwithstanding the Statute of 32 H. 8. whose words are, No marriage,
Gods Law excepted, shall be impeached without the Levitical degrees.

When an Act of Parliament declares a marriage to be against Gods Law, it must
be admitted in all Courts and Proceedings of this Kingdom to be so.

By an Act, 25 H. 8. c. 22. entitled, An Act declaring the Establishment of
the Succession of the Kings most Royal Majesty in the Imperial Crown of this
Realm.

Among sundry marriages declared by that Act to be marriages within the degrees
of marriage prohibited by Gods Law, the marriage of a man with his wives sister
is expressly declared to be prohibited by Gods Law, and that a Divorce should be
of such marriage, if any such were.

But this Act is expressly repealed by an Act in 28 H. 8. c. 7. entitled, An
Act for the Establishment of the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

By that Act of 28 H. 8. it is declared in these words, And furthermore, since
many Inconveniences have fallen, as well in this Realm as others, by reason of
the marrying within the degrees of marriage prohibited by Gods Law. That is to
say, The Son to marry the Mother or the Stepmother, carnally known by his
Father, The Brother the Sisters, The Father his Sons daughter, or his Daughters
daughter, Or the Son to marry the Daughter of his Father, procreat and born by
his Stepmother, Or the Son to marry his Aunt, being his Fathers or Mothers
sister, Or to marry his Uncles wife, carnally known by his Uncle, Or the Father
to marry his Sons wife, carnally known by his Son, Or the Brother to marry his
Brothers wife, carnally known by his Brother, Or any man married, and carnally
knowing his wife, to marry his Wives daughter, or his Wives sons daughter, Or
his Wives daughters daughter, Or his Wives sister.

Then it declares, Those marriages to be indispensable, because against Gods
Law, and that there should be a separation of such marriages, if any were, and
the Children procreat in them to be illegitimate.

But this Clause also of this Act of 28 H. 8. as some conceive, is repealed by
1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 8. in these words, And also all that part of the Act
made in the said 28 H. 8. entitled, An Act for the Establishment of the
Succession of the Imperial Crown of the Realm, that concerns a Prohibition to
marry within the degrees expressed in the said Act, shall henceforth be
repealed, made frustrate, void, and of none effect.

By the Act of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. two other Laws are likewise repealed,
which concern the question before us, viz. An Act in 28 H. 8. c. 16. entitled,
An Act for the release of such as have obtained pretended Licenses and
Dispensations from the Sea of Rome: And the Act of 32 H. 8. c. 38. which has
been often mentioned.

But these two last Acts are revived by the Act of 1 Eliz. c. 1. and in force;
but neither the Act of 25 H. 8. nor 28 H. 8. c. 7. are revived in express
terms: And not only so, but the Act of 1 El. c. 1. has this Negative Clause,
That all other Laws and Statutes, and the Branches and Clauses of any Act or
Statute repealed by the said Act of Repeal made in the time of the said late
King Philip and Queen Mary, and not in this present Act specially mentioned and
revived, shall stand, remain, and be repealed and void in such like manner and
form as they were before the making of this Act.

Whence it follows, That this marriage is not now proved to be against Gods
Law, by either of these repealed Statutes of 25 H. 8. or 28 H. 8. c. 7. unless
it be made out, that one of them at least remains at this day in force. And as
for that,

The Act of 28 H. 8. c. 16. which makes void all Dispensations from the Sea of
Rome, and expressly revived by 1 Eliz. and all Branches, Words, and Sentences
thereof, has these words, As a Grace of the Kings to diverse of his Subjects,
who had married by Dispensation, notwithstanding that Act made all
Dispensations from Rome void.

All marriages had from the Third of November, 26 H. 8. for which no Divorce or
Separation is had, and which marriages be not prohibited by Gods Laws, limited
and declared in the Act made this present Parliament for Establishing the Kings
Succession, or otherwise, by Holy Scriptures, shall be good. By which words I
conceive the Clause of 28 H. 8. c. 7. repealed in Queen Mary's time, is again
revived.

28 H. 8. c. 7. concerning marriages prohibited by Gods Law, continues still
repealed, because it is not specially mentioned to be revived by the Act of 1
Eliz. And therefore no Act is in force declaring the husbands marriage with his
wives sister to be prohibited by Gods Law.



By the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 7. All marriages prohibited by Gods Law, limited and
declared by the Clause of that Act, were unlawful, notwithstanding any
Dispensation had before the Repeal of that Clause.

By the Reviver in 1 Eliz. of 28 H. 8. c. 16. and of every Clause in it, All
marriages prohibited by Gods Law, limited and declared by 28 H. 8. c. 7. were
again unlawful, as before the Repeal, notwithstanding any Dispensation.

Therefore the Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 7. was revived by the Reviver of the
Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 16. in 1 Eliz. and made as effectual as before it was
repealed, and so it continues.

If it had been enacted by Parliament after the Repeal of the Clause in 28 H.
8. c. 7. That all marriages prohibited by Gods Law, limited and declared by 28
H. 8. c. 7. should be unlawful, notwithstanding any Dispensation that enacting
had revived the Clause in 28 H. 8. c. 7.

Therefore the same thing being enacted by revival of 28 H. 8. c. 16. must have
the same effect of reviving that Clause in 28 H. 8. c. 7.

I will put it, for more clearness, by way of a Case; A man before the Third of
November, 26 H. 8. by Dispensation from Rome, had married his wives sisters
daughter, which marriage was prohibited by the Canons of the Church, and no
Divorce had been attempted in the Case until after 1 Eliz. and the Reviver of
the Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 16. which made void all Dispensations from Rome.

It is plain, That this marriage being not prohibited by Gods Law, limited and
declared in the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 7: was by the express words of the revived
Act of 28 H. 8. c. 16. a marriage to continue good without separation,
notwithstanding all Dispensations from Rome were nulled; because it was no
marriage excepted out of the Grace intended and given by that Act to the Kings
Subjects married by Dispensation before November the Third, 26 H. 8. and not
then separated.

But if a marriage before the Third of November, 26 H. 8. had been by
Dispensation between the brother and sister, or as this Case is between the
husband and his wives sister, and no Separation attempted until after 1 Eliz.
and the Reviver of the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 16. These marriages were not to
continue good, and without Separation by 28 H. 8. c. 16. because they were
marriages particularly excepted out of the Grace granted by that Act, as being
prohibited by Gods Law, limited and declared in the Act of 28 H. 8. c. 7. which
proves 28 H. 8. c. 7. to be in force by the Reviver of 28 H. 8. c. 16. and
consequently the marriage in question to be clearly against Gods Law, which is
the thing to be proved.

In the Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 7. there are two Clauses concerning marriages,
The first declaring certain marriages there recited, to be within the degrees
prohibited by Gods Law, which Clause concerns the present question, and is
before cited.

The second Clause, in these words, Be it therefore enacted, That no person or
persons, Subjects or Resiants of this Realm, or in any your Dominions, of what
estate, degree, or degrees soever they be, shall from henceforth marry within
the degrees before rehearsed, what pretense soever shall be made to the contrary
thereof. Then it proceeds,

That if there were any Divorce or Separation made of any such marriages by the
Archbishops or Ministers of the Church of England, such Separation should
remain good, and not be revokable by any Authority; and the Children procreated
under such unlawful marriage, should be illegitimate.

And if any such marriages were in any the Kings Dominions without Separation,
that there should be a separation from the Bonds of such unlawful marriage.

Now we must observe, the Act of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 8. does not repeal
this Act entirely of 28 H. 8. c. 7. but repeals only one Clause of it; the
words of which Clause of Repeal are before cited, and manifest this second
Clause of the Act of 28 H. 8. and not the first to be the Clause intended to be
repealed.

For there was no reason to repeal the Clause declaratory of marriages
prohibited by Gods Law, which the Church of Rome always acknowledged; nor do
the words of Repeal import any thing concerning marriages within degrees
prohibited by Gods Law.

But (as the time then was) there was reason to repeal a Clause enacting all
Separations of such marriages with which the Pope had dispensed, should remain
good against his Authority; and that such marriages with which he had
dispensed, not yet separated, should be separate.

And the words of the Clause of Repeal manifest the second Clause to be
intended, viz. All that part of the Act made in the said Eight and twentieth
year of King Henry the Eighth, which concerns a prohibition to marry within
the degrees expressed in the said Act, shall be repealed, etc.

As it is true, That if a marriage be declared by Act of Parliament to be
against Gods Law, we must admit it to be so; for by a Law (that is, by an Act
of Parliament) it is so declared.

By the same reason, if by a lawful Canon, a marriage be declared to be against
Gods Law, we must admit it to be so; for a lawful Canon is the Law of the
Kingdom, as well as an Act of Parliament: And whatever is the Law of the
Kingdom, is as much the Law as any thing else that is so; for what is Law does
not suscipere magis aut minus.

But by a lawful Canon of this Kingdom, which is enough, and not only so, but
by a Canon warranted by Act of Parliament, the marriage in question is declared
to be prohibited by Gods Law, therefore we must admit it to be so.

In a Synod or Convocation holden at London in the year 1603. for the Province
of Canterbury, by the Kings Writ, and with the Kings License under the Great
Seal of England, to treat, consult, and agree of such Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastic as should be there thought fit. Several Canons were concluded and
agreed

To which King James gave his Royal Assent and Approbation, and by his Letters
Patents ratified and confirmed them, according to the form of the Statute made
in 25 H. 8. c. 19. and commanded the due observance of them. Among which the
Ninety ninth Canon is,

No person shall marry within the degrees prohibited by Gods Law, and expressed
in a Table set forth by Authority in the year of our Lord 1563. and all
marriages so made and contracted, shall be adjudged incestuous and unlawful;
and the aforesaid Table shall be in every Church publicly set up and fixed at
the charge of the Parish.

Which is the same as -- No person shall marry within the degrees prohibited by
Gods Law, and which degrees are expressed in the Table, etc.

For to the Question, What is expressed in the Table? there can be no Answer,
but the degrees prohibited by Gods Law.

But by this Table, this marriage in question is expressed to be in a degree
prohibited by Gods Law, therefore it must be admitted to be so.

Another consequent is this, That by this Canon, and consequently by the Law of
this Kingdom, All marriages prohibited by that Table, are declared to be within
the degrees prohibited by Gods Law.

Note, That any marriage unlawful by holy Scripture, is declared here to be
against Gods Law Judicially, no otherwise, than because by the Law of the Land
the Scripture it self is declared and approved to be the Law of God; for the
Scripture cannot judge it self to be Scripture without some Judicature. --
Therefore by the sixth Canon, tempore Ed. 6. at a Convocation in London, Anno
1552. the Authority of the Old Testament was declared. Can. 1552.
At a Convocation of both Provinces in London, Anno 1562. the Canonical and
Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament were particularly enumerated, Can. 1563.
and the Books of the New declared Canonical, as Received. By the seventh Canon
the Authority of the Old Testament Declared.

By the Act it is said, That the Clergy of this Kingdom, nor any of them, shall
henceforth enact, promulgate, or execute any Canons, Constitutions, or
Ordinances Provincial, by whatsoever name or names they may be called, in their
Convocations, in time coming, which shall always be assembled by Authority of
the Kings Writ, unless the same Clergy may have the Kings most Royal Assent and
License to make, promulge, and execute such Canons, Constitutions, and
Ordinances Provincial, etc.

The Chief Justice delivered the Resolution of the Court; And accordingly a
Consultation was granted.

In Camera Scaccarii. Edward Thomas Plaintiff. Thomas Sorrel Defendant.

THE Plaintiff by Information in the Kings Bench, tam pro Domino Rege quam pro
seipso, demands of the Defendant Four hundred and fifty pounds for selling Wine
in the Parish of Stepney, in the County of Middlesex, by Retail, Ninety several
times, between the Tenth day of June, the Seventeenth of the King, and the Two
and twentieth day of May, the Eighteenth of the King, to several persons,
without license, contrary to the Statute of 12 Car. 2. whereby he forfeited
Five pounds for every several offense, which amounts to Four hundred and fifty
pounds.

The Defendant pleads, Nil debet, and therefore puts himself upon the Country.
The Jury find,

That as to all the Debt, except Fifty pounds, the Defendant owes nothing. And
as to the Fifty pounds, they find the Statute of 7 E. 6. c. 5. concerning
retailing of Wines, prout in the Statute.

They find Letters Patents under the Great Seal, dated 2 Febr. 9 Jac. (...)
prout in the Letters Patents, whereby King James incorporated the Company of
Vintners in the City of London, by the Name of Master, Warden, Freemen, and
Commonalty of the Mystery of Vintners in the said City, and thereby among other
things granted, for him, his Heirs and Successors, to the said Master, Warden,
and Freemen of the said Company, and their Successors, that they might always
after, within the said City and Suburbs of the same, and within three Miles
from the Walls or Gates thereof, and in all and every other City and Seaports,
called Port-towns, within the Kingdom of England, and in all other Cities and
Towns, known by the name of Thorough-fare-towns, where Posts were set and laid
between Dover and London, and between London and Barwick, where any of the
Freemen of the said Mystery did, or should happen to dwell and keep a Wine
Tavern, and by themselves or servants, sell Wine by retail or in gross to their
best advantage, in their houses, or elsewhere, Non obstante the Statute of 7 E.
6.

They find the Act of 12 Car. 2. c. 25. and the confirmation of it concerning
the giving Licenses to retail Wine, and the Proviso therein prout.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend, or be prejudicial to the Master, Wardens, Freemen, and Commonalty of
the Mystery of Vintners of the City of London, or to any other City or Town
Corporate, but that they may use and enjoy such Liberties and Privileges, as
heretofore they have lawfully used and enjoyed.

They find. That the Master, Wardens, Freemen, and Commonalty of the Mystery of
Vintners in the City of London, was an ancient Corporation of the said City of
London, at the time of the Act of 12 Car. 2. and incorporated by the Name of
Master, Wardens, Freemen, and Commonalty of the Mystery of Vintners of the City
of London.

They find, That the Defendant, three years before, and during all the time in
the Information, used the Trade of retailing of Wine, and kept a Tavern in the
Parish of Stepney in the County of Middlesex, was an Inhabitant there, and that
the Defendants house, in which the said Wine was sold, is within two miles of
the City of London.

They find, That the Defendant, within the time in the Information mentioned,
did sell Ten pints of Sack, as in the Information mentioned, to be drunk and
spent in his said dwelling house, being a Tavern, in the said Parish of
Stepney.

They find, That at the time of the sale of the said Wine, and three years
before, the Defendant was a natural born Subject of the King, and a Freeman of
the City of London of the said Company of Vintners.

Si pro quer. quoad 50 l. pro quer.

Si pro Def. pro Def. 1 s.

Upon this Special Verdict three Questions have been raised.

1. Whether the Patent of 9 Jac. was not void in its Creation?

2. Admitting it was not void in its Creation, Whether it became void by the
death of King James.

3. If it were a good Patent in the Creation, nor was void by the death of King
James, Whether the Proviso in the Act of 12 Car. 2. Saving all the Right of the
Master, Wardens, Freemen and Commonalty of Vintners in the City of London, has
preserved all that Right which they had by the Patent of 9 Jac. against the Act
of 12 Car. 2?

1. I conceive, That if the Patent, 9 Jac. were not void in the Creation, it
remained good after the death of King James.

2. If it were not void in the Creation, nor by the death of King James, all
Right that the Master, Wardens, Freemen and Commonalty of Vintners had by it,
is still preserved by the Proviso in the Act of 12 Car. 2. but if the Patent of
9 Jac. was void in its Creation, or by the death of King James, then the
Proviso in the Act of 12 Car. 2. aids them not at all.

So as now it is only insisted on, That the Patent of 9 Jac. was void in its
Creation, for two Reasons.

1. For that the Law of 7 E. 6. was such a Law, pro bono publico, as the King
could not dispense against it, more than with some other penal Laws, pro bono
publico.

2. If he could to particular persons, he could not to the Corporation of
Vintners, and their Successors, whose number or persons the King could never
know; and that it stood not with the trust reposed in him by the Law, to
dispense so generally without any prospect of number or persons.

The Books have been plentifully urged at the Bar, and by my Brothers, who
argued before me, therefore I shall not Actum agere to repeat them.

But I observed not that any steady Rule has been drawn from the Cases cited
to guide a man's Judgment, where the King may, or may not dispense in penal Laws,
excepting that old Rule taken from the Case of 11 H. 7. 11 H. 7. f. 11, 12.


That with Malum prohibitum by Stat. the King may dispense, but not with Malum
per se.

But I think that Rule has more confounded men's Judgments on that subject,
than rectified them.

Yet I conceive that Case, and the Instances given in it, rightly understood,
to be the best key afforded by our Books, to open this dark Learning (as it
seems to me) of Dispensations, to which therefore I shall only or principally
apply my self.

Before I enter upon it, I must previously assent, That every act a man is
naturally enabled to do, is in it self equally good, as any other act he is so
enabled to do. And so all the Schoolmen agree, That Actus qua actus non est
malus. Romans 4.15.
And that men's acts are good or bad only as they are precepted or prohibited by
a Law, according to that Truth, Where there is no law there is no
transgression. Whence it follows, That every Malum is in truth a Malum
prohibitum by some Law.

In the next place, I mean by the word (Dispensation) when I use it, another
thing than some of my Brothers defined it to be, namely, That it was Liberatio
a poena; or as others, That it is provida relaxatio Juris, which is defining an
ignotum per ignotius, but liberare a poena, is the proper effect of a pardon,
not of a dispensation; For a dispensation obtained does jus dare, and makes the
thing prohibited lawful to be done by him who has it, upon which depends the
true reason of many Cases which admit not of dispensation; but a pardon frees
from the punishment due for a thing unlawfully done. Yet freedom from
punishment is a consequent of a dispensation, though not its effect. But so it
is also a consequent of repealing the Law, and a consequent of an exception at
the making of the Law of some particular person or persons from being bound by
the Law.

I come now to the Case it self of 11 H. 7. wherein I agree, That with Malum
prohibitum by Stat. indefinitely understood the King may dispense.

But I deny that the King can dispense with every Malum prohibitum by Statute,
though prohibited by Statute only.

1. The King may pardon Nusances that are transient, and not continuing, as a
Nuisance in the Highway, which still continues, and is not ended, until
removed; cannot be pardoned: So of a Watercourse diverted, or a Bridge broken
down, Cok. Pla. Coron. f. 237.
they cannot be pardoned so as to acquit the Nusance-maker for committing them;
but the fine or punishment imposed for the doing may be pardoned.

But breaking the Assise of Bread and Ale, forestalling the Markets,
engrossing, regrating, or the like, which continue not, but which are over
as soon as done, until done de novo again, may be pardoned, like other offenses:
So as the Offender shall not be impleaded for them, otherwise than by persons
who have received particular damage, which the King cannot remit; this
difference holds in offenses by penal Laws.

22 Car. 2. c. 8.
So a Mayor or Bailiff of a Town, or other Toll-taker, who is penally bound to
provide true Market measures, and does not, cannot be pardoned by the King,
because the fault still continues; but the punishment inflicted the King may
pardon. But by a Law all these offenses may be pardoned.

So it is generally true, that malum per se cannot be dispensed with; but
thence to infer (as many do) that every malum which the King cannot dispense
with is malum per se, is not true.

Nor is there in that Case any sufficient designation of what is malum per se,
and why to prevent error in disquisition concerning it, though some instances
thereof, mala per se, be very right.

I shall therefore endeavor to in stance in several kinds of mala per se,
which cannot be dispensed with, and in some mala prohibita by Acts of
Parliament, and otherwise, which the King also cannot dispense with; and to
give the reason why he cannot in both, thereby to make the conclusion I drive
at less confused, which is to differ penal Laws dispensable from those which
are not.

Murder, Adultery, Stealing, Incest, Sacrilege, Extortion, Perjury, Trespass,
and many other of the like kind, all men will agree to be mala per se, and
indispensable: All which are prohibited, and by Statutes. Nor is it much to
say, those are also prohibited by the Common Law, and therefore cannot be
dispensed with, if that were the reason, nothing prohibited at the Common Law
could be dispensed with, which is not so.

2. Where the Suit is only the Kings for breach of a Law, which is not to the
particular damage of any third person, the King may dispense; but where the
Suit is only the Kings, but for the benefit and safety of a third person, and
the King is entitled to the Suit by the prosecution and complaint of such third
person, the King cannot release, discharge, or dispense with the Suit, but by
consent and agreement of the party concerned. As where, upon complaint of any
person, a man has entered into Recognizance to keep the Peace against such
person, the King cannot discharge such Recognizance before it be forfeited; but
the party whose safety is concerned may, though the King only can sue the
Recognizance. Some more such Cases may be.

As the Laws of Nusances are pro bono publico, so are all general penal Laws;
and if a Nuisance cannot be dispensed with for that reason, it follows, no penal
Law, for the same reason, can be dispensed with.

Therefore the reason is, because the parties particularly damaged by a
Nuisance, have their Actions on the Case for their damage, whereof the King
cannot deprive them by his dispensation: And by the same reason, other penal
Laws, the breach of which are to men's particular damage, cannot be dispensed
with.

3. Nusances and Ills prohibited by penal Acts of Parliament, are of the same
nature as to the public, 4 E. 4. f. 31. 22 E. 4. f. 22. 3 H. 7. f. 1. Br.
Leet. n. 2. 19, 25, 26, 30.
although (as the Law is now received) the mala or nocumenta prohibited by Acts
of Parliament, are not presentable in Leets, or the Sheriffs Torn, as Nusances
at Common Law are, of which some questionless cannot be dispensed with; As
obstructing the High way, diverting a Watercourse, breaking down a Bridge,
breaking the Assise of Bread and Ale: for as to these, the parties particularly
damaged by them have their Actions, which the King cannot discharge.

4. Other ancient Nusances are by which no man has a particular damage or
action for it, as if a man buy provision coming to the Market by the way (which
is a Nuisance by forestalling the Market) and sells it not in the Market
forestalled, no Action lies for a particular damage to any man, more than to
every man; but the King may punish it.

So if a may buy Corn growing in the field, contrary to the Statute of 5 E. 6.
c. 14. he is an Ingrosser: So selling Corn in the Sheaf is against the Common
Law by Robert Hadham's Case, Cok. f. 197. c. 89. Hill. 25 E. 3. coram Rege.
cited in Coke's Pleas of the Crown, and punishable by the King, but no
particular person can have an Action for such engrossing more than every man;
yet these are Nusances by the Common Law, but so made by prohibiting Laws
beyond memory: As by a Law of King Athelstans, Ne quis extra oppidum quid emat,
Sax. Laws. f. 49. c. 12. Will. the firsts Laws. f. 171. c. 60, 61. Cok. Pleas
Coron. 197.
forestalling was prohibited. And by several Laws of William the First, Ne
venditio and emptio fiat nisi coram testibus and in civitatibus. Item nullum
mercatum vel forum sit, nec fieri permittatur, nisi in civitatibus regni
nostri. And no way differ from public evils now prohibited by Parliament, and
may, by it, be permitted, for the Statute of 15 Car. 2. c. 5. 15 Car. 2 c. 5.
gives leave to ingross without forestalling, when Corn exceeds not certain
Rates. Nor see I any reason why the King may not dispense with those Nusances
by which no man has right to a particular action, as well as he may with any
other offense against a penal Law, by which no third person has cause of
Action.

Whence it follows, That if an Act of Parliament call an offense a Nuisance,
from which no particular damage can arise to a particular person, to have his
Action, the King may dispense with such a nominal Nuisance as with an offense
against a penal Law, for which a man can have no Action for his particular
damage.

5. The Register has no Writ of Ad quod damnum, upon any License to be
granted, but for alienation of Capite Land, or in Mortmain, or for diverting or
obstructing a Watercourse, or Highway, in which Cases the Writ is directed to
the certain Sheriff or Escheator of the County, where the Land-way or
Watercourse lie; but for Licenses for other things, as Exportation or
Importation of prohibited Commodities, a Writ of Ad quod Damnum, cannot be
directed to any certain Sheriff, or other Officer, to enquire.

Nor is it enough to make a thing malum per se, because prohibited at Common
Law: But the reason is,

The word Murder (ex vi termini, in the Language it is used in) signifies
unlawful killing a man. The word Adultery, unlawful Copulation; Stealing,
unlawful taking from another; Perjury, unlawful swearing; and Trespass, ex vi
termini, an unlawful imprisonment, or unlawful entry, or the like, upon
another House or Lands, and so do the other mala instanced.

If these mala might be dispensed with, in regard a dispensation, as I said.
makes the thing to be done lawful to him who is dispensed with, it follows,
that the dispensation would make unlawful killing, which the word Murder
imports, vi termini, to be lawful; unlawful taking from another, which the word
Stealing imports, to be lawful; unlawful Swearing, which Perjury imports, to be
lawful; an unlawful Entry upon a man's House or Land, which the word Trespass
imports, to be lawful, and so of the rest.

So the same thing, at the same time, would be both lawful and unlawful, which
is impossible.

For the same reason, a Law making Murder, Stealing, Perjury, Trespass, or any
the rest of the mala instanced in lawful, would be a void Law in it self.

For a Law which a man cannot obey, nor act according to it, is void, and no
Law: And it is impossible to obey contradictions, or act according to them.

Therefore I may conclude those things to be mala in se, which can never be
made lawful.

The instances in that Book of 11 H. 7. are none of these, but near them: the
words are, But malum in se, the King, nor any other can dispense. And
instanceth,

Si Come, si le Roy, voyloit pardon de occider un homme ou de fair nuisance in
le haut chemin, ceo est void.

Where by the way, pardon is mis-printed for pocar done, for the King may
pardon killing a man; but if the King will give power to kill a man, or to make
a nuisance in the Highway, it is void.

And upon the same reason, a license to imprison a man, to take his Land, his
Horse, or any thing that is his from him, is void.

For in life, liberty, and estate, every man who has not forfeited them, has
a property and right which the Law allows him to defend; and if it be violated,
it gives an Action to redress the wrong, and to punish the wrong-doer.

Therefore a dispensation, that is, to make lawful the taking from a man any
thing which he may lawfully defend from being taken, or lawfully punish if it
be, must be void.

For it is a contradiction to make it lawful, to take what may be lawfully
hindered from being taken, or lawfully punished, if it be.

And that were to make two men have several plenary rights in the same thing at
the same time, which no Law can effect: Therefore to do a thing which no Law
can make lawful, must be malum in se.

But these instances differ from the former; for killing a man, or taking from
him his Lands or Goods, do not import, ex vi termini, that which is unlawful,
as Murder and Stealing do; for in many Cases killing a man, or taking his
liberty or goods from him, is lawful, and where it is not, may by a Law be made
so, which the other can never be.

As every new capital punishment ordained by Law, makes killing a man lawful
where it was not before; every new aid granted out of men's estate, makes a
taking from men lawful that was not before.

But this is because a Law can alter, change, or transferr a man's property in
life, liberty, estate, or any interest, as it will, which cannot be done
without a Law, and thereby nothing unlawful is made lawful: But the property
which a man had, and was the subject matter of the unlawful doing or taking
before, is altered or transferred to another, either in toto or in tanto.

So as to violate men's properties is never lawful, but a malum per se, as that
Book is of 11 H. 7. and according to that of Bracton;

Bract. l. 3. f. 132
Rex non poterit gratiam facere cum injuria and damno aliorum quod autem
alienum est dare non potest per suam gratiam.

But to alter or transferr men's properties to others, is no malum per se, it is
daily done by the owners express consent, and by a Law without their express
consent.

And as the Law is, the Lord of a Villain may transferr his Villains property,
in Lands or Goods, to himself, by entry or seizure: And it is the signal
difference between a Freeman and Villain, that it cannot be done to a Freeman,
nor yet to a Villain to the use of any but his Lord.

The Learned and Judicious Grotius, in his excellent Work de Jure belli ac
pacis, is most apposit upon this subject:

Grot. de Jure belli ac pacis, l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5, 6.
Sicut ergo ut bis duo non sint quatuor, ne a Deo quidem potest effici, ita ne
hoc quidem, ut quod intrinseca ratione malum est, malum non sit. And then
follows, after some further explanation of his notion, Ita, si quem Deus occidi
praecipiat, aut res alicujus auferri; non licitum fiet Homicidium aut furtum
(quae voces vitium involvunt) sed non erit Homicidium aut furtum; quod vitae
and rerum supremo Domino auctore fit. And it is the same to say,

Si quem Lex occidi praecipiat aut res alicujus auferri, non licitum fiet
homicidium aut furtum (quae voces vitium involvunt) sed non erit homicidium aut
furtum quod a lege vitae and rerum potestatem habente, auctore fit.

If any need further satisfaction concerning what has been said on this
occasion, he may resort with success to the place quoted of that great Lawyer.

But it is to be observed, That altering or changing property is no subject
matter for a dispensation. A man is not dispensed with to do an act which he
cannot do, but to do an act which simply he can do, but the Law prohibits his
doing it, penally.

But altering or changing property is an act simply out of his power to do,
which should be dispensed with in that behalf.

And thus we see violation of property is a malum per se by that Book of 11 H.
7. and the reason why it is so, and cannot be dispensed with.

A third kind of malum per se by that Case of 11 H. 7. 11 H. 7.
is that which the Law of the Land admits to be specially prohibited, Jure
Divino, Et Isint le Roy, ne null Evesque ou Presbiter poit doner license a un de
fair Lechery, Quia est malum in se, says the Book, that is Coition without
wedlock, which offense, when by mutual consent, injures no property, having two
husbands or two wives at the same time; but that is also against the property
of the first husband or wife, marriage within the Levitical degrees. 32 H. 8.
c. 38.
All which are admitted by the Law of the Land to be prohibited, Jure Divino,
and cannot be dispensed with; For no Human authority can make lawful what
Divine authority has made unlawful, without Gods leave, and then it is by his
authority.

Many more particulars fall under this head, which I shall not now mention.
Hence I infer mala in se to be only such as imply a contradiction to be made
lawful, and consequently what may be made lawful by Human Law to be no malum in
se, as not differing from other things which may be permitted or prohibited
occasionally, at the pleasure of the Lawmakers.

The King cannot dispense with a Nuisance to the Highways by 11 H. 7. and
consequently, as some think, with no other public Nuisance, by Sir Edward
Coke. Cok. Pleas of the Crown, f. 237. c. 105.
For all common Nusances, as not repairing Bridges, Highways, etc. the Suit is
the Kings, but he cannot pardon or discharge the Nuisance or the Suit for the
same, the Highways being necessary to support such of his Subjects as are
occasioned to travel them: Of this more hereafter.

The specifical offenses, which are public Nusances, I do not reckon to be
mala in se, as some do, because though it be admitted none of them can be
dispensed with, yet a Law may make them lawful; and if so, they are not mala in
se, as before.

But either a dispensation, or a Law to commit Nusances (in those terms) I
conceive to be void, because the word Nuisance imports a thing, vi termini, that
is unlawful as Trespass does; and therefore it is a contradiction to make it
lawful by a dispensation or Law.

But by a Law, a Baker or Victualler may sell Bread or Ale of such weight or
measure as he pleases, and as they did before the Assise was made. By a Law a
Watercourse may be diverted; Corn growing in the field, or Provision going to
a Market may be bought up by the way, which are Nusances in Specie, so of the
rest; and therefore not mala in se, as some have thought, but mala politica, as
they are prohibited.

But obstructing a Highway, diverting a Watercourse, breaking down a Bridge,
breaking the Assise of Bread and Ale, cannot be dispensed with, though they are
only punishable by the King, because such a Dispensation would take away the
Action of those who had particular damage by the offense done.

But a Dispensation to buy the standing Corn of such a particular man, or
field, or a certain provision going to such a Market, such a Market Day, may be
good, for no man can declare upon a particular damage to himself thereby, for
if any man could, every man could; but a general dispensation in either kind,
were an abrogation of the Laws which prohibit them, which cannot be.

Next, some Nusances are permanent, and continue still, until removed, as
Ditches, Hedges, or other obstructions to the Highways, diverting
Watercourse, decay of Bridges; these cannot be pardoned, nor the Suit for
them, until removed; but breaking the Assise of Bread and Ale, buying provision
in the way to Market, engrossing a certain quantity of Corn, these are
transient Nusances, as I conceive, which continue not, but cease, until done de
novo, and such may be pardoned, and the Suit for them (as I conceive).

And note, if a man have particular damage by a foundrous way, he is generally
without remedy, though the Nuisance is to be punished by the King. The reason is,

Because a foundrous way, a decayed Bridge, or the like, are commonly to be
repaired by some Township, Vill, Hamlet, or a County who are not corporate, and
therefore no action lies against them for a particular damage, but their
neglects are to be presented, and they punished by fine to the King.

But if a particular person, or Body Corporate, be to repair a certain
Highway, or portion of it, or a Bridge, and a man is endamaged particularly by
the foundrousness of the way, or decay of the Bridge, he may have his Action
against the person or Body Corporate, 11 H. 4. f. 83. a. Rolls. Actions sur
Case, f. 104. l. 2.
who ought to repair for his damage, because he can bring his Action against
them; but where there is no person against whom to bring his Action, it is as
if a man be damaged by one that cannot be known.

Though no person, Natural or Corporate, can have an Action for a public
Nuisance, or punish it, but the King, upon presentment or indictment, as appears
3 E. 2. Where the Mayor and Commonalty of London brought an Action upon the
Statute for forestalling the Markets, Fitz. Action sur le Stat. 3 E. 2. n. 26.
which shows it must be the Stat. de Pistoribus in 31 E. 1.
and after selling at double the rate, because no particular damage was
alleged, without which the Suit was only the Kings, the Plaintiffs had nothing
by their Action.

For if by any public Nuisance a man have a particular damage, 27 H. 8. 26,
27. Cok. Litt. f. 56. a, Cok. pl. Coron. tit. Pardon.
he may have his Action on the Case against the Nusance-maker.

And the reason why the King cannot dispense in such Cases, is, not only as
Nusances are contra bonum publicum, but because if a Dispensation might make it
lawful to do a Nuisance, which differs from a License, to continue a Nuisance in
the reason of it, the person damaged by it would be deprived of his Action, for
an Action cannot lie for doing that which was lawfully done; and it is the same
to alter or change property, by making what is mine to be lawfully another
man's, as to license another to damage me, and I shall have no Action or Remedy
for it: And no offense against a penal Law could be dispensed with, if the
reason of not dispensing were because the offense is contra bonum publicum, for
all offenses by penal Laws are such.

And it is observable, That if upon the Retorn of an Ad quod dampnum it appear
to be ad dampnum vel prejudicium of no man, Cro. 8 Car. 1. f. 266, 267. The
King verse. Ward.
the King may then license the stopping up of an ancient Highway, or diverting
a Watercourse, or part of it, for the concern is then wholly his own, but
without his license it can never be done, though a better way be set out, and
so retorn'd upon an ad quod damnum.

Offenses against penal Laws to be dispensed with.
1. There are many penal Laws, by transgressing which the Subject can have no
particular damage, and therefore no particular Action; for the Law gives not
particular Actions regularly but for particular damage.

2. If any man might have an Action when he had no more damage than every other
man had, thousands should equally have their several Actions, which the Law
permits not.

11 H. 7. f. 12. 1 H. 7. f. 3.
As if Transportation of Wool, Money, Corn, Horses, Bell-metal, Beer, or the
like, be penally prohibited by Acts of Parliament, no Subject can derive a
particular damage to himself for having an Action against the Offender.

Secondly, If one might have an Action for such offenses, every man might have
the like, therefore such offenses are only to the King's damage in his public
Capacity of Supreme Governor, and wronging none but himself, he may (as every
man else may) dispense with his own wrong, when it is absque damno and injuria
aliorum.

And though such Laws are pro bono publico in some sense, they are not Laws pro
bono singulorum populi, but pro bono populi complicati, as the King in his
discretion shall think fit to order them for the good of the whole.

In this notion the estate of every Pater familias may be said to be pro bono
Communi of his Family, which yet is but at his discretion and management of it;
and they have no interest in it, but have benefit by it.

Offenses not to be dispensed with.
There are other penal Laws by Acts of Parliament, and punishable at the Kings
Suit by Indictment or Presentment; the transgressing of which is to the
immediate wrong of particular persons, and for which the Law gives them special
Actions, with which the King cannot dispense: As he cannot license a man to
commit maintenance, to make a forcible entry, to carry distresses out of the
hundred, 8 H. 6. c. 9. Stat. 1 and 2 P. and M. c. 12.
contrary to the Statute, which yet are no Mala in se; for it is no Malum in se
to maintain in a just cause, to enter forcibly where the entry is lawful, to
carry a distress farther or nearer; but are mala when prohibita, and non when
permissa, as they would be were the Laws repealed, and were before they were
made: From whence it is clear, there are mala prohibita by Acts of Parliament
with which the King cannot dispense: And next, it follows not, that a Malum
with which the King cannot dispense, is a Malum in se, which are the exceptions
I took to the received Rule, out of the Case of 11 H. 7.

No non obstante can dispense in these Cases, 8 H. 6. f. 19. The Chancellor of
Oxfords Case. Br. Pat. n. 15.
and many the like, for that were to grant that a man should not have lawful
Actions brought against him, or be impleaded at least in certain Actions, which
the King cannot grant.

For the same reason the King cannot license a Baker, Brewer, or Victualler, to
break the Assise of Bread or Ale, Stat. de Pistoribus c. 7. 31 E. 1.
nor a Miller to take more Toll than the Law appoints, nor a Taverner to break
the Assise of Wine, nor a Butcher to sell measled Swines flesh, or Murrain
flesh, nor any man to forestall the Market by a non obstante of the Statute de
Pistoribus, which prohibits all these under severe penalties.

Nor can he license Butchers, Fishmongers, Poultrers, or other sellers of
Victuals, nor Hostlers to sell Hay and Oats at what price they please, Stat. 23
E. 3. c. 6. 13 R. 2. c. 8. 9 Car. 1. Came. Stell.
by a non obstante of the Statute of 23 E. 3. c. 6. and 13 R. 2. c. 8. which
require that the prises be moderate. And it was so resolved and decreed in the
Star Chamber by opinion of all the Judges, 9 Car. 1. and that the Justices of
the Peace, in the respective Counties, were to ascertain the prises of Hay and
Oats.

He cannot license a Labourer to take more wages, Regist. f. 190. a tit. de
Servientibus. In the Table of the Register the Title is de Laborariis.
nor any Officers to take more Fees than the Law allows, nor to distrain a man's
Plough-Beasts, where there is other distress; for in these, and multitudes of
like cases the damaged person has his Action equally as for a Nuisance, to his
particular hurt.

And even in the Case of a Common Informer, who cannot sue but in the King's
Name, as well as his own, when he is once entitled to Action, which he never is
but by commencing Suit, for then the Action popular is become his proper
Action, the King can neither pardon, release, or otherwise discharge his right
in the Suit, as is fully resolved 1 H. 7. 1 H. 7. f. 3.
and in many other Books, much less can he discharge or prevent the Action of
any other man.

The Statute of 12 Car. 2. c. 25. upon which this Case arises, has examples
of penal Laws in both these kinds. 12 Car. 2. c. 25


1. Every man is prohibited to sell Wine by retail, contrary to the Act, upon
forfeiture of Five pounds for every offense; from which offense no third man
can possibly derive a particular damage to himself, for which he can have an
Action upon his Case.

2. If any man should have an Action because another sold a pint of Wine
without license, every man should have the like Action which the Law permits
not.

Whence it follows, That the offense wrongs none but the King, and therefore he
may, as in like Cases, dispense with it.

By a second Clause in that Act, the mingling of Wine with several Ingredients
therein mentioned, is penally prohibited; as by another Clause the sale of Wine
at greater prizes than the Act limits.

He that shall offend, either by unlawful mixtures, or by selling dearer than
the Law admits, does a particular wrong to the buyer, for which he may have his
Action; and therefore the King cannot dispense with either of those Offenses.

Dispensations void against Acts of Parliament for maintaining Native
Artificers.
The Case of Monopolies, the eleventh Report.
If Foreign Manufactures, or Foreign Corn, as by the Acts of 3 E. 4. c. 4. ^ 3
E. 4. c. 3. be prohibited for support of those Artificers, and the Husbandmen
within the Kingdom, a License to one or more to bring them in, if general, is
void by the Case of Monopolies, notwithstanding a Non obstante.

1. All penal Laws, when made, and in force, are equally necessary, and in
things necessary there is no gradation of more or less necessary.

2. If any penal Laws were possibly less dispensable than others (but upon the
differences already given) those capitally penal were less dispensable than
those less penal; but it is not so, 11 H. 7. f. 11.
for coining money of right Alloy in imitation of the Kings Coin, is capitally
penal without license, but it may be licenced.

1 H. 7. f. 3.
If transporting Wool were Felony, yet the King may license it.

It is capital to multiply Gold or Silver by the Statute of 5 H. 4. c. 4. but
may be licensed; Cok. plac. Coronae, f. 74. c. 20.
as was done to John Faceby, tempore H. 6. the Dispensation with a non obstante
of that Statute may be seen, Coke's placita Coronae, f. 74. c. 20.

If an Ad quod damnum issue to enquire ad quod damnum vel praejudicium, a
license for a Mortmain will be: One Inquiry is -- Si patria per donationem
illam magis solito non oneretur, etc. Though the Retorn be, that by such
license patria magis solito oneretur, yet the license, if granted, will be
good, which shows that Clause is for Information of the King, that he may not
license what he would not, and not for Restraint, to hinder him to license what
he would. Fitz. Not. Br. Ad quod damum, f. 222 b. Letter D.
For by Fitz-herbert the usual license now is with -- Et hoc absque aliquo
brevi de Ad quod damnum. And when the King can license without any Writ of Ad
quod damnum, he may, if he will, license whatever the Retorn of the Writ be.
Though it be said in the Case of Monopolies, That in the Kings Grant it is
always a Condition expressed or employed, Quod patria plus solito non oneretur,
but that seems but gratis dictum.

So if the King will, ex speciali gratia, license a Mortmain, Dyer 9, 10 El. f.
269. a.
the Chancellor need not issue any Ad quod damnum, for the King, without words
of Non obstante, is sufficiently appris'd by asking his license to do a thing,
which at Common Law might be done without it, that now it cannot be done
without it. And that is all the use of a Non obstante.

But whether in such Cases licenses limited to certain quantities of the
Commodities to be imported be good (as some collect from that Case, as it is
reported, which appears not by the Judgment) nor in what Cases licenses may be
general, or ought to be limited, is not now properly before us.

1. If Exportation, Importation of a Commodity, or the exercise of a Trade be
prohibited generally by Parliament, and no cause expressed of the Prohibition,
a license may be granted to one or more without limitation to Export or Import,
or to exercise the Trade: For by such general Restraint the end of the Law is
conceived to be no more than to limit the over-numerous Exporters, Importers,
or Traders in that kind, by putting them to the difficulty of procuring
licenses, and not otherwise, and therefore such general licenses shall not be
accounted Monopolies.

2. In such Cases the Law implies the King may license as well as if the
prohibitory Law had been that no such Importation, Exportation, or Trading
should be without the King's express license, in which Case the license
requires no limitation to a certain quantity.

3. It is apparent, That if the exercise of a Trade be generally prohibited,
the King's License must be without any Limitation to him that has it, to
exercise his Trade, as before it was prohibited, else it is no license at all.

4. Where the King may dispense generally he is not bound to it, but may limit
his Dispensation if he think fit.

5. If to avoid a Monopoly his Dispensation upon all prohibitory Laws generally
must by Law be limited; his limited Dispensation may be for greater quantities
than were Imported or Exported before the Restraint, because the quantity in
the Dispensation is left indefinite, and may be any quantity certain, and
consequently the end of the Restraint equally frustrated, and the Monopoly as
effectual as if the License had been general, though it be limited.

6. If a Commodity be prohibited to be Exported or Imported, because too great
quantities of it is carried out, or brought in, the Licenses ought to be
limited to answer the end of the Act.

7. If Importation of a Commodity be prohibited, to maintain the Native
Artificers of that Commodity in the Kingdom with livelihood, and so of
Exportation, no License, either with stint or limitation, or without it, seems
good by way of Merchandise; for both of them may equally frustrate the end of
the Act in the support of the Native Artificers for the former reason, but such
a License may be good to Import for a man's private use, though in the Case of
Monopolies it is said, Such a License (without any Limitation) is a Monopoly,
which is as much perhaps by implication, as to say that such a License with a
Limitation is no Monopoly, quod non credo.

As to the second Question; Admitting King James might have dispensed with
particular persons for selling Wine by Retail, as the constant course has been
since the Statute of 7 E. 6.

Whether he could dispense with a Corporation, or with this Corporation of
Vintners, and their Successors, as he has done, having no possible knowledge
of the persons themselves, or of their number, to whom he granted his
Dispensation? which is the Reason insisted on why his Grant is not good. As to
that,

1. First, That the nature of the offense is such as may be dispensed with,
seems clear in reason of Law, and by constant practice of licencing particular
persons.

2. Where the King can dispense with particular persons, he is not confined to
number or place, but may license as many, and in such places, as he thinks fit.

An Act of Parliament, which generally prohibits a thing upon penalty which is
popular, or only given to the King, may be inconvenient to diverse particular
persons, in respect of person, place, time, etc. For this cause the Law has
given power to the King to dispense with particular persons.

But that Case touches not upon any inconvenience from the largeness of the
Kings dispensation, in respect of persons, place, or time, which the Law leaves
indefinite to the pleasure of the King, as the remedy of inconveniences to
persons and places by the penal Laws, some of which may be very inconvenient to
many particular persons, and to many trading Towns, others but to few persons
or places, and the remedy by Dispensation accordingly must sometimes be to
great numbers of persons and places, and sometimes to fewer.

If the wisdom of the Parliament has made an Act to restrain pro bono
publico, the Importation of Foreign Manufactures, that the Subjects of the
Realm may apply themselves to the making of the said Manufactures for their
support and livelihood, to grant to one or more the Importation of such
Manufacture (without any limitation) non obstante, the said Act is a Monopoly,
and void.

3. It is admitted a Corporation is capable of a Dispensation; as where the
King has an Inheritance in the thing concerning which the Dispensation is (so
it was expressed) and therefore he may dispense with a Corporation of
Merchants, or with a Town Corporate, not to pay Custom for some Commodity, as
he may with particular persons.

This seems to end the Question; For if the offense in its nature may be
dispensed with, and a Corporation be capable of a Dispensation, the King's not
knowing the persons or numbers (which is the pretended reason) will not avoid
the Dispensation in the present Case of the Vintners.

For by the same reason dispensations to Corporations, and their Successors,
would be void in all Cases, as well as in this; for their persons and numbers
must be equally unknown to the King, in every Case, as in the present Case.

That a dispensation may be granted to a Body Corporate or Aggregate, as well
as to private persons. Suarez de Legibus, which Mr. Attorney cited in this
Case, and is in truth a most learned Work, is very express.

Suarez de Legibus l. 6. c. 12. f. 416.
Dispensatio autem per se primo versari potest circa personam privatam, quia
solum est particularis exceptio a Communi Lege; potest etiam ferri circa
communitatem aliquam quae sit pars majoris communitatis, sicut uni Religioni,
Ecclesiae aut Civitati conceditur privilegium, per quod excipitur a Lege
Communi. Potest etiam concedi toti communitati pro uno Actu, vel pro certo
tempore per modum suspensionis. This last must be understood where the
Dispensator is the entire Lawmakers.

And accordingly Dispensations are as frequently granted by the Pope, from whom
the use of Dispensations was principally derived to us, to Bodies Corporate,
that is, to religious Orders, as to private persons, Laertius Cherubinus his
Bullarium.
as is apparent in the Bullaries, if any will consult them; but I forbear
citing them, because they are Foreign Authorities.

2 R. 3. f. 11, 12. 1 H. 7. f. 2, 3.
E. 3. licensed the Citizens of Waterford in Ireland, their Heirs and
Successors, to carry their Staple Merchandise to what parts they pleased beyond
the Seas, being bound under great penalties by Act of Parliament, to bring them
to the Staple. And the Judges twice assembled 2 R. 3. and 1 H. 7. made no
question of the Kings Dispensation, but the Question was because later Laws of
Henry the Sixth's time had enacted the bringing of Irish Merchandise to the
Staple at Calice.

Regist. ad quod damnum, f. 252. b.
The King may license an Aggregate Body Corporate, and their Successors, to damm
up an ancient Current of the Sea through their Land for carriage by water to a
Vill, and that such passage and carriage shall be by a new Current, as
commodious, as appears by a Writ of Ad quod damnum in the Register, in the Case
of the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church in Canterbury, which is a Body
Corporate.

The like license may be to such Body Corporate, and their Successors, Regist.
f. 254. b
to bring the Watercourse of a Well for the use of that Community, as by like
Writ of Ad quod damnum appears in the Case of the Prior and Covent of K. for
diverting such a Watercourse for the use of their House.

And by another like Writ, Regist. f. 255. a
in the Case of the Fraternity of Friars Minors, for diverting of a
Watercourse, or part of it, to serve the House of the Fraternity.

And so a License may be to a Corporation to stop up a Highway through their
Land, a more commodious being by them set out in place of it, as is common in
the Cases of particular persons.

And in all these Cases, the benefit of the License is to every particular
person of the Corporation, more than to the Body Politic.

And these are not Licenses where the King has an Inheritance, unless all
Highways and Watercourse be accounted the Kings Inheritance.

The like Dispensation or Exemption the King may grant to a Corporation that
they shall be Toll-free, which extends to every man, and not to the Corporation
only in their Corporate Capacity.

And a Dispensation and Exemption differ in sound only; for a Dispensation is
properly to license a person to do a thing which he can do, but is by a Law
penally prohibited from doing it.

An Exemption is properly to license a man, or men, not to do a thing which
they are penally by a Law precepted to do.

Edward the Third granted to the Bailiffs, Mayor, 4 H. 6. f. 6.
and Burgesses of Oxford, that none of them should be sworn in Iuries with
Foreigners that were not of the Town.

The like Grant was made to the Commonalty and Citizens of Norwich by Edward
the Fourth, 21 E. 4. f. 56.
that they should not be put in Iuries out of the Town of Norfolk. These are
Dispensations or Exemptions to a Corporation, and their Successors, that none
of them should serve in Iuries but within their Corporation, which otherwise by
the Law they must have done: And the like we meet with daily to other Towns in
the Circuits.

Now if it shall be said, That Highways, the Water-streams, Tolls of Markets,
Fines of Jurors, and the like, are the Kings Inheritance as well as his
Customs are; and therefore the King, as to them, may dispense with
Corporations, Then

It is clear, That penal Laws (the breach of which enables no man to an Action
for his damage thereby) and the forfeiture and punishment for breaking them are
much more the Kings Inheritance.

Therefore, ex concesso, the King may dispense with Corporations as to them.

Pl. Com. f. 487 Nicholls C.
2. The King cannot dispense in any Case, but with his own Right, and not with
the Right of any other. And every Right of the Crown is its Inheritance or
Interest: Therefore where the King can dispense at all, he has an Inheritance
or Interest, and consequently where he can dispense at all, he may dispense to
a Corporation.

If the Laws of 7 E. 6. and 12 Car. 2. had been penned thus, Every man that
sells Wine contrary to this Act, shall pay the King Two pence for every pint so
sold; this Two pence had been a Duty and Inheritance to the King, as his
Customs are, without difference; and as the Duty of Six pence lately was upon
every quart of French Wine retail'd. Why then, the greater or less the Duty be,
alters not the nature of the King's Inheritance in the Duty.

Therefore if the Acts had been, That every seller of Wine, contrary to the
Act, should pay the King Five pounds for every pint sold, there Five pounds had
equally been the King's Duty and Inheritance, as the Two pence before; and
there had been no restraint to sell, but what was made by payment of so great a
Duty to the King?

Secondly, The Acts so penned had equally hindered the selling of Wine, as now
they do by words, prohibiting sale upon forfeiture of Five pounds; for in both
Cases the payment of Five pounds, whether by Forfeiture or Duty, is that which
only prevents the selling.

Therefore the Laws were the same in effect, either way penned; and
consequently the Forfeiture of Five pounds given, as the Acts stand penned, is
equally the King's Inheritance, as if it had been given by way of Duty.

In the next place I will show what Dispensations or Licenses are, as I
conceive, unquestionably good to Corporations, and their Successors.

1. A License to purchase in Mortmain, which none can have but a Corporation or
single Body Politic.

2. A License to make a Park, Chase, or Warren in their own Ground, which the
Law prohibits to be done without license.

3. A License to convert some quantity of their ancient Arable Land into
Pasture, which was prohibited by the Acts of 4 H. 7. 5 Eliz. and diverse other
Laws, 4 H. 7. c. 19.
most of which were repealed in 21 Jac. which is not material, as to the
Question in hand. And that is an Offense also at the Common Law, and I remember
it proceeded against as such, tempore Ca^^^. 1. in the Star Chamber, after the
Repeal of most of the Statutes prohibiting it.

4. A License to convert part of their Wood-land into Arable, 35 H. 8. c. 17.
contrary to the Statute of 35 H. 8. and contrary also to the Common Law.

I have a Note of a Charter of King John, to an Abbot and his Covent, by which
they had License, Nemora sua pertinentia Domui suae redigere in culturam.

5. A License to erect some Cottages upon their Waste, or other Lands, 31 El.
c. 7.
contrary to the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 7.

6. A License to erect a Fair or Market.

7. A License to an Abbot and his Covent, Pl. Com. Grendons C.
to appropriate a Rectory.

In all these Cases the King has no knowledge of the persons themselves, or of
their number, to whom he grants his License or Dispensation; Therefore that can
be no reason to avoid the Charter of the Corporation of Vintners.

A Dispensation or License properly passes no Interest, nor alters or
transfers Property in any thing, but only makes an Action lawful, which without
it had been unlawful. As a License to go beyond the Seas, to hunt in a man's
Park, to come into his House, are only Actions, which without License, had been
unlawful.

But a License to hunt in a man's Park, and carry away the Deer killed to his
own use; to cut down a Tree in a man's Ground, and to carry it away the next day
after to his own use, are Licenses as to the Acts of Hunting and cutting down
the Tree; but as to the carrying away of the Deer killed, and Tree cut down,
they are Grants.

So to license a man to eat my meat, or to fire the wood in my Chimney to warm
him by, as to the actions of eating, fireing my wood and warming him, they are
Licenses; but it is consequent necessarily to those Actions that my Property be
destroyed in the meat eaten, and in the wood burnt, so as in some Cases by
consequent and not directly, and as its effect, a Dispensation or License may
destroy and alter Property.

Trin. 2. Jac.
To the Presidents of Wright versus Horton, and alios.

Of Norris versus Mason, Trin. 2 Jac. Both which were the same Cases with the
present, upon the Letters Patents of Queen Elizabeth, the Ninth of her Reign,
to the Vintners of London.

Of Young versus Wright. Mich. 12 Car. 2.

No Answer has been given, but that which is none, viz. That the two first
Judgments were without Argument, which is not essential to a Judgment; and
Judgments are frequently given when the Cause is conceived clear (as it seems
these were conceived) if there were no Argument, which is but a Non liquet.

The Answer to the last President is, That the Judgment upon the Roll is torn
off. That some of the Judges are living who gave the Judgment, and many more
who know it to have been given.

Other Presidents of Licenses to Corporations.
6 H. 8. 1.
A Special License to the Fraternity of Corvisors, London, to exercise their
Callings, notwithstanding a penal Statute to the contrary, 1 R. 3.

1 E. 6. 4.
Inhabitantibus in Com. Norf. and Civitat. Norwic. authoritat. barganizare pro
Lanis, non obstante Statuto 37 H. 8.

2 E. 6. 3.
Mercatoribus de Venice Licenc. Special. emere in aliquo Com. hujus regni Angl.
500 Saccas Lanarum, ac illas operare, and sic operat. in parts exteras, and
transmarinas carriare absque impedimento, non obstante Statut. 4 H. 7.

7 E. 6. 6.
Mercatoribus transeuntibus Licenc. asportare pecun. contra formam Statuti.

1 E. 6. 7.
Johanni Gale Mil. Licenc. pro omnibus suis servis sagittare in vibrell. non
obstante Act. Parliament. Cons. Tho. Com. South.

2 R. 3. 1.
A Proclamation dispensing with a penal Statute touching Cloth-making, 1 R. 3.

9 Eliz. 3.
Henr: Campion and al. Brasiator. de Land. and Westminster. licenc. retinere alienos
in servitiis suis.

27 H. 8. 2.
Major. Civitat. Heref. Licenc. perquirere terram ad Annuum valorem 40
Marcarum, non obstante Statuto.

36 Eliz. 3.
Ballivis, etc. de Yarmouth, magna Licenc. transportare 40000 quarter. frument.
and gran. infra 10 Ann.

26 Eliz. 7.
President. etc. Mercatorum Hispaniae and Portugal. infra Civitat. Cestr.
Licenc. transportare 10000 Dickers of Leather per 12 Ann.

1 M. 2.
Mercatoribus de le Stillyard, License for three years to Export any manner of
Woollen Cloth, at 6 l. and under, unrowed, unbarbed, and unshorn, without
forfeiture.

1 M. 11.
Mercatoribus periclitan. a License to transport all manner of Woollen Cloth,
non obstante Stat.

Roberto Heming and alios, License to sell Faggots within London and
Westminster, non obstante Stat.

2 Jac. 22.
A License to the Gun-makers of London to transport Guns.

4 Eliz. 2.
A License to the Mayor, etc. of Bristoll, that they may lade and unlade their
Ships, etc. of their Goods, and lay the same on Land, and from Land to
transport them, Non obstante Statut.

6 Eliz. 11.
Mercatoribus Periclitan. License to transport their Merchandises in strange
Ships, Non obstante Statut.

5 Car. 1.
Mercatoribus de le East Indies, License to transport 10000 l. in English Gold.

Objections against the Patent 9 Jac.
London, and of the Corporation of Vintners, which freedom the City and
Corporation gives to whom they please, is dispensed with. So in effect the City
of London and Corporation of Vintners give Dispensation to sell Wine, The Case
of penal Laws, Seventh Rep. Answ. 1.
which by Law none but the King can grant, as is resolved in the Seventh Report.

The King Incorporates a Town by name of Mayor and Burgesses, with power to the
Burgesses annually to choose a New Mayor, Brook. Commission, n. 5.
and grants that every Mayor, at the end of his Majoralty, shall be a Justice
of the Peace in that Corporation: It is no Inference, because the Burgesses
elect the Mayors, that therefore they make Justices of Peace, for they are made
so by the King's Great Seal, and not by them. The Case is in Brook, Title
Commission, N. 5.

Nor is that Case of penal Laws so generally true perhaps, if not understood
where the King governs in person, and not by his Lieutenant, as in Ireland, or
by Governors, as in the Plantations of the Western Islands.

The City of London grants Dispensations in this Case, no more than the
Burgesses make Justices of the Peace in the other.

King cannot dispense with a man to buy an Office contrary to the penal Statute
of 5 E. 6. nor with one Simoniacally presented to hold the Living, nor with any
of the House of Commons not to take the Oath of Allegiance, according to the
Statute 7 Jac. c. 6. nor to Sue in the Admiralty for a Contract on the Land,
contrary to the Statute 2 H. 4.

First, It is against the known practice since the Statute of 7 E. 6. That the
King cannot dispense for selling of Wine, for that Objection reaches to
Dispensations with single Persons as well as Corporations.

2. The reason why the King cannot dispense in the Cases of persons were made
incapable to hold them: and a person incapable is as a dead person, and no
person at all as to that wherein he is incapable: For persons entered in
Religion, and dead in Law, were not to all purposes dead, but to such wherein
they were incapable to take or give.

3. A Member of the House of Commons is by 7 Jac. persona and not to be
permitted to enter the House before the Oath taken. A particular Action is
given by 2 H. 4. for such Suit in the Admiralty, and such License gives the
Admiralty a Jurisdiction against Law, 4 and 5 P. M. Dyer 159. Domingo Belatta's
Case.

A third Objection was, That this general Dispensation answers 7 E. 6. but
seems to frustrate and null that Law wholly: And though the King can dispense
with penal Laws, yet not in such manner, as to annihilate and make them void.

If this Objection held good in fact, it is a material one; 7 E. 6. intended
not that no Wine should be sold, nor that it should be with great restraint
sold, but not so loosly as every man might sell it. And since it is admitted
that the Act of 7 E. 6. restrains not the King's power to license selling Wine
(which perhaps was more a Question than this in hand) it is clear the King may
license, as if the Act had absolutely prohibited selling Wine, and left it to
the King to license as he thought fit, not abrogating the Law. And if so,

The end of the Act being only that every man should not sell Wine that would,
as they might when the Act was made, and not to restrain convenient numbers to
sell for the Kingdoms use.

The King could not better answer the end of the Act, than to restrain the
sellers to Freemen of London.

To the Corporation of Vintners, men bred up in the Trade,

And that such should be licensed without restraint, is most agreeable to the
Laws of the Kingdom, which permits not persons, who had served Seven years to
have a way of livelihood, to be hindered from exercising their Trades in any
Town or part of the Kingdom, Tailors of Ipswich C. Report 11.
as was resolved in the Tailors of Ipswich Case, in the Eleventh Report. And
therefore the King had well complied with the ends of the Law, had he licenced
such to sell in any part of the Kingdom, which he did not, but confined them to
Towns.

Licenses to Corporations for purchasing in Mortmain,

That the Laws against Mortmain are not penal, because they may be dispensed
with without a Non obstante, and so cannot penal Laws be.

durus sermo that those Laws are not penal which give the forfeiture of the
Land.

2. By the Statute of 1 H. 4. c. 6. and 4 H. 4. c. 4. the King is restrained in
some Cases from granting as he might at the Common Law.

Therefore without a Non obstante of those Laws, it cannot appear that the King
would have granted it if he had been appris'd of those restraining Laws:
Therefore a Non obstante in such Case is requisite. But when a man might, by
the Common Law, purchase without license, as in the Case of Mortmain, before
the prohibiting Statutes, or might Export or Import a prohibited Commodity
before restraint by Statute, a License ex specialia gratia is sufficient
without a Non obstante: For by petitioning for a License, the King is
sufficiently informed the Law permits not the thing without a License (which is
all the use of a Non obstante). This enough appears by the Case in Dyer 269.
where a License, ex speciali gratia, is good without issuing any Ad quod damnum
in the Case of Mortmain.

3. The Writ of Ad quod damnum in that Case, which regularly issues, informs
the King better than a Non obstante would do.

Mortmain, the King dispenses only with his own Right, and concludes not the
mean Lords.

It is true, for the King in no case can dispense but with his own Right, and
not with another.

Answer has been offered to the President of Waterford, by dispensed with the
Offense of not bringing the Staple Merchandise from Ireland to Calais, being so
penal, which was an Offense by 10 H. 6. c. and 14 H. 6. c. to the universal
hurt of the Kingdom, and therefore much greater than selling of Wine contrary
to the Statute of 7 E. 6. c. but that was as has been said,

Because those Merchants were to pay Custom to the King, which was his
Inheritance, and with which he could dispense.

Merchants of Waterford were to pay Customs to the King for their Staple
Merchandise, for which he might dispense if he would, but never did, for any
thing appears: The Merchants of Waterford were, upon penalties, to bring their
Staple Merchandise to Calais, with which the King could not dispense, had no
Customs been due from them, yet he did dispense with them for that which he
could not, viz. bringing their Goods to Calais, because he did not dispense
with them for that which he could, viz. their Customs, there is no Inference
nor Coherence in this Answer.

But it also appears by the Statute 27 E. 3. c. 11. of the Staple for the
reason therein given, that the Merchants of Ireland were to pay their Customs
in Ireland, and to bring their Cockets of their payments there to the Staple,
lest otherwise they might be doubly charged.

Therefore the Customs which were paid in Ireland before the Goods brought to
the Staple, was no cause for dispensing with the Corporation of Waterford for
not bringing their Merchandise to the Staple, according to the penal Laws for
that purpose. The License of Edward the Third, pleaded by the men of Waterford,
was perhaps after the Statute of 27 E. 3. when they were not to pay their
Customs at the Staple; but however, the Licenses by them pleaded, 1 H. 7. by
Henry the Sixth, and Edward the Fourth, were long after they were to pay their
Customs in Ireland, and not at the Staple.

I must say as my Brother Atkins observed before, That in this Case the
Plaintiffs Council argue against the Kings Prerogative, for the extent of his
Prerogative is the extent of his Power, and the extent of his Power is to do
what he has will to do, according to that, ut summae potestatis Regis est
posse quantum velit sic magnitudinis est velle quantum potest; if therefore the
King have a will to dispense with a Corporation, as it seems K. James had in
this Case, when the Patent was granted, but by Law cannot, his Power, and
consequently his Prerogative, is less than if he could.

1. Malum prohibitum is that which is prohibited per le Statute: Per le Statute
is not intended only an Act of Parliament, but any obliging Law or
Constitution, as appears by the Case: For it is said, The King may dispense
with a Bastard to take Holy Orders, or with a Clerk to have two Benefices, with
cure; which were mala prohibita by the Canon Law, and by the Council of
Lateran, not by Act of Parliament.

2. Many things are said to be prohibited by the Common Law, and indeed most
things so prohibited were primarily prohibited by Parliament, or by a Power
equivalent to it in making Laws, which is the same, but are said to be
prohibited by the Common Law, because the Original of the Constitution or
prohibiting Law is not to be found of Record, but is beyond memory, and the Law
known only from practical proceeding and usage in Courts of Justice, as may
appear by many Laws made in the time of the Saxon Kings, of William the First,
and Henry the First, yet extant in History, which are now received as Common
Law. So if by accident the Records of all Acts of Parliament now extant, none
of which is elder than 9 H. 3. (but new Laws were as frequent before as since)
should be destroyed by fire, or other casualty, the memorials of proceeding
upon them found by the Records in Judicial proceeding, would upon like reason
be accounted Common Law by Posterity.

3. Public Nusances are not mala in se, but mala politica and introducta,
though in some passages of Coke's Posthuma's they are termed mala in se,
because prohibited at Common Law, which holds not for the reasons before given:
For liberty of Highways strangers have not in Foreign Territories, but by
permission, therefore not essential to Dominion, because it may be lawfully
prohibited. 2. Liberty of the Highways is prohibited with us in the night, by
the Statute of Winchester, in some seasons of the year, and in times of war,
and for apprehension of Thieves in time of Peace, etc. The Assise of Bread and
Ale is constituted by Statute, and may be taken away. Forestalling the Market
and engrossing has like institution; the first was prohibited by Athelstans
Laws and William the First's, and may be permitted by a Law; the second is
allowed by the late Laws when Corn is at a certain low price, quaere the Law
tempore Car. 2. the pulling down of Bridges wholly, or placing them in other
places, may be done by a Law; and what may be, or not be, by a Law, is no malum
in se, more than any other prohibitum by a Law is.

Judgment was given by the Advice of the Judges in the Kings Bench, Quod
Quaerens nil Capiat.

In a formedon in the Reverter.
Mich. 25 Car. II. C. B. Rot. 253. John Bole Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife,
and John Ely Gent. and Sarah his wife, Demandants, against Anne Horton Widow,
Tenant of (...)
The Writ.
ONe Message, Thirty Acres of Land, Fifteen Acres of Meadow, Twenty Acres of
Pasture, and of the third part of One Message, One hundred and forty Acres of
Land, Four and forty Acres of Meadow, Eighty three Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances in Tickhill and Wellingly, which William Vescy Gent. Grand father
of the said Elizabeth and Sarah, whose Coheirs they are, gave to John Vescy,
during the life of the said John, and after the decease of the said John, to
the heirs males of the body of the said John begotten, and for default of such
issue to Robert Vescy, and the heirs males of his body begotten, and for
default of such issue to William Vescy, son of the said William the
Grandfather, and to the heirs males of his body begotten, and for default of
such issue to Matthew Vescy, and the heirs males of his body begotten: And
which, after the death of the said John, Robert, William the Son, and Matthew
to the said Elizabeth and Sarah, Cosins and Coheirs of the said William the
Grandfather, that is to say Daughters and Coheirs of the said John, Son and
Heir of the said William the Grandfather, ought to revert by form of the said
gift, for that the said John, Robert, William the Son, and Matthew, are dead,
without heirs males of their bodies lawfully begotten: Then counts that

The Count.
William the Grandfather was seized of the Premises in demand in his Demesne,
as of Fee, and held the same in Soccage of the late King Charles, as of his
honor of Tickhill in the said County, in free Soccage by fealty only, and so
seized the Eight and twentieth day of November, 1628. at Tickhill aforesaid,
made his last Will in writing, and thereby devised the said Lands to the said
John Vescy for life, and after to the heirs males of his body begotten: And for
default of such issue, to Robert Vescy, and the heirs males of his body; and
for default of such issue, to William Vescy the Son, and the heirs males of his
body; and for default of such issue, to Matthew Vescy, and the heirs males of
his body; and after the Six and twentieth of December, 1628. at Tickhill
aforesaid, died so seized. And the said John, after his death entered, and was
seized by force of the said gift, and died so seized without heir male of his
body.

After the death of John, Robert entered by virtue of his said Remainder, and
was seized accordingly, and so seized, died without heir male of his body,
after whose death William entered by virtue of his said Remainder, and was
seized accordingly; and he being so seized, Matthew died without heir male of
his body, and after the said William died seized of the premises without heir
male of his body: After the death of which William the Son, for that he died
without heir male of his body begotten, the right of the Premises reverts to
the said Elizabeth and Sarah, who, together with their said Husbands, demand as
Cosens and Coheirs of the said William the Grandfather, that is to say,
Daughters and Coheirs of the said John, Son and Heir of the said William the
Grandfather, and which after the death of the said John, Robert, William, and
Matthew, for that they died without any heir male of their bodies, ought to
revert to them.

The Tenant Anne for Plea says, That the said William, The Bar.
whose Cosens and Coheirs the said Elizabeth and Sarah are, by his Deed dated
the Seventh of November, 1655. in consideration of a marriage to be solemnized
between him and Anne the now Tenant, then by the name of Anne Hewett, and of
1200 l. marriage Portion, and for a Ioynture for the said Anne, and in
satisfaction of all Dower, she might claim out of his Lands. And for settling
the said Lands upon the issue and heirs of the said William, to be begotten of
her the said Anne

Infeoffed James Lane and John Lane Gentlemen, of the said Premises, Habendum
to them, their heirs and assigns for ever, To the use of the said William Vescy
the Feoffer and his assigns, for term of his life, without impeachment of
Waste, and after to the use of the said Anne the Tenant (if the Marriage
succeeded between them) for term of her life for her Jointure, and after her
decease to the use of the heirs males of his body on her body begotten forever;
and for want of such issue to the use of the heirs females of him the said
William Vescy upon her body begotten; and for want of such issue, to the use of
the right heirs of him the said William Vescy; And bound him and his heirs to
warrant the premises as aforesaid, to the said Feoffees and their Heirs, to
the uses aforesaid.

By virtue whereof, and of the Statute of Uses, the said William was seized for
term of his life, with the Remainder over as aforesaid: And after the said
marriage was had and solemnized between him and the Tenant Arine.

That William died so seized without any issue of his body, and Anne survived
him, and entered, and by virtue of the said Feoffment and the Statute of Uses,
is seized in her Demesne as of Freehold for term of her life.

And that the said warranty of the said William descended from him to the said
Elizabeth and Sarah, as Cosins and Coheirs of him the said William the Son,
that is to say, Daughters and Coheirs of John Vescy, Brother and Heir of the
said William the Son, and demands Judgment if against the said Warranty the
Demandants shall be received to demand, and avers her self, and Anne Hewett
named in the Feoffment, to be the same person.

The Replication.
The Demandants reply, and confess the Feoffment to uses of William, as is
pleaded in Bar to Lane and Lane, and their heirs, with warranty: But further
say, That the said William Vescy the Son, after, that is the Four and twentieth
of December, 14 Car. 2. at Tickhill aforesaid, died without any issue of his
body, which they are ready to aver, and demand Judgment if they shall be barred
of their Action against the said Anne by the said Feoffment and warranty.

The Rejoinder.
Anne the Tenant rejoyns that the Replication is insufficient, and demurs
thereupon.

The matter of the Replication is all set forth in the Defendants Plea in Bar,
but only the time of William Vescy's death, which was not material, upon which
the Demandants ought to have demur'd, and not to have replied impertinently.

The Case upon the Pleading.
William Vescy seized of the Land in question in his Demesne, as of Fee, held
of King Charles the First, in free Soccage, as of his Honor of Tickhill, by
his last Will and Testament devised the same to John Vescy his eldest Son, and
the heirs males of his body; and for default of such to Robert Vescy, and the
heirs males of his body; and for default of such to William Vescy his Son, and
the heirs males of his body; and for default of such to Matthew Vescy, and the
heirs males of his body, and died. Then John entered, and died seized without
issue male, leaving two daughters, Elizabeth and Sarah, now Demandants,
together with their Husbands.

After his death Robert entered, and died seized, without issue male.

Then William entered, and was seized, and Matthew, in the life of William, died
without issue male,

William, by his Deed Indented in Consideration of an intended marriage with
Anne the now Tenant, and for other Considerations, infeoffed James Lane and
John Lane, Habendum to them and their Heirs, to the use of William the Feoffor,
for term of his life, and after to the use of Anne Hewet, now the Tenant, for
her life; then to the use of the heirs males of his body upon her begotten; and
for default of such, to the use of the heirs females of his body on her
begotten; and for default of such, to the use of his right Heirs: And bound him
and his Heirs to warrant to the said Feoffees and their Heirs.

William, by virtue of the said Feoffment, and of the Statute of Uses, was
possessed, and after he married the now Tenant, and died seized, as of his
Freehold, without any issue of his body.

After his death, Anne his wife, now Tenant, by virtue of the said Feoffment
and Statute of Uses, entered and was posssessed.

Against whom, Elizabeth and Sarah, Daughters and Coheirs of John Vescy, and
Cosins and Coheirs of William the Devisor, bring their Formedon in the Reverter.

Anne, the Tenant in possession, would rebutt and bar them by the said
warranty of William Vescy the Son, whose Cosins and Coheirs they are
(videlicet) the Daughters and Coheirs of John, eldest Brother of the said
William.

And whether the said Anne, Tenant by the said Feoffment and Statute of Uses,
can rebutt them by the said warranty, is the general Question?

For Resolution of which I must make these previous Questions.

The first is, If before the Statute of 27 H. 8. to Uses, Tenant in tail had
made a Feoffment in Fee to uses with warranty to the Feoffees and their Heirs,
such Feoffees, in a Formedon in the Reverter, brought against them by the Heirs
of the Donor, could have rebutted and barred them by the warranty of the Tenant
in tail?

For if the Feoffees to use in such case could not have barred the Heirs of the
Donor before the Statute by the warranty, it is evident the Cestuy que use,
since the Statute, cannot bar them; for he can have no more power since the
Statute, than the Feoffees to use had before the Statute by the warranty.

I put the Case before the Statute, for clearness sake only; for though since
the Statute there are Feoffees to use as before, yet no question can be made
upon their rebutter by a warranty, because the Estate is out of them by the
Statute as soon as it is in them.

And as to this, the Case in effect is no more than, Whether the warranty of
Tenant in tail (which must be admitted to be a Collateral warranty) descending
upon the Donor, or his Heirs, will bar him or them of the Reversion.

The second Question I make, admitting the Heirs of the Donor to be barred by
the warranty of Tenant in tail, descending upon them, is, Whether after the
Statute of Uses, the Cestuy que use can have any benefit of the warranty
granted to the Feoffees to use, either by way of Voucher or Rebutter? Because
the Cestuy que use is not in possession in the per by the Feoffees, but by the
Statute of Uses.

The third Question is, admitting generally that the Cestuy que use shall have
benefit of the warranty made to the Feoffees to use, Whether yet in this Case,
Anne the Tenant being a Cestuy que use, shall have benefit of the warranty made
to the Feoffees? Because neither William, the first Cestuy que use, nor his
Heir, the last Cestuy que use, in the Case could, nor can have any benefit of
this warranty, because William, the first Cestuy que use, nor his Heir, could
not, nor can warrant to himself; but as to William and his Heirs, the warranty
is clearly extinct.

The Argument.
And as to the first Question, I conceive the Law to be that the warranty of
William, the Tenant in tail, descending upon Elizabeth and Sarah the
Demandants, his Heirs at Law, is no bar in the Formedon in Reverter brought by
them, as Heirs to William their Grandfather, the Donor, though it be a
Collateral warranty.

I know it is the persuasion of many professing the Law, That by the Statute of
Westminster the second, De donis conditionalibus, the Lineal warranty of Tenant
in tail shall be no bar in a Formedon in the Descender, but that the
Collateral warranty of Tenant in tail is at large, as at the Common Law
unrestrained by that Statute.

Sir Edward Coke, in his Comment upon Section 712. Sect. 712.
of Littleton, A lineal warranty does not bind the right of an Estate tail, for
that it is restrained by the Statute de donis Conditionalibus: And immediately
follows, A lineal warranty and assets is a bar of the right in tail, and is
not restrained.

But the reason why the warranty of Tenant in tail, with Assets, binds the
right of the Estate tail, is in no respect from the Statute de donis, but is by
the Equity of the Statute of Gloucester, by which the warranty of Tenant by the
Courtesy bars not the Heir, for the Lands of his Mother, if the Father leave
not Assets to descend in recompense.

And therefore it was conceived, after the Statute de donis was made. That if
Tenant in tail left Assets to descend in Feesimple, his warranty should bind
the right of the Issue in tail by the equity of that preceding Statute of
Gloucester.

Whereas if the Statute of Gloucester had not been, the Lineal warranty of
Tenant in tail had no more bound the right of the Estate tail by the Statute de
donis, with Assets descending, than it does without Assets.

For the better clearing therefore of the Law in the Case in question, I shall
preparatorily assert some few things, and clear what I so assert, without which
the truth of the Conclusion I hold, will not appear so naked to the Hearers as
it should.

Ass. 1.
The first is, That at the Common Law the distinction of a lineal and collateral
warranty was useless and unknown: For though what we now call a Collateral and
a lineal warranty might be in speculation and notionable at the Common Law, as
at this day a Male warranty, or a Female warranty may be, yet as to any effect
in Law, there was no difference between a Lineal warranty and a Collateral; but
the warranty of the Ancestor descending upon the Heir, be it the one or the
other, did equally bind. And this, as it is evident in it self, so is it by
Littleton, whose words are,

Litt. Sect. 697.
Before the Statute of Gloucester, all warranties which descended to them, who
are Heirs to those who made the warranties, were bars to the same Heirs to
demand any Lands or Tenements against the warranties, except the warranties
which commence by disseisin.

Therefore, if a Question had been at the Common Law only, Whether in some
particular Case the Ancestors warranty had bound the Heir? It had been a
senseless Answer to say it did, or did not, because the warranty was Lineal or
Collateral, for those warranties were not defined at the Common Law, nor of use
to be defined: But the proper Answer had been, That the warranty did bind the
Heir, because it commenced not by disseisin for every warranty of the Ancestor,
but such descending upon the Heir did bind him.

So if after the Statute of Gloucester, Tenant by the Courtesy had aliened with
warranty, had it been demanded, if the Heir were barred by that warranty, it
had been an absurd Answer, That he was not, because it was a Collateral
warranty of his Father, without Assets: For all Collateral warranties of the
Father were not restrained, but his warranty in that Case which could be no
other than Collateral) was restrained by the Statute. Therefore

The adequate Answer had been, That the Fathers warranty bound not in that
Case, without Assets, because the Statute of Gloucester had so restrained it.

My second Assertion is, Ass. 2.
That the Statute de Donis restrains not the warranty of Tenant in tail from
barring him in the Remainder in tail by his warranty descending upon him.

1. For that the mischief complained of, and remedied by the Statute, is, That
in omnibus praedictis casibus therein recited, post prolem suscitatam habuerunt
illi quibus Tenementum sic conditionaliter datum fuit hucusque potestatem
alienandi Tenementum sic datum, and exhaeredandi exitum eorum contra voluntatem
Donatoris. But the warranty of the Donee in tail descending upon him in the
Remainder, who regularly claims by purchase from the Donor, and not by descent
from the Donee in tail, could be no disinheriting of the Issue of the Donee,
claiming by descent from him, against which disinheriting only the Statute
provides, which is evident by the Writ of Formedon in the Descender, framed by
the Statute in behalf of such Issue of the Donee, whom the Statute intends.

2. The Statute did not provide against Inconveniences or Mischiefs which were
not at the time of making the Statute, but against those which were. But at the
making of it there could be no Remainder in tail, because all Estates, which
are Estates tail, since the Statute, were Fee-simples Conditional before the
Statute, upon which a Remainder could not be limited.

So is Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon the Statute de Donis, The Formedon
in Reverter did lie at Common Law, Cok. part. 2. f. 336.
but not a Formedon in Remainder upon an Estate tail, because it was a
Fee-simple Conditional, whereupon no Remainder could be limited at Common Law,
but after the Statute it may be limited upon an Estate tail, in respect of the
Division of the Estates.

3. The Statute formed a Writ of Formedon in the Descender for the new Estate
tail created by the Statute, and mentions a Formedon in the Reverter, as
already known in the Chancery; for the Donor, for whom the Statute likewise
intended to provide, but formed or mentioned none for the Remainder in tail.

And the Cases are common in Littleton, Litt. Sect. 716, 718, 719.
and in many other Books, that the warranty of Donee in tail is Collateral to
him in the Remainder in tail, and binds as at the Common Law.

But thence to conclude, That therefore the warranty of the Donee in tail shall
bar the Donor of his Reversion, because it is a Collateral warranty also, is a
gross Non sequitur; for the Donees warranty does not therefore bar the
Remainder, because it is a Collateral warranty, but because the Statute de
Donis does not restrain his warranty from barring him in the Remainder, as has
been cleared, but leaves it as at Common Law, but it does restrain his warranty
from barring him in the Reversion, as shall appear.

There is one Case in Littleton remarkable for many Reasons, where the warranty
of Tenant in tail is lineal, and not collateral, to the person in Remainder,
and therefore binds not if the Case be Law (as may be justly doubted) as
Littleton is commonly understood.

Litt. Sect. 719.
Land is given to a man, and the heirs males of his body, the Remainder to the
heirs females of his body; and the Donee in tail makes a Feoffment in Fee with
warranty, and has Issue a Son and a Daughter, and dies, this warranty is but
a lineal warranty to the Son to demand by a Writ of Formedon in the Descender;
and also it is but lineal to the Daughter to demand the same Land by a Writ of
Formedon in the Remainder, unless the Brother dies without Issue male, because
she claims as Heir female of the body of her Father engendered. But if her
Brother release to the Discontinuee with warranty, and after dye without Issue,
this is a collateral warranty to the daughter, because she cannot conveigh the
right which she has to the Remainder, by any means of descent by her brother.

1. Here the warranty of the Father, Donee in tail, is but lineal to the
Daughter in Remainder in tail; But she claims, says the Book, her Remainder as
heir female of the body of the Donee in tail, which differs the Case from other
persons in Remainder of an Estate tail: But of this more hereafter.

2. And by the way, in this Case Sir Edward Coke, though he has commented upon
it, has committed an oversight of some moment, by using a Copy that wanted a
critical emendation: For where it is said, That the warranty of the Father is
but lineal to the Daughter, to demand the Land by a Formedon in the Remainder,
unless the Brother dye without Issue-male, because she claims as Heir female of
the body of her Father. By which reading and context the sense must be, That if
the Son dye without Issue male of his body, then the warranty of the Father is
not lineal to the Daughter, cujus contrarium est verum, for she can claim her
Remainder as heir female of the body of her Father, and thereby make the
Fathers warranty lineal to her, but only because her Brother died without Issue
male.

That which deceived Sir Edward Coke to admit this Case as he has printed it,
was a depraved French Copy thus, Si non friar devyast sans Issue male, which
truly read, should be, Si son friar devyast; and the Translation should be, Not
unless the Brother dye without Issue male, but, If her Brother dye without
Issue male.

Another reason is that his French Copy was depraved, Because the French of it
is, Si non friar devyast sans Issue male, which is no Language, for that
rendered in English, is, Unless Brother dye: For it cannot be rendered as he has
done it, unless the Brother dye, without the French had been, Si non le friar
devyast, and not Si non friar devyast.

Sir Edward Coke's first Edition of his Littleton, and all the following
Editions, are alike false in this Section. I have an Edition of Littleton in
1604. so depraved, which was long before Sir Edward Coke published his; but I
have a right Edition in 1581. which it seems Sir Edward Coke saw not, where the
Reading is right, Si son friar devyast sans Issue male: Therefore you may mend
all your Littletons, if you please, and in perusing the Case, you will find the
grossness of the false Copies more clearly than you can by this my Discourse of
it.

And after all, I much doubt whether this Case, as Littleton is commonly
understood, that is, That this lineal warranty does not bind the Daughter
without Assets descending, be Law, my Reason is, for that no Issue in tail is
defended from the warranty of the Donee, or Tenant in tail, but such as are
inheritable to the Estates intended within that Statute, and no Estates are so
intended but such as had been Fee-simples Conditional at the Common Law.

And no Estate in Remainder of an Estate tail, that is of a Fee Conditional,
could be at Common Law.

All Issues in tail, within that Statute, are to claim by the Writ there
purposely formed for them, which is a Formedon in the Descender, not in
Remainder.

3. A third thing to be cleared, is, That the Statute de Donis did not intend
to preserve the Estate tail for the Issue, or the Reversion for the Donor
absolutely against all warranties that might bar them, but only against the
Alienation, with, or without warranty of the Donee and Tenant in tail only; for
if it had intended otherwise, it had restrained all Collateral warranties, of
any other Ancestor, from binding the Issue in tail, which it neither did, nor
intended, though well it might, such warranters having no title.

4. The Statute de Donis did not intend to restrain the Alienation of any
Estates, but Estates of Inheritance upon Condition expressed or employed, such
as were Fee-simples Conditional at Common Law; And therefore if Tenant for life
aliened with warranty which descended upon the Reversioner, such Alienation or
Warranty were not restrained by this Statute, but left at Common Law.

1. Because the Estate aliened was not of Inheritance upon Condition within
that Statute.

2. He in the Reversion had his remedy by entering, for the forfeiture upon the
Alienation, if he pleased, which the Donors of Fee-simples Conditional could
not do.

These things cleared, I think it will be most manifest by the Statute de
Donis, and all ancient Authority, That the warranty of Tenant in tail, though
it be a Collateral warranty, will not bar the Donor, or his Heir, of the
Reversion.

After the Inconvenience before recited, That the Donees disinherited their
Issue against the form of the Gift; then follows,

Et praeterea cum deficienti exitu de hujusmodi Feoffatis, Tenementum sic datum
ad donatorem vel ad ejus haeredes reverti debuit per formam in Charta de dono
hujusmodi expressam, licet exitus, si quis fuerit obiisset per factum tamen,
and Feoffamentum eorum quibus Tenementum sic datum fuit sub condition exclusi
fuerunt, hucusque de Reversione eorundem Tenementorum quod manifest fuit
contra formam doni.

Hitherto the Inconveniences and Mischiefs which followed the Issue of the
Donees, and to the Donor, when they failed by the Donees power of Alienation,
are only recited in the Statute, without a word of restraint or remedy.

The follows the remedy and restraint in these words only, and no other.

Propter quod Dominus Rex perpendens quod necessarium, and utile est in
praedictis casibus (which comprehends both Inconveniences) apponere remedium,
Statuit quod voluntas donatoris secundum formam in Charta Doni sui manifest
expressam de caetero observetur, ita quod non habeant illi quibus Tenementum,
sic datum fuit sub condition potestatem alienandi Tenementum, sic datum quo
minus ad exitum illorum quibus Tenementum sic fuerit datum, remaneat post eorum
obitum, vel ad donatorem, vel ad ejus haeredes, si exitus deficiat, revertatur.
Per hoc quod nullus sit exitus omnino vel si aliquis exitus fuerit, and per
mortem deficiet, haerede de corpore hujusmodi exitus deficiente.

1. By these words the Donee or Tenant in tail is restrained from all power of
alienation, whereby the Lands entailed may not descend to the Heir in tail
after his death.

Therefore,

By these words he is restrained from alienation with warranty, which doubtless
would hinder the Land so to descend, if it were not restrained by the words of
the Statute.

2. By the same words the Donee in tail is restrained from all power of
alienation, whereby the Lands entailed may not revert to the Donor for want of
Issue in tail.

Therefore,

By those words he is restrained from such alienation with warranty, whereby
the Lands may not revert to the Donor, or his Heirs, for want of Issue in tail.

For the same words of the Statute must be of equal power and extent to
restrain the Donees alienation from damaging the Donor, as from damaging the
Issue in tail. Otherwise

3. Words in an Act of Parliament, That A. should have no power to hurt the
right of B. nor the right of C. must signify that A. shall have no power to
hurt the right of B. but shall have some to hurt the right of C. which is that
A. by his warranty shall not harm B. but may by his warranty harm C.

4. If it be said, The Statute restraining not the alienation by warranty, as
to the Issue in tail, the Issue would have no benefit by the Statute; For it is
as easy for the Donee or Tenant in tail to alien with warranty (and so to
deprive the Issue of all benefit of the Statute) as to alien without warranty.

But his warranty can seldom descend upon the Donor, and therefore cannot be so
hurtful to him as to the Issue in tail. How does this satisfy the equal
restraint of the Statute from harming the Donor, or the Issue in tail? For,

This Logic and Reasoning is the same as to say, A. by express words is
restrained from beating B. or beating C. but A. has more frequent
opportunities of beating B. than of beating C. Therefore the same words
restrain A. from beating B. at all.

But not from beating C. when opportunity is offered.

5. In the next place, admit the words of restraint in the Statute de donis had
been, Rex Statuit quod voluntas donatoris in Charta doni sui expressa de cetero
observetur, ita quod non habeant illi quibus Tenementum, sic fuit datum sub
Condition potestatem alienandi Tenementum sic datum per Warrantiam, vel
aliter, quo minus ad exitum eorum remaneat vel ad donatorem revertatur.

It had then been clear to every understanding, That the warranty of the Donee
or Tenant in tail, by the express words of the Statute, did neither bar the
Donor, nor the Issue in tail (for words more express were not inventable to
restrain the Donees warranty from barring them) and then observe what
consequents had been rightly deduced from such restraint made by the Statute.

The Statute expressly restrains the warranty of Tenant in tail from barring his
Issue, whence it follows, That by the Statute the Issue in tail is not barred
by the Lineal warranty of Tenant in tail, because his warranty upon the Issue
in tail cannot possibly be any other than a Lineal warranty.

It might be said in like manner, the Statute de donis restrains the warranty
of Tenant in tail from barring the Donor, or his Heir of the Reversion, the
consequent thence deducible had been, That the Statute had restrained the
Collateral warranty of Tenant in tail from barring the Donor, or his Heirs;
because his warranty falling upon the Donor, or his Heir, could be no other
than a Collateral warranty.

Now it is true, the word (warranty) is not in syllables within the restraint
of the Statute, but is necessarily employed in it, else the Issue in tail would
be barred by the warranty of Tenant in tail, without Assets, contrary to all
the Current of our Books from the making of the Statute.

But those general words of the Statute restraining the Donees power of
alienation in express terms, equally and pari passu for the benefit of the
Donor, as for the benefit of the Issue in tail, can never be understood to
restrain the warranty of Tenant in tail only for the benefit of the Issue in
tail, but not at all for the benefit of the Donor, but the Statute must
necessarily restrain his warranty indefinitely from hurting either, and by
consequent his Lineal warranty is restrained from hurting the Issue, and his
Collateral warranty from hurting the Donor, to whom his warranty can never be
but Collateral, as it can never be but Lineal to the Issue in tail.

And if it be necessarily understood and employed in the Statute, the operation
must be the same as if it had been syllabically inserted in the Statute.

Then to say by the restraint of the Statute, the Donees have not power to
alien the Land intayl'd, quo minus ad exitum illorum remaneat post eorum
mortem; but they have power to alien quo minus ad donatorem revertatur
deficiente exitu, is to make the Statute contradictory to it self; which says,

Non habeant de caetero potestatem alienandi quo minus ad exitum illorum
remaneat vel ad donatorem, vel ejus haeredes revertatur deficiente exitu.

6. Again, if the Statute had provided only for indemnity of the Issue in
tail, omitting the Donor and his Heirs, by the words, Non habeant de caetero
potestatem alienandi quo minus Tenementum sic datum ad exitum illorum remaneat
post obitum eorum. The Donees warranty had been restrained (as it is) to bar
the Issue.

And if it had only provided for the Indemnity of the Donor and his Heirs,
omitting the Issue, by the words, Non habeant potestatem alienandi quo minus
Tenementum sic datum ad Donatorem vel ad ejus haeredes revertatur deficiente
exitu, must not his warranty have been restrained from barring the Donor and
his Heirs in like manner?

Why then the restraint reaching to both (Issue and Donor) must not both have
like benefit of it?

And for further Answer to that thin Objection, That the Statute did not
provide against the Donees warranty, falling on the Donor or his Heirs, because
it can fall on them but seldom, and that Laws provide against ills quae
frequentius accidunt.

It is true, when the words of a Law extend not to an inconvenience rarely
happening, and do to those which often happen, it is good reason not to strain
the words further than they reach, by saying it is casus omissus, and that the
Law intended quae frequentius accidunt.

But it is no reason, when the words of a Law do enough extend to an
inconvenience seldom happening, that they should not extend to it as well as if
it happened more frequently, because it happens but seldom. For,

By that Reason, if Lands be given to a man, and the Heirs of his body, his
warranty should not bar the Issue in tail within the meaning of the Statute,
because there his warranty must always fall upon the Issue in tail; but if
given to him, and the Heirs females of his body, it should bar, because it
falls less frequently upon such Heir female, which is absurd.

7. The Statute further commands, That the Donors Will be observed, according
to the form of his Gift expressed in his Charter, which was that if the Donee
died without Issue, the Land should retorn to the Donor or his Heirs. Therefore
such alienation is forbid which hinders the retorn of it according to the
Charter, and consequently alienation with warranty is forbid.

I add, That the makers of the Statute well understood the use of restraining
the Donees warranty from hurting the Donor, or the Issue in tail, but not
possibly the use of restraining his Lineal or Collateral warranty, which were
terms then useless and unknown, and therefore not in their prospect at all.

I shall now a little resume my former reasoning, for more clearing of this
point.

If immediately after the Statute de Donis, Tenant in tail had made a Feoffment
in Fee with warranty, which descended upon the Issue in tail, if it had been
demanded, Whether that warranty barred the Issue in a Formedon in the
Descender, it had been an unintelligible Answer to have said in that Age, That
it did not bar the Issue in tail, because it was a Lineal warranty; for that
had been to answer an Ignotum per multo ignotius, than which nothing is more
irrational.

But the clean Answer had been, That the Donees power of Alienation was
restrained in general by the Statute de Donis, and therefore his Alienation by
warranty, and consequently his warranty, could not bar the Issue in tail.

In like manner if Tenant in tail had been with the Remainder over, soon after
the Statute (as then it might be) and he had made a Feoffment in Fee with
warranty, and dyed, and the warranty had descended upon him in the Remainder.

If it had been demanded then, Whether that warranty did bar him in the
Remainder? It had been an Answer not to be understood to have said, That it did
bar him, because it was a Collateral warranty.

But the right Answer had been, That it was the warranty of the Ancestor,
descending upon the Heir, and was not restrained within the Statute de Donis,
and therefore must bind him in the Remainder of Common Course.

So as the Doctrine of the binding of Lineal and Collateral warranties, or
their not binding, is an Extraction out of men's brains, and Speculations, many
scores of years after the Statute de Donis.

And if Littleton (whose memory I much honor) had taken that plain way in
resolving his many excellent Cases in his Chapter of warranty, of saying the
warranty of the Ancestor does not bind in this Case, because it is restraind by
the Statute of Gloucester, or the Statute de Donis, and it does bind in this
Case, as at the Common Law, because not restrained by either Statute (for when
he wrote there were no other Statutes restraining warranties, there is now a
third 11 H. 7.) his Doctrine of warranties had been more clear and satisfactory
than now it is, being intricated under the terms of Lineal and Collateral; for
that in truth is the genuine Resolution of most, if not of all his Cases: For
no man's warranty does bind, or not, directly, and a priori, because it is
Lineal or Collateral; for no Statute restrains any warranty under those terms
from binding, nor no Law institutes any warranty in those terms; but those are
restraints by consequent only from the restraints of warranties made by
Statutes.

Objections.
On the other side was urged Sir Edward Coke's Opinion upon Sect. 712. of
Littleton, and his Comment upon the Statute de Donis (which is but the quoting
of his Littleton) where his words are,

The warranty of the Donee in tail, Cok. Litt. Sect. 712.
which is Collateral to the Donor or him in Remainder being heir to him, does
bind them without any Assets: For though the Alienation of the Donee, after
Issue, does not bar the Donor (which was the Mischief provided for by the Act)
yet the warranty being Collateral, does bar both of them, because the Act
restrains not that warranty, but it remains at Common Law.

These words may have a double meaning, though the alienation of the Donee does
not bar the Donor (which was the Mischief provided for by the Act) yet the
warranty being Collateral does bar.

If the meaning be, That the warranty is a thing Collateral to the Alienation
against which provision was made, and therefore the warranty was not
restrained, but the Alienation was.

By the same reason, and in the same words, it may be said, The Alienation of
the Donee does not bar the Issue in tail (which was the Mischief provided for
by the Act) yet his warranty, which is a thing Collateral to the Alienation,
does bar, because it remains at Common Law.

So as this Reason concludes equally, That the Lineal warranty of Donee in tail
should bar his issue, as that his Collateral warranty should bar the Donor.

Another meaning of his words may be, having first asserted that the Collateral
warranty of the Donee does bar the Donor descending upon him, and giving the
reason of it, he gives no other but this, For though the Alienation of Donee in
tail does not bar him, yet the warranty, being a Collateral warran y, does
bar him; which is idem per idem, and the same as if he said, The Collateral
warranty of Donee in tail does bar the Donor and him in Remainder; for the
warranty being Collateral, does bar both of them; which is no reason of his
Assertion, but the same Assertion over again. And where it follows, For the Act
restrains not that warranty, viz. the Collateral, no more does the Act
restrain the Lineal warranty in express terms, or by any Periphrasis, more than
it does the Collateral, but restrains all power of Alienation in prejudice of
the Issue or Donor, and consequently the power of Aliening with warranty to the
hurt of either.

2. The second thing objected was Littleton's own Authority in the same Sect.
712. his words are,

He that demands Fee-tayl by Writ of Formedon in Descender, shall not be
barred by Lineal Warranty, unless he has Assets by descent in Fee-simple by
the same Ancestor that made the warranty. But says not he that demands
Fee-tayl by Formedon in Remainder, shall not be barred, quod nota as to the
Case, Sect. 719. But Collateral warranty is a bar to him that demands Fee,
and also to him that demands Fee-tayl, without any other descent of
Fee-simple. Whence it was concluded, That the Collateral warranty must bar the
Donor without Assets, who demands a Fee-simple. But

Littleton's words end not there, but immediately follow, Except in Cases which
are restrained by the Statutes, in the plural number; which words taken in, as
Littleton's Case is, make his Authority directly for me.

For when Littleton wrote, there were but two Statutes which restrained any
warranty from binding, as at Common Law, namely the Statute of Gloucester and
Westminster the second, de Donis; now there is a third, 11 H. 7. c. 20.

So as those words of Littleton are the same as if he had said, Except in Cases
restrained by the Statutes of Gloucester and Westminster the second, de Donis.

Whence it follows, That by Littleton both Statutes did restrain some
Collateral warranties, but the Statute de Donis restrains no other than the
Collateral warranty of the Donee descending upon the Donor, it leaving all
other Collateral warranties as at the Common Law. Ergo it does restrain that,
which is the solution of the Question, and according to Littleton.

I have examined several Editions of Littleton, and the words are the same in
all, Si non in Cases restrained per les Estatutes.

No man will say, that by those words, Except in Cases restrained by the
Statutes, Littleton meant Statutes that were not then made, nor perhaps never
would be.

For that were to make him say in instructing his Son (for, and to whom he writ
his Books) what the Law was.

But a Collateral warranty does bind both for Fee and Fee tail, except in Cases
restrained by Statutes, yet to be made, and which perhaps never will be made:
Besides the words restrained per les Estatutes by the Statutes, always denote
Statutes which signally are, and not which are not.

3. The third Objection was from Littleton, Sect. 716. where it is showed the
Collateral warranty of Tenant in tail does bind him in Remainder in tail, which
is agreed; for the Statute de Donis restrains not the warranty of Donee in tail
descending upon him in Remainder, as has been cleared.

4. The fourth Objection was the Case of 41 Ed. 3. Fitz. tit. Garranty pl. 16.
whence it was urged as Justice Herles Opinion, and by him spoken.

1. That he was at the making of the Statute de Donis.

2. That the makers of the Statute intended that the Donees warranty should not
bar a Donor, stranger in blood to the Donee, but should bar a Donor of
kindred to the Donee.

This Case is of no Credit in several respects. For,

1. The Statute makes no such difference of a Donor stranger, and a Donor privy
in blood to the Donee, as is urged in that Case.

2. The Statute is, That the Donors will was to be observed, expressed in his
Charter of Gift; and if a Donor were privy in blood, yet his will in his
Charter might be the same as that of a stranger Donor, and was equally by the
Statute to be observed.

3. The warranty of Donee in tail could never descend upon a stranger Donor,
for such could never be his Heir, nor needed any help of the Statute against
his warranty.

4. The Donor in Frank-marriage, who might be Cosen to either party married,
and must be of kindred to one or both Donees, is expressly named as a Donor,
wronged by the Donees alienation in the Statute: Therefore a Donor of the
Donees blood was within the remedy of the Statute.

5. Nor could this be Herle's Opinion in 41 E. 2. but in the Context of the
Report Finchden says, Il est dit in terms Comment Herle que fuit un Justic,
dit que il fuit al fesanc del Stat. and dit as before.

And for that the name of Herle is written in the Report in large Letters, as
the Judges Names use to be, it was mistaken at the Bar, as if the Context had
begun, Herle que fuit un Justic dit, which could not then be an Opinion of
Herles. For if he were at the making of the Statute de Donis, 13 E. 1. he could
not then be less than Four and twenty, or Five and twenty years old, and must
have lived after until 41 E. 3. above Eighty years. But the truth is, he died
in, or soon after, 7 E. 3.

So it is not Herle's Opinion, but Finchden says, It is said in Terms, that
is, of the Year Books, how Herle, who was a Justice, said, He was at the making
of the Statute which was made to redress the Mischief to the Donor, who was a
stranger; And therefore he said that the Donor in the Case being no stranger,
he saw no reason why he should not be barred, being out of the mischief of the
Statute, but gave no Rule, but the Debate was adjourned.

Another Reason proving this, is, That it is said, Herle que fuit un Justic,
which no Reporter ever said of a Justice at present, and reporting his Opinion.

What Finchden said is grounded upon what he had heard was said by Herle in
former terms. But no such Opinion of Herles appears any where, but the contrary
clearly in several places.

The Reporter, at the end of the Case, 7 E. 3. f. 34. Fitz. Garranty p. 44.
has vid. 5 E. 3. Opinion Herle que le warranty le Ten. in tail, n'est pas
bar al donor pour ceo que le statut rehearse le mischief quod Donatores fuerunt
exclusi de Reversionibus hucusque, and les heirs disherit issint a restrainer
tiel point fuit le stat. de Donis Conditionalibus, fait quod voluntas donatoris
observetur. Here is Herle's own Opinion expressly contrary to what Finchden by
hearsay only said it was.

In another Case upon question, Fitz. 7 E. 3. f. 48. p. 46.
Whether the warranty of Tenant in tail barred him in Remainder? Herle says,
Le statute voet que ceux as queux les Tenements sont done, ne eient power de
alienation quo minus il descendra al Issue, ou retorn al Donor, and in ceo
point le statute voet que le volunt del donor in omnibus observetur mes le
statute, ne parle riens de cestuy in le Remainder, and so ruled.

Here is the Opinion of Herle in another Case, That the warranty of the Donee
in tail barred not the Issue in tail, nor the Donor, by the Statute, but barred
him in Remainder, as not aided by the Statute.

In a question, Fitz. p. 61. Garranty. 6 E. 3. f. 56.
Whether the King were barred by the warranty of Tenant in tail, his Ancestor
for a Reversion descended to him, with Assets? Herle gives his Opinion as known
Law then, Vous saves bien que de ley cestuy que demand per Formedon in
Reverter, ne serra bar per le garranty, cestuy a que les Tenements fuerunt
done in tail, sil ne eyt per descent tout soit il heir a luy, and le quel Roy
ad per descent ou non, ne poiomus enquire. And on this Case Sir Edward Coke
makes an Observation, That the King was not bound by a Collateral warranty for
the Reversion of an Estate in tail, no more is any other Donor, by that Case.

So as Sir William Herle's Judgment, who was then Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas in three several years, and several Cases, was directly contrary to what
Finchden, 41 E. 3. said it was upon Report.

Besides the contrary of what my Brother Ellis urged from this Case, may be
thus inferred out of it: This Case admits that the Statute restrains the
warranty of the Donee from barring some Donor, viz. a Donor stranger in blood,
as was said; for it restrains Alienation without warranty against all Donors,
but the Statute did not restrain the Donees warranty from barring such a Donor,
for his warranty could never descend upon a stranger, and the Statute did not
restrain a thing which could not be: Therefore, ex concesso, the Statute
restrained the Donees warranty from barring the Donor of blood to the Donee.

7 E. 3. 34. p. 44.
5. The fifth Objection was a Case 7 E. 3. that Tenant in tail made a Feoffment
in Fee, and died issuless, and the Feoffee rebutted the Donor by the warranty.

This Case rightly understood is not to the purpose, for the Donor was not
rebutted by the warranty of Tenant in tail (which is the present question) but
by the Donors own warranty.

The Case was, That A. gave Land to W. and E. his wife, Habendum praedictis W.
and E. and haeredibus inter se legitime procreatis, and warranted those
Tenements to the said W. and E. and haeredibus eorum seu assignatis. The Heir
in tail made a Feoffment in Fee, and died, leaving no Issue inheritable, and
the Donor was rebutted in his Formedon in Reverter by his own warranty, having
warranted to the Donee, his Heirs and Assigns, and the Feoffee claimed as
Assignee. And it was adjudg'd against the Donor after in the same year, as
appears 46 E. 3. f. 4. b. and there admitted good Law. 46 E. 3. f. 4. b.


But Sir Edward Coke denies this Case to be Law now, saying, That the warranty
determined with the Estate tail, to which it was first annexed; and doubtless
it did so as to Voucher, but whether as to Rebutter of the Donor, the party
rebutting having the Land, though another Estate in it, and deriving the
warranty to himself, as Assignee, is not clear.

6. A sixth Objection was made from a Case 27 E. 3. f. 83. of a Formedon in
Reverter brought, 27 E. 3. f. 83. pl. 42.
and the Deed of Tenant in tail, Ancestor to the Demandant, showed forth, but
the Book mentions no warranty; but it is like it was a Deed with warranty, and
the Plaintiff durst not demurr, but traversed the Deed, as any would avoid
demurring upon the validity of an Ancestor's Deed, when he was secure, there
was no such Deed of the Ancestor.

7. 4 E. 3. f. 56. pl. 58.
The last Objection was a Case 4 E. 3. f. 56. p. 58. where Tenant in tail made
a Feoffment with warranty, and the warranty descended upon him in the Remainder
in tail, which barred him, which is a Case agreed, as before: For the Statute
of Westminster the second, provides not at all for him in Remainder; but as to
him, Tenant in tayls warranty is left as at Common Law.

In 4 E. 3. a Formedon in the Descender was brought by the Issue in tail, and
the Release of his elder Brother, 4 E. 3. f. 28. pl. 57.
with warranty, was pleaded by the Tenant Stoner, who gave the Rule in the
Case: Le statute restraynes le power del Issue in tail, to alien in prejudice
of him in the Reversion, by express words and a Fortiori, the power of the
Issue in tail is restrained to alien in prejudice of the Issue in tail.

Whereupon the Tenant was ruled to answer, and pleaded Assets descended.

Here it was admitted, 10 E. 3. f. 14, pl. 53.
the Issue in tail could not alien with warranty in prejudice of the
Reversioner: And in 10 E. 3. soon after a Formedon in Reverter being brought,
and the warranty of Tenant in tail pleaded in bar. Scot alleged the restraint
of the Statute as well for the Reversioner as for those claiming by descent in
tail. The same Stoner demanding if the Ancestor's Deed was acknowledged, and
answered it was; His Rule was, That the Judgment must be the same for the
Reversioner as for the Issue, in these words, Ore est tout sur un Judgment,
which can have no other meaning, considering Scot's words immediately before,
that the Law was the same for the Reversioner, as for the Issue in tail, and
Stoner's Opinion in the Case before to the same effect, 4 E. 3.

Objections from Modern Reports.
Moore f. 96. pl. 239.
In Moore's Reports this Case is, A man seized of Land, having Issue two Sons,
devised it to his youngest Son in tail; and the eldest Son died, leaving Issue
a Son; the youngest aliened in Fee with warranty, and died without Issue, the
Son of the eldest being within age: If this Collateral warranty shall bind the
Son within age, without Assets, notwithstanding the Statute of Westminster the
second? was the question?

And the Opinions of Plowden, Bromley Solicitor, Manwood and Lovelace,
Sergeants, and of the Lord Dyer and Catlin Chief Justice, were clear, That it
is a Collateral warranty, and without Assets did bar, notwithstanding his
Nonage, for that his Entry was taken away. And this was the Case of one Evans,
12 and 13 of the Queen, as it was reported to me.

This Opinion makes against me, I confess, but give it this Answer.

1. This Case is not reported by Sir Francis Moore, but reported to him, non
constat in what manner, nor by whom.

2. It was no Judicial Opinion, for Plowden, Bromley Solicitor, two Sergeants,
Manwood and Lovelace, are named for it, as well as Dyer and Catlin, who were
then Chief Justices of the several Courts, which proves the Opinion not only
extra-judicial, but not given in any Court.

3. The motive of their Opinion was, because the warranty was Collateral, which
is no true reason of the binding, or not, of any warranty.

4. An extra-judicial Opinion given in, or out of Court, is no more than the
Prolatum or saying of him who gives it, nor can be taken for his Opinion,
unless every thing spoken at pleasure, must pass as the speakers Opinion.

5. An Opinion given in Court, if not necessary to the Judgment given of
Record, but that it might have been as well given if no such, or a contrary,
Opinion had been breach'd, is no Judicial Opinion, nor more than a gratis
dictum.

But an Opinion, though Erroneous, concluding to the Judgment, is a Judicial
Opinion, because delivered under the Sanction of the Judges Oath, upon
deliberation, which assures it is, or was, when delivered, the Opinion of the
Deliverer.

Yet if a Court give Judgment judicially, another Court is not bound to give
like Judgment, unless it think that Judgment first given was according to Law.

For any Court may err, else Errors in Judgment would not be admitted, nor a
Reversal of them.

Therefore, if a Judge conceives a Judgment given in another Court to be
erroneous, he being sworn to judge according to Law, that is, in his own
conscience ought not to give the like Judgment, for that were to wrong every
man having a like cause, because another was wronged before, much less to
follow extra-judicial Opinions, unless he believes those Opinions are right.

The other Case is in Coke, 5 Car. Salvin versus Clerk, in Ejectment upon a
special Verdict; Alexander Sidenham Tenant in tail to him and the Heirs males
of his body, the Reversion to John his eldest Brother, made a Lease for three
Lives, warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 28. with warranty. And after 16
Eliz. levies a Fine with warranty and proclamations to Tailor, and dies without
Issue male, leaving Issue Elizabeth his Daughter, Mother to the Plaintiffs
Lessor. In 18 Eliz. the Lease for Lives expired. In 30 Eliz. John the elder
Brother died without Issue, the said Elizabeth being his Niece and Heir. The
Defendant entered, claiming by a Lease from Tailor, and Points entered upon him
as Heir to Elizabeth.

A question was moved upon a supposed Case, and not in fact within the Case,
Whether if the Fine had not been with proclamation (as it was) and no Non-claim
had been in the Case (as there was) this warranty should make a discontinuance
in Fee, and bar Elizabeth, it not descending upon John after Alexanders death,
but upon Elizabeth, who is now also John's Heir, or determined by Alexander's
death.

The Judges were of opinion, as the Reporter says, That the warranty did bar
Elizabeth, and consequently her Heir, because the Reversion was discontinued by
the Estate for Lives, and a new Fee thereby gained, and the Reversion displaced
thereby, and the warranty was annexed to that new Fee. But this Case is all
false, and mis-reported.

1. For that it says the Lease for Lives was a discontinuance of the
Reversion, and thereby a new Fee gained to Tenant in tail, which he passed away
by the Fine with warranty, which could not be; for in the Case it appears the
Lease was warranted by the Stat. of 32 H. 8 and then it could make no
discontinuance, nor no new Fee of a Reversion could be gained, 40 Eliz. Keen
and Copes C. 602. pl. 13.
and then no Estate to which the warranty was annexed, and so was it resolved
40 El. Keen and Copes Case.

2. That Opinion was extra-judicial, it being concerning a point not in the
Case, but supposed.

3. That Case was resolved upon the point of Non-claim, and not upon this of
the warranty, which was not a point in the Case.

4. Some of the Judges therefore spoke not to that point, as appears in the
Case.

As to the second Question, Admitting the warranty of Tenant in tail does bind
the Donor and his Heirs, yet in regard the Defendant, Tenant in possession,
cannot derive the warranty to her self, from the Feoffees, as Assignee, or
otherwise, Whether she may rebutt the Demandants, or not, by her possession
only? is the question; and I conceive she may not, as this Case is.

I shall begin with those Authorities that make, and are most pressed against
me, which is the Authority of Sir Edward Coke in Lincoln College Case, in the
third Report, and from thence brought over to his Littleton, f. 385. a.

His words in Lincoln College Case, f. 63. a. are, He which has the
possession of the Land shall rebutt the Demandant himself, without showing how
he came to the possession of it; for it suffices him to defend his possession,
and bar the Demandant, and the Demandant cannot recover the Land against his
own warranty. And there he cites several Cases, as making good this his
Assertion.

In the same place he says it is adjudg'd, 38 E. 3. f. 26. That an Assignee
shall rebutt by force of a warranty made to one and his Heirs only.

This Doctrine is transferred to his Littleton, in these words, If the warranty
be made to a man and his heirs without this word Assigns, yet the Assignee or
any Tenant of the Land may rebutt. And albeit no man shall vouch, or have a
Warrantia Chartae, either as party Heir or Assignee, but in privity of Estate,
yet any one that is in of another Estate, be it by disseisin, abatement,
intrusion, usurpation, or otherwise, shall rebutt by force of the warranty, as
a thing annexed to the Land: which sometimes was doubted in our Books, when as
in the Cases aforesaid, he that rebutteth claims under, and not above the
warranty.

I shall clearly agree, no man shall vouch, or have a warrantia Chartae, who is
not in in privity of Estate, that is, who has not the same Estate, as well as
the same Land, to which the warranty was annexed: And the reason is evident,
because the Tenant must recover if the Land be not defended to him by the
warranter, such Estate as was first warranted, and no other, unless a Fee be
granted with warranty only for the life of the Grantee or Grantor, in which
Case the Grantee, upon voucher, recovers a Fee, though the warranty were but
for life.

I shall likewise agree the Law to be as Sir Edward Coke says in both places,
if his meaning be that the Tenant in possession, when he is impleaded, may
rebutt the Demandant, without showing how he came to the possession which he
then has, when impleaded, be it by dissism, abatement, intrusion, or any other
tortious way: And for the reason given in Lincoln College Case, That it
suffices that the Tenant defend his possession: But if his meaning be, that
the Tenant in possession need not show that the warranty ever extended to him,
or that he has any right to it, then I must deny his Doctrine in Lincoln
College Case, or in Littleton, which is but the former there repeated to be
Law.

For as it is not reasonable a man should recover that Land which he has once
warranted to me, from me, what title soever I have in it at the time when he
impleads me.

So on the other side, it is against reason I should warrant Land to one who
never had any right in my warranty. And the same reason is, if a man will be
warranted by Rebutter, he should make it appear how the warranty extends to
him, as if he will be warranted by Voucher, for the difference is no other,
than that in the case of Voucher a stranger impleads him in case of Rebutter,
the Warranter himself impleads him, and in a Voucher he must make his title
appear to be warranted, Ergo in a Rebutter. But he needs not have like Estate
in the Land upon a Rebutter as upon Voucher, which is for the reason given of
recovering in value.

And the only reason why the person, who is to warrant, impleading the Tenant
of the Land, shall not recover, but be rebutted by the warranty, is because if
he should recover the Land, the Tenant, who is entitled to the warranty, must
recover in value from him again, and therefore to avoid Circuit of Action, he
shall not recover, but be rebutted and barred, as is most reasonable.

I shall therefore first make it appear by all ancient Authorities, That the
Tenant in possession shall not rebutt the Demandant by the warranty, without he
first make it appear that the warranty did extend to him as Heir or Assignee.

To prove this are full in the point,
Hill. 8 E. 3. f. 10. tit garranty pl. 48. New Edit. f. 283. b. number. 28
The Book of 8 E. 3. f. 10. of the Old Edition Hillary Term, tit. Garranty, pl.
48. where upon a great Debate it was ruled, That the Tenant must show how he
was entitled to the warranty, and how it extended to him, and accordingly did
so before his Plea was admitted by way of Rebutter.

10. E. 3. f. 42. b. New Edit. f. 391. b. number. 42
Another Book full in the point, is 10 E. 3. f. 42. b. of the Old Edition, where
in like manner the Tenant was forced to show how the warranty extended to him
upon Debate: and it is remarkable in that Case, That his showing the Deed of
warranty to him, whose Assignee he was, and the Deed of Assignment to himself
was not enough but he was compelled to plead orally, as the manner then was;
That William, who had the warranty assigned to him by his Deed there showed
forth, and the reason given that the Deed of Assignment could not speak and
make his Plea, and was but Evidence of the truth of his Plea.

But in that very Case, when it was replied, That he was not Tenant by the
Assignment of William, but by disseisin of the Plaintiff, it was not permitted
without traversing the Assignment of William: For if he were once entitled to
the warranty, what Estate soever he had when impleaded, he might rebutt, though
he could not vouch. Which Case proves fully both my Positions, That a man
cannot rebutt without showing how the warranty extends to him.

2. That so doing, he may, whatever Seisin he has at that time, be it by
Disseisin, or Abatement, etc. or otherwise.

22 Ass. pl. 88.
A third Case is, when the Tenant being impleaded, pleaded the warranty of the
Demandants Father to one A. and bound him and his Heirs to warrant to A. his
Heirs and Assigns, and that he was Assignee of A. and demanded Judgment. In
that Case, because he did not plead that he was Assignee of A. by Deed, the
Plea was disallowed (which since has been thought not necessary) but a
fortiori if he had pleaded no Assignment at all from A. by Deed, or without
Deed, to entitle him to the warranty, his Plea had been necessarily disallowed.

My next Assertion is, That the Tenant in possession setting forth how the
warranty extends to him, needs not set forth by what Estate or Title he is in
possession.

To this I shall cite three Books full in the point. 6 E. 3. f. 7. old Edit.
new Edit. 6 E. 3. f. 187 Number. 16. 10 F. 3. f. 42. cited before old Book. 45 E.
3.


But in all these Cases it is to be noted, That the Tenant rebutting, though he
was in possession of another Estate than that to which the warranty was
annexed; yet constantly showed how the warranty was derived to him, which Sir
Edward Coke observed not, either in Lincoln College Case, or his Littleton,
but cites in Lincoln College Case the Case of 45 E. 3. 45 E. 3. f. 18.
and some others I shall mention after, to show a man may rebutt, being in of
another Estate than that which was warranted, which is true, but not without
intitling himself to the warranty.

That the Law of rebutting stands upon the difference I have taken, besides the
Authorities urged, will be evident for these Reasons.

As a warranty may be created, so may it be determined or extinguished various
ways.

1. It may be released, as Littleton himself is Sect. 748. 2. It may be
defeasanc'd, as Sir Edward Coke upon that Sect. 748. 3. It may be lost by
Attainder, Sect. 745. 4. It may be extinguished by Re-feoffment of the
warranter or his Heirs, by the Garrantee or his Heir.
In all these Cases, if the warranty be destroyed, it cannot be rebutted; for
there cannot be an accident to a thing which is not, and rebutting is an
accident incident to a warranty: And therefore if the warranty have no being,
there can be no rebutter.

Why then admit A. warrants Land to B. and his Assigns, during the life of B.
after B. releases this warranty to A. and then Assigns to C. C. is impleaded by
A. and pleads generally that A. warranted to B. for his life, and that B. is
still living, if C. could rebutt A. by this manner of pleading, without showing
when B. assigned to him, so to derive the benefit of the warranty to himself,
A. could never have benefit of the Release of the warranty, because it could
not appear whether the warranty were released before or after the assignment;
if before, then the warranty is gone, and cannot be rebutted, but if after, it
may.

So if A. binds him and his Heirs to warrant to B. his Heirs and Assigns, B.
dies, his Heir releases the warranty, and dies, and then the Heir of the Heir
assigns: The Tenant is impleaded by A.

If he may rebutt by his bare possession without showing how the warranty
extended to him, A. can have no benefit of his Release before any assignment
was made; for the Demandant cannot be supposed to know the time of the
assignment, and consequently cannot know how to plead the Release, until the
time of the assignment appear, which is most consonant in reason with the
Authorities before urged.

Another reason is, That constantly, in elder times, when the Tenant pleaded a
warranty to rebutt, he concluded his Plea, that if he were impleaded by a
stranger, the Demandant was to warrant him, which could not be without showing
how the warranty extended to him; for he was not to warrant him, if impleaded
by a stranger; because he had possession of the Land only.

Sir Edward Coke in Lincoln College Case, cites the Book of 38 E. 3. f. 26. as
adjudg'd to prove that the bare possession of the Land is sufficient for the
Tenant to rebutt, for that the Assignee may rebutt a warranty made only to a
man and his Heirs: If that were so, it were to his purpose; but there is no
such Case in 38 E. 3. f. 26. but the Case intended is 38 E. 3. f. 21. and he
quotes the folio truly in his Littleton.

But the Case is not, That an Assignee may rebutt, or have benefit of a
warranty made to a man and his Heirs only, but that a warranty being made to a
man, his Heirs and Assigns, the Assignee of the Heir, or the Assignee of the
Assignee, though neither be Assignee of the first Grantee of the warranty,
shall have like benefit of the warranty, as if he were Assignee of the first
Grantee, which has been often resolved in the old Books.

To the same purpose he cites a Case out of 7 E. 3. f. 34. and 46 E. 3. f. 4.
which does but remember that of 7. as adjudg'd, That the Assignee of Tenant in
tail might rebutt the Donor; whence he infers, as before, that the Tenant in
possession might rebutt without any right to the warranty: But the Inference
holds not from that Case.

The Case of 7 E. 3. was, That Land was given in tail, and the Donor warranted
the Land generally to the Donee, his Heirs and Assigns, the Donee made a
Feoffment in Fee, and died without Issue; and the Donor impleading the Feoffee
was rebutted, because he had warranted the Land to the Donee, his Heirs and
Assigns, and the Feoffee claimed as Assignee of the Donee, and therefore
rebutted, not because he had a bare possession. But this Judgment of 7 E. 3.
Sir Edward Coke denies (and perhaps justly) to be Law now, because the Estate
tail being determined to which the warranty was first annexed, the whole
warranty determined with it.

But however, the Case no way proves what it is alleged for in Lincoln
College Case, That a man may rebutt without ever showing the warranty extended
to him, for the Feoffee did in that Case show it: So in the Case 45 E. 3. f.
18. the Feme, who rebutted, showed she was Grantee of the warranty.

To this may be added, That what is delivered, as before, in Lincoln College
Case, is neither conducing to the Judgment given in that Case, nor is it any
Opinion of the Judges, but is Sir Edward Coke's single Opinion, emergently
given, as appears most clearly in the Case.

To conclude,

When the Feoffees were seized to the use of William Vescy for his life, and
after to the use of the Defendant, his wife, for her life, and after to the use
of the right Heirs of William Vescy.

And when by Operation of the Statute of 27 H. 8. the possession is brought to
these uses, the warranty made by William Vescy to the Feoffees and their Heirs,
is wholly destroyed.

For if before the Statute the Feoffees had executed an Estate to William for
life, the Remainder to his wife for life, the Remainder to his right Heirs.

The warranty had been extinguished by such Execution of Estate, and released
in Law, for it could be in none but in William and his Heirs, who could not
warrant to himself, or themselves. By Littleton Sect. 743. for his Heirs, in
such Case, take not by Purchase, but Limitation, because the Freehold was in
him with a Remainder over to his right Heirs, and so has as great an Estate in
the Land as the Feoffees had, and then the warranty is gone by Littleton. Litt.
Sect. 744.


And now the Statute executes the possession in the same manner, and the
warranty is in none, for the time present or future, but extinct: If the
warranty had been to the Feoffees, their Heirs and Assigns, it might have been
more colourably questioned, Whether the mean Remainder were not an Assignee of
the Feoffees, and so to have benefit of the warranty; but the warranty being to
the Feoffees and their Heirs only, no Estate remaining in them, no Assignee can
pretend to the warranty.

2. William Vescy could by no possibility ever warrant this Estate to the
Defendant during his life, and where the warranty cannot possibly attach the
Ancestor, it shall never attach the Heir, as by Littleton's Case: If a man
devises Lands in Fee to another with warranty, for him and his Heirs, his
Heirs shall not be bound to the warranty, because himself could never be.

And though in that Case the Estate to be warranted, commenced after the death
of the Warranter, and here the Remainder to the wife is in being before his
death, yet the reason differs not; for himself could no more warrant this by
any possibility than that, and his Heir might as equally warrant the Estate
devised, as this.

Next Justice Jones in Spirt and Bences Case, cites a Case 7 Eliz. the same
with this Resolution, resolved in the Common Pleas, That the mediate Remainder
could not be warranted.

In this Case, if the Feoffees before the Statute had either voluntarily, or by
coercion of the Chancery, after the death of the first Cestuy que use for life
executed the Estate of the mean Remainder, such person in Remainder could have
no benefit of the warranty, being but an Assignee of the Feoffees, because the
warranty was only to them and their Heirs.

No more can the person in Remainder here, whose Estate is executed by the
Statute, be warranted more than if such Estate had been executed by the Common
Law.

There are another sort of persons who may rebutt, and perhaps vouch, who are
neither Heirs nor formally Assignees to the Garrantee, but have the Estate
warranted, dispositione and instituto Legis, which I conceive not to differ
materially, whether they have such Estate warranted by the Common Law, or by
Act of Parliament.

The first of this kind I shall name, Ass. p. 9. 35
is Tenant by the Courtesy, who, as was adjudg'd 35 Ass. might rebutt the
warranty made to his wives Ancestor; yet was neither Heir nor formal Assignee
to any to whom the warranty was granted; nothing is said in the Book concerning
his vouching, but certainly the wives Heir may be received to defend his
estate, if impleaded by a stranger, who may vouch according to the warranty, or
may rebutt, as the Case of 45 E. 3. f. 18. is.

But this difference is observable also, where such a Tenant rebutts, it
appears what claim he makes to the warranty, and so the Inconveniences avoided
which follow a Rebutter made upon no other reason than because he who rebutts
is in possession of the Land warranted.

A second Tenant of this kind is the Lord of a Villain, 22 Ass. p. 37.
and therefore the Case is 22 Ass. That Tenant in Dower made a Lease for life
to a Villain (which in truth was a forfeiture for making a greater Estate of
Freehold than she had power to make) and bound her and her Heirs to warranty;
the Lord of the Villain entered upon the Land in her life time, and before the
warranty attached, the Heir, who had right to enter for the forfeiture, the
Mother died, and the Heir entered upon the L. of the Villain, who reentred, and
the Heir brought an Assise. The L. of the Villain pleaded the warranty, and
that the Heir, if a stranger had impleaded him, was bound to warrant the
Estate, and therefore demanded Judgment if the Heir himself should implead him.

1. It is there agreed, if the warranty had attached the Heir before the Lords
entry, the Heir had been bound: but quaere.

2. By that Book it seems the Lord, impleaded by a Stranger, might have vouched
the Heir, if the warranty had attached him before the Lords entry.

But in this Case it appears, the Lord was no formal Assignee of the Villains,
for this warranty must be as to an Assignee (for the Estate warranted was but
for life) and the Lords Estate was only by order of the Law.

A third Case of this nature is, Where the Ancestor granted Lands to a Bastard,
with warranty; but how far the warranty extended, as to the Heirs, or Heirs and
Assigns of the Bastard, appears not in the Case: the Bastard died without
Issue, and consequently without Heir, the L. by Escheat entered, upon whom the
Heir entered, the warranty of his Ancestor having not attached him before the
Bastards death (for it seems this was in a Case where the Heir might have
entered in his Ancestors life time, and so avoided his warranty, as in the
former case of the L. of a Villain) by the Book the warranty having not
attached him during the Bastards life, the Lord by Escheat could have no
benefit of it, but if it had attached him, he might; ut videtur.

In this Case, if the warranty were to the Bastard and his Heirs only, it
determined, he dying without Issue, and then there could be no Rebutter or
Voucher by the Lord by Escheat, if the warranty had attached the Heir; but if
it were to him, his Heirs and Assigns, then the Lord, whose title is by the Act
and Disposition of the Law, and not as Assignee in the per had, notwithstanding
the benefit of this warranty; quod nota.

These Cases are mentioned in Lincoln College Case, and in Spirt and Bences
Case in Cr. 1. and in both places admitted for Law.

Nor seems this very unreasonable; That the warranty being an incident to the
Estate warranted, should accompany it where the Law disposed the Estate and
Land warranted to all intents.

2. In many Cases the Law disposing the Estate, if the warranty attended it
not, the disposition made by the Law were in vain, for without the warranty the
Estate may be necessarily avoided.

Such persons who come to the Estate, dispositione Legis, are not properly in,
in the post, but they modally have the Estate by consent, both of the Warranter
and Garrantee, because they have it by the Act of Law, Statute or Common, to
whose dispose every man is as much consenting, and more solemnly than he is to
his own private Deed.

And after this way, if the two last Cases be Law, the Cestuy que use having
his Estate by operation and appointment of the Statute of Uses of 27 H. 8. may
have the benefit of the warranty attending the Estate, though he be no formal
Assignee or Heir to the Feoffees to use.

Many other Estates are of this kind; as Tenant in Dower, if endowed of all the
Land warranted. An Occupant, Tenants by the Statute of 6 R. 2. c. 6. where the
Feme consents to the Ravisher. Tenant by 4 and 5 P. M. because the ward
consented to her taking away without the Guardians consent. Lands warranted,
which after become forfeited to the King, or other Lords, etc.

Quaere in the Cases of 22 Ass. p. 37. and 29 Ass. p. 34. Whether,
notwithstanding the warranty had descended upon the Heir, while the Lands were
in the possession of the Villain in the first Case, and of the Bastard in the
second Case, before any entry made by either Lord, the Lands could have
rebutted or vouched by reason of those warranties, being in truth strangers to
the warranty, and not able to derive it to themselves any way.

But if after the warranty descended upon the Villain or Bastard, the Villain
or Bastard had been impleaded by the Heir, and had pleaded the warranty against
the Heir, and had Judgment thereupon by way of Rebutter, then the Lords might
have pleaded this Judgment as conclusive, and making the Villains Title, or
Bastard, good against the Heir, and the Heir should never have recovered
against the Lords. And this seems the meaning of the Book 22 Ass. p. 37. if
well considered. Though in Spirt and Bences Case no such difference is observed.

Caetera desiderantur.

The Court was in this Case divided, viz. The Chief Justice and Justice Archer
for the Demandant, and Justice Wild and Justice Atkins for the Tenant.

CONCERNING PROCESS Out of the COURTS at WESTMINSTER INTO WALES Of late times,
and how anciently. Memorandum, These Notes following were all wrote with the
proper hand of the Chief Justice Sir John Vaughan, and intended to be
methodised by him, in order to be delivered in Court.

A Man taken upon a Latitat in England, 10 Jac. Bolstrode part 2. f. 54, 55.
Hall and Rotherams Case.
puts in two Welsh men for his Bayl, Judgment passing against him, it was a
Question, Whether after a Capias ad Satisfaciendum issued against the
Principal, who was not to be found, Process might issue into Wales, which must
be by Scire Facias, first against the Bayl; whereupon Mann the Secondary of the
Kings Bench informed the Court that it had been so done in like Cases many
times.

But the Court was likewise informed, that Brownloe, Chief Pronotary of the
Common Pleas, affirmed they did not then use to send such Process into Wales,
but only Process of Outlawry.

But Mann affirming that their Course was otherwise in the Kings Bench, the
Court awarded Process into Wales against the Bayl, and said, If the parties
were grieved, they might bring their Writ of Error.

1. This Award of the Kings Bench has no other Foundation to justify it, than
Mann's the Secondaries Information, That the like had been often done, which
was his own doing possibly, and never fell under the Consideration of the Court.

2. The Court weighed it no more than to say, The parties grieved might have a
Writ of Error, which by the way must be into the Parliament, for it concerned
the Jurisdiction of the Court, which the Act of 27 Eliz. for Errors in the
Exchequer Chamber excepts; and upon that ground any injustice might be done,
because the party wronged may have a Writ of Error.

3. Brownloe the Chief Pronotary of the Common Pleas, and a most knowing man,
affirmed no such Process issued thence into Wales, and but only Process of
Outlawry.

So as this awarding of Process into Wales, upon the usage of that Court,
affirmed by Mann, is counter'd by the contrary usage of the Common Pleas,
affirmed by Brownloe: Therefore that Book and Authority is of no moment to
justify the issuing of a Scire facias into Wales.

11 Jac. Bolstrode part 2. f. 156, 157. Bedo v. Piper.
The next Case in time is 11 Jac. in Debt upon a Bond; the Action was laid in
the County of Hereford, upon Nil debet pleaded, the Plaintiff had Judgment and
Execution, and a Writ to the Sheriff of the County of Radnor, to levy
Execution, who did not, but made his Retorn, That breve Domini Regis non currit
there.

Qu. How an Action of Debt could be laid in Hereford, which must be by
Original, unless the party were in Custodia Mariscal. and declared upon a Bond
in the County of Hereford.
Coke, the Chief Justice, said, before the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 26. which
annexed Wales and England, doubt might have been in that Case; but since the
Statute 27 H. 8. it was clear, and grounded himself upon a Case in 13 E. 3. of
which more anon: In this Case the Court did agree, That the Writ of Execution
did well go into Wales, and amerced the Sheriff 10 l. for his had Retorn.

In this Case Dodridge agreed with Coke, and said, If the Law should be
otherwise, all the Executions in England would be defeated.

This was a Resolution upon some Debate among the Judges of the Court, but upon
no Argument at Bar for any thing appearing.

Per Doderidge, If Debt be brought against one in London, 16 Jac. B.R. Croke
484.
and after the Defendant removes, and inhabits in Wales, a Capias ad
satisfaciendum may be awarded against him into Wales, or into any County
Palatine, and this was his Opinion exactly in the former Case.

But as the course of the Common Pleas was alleged to be contrary to what Mann
said was used in the King Bench, in the Case of Hall and Rotheram, 10 Jac.
before cited so.

It was in the same year 11 Jac. wherein the Kings Bench resolved, That
Execution did well issue to the Sheriff of the County of Radnor of a Recovery
in Debt in the Kings Bench, and fined the Sheriff for his Retorn, that breve
Domini Regis non currit in Wallia.

Resolved otherwise in the Common Pleas, 11 Jac. Godbolt f. 214.
and that by the whole Court, That a Fieri facias, Capias ad Satisfaciendum, or
other Judicial Process did not run into Wales, but that a Capias utlagatum did
go into Wales; and as Brownloe, Pronotary, then said, that an Extent has gone
into Wales.

And it is undoubtedly true, as to the Capias utlagatum and Extent, but as to
all other Judicial Process into Wales, upon Judgments obtained here between
party and party, hitherto there is nothing to turn the Scale: The Judgment of
the Court of Common Pleas being directly contrary to that of the Kings Bench in
the same age and time.

Upon occasion of a Procedendo moved for to the Council of the Marches, who had
made a Decree, Bendloes Rep. 2 Car. 1. Term. Mich. f. 192. Beatons Case.
That some persons living in the English Counties, where they at least
exercised Jurisdiction, should pay moneys recovered against him at a great
Sessions in Wales, he having neither Lands or Goods, nor inhabiting in Wales,
having obtained a Prohibition to the Council of the Marches, the Court of the
Kings Bench was against the Procedendo. No time is mentioned when this
Resolution, cited by Jones, was, so as i^ probably preceded the Resolutions of
the Judges in Crook.
And Justice Jones cited a Case where Judgment was given in the great Sessions
of Cardigan, against a Citizen of London, who then inhabited there, and after
removed his Goods and Person thence, that upon great deliberation it was
resolved, A Certiorari should issue out of the Chancery to remove the Record
out of Wales, and that then it should be sent by Mittimus into the Kings Bench,
and so Execution should be awarded in England of the Judgment had in Wales. If
this were so, for which there is no other Authority but that Justice Jones
cited such a Case, not mentioning the time, I agree it would seem strange, that
a Judgment obtained in Wales should by Law be executed in England, and that a
Judgment obtained in England, could not be executed in Wales.

Cr. 2 Car. 1. f. 346.
But in the same year, in Easter Term before, at an Assembly of all the Justices
and Barons, it was resolved, where Judgment was given in Debt at the great
Sessions in Wales against a Defendant inhabiting there, and the Defendant dying
intestate, one who inhabited in London taking Administration, This Case is in
the point for a Scire facias to have Lands in Wales must be against the Heir
inhabiting in England, but having Lands in Wales.
that Execution could not be in Wales, because the Administrator inhabited not
there, nor a Certiorari granted out of the Chancery to remove the Record, that
so by Mittimus it might be sent to the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, to take
forth a Scire facias upon it, to have Lands out of Wales, or Goods in the
Administrators hands liable to it there.

This was the Resolution of all the Justices and Barons for these Reasons:
First, by this way all Judgments given in London, or other inferior
Jurisdictions, would be removed, and executed at large, which would be of great
inconvenience to make Lands or Goods liable to Execution, in other manner than
they were at the time of the Judgment given, which was but within the
Jurisdiction.

Secondly, It would extend the Execution of Judgments given in private and
limited Jurisdictions, as amply as of Judgment given at the Kings Courts at
Westminster.

By this Resolution a Judgment given in Wales shall not be executed in England,
out of their Jurisdiction of Wales, and a pari, a Judgment given in England,
ought not to be executed in Wales, which is out of the Jurisdiction of the
English Courts, more than a Judgment given in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas,
ought to be executed in Ireland, or the Islands which are out of their
Jurisdiction, equally and upon the same grounds, for any thing deducible from
these Cases, which was never pretended that it could be done.

And by that Case of Coke, Lands, Persons, or Goods ought not to be liable to
Judgments in other manner than they were at the time of the Judgment given,
which was where the Court had Jurisdiction which gave the Judgment.

Nor is it material to say, the Judgments then given are of no effect, no more
than to say Judgments given in the Kings Courts, are of no effect against an
Irishman, Dutchman, or Scotch-man, that has no Lands or Goods in England
liable to Execution by that Judgment.

For the Plaintiff commencing his Suit, ought to be conuzant what benefit he
might have from it.

Nor are Presidents of Fact, which pass sub silentio in the Court of Kings
Bench or Common Pleas, in such Cases to be regarded.

For Processes issue out of the Offices regularly to the Sheriffs of the
County, whereupon the Testator, the Person, Goods, or Lands, are said to be
without distinction of places within or without the Jurisdiction of the Court,
if the name of the County be familiar to them, as those of Wales are, but not
those of Ireland.

We must then look higher, and search for surer Premises than those late
Awards of the Courts at Westminster, to determine this Question.

And first it must be agreed, That when Wales was a Kingdom, or Territory
governed by its own Laws, and the people subject to a Prince peculiar to
themselves immediately, and not to the Crown of England, no Process, of any
nature, could issue thither from the Courts of England, more than to any other
Foreign Dominion that is not of the Dominion of England.

In which Assertion I neither do, nor need affirm any thing, Whether Wales were
held from the Crown of England by Feodal Right, or not? and what sort of
Liegeance the Princes of Wales, and from what time, did owe to the King of
England? For whatever that was, yet Wales was governed by its own Laws, and not
bound by any Law made in England to bind them more than Scotland was, when yet
the King of Scotland did homage to the King of England for that very Kingdom of
Scotland.

I begin then with the time that Wales came to be of the Dominion of the Crown
of England, and was obliged to such Laws as the Parliament of England would
enact purposely to bind it.

This was not before the entire submission of Wales (de alto and basso) as the
words of the Statute of Rutland are to King E. 1. which a little in time
preceded the making of those Laws for Wales, called the Statute of Rutland.

Whether it was really a Statute by Parliament, or concession of the King by
his Charter, for the future Government of Wales is not material (for so at
least it appears to be).

But by what transaction soever, either of voluntary submission, or partly by
force of Arms it was effected, it is evident, that from that time Wales became
absolutely of the Dominion of the Kingdom of England, and not only of the
Empire of the King of England, as it might possibly have been, for now Scotland
is.

The words of the Statute of Rutland are, Divina Providentia quae in sui
dispositione non fallitur, inter alia suae dispensationis munera quibus Nos,
and Regnum Nostrum Angliae decorari dignata est, terram Walliae cum incolis
suis prius nobis jure feodali subjectam, jam sui gratia in proprietatis nostrae
Domin. obstaculis quibuscunque cessantibus, totaliter and cum integritate
convertir, and coronae regni praed. tanquam partem corporis ejusdem annexit and
univit.

So as from this time it being of the Dominions of the English, the Parliaments
of England might make Courts to bind it; but it was not immediately necessary
it should, but its former Laws (excepting in point of Sovereignty) might still
obtain, or such other as E. 1. should constitute, to whom they had submitted;
and accordingly their Laws, after their Submission, were partly their Old Laws,
and partly New, ordained by him.

Preamble Stat. Walliae.
Leges and Consuetudines partium illarum hactenus usitatas coram nobis and
proceribus Regni nostri fecimus recitari; quibus diligenter auditis and before
intellectis, quasdam illarum de consilio procerum praedictorum delevimus,
quasdam permisimus, and quasdam correximus, and etiam quasdam alias adjiciendas
and faciendas decrevimus, and eas de caetero in terris Nostris, in partibus
illis perpetua firmitate teneri, and Observari volumus in forma subscripta.

Then follow the Ordinances appointing Writs Original and Judicial, in many
things varying from those of England, and a particular manner of proceeding,
and a particular Justiciar to administer Justice, and particular Chancery, out
of which the Writs for those parts were to issue.

So as though Wales became of the Dominion of England from that time, yet the
Courts of England had nothing to do with Administration of Justice there, in
other manners than now they have with the Western Islands, Barbados, St.
Christophers, Mevis, New England, which are of the Dominions of England, and so
is Ireland, the Isles of Garnsey and Jersey at present, all which may be bound
by Laws, made respectively for them by an English Parliament: but all, or most
of them, at present by Laws appointed and made by the King's Letters Patents,
and the King's Writs Original or Judicial from the Courts of Westminster go not
there; so anciently were Gascoign, Guyen, and Calais of the Dominions of
England, but governed by the Customs and Laws used there, and out of the
Jurisdiction of the Kings Courts.

And it is observable, That these Territories of France were not held by the
Crown of England by that right it had to all France (as is much mistaken) and
particularly by Sir Edward Coke in Calvin's Case: For those Territories, by an
Act and Conclusion of Peace made by E. 3. with the French, which was ratified
by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, those Territories were then annexed
thereby to the Dominion of the Crown of England; whereof I had a fair and
ancient Copy from Mr. Seldom, but lost it by the fire.

And that Gascoign, Guyen, 2 R. 3. f. 12.
and Calais were of the Dominions of England and Ireland, appears by the Book 2
R. 3. f. 12.

But to all Dominions of Acquisition to the Crown of England, some Writs out of
the King's Chancery have constantly run.

Sir Edward Coke, in Calvin's Case, Calvin's Case 7. Rep. f. 20.
calls them Brevia mandatoria, and non remedialia, distinguishing Writs into
Brevia mandatoria and remedialia, and Brevia mandatoria non remedialia: The
first sort, he says, never issue into Dominions belonging to England, but not
parts of it; the other do.

More intelligibly it may be said, That Writs in order to the particular Rights
and Properties of the Subject (which he calls Brevia mandatoria remedialia) for
this Writ is a Mandate, issue not to Dominions that are no part of England, but
belonging to it: For surely, as they have their particular Laws, so
consequently they must have their particular Mandates or Writs in order to them.

And though their Laws should by accident be the same with those of England, as
has happened to Ireland some times, and now to Wales, yet the Administration
of them is not necessarily by and under the Jurisdiction of the Courts of
England.

Brevia mandatoria, and non remedialia, are Writs that concern not the
particular Rights or Properties of the Subjects, but the Government and
Superintendency of the King, Ne quid Respublica capiat detrimenti, such are
Writs for safe Conduct, and protection, Writs for Apprehension of persons in
his Dominions of England, and withdrawing to avoid the Law into other of his
Dominions, as he instances in such Writs to the Dominions of Gascoign, viz. to
the Major of Bourdeaux, there to certify concerning a person Outlawed in
England, if he were in Servitio Regis there; of like nature are the Writs of Ne
Exeat Regnum, de Leproso amovendo, de Apostata Capiendo, ad quod damnum, and
Writs to call persons thence (as has been done before they had Burgesses to
the Parliament of England).

And Writs of Error into all Dominions belonging to England, lie upon the
ultimate Judgments there given into the Kings Courts of England, to reverse
Judgments, or affirm, which is the only Writ which concerns Right and Property
between the Subjects that lies.

The Reasons are, First for that without such Writ, the Law appointed or
permitted to such inferior Dominion, might be insensibly changed within it
self, without the assent of the Dominion Superior.

Secondly, Judgments might be then given to the disadvantage or lessening of
the Superiority, which cannot be reasonable; or to make the Superiority to be
only of the King, not of the Crown of England (as King James once would have it
in the Case of Ireland, ex relatione J. Seldom mihi, whom King James consulted
in this Question).

The practice has always been accordingly, as is familiarly known by reversal
or affirmance of Judgments given in the Kings Bench in Ireland, in the Kings
Bench here, which is enough alone to prove the Law to be so to other
subordinate Dominions.

21 H. 7. f. 3.
And it is as clear, That Writs of Error did lie in the Kings Bench to reverse
Judgments in Calais (and the reason is alike) per Curiam, for which were diverse
Presidents.

This being the state of Wales, when it first became an Accession to the
Dominion of England under E. 1. and when it was far from the Jurisdiction of
the Courts of Justice in England, as before it was added to the Dominion of the
Crown of England. And as other Dominions added to it were 7 H. 4. f. 14. it was
questioned only, Whether a Protection, quia moratur in obsequio nostro in
Wallia, were good? because, says the Book, it is within the Realm of England:
it may be as in the Case of Bastardy, the Husband being infra quatuor maria,
which doubtless was the Isle of Britain, so the Primacy of Bishops in Scotland
and Wales was that of England, Qu. about this, but that gives no Jurisdiction
to the Courts.

There were two ways by which alteration might be wrought: The first by Act of
Parliament in England, making Laws to change either the Laws or Jurisdictions
of Wales, or both.

The second, by Alterations made in the Laws formerly by him established by E.
1. himself, and perhaps by his Successors, Kings of England, without
Parliament, by a Clause contained in the Close of that Statute or Ordinance,
called Statutum Walliae, in these words:

Et ideo vobis Mandamus quod premissa de caetero in omnibus observetis, ita
tantum quod quotiescunque, and quandocunque, and ubicunque nobis placuerit
possimus predicta Statuta, and eorum parts singulas declarare, interpretari,
addere sive diminuere pro nostrae libito voluntatis, prout securitati nostrae
and terrae nostrae predictae viderimus expediri. This seems to extend but to
the person of E. 1. and not to his Successors; and however, no such change was
made by Him or his Successors.

But the first remarkable Alteration made, seems to have been by Act of
Parliament, and probably in the time of E. 1. who reigned long after the
Statute of Wales, but the Act it self is no where extant, that I could learn.
But great Evidence that such there was, which in some measure gave a
Jurisdiction to the Kings Courts of England in Wales, not generally, but over
the Lordships Marchers there.

This appears clearly by a Case, Fitz. Ass. 18 E. 2. pl. 382.
not much noted nor cited by any that I know, to this purpose, being out of the
printed Year-Books, but printed by Fitz-herbert out of the Reports he had of E.
2. as he had of E. 1. and H. 3. all which we want wholly, though some Copies
are extant of E. 2. which Case is the only light that I know to clear the
Question in hand.

An Assise of Novel Disseisin was brought against C. de libero tenemento in
Gowre, and the Writ was directed to the Sheriff of Gloucester, and the Plaint
was made of two Commots, which is mis-printed Commons, and comprehends all
Gouers-land, now part of the County of Glamorgan, by 27 H. 8. but was not so
then, the Assise past against the Tenant, before the Justice assigned to take
Assizes in the Marches of Wales.

The Tenant brought his Writ of Error and Assigns for Error.

1. That the Writ was directed to the Sheriff of Gloucester, and the Land put in
view was in Wales.

(2) That the Land was out of the Power and Bayliwick of the Sheriff of
Gloucester.

(3) That the Assise ought to be taken in the County where the Land lies, and
that Goures-land was in no County.

(4) That the Writ was de libero tenemento in villa, sive Hamletto de Gouerse,
and Gouer, was no Village or Hamlet, but an entire Country consisting of two
Commots.

To these Errors assigned Scroope, then Chief Justice, made Answer,

1. That Gower is a great Barony in the Marches of Wales, and That every Barony
of the Marches has a Chancellor, and its own Writs, whereby one Tenant wronged
by another may be righted: But when the Lord is outed of his entire Barony, he
can have no remedy by his own Writ, for he is outed of all his Jurisdiction.

And it is repugnant to demand Justice of him whose Jurisdiction is questioned,
that is, to give it, ut mihi videtur.

That therefore it was ordained by Parliament, when the Baron or Marcher is
outed of his Barony in the Marches of Wales, he ought to go to the King for
Remedy, and have a Writ in the Kings Chancery directed to the Sheriff of the
next English County, and the Sheriff of Gloucester served the Writ, as being the
next English Sheriff. This being the most material, the other Errors were also
answered, and the Judgment was affirmed.

From this Case we may learn, and from no other, as I believe, at least with so
much clearness, That the Summons of Inhabitants in Wales, and the trial of an
Issue there arising, should be by the Sheriff of, and in the next adjoining
English County, was first ordained by Parliament, though the Act be not extant
now; nor is it conceived how it should be otherwise, it being an empty Opinion
that it was by the Common Law, as is touched in several Books, who knew the
practice, but were strangers to the reasons of it.

For if the Law had been, that an Issue arising out of the Jurisdiction of the
Courts of England, should be tried in that County of England next to the place
where the Issue did arise: not only any Issue arising in any the Dominions of
England out of the Realm, might be tried in England by that rule, but any Issue
arising in any Foreign parts, as France, Holland, Scotland, or elsewhere, that
were not of the Dominions of England, might, pari ratione, be tried in the
County next adjoining, whereof there is no Vestigium for the one or the other,
nor sorts it any way with the rule of the Law.

2. This Ordinance of Parliament extended not to all Wales, but only to the
Lordships Marchers there, nor any way comprehended the ancient Shires of Wales,
or Body of the Principality to which the Ordinance of the Statute of Rutland
only extended: For Lordships Marchers were out of the Shires, as appears by
Statute 27 H. 8.

3. It appears by the Case, that Gower was not within any County at that time.

Another Case to the same purpose is in Fitz herbert, Fitz. Jurisdiction, 13 E.
3. pl. 23.
Title Jurisdiction, and not in any other Reports, 13 E. 3. in a Writ of
Cosenage, the Demand was of Castle of K. and Commot of J. the Defendant pleaded
the Castle and Commot were in Wales, where the King's Writ runs not; and it was
said that the word was not intelligible in the Courts of England, and Judgment
was prayed if the Court would take Conizance.

To give the Court Jurisdiction, it was urged pressingly,

1. That they had given the Court Jurisdiction, by alleging the Court knew not
what was meant by Commot, which the Court was to determine whether it did or
not: Therefore Jurisdiction was admitted therein.

2. Parning pressed they had demanded the view, which gave the Court
Jurisdiction.

3. For that the Original was directed to the Sheriff of Hereford, who by his
Retorn had testified the Summons, and the Tenant had appeared, and so affirmed
the Summons.

4. For that the view was had: Notwithstanding all which, to give the Court
Jurisdiction, it was said to Parning, He must say more before the Court would
have Jurisdiction. Which evidently proves that the Court had no Jurisdiction
generally of Land in Wales, as I observed from the former Case. And no act of
the party gives Jurisdiction to the Court, by elapsing his time to plead to the
Jurisdiction, if it appear by the Record the Court has no Jurisdiction, as in
this Case it did.

Then Woodstock said, Though the Castle and Commot were in Wales, the Court
ought not to be outed of Jurisdiction, for by Commot a great Signiory was
demanded, consisting of Lands, Rents, and Services, and that the Castle and
Commot were held in Capite of the King, as of his Crown, and said, those so
held were to be impleaded here, and not elsewhere, 7 H. 6. f. 36. b.
so is 7 H. 6. f. 36. b.

And said, the King by his Charter had granted the Castle and Commot to the
Tenant in tail, and thereupon prayed aid of the King, and it was granted
hereupon.

But before this was showed, and that it was a great Signiory, and held of the
King in Capite, by which it was no part of the Principality, nor held under it,
the Court would own no Jurisdiction; but when that appeared the Case was the
same with the former in 18 E. 2. and the Defendant had no remedy but in the
Kings Courts.

This Case was cited by Sir Edward Coke, in the Case before cited 11 Jacobi,
concerning the Sheriff of Radnor, but the difference not observed of its being
a Lordship in Wales, held immediately of the King in Capite, nor that the Court
owned no Jurisdictions generally concerning Lands in Wales by the Summons and
view of the next adjoining Sheriff.

William de Cosington and Elizabeth his Wife, brought a Writ of Dower, of the
third part of the Land in Gower, against the Earl of Warwick, as Tenant; and
the Writ was, Quod reddat ei rationabilem dotem de libero tenemento quod fuit
Jo. Moubray quondam viri sui in terra de Gowre in Wallia.

It appears not in the Case to what Sheriff the Writ was directed, though this
Case be in the Book at large, but it appears that those of the Chancery, and
the Judges of the Kings Bench had been consulted with concerning the Writ (in
bringing it for Dower in terra de Gower in Wallia) therefore it must issue from
the High Court of Chancery, and must be directed consequently to the Sheriff of
Gloucester, as the Assise was in 18 E. 2.

Br. abridging this Case, says, The Action was against the Earl of Warwick, as
being Lord of the entire Signiory of Gower, and then he was to be impleaded by
Writ out of the Chancery here equally, and upon the same reason for a third
part of the Signiory, as for the whole, according to the Case of 18 E. 2. first
cited; for the Lord could no more make a Precipe to summon himself to his own
Minister, or to make Execution against himself for a third part of the Royalty
than for the whole: And therefore the Ordinance of Parliament then mentioned,
equally extended to this Case as to that of 18 E. 2.

This is not strange that Acts of Parliament are lost sometimes; Note.
the Act of 3 E. 1. by which old Customs were granted, not extant, but clear
proofs of it remain.

These three last Cases therefore, wherein the Tenants were impleaded in the
Courts here for Land in Wales, and Summons and Execution made by the Sheriff of
the next adjoining County, are well warranted by an Act of Parliament not
extant, being for either the Lordships Marchers themselves, or some part of
them, and against the Lord himself, as that Case of 18 E. 2. expressly resolves.

All these were real Actions: The first an Assise of Novel Disseisin; the
second a Writ of Cosenage; the third a Writ of Dower.

The like Case is cited 19 H. 6. 19 H. 6. f. 12. A.
That when the Manor of Abergavenny was demanded, the Writ was directed to the
Sheriff of Hereford, as Newton urged, for this was a Lordship Marcher, and held
of the King in Capite, as appears by Moore's Reports in Cornwals Case, in that
the Barony of Abergavenny was held by the Lord Hastings of the King in Capite,
to defend it at his charge, ad utilitatem Domini Regis.

Exactly agreeing with this Doctrine is the Book of 21 H. 7. f. 33. b. if a
Signiory in Wales be to be tried, 21 H. 7. f. 33. B.
it shall be tried here by the Course of the Common Law; but if Lands be held
of a Signiory in Wales, it shall be tried within the Manor, and not elsewhere.

As for that expression, by the Course of the Common Law, 19 H. 6. f. 12. A.
it is also in the Book 19 H. 6. that Deeds and all other things alleged in
Wales, shall be tried in the adjoining Countries at the Common Law, otherwise
there would be a failer of Right: And of this opinion seemed most of the
Justices, arguendo obiter, the Case before them not concerning Wales, but the
County Palatine of Lancaster.

Of Churches in Wales a Quare Impedit shall be brought in England, yet the
Land, and other things in Wales, 30 H. 6. f. 6. B.
shall be determined before the Stewards of the Lords of Wales, if it be not of
Lands between the Lords themselves.

There is an ancient Book remarkable to the same purpose, 8 E. 3. Term. Mich.
59.
speaking of the Common Pleas, This Court has more Conuzance of Pleas of the
Welsh Shires, than it has of Pleas of the County of Chester; for the Pleas of
Quare Impedits, and of Lands and Tenements held of the King in chief in Wales,
shall be pleaded here, and they shall not be so of the County of Chester.

Fitz. Jurisdiction. p. 34. 6 H. 5.
Land in Wales immediately held of the King, is pleadable in England per
Haukford, 6 H. 5. no such Book at large.

The Law, and doubtless the Ordinance made by Parliament, mentioned in 18 E. 2.
concerning Lordships Marchers, was the same concerning Land held in chief of
the King, and are mentioned in the Books as synonimous, and were so for all
Lordships Marchers were held from the Crown in chief, nor could the King
probably have other Lands in chief in Wales, beside the Lordships Marchers, for
all was either of Lordships Marchers, or Lands belonging to the Principality,
and held from it, and not from the Crown in chief: To this purpose there is an
ancient Statute 28 E. 3. very convincing.

28 E. 3. c. 2.
All the Lords of the Marches of Wales shall be perpetually Attendants, and
annexed to the Crown of England, as they and their Ancestors have been at all
times before this, in whose hands soever the same principality be, or shall
come.

And they being no part of the Principality, and consequently not under the
Statute and Ordinance of Wales, 12 E. 1. It was provided by a Law, That they
should be impleaded in England, and the Summons and Trial to be by the Sheriff
of, and in the next adjoining County.

Accordingly you find the practice was by many ancient Cases remembered, but the
Year-Books of E. 2, being never printed, wherein only that Statute is mentioned
otherwise than in Fitz-herbert's Abridgment, and the Statute it self not
extant, gave occasion to men obiter in the time of H. 6. and H. 7. long after,
to say that such impleading for matters arising in Wales in the Courts of
England, and the Trials to be in the adjacent Counties, because they knew not
it came to pass by Act of Parliament, was by the Common Law, on which had they
reflected with seriousness, they had found it impossible.

For that Trials concerning Lands in Wales, quatenus particularly Wales, after
it became of the Dominion of England, should by the Common Law be differing
from other Trials in England, and in the adjacent Counties, could not possibly
be for Wales, was made of the Dominion of England, within time of memory, viz.
12 E. 1. and whatever Trial was at Common Law, must be beyond all memory:
Therefore no such Trial for Land in Wales particularly could be by the Common
Law.

It remains then, That if such were at Common Law, it must be for Lands in all
Dominions of the Acquisition of England consequently for Ireland, Garnsey, and
Jersey, Gascoign, Guyen, Calais, Tournay, as well as Wales, but it was never in
practice or pretense that any such Trials should be for any Land in these
places.

Therefore it is evident, That it was, and it could be no otherwise than by Act
of Parliament, that Wales differed from the other Dominions, belonging to
England, in these Trials.

Nor was it by any new Law made by E. 1. or any his Successors, by the Clause
in the end of the Statute of Rutland, which has nev^r been pretended: For by
that Clause power was given to change Laws simply for Wales, but this way of
Trials changes the Law of England, in order to Trials for Land in Wales, which
that Clause neither does, nor could warrant.

Besides this new way of Trials concerning Lordships Marchers held in chief
from the King, the Books are full, that in Quare Impedits for disturbance to
Churches in Wales, the Summons and Trial must be by the Sheriff of, and in the
adjacent Counties, which is often affirmed and agitated in the Books, but with
as much confusion, and as little clearness as the other concerning Land.

To this purpose is the Case before 8 E. 3. the Pleas of Quare Impedits, 8 E.
3. 59.
and of Land and Tenements held in chief of the King in Wales, shall be pleaded
there.

A Quare Impedit brought by the King against an Abbot, 15 E. 3. Fitz.
Jurisdiction, p. 24.
exception taken that the Church was in Wales, where the Kings Writ runs not,
and non allocatur, for the King was party by the Book, as a reason.

A Quare impedit cannot be brought in Wales, 11 H. 6. f. 3. A, B.
because a Writ to the Bishop cannot be awarded, for they will not obey it, and
so was the Opinion in that Case of Danby, Morton, and Newton, that Quare
Impedits for Churches in Wales must be brought only in the Kings Courts, and
the Opinion is there, that the Prince could not direct a Writ to the Bishops in
Wales, upon Quare Impedits there brought.

So is the Book of 30 H. 6. of Churches in Wales, 30 H. 6. f. 6. B.
a Quare Impedit shall be brought in England; the Case was cited before
concerning Trials of Lands in Wales.

A Quare Impedit was brought in the County of Hereford of a disturbance in
Wales to present to a Church, 35 H. 6. f. 30. A, B.
exception was taken by Littleton only to this, that the Plaintiff did not show
in his Count or Writ, that Hereford was the next adjoining County, but by the
Book it was well enough, for if Hereford were not the next adjoining County,
the Defendant might show it, but no exception was taken to the bringing of the
Writ into the County of Hereford, if it were the next County.

36 H 6. f. 33. A, B.
Quare Impedits shall be brought here of Churches in Wales, and shall be sued
in the Counties adjoining, for that the Justices, (read it) Bishops, will not
obey any man there.

If a Quare Impedit be brought here of a Church in Wales, it shall be tried in
the County adjoining: The reason there given is the same as in many other
Books, Car nous avomus power ad escrier al Evesque mes ils voylont, and parront
ceo disobeyer.

It is manifestly mis-printed, Car nous navomus power ad escrier al Evesque mes
ils voylont and parront ceo disobeyer, which is not sense.

By these Books, and many other, it is clear, Quare Impedits were formerly
brought in England for Churches in Wales, as real Writs were for Land, and the
Trial was in the next adjoining English County.

But as those Trials for Land were only for Lordships Marchers held of the King
in chief, or part of them, and that by special Act of Parliament, as has been
opened.

So the Quare Impedits brought in England, and Trials there had upon them, were
not for all Churches in Wales, but for Churches only within the Lordships
Marchers, whether of the Kings Patronage, or others; for there it is certain,
according to the reason given in the Books, that the Stewards of the Lordships
Marchers, to whomsoever they belonged, could not write to the Bishops. And
Newton was right, 19 H. 6. That if Action of Dower once brought in the Court of
any Signiory real (it should be Royal) in Wales, and there issue should be upon
usque accouple in loyal Matrimony, which must be tried by the Bishop, but the
Court had no power to write to the Bishop, but therefore says he, The King
shall write to the Marshal to remove the Record hither, and then we shall make
Process to the Bishop. But this is against the Resolution of all the Judges in
Cr. 2 Car. 1. f. 34.

So as either of Necessity this was a provision in the same Act, That as well
Quare Impedits should be brought in England of Churches in the Lordships
Marchers of Wales, as that Writs should be brought in England of Lordships
Marchers, or any part of them in question, because Justice could not be had in
Wales, either concerning such Lordships or Churches, or else Churches within
Lordships Marchers, being in the same Case for a failer of Justice they were
comprehended, and ought to be so within the equity of that Act of Parliament,
for Justice to be had touching the Lordships themselves, and that the Law was
such, appears

1. That only Quare Impedits for Churches in Lordships Marchers in Wales, and
not for Churches in the ancient Shires, or of the Principality of Wales,
whereof submission and render was made to E. 1. were to be brought and tried in
England.

2. That Trials and Writs in England for Land in Wales were only for Lordships
Marchers, and not for any Land in Wales, which was of the ancient Principality;
for the Lordships Marchers were, or most of them, of the Dominion of England,
and held of the King in chief, as appears by the Statute 28 E. 3. c. 2. and by
the Title of the Earl of March before the rendition of the Principality to E. 1.

That the Law was so for the Quare Impedits appears in the first place by the
Book before cited, 11 H. 6. f. 3. where Danby, Martin, and Newton were of
Opinion (argued about a Church in Garnsey, for the Case before them was not of
a Church in Wales) That Quare Impedits for Churches in Wales were to be brought
in England, which was true; but not for Churches which were not in any
Lordships Marchers. Strange affirms positively in the same Case, in these words,

It is frequent to have Quare Impedits in Wales, Per Strange 11 H. 6. f. 3.
and the Bishops there do serve the Writs directed to them, which I my self
have often seen. And what he said was most true for Churches within the
Principality, as what the other Judges said was also true concerning Churches
within the Lordships Marchers, for those Courts had no power to write to the
Bishops.

But this is most manifest by the Statute of Wales 12 E. 1. That the Kings
Justiciar there had power within the County where he was Justiciar to write to
the Bishops, which the Lords Marchers could not do.

The words of the Law are upon demand of Dower in Wales before the Kings
Justiciar: Stat. Walliae, f. 17.


Si forte objiciat, quare non debet dotem habere, eo quod nunquam fuit tali
quem ipsa vocat virum legitimo matrimonio copulata, tunc mandabitur Episcopo
quod super hoc inquirat veritatem, and inquisita veritate certificet
Justitiarios Walliae, and secundum certificationem Episcopi procedatur ad
judicium.

It is clear also, 10 H. 4. f. 6.
That the Bishops of Wales were originally of the Foundation of the Princes of
Wales, as is the Book of 10 H. 4. and their Courts did write to their own
Bishops, as the Courts in England did to the Kings Bishops.

And when the Dominion of Wales was lawfully vested in the King of England, his
Justices there must have the same power, as to the Bishops, that the Justices
of the Courts of the Prince of Wales had before. How the same stands in this
point, since the Statute of 27 of the Union of Wales with England, shall be
showed after.

Besides what has been already showed, That the Writs out of the Chancery in
England issued not into Wales for Trials of Land, other than the Land of
Lordships Marchers, and by a special Law that was provided, but neither for
other Lands nor for other Issues arising in Wales, Trials were not to be in the
English Counties.

11 H. 6. f. 3. A, B.
In 11 H. 6. Danby says, That if a Church in Wales, which is out of the
Jurisdiction of the Common Law, and a Franchise of the Prince, cannot award a
Writ to the Bishop, and for this cause it must be brought here: But other
Actions are not maintainable here of a thing done in Wales, which was true of a
thing done within the Principality, and of a Church within the Principality
also, a Quare Impedit was not to be brought in England.

19 H. 6. f. 12. A.
In 19 H. 6. Fortescue takes a difference between Wales, which was once a
Kingdom of it self, and the Counties Palatine, which were parcels of England,
and therefore says, The King may send a Record to be tried in the Counties
Palatine, because he might do so at Common Law, but could not into Wales,
because he could not at Common Law.

And then he says, That is the cause that the Statute wills, that of things
pleaded there (as of a Release bearing date there) it shall be tried in the
next adjoining County. What this Statute should be, he means, unless it be the
same mentioned in the Case 18 E. 2. is not intelligible; for the Statute of 9
E. 3. which speaks of Releases pleaded in Franchises within the Realm, That
they should be tried in the County where the Action was brought, he cannot
intend, for that Wales was no Franches nor Franchis of the Realm, and Trials
where the Action is brought is not a Trial in the next adjoining County to the
place where the Issue arises. And by Ascue expressly in that Case, that Statute
proves in it self it does not extend to a Deed bearing date in Wales, but all
such Deeds, and all other things alleged in Wales, shall be tried in the
County next adjoining by the Common Law, for so he adds, which could not be.

So as an Action brought upon a Bond or Deed made in Wales, Ireland, Normandy,
and Dutchland, or upon a matter there alleged, cannot possibly be for want of
Trial, but a Plea in Bar to an Action brought arising there; some question
has been, Whether such a Plea shall not be tried where the Action is brought?
and in such a Case, if the Plea in Bar arise wholly out of the Realm of
England, the better Opinion is that such Plea wants a Trial: See for this 32 H.
6 25. B. 8 Ass. pl. 27. d. Dowdales Case, Co. l. 6.

Thus bringing Actions in England, and trying them in Counties adjoining to
Wales, without knowing the true reason of it, also bringing Quare Impedits in
like manner for Churches in Wales, without distinguishing they were for Lands
of Lordships Marchers held of the King, and for Churches within such Lordships
Marchers, has occasioned that great diversity and contrariety of Opinions in
our Book; and at length that common Error, That matters in Wales, of what
nature soever, are impleadable in England, and to be tried in the next
adjoining County.

When no such Law was ever pretended to be concerning other the Kings Dominions
out of the Realm, belonging to the English Crown, of the same nature with
Wales, as Ireland, the Isles of Garnsey and Jersey, Calais, Gascoign, Guyen
anciently.

Nor could it be pretended of Scotland if it should become a Dominion of the
Crown of England, it being at present but of the King of England, though it was
otherwise when the King came to the Crown.

And to say that Dominions contiguous with the Realm of England, as Wales was,
and Scotland would be, is a thing so simple to make a difference, as it is not
worth the answering; for no such difference was assignable before Wales became
of the Dominions of England, and since, the Common Law cannot make the
difference, as is observed before.

It remains to examine what other Alterations have been by Act of Parliament,
whereby Jurisdiction has been given to the Courts of England in Wales, without
which it seems clear they could have none.

1. And first by Parliament 26 H. 8. power was given to the Kings President and
Council in the Marches of Wales in several Cases.

2. Power was given to indict, outlaw, and proceed against Traitors, Clippers
of Money, Murderers, and other Felons within the Lordships Marchers of Wales,
so indicted in the adjoining Counties by the same Statute, but not against such
Offenders within the Principality of Wales, which was not Lordships Marchers.

3. Some other Laws are of this nature about the same time, to punish the
perjury of Jurors in Wales, generally before the Council of the Marchers.

1 E 6. c. 10. and ^1 Eliz. c. 3.
That Proclamations upon Exigents should issue into Wales, was ordained by the
Statute of 1 E. 6. for by a Statute before in 6 H. 8. c. 4. such Proclamations
went but to the adjoining Counties, Rastall Exigent.
but the Capias utlagatum went always, as I take it, being a Mandatory Writ for
the King, but by 1 E. 6. c. 10. That if any persons dwelling in Wales shall,
after the time limited by the Act, be outlawed, that then Writs of special
Capias utlagatum, single Capias utlagatum, Non molestando, and all other
Process for or against any person outlawed, shall issue to the Sheriffs of
Wales, as immediate Officers of the King's Bench and Common Pleas.

Capias Utlag^tum.
So as the issuing of a Capias utlagatum into Wales, is clear by Parliament.

34 H. 8.
Persons having Lands in Wales, and bound in Statute Staples or Recognizances in
England, Process to be made against them out of the Chancery in England to the
Sheriffs of Wales, and for Recognizances acknowledged before either of the
Chief Justices by them, Process to be immediately pursued from the said
Justices.

34 H. 8. c. 26.
All Process for urgent Causes to be directed into Wales by command of the
Chancellor of England, or any of the King's Council, as has been used.

The next is the Alteration made by the Statute of 27 H. 8. which was very
great, and by which it is commonly taken, that Wales was to all purposes united
with England, and that since all Process may issue out of the Courts here to
Wales. It is said that the Dominion and Principality of Wales is, and always
has been, incorporated to the Realm of England, that is, ut per Stat. Walliae
12 E. 1. jure feodali, non proprietatis, and so it is expounded in Calvin's
Case.

Call. C. 7 Rep. f. 21. B.
But there it is said by 12 E. 1. which is there taken for an Act of Parliament,
Wales was united and incorporated unto England, and made parcel of England in
possession, and the Case of 7 H. 4. f. 14. there cited; but this is clearly
otherwise, for unless that Stat. Walliae were an Act of Parliament, it could
not make Wales part of England, which is much questioned; for no such
Parliament is found summoned, nor Law made in it, nor is it likely at that time
a Parliament of England should be summoned there, for Rutland is doubtless in
Wales, which had it been part of England then made, all Laws made, or to be
made in England, without naming Wales, had extended to it, which they did not
before 27 H. 8.

The Incorporation of Wales with England by that Act, consists in these
particulars generally.

1. That all persons in Wales should enjoy all Liberties, Privileges, and Laws
in England, as the natural born Subjects of England.

2. That all persons inheritable to Land, should inherit the same according to
the Laws of England, thereby inheriting in Gavel kind was abrogated.

3. That Laws and Statutes of England, and no other, should for ever be
practiced and executed in Wales, as they have been, and shall be in England.

And as by this Act hereafter shall be further ordained: By this Clause not
only all the present Laws of England were induced into Wales, but all future
Statutes of England to be made, were also for the future in like manner induced
into Wales, which was more than ever was done in Ireland; though Ireland
before, and by Parning's Act, had the present Laws then, and Statutes of
England introduced into Ireland, but not the future Laws and Statutes to be
made, as in this Case was for Wales.

But this gave no Jurisdiction in general to the Courts of England over Wales
more than before; nor otherwise than if a Law were made in England, That the
Laws and Statutes of England now, and for the future always to be made, should
be Laws in Ireland, the Courts in England would not thereby have other
Jurisdiction in Ireland than they already have in any respect.

The Uniting of Wales to England, and Incorporating, Note.
does not thereby make the Laws used in England to extend to Wales, without
more express words, Pl. Com. 129. B. 130. A.

By this Act it appears, That the Lordships Marchers in the Dominions of Wales,
did lie between the Shires of England and the Shires of Wales, and were not in
any Shire: most of which Lordships were then in the King's possession, and some
in the possession of other Lords: And that diverse of them are by the Act united
and joined to the County of Gloucester, others to the County of Hereford, and
others to the County of Salop; others respectively to the Shires of Glamorgan,
Carmarthen, Pembrook, and Merioneth.

The residue of the said Lordships Marchers were thereby framed and divided
into five particular Counties, erected and created by the Act, namely, the
County of 1 Monmouth, 2 of Breenock, 3 of Montgomery, 4 of Radnor, 5 of Denbigh.

The respective Lordships Marchers annexed to the respective English Counties
of Salop, Hereford, and Gloucester, are now to all intents under the
Jurisdiction of the Courts at Westminster, in like manner as the Counties to
which they were annexed formerly were, and yet are.

So is one of the new erected Counties framed out of the said Lordships
Marchers, namely, the County of Monmouth, which by the said Act is to all
purposes under the Jurisdiction of the Kings Courts at Westminster, as any
English Country is.

All the Lordships Marchers annexed to the ancient Shires of Wales, are now,
since the Statute, under the same Jurisdiction for Administration of Justice,
as those ancient Shires were before the Statute of the 27. and yet are, so as
the Lordships Marchers annexed to those ancient Shires of Wales, are now such
parts of them as the Lordships Marchers annexed to the English Shires are parts
of them.

And the four new Shires in Wales, excluding Monmouth shire, are by the said
Act under the same Administration of Justice, by the King's Justices, to that
purpose there Commissioned, as the other ancient Shires of Wales formerly were,
and are, and consequently wholly out of the Jurisdiction of the King's Courts
at Westminster.

And the reason appears in the Statute, forasmuch as the Counties or Shires of
Brecnock, Radnor, Montgomery, and Denbigh be far distant from the City of
London, and the Inhabitants of the said Shires not of substance to travel out
of their Counties to have the Administration of Justice.

It is therefore enacted, that there shall be respective Chanceries and
Exchequers in these Counties, and that the Sheriffs of those Counties shall
make their Accounts before the Chamberlain and Barons there appointed.

And that Justice shall be used and ministered in the said new Shires, according
to the Laws and Statutes of England, by such Justiciar or Justicers as shall be
thereto appointed by the King, and after such form and fashion as Justice is
used and ministered to the King's Subjects within the three Shires of
North Wales, which is according to the ancient Administration of Justice by the
Statute of Wales 12 E. 1.

So as since this Statute the Courts of Westminster have less Jurisdiction in
Wales than before; for before they had some in all their Lordships Marchers,
which were in no County, as by this Act, and since, they being all reduced into
Counties, either of England or Wales, their Jurisdiction is absolute over such
of them, as are annexed to English Counties, but none over the rest.

And accordingly it has been still practiced since the Statute, for before,
Lordships Marchers and Quare Impedits of Churches within them were impleadable
in the Kings Courts by Originals out of the Chancery, directed to the adjoining
Sheriffs, and the Issue tried in the Counties adjoining.

But since no such Original has issued for real Actions, nor any such Trial
been.

And what has been in personal Actions of that kind, began upon mistake,
because they found some Originals issued into some part of Wales, and knew not
the true reason of it, that it was by Act of Parliament, they then concluded
Originals might issue for any cause arising into any part of Wales, and the
Trials to be in the adjacent Counties of England generally.

And though that practice has been deserted since the Statute of 27 H. 8. as
to real Actions, because the subject matter of the Lordships Marchers was taken
away, which in some sense was lawful (as is opened) before the Statute, yet
they have retained it still in personal Actions, which was never lawful, nor
found in any Case anciently practiced, as real Actions were, as appears in the
Case of Stradling and Morgan in the Commentaries; yet that was upon a quo minus
out of the Exchequer, which I do not see how it can change the Law.

If Judgments be obtained in the King's Courts against persons Wales, and that
Process of Execution cannot be awarded thither, the Judgments will be
ineffectual.

The same may be said of Judgments obtained against a Frenchman, or Dutchman,
whose usual Residence, Lands, and Goods are in those Territories; he that sues
ought to foresee what benefit he shall have by it, and must not expect it, but
where the Courts have Jurisdiction.

Judgments obtained here against Irish-men, Garnsey or Jersey Inhabitants, or
formerly against those of Calais, Gascoign, Guyen, which were equally, and some
are still, of the Dominions of England, as Wales is subject to the Parliament
of England, but not under the Jurisdiction of the Courts at Westminster, though
subject to Mandatory Writs of the King.

Judgments obtained in the King's Courts, Execution is had in Franchises, and
also in Counties Palatine, where the King's Writ runs not, and by the same
reason ought to be had in Wales, though the King's Writ runs not there.

Franchises inferior are derived out of Counties by the King's Grant, where
the King's Writ did run, and so were Counties Palatine part of the Realm
anciently, where the Subjects of the Realm had right to have Execution of the
Lands and Goods of those against whom they recovered in the King's Courts,
whereof they are no more to be deprived than of their Actions by the King's
Grant, for he may make what Counties he pleases Counties Palatine; but in
Dominions out of the Realm, the Subject had no such Right, in the other they
have it, because they had it at Common Law, but in others not, because they had
it not at Common Law.

Jurisdiction in a Dominion or Territory belonging to England, the way to
determine it is by examining the Law in Dominions, the same in Specie with that
concerning which the Question is, and not to examine the Law in Franchises or
Dominions of another kind: Therefore to determine what Jurisdiction the King's
Courts have in Wales, ought to be by examining their Jurisdiction in Ireland,
the Islands of Garnsey, Jersey; Calais, Gascoign, Guyen, in former times, some
part of Scotland, and the Western Islands, and many others might be named which
are Dominions in Specie the same with Wales, and belonging to England, where
the King's Writ runs not; and not this power in Franchises within the Realm,
part of English Counties, before they were Franchises, and continuing so after,
or in entire Counties Palatine, which sometimes were under the Jurisdiction of
the King's Courts, and in which the Subjects had a right of their Trials upon
Pleas pleaded, and of Execution, and which cannot be taken from them where the
King's Writ runs not.

The Cases are full in this point in 19 H. 6. f. 12. and 32 H. 6. f. 25. and
many more Books.

Statute of 9 E. 3. Pleas of Releases or Deeds, dated in Franchises within the
Realm, shall be tried where the Action is brought.

Wales is no Franchise, or if it were, not within the Realm; for the questions
concerning a Deed pleaded, bearing date there, but of Original Process for
Causes arising, and Trials of them in the next County adjoining, and not in the
County, where the Action of a Deed dated in a Franchise of the Realm, which do
toto coelo differ, and concerning Executions and Judgments here to be made in
another Dominion.

The same may be said concerning the Statute of 12 E. 2. when Witnesses to
Deeds in Foreign Franchises are to be summoned with the Jury, and the Trial,
notwithstanding their absence, to proceed when the Writ is brought.

Presidents of Process issued to the Sheriffs of Wales, without a Judicial
decision upon Argument, are of no moment: Many things may be done several ways
(as Bonds) though they have regularly one common form, yet they may be in other
forms as well. Presidents are useful to decide questions, but in such Cases as
these which depend upon Fundamental Principles, from which Demonstrations may
be drawn, millions of Presidents are to no purpose: Besides, it is known, that
Officers grant such Process to one Sheriff or County, as they use to another,
nor is it in them to distinguish between the power of the Court over a Sheriff
in Wales from a Sheriff in England, especially when they find some Writs of
Execution going which are warranted by Acts of Parliament, which they know not,
though they do know Process of Execution in fact runs thither, as Capias
utlagatum, Extents upon Statute, which are by Acts of Parliament. And that
other Mandatory Writs issue thither as well at Common Law, as by a particular
Clause concerning the Chancellor in the Act of 34 H. 8. c. 26.

By the Register upon a Judgment had in the Common Pleas against a Clerk,
Regist. f. 43. B Brevium Judicialium.
who was after made Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, upon a Fieri Facias issued
to execute the Judgment to the Sheriff of Middlesex, and his Retorn that he had
no Lands or Goods in his Bayliwick, but was Archbishop in Ireland, upon a
Testatum of it in the Common Pleas, that he had Lands and Goods in Ireland, a
Fieri Facias issued in the King's name, Justiciario suo Hiberniae, to make
Execution; but it appears not whether this Writ issued from the Common Pleas,
or especially by the King's Direction out of the Chancery, which possibly may
be as a special Mandatory Writ of the Kings locum tenens there, which varies in
style at the Kings pleasure; anciently Justiciario suo Hiberniae, at other
times Locum tenenti nostro, at other times Deputat. or Capitaneo generali
nostro, which styles are not regularly known to the Officers of the Courts at
Westminster.

And perhaps by special Writs to the chief Officer and the King, Execution may
be made of Judgments given at Westminster in any of his Dominions, which would
be enquired of.

FINIS.
An Exact and Perfect TABLE TO THE REPORTS and ARGUMENTS OF Sir JOHN VAVGHAN,
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.
Abatement of Writs, See Writs. 1. WHere a Writ is brought against an Executor
in Debt upon a simple Contract, he may abate it, 94 2. Judges ought not Ex
officio to abate Writs, but it must come before them by Demurrer, 95
Act of the Party. 1. Every act a man is naturally enabled to do is in it self
equally good, as any other act he is so enabled to do, 333
Actions, and Actions upon the Case. 1. Actions upon the Case are more
inferior, and ignobler than Actions of Debt, 101 2. Actions of the Case are all
Actiones Injuriarum and contra Pacem, and it is not a Debt certain, but damages
for the breach of the promise that must be recovered in it, 101 3. Wheresoever
the Debt grew due, yet the Debtor is indebted to the Creditor in any place
where he is, as long as the Debt is unpaid, 92 4. The Plaintiff must recover by
his own strength, and not by the Defendants weakness, 8, 58 5. If you will
recover any thing against any man, it is not enough for you to destroy his
Title, but you must prove your own better than his, 60 6. In life, liberty, and
estate, every man who has not forfeited them, has a property and a right
which the Law allows him to defend, and if it be violated, it gives an Action
to redress the wrong, and punish the wrong-doer, 337 7. There are several penal
Laws by transgressing of which the Subject can have no particular damage, and
therefore no particular Action, 341 8. All Actions brought against Officers
within the Statute of the One and twentieth of K. James, must be laid in the
proper County, 115, 116, 117 9. Case and not Debt lies for a Solicitor for
Soliciting Fees, 99
Ad quod dampnum. 1. When the King can license without a Writ of Ad quod
dampnum, he may license if he will, whatever the Return of the Writ be, 341,
345 2. Where the Writ of Ad quod dampnum informs the King better then a Non
obstante, 356 3. Though there be a Return upon an Ad quod dampnum, that it is
not ad dampnum, yet there must be the Kings license afterward, 341
Administration and Administrator. 1. How they are to administer the Intestates
Estate, 96 2: An Administrator has a private office of trust, he cannot assign
nor leave it to his Executor, 182 3. An Administrator must take an Oath to make
a true account, 96 4. An Action will not lie against them upon a Tally, because
it is no good Specialty, 100 5. In an Action of Debt upon Bond or Contract
brought against him he may confess Judgment, if there is no fraud, although he
has notice of a former Suit depending, 95, 100 6. If an Administrator, durante
minore Aetate, brings an Action, he must averr the Administrator or Executor to
be under the Age of Seventeen years, 93 7. The manner of pleading Plene
administravit praeter and ultra, 154
Advowson, See Quare Impedit. 1. The rights of an Advowson, 7 2. Where the
Plaintiff and Defendant must allege Seisin in an Advowson by a former
Presentation, 8
Agent and Patient. 1. In a Quare Impedit both Plaintiff and Defendant are
Actors, and may have a Writ to the Bishop, 6, 7, 58
Age, See Infant. Alien. 1. The time of the birth is of the Essence of a
Subject born, for he cannot be a Subject unless at the time of his birth he was
under the Kings Liegeance, 286, 287 2. Regularly who once was an Alien to
England, cannot be inheritable there but by Act of Parliament, 274, 282 3. He
that is privileged by the Law of England to inherit, must be a Subject of the
Kings, 268, in loco 278, 286 4. He must be more than a local Subject, ibid. 286
5. He must be otherwise a Subject, than any Grant or Letters Patents can make
him, ibid. 6. The Natives of Jersey, Garnsey, Ireland, and the English
Plantations, etc. are not Aliens, 268 in loco 278, 279 7. Those which are born
in the Kings Foreign Plantations, are born his Natural Subjects, and shall
inherit in England, 279 8. A Natural Subject is correlative to a Natural
Prince, and a man cannot have two natural Sovereigns, no more than two Fathers
or two Mothers, 280, 273 in loco 283 9. The several ways by which men born out
of England may inherit in England, 281 10. An Antenatus in Scotland shall not
inherit without an Act of Parliament, because he is an Alien, 274 in loco 284,
287 11. Who are the Antenati and Postnati, and the difference between them, 273
in loco 283 12. An Act of Parliament in Ireland shall never Naturalize an Alien
to England to make him inheritable there, 274 in loco 284 13. No Tenure by
Homage, etc. in any of the Kings Dominions; acquired by Conquest, or by Grant,
or Letters Patents, can make a man inheritable in England, 279 14. No Laws made
in any Dominion acquired by Conquest, or new Plantation by the Kings Governor
or people there, by virtue of the Kings Letters Patents, can make an Alien
inheritable in England, 279 15. One Naturalized in Scotland since the Union,
cannot inherit in England, 268 in loco 278, 279, 280, 285 16. A man born a
Subject to one that is King of another Country, and who afterward comes to be
King of England, is an Alien, and shall not inherit in England, ibid. 285, 286
17. An act of Law making a man as if he had been born a Subject, shall not work
the same effect, as his being born a Subject, which is an effect of Law, 280
18. An Alien has issue a Son, and afterward is Denizen'd, and he afterward
has another Son, here the youngest Son shall inherit, 285
Allegiance. 1. All Allegiance and Subjection are acts and obligations of Law,
the subjection begins with the birth of the Subject, at which time the Kings
protection of him likewise begins, 279
Appendant. 1. Whatsoever is appendant to the Land goes to the Occupier thereof
naturally, 190 2. An Advowson may be appendant to a Manor, 12
Apprentice. 1. The Law permits not persons, who have served Seven years to
have a way of livelihood, to be hindered from the exercise of their Trades in
any Town or part of the Kingdom, 356
Archbishop, See Ordinary, Dispensation. 1. The Archbishop may dispense for a
Plurality, 20
Assets. 1. The manner of pleading Assets ultra, 104
Assignee and Assignment. 1. Offices or acts of personal Trust cannot be
assigned; for that Trust which any man may have, is not personal, 180, 181 2.
An Occupant becomes an Assignee in Law to the first Lessee, 204 3. If a man
Covenants against himself, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, yet if
his Assigns do a tortious act, it is no breach of the Covenant, because he may
have remedy by Action for the tort, 118 to 128
Assise. 1. An Assise will not lie for a Rent issuing out of Tithes barely, 204
Attaint, See Title Statutes, 3, 11. 1. An Attaint lies only in Civil, not
Criminal Causes, 145, 146 2. Jurors are not finable for a false Verdict, an
Attaint only lies against them, 145
Attorney. 1. An Attorney cannot bring Debt for Soliciting, but Case only, 99
2. The Defendant cannot wage his Law for Attorneys Fees, ibid.
Attornment. 1. By the Common Law an Attornment was requisite to entitle the
Lord, the Reversioner, the Grantee of a Remainder, or of a Rent by Deed or
Fine, to distrain for Rent in arrear, 39 2. By a Grant and Attornment the
Grantee becomes actually seized of the Rent, 40 3. Attornment and power to
distrain follows the possession, and not the use, 43 4. An Attornment cannot be
for a time, 27 5. An Attornment of the Tenant does not disclaim, but affirm his
possession: For it is the act of the Tenant by reason of his being in
possession, 193 6. A man's Estate in a Rentcharge may be enlarged, diminished,
or altered, and no new attornment or privity requisite to such alteration, 44
7. Attornment is requisite to the Grant of an Estate for life, but to a
Confirmation to enlarge an Estate it is not, 44, 45, 46 8. A Rentcharge is
granted to Commence Seven years after the death of the Grantor Remainder in
Fee, Attornment must be made in the life time of the Grantor, 46 9. If a Fine
is levied of the Reversion of Land, or of a Rent to uses, the Cestuy que use
may distrain without Attornment, 50, 51 10. Where a Rent, Reversion, or
Remainder is sold by Bargain and Sale, the Bargainee may distrain without
Attornment, 51 11. Where a man is seized of a Rentcharge and grants it over,
to which the Tenant attorns, and he afterward retakes that Estate, here must
be a new Attornment, for the former privity is wholly destroyed 44 12. Where an
Attornment shall be good to a contingent use, 52
Bargain and Sale, See Intollment. 1. WHere a Rent, Reversion, or Remainder is
sold by Bargain and Sale, the Bargainee may distrain for the Rent without
Attornment, 51
Baron and Feme. 1. The man after the marriage has the deduction of the woman
ad Domum and Thalamum, and all the civil power over her, and not she over him,
306 2. The Interdicts of carnal knowledge in the Levitical Law were directed to
the men, not to the women, who are interdicted but by a consequent, for the
woman being interdicted to the man, the man must also be interdicted to the
woman, for a man cannot marry a woman and she not marry him, 305
Bishop, See Ordinary, Archbishop. 1. What Bishops were originally, 22 2. A
Parson is chosen Bishop, his Benefices are all void, and the King shall
present, 19, 20 3. It is not at all inconsistent for a Bishop to be an
Incumbent, 22 4. A Bishop may be an Incumbent after Consecration, 24 5. How
many Benefices a Bishop may retain by a Dispensation, 25 6. No Canon
Ecclesiastical can be made and executed without the Kings Royal assent, 329 7.
Bishops in Wales were originally of the foundation of the Prince of Wales, 411
Canons Ecclesiastical, See Title Ecclesiastical Court. 1. WHat Canons are good
and binding, and what not, 327, 328
Capias ad Satisfaciendum, See Execution. Certiorari. 1. A Certior. lies out of
the Chancery to Ireland to certify an Act of Parliament, but it does not lie
to Scotland, 287 2. A Certiorari does not lie to Wales to certify a Record to
the Courts at Westminster, to the intent that Execution may issue out here upon
it, 398
Certificate. 1. There are many things whereof the Kings Courts sometimes ought
to be certified, which cannot be certified by Certiorari, 288
Chancery. 1. The Chancery may grant a Habeas Corpus, and discharge a Prisoner
thereupon as well as the Kings Bench, 157
Commendam. 1. Capere in Commendam is good where the Patron is not prejudiced,
25 2. Retinere in Commendam is good, where consented to by him that was to
present to the Avoidance, 25 3. Commendam Retinere may be for years, 24, 25 4.
How many Benefices a Bishop may retain, by a Dispensation, 25 5. Although the
King confirms it, yet the Incumbent derives no Estate from the King, but only
by the Patrons presentment, 26
Common, See Title Statute 1. 1. No Common of Pasture can be claimed by Custom
within the Manor, that may not be prescribed for out of the Manor, 254 2.
Inhabitants not Incorporated cannot prescribe in a Common, 254 3. How
Copyholders must prescribe for Common, ibid. 4. Where the Tenant may prescribe
to have sola and separalis Communia, and where not, 255, 256 5. One or more
Tenants may have solam and separalem Communiam from other Commoners, but not
from the Lord, 256 6. Where the Commoner claims habere solam and separalem
Pasturam, how and upon what Action, Whether the Lord shall be excluded or no?
the matter will come in question, 253 7. Where a Commoner prescribes for Common
for Cattle levant and couchant, Antiquo Messuagio, without any Land, the
prescription is naught, because Cattle cannot be levant and couchant to a
Common intent, upon a Message only, 252, 253 8. Where the Lord may approve
against the Commoners being an Exposition of the Statute of Merton, 256, 257
Common Pleas Court. 1. The Common Pleas or Exchequer may, upon the Return of a
Habeas Corpus, d scharge a Prisoner, if it appear the Imprisonment is against
Law, 157 2. If the Imprisonment is just, or doubtful and uncertain, the Common
Pleas cannot bayl him, but must remand him, 157 3. A Prohibition for
incroaching of Jurisdiction lies in the Common Pleas, 157
Condition. 1. The difference between a Condition and Limitation, 32 2. A
Devise to the Son and Heir, and if he did not pay all the Legacies, that then
it shall remain to the Legatees: In default of payment this shall vest in the
Legatees by Executory Devise, 271
Condition of an Obligation. 1. A Bond is entered into with Condition for quiet
Enjoyment, the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff entered, and might have
quietly enjoyed: the Plaintiff replied, That he was outed by J. S. the
Replication is void, because he did not say that J. S. had a good Title. 121,
122
Confirmation. 1. A Confirmation cannot be for a time, 27 2. Where it shall
enlarge an Estate, 44, 45 3. The Kings Confirmation of a Commendam transfers no
Right to the Incumbent, 26
Constable, See Title Officer. Construction of Law, See Title Law. 1. It is
both equitable and of public convenience, that the Law should assist men to
recover their dues, when detained from them, 38 2. It is an absurdity to say,
That a man has a Right to a thing, for which the Law gives him no remedy, 47,
138
Copyholder. 1. They cannot prescribe against the Lord to have solam and
separalem Pasturam, 254, 255 2. How the Copyholders must prescribe for Common,
254
Corporation. 1. The King may dispense with a Corporation for any thing which
in its nature may be dispensed with, 347, 348 2. The King may dispense with a
Corporation as to penal Laws, 349, 350 3. What Licenses made by the King to
Corporations are good, and several instances of them, 348, 349, 350 4. What
Licenses to a Corporation are not good, 351, 352
Costs, See Damages. 1. Upon a Nonsuit or Discontinuance upon an Action brought
against Officers, they shall have their double Costs by the Statute of the One
and twentieth of King James, 117
Covenant. 1. All Covenants between the Lessor and Lessee are Covenants in Law,
or express Covenants, 118 2. An express Covenant, restrains the general
Covenant in Law, 126 3. Where the Covenant is to enjoy against one or more
particular men, and where against all men, 127 4. By a Covenant in Law the
Lessee is to enjoy his Term against the lawful entry or interruption of any
man, but not against tortious Entries, because the Lessee has his proper
remedy against the wrongdoers, 118, 119 5. If a stranger, who has no right,
outs the Lessee, he shall not bring Covenant against the Lessor, because he
has remedy by Action against the stranger: But if he enter by elder Title,
then he shall have Covenant, because he has no other remedy, 119, 120 6.
Though the Covenant is that the Lessee shall enjoy against all persons, yet he
shall not have Covenant against the Lessor, unless he be legally outed, 119,
120, 121, 123 7. The Law shall never adjudge that a man covenants against the
wrongful acts of strangers, except the words are full and express, 121 8. When
the Covenant is to enjoy against all men, the Covenant is not expressly to enjoy
against tortious acts; neither will the Law so interpret it, 123, 125
Coverture, See Baron and Feme. County Palatine, See Title Franchise. Court or
Courts, See Common Pleas, Kings Bench. 1. The Court of Kings Bench cannot
pretend to the only discharging of prisoners upon Habeas Corpus (unless in case
of privilege) but the Chancery may do it without question, 157 2. Prohibitions
for incroaching Jurisdiction, may issue as well out of the Common Pleas as
Kings Bench, ibid. 209 3. The Judges of the Temporal Courts have full conizance
of what Marriages are within the Levitical Degrees, and what not, 207 4. They
have likewise conizance of what Marriages are incestuous, and what not; and may
prohibit the Ecclesiastical Courts from questioning such Marriages, 207 5. The
Secular Judges are most conizant of Acts of Parliament, 213 6. If a Court give
Judgment judicially, another Court is not bound to give the like Judgment,
unless it think that Judgment first given to be according to Law, 383 7. The
Court of the Sessions in London does not differ in its essence, nature, and
power from another Sessions in the Country; but all differ in their accidents,
which make no alteration in their actings in the eye of the Law, 140
Custom, See Prescription. 1. How things become strangely unnatural to man by
custom only, 224
Customs for Merchandise, See Title Statutes 2, 25. 1. The Customs called
Custumae Antiquae for Wool, Wooll-fells, and Leather, were granted by
Parliament to King Edward the First, in the third year of his Reign; and was no
Duty at the Common Law, 161, 162, 163 2. The several properties that Wines must
have which are liable to pay Tunnage and Poundage by the Act of 12 Car. 2. 165
3. No goods are to pay Custom but those which are brought in to Merchandise,
not such as come in by accident, as in case of wreck, 165, 166, 171, 172 4. By
the common Law all wrecks were the Kings, and therefore not liable to pay
Custom, because they were his own, 164
Damages, See Costs. 1. In an Action upon the Case the whole Debt is recovered
in Damages, 101
Debt. 1. Debts by simple contracts were the first Debts that ever were, and
are more noble than Actions on the Case, upon which only damages are
recoverable, 101 2. Actions in the debet and detinet are actions of property,
which is not in an action on the Case, ibid. 3. Actions upon Bond or Deed made
in Wales, Ireland, Normandy, etc. where to be tried, 413 4. Wheresoever the
Debt grew due, yet the Debtor is indebted to the Creditor in any place where he
is, as long as the Debt is unsatisfied, 92 5. It lies not for a Solicitor for
his soliciting Fees, but for an Attorney it well lies and there shall be no ley
Gager in it, 99
Declaration, See Pleading. 1. The Plaintiff must recover by his own strength,
and not by the Defendants weakness, 8, 58, 60 2. When the Plaintiff makes it
appear to the Court that the Defendants Title is not good, yet if the Plaintiff
do not make out a good Title for himself, he shall never have Judgment, 60 3.
The form of a Declaration in London according to their custom, 93 4. The King
may vary his Declaration, but it must be done the first Term, 65 5. In a Quare
Impedit the Plaintiff must in his Declaration allege a presentation in
himself, or those from whom he claims, 7, 57
Demand, See Request. 1. A Demand of Rent is not requisite upon a Limitation,
because Non-payment avoids it, 32 2. But where there is a condition, there must
be a demand before entry, ibid. 3. Where there are several Rents, the demands
must be several, 72 4. If more Rent is demanded than is payable, the demand is
void, ibid.
Devastavit, See Executors. Devise, Devisor, Devisee. 1. The Law does not in
Conveyances of Estates, admit Estates to pass by Implication regularly, but in
Devises they are allowed with due restrictions, 261, 262, etc. 2. If an Estate
given by Implication in a Will be to the disinheriting of the Heir at Law, it
is not good if such Implication be only constructive and possible, but not a
necessary Implication, 262, 263, 267, 268 3. The necessary Implication is, that
the Devisee must have the thing Devised, or none else can have it, 262, 263 4.
A. devises his Goods to his wife, and after her decease his Son and Heir shall
have the House where they are, this is a good Devise of the House to the wife
by Implication, because the Heir at Law is excluded by it, and then no person
can claim it but the wife by Implication of the Devise, 263, 264. 5. A. having
issue Thomas and Mary, devises to Thomas and his Heirs for ever; and for want
of Heirs of Thomas, to Mary and her Heirs. This is an Estate tail in Thomas,
269, 270 6. My will is, if it happen my Son George, Mary, and Katherine my
Daughters, to dye without issue of their bodies lawfully begotten, then all the
Freehold Lands I am now seized of, shall remain and be to my Nephew A. B. The
construction and meaning of these words and quid operatur by them, 260, 261,
262, 263, 264, etc. 7. If Land is devised to H. and his heirs as long as B.
has heirs of his body, the remainder over, such latter Devise will be good,
not as a Remainder, but as an Executory Devise, 270 8. My son shall have my
Land to him and his heirs, so long as any heirs of the body of A. shall be
living, and for want of such heirs, I devise it to B. here B. shall take by
future and Executory Devise, 270 9. A Devise to the son and heir in Fee, being
no other than what the Law gave him, is void, 271 10. A Devise that if the son
and heir pay not all the Legacies, then the Land shall go to the Legatories,
upon default of payment this shall vest in the Legatories by Executory Devise,
271 11. A. had issue W. T. and R. and devises to T. and his heirs for ever, and
if T. died without issue, living W. that then R. should have the Land, this is
a good Fee in T. and R had a good Estate in possibility by Executory Devise
upon the dying of T. without issue, 272 12. An Executory Devise cannot be upon
an Estate tail, 273 13. I bequeath my son Thomas to my Brother R, to be his
Tutor during his minority; here the Land follows the custody, and the Trust is
not assignable over to any person, 178, 179, etc. 14. A Devise of the Land,
during the minority of the Son, and for his maintenance and education, until he
come of age, is no devising of the Guardianship, 184
Descent. 1. Children inherit their Ancestors Estates without limit in the
right ascending Line, and are not inherited by them, 244 2. In the collateral
Lines of Uncle and Nephew, the Uncle as well inherits the Nephew, as the Nephew
the Uncle, 244 3. In the case of Aliens nothing interrupts the common course of
Discents but Defectus Nationis, 268
Disclaimer. 1. In a Quare Impedit upon the Bishops Disclaimer there is a
Judgment with a Cessat Executio quousque, etc.
Dismes, See Tithes. Disseisor. 1. A Disseisor Tenant in possession may Rebut
the Demandant without showing how he came to the possession which he then has,
but he must show how the warranty extended to him, 385, 386
Dispensation, See Title Statutes 14. 1. The Pope could formerly, and the
Archbishop now can dispense for a plurality, 20, 23 2. How many Benefices a
Bishop may retain by Dispensation, 25 3. A Dispensation for years, and good, 24
4. A Dispensation after the Consecration of a Bishop comes too late to prevent
the Voidance, 20 5. If a man has a Benefice with cure, and accepts another
without a Dispensation or Qualification, the first becomes void, and the Patron
may present, 131, 132 6. No Dispensation can be had for marrying within the
Levitical Degrees, 214, 216, 239 7. A Dispensation obtained does jus dare, and
makes the thing prohibited lawful, to be done by him who has it, 333, 336 8.
Freedom from punishment is a consequent of a Dispensation, but not its effect,
333 9. What penal Laws the King may dispense with, and what not, 334, 335, 336;
etc. 10. Where the Suit is only the Kings for the breach of a penal Law, and
which is not to the damage of a third person, the King may dispense, 334, 336,
339, 340 11. Where the Offense wrongs none but the King, he may dispense with
it, 344 12. Where the Suit is the Kings only for the benefit of a third person,
there he cannot dispense, 334, 336 339, 340 13. Offenses not to be dispensed
with, 342 14. A Dispensation to make lawful the taking from a man any thing
which he may lawfully defend from being taken, or lawfully punish it if it is
taken, must be void, 341 15. Dispensations void against Acts of Parliament for
maintaining Native Artificers, 344 16. Where the exercise of a Trade is
generally prohibited, the Kings license must be without any limitation to him
that has it, to exercise his Trade as before it was prohibited, otherwise it
is no license, 346 17. Where the King may dispense generally he is not bound to
it, but may limit his Dispensation, 346 18. Where the King can dispense with
particular persons, he is not confined to number or place, but may license as
many, and in such places, as he thinks fit, 347 19. A Corporation is capable of
a Dispensation, 347, 348 20. A Dispensation to a person to keep an Office
(which person is not capable of such Office) is void, 355 21. Where a license
Ex speciali gratia, is good to dispense with a penal Law without a Non
obstante, 356
Distress. 1. A privity is necessary by the common Law between the Distrainer
and Distrained, 39 2. Attornment and power to Distrain follows the possession,
and not the Use, 43 3. Where a Rent is well vested and there is an Attornment,
when ever the Rent is arrear, a Distress is lawful, unless the power is lost,
39 4. Where Rent is arrear, and afterward the Rent is granted over in Fee, and
an Attornment thereunto, here the Grantor has lost his arrears, and cannot
Distrain, 40 5. If a Fine is levied of the Reversion of Land or of Rent to
Uses, the Cestuy que use may Distrain without attornment, 50, 51
Dominion. 1. Dominions belonging to the Crown of England cannot be separated
from it, but by Act of Parliament made in England, 300 2. What are Dominions
belonging to the Realm of England, though not in the Territorial Dominions of
England, ibid. 3. By what Title the Crown of England held Gascoign, Guyen, and
Calais, 401
Dower. 1. The wife of a Conizee of a Fine shall not be thereof endowed,
because it is but a fictitious Seisin, 41 2. The wife is dowable of a Rent in
Fee, 40
Droit d'Advowson. 1. Where the Writ lies, and for whom, 11, 16 2. In a Droit
d'Advowson the King may allege Seisin without alleging any time, 56
Ecclesiastical Court, See Archbishop, Prohibition. THe Secular Judges are most
conuzant of Acts of Parliament, 213 2. The Temporal Judges have conuzance of
what marriages are within the Levitical Degrees, and what not, and what are
incestuous, 207 3. The Clergy of this Kingdom shall not enact or execute any
Canon, Constitution, or Ordinance Provincial, unless they have the Kings
license, 329
Elegit. 1. It lies upon a Recognizance taken in any of the Courts at
Westminster, or before any Judge out of Term, 102
Error, See Presidents, Judgment. 1. An erroneous Judgment is a good Judgment
to all intents whatsoever, until reversed, 94 2. If an inferior or superior
Court gives an erroneous Judgment, it is reversible by Writ of Error, 139 3.
Where the matter concerns the Jurisdiction of the Court, a Writ of Error lies
no where but in Parliament, 396 4. A Writ of Error lies to reverse a Judgment
in any Dominion belonging to England, 290, 402 5. A Writ of Error lay to
reverse a Judgment in Calais, 402 6. It lies to reverse a Judgment in Ireland
290, 291, 298, 402
Escheat. 1. Where the Heir at Law dies without heir, the Land escheats, and
the Lord's Title will precede any future Devise, 270
Esplees. 1. The profits of a Mine is no Esplees for the Land, but only the
Esplees for the Mine it self, 255 2. So likewise for a Wood, the profits of it
is no Esplees, but only for the Land only upon which the Wood grows, ibid.
Estates, See Grant. 1. The Law does not in Conveyances of Estates, admit
Estates to pass by Implication, as being a way of passing Estates not agreeable
to the plainness required by Law in the transferring of Estates, 261, 262 etc.
2. But in Devises they are admitted with due restrictions, 261, 262, 263, etc.
3. What Executory Devises and contingent Remainders are good, and what not,
272, 273 4. When a new Estate is granted, the privity to the old Estate is
destroyed, 43 5. The Estate may be changed, and yet the possession not changed,
but remain as formerly, 42 6. An Estate in a Rentcharge may may be enlarged,
diminished, or altered, and no new Attornment or privity requisite, 44, 45, 46
7. The Seisin of the Conizee of a Fine is but a mere fiction, and an invented
form of Conveyance only, 41 8. His wife shall not be endowed, neither shall his
heir inherit, 41
Estoppel or Conclusion. 1. A Demise by Indenture of a Term habendum from the
expiration of another term therein recited, when really there is no such term
in esse, is no Estoppel to the Lessor or Lessee, but the Lessee may presently
enter, and the Lessor grant the Reversion, 82
Evidence. 1. No evidence can be given to a Jury of what is Law, 143 2. A
witness may be admitted to prove the Contents of a Deed or Will, 77 3. The Jury
may go upon evidence from their own personal knowledge, 147
Execution, See Elegit. 1. Lands, Persons, or Goods, ought not to be liable to
Judgments in other manner than they were at the time of the Judgment given,
which was where the Court had Jurisdiction which gave the Judgment, 398 2. What
Execution shall be sued out upon a Recognizance acknowledged in any of the
Courts at Westminster, or before a Judge, 103 3. What Execution shall be sued
out upon a Statute, 102 4. Upon a Recovery in England an Execution does not lie
into Wales, 397, 398 5. Perhaps by special Writs to the chief Officer of the
King, Execution may be made of Judgments given at Westminster in any of his
Dominions, 420
Executor, See Title Statute 10, 20. 1. How they are to administer the
Testators estate, 96 2. An Executor may refuse, but cannot assign over his
Executorship, 182 3. It is no Devastavit in an Executor to satisfy a Judgment
obtained upon a simple Covenant, before a debt due by Obligation, 94, 95, 97 4.
Where an Action of Debt upon Bond or Judgment is brought against him, he may
confess the Action, if there be no fraud in the Case, although he has notice
of a former Suit, 95, 100 5. The Executor may plead an erroneous Judgment in
Bar, 94, 97 6. A Recognizance in Chancery must be paid before Debts upon
simple Contracts, and Debts by Bond, 103 7. It is a Devastavit in an Executor
to pay voluntarily a Debt by simple Contract before a Debt by Bond whereof he
had notice (and not otherwise) 94, 95 8. It is a Devastavit to satisfy a later
Judgment if there are not Assets left to satisfy a former Judgment, 95 9. An
Action will not lie against Executors upon a Tally, because it is no good
Specialty, 100 10. The pleading of Plene administravit praeter, and plene
administravit ultra, and in what Cases it may be pleaded, and how, 104
Exposition of Words. Quam diu, 32 Dum, ibid. Dummodo, ibid. Usually letten,
33, 34 At any time, 34 Or more, 35 More or less, ibid. Gurges, 108 Stagnum,
ibid. Appertaining, 108, 109 Reputation, 109 Without any let, 121 Quiet and
pacifice, ibid. Lawfully enjoy, 124 Dedi and Concessi, 126 Wreck, 168 Derelict,
ibid. Imported or brought, 171, 172 Per Nomen, 174, 175 Claim, 188, 193 Una
cum, 197 Nature, what it is, 221, 224 Unnatural, 221, 222, 224 Uncle, 241
Communia, 255 Remainder, 269 in loco 279 Naturalization, 280 Antenati and
Postnati, 273 Near of kin. 306, 307, 308, 309, 310 Malum prohibitum, and malum
in se, 332, 333, 334, etc. 358, 359 Dispensation, 333, 336, 349 Exemption, 349
Commot, 405
Exposition of Sentences. 1. Words which are insensible ought to be rejected,
so also words of known signification, so placed in the Deed that they make it
repugnant and senseless, are to be rejected equally with words of no
signification, 176 2. In things necessary there are no degrees of more or less
necessary, 344 3. What appears not to be, must be taken in Law to be as if it
were not, 169 4. Lands usually letten shall be intended Lands twice letten, 33
5. Lands which have at any time before been usually letten, how expounded, 34
6. How long time will gain a Reputation to pass a thing as appertaining, 109
Extinguishment. 1. Extinguishment of a Rent is when it is absolutely conveyed
to him who has the Land out of which it issues; or the Land is conveyed to him
to whom the Rent is granted, 199 2. A perpetual union of the Tenancy to the
Rent, or Rent to the Tenancy, is an extinguishment of the Rent, 39 3. Where
Rent is arrear, and afterward it is granted over in Fee, and an Attornment
thereunto, here the Grantor has absolutely lost his arrears, and cannot after
distrain, 40
Extent. 1. An Extent is sueable into Wales, but a Ca. Sa. or Fi. Fa. is not,
397
Fee-simple. 1. A Fee-simple determinable upon a Contingent is a Fee to all
intents, but not so durable as an absolute Fee-simple, 273 2. A. had issue W.
T. and R. and devised to T. and his heirs for ever, and if T. died without
issue living W. then W. should have the Land, this is a good Fee in T. And W.
has a Fee in possibility by Executory Devise, if T. dyed without issue before
him, 272
Fieri Facias, See Execution. Fine, Fines. 1. A Fine levied without
consideration or use expressed, is to the use of the Conizor, 43 2. The Seisin
of the Conizee of a Fine is but a mere fiction, and an invented form of
Conveyance only, 41, 42 3. The wife in that case shall not be endowed, neither
shall it descend to his Heir, 41
Formedon. 1. The Statute de Donis formed a Writ of Formedon in the Descender,
for the new Estate Tail created by that Statute, but makes no mention of a
Formedon in the Reverter, as already known in the Chancery, 367
Franchise. 1. Franchises Inferior and Counties Palatine, are derived out of
the Counties by the Kings Grants, where the Kings Writ did run, 418
Fraud. 1. Wheresoever an Action of Debt, upon Bond or Contract, is brought
against an Executor, he may confess the Action, if there be no fraud in the
case, although he have notice of a former Suit depending, 95
Guardian in Soccage, See Title Statutes 26. 1. WHO is Guardian in Soccage at the
Common Law, 178, 244 2. What a Guardian may do in his own name, 182 3. Who were
Legitimi tutores, or Gardians by the Civil Law, 244 4. The Exposition of the
Statute made 12 Car. 2. 183, 184 5. The Guardian by the Statute of 12 Car. 2.
does not derive his authority from the Father, but from the Law, 186 6. The
Lands follow the Gardianship, and not the Gardianship the Lands, 178 7. The
Gardianship now by the Statute may be till One and twenty years, 179 8. Such a
special Guardian cannot transfer the custody of the Ward by Deed or Will to any
other, 179, 181 9. The trust is only personal, and not assignable; neither
shall it go to the Executors or Administrators, 180, 181 10. If the father
appoint the custody until One and twenty, and the Guardian dies, it determines
with the death of the Guardian, and is a Condition in Law (if he live so long)
185
Grants, Grantor, Grantee. 1. The Law does not in the Conveyances of Estates,
admit Estates regularly, to pass by implication: But in Devises they are
allowed with due restrictions, 261, 262, etc. 2. A thing so granted as none can
take by the Grant, is a void Grant, 199 3. In Grants, words which are
insensible ought to be rejected; so likewise words of known signification, when
they are so placed in the Deed that they are Repugnant, are to be rejected
equally with words of no known signification, 176 4. The meaning of the word
(appertaining) in a Grant, and how far it will extend, and what it will pass,
108, 109 5. Land in possession cannot pass by the Grant of a Reversion, but by
the grant of Land a Reversion will pass, 83 6. By the Grant of Stagnum and
Gurgitem aquarum, the Soil of the Pond passes, 107, 108, 109 7. Where by the
Devise of the Farm of H. the Manor of H. will well pass, 71 8. To a Grant of a
Rent by the Common Law an Attornment is requisite, 39 9. A Lease is made
habendum for 40 years after the expiration of a Lease made to another person,
whereas in truth there is no such Lease, this Lease for 40 years shall commence
presently, 73, 74, 80, 81, 83, 84 10. To give or grant that to a man which he
had before, is no gift at all, 42
Grants by the King, See Non Obstante, Pardon, Prerogative. 1. Where the Kings
Grant is void (although there be a saving in an Act of Parliament of all the
Right of such Grantee) yet that shall not aid it, 332 2. If a Patent is not
void in its creation, it remains good after the death of the King that granted
it, 332
Habendum. 1. A Lease is made habendum for Forty years after the expiration of
a Lease made to another person, whereas in truth there is no such Lease; this
Lease for Forty years shall commence presently, 73, 74, 80, 81 2. A Rent is
granted, habendum for Seven years after the death of the Grantor, Remainder in
Fee, 46
Habeas Corpus. 1. The Writ of Habeas Corpus is now the most usual Remedy by
which a man is restored again to his liberty, if against Law he has been
deprived of it, 136 2. The Cause of the imprisonment ought as specifically and
certainly appear to the Judges upon the Return, as it did appear to the Court,
or person authorized to commit, 137, 138, 139, 140 3. A prisoner committed per
mandatum of the Lord Chancellor, by virtue of a Contempt in Chancery, was
presently bailed, because the Return was generally for Contempts to the Court,
but no particular Contempt expressed, 139, 140 4. The Court of Common Pleas or
Exchequer upon Habeas Corpus may discharge Prisoners (imprisoned by other
Courts) upon the insufficiency of the Return only, and not for privilege, 154
5. Where a man is brought by Habeas Corpus, and upon the Return it appears that
he was imprisoned illegally (though there is no cause of privilege for him in
the Court) yet he shall not be remanded to his unlawful Imprisonment, 156 6.
The Kings Bench may bayl, if they please, in all Cases, but the Common Bench
must remand, if the cause of the imprisonment returned is just, 157
Heir. 1. Children shall inherit their Ancestors without limitation in the
right ascending Line, and are not inherited by them, 244 2. In the collateral
Lines of Uncle and Nephew, the Uncle as well inherits the Nephew, as the Nephew
the Uncle, ibid. 3. The Heir shall never be disinherited by an Estate, given by
Implication in a Will, if such Implication be only constructive and possible,
but nor a necessary Implication, viz. such an Implication that the Devisee must
have the thing devised, or none else can have it, 262, 263, 268 4. He that is
privileged by the Law of England to inherit there, must be a Subject of the
Kings, 268 5. The four several ways that a man born out of England may inherit
in England, 281 6. How long the Heir shall continue in Ward upon the Devise of
his Father; and a full Exposition of the Statute of 12 Car. 2. 178 7. The Heir
of the Conizee of a Fine only, shall take nothing by Descent, 41
Husband and Wife. See Baron and Feme. Imprisonment, See Title Habeas Corpus.
Incest. 1. INcest was formerly of Spiritual Conuzance, 212 2. The primitive
Christian Church could punish incestuous marriages no other way than only by
forbidding them communion with them, 313 3. The Judges have now full conuzance
of what Marriages are incestuous, and what not, 207, 209, 210 4. Among the
Hebrews there was no Divorce for Incest, but the Marriage was void, and the
Incest punished as in persons unmarried, ibid.
Incumbent. 1. One Incumbent may sue a Writ of Spoliation against the other,
where the Patrons right comes in question, 24 2. If an Incumbent with Cure take
another Benefice with Cure, the first is void, and the Patron may present, 21
3. A Bishop may be an Incumbent after Consecration, 24 4. The Kings
Confirmation of the Commendam transfers no right into the Incumbent, 26 5.
Where the Incumbent does not read the Articles according to the Statute, he
stands ipso facto deprived, 131, 132 6. And if he had not subscribed the
Articles, he had been never Incumbent, 133
Infant. 1. Where the Gardianship of an Infant is devised since the Statute of
12 Car. 2. what passes thereby, together with a full Exposition of that
Statute, from 177 to 186 2. He is capable at Seventeen years of Age of taking
Administration in his own name, 93
Institution and Induction. 1. By Induction into the Rectory, the Parson is
seized of all the possessions belonging to his Rectory, 198 2. Institution and
Induction is a good Title until a better appears, 7, 8 3. Where after
Institution and Induction the party inducted may bring his Ejectment, and shall
not be put to his Quare Impedit, 129, 130, 131
Iointenants. 1. There can be no Jointenants in Occupancy, 189 2. They may
release or confirm to each other, and thereupon those privileges which did
belong to both, shall pass to one of them, 45
Ireland. See Alien, Error. 1. Ireland is a conquered Kingdom, and appears so
by the express words of an Act of Parliament there 292 2. Though Ireland has
its own Parliament, yet it is not absolute, and sui Juris, ibid. 3. What things
the Parliament of Ireland cannot do, ibid. 4. When, Ireland received the Laws
of England, 293, 298 5. What Laws made in the Parliament of England are binding
in Ireland, 293
Issue. 1. No Issue can be joined of matter in Law, 143
Judges of Justices. 1. Where the Law is known, and clear, although it is
unequitable and inconvenient, yet Judges must adjudge it as it is, 37, 285 2.
But where it is doubtful, and not clear, there they must Interpret it to be as
is most consonant to equity, 38 3. Defects in the Law can only be remedied in
Parliament, 38, 285 4. Judges must judge according as the Law is, not as it
ought to be, but if inconveniences necessarily follow out of the Law, the
Parliament only can cure them, 285 5. An Opinion given in Court, if not
necessary to the Judgment given upon Record, is no Judicial Opinion, no more
than a gratis dictum, 382 6. But an Opinion, though erroneous, concluding to
the Judgment, is a Judicial Opinion, because delivered under the Sanction of
the Judges Oath upon deliberation, which assures it is, or was, when delivered,
the Opinion of the Deliverer, 382 7. When the King has constituted any man a
Judge, his Ability, Parts, and Fitness for the place are not to be reflected
upon, or censured by any other person, being allowed by the King, who only is
to judge of the fitness of his Ministers, 138 8. We must not, upon supposition
only, admit Judges deficient in their Office, for so they should never do
right: Nor on the other side must we admit them unerring in their places, for
so they should never do any thing wrong, 139 9. Judges have in all Ages been
complained of, and punished for giving dishonest and corrupt judgments, 139 10.
A Judge cannot Fine and Imprison a Jury for giving a Verdict contrary to his
Directions, 146, 147, 148, 149 11. Judges ought not to abate Writs ex officio,
95, 97 12. The Judges direction to the Jury ought to be upon Supposition, and
not Positive; viz. if you find the Fact thus, then it is for the Plaintiff; if
you find it thus, then for the Defendant, 144 13. The Judge can never direct
what the Law is in any controverted matter, until he first knows the Fact, 147
Judgment, See Error. 1. A Judgment is the Act of the Court, and compulsory to
the Defendant, 94, 95 2. Where the Plaintiff makes it appear to the Court that
the Defendants Title is not good, but does not set forth a good Title for
himself, the Court shall never give Judgment for him, 60 3. An ill Declaration
will not avoid the Judgment, it only makes it erroneous, 93, 94 4. An erroneous
Judgment is a good bar for an Executor in an Action brought against him, 94 5.
A Judgment given in England, ought not to be executed in Wales, 398 6. In a
Quare Impedit, where the Bishop disclaims and the Parson loses by Default,
there shall go a Writ to the Bishop, Non obstante Reclamatione, to remove the
Incumbent, but with a Cessat Executio until the Plea is determined between the
Plaintiff and Patron. 6
Jurisdiction, See Courts, Prohibition. 1. When the Question is of a
Jurisdiction in a Dominion belonging to England, how to be determined, 418 2.
Where ever a Debt grows due, yet the Debtor is indebted to the Creditor in any
place where he is, as long as the Debt is unsatisfied, 92 3. It is the
Defendant, not the Plaintiff, must take Exceptions to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, 93 4. Where the appearance of the Tenant upon the Summons shall not
affirm the Jurisdiction of the Court, 405 5. The Temporal Courts may prohibit
the Spiritual Courts in Cases of incestuous Marriages, and Marriages within or
without the Levitical Degrees, 207
Jurors, See Verdict, Attaint. 1. Jurors must be returned out of the Vicinage
where the cause of Action arises, 148 2. What is the legal Verdict of the
Jury, 150 3. No evidence can be given to a Jury of what is Law, 143 4. The
Verdict of the Jury cannot change the Reason of the Law, 101 5. The Jury, and
not the Judge, resolve and find what the Fact is, 144 6. A Jury-man swears to
what he can infer and conclude from the Testimony of Witnesses, by the act and
force of his Understanding, to be the Fact inquired after, 142 7. The Jury may
have Evidence from their own personal knowledge, 147 8. Although a Jury find
contrary to their Evidence, yet they are not finable, an Attaint only lies
against them, 144, 145, 147, 148, 149 9. Neither are they fineable where an
Attaint does not lie, 145 10. A Juror kept his Fellows a day and night without
any reason for assenting, and therefore sent to the Fleet, 151 11. A Jury was
never punished upon an Information either in Law or the Star Chamber, for
finding an untrue Verdict, unless Imbracery, Subornation, or the like, were
joined, 152 12. Where the Judges conceive the Jury have been unlawfully dealt
withal to give their Verdict, they are finable, 153 13. The Jury can never find
Ignoramus upon a Trial, 154
King, See Grants of the King, Prerogative. 1. No Canon Ecclesiastical can be
made without the Kings license and assent, 329 2. The King will not take away
another man's Right against his Will, 14 3. The King cannot pardon an Offense
done to a particular person, 333 4. Where the Suit is only the Kings for the
breach of a penal Law, and which is not to the damage of a third person, the
King may dispense, 334, 336 5. But where the Suit is the Kings only for the
benefit of a third person, and the King is entitled by the prosecution and
complaint of such third person, the King cannot release or dispense with such
Suit, without the Agreement of such party concerned, 334, 336, 356 6. If a
Title appear for the King, the Court, Ex officio, ought to give Judgment for
him, though no party, 299 7. Where the Offense wrongs none but the King, he may
dispense with it, 344 8. What things the King may pardon, but not dispense
with, 333, 334, 336, etc. 9. Offenses against penal Laws not to be dispensed
with, 333, 334, 342, etc. 10. Where the King may dispense generally, he is not
bound to it, but may limit his Dispensation, if he think fit, 346 11. Where the
King can dispense with particular persons, he is not confined to number or
place, but may license as many, and in such places, as he thinks fit, 347 12.
If the Kings Grant is not void in its Creation, it remains good after his death
against his Successor, 332 13. Where the exercise of a Trade is generally
prohibited, the Kings license must be without any limitation to him that has
it, to exercise his Trade, as before it was prohibited, otherwise it is no
license, 346 14. The Kings Confirmation of a Commendam transfers no Right to
the Incumbent, 26 15. Where in a Quare Impedit brought by the King his Title
appears to be but a bare Suggestion, he cannot forsake his own Title, and
endeavor to destroy the Defendants, 61 16. Where the King presents by Lapse,
and has then other good Title to present, yet it is void, 14 17. Those under
the Kings power, as King of England, in another Princes Dominions, are under
his Laws, 282 18. The Natives of any of the Kings Foreign Plantations are his
Majesty's Natural Subjects, and shall inherit in England, 268 in loco 278, 279
Kings Bench, See Courts. 1. The Court of Kings Bench cannot pretend to the
only discharging of Prisoners upon Habeas Corpus, (unless in case of
privilege) for the Chancery may likewise do it, 157 2. Upon the Return of
Habeas Corpus, the Kings Bench may, if they please, bayl the prisoner, but the
Common Pleas must remand him if the cause of the imprisonment returned is just,
157 3. The Kings Bench may quash the Order of Commitment upon a Certiorari, 157
4. May grant Prohibitions for encroaching Jurisdiction, ibid.
Lapse. 1. PResentation by Lapse makes no severance of the Advowson, 14 2.
Where a man accepts a second Benefice with Cure, without a Dispensation or
Qualification, the first Benefice is void, and the Patron may present; but if
he does not present, then if it is under value, no Lapse shall incur until
there is a Deprivation, and Notice: But if it is above value, then the Patron
must present within six months, 131, 132
Law, See Construction of Law. 1. When a Law is given to any people, it is
necessary that it be conceived and published in words which may be understood;
for without that it cannot be obeyed, and the Law which cannot be obeyed, is no
Law, 305 2. The meaning of the words in any Law are to be known, either from
their use and signification, according to common acceptance before the Law
made, or from some Law or Institution declaring their signification, 305 3. A
Law which a man cannot obey, nor act according to is void, and no Law, 337 4.
To do a thing which no Law can make lawful, is malum in se, 337 5. Where the
Law is known and clear, though it be unequitable and inconvenient, yet Judges
must determine as it is, without regarding the unequitableness or
inconveniences, 37 6. Where the Law is doubtful, and not clear, the Judges
ought to interpret it as is most consonant to equity, 38 7. Defects in the Law
can be remedied only in Parliament, 38, 116, 132 8. Whatever is declared by Act
of Parliament to be against Gods Law, must be so admitted to be by us, because
it is so declared by an Act of Parliament, 327 9. A Law not published, is no
more obligative, then a Law only concealed in the mind of the Lawgiver, is
obligative, 228, 236 10. A lawful Canon is the Law of the Kingdom, as well as
an Act of Parliament; and whatever is the Law of the Kingdom, is as much the
Law as any thing else that is so, 21, 132, 327 11. It is irrational to suppose
men ignorant of those Laws for the breach of which they are to be punished, 208
12. Every thing in one sense is taken for Common Law (if it be Law) when it
appears not to be by Act of Parliament, 163 13. It is never prudent to change a
Law which cannot be bettered in the Subject matter of the Law, 239 14. A man
has no Right to any thing for which the Law gives no remedy, 253 15. The
effect of Law can do more than an act of Law, 280 16. How things become natural
by custom, 224 17. What natural Laws are, 226, 227 18. Of transgressing
Natural Laws, and in what sense that is to be understood, 226, 227, 228 19. It
is not safe in case of a public Law (as between the Spiritual and Temporal
Jurisdiction) to change the Received Law, 220 20. The Law of the Land cannot be
altered by the Pope, 20, 21, 132 21. Many Laws made in the time of the Saxon
Kings are now received as Common Law, 358
Lease, Lessor, Lessee, See Title Statute 23. 1. A Demise, having no certain
commencement, is void, 85 2. In what cases the Lessee shall bring an Action
against his Lessor for breach of Covenant, upon a Covenant of Quiet Enjoyment,
without the lawful disturbance of himself, etc: it being a full exposition of
that Covenant, when it is either by Law or Express, and general or particular,
from 118 to 128 3. A Demise of Tithe with Land is good within the 13 El. but a
Demise of Tithe barely is not good, 203, 204 4. A man leases Lands for certain
years, habendum post dimissionem inde factum, to J. N. and J. N. has no Lease
in esse, the Lease shall commence immediately from the Sealing, 73, 74, 80, 81,
83, 84 5. A power is granted to Demise Lands usually letten, Lands which have
been twice letten are within this Proviso, 38 6. Which at any time before have
been usually letten, that which was not in lease at the time of the Proviso,
nor twenty years before, is not within the Proviso, 34, 35, by the Demise of
the Farm of H. the Manor of H. will pass, 71 7. Proviso that the Plaintiff may
lease for One and twenty years, reserving the ancient Rents, so long as the
Lessees shall pay the Rents, these are words of limitation, and the Non-payment
of the Rent determines the term without a Demand, 32
License, See Title King, Dispensation. Limitation. 1. A Limitation determines
a Lease without demand of the Rent, 32 2. What words shall be taken to be a
Limitation, and no Condition, 32
Livery and Seisin. 1. Where a Rectory is granted Una cum Decimis de D, the
Tithe which alone cannot pass without Deed, does pass by the Livery of the
Rectory; and without Livery the Tithe will not pass, because it was intended to
pass with the Rectory by Livery, 197, 198
London. 1. The Customs of London are confirmed by Act of Parliament, 93 2.
How Declarations are in London, according to their Custom, ibid.
Marriages, See Title Statute 16. 1. Incest was formerly of Spiritual
Conizance, 212 2. The Judges of the Temporal Courts have, by several Acts of
Parliament, full conizance of Marriages within or without the Levitical
Degrees, 207, 209, 210 3. They have full conizance of what Marriages are
Incestuous, and what not, according to the Law of the Kingdom; and may prohibit
the Spiritual Courts from questioning of them, 207, 209, 210, 305 4. The
Interdicts of Marriage and carnal Knowledge in the Levitical Law, were directed
to the men, not to the women, who are interdicted by a consequent; For the
woman being interdicted to the man, the man must also be interdicted to the
woman; for a man cannot marry a woman and she not marry him, 305 5. A man
married his Grandfathers Brothers wife by the Mothers side, and held lawful,
206, 207 6. A man married his first Wives sisters daughter, and held unlawful;
and after a Prohibition a Consultation granted, 247, 321, 322 7. For a man to
marry his wives sister, is a Marriage expressly prohibited within the Eighteenth
of Leviticus, 305 8. What Marriages are lawful, and what not, 210, 218, 219,
305, 306, 307, 308, 309 9. How the words (No Marriages shall be impeached, Gods
Law except) shall be understood, 211 10. What Marriages are prohibited within
the Levitical Degrees, 214, 215, 306, 307, 308 11. What Marriages are by Gods
Law otherwise prohibited, 220, 221 12. Marriages contrary thereunto ought not
to be dispensed with, 214, 216 13. Marriages with Cosen Germans lawful, 218,
219 14. All Marriages are lawful which are not prohibited within the Levitical
Degrees, or otherwise by Gods Law, 219, 240, 242, 305 15. In what sense any
Marriages and Copulations of man with woman, may be said to be natural, and in
what not, 221 16. Marriages forbidden in Leviticus lawful before, 222 17.
Marriages lawful after restoring the world in Noah, ibid. 18. Concerning
Universal Obligation to the Levitical Prohibitions in cases of Matrimony and
Incest, 230 19. What Marriages were usual in old times, 237 20. How simple
Fornication was satisfied in the time of Moses, ibid. 21. Who shall be said to
be the near of kin, which are prohibited Marriage, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311 22.
What Marriages are by the Matrimonial Table of England interdicted, 315, 316,
317, 318 23. Marriages within the Levitical Prohibitions were always unlawful,
but Marriages within the Levitical Degrees were not always unlawful, 319, 320,
321 24. How the Levitical Degrees are to be reckoned, 320 25. All Marriages
prohibited by the Table, are declared to be within the Degrees prohibited by
Gods Law, 328 26. In what the Parochial Matrimonial Table used in England,
agrees with the Karait Rabbis, 311, 312 27. The primitive Christian Church
could punish Incestuous Marriages no otherwise than by forbidding them the
Communion, 313 28. By what Law the primitive Christian Churches conceived
themselves obliged, in the matter of Marriage, to observe the Levitical
prohibitions strictly and indispensibly, 314 29. Amongst the Hebrews, there was
no Divorce for Incest, but the Marriage was void, and the Incest punished as in
persons unmarried, 313
Master and Servant. 1. Although there is no Master or Servant originally in
Nature, but only parity, yet, after Laws have constituted those Relations, 242
2. A Father cannot be Servant to his Son, 243
Metropolitan, See Archbishop, Ordinary. Misrecital, See Lease. 1. Where a
Lease is misrecited in the date, and the habendum is to be from the date which
is misrecited, there the Lease shall commence from the Sealing, 73
Monopoly. 1. If Exportation or Importation of a Commodity, or Exercise of a
Trade is prohibited generally by Act of Parliament, and no cause thereof
expressed, a license may be granted to one or more persons, with a Non
obstante; for by such general Restraint the Law intended to limit the
over-numerous Importers and Traders; and such general Licenses shall not be
accounted Monopolies, 345 2. To avoid a Monopoly the Kings Dispensation upon
all prohibitory Laws, must generally be limited by Law, 346
Naturalization, See Title Alien. Non obstante. 1. IT is a license to do a
thing which at the Common Law might be done without it, but now (being
restrained by some Act of Parliament) cannot be done without it, 345, 356 2.
Where a license Ex speciali gratia is good to dispense with a penal Law without
a Non obstante, 356
Nuisance. 1. Public Nusances are not Mala in se, but Mala politica and
introducta, 358 2. The King may pardon a transient Nuisance, 333 3. An Action
will not lie for a Nuisance for which no man has a particular damage, 335, 341
4. If a man have a particular damage by a foundrous way, he is generally
without remedy, because it ought to be repaired by some Township or Vill,
against whom an Action will not lie, but an Indictment only, 340
Oath. 1. Upon granting of Administration the Administrator is to take an Oath
duly to administer the Estate of the deceased, 96
Occupant and Occupancy. 1. What Natural Occupancy is, 188 2. What Civil
Occupancy is, 189 3. An Occupant shall enjoy whatsoever is belonging to that
which he occupies, 196 4. No Occupancy begins with the Freehold, but begins by
possessing the Land; and the Law casts the Freehold upon him, 195 5. A Claim
without actual possession cannot make a man a Natural Occupant, 188 6. There
can be no Occupancy of any thing wherein another has a Right, 188, 189 7. Two
cannot have severally possession of the same thing at one time, 189, 192 8. Of
what things there may be an Occupancy, and of what not, 190, 194, 198 9. A man
cannot be an Occupant, but of a void possession, or of a possession which he
himself has, 192 10. What it is that makes an Occupant, 191 11. Tenant for
years, or at will, may be an Occupant, 192 12. An Occupant becomes an Assignee
in Law to the first Lessee, 204 13. The Occupant is liable to pay the Rent,
202, 203 14. He has power to pass over his interest, 205 15. If a man die
seized pur auter vie of a Rent, Tithe, etc. or other thing, whereof there can
be no Occupancy either directly or by consequence, as adjuncts of something
else, by the death of the Grantee; In all these cases the Grant is determined
as if there never had been any, 201, 202 16. But when those things are granted
in the same Deed, together with other things of which there may be an
Occupancy, then they shall be subject to the Occupancy, 202
Office before Escheators, See Inquisition. 1. Principally an Office for the
King is as necessary as an Entry for a common person, 153 2. It neither
determines any man's Right, neither does any party put any Trial upon them, 153
3. An Inquest of Office is not subject to an Attaint, they are only to find
naked matter of Fact, 153 4. Where an Office is found, if the Defendant has no
Title, then the King has one by his Office, 62 5. No person shall Traverse the
Office, unless he makes to himself a good Title, 64
Office and Officer, See Title Statutes 24. 1. All Offices of Trust must be
personally occupied, unless granted to be occupied by a Deputy, 181 2. Offices
of personal Trust cannot be assigned, for the Trust is not personal which any
man may have, 180 3. An Office of Trust and Confidence cannot be granted for
years, 181 4. All Actions brought against the Officers mentioned in 21 Jacobi,
must be laid in the proper County; and if the Plaintiff is Nonsuited, or
Discontinue, or a Verdict against him, they shall have their double costs, 111,
112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117
Ordinary, See Administration, Archbishop, Lapse. 1. The Ordinary may enforce
the Executors to pay Debts upon Contracts, as well as Legacies or Marriage
money, 97 2. Where the Ordinary is to supply the Cure, until the Patron present,
132 3. Where the Ordinary disclaims in a Quare Impedit, there is a Judgment
with a Cessat Executio quousque, etc. 6
Pardon, See Dispensation, King. 1. A Pardon frees a man from the punishment
due for a thing unlawfully done, 333 2. What Offenses committed against
Statutes the King may pardon, and what he cannot, 333, 334, 335, etc. 3. The
King may pardon a transient Nuisance, but a continued Nuisance cannot be
pardoned, so as to acquit the Nusance-maker for committing them, but the fine
or punishment imposed for the doing thereof may be pardoned, 333 4.
Forestalling the Market, Engrossing, or the like, which continue not, but are
over as soon as done, until done de novo again, may be pardoned like other
Offenses, so as the persons shall not be impleaded, otherwise than by the
persons who have received particular damage, which the King cannot remit, ibid.
Parliament, See Statute. Parson and Patron. 1. A Parson is chosen Bishop, his
Benefices are all void, and thereupon the King shall present, 19, 20, 21 2.
Where a Benefice becomes void by accepting another without a Dispensation, the
Patron is bound to present without Notice, and where not, 131 3. Where the
Parson does not read the Articles, according to the Statute, he stands deprived
ipso facto, ibid. 4. Where the Parson does not subscribe the Articles, there he
is not Incumbent, although he keeps in possession, 133 5. A Churchman cannot
make a Lease of the possessions of his Church without Deed, 197
Perpetuity. 1. Every Fee-simple is a perpetuity, but in the accident of
Alienation; and alienation is an incident to a Fee determinable upon a
Contingent, 273 2. There is no Law simply against perpetuities, but against an
Entail of perpetuities, ibid.
Pleading, See Traverse. 1. If the Falsehood in the Defendants plea is neither
hurtful to the Plaintiff, nor beneficial to the Defendant, there it shall not
hurt the Defendant, 104 2. Where the Defendant pleads a false plea, which
falsehood is detrimental to the Plaintiff, and beneficial to the Defendant, as
by pleading several Judgments, and concluding that he has not Assets ultra,
there the Plaintiff may Reply, That one of the Judgments are satisfied; which
Replication shall be fatal to the Defendant, 103 3. But to plead, That he has
not bona and catalla praeterquam bona quae non sufficient. to satisfy the
Judgments, is void for the Uncertainty; for no Sum being mentioned, no good
Issue can be taken upon it, 104 4. So likewise to say, That he has not Assets
ultra what will satisfy, etc. is void for Uncertainty, ibid. 5. But it is good
pleading to say, That he has not Assets praeterquam bona and catalla ad
Valentiam separal. denar. per ipsum in satisfactione separal. indic. solut. And
also, besides Assets to the value of Ten shillings, which are liable to
satisfy the Statutes, ibid. 6. It is a good plea for an Executor to plead
several Judgment, etc. and conclude quod non habet, nec ad aliquod tempus
habuit any Assets of the Testators praeterquam bona and catalla, sufficient to
satisfy those Judgments, etc. 103 7. To this the Plaintiff must Reply, Assets
ultra, or that any one of the Judgments are satisfied, ibid. 8. The pleading of
a special plene Administravit, 91 9. In pleading of a Judgment it is not
necessary to set forth the whole Record; but to say, That in such a Court such
a Judgment was obtained, 92 10. In pleading of a Judgment, it may be as well
pleaded quod recuperaret as recuperet, 93 11. An erroneous Judgment is a good
bar, until reversed by Error, 94 12. How a Recognizance or Statute ought to be
pleaded, 102 13. Every Defendant in a Quare Impedit may plead Ne disturba pas,
58 14. The pleading of a Seisin in gross, Appendancy, and Presentation in a
Quare Impedit, 15 15. The Tenant shall never be received to Counter-plead, but
he must make to himself, by his plea, a Title to the Land, and so avoid the
plaintiffs Title alleged by a Traverse, 58 16. A Commoner prescribes for
Common for Cattle levant and couchant, antiquo Messuagio, which is not good,
because Cattle cannot, to a common intent, be levant upon a Message only, 152,
153 17. See the form of pleading a Custom to have solam and separalem pasturam
for the Tenant against the Lord, 252, 253 18. The pleading of per nomen in a
Grant, and how it shall be taken, 174, 175
Pluralities, See Title Statute 14, 22. 1. If a man have a Benefice with Cure,
whatever the value is, and is admitted and instituted into another Benefice
with Cure, having no Qualification or Dispensation, the first Benefice is void,
and the Patron may present, 131
Pope. 1. The Pope could not change the Law of the Land, 20 2. He could
formerly grant a Dispensation for a plurality, 20, 23, 24 3. He did formerly
grant Faculties, Dispensations for Pluralities, Unions, Appropriations,
Commendams, etc. 23
Prerogative, See King. 1. By the Common Law all Wrecks did belong to the King,
164 2. The extent of the Kings Prerogative is the extent of his power, and the
extent of his power is to do what he has a will to do; according to that, Ut
summae potestatis Regis est posse quantum velit, sic magnitudinis est velle
quantum potest, 357 3. The King may take Issue, and afterward Demurr, or first
Demurr, and afterward take Issue: Or he may vary his Declaration, but all this
must be done in one Term, 65 4. He may choose whether he will maintain the
Office, or traverse the Title of the party, and so take traverse upon traverse,
62, 64
Prebend and Prebendary. 1. What a Prebendary or Rectory is in the eye of the
Law, 197 2. A Prebend or Churchman cannot make a Lease of their Possessions in
the right of the Church without Deed, 197
Prescription, See Modus Decimandi, Custom. 1. What Prescriptions for Commons
are good, and what not, 257 2. How Copyholders shall prescribe for Common, 254
3. The Tenant (a Commoner) prescribes against his Lord to have Solam and
separalem pasturam, this is a void prescription, 354, 355, 356 4. Inhabitants
not Corporate cannot prescribe in a Common, 254 5. One Commoner may prescribe
to have Solam and separalem pasturam against another Commoner, 255
Presentation, See Advowson, Ordinary, Parson, Quare Impedit. 1. In a Quare
Impedit the Plaintiff must allege a presentation in himself, or in those under
whom he claims, 7, 8, 57 2. So likewise must the Defendant, ibid. 8 3. What a
bare presentation is, 11 4. A void presentation makes no usurpation, 14 5. When
the presentation shall make an usurpation, ibid. 6. Where the King presents by
Lapse without Title, and yet has other good Title, the presentation is void,
ibid. 7. Where a Parson is chosen a Bishop, his Benefices are all void, and the
King shall present, 19, 20, 21 8. Where a Benefice becomes void by accepting
another without a Dispensation, the Patron is bound to present without notice,
and where not, 131
Presidents. 1. An extrajudicial Opinion given in, or out of Court is no good
president, 382 2. Presidents without a Judicial decision upon Argument, are of
no moment, 419 3. An Opinion given in Court, if not necessary to the Judgment
given of Record, is no Judicial Opinion, nor more than a gratis dictum, 382 4.
But an Opinion, though erroneous to the Judgment, is a Judicial Opinion,
because delivered under the Sanction of the Judges Oath upon deliberation,
which assures it is, or was, when delivered, the Opinion of the Deliverer, 382
5. Presidents of Fact which pass sub silentio in the Court of Kings Bench or
Common Pleas, are not to be regarded, 399 6. New presidents are not
considerable, 169 7. Presidents are useful to decide Questions, but in Cases
which depend upon fundamental principles, from which demonstrations may be
drawn, millions of Presidents are to no purpose, 419 8. Long usage is a just
medium to expound an Act of Parliament, 169
Privity, See Estate. 1. A privity is necessary by the Common Law to distrain
and avow, between the Distrainor and Distrained, 39 2. Such privity is created
by Attornment, ibid. 3. Where a new Estate is gained, the privity of the old
Estate is lost, 43 4. Where it is not lost between Grantor and Grantee of a
Rent, after a Fine levied by the Grantee to his own use, ibid. 5. Where an
Estate in a Rent may be altered, and no new Attornment or privity requisite,
144
Privilege. 1. Privilege lies only where a man is an Officer of the Court, or
has a prior Suit depending in the Common Pleas, and is elsewhere molested,
that he cannot attend it, 154 2. All Officers, Clerks, Attorneys of the Common
Pleas, and their Menial Servants, shall have their Writ of Privilege, 155
Process. 1. No Process shall issue from hence into Wales, but only Process of
Outlawry and Extent, 396, 397 2. A Fieri Facias, Capias ad satisfaciendum, or
other Judicial Process, shall not go from hence thither, 397 3. Process in
Wales differ from Process in England, 400
Prohibition, See Title Marriage. 1. Prohibitions for encroaching Jurisdiction
are as well grantable in the Common Pleas as Kings Bench, 157, 209 2. A man was
sued in the Spiritual Court for having married with his Fathers brothers wife,
and a Prohibition was granted, 206, 207, etc. 3. The Judges have full conizance
of Marriages within or without the Levitical Degrees, 207, 220 4. They have
conizance of what Marriages are incestuous, and what not; and may prohibit the
Spiritual Court from questioning of them, ibid. 5. How the suggestion upon the
Statute of 32 H. 8. concerning Marriages, must be drawn, to bring the matter in
question, 247
Proof, See Witnesses, Evidence. 1. A witness shall be admitted to prove the
Contents of a Deed or Will, 77
Property. 1. In Life, Liberty, and Estate, every man who has not forfeited
them, has a property and right which the Law allows him to defend, and if it
be violated, it gives an Action to redress the wrong, and to punish the
wrong-doer, 337 2. To violate men's properties is never lawful, but a malum in
se, 338 3. But to alter or transfer men's properties, is no malum in se, ibid.
Proviso. 1. A power is granted to make Leases of Lands usually letten, Lands
which have been twice letten are within this proviso, 33 2. Of Lands which have
at any time before been usually letten, that which was not in Lease at the time
of the proviso, nor twenty years before, is out of the power, 34
Possession. 1. He that is out of possession, if he brings his Action, must
make a good Title, 8 2. Where one man would recover any thing from another, it
is not sufficient to destroy the Title of him in possession, but you must prove
your own to be better than his, 58, 60 3. When a man has gotten the possession
of Land that was void of a Proprietor, the Law casts the Freehold upon him, to
make a sufficient Tenant to the Precipe, 191 4. Prior possession is a good
Title against him, who has no Title at all, 299 5. A separate possession of
one and the same Land can never be in two persons at one and the same time, 42,
47 6. By a Fine the Estate may be changed, although the possession is not
changed, 42, 43 7. The Conuzee of a Rent granted by Fine to Uses, cannot have
any actual Seisin nor be in possession since the 27 H. 8. 49
Quare Impedit. 1. WHere in a Quare Impedit the Plaintiff and Defendant are
both actors, 6, 7, 8, 58 2. The Plaintiff in his Count must allege a
presentation in himself, or in those from whom he claims, 7, 8, 17, 57 3. So
likewise must the Defendant, because they are both Actors, 7, 8, 57, 60 4. The
Plaintiff must recover by his own strength, and not by the Defendants weakness,
8, 58, 60 5. Where the King, or a common person, in a Quare Impedit sets forth
a Title, which is no more than a bare Suggestion, he shall not then forsake his
own, and endeavor to destroy the Defendants Title, 61 6. In all Quare Impedits
the Defendants may traverse the presentation alleged by the Plaintiff, if the
matter of Fact will bear it, 16, 17 7. But the Defendant must not deny the
presentation alleged, where there was a presentation, 17 8. Where the
Presentation, and not the Seisin in gross of the Advowson or Appendancy, is
traversable, 10, 11, 12, 13 9. When the Seisin in gross or appendancy is
traversable, 12 10. An Incumbent is elected Bishop, and before Consecration he
obtains a Dispensation in Commendam Retinere, he is afterward consecrated, and
dies, the Patron shall present, and not the King, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27 11. If a man, who has a Benefice with Cure, accepts of another
without Dispensation or Qualification, the first Benefice is void, and the
Patron may present; and his Clerk, who is admitted, instituted, and inducted,
may bring his Action of Trespass or Ejectment, 129, 130, 131 12. All Quare
Impedits for disturbance to Churches within the Lordships Marchers of Wales,
shall be brought in England in the next adjoining County, 409, 410 13. Judgment
with a Cessat Executio upon the Bishops Disclaimer, 6 14. Where the Parson,
Patron, and Ordinary are sued in a Quare Impedit, and the Ordinary disclaims,
and the Parson loses by default, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment to recover
his presentation, and a Writ to the Bishop to remove him with a Cessat
Executio, until the plea is determined between the Plaintiff and Patron, ibid.
Rebutter, See Title Warranty. 1. WWO may Rebut, 384 2. The difference between
a Rebutter and Voucher, 385, 386, 387 3. Whether the Tenant in possession may
Rebut without showing how he came to the possession, 385 4. Whether a Rebutter
may be when the warranty is determined, 387 5. How many several sorts of
persons may Rebut, and how those that come in ex institutione and dispositione
legis may Rebut, 390, 391, 392
Recital. 1. The Recital of one Lease in another is not a sufficient proof that
there was such a Lease as is recited, 74, 75
Recognizance, See Title Statutes, 8. 1. The Chancery, and all the Courts at
Westminster, had before the Statute of Acton Burnel, and still have power to
take Recognizances, 102 2. So likewise may every Judge take a Recognizance in
any part of England, as well out of Term as in Term, 103 3. Where a
Recognizance taken before the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas is in the
nature of a Statute Staple, 102 4. Execution upon such Recognizances are not as
upon Statutes, but by Elegit, ibid.
Record. 1. How a Record is to be pleaded, 92
Recovery and Common Recovery, See Title Statutes 13. See Voucher, Warranty. 1.
Where a Recovery (against its nature) shall be a Forfeiture, because it is
taken as a common Conveyance, 51 2. A Rent may arise out of the Estate of
Cestuy que use upon a Recovery, which was to have risen out of the Estate of
the Recoverer, 51
Release. 1. Joyntenants may release and confirm to each other, 45
Remainder, See Title Warranty. 1. A Remainder must depend upon some particular
Estate, and be created at the same time with the particular Estate, 269 2. A
Remainder cannot depend upon an absolute Fee simple, 269, 367 3. If Land is
devised to A. and his Heirs as long as B. has Heirs of his body, the Remainder
over; this is good in a Devise, not as a Remainder, but as an Executory Devise,
270 4. A Remainder in Fee upon a Lease for years, 46 5. The Statute de Donis
restrains not the warranty of Tenant in Tail from barring him in the Remainder
in Tail by his warranty descending upon him, 367, 377
Rent. 1. By the Common Law there ought to be an Attornment to enable the
Distrainor to make a good Avowry upon a Distress for Rent, 39 2. Where a Rent
is well vested, and there is an Attornment, when ever the Rent is arrear, a
Distress is lawful, unless the power is lost, ibid. 3. An Estate in a
Rentcharge may be enlarged, diminished, or altered, and no new Attornment or
privity requisite, 44, 45, 46 4. The power to distrain may be lost by a
perpetual Union Suspension pro tempore Dying without Heir Granting of it upon
Condition and by a granting over 39 5. The several things that a Rent is
subject to, 40 6. Rent is granted pur auter vie, the Grantee dies, the Rent is
thereby determined, 200, 201 7. Where Rent is arrear, and afterward it is
granted over in Fee, and an Attornment thereupon, here the Grantor has lost
his arrears, and cannot afterward distrain, 40 8. A Rent may arise out of the
Estate of Cestuy que use, upon a Recovery, 52 9. There can be no Occupancy of a
Rent, 200
Reversion, See Title Warranty. 1. By the grant of a Reversion, Lands in
possession will not pass, but by the grant of Lands a Reversion will pass, 83
2. If Tenant for life alien with warranty, which descends upon the Reversioner,
such alienation with warranty is not restrained by the Statute de Donis, 370 3.
An alienation with warranty, which shall hinder the Land from reverting to the
Donor or his Heirs, is expressly forbidden by the Statute de Donis, 374
Right, See Title Action. 1. Where there can be presumed to be no remedy, there
is no right, 38
Seisin. 1. THe profits of all and every part of the Land, are the Esplees of
the Land, and prove the Seisin of the whole Land, 255 2. In an Entry sur
Disseisin, or other Action, where Esplees are to be alleged, the profits of a
Mine will not serve, 254
Spoliation. 1. The Writ of Spoliation lies for one Incumbent against the
other, where the Patrons right comes in question, 24
Statute, See Recognizance. 1. A Recognizance taken before the Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas in the nature of a Statute Staple, 102
Statutes in general. 1. Where an Act of Parliament is dubious, long usage is a
just medium to expound it by; and the meaning of things spoken and written must
be as has been constantly received by common acceptance, 169 2. But where
usage is against the obvious meaning of an Act, by the vulgar and common
acceptance of words, then it is rather an oppression, then exposition of the
Act, 170 3. When an Act of Parliament alters the Common Law, the meaning shall
not be strained beyond the words, except in cases of public utility, when the
end of the Act appears to be larger than the words themselves. 179 4. Secular
Judges are most conizant in Acts of Parliament, 213 5. When the words of a
Statute extend not to an inconvenience rarely happening, but does to those
which often happen, it is good reason not to strain the words further than they
will reach, by saying it is casus omissus, and that the Law intended quae
frequentius accidunt, 373 6. But where the words of a Law do extend to an
inconvenience seldom happening, there it shall extend to it as well as if it
happens more frequently, 373 7. An Act of Parliament, which generally prohibits
a thing upon a penalty which is popular, or only given to the King, may be
inconvenient to diverse particular persons, in respect of person, place, time,
etc. For this cause the Law has given power to the King to dispense with
particular persons, 347 8. Whatsoever is declared by an Act of Parliament to be
against Law, we must admit it so; for by a Law, viz. (by Act of Parliament) it
is so declared, 327 9. Where the Kings Grant is void in its creation, a saving
of that Grant in an Act of Parliament shall not aid it, 332 10. How an Act of
Parliament may be proved there has been such an Act, where the Roll is lost,
162, 163, 404, 405, 407 11. An Act of Parliament in Ireland, cannot effect a
thing which could not be done without an Act of Parliament in England, 289 12.
Distinct Kingdoms cannot be united but by mutual Acts of Parliament, 300 13. A
repealed Act of Parliament is of no more effect, than if it had never been
made, 325
Statutes. 1. Merton, cap. 4.
The Statute of Merton, which gave the owner of the Soil power to approve
Common, did not consider whether the Lord was equally bound to pasture with his
Tenants, or not; but it considered that the Lord should approve his own Ground,
so as the Commoners had sufficient, 256, 257 2. The inconveniences before the
making of the Statute, and the several remedies that were provided by it, 257
1. Westminster. 1. 3 E. 1.
The Antiquae Custumae upon Woolls, Woolfells, and Leather, were granted to E.
1. by Parliament, and therefore they are not by the Common Law, 162, 163
1. Westminster. 1. cap. 38.
Attaints in Pleas real were granted by this Statute, 146
1. Westminster. 2. cap. 24.
The Quare Ejecit infra terminum is given by this Statute, for the recovery of
the Term against the Feoffee; for an Ejectment lay not against him, he coming
to the Land by Feoffment, 127
Statute of Gloucester.
1. Restrained warranties from binding, as at Common Law, 366, 377 2. Before
this Statute all Warranties which descended to the Heirs of the Warrantors,
were bars to them, except they were Warranties which commenced by Disseisin,
366 3. The reason why the warranty of Tenant in Tail, with assets, binds the
right of the Estate Tail is in no respect from the Statute de Donis, but by the
equity of the Statute of Gloucester, by which the Warranty of the Tenant per
Courtesy bars not the Heir; for his Mothers Land, if his Father leaves not
assets to descend, 365 4. If this Statute had not been made, the lineal
Warranty of Tenant in Tail had no more bound the right of the Estate Tail by
the Statute de Donis, with assets descending, than it does without assets,
ibid.
Westminster. 2. De Donis.
1. All Issues in Tail within this Statute, are to claim by the Writ purposely
formed there for them, which is a Formedon in the Descender, 369 2. it intended
not to restrain the alienation of any Estates, but such as were Fee-simples at
the Common Law, 370 3. This Statute intended not to preserve the Estate for the
Issue, or the Reversion for the Donor, absolutely against all Warranties, but
against the alienation, with, or without Warranty of the Donee and Tenant in
Tail only, 369 4. Therefore if Tenant for life alien with Warranty, which
descended upon the Reversioner, that was not restrained by the Statute, but
left at the Common Law, 370 5. By this Statute the Warranty of Tenant in Tail
will not bar the Donor or his Heir, of the Reversion, ibid. 6. The Donee in
Tail is hereby expressly restrained from all power of alienation, whereby the
Lands entayled may not revert to the Donor for want of issue in Tail, 371 7.
See a further Exposition upon this Statute, from fol. 371 to 393
1. Wales, Statute de Rutland, 12 E. 1.
after the Conquest of it by Edward the First, was annexed to England, Jure
proprietatis, and received Laws from England as Ireland did, Vide postea 9, 17,
18.
and had a Chancery of their own, and was not bound by the Law of England,
until 27 H. 8. 300, 301, 399, 400 2. Although Wales became of the Dominion of
England from that time, yet the Courts of England had nothing to do with the
Administration of Justice there, in other manner than now they have with the
Barbados, Jersey, etc. all which are of the Dominions of England, and may be
bound by Laws made respectively for them by an English Parliament, 400 See for
a further Exposition, 401, 402, etc.
Acton Burnell, 13 E. 1.
1. Recognizances for Debt were taken before this Statute by the Chancellor, two
Chief Justices, and Justices Itinerants; neither are they hindered by this
Statute from taking them as they did before, 102
28 E. 3. c. 2. concerning Wales.
1. Trials and Writs in England for Lands in Wales, were only for Lordships
Marchers, and not for Lands within the Principality of Wales, Vide ante 7.
postea 17, 18.
for the Lordships and Marchers were of the Dominion of England, and held of
the King in Capite, 411
31 E. 3. cap. 11. Concerning Executors.
1. Though Executors and Administrators are not compelled by the Common Law to
answer Actions of Debt for simple Contracts, yet the Law of the Land obliges
payment of them, 96 2. Upon committing Administration, Oath is taken to
administer truly, which cannot be without paying the Debts, 96 3. Oath is
likewise taken to make a true account to the Ordinary of what Remains, after
all Debts, Funerals, and just Expenses deducted, 96
1. 34 E. 3. c. 7. of Attaints.
This Statute granted Attaints in personal Actions, 146
1. 2 H. 6. cap. 4.
Those born in Ireland, are subject to, and bound by, the Laws of England, as
those of Calais, Gascoign, and Guien were, 293
1. 7. H. 8. c. 4. of Recoveries.
If a Common Recovery had been to Uses of Lordships and Manors before the
Statute of the 27 H. 8. the Recoverors had no remedy to make the Tenants Attorn
(for a quid Juris clamat would not lie upon a Recovery before the Statute of 27
H. 8.) which did give remedy, 48
1. If a man have a Benefice with Cure, 21 H. 8. c. Dispensations.
whatever the value be, and is admitted and instituted into another Benefice
with Cure, Postea 15.
of what value soever, having no Qualification or Dispensation, the first is
ipso facto void, and the Patron may present another, 131 2. But if the Patron
will not present, then if under value, no Lapse shall incurr until Deprivation
of the first Benefice and notice, Postea 22.
but if of the value of Eight pounds, the Patron, at his peril, must present
within the six Months, 131
25 H. 8. cap. 21. of Dispensations.
1. The Pope could formerly, and the Archbishop now can sufficiently dispense
for a plurality by this Statute, Ante. 14.
20 2. A Rector of a Church dispensed with according to this Statute, before he
is consecrated Bishop, remains Rector, as before, after Consecration, 24
25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 28 H. 8. c. 16. 32 H. 8. c. 38. of Marriages.
1. Neither by this Act, or 28 H. 8. cap. 7. no Marriage prohibited before,
either by Gods Law, or the Canon Law, differenced from it is made lawful, 216,
325 2. That the Marriages particularly declared to be against Gods Law, cannot
be dispensed with, but other Marriages, not particularly declared to be against
Gods Law, are left Statu quo prius, as to the Dispensations, 216, 325 3. That
neither of these Acts gave Jurisdiction to the Temporal Courts concerning
Marriages, more than they had before, but were Acts directory only to the
Ecclesiastical proceedings in matters of Marriage, 216 4. Neither of these Acts
declare, That the Degrees rehearsed in the said Acts, thereby declared to be
prohibited by Gods Law, are all the Degrees of Marriage prohibited by Gods Law,
ibid. 5. The Levitical Degrees, quatenus such are set forth by no Act of
Parliament, but Marriages which fall within some of those Degrees are said to
be Marriages within the Degrees prohibited by Gods Law by 28 H. 8. c. 7. and 28
H. 8. c. 16. 319 6. The 32 H. 8. c. 38. prohibits the impeaching of Marriages
only which are absolutely within the Levitical Degrees, leaving all other to
Spiritual Jurisdiction, as before that Act, 320 7. A Marriage with the
Grandfathers brothers wife by the mothers side, is a lawful Marriage by the 32
H. 8. c. 38. 206, 207 8. The marriage of the Husband with the Wives sister, or
the Wives sisters daughter, is prohibited within the Levitical Degrees, 322,
323 9. The 28 H. 8. cap. 16. makes invalid all Licenses, Dispensations, Bulls,
and other Instruments purchased from Rome, 217 10. This Statute of 25 H. 8. is
Repealed by the 28 H. 8: but not for the matter of Marriages there prohibited,
215 11. The Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. does not Repeal the 28 H. 8. cap.
7. entirely, but only one Clause of it, 324, 327 12. Some parts of 32 H. 8. c.
38. are Repealed, 218
1. 26 H. 8. Concerning Wales.
By this Statute power was given to the Kings President and Council in the
Marchers of Wales, Ante 7, 9. Postea 18.
in several Causes, as to Indict, Outlaw,
Proceed against Traitors, Clippers of Money, Murderers and other Felons,
within the Lordships, Marchers of Wales, to be indicted in the adjoining
County. But this did not extend to the Principality of Wales, 413
27 H. 8. concerning Wales.
1. The alteration which was made by this Statute, as to Wales, 414, 415 2. To
what Counties the Lordships Marchers of Wales are now annexed by this Statute,
Ante 7, 9, 18.
415
27 H. 8. of Uses.
1. A Use cannot arise where there is not a sufficient Estate in possession, 49
2. This Statute is properly to give the possession to him who had not the
possession, but the use only, viz. the possession which he wanted before to the
use which he had before, in such manner as he has the use, 42 3. It was never
the intent of the Statute to give the possession to fictitious Conuzees, in
order to a form of Conveyance; but the Statute brings the new uses, raised out
of a feigned possession in the Conuzee, to the real possession, which operates
according to their intent to change their Estate, 42 4. If an Estate for life
had been granted to the use of a man and his Heirs, an Estate in Fee could not
rise out of it by this Statute, 49 5. The principal use of this Statute,
especially upon Fines levied, is not to bring together a possession and a use,
but to introduce a general form of Conveyance, by which the Conuzors in the
Fine may execute their purposes at pleasure, by transferring to Strangers,
enlarging or diminishing their Estates, without observing the strictness of Law
for the possession of the Conuzee, 50 6. The Conuzee of a Rent granted by Fine
to uses, cannot have any actual seisin, or be in possession of such Rent since
this Statute, 49 7. A. makes a Feoffment with Warranty to the use of himself
for life, Remainder to his wife for life, Remainder to the use of his right
Heirs, when by this Statute the possession is brought to these uses, the
Warranty made by A. to the Feoffees and their Heirs, is wholly destroyed, 389
1. 32 H. 8. c. 32. concerning Executors.
This Statute gives Remedy for recovery of such Debts by Executors as were due
to the Testator, and for which there was no remedy before (viz.) the Tenants
did retain in their hands, arrearages of Rents, whereby the Executors could not
pay the Testators Debts, 48
7 E. 6. cap. 5. selling of Wines.
1. This Statute never intended that no Wine should be sold, nor that it should
be with great restraint sold, but every man might not sell it. And since it
restrains not the Kings power to license the selling of Wine, it is clear the
King may license, as if the Act had absolutely prohibited the selling of Wine,
and left it to the King to license, as he thought fit, 355 2. The intent of the
Act being, That every man should not sell Wine that would, his Majesty could
not better answer the ends of the Act, than to restrain the sellers to Freemen
of London, to the Corporation of Vintners, men bred up in that Trade, and
serving Apprenticeships to it, ibid.
13 El. c. 12 Not reading the Articles.
1. Immediately upon not reading the Articles, the Incumbent is by this Statute
deprived ipso facto, 132 2. Upon such Deprivation the Patron may present, Ante
14.
and his Clerk ought to be admitted and instituted; but if he do not, no Lapse
incurrs until after Six months after notice of such Deprivation given to the
Patron, 132 3. Where the Incumbent subscribes the Articles upon his Admission
and Institution, that makes him perfect Incumbent pro tempore, 133 4. But if he
has a Benefice, and afterward accepts another, and does not subscribe, nor
read the Articles, then he never was Incumbent of the second, and consequently
never accepted a second Benefice to disable him from holding the first, 132,
133, 134
1. That all Leases by Spiritual persons of Tithe, etc. 13 Eliz. cap. 10.
Concerning Leases to be made by Ecclesiastical persons.
parcel of their Spiritual Promotions, other than for One and twenty years, or
three Lives, reserving the accustomed yearly Rent, shall be void. 2. This
Statute intended that Leases in some sense might be made of Tithes for One and
twenty years, or three Lives, and an ancient Rent Reserved, but of a bare Tithe
only a Rent could not be reserved, for neither Distress nor Assise can be of
such a Rent, 203, 204 3. Therefore a Lease of Tithe and Land, out of which a
Rent may issue, and the accustomed Rent may be reserved, must be good within
the intent of the Statute, 204
7 Jac. cap. 5.21 Jac. cap. 12. For Officers to be sued in the proper County.
1. The question upon these Acts was, Whether an Officer, or any in their
assistance, that shall do any thing by color of, but not concerning their
Office, and be therefore impleaded, shall have the benefit of these Acts. 2. Or
if they are impleaded for any thing done by pretense of their Offices, and
which is not strictly done by reason of their Office, but is a mis-seazante,
Whether they may have the like benefit? 3. Without this Act the Action ought to
be laid where the Fact was done, and the Act is but to compel the doing of that
where an Officer is concerned, that otherwise Fieri debuit, 114 4. The Statute
intends like benefit to all the Defendants (where the Fact is not proved to be
done where the Action is laid) as if the Plaintiff became Nonsuit, or suffered
a Discontinuance (viz.) that they should have double costs, 117
12 Car. 2. cap. 4. For granting Tonnage and Poundage to the King.
1. Those Wines which are to pay this Duty, according to the Act, must be Wines
brought into Port, as Merchandise, by his Majesty's Subjects or Strangers, 165
2. But Wines which are by their kind to pay Duty, if they shall be brought into
Ports or Places of this Kingdom, neither by his Majesty's Subjects, nor Aliens,
they are not chargeable with this Duty, ibid. 3. If they are not brought into
the Ports and Places as Merchandise, viz. for Sale, they are not chargeable
with the Duty, 165, 170 4. Wines coming into this Kingdom, as Wreck, are
neither brought into this Kingdom by his Majesty's Subjects nor Strangers, but
by the Wind and Sea, 166 5. Wrecked Goods are not brought into this Kingdom for
Merchandise, viz. for Sale, but are as all other the Native Goods of the
Kingdom, for sale, or other use, at the pleasure of the owner, ibid. 6. All
Goods chargeable with the Duties of this Act, must be proprieted by a natural
born Merchant, or Merchant Alien, and accordingly the greater and lesser Duty
is to be paid, 166, 168 7. All Goods subject to this Duty, may be forfeited by
the disobedience and mis-behaviour of the Merchant-proprietor, or those
entrusted by him, 167
1. The intent of this Statute is to privilege the Father against common
Right, 12 Car. 2 cap. 24. To enable the Father to devise the Guardianship of
his Son.
to appoint the Guardian of his Heir, and the time of his Wardship under One
and twenty, 179 2. Such a special Guardian cannot transfer the custody by Deed
or Will to any other, 179 3. He has no different Estate from a Guardian in
Soccage, but for the time the of Wardship, 179 4. The Father cannot by this Act
give the custody to a Papist, 180 5. If the Father does not appoint for how
long time under One and twenty years his Son shall be in Ward, it is void for
Uncertainty. 185 6. The substance of the Statute, and sense thereof is, That
whereas all Tenures are now Soccage, and the Law appoints a Guardian till
Fourteen: yet the Father may nominate the Guardian to his Heir, and for any
time, until his Age of One and twenty; and such Guardian shall have like remedy
for the Ward as Guardian in Soccage at the Common Law, 183
Supersedeas. 1. If a privileged person, as an Attorney, etc. or his Menial
Servant, is sued in any Jurisdiction foreign to his privilege, he may have a
Supersedeas, 155
Surplusage. 1. Surplusage in a special Verdict, 78
Suspension. 1. A Suspension of Rent is when either the Rent or Land are so
conveyed, not absolutely and finally, but for a certain time after which the
Rent will be again revived, 199 2. A Rent may be suspended by Unity for a time,
and afterward restored, 39
Tail, See Title Warranty. 1. SEE an Exposition upon the the Statute de Donis,
370, 371, 372, etc. 2. What shall be a good Estate Tail by Implication in a
Devise, 262 3. A. having Issue Thomas and Mary, devises to Thomas and his
Heirs for ever; and for want of Heirs of Thomas, to Mary and her Heirs: This is
an Estate Tail in Thomas, 269, 270 4. A Copyholder in Fee surrenders to the use
of F. his Son, and J. the Son of F. and of the longest liver of them; and for
want of Issue of J. lawfully begotten, the Remainder to M. here it being by
Deed, J. had only an Estate for Life, but had it been by Will, it had been an
Estate Tail by Implication, 261 5. The Warranty of the Tenant in Tail
descending upon the Donor or his Heirs, is no bar in a Formedon in the
Reverter brought by them, although it be a Collateral Warranty, 364, 365 6. The
lineal Warranty of Tenant in Tail shall not bind the Right of the Estate Tail
by the Statute de Donis, neither with or without Assets descending, 365
Tenures, See Title Estates. Testament, See Devise. 1. A Custody (as a
Gardianship in Soccage) is not in its nature Testamentary, it cannot pay Debts
nor Legacies, nor be distributed as Alms, 182
Title. 1. When you would recover any thing from me, it is not sufficient for
you to destroy my Title, but you must prove your own to be better than mine,
58, 60 2. In a Quare Impedit, if the Defendant will leave the general Issue,
and controvert the Plaintiffs Title, he must do it by his own Title, 58 3. The
Plaintiff must recover by his own strength, and not by the Defendants weakness,
8, 58 4. Priority of possession is a good Title against him who has no Title
at all, 299 5. No man can Traverse an Office; except he can make himself a good
Title, 64
Trade. 1. The Law permits not persons, who have served Seven years to have a
way of livelihood, to be hindered in the Exercise of their Trades, in any Town
or part of the Kingdom, 356
Traverse. 1. No person shall Traverse an Office, unless he can make himself a
good Title, 64 2. When in a Quare Impedit the Defendant Traverseth any part of
the Plaintiffs Count, it ought to be such part as is inconsistent with his
Title, and being found against the Plaintiff, destroys his Title, 8, 9, 10 3.
Where the presentation, and not the seisin of the Advowson is to be traversed,
9, 10, 11, 12 4. Where the Presentation, and not the Appendancy is traversable,
10, 11, 15 5. Where the Seisin in Gross or Appendancy is Traversable, 12, 13 6.
The Appendancy is well Traversed, when it is all the Plaintiffs Title to
present, and inconsistent with the Defendants, 13, 15 7. Where either the
Appendancy or Presentation may be Traversed, 15 8. Where neither the Seisin in
Gross, nor Appendancy, shall be Traversed, but only the Vacancy, 16 9. Where
the King may take a Traverse upon a Traverse, which regularly a common person
cannot do, but where the first Traverse tendered by the Defendant is not
material to the Action brought, 62 10. Where the King may refuse to maintain
his own Title, which is Traversed by the Defendant, and take a Traverse to the
Title made by the Defendant, 62, 64
Trespass. 1. By the ancient Law it was adjudged in Parliament, no man ought to
be condemned in a Trespass de praecepto or auxilio, if no man were convicted of
the Fact done, 115, 116 2. Action of Trespass against Officers within the
Statute, as Constables, etc. and their Assistants must be laid in the proper
County, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117
Trial. 1. Actions upon Bond or Deed, made in Wales, Ireland, Normandy, etc.
where to be brought, 413 2. How Dominions, Leagues, and Truces are to be tried,
288 3. An Issue arising out of the Jurisdiction of the Courts of England,
although it arise within the Dominions of England out of the Realm, shall not
be tried in England, 404 4. If a Signiory in Wales (that is not part of the
Principality) be to be tried, it must be tried by the Common Law; but if Land
within the Signiory is to be tried, it must be tried within the Manor there,
407 5. A person naturalized in Ireland, commits Treason beyond the Seas, where
no local Allegiance is due to the King, how and where he shall be tried, 291,
292
Tithes. 1. Though Tithes pass by Deed only, yet where a Rectory and the Tithes
de D. are granted, if there is not Livery, neither the Rectory nor Tithes will
pass, because they were intended to be granted together, 197 2. There can be no
primary and immediate Occupancy of Tithes, 191, 194 3. A Rent cannot be
reserved out of a bare Tithe only, to make the Lease good within the 13 Eliz.
cap. 10. because neither a Distress nor Assise can be brought thereof, 204
Verdict, See Evidence, Issue. 1. THE Jury may find a Deed or a Will, the
Contents thereof being proved by witnesses, 77 2. But if they will collect the
Contents of the Deed, and by the same Verdict find the Deed in haec Verba, the
Court is not to adjudge upon their Collection, but the Deed it self, ibid. 3. A
Deed or Will must not be found in part, because the Court cannot but adjudge
upon the whole matter, and not upon part only, 84 4. The legal Verdict of the
Jury is finding for the Plaintiff, or the Defendant: and what they answer, if
asked, concerning some particular Fact, is no part of their Verdict, 150 5. In
a general Verdict, finding the point in Issue by way of Argument, although
never so concluding, is not good, 75, 187 6. In a Special Verdict the Case in
Fact must be found clear, to a common intent, without Equivocation 75, 78, 87
7. The Issue was, Whether a Copyhold was grantable to three for the lives of
two; The Jury find that it is grantable for Three Lives; this was argumentative
only, and therefore a void Verdict, 87 8. Where a man by Lease reciting a
former Lease to have been made, does Demise for Forty years after the
Expiration of that Lease, paying the same Rent as is mentioned in the recited
Lease, and only the Lease for Forty years, and not the recited Lease, is found
in the Verdict: This Verdict is a void Verdict, and finds neither the one or
other Lease, 74, 75, 76, 81, 82
Vintners, See Title Statute 21. 1. The King could not better answer the end of
the Act of 7 E. 6. than to restrain the Sellers of Wine to Freemen of London.
2. To the Corporation of Vintners, men bred up in that Trade, and serving
Apprenticeships to it, 355 3. And that such should be licensed, without
restraint, is most agreeable to the Law of the Kingdom, which permits not
persons, who have served Seven years to have a way of livelihood, to be hindered
in the Exercise of their Trades, 356
Voucher, Vouchee. 1. No man shall Vouch, who is not privy to the Estate (that
is) who has not the same Estate, as well as the Land to which the warranty was
annexed, 384 2. When a man will be warranted by Voucher, he must make it appear
how the warranty extends to him, 385
Use, See Title Statutes 19. 1. The Statute brings the new Uses raised out of a
feigned possession, and for no time in the Conizee, to the real possession, and
for all times in the Conizors, which operates according to their Intents to
change their Estates, but not possessions, 42 2. By the Statue of 27 H. 8. the
Use and Possession come instantly together, 50 3. The principal use of the
Statute of Uses, is to introduce a general form of Conveyance, by which the
Conizors of the Fine may execute their purposes at pleasure, 50 4. An old Use
may be revoked, and a new Use raised at the same time, 42 5. Uses declared by
Indenture made a year after the Recovery, 51 6. If a Fine be levied of the
Reversion of Land, or of a Rent to Uses, the Cestuy que use may Distrain
without Attornment, 50, 51 7. A Rent may arise out of the Estate of Cestuy que
use upon a Recovery, which was to arise out of the Recoverers Estate, 52
Usurpation. 1. A void presentation makes no Usurpation, when the Kings
Presentation gains a Title by Usurpation, 14 2. If a man, in time of Vacancy,
present his Clerk, who is admitted, instituted, and inducted, he gains a good
Title to present by Usurpation when the Church becomes next void, 10, 11, 12,
15, 57
Wager of Law. 1. A Man can never wage his Law for a Demand which is uncertain,
because he cannot swear he paid that which consisted of Damages only, 101 2.
Debt lies against an Executor for Attorneys Fees, because there the Testator
could not wage his Law, 99
Wales, See Title Statute, 7, 9, 15. 1. Wales, after the Conquest of it by
Edward the First, was annexed to England, Jure Proprietatis, 300 2. It received
Laws from England as Ireland did, and differs nothing from it, but only in
Irelands having a Parliament, 300, 301 3. Wales, before the Conquest of it by
England, was governed by its own Laws, 399 4. When Wales came to be of the
Dominion of the Crown of England, and what Laws they were then obliged to, 399,
400, 402, 415, 5. Process in Wales differs from Process in England, 400, 412 6.
That the Summons of Inhabitants in Wales, and the Trial of an Issue arising
there should be by the Sheriff of the next adjoining County, was first ordained
by Parliament, and not at the Common Law, 404, 408, 412 7. This Ordinance
extended not to all Wales, but only to the Lordships Marchers there, neither
did it extend to the Body of the Principal ty of Wales, to which the Statute of
Rutland only extended, 405, 408, 411, 412 8. Where the Land is part of the
Principality of Wales, it was subject to the Laws of Wales; but when it is held
of the King, then there was no remedy but in the Kings Courts, 405, 406, 408 9.
If a Signiory in Wales was to be tried, it should be tried by the Common Law;
but if Lands were held of the Signiory, it should be tried within the Manor,
407 10. All Quare Impedits for disturbance to Churches in Wales, within the
Lordships Marchers only, were tryable in England, and not in Wales, 409, 410
11. The Bishops of Wales were originally of the Foundation of the Prince of
Wales, 411 12. By the 26 H. 8. Power is given to Indict, Outlaw, and Proceed
against Traitors and Felons, etc. within the Lordships Marchers of Wales, and
to be indicted in the adjoining County, but not against Offenders within the
Principality, 413 13. What alterations have since been made by the 27 H. 8. and
1 E. 6. cap. 10. 414, 415, 416, etc. 14. The uniting and incorporating of Wales
to England, does not thereby make the Laws used in England extend to Wales,
without more express words, 415 15. Since the Act of 27 Hen. 8. the Courts at
Westminster have less Jurisdiction in Wales than they had; for as they before
had Jurisdiction in all the Lordships Marchers; they now have only in these
four Counties therein particularly mentioned, but none over the rest, 417 16.
No Fieri Facias, Capias ad satisfaciendum, or other Judicial Process did run
into Wales, but only an Outlawry and an Extent had gone, 397, 412, 414 17. A
Judgment given in Wales, shall not be executed in England, 398 18. The
Lordships Marchers did lie betwixt the Shires of England and the Shires of
Wales, 415 19. To what Counties and Places the Lordships Marchers in Wales are
now annexed by the 27 H. 8. 415
Warrantia Chartae. 1. No man shall have a Warrantia Chartae who is not privy
to the Estate, that is, who has not the same Estate as well as the Land to
which the warranty was annexed, 384
Warranty, See Title Statutes 5, 6. 1. Dedi and Concessi is a warranty in Law,
126 2. Where there is a warranty in Law, and an express warranty, it is at the
election of the party to take advantage of either, 126, 127 3. At the Common
Law the distinction of a lineal and collateral warranty was useless and
unknown; and as to any effect of Law, there was no difference between a lineal
and collateral warranty, but the warranty of the Ancestor descending upon the
Heir, be it the one or the other did equally bind, 366 4. The warranty of
Tenant Tail descending upon the Donor, or his Heirs, is no bar in a Formedon
in Reverter brought by them, although it be a collateral warranty, 364, 365,
368 5. The warranty of Tenant by the Courtesy bars not the Heir, if the
Father leave not Assets to descend in Recompense, 365 6. The lineal warranty of
Tenant in Tail shall not bind the right of the Estate Tail by the Statute de
Donis, neither with or without Assets descending, 365, 366 7. The Statute de
Donis restrains not the warranty of Tenant in Tail, from barring him in the
Remainder in Tail by his warranty descending upon him, 367 As to him in
Remainder in Tail the warranty of the Donee is collateral, and binds as at the
Common Law, 367, 377, 379, 381 8. No Issue in Tail is defended from the
warranty of the Donee or Tenant in Tail, but such as are inheritable to the
Estates intended within that Statute, and no Estates are so intended, but such
only as had been Fee-simples conditional, 369 9. The Statute de Donis preserves
the Estate Tail for the Issue or the Reversion for the Donor, against the
alienations of the Donee or Tenant in Tail, with or without warranty, but not
absolutely against all warranties that might bar them; for it has not
restrained the collateral warranty of any other Ancestor, 369, 370, 377, 379,
381 10. An alienation with warranty, which shall hinder the Land from reverting
to the Donor or his Heirs, is expressly forbidden by the Statute de Donis, 374
11. No man's warranty does bind directly, and a priori, because it is lineal or
collateral; for no Statute restrains any warranty under those terms from
binding, nor no Law institutes any warranty in those terms, but those are
restraints by consequent only, from the restraints of warranties made by
Statute, 375 12 The Statute de Donis makes no difference between a Donor
stranger, and a Donor privy in blood to the Donee, but the warranties are the
same in both Cases, 378 13. The Tenant in possession, may Rebutt the Demandant
without showing how he came to the possession which he then has when
impleaded, be it by disseisin or any other tortious way; but he must show how
the warranty extended to him, 385, 386 14. If a man will be warranted by a
Rebutter, he must make it appear how the warranty extends to him, but he need
not have the like estate in the Land upon a Rebutter, as upon a Voucher, 385
15. The Tenant in possession shall not rebut the Demandant by the warranty,
without he first make it appear that the warranty did extend to him as Heir or
Assignee, 385, 386, 387, 388 16. Where a man is once entitled to the warranty,
whatsoever Estate he had when impleaded, he might rebut, though he could not
vouch, 386 17. Tenant in possession setting forth how the warranty extends to
him, needs not set forth by what Estate or Title he is in possession, 387 18. A
warranty may be extinguished several ways by Release, by Defeazance, by
Attainder, by Re-feoffment of the Warrantor or his Heirs, 387 And where the
Estate to which it is annexed is determined, 389
19. If the warranty be destroyed, the Rebutter, which is the incident to it,
is likewise destroyed, 387, 392 20. Feoffees are seized to the use of A. for
his life, afterward to the use of his wife for her life, and after to the use
of the right heirs of A, and when by the Statute of Uses the possession is
brought to these Uses, the warranty by A. to the Feoffees and their heirs is
wholly destroyed, 389 21. But if it had been made to them and their Assignees,
it were more colorable than to them and their Heirs only, 390 22. Where the
warranty cannot attach the Ancestor, it shall never attach the Heir, ibid. 23.
Where a warranty is made to a man and his heirs, his Assignee can take no
advantage of it, ibid. 24. The Warranty being an incident to the Estate
warranted, shall accompany it where the Law disposes the Estate and Lands
warranted to all intents, 392 25. Such persons who come to the Estate
dispositione legis, are not properly in the post, ibid. 26. There are some
persons who may rebutt, and perhaps vouch, who are neither Heirs, nor formally
Assignees, but have the Estate warranted dispositione legis, as Tenant pur le
Courtesy, Tenant in Dower, etc. 390, 391, 392
Wife, See Baron and Feme. Will, See Devise. Witnesses. 1. A Witness swears but
to what he has seen or heard generally; or more largely to what has fallen
under his Senses, 142
Writ, See Abatement of Writs. 1. Brevia Mandatoria, and Non Remedialia, are
Writs that concern not the Rights or Properties of the Subject, but the
Government and Superintendency of the King, 401 2. No person shall have a Writ
to the Bishop, except his Title appears plainly, 60 3. In a Quare Impedit the
Plaintiff and Defendant are both Actors, and may each of them have a Writ to
the Bishop, 6, 7 4. In a Quare Impedit, if all the Defendants plead Ne disturba
pas, the Plaintiff may pray a Writ to the Bishop, or maintain the disturbance
for damages, 58 5. A Writ to the Bishop Non obstante Reclamatione, 6 6. Judges
ought not, ex Officio, to abate Writs, 95
Wreck, See Title Statutes 25. 1. By the Common Law all wreckt Goods were the
Kings, and therefore are not chargeable with any Custom, 164 2. Wrecks are
such Goods as are cast on Land, and have no other owner or proprietor but who
the Law makes, viz. the King or Lord of the Manor, but they have not an
absolute property until after a year and a day, 168 3. Goods which are wreck,
are not liable to pay any Custom by 12 Car. 2. nor any other Law, 165, 166,
171, 172 4. A man may have wreck by prescription, 164 5. Goods derelicted may
be wreck, 168

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10. in marg. r. 269. p. 45. l. 21. r. Case. p. 107. l. 3. r. March. p.
157. in marg. r. Magna Chart. p. 161. l. 35. r. resolved. ibid. l. 35. r.
searches. p. 183. in marg. r. 89. p. 208. l. 23. r. knowledge. l. 36. r. 23. p.
210. l. 22. r. fourth. p. 337. l. 11. r. poyar. p. 359. l. penult. r. by the.
p. 383. l. 12. r. Croke. p. 390. l. 38. r. Institutione. p. 410. l. 26. r.
unque p. 420. l. 3. r. of.

A TABLE of the Names of the Principal CASES contained in this BOOK.
B.
BEdle verse. Constable 177 Bole and alii verse. Horton 360 Bushels Case 135
C.
CRawe verse. Ramsey 274 Crawley verse. Swindley and alios 173
D.
DIxon verse. Harrison 36
E.
EDes verse. the Bishop of Exon, 18 Edgcombe verse. Dee 89
G.
GArdner verse. Sheldon 259
H.
HAyes verse. Bickerstaff 118 Harrison verse. Dr. Burrell, 206 Hill verse. Good
302 Holden verse. Smallbrook 187
K.
THe King verse. Bishop of Worcester, 53
N.
SIr Henry North verse. Coe 251
P.
PRice verse. Braham and alios 106
R.
Row verse. Huntington 66
S.
SHephard verse. Gosnold and alios, 159 Shute verse. Higden 129 Styles verse. Coxe
and alios 111
T.
SIr John Tufton verse. Sir Richard Temple 1 Tristram verse. Viscountess
Baltinglasse 28 Thomas verse. Sorrel 330
W.
COncerning Process out of the Courts of Westminster into Wales 395

