AN ELEGY upon the Death of the most Excellent Poet MR JOHN CLEAVELAND.
Glow-Wormes may peep, when sable night
Hoodwinks the Sun's triumphant light,
Why may not I (although I 'nere,
But as a star shone in Witt's Sphere)
Borrow some luster from our dying Sun,
And from his fall have resurrection?
Immortal CLEAVELAND! my pen's at a stand,
And wonder strikes a palsy 'nto my hand.
Immortal CLEAVELAND'S dead! oh let my eyes.
Weep faster, then my pen can Elegies!
Dear Soul, since (...) with Ebon night
My tootoo spongious Verse will strive to light
Thee to the grave; though with a twinkling ray,
Snatched from the former luster of thy Day.
Does thy verse, with thy glass then cease to run?
Do the fates cut the line the Muses spun?
Have the three Sisters then more power then Nine?
Has covetuous Aeacus robbed thee of that Mine,
That sparkled in each Diamond word, each Line
Richer in Golden sense, then the King of Spain,
Alluring more then Danae's golden rain?
When in our blockish age Wit was at fall,
And to write verse was thought Apocriphall:
Thou did it raise to the Elah of perfection,
Thy lines were Searcloths against the infection
Of Sore-back'd Time, and thy ingenious Muse
Maugre all malice, lofty strains did use.
Noe Doubt, the future ages will admire,
How well in frosty ignorance, thy fire
(Hotter then any, Zealots) in a time
When 'twas called sin to read or writ a rhyme:
Could' flame so bright, and how thou could fit
The unbiased time with thy well biased wit.
Tho all our Mango Poets thee upbraid,
(Whose Drabs are Muses, Poetry their Trade.)
Tho Sacrilegious Elves pollute thy fame
With their unhallowed lips, yet shall thy name
Out live their Spurious bratts, thy golden strain
(The Geniall Son of thy great teeming brain.)
Shall be held sacred by posterity
As the Idaea of true Poetry.
And like Mahumetans we hence will write
From thy Hegira, from thy speedy flight
From us to heaven, where thy Muse does sing
Sweet-breathing Cantoes to the Immortal King.
Unto Apollo's Shrine we will noe more
Go Pilgrims, but thy relics we will adore:
And to thy Sacred Poems, we will lo!
As zealous Turks unto Medina go,
Where they, like the Pythian Oracle, dispense
To Poets laws, fraught with more Eloquence.
When thy terse Muse in Cataracts did fall,
It made not Deaf, but it did Silence all
Those Sectaries, that dwell't too near the wave
Of Nile-like swelling Shism, yea and did lave
The putrefacted Humors of our times,
The Pestilence of our age, its damned crimes,
(Whether Jack Presbyter thou did discribe
Or Adoniram, or that black-mouthed tribe.
Must I here stay? noe, noe, my tears supply
Mine Ink, although my Standish says it is dry.
Dear soul farewell, our pur-blind eyes noe more
Can view thy Western Sun, yet we adore,
Like the Enthusiastique Priest, the West,
Hoping thy rise far brighter from the East.
Epigraphe.
Defessus toties humilis serpendo Poeta
Noster humi, summum respicit ille polum.
Viderat ut coelum pleno stupefactus hiatu,
Fac Deus, and proprius videro; dixit, obit.
Haec inter suspiria and lachrymas Scripsit Philomusus Philoponus.


