COSMOGRAPHY AND GEOGRAPHY In Two Parts: THE FIRST, Containing the General and
Absolute Part of COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY, BEING A TRANSLATION From that
Eminent and much Esteemed GEOGRAPHER VARENIVS, Wherein are at large handled All
such Arts as are necessary to be understood for the true knowledge thereof. To
which is added the much wanted Schemes omitted by the Author.

THE SECOND PART, Being a Geographical Description of all the WORLD, Taken from
the Notes and Works of the Famous Monsieur SANSON, Late GEOGRAPHER to the
French King: To which are added About an Hundred Cosmographical, Geographical
and Hydrographical TABLES of several Kingdoms and Isles in the World, with
their Chief Cities, Seaports, Bays, etc. drawn from the MAPS of the said SANSON.

Illustrated with MAPS.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Richard Blome, MDCLXXXII.

royal English blazon or coat of armsTo the Right Noble CHRISTOPHER, DUKE OF
ALBEMARLE, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys,
Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Lieutenant of Devonshire and
Essex, Captain of His MAJESTY'S Life Guards and Guards of Horse, One of the
Gentlemen of His Bed Chamber, and One of His Most Honurable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
WHEN I consider You are the Duke of ALBEMARLE, the very Title is so Great,
that it puts a damp on my Quill, and disables me from making any sufficient
Apology for this presumptuous Dedication; But on the other hand, when I
consider that You are Heir to Your now Glorious Fathers Virtues, as well as to
his Titles and Dignities; and that his Goodness and Humility are entailed on
You his only Son, I cannot want a Motive to this Ambition. My Lord, This Volume
is a Cosmographical and Geographical Description of the WORLD, in which Your
Name is great and precious; and although in it self is excellent, yet being
Countenanced by Your Protection will admit of no Equals. This being granted by
Your Grace's Favor, I have no more to beg, but that Your Fathers Magnanimity,
Valor, Grandeur and Heroic Actions may be so deeply imprinted on You, that
these Kingdoms may not only love and admire You, but that Your Name and Memory
may be precious to future Ages; which is the Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Graces most Obedient Servant, RICHARD BLOME.

THE Preface to the Reader.
AMongst all those Arts or Sciences which Man ought to have a Knowledge of, the
Description of the Earth and Heavens, which is termed COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY
(for the Vtility and Dignity thence arising) ought not to have the least
estimate; the Soul being naturally inclined to the exploration of COSMOGRAPHY
and GEOGRAPHY, as a necessary inherent in it; which seems evident; in that Men
of undoubted Judgments, out of a singular desire to propagate this Study, and
sparing no Cost or Labor, have traveled over the greatest part of the
Universe. Unto this we add, That seeing the Earth was created by God to be the
habitation of Man, if by brevity of Life, and Humane imbecility, we cannot so
well Travel with the Body, yet at leastwise we would visit, behold, and
contemplate it in our Minds; for its beauty, admirable elegancy, and the Honor
of the Creator. There are many other Forceable Arguments, by which it appears
all Men are generally inclined to the knowledge thereof: As the Commodities of
every Nation are peculiar to it self, so that (according to Divine Providence)
one Nation cannot well subsist without the help of another, to which end they
are transported by way of Exchange and Traffic unto other Countries. But, to
show the use of it in all Arts and Sciences; there being none but receive some
light and assistance from COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY. To this the immortal
Stagyrite, and Divine Plato flies as a refuge, when a numberless multitude,
and variety of Natures secrets in Lands disjoined, and the profound Ocean
sometimes nonpluseth or staggers their Capacities. The Moral PHILOSOPHER is a
Non-essence, being unskilled herein; for how can he search into, or inform
himself of the Genius, Natures, Inclinations, or Studies of Men, and what is
most proper for every distinct Nation or People (being his adequate subject)
without this Chart to stear by? The PHYSICIAN is necessitated to have a great
insight in this Noble Study, both for observing the Drugs and Medicaments,
transported from Foreign Parts, etc. judging their Natures and Effects from the
several Climates, etc. but especially for the variety of Bodies, or
Constitutions, which are habituated according to the Climate and Soil of the
Country. Take this away from the MARTIALIST, his Stratagems fail, and his whole
Knowledge is in a feeble condition. The MERCHANT and NAVIGATOR are compelled
unto an insight herein, for the knowing the Situation and Climate of
Countries, their Circumferences; the Latitude and Longitude of Places, the
Currents of Rivers; what Commodities each Region abounds in, and what they
are deficient of, and the Manners, Customs, and Dispositions of the
Inhabitants. Without COSMOGRAPHY and GEOGRAPHY all History is a thing of little
use, the affinity of them both being such, that they seem to center both in
one. And, to come more home to the matter; the History of the Scythians,
Indians, Aethiopians, and Americans, are only expressed unto us by Geographers.
Farther, Historiographers make use of Geographical Descriptions for the better
and more full illustration of their History: And lastly, in reference unto
POLICY, or Management of State, no Wars, Societies or Leagues, can be well made
with a Foreign State or Kingdom, except there be first a perfect knowledge of
the Nature, Disposition, Manners, Customs, Strength, etc. of the Nation or
P^^ple with which such a Combination or League, etc. is to be made and
established. Henry, King of Castile, though much weakened by Sickness, yet
neglected not to send frequent Ambassadors into Asia, that he might have a
continual information of the Manners and Strength of those Provinces: And the
same was done by Moses, before his setting foot into Palestine. Now Nature,
which exhibiteth and discovers her elegancy and force in the production of
variety of things, has not only diversely distinguished the Faces and
Physiognomy, but also the Souls and Minds of Men; The Modes, Genius's, Customs
and Natures of Nations being vastly different; unto this very end she has
variously disposed the causes themselves. GEOGRAPHERS have divided the World
into Climates, and every Climate is distinctly subject to the Dominion of some
Planet, as the chief cause of this Diversity; where observe, that the first
Climate, which extends through the Meroe (an Isle, made so by the River
Nilus) is subject to Saturn. Those under the second Climate, is attributed to
Jupiter, and passes through Siene, a City in Egypt. Those inhabiting under
the third, is subject to Mars, and extends through Alexandria. Those under
the fourth, is appropriated to the Sun, and stretches through Rhodes, and the
middle of Greece. Those under the fifth, which passes through Rome, and
divides Italy from Savoy, is attributed to Venus. Those under the sixth, where
Mercury is predominate, passes through France. And those under the seventh,
which is subject to the Moon, passes through Germany, the Low Countries and
England; which said Planets have their Operations or Influences on the
Inhabitants dwelling under each of the said Climes. So that although the
glorious and eternal Luminaries of Heaven have an efficacious operation, yet
notwithstanding the Disposition of the Earth, has a far greater prevalency;
seeing that through the various situation of Hills and Valleys, we
experimentally find more great and different effects of the Celestial Rays,
which are also contemporated by the Rivers and Lakes. This can be denied by no
man, that Nature is admirable in her Works; sometimes as it were on set purpose
deluding the curiosity of Humane wisdom, by receding from the ordinary Laws of
Causes. Who can render a sufficient reason of that which is testified by
Mariners concerning the Region of Maliapur, in which is seated Calicut? an
exceeding high Mountains, topping the Clouds, dividing this Province
throughout, and ending in a Promontory, which is now called Comorium, which
although it has the same Altitude of the Pole, yet when the Winter rages, and
the Waters swell on the one side, on the other side the Fields and Towns are
schorched with excessive heat, and the Sea calm. Wherefore this diversity which
is discovered in the Climates, the situation of Provinces; Contemporation of
the Air and Elements, do variously discriminate the Constitutions of Men, and
those Constitutions, their Natures; for the manners of the Mind follow the
temperament and disposition of the Body. The Septentrional or Northern People
being remote from the Sun, and by consequence inhabiting in cold Countries; are
Sanguine, Robust, full of Valor and Animosity; hence they have always been
Victorious and predominant over the Meridional or Southern Nations; as the
ASSYRIANS over the CHALDEANS; the MEDES over the ASSYRIANS; the PARTHIANS over
the GRECIANS, the TVRKS over the ARABIANS; the GOTHS over the GERMANS; the
ROMANS over the AFRICANS; and the ENGLISH over the FRENCH. They love Freedom
and Liberty, as those also do which are Mountaineers, as the Helvetians,
Grissons, and Cantabrians. The Nations proximate to the Sun, have their Blood
wholly exsiccated by immoderate Heat; hence the Inhabitants of those Places are
melancholy, and profound in the penetrating of the secrets of Nature: For all
the Northern Nations receive the Mysteries of the Sciences from the EGYPTIANS
and ARABIANS. The Provinces which are immediately between both Torrid Zones
enjoy a a Benign Heaven; so that they Flourish in Religion Justice and Prudence.
The Mutations of Governments, the Transmigration and Emission of Colonies,
Converse, Matrimony, War and Peace; also the Motions of the Celestial Spheres,
which drive from the Poles, and the Zodiac of the Primum Mobile, the Heavenly
Images on these Inferior Bodies, do change and alter the Habits, Manners, and
also Nature it self. If we have recourse unto History, we shall find the
GERMANS noted of old for lofty Minds, and the ITALIANS on the contrary too
abject and low, which difference now cannot be discerned. Nations have Swayed
and been Predominate by turns, and as long as the Monarchy has had duration
amongst them, Virtue has flourished, Arts and Arms have gone hand in hand,
which afterward with the Ruin of the Empire has been smothered in its Ashes,
and received Vivification in another place; yet notwithstanding these Obstacles
every Nation has certain Propensions and fixed Affections appropriate to every
one, which will adhere to Forrainers, if that they long remain amongst them.

The Intelligent Reader, who desires a Knowledge in these and other
Particulars, with a throughout Prospect of the Vtility of COSMOGRAPHY and
GEOGRAPHY, may consult the Work it self.

RICHARD BLOME.

The Contents of the SECTIONS and CHAPTERS.
GENERAL GEOGRAPHY, which may be divided into III. Parts; 1. The Absolute Part
divided into Five Sections, The first Section of things to be foreknown, Chap.
1. Of the Precognita's, Page 1 Chapter 2. Things necessary to Geometry and
Trigonometry, p. 6
The Second Section explaineth the Affections of the whole Earth, Chap. 3. Of
the Figure of the Earth, p. 11 Chap. 4. Of the Dimension and Magnitude of the
same, 15 Chap. 5. Of the Motion of the same, p. 23 Chap. 6. Of its Place in the
System of the World, p. 27 Chap. 7. Of its Substance and Constitution, p. 30
The Third Section, in which the Constitution and Parts of the Earth are
explained, Chap. 8. Of the division of the Earth by Waters, p. 35 Chap. 9. Of
Mountains in general, p. 40 Chap. 10. Of the difference of Mountains, p. 46
Chap. 11. Of Woods, Deserts, and Mines, p. 54
The Fourth Section of Hydrography, in which the Waters and their Properties
are explained, Chap. 12. Of the division of the Ocean throughout the Earth, p.
57 Chap. 13. Of the Ocean and its Parts, p. 65 Chap. 14. Of the Motions of the
Sea, especially of the flux and reflux, p. 83 Chap. 15. Of Lakes, Pools, and
Marshes, p. 102 Chap. 16. Of Rivers, p. 108 Chap. 17. Of Mineral Waters,
Baths, Spaws, etc. p. 130 Chap. 18. Of the mutation of Dry places into Watery,
and the contrary, p. 142
The fifth Section of the Atmosphere and Wind, Chap. 19. Of the Atmosphere and
Air, p. 154 Chap. 20. Of the Winds in general, p. 179 Chap. 21. Of the
differences of Winds, and of them in particular, p. 187

2. The Respective Part ^xplaining the Celestial Affections, Chap. 22. Of the
Celestial Affections in general, p. 2^3 Chapter 23. Of the Latitude of a Place, and
the Elevation of the Pole, p. 207 Chap. 24. Of the division of the Earth into
Zones, p. 213 Chap. 25. Of the Longitude of the Days, and division of the Earth
into Climates, p. 220 Chap. 26. Of the Light, Heat, Cold, Rains, with other
Properties of the Zones according to the Season of the Year, p. 231 Chap. 27.
Of Shadows, and the division of the Inhabitants in respect of the Shadow, p.
259 Chap. 28. Of the Comparation of the Celestial Affections in diverse places,
where is treated concerning the Antoeci, Perioeci, and Antipodes, p. 269 Chap.
29. Of the diversity of Time in diverse Places, p. 275 Chap. 30. Of the diverse
Rising of the Sun and Moon, and of the other Appearances, p. 280
3. The Comparative Part considering the Affections which do arise from the
comparing of one place to another, Chap. 31. Of the Longitude of Places, p. 291
Chap. 32. Of the Situation of Places one to another, p. 309 Chap. 33. Of the
mutual distances of Places, p. 335 Chap. 34. Of the visible Horizon, p. 342
Chap. 35. Of the Art of Navigation in general, and of the Building of Ships, p.
344 Chap. 36. Of the Lading or Ballacing of Ships, p. 345 Chap. 37. Of the
Directory of the Nautick Art, in the first part the know^edge of the Distance,
p. 347 Chap. 38. The ^^^ond part, the knowledge of the Quarters, p. 348 Chap.
39. The third part, of Histiodromia, or the Course of a Ship, p. 353 Chap. 40.
The fourth part of the place of a Ship in a Voyage, p. 361


Lib. 1. c. 2.
A Half English foot. A Half Dutch and also an old Roman half foot A Half foot
of Paris in French. And also a half Greek foot. A Half foot of Antwerp in
Handers. A Half Egyptian foot from Alexandria. A Half Babylonian foot
mentioned by Historians. A Half foot of Venice. A Half foot of Toledo in
Spain. A Half foot of Vienna in Austria.
The Proportion of diverse Miles according to their compaired Length Lib. 1.
c. 2.
An Indian Mile A Russian Mile A Mile of Cambaja An English Mile A French Mile,
And almost an old Arabian League A Holland Mile. A Spanish League A German
Mile A Swedish Mile




THE ABSOLUTE OR COMPLETE PART OF General Geography.
BOOK I. SECT. I.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Precognita's, or things known before the handling of
the Art it self; as the Definition, Division, Object, Properties, Principles,
Order, Method, Original, Excellency, and other affections of GEOGRAPHY; to be
spoken of by way of Preface.
A Preface to an Art, very necessary.
THE Custom or fashion has for a long time prevailed, that they who completely
treat of, and handle any Art or Science, do in the first place declare some
things touching the Conditions, Method, Constitution, and other properties of
their Doctrine. Neither do I think that this is done by them without reason; so
that it be performed without any Sophistical encroachment; seeing that by such
like fore-had Instruction, the Readers Understanding may beforehand conceive a
certain Idea or Platform of the whole Art or Science to be afterward handled,
or at least may understand the Argument or Contents thereof; and withal may
gather thereby, how he ought to order himself in the studying the same. I
therefore shall in this Chapter deliver some few passages concerning the same.

The Definition of Geography.
GEOGRAPHY is called a mixed Mathematical Science, which teaches the affections
or qualities of the Earth, and the parts thereof depending of quantity; that is
to say, the figure, place, magnitude, and other like properties.

Geography by some (but too strictly) is taken for the only description and
pl^cing the Countries of the Earth; And on the contrary, by others it is
extended (but too largely) to the political description of every Country. But
these Men are easily excused, seeing they do it to retain and stir up the
Readers affections; who otherwise by a bare account, and naked description of
those Countries, would be made drowsy and heedless.

The Division of Geography.
We will divide Geography into General and Special, or Universal and
Particular. General or Universal Geography is that, which does generally
consider the Earth, and declare its properties without any respect of
particular Countries. Special or Particular Geography is that, which teaches
the constitution and placing of all single Countries, or every Country by it
self. And this particular Geography is twofold, Particular Geography twofold,
Chorographical and Topographical. General Geography, and its parts.
to wit Chorography and Topography. Chorography proposes the description of
any Country, having at least a mean magnitude. Topography describes any little
tract of Land, or place.

In this Book we will present you with a General Geography; which we have
distributed into Three parts, to wit, the Absolute part, the Respective part,
and the Comparative part. In the Absolute part we will consider the very Body
of the Earth, with its parts, and proper affections and qualities; as figure,
magnitude, motion, Lands, Seas, Rivers, etc. In the Respective part we will
contemplate those properties and accidents which from Celestial causes happen
to the Earth: And lastly, the Comparative part shall contain an explication of
those properties, which arise from the comparing of diverse places of the Earth.

The Object of Geography.
The Object of Geography, or Subject about which it is employed, is the Earth;
but principally its Superficies and parts.

The Properties of Geography.
Those things which deserve to be considered in every Country, seem to be of a
triple kind, to wit Celestial, Terrestrial, and Human; and therefore may be
declared in the particular Geography for every Country, with the profit of
Learners and Readers.

The Celestial properties of Geography.
I call those Celestial properties which depend on the apparent motion of the
Sun, Stars, and other Planets: and seem to be Eight. 1. The elevation of the
Pole, the distance of the place from the Equator, and from the Pole. 2. The
obliquity or wriness of the daily motion of the Stars above the Horizon of that
place. 3. The Quantity of the longest and shortest day. 4. The Climate and
Zone. 5. Heat and Cold, and the Seasons of the year: also Rain, Snow, Winds,
and other Meteors: for although these things may be referred to Terrestrial
properties, yet because they have a great affinity with the four Seasons of the
Year, and motions of the Sun; therefore we have marshalled them in the order
and rank of Celestials. 6. The rising of the Stars, their appearance and
continuance above the Horizon. 7. The Stars passing through the Vertical point
of the place. 8. The quantity or swiftness of the Motion, wherewith, according
to Copernicus his Hypothesis, each one is very hour wheeled about. According to
Astrologers a Ninth property may be added; because they do appoint one of the
Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and the peculiar Planet of that Sign, to rule and
govern every Country. But this Doctrine has ever seemed to me frivolous,
neither can I perceive any ground for it: nevertheless at the end of our
Special or Particular Geography, we will reckon up this their distribution.

These may suffice for the Celestial affections or properties. I call those
Terrestrial properties, which are considered in the place of every Country it
self; of which I shall note Ten. 1. The bounds and circumference of the
Country.2. Its Figure.3. Its Magnitude.4. Its Mountains.5. Its Waters, as
Rivers, Springs, Bays of the Sea.6. The Woods and Deserts.7. The Fruitfulness
and Barrenness, as also the kinds of Fruits.8. The Minerals, or things dig'd
out of the Earth.9. The living Creatures.10. The Longitude of the Place, which
ought to be added to the first Terrestrial property, to wit the Circumference.

The Humane properties of Geography.
I make the third kind of Properties, which are to be considered in every
Country, to be Humane, which do depend of the Men, or Natives and Inhabitants
of the Countries: of which Humane properties about Ten also may be made. 1. The
stature of the Natives, as to their shape, color, length of life, Original,
Meat, Drink, etc.2. Their Trafficks and Arts in which the Inhabitants are
employed.3. Their virtues, Vices, Learning, Wit, etc.4. Their Customs in
Marriages, Christnings, Burials, etc.5. Their Speech and Language.6. Their
State-Government.7. Their Religion and Church Government.8. Their Cities, and
most renowned Places.9. Their memorable Histories. And10. Their famous Men,
Artifices, and Inventions of the Natives of all Countries.

These are the three sorts of Properties to be declared in Special Geography;
although those Terrestrial properties, which make up the third rank, are not so
rightly referred to Geography: But we must yield somewhat to Custom and the
Profit of Learners. We will besides these, join many Chapters to Particular
Geography, concerning the practice of Geography.

But in General Geography, which we will unfold in this Book; first the
absolute properties of the Earth, and its constitution, are considered. Lastly,
in the Comparative part those things shall be proposed, which are offered unto
us in the comparing one place with another.

The Principles of Geography.
The Principles which Geography uses for the confirming the truth of her
Propositions, are threefold: 1. Geometrical, Arithmetical, and Trigonometrical
Propositions. 2. Astronomical Precepts and Theorems; although it may seem like
a miracle for the knowledge of the Earth in which we dwell, to use the
Celestial Bodies, which are so many thousand miles remote from us. 3.
Experience; for indeed the greatest part of Geography, especially that which is
Particular, is upheld by the only Experience and Observation of men who have
described every Country.

The Order of Geography.
Concerning the Order which I esteem sitting to observe in this Art of
Geography, it has been already spoken in the Division and Explication of the
properties thereof; yet here meets us a certain difficulty concerning the Order
to be observed in the explication of these Properties: Forsooth, whether to all
Countries their own Properties are to be attributed, or whether the Countries
themselves are to be ascribed to the Properties generally explicated? Aristotle
in the first Book of the History of Living Creatures, as also in his first Book
of the Parts of Living Creatures, moves the like doubt, and disputes it at
large; whether according to the single ^orts of Living Creatures, their
Properties are singly to be reckoned up; or else, whether these Properties are
generally to be declared, and the Living Creatures in which the may be found
are then to be subjoyned? The like difficulty occurs also in other parts of
Philosophy. We in General Geography have generally unfolded some Properties,
which in Special Geography we will apply to the application of single Countries.

The Method of Geography.
As touching the method and manner of proving the truth of Geographical
Tenants, very many are proved in general Geography by Demonstrations properly
so called, especially Celestial Properties: but in special Geography (the
Celestial Properties only excepted, which may be demonstrated) are in a manner
declared without demonstration, because experience and observation does confirm
them, neither can they be proved by any other means.

Also very many Propositions are proved, or rather demonstrated by the
Terrestrial Artificial Globe, and also by Geographical Maps; and some of these
Propositions which are thus explained upon the Globe, etc. may be confirmed by
lawful demonstrations. Again, some Propositions can in no wise be so proved,
but are therefore received; because we suppose, that all places in the Globe
and Maps are so disposed, even as they lie on the Earth. Yet in these things we
will rather follow the Descriptions made by Authors of Geography. The Globe and
Maps serve for the clearing and more easy comprehension thereof.

The Original of Geography.
The Original of Geography is not New, nor brought into the World at one birth,
neither came she to us from one Man: but her Principles and Foundations were
laid long ago, yea many Ages since; although ancient Geographers were employed
only in describing Countries which is the part of Chorography, and Topography.
The Romans were accustomed, when any Country by them was subdued, to show in
their Triumph the Chorography thereof lively pencilled, and drawn on a Table,
and flourished with Pictures to the Beholders. There were besides at Rome in
Lucullus his Porch, many Tables of Geography exposed to the view of all men.
The Senate of Rome about an hundred years before Christ's Birth, sent Surveyors
and Geographers into diverse parts of the World, that they might measure out the
Earth; but they came far short thereof. Neco King of the Egyptians, many Ages
before the Birth of Christ, commanded that the whole outer-side of Africa
should be discovered by the Phoenicians in three years space. King Darius
commanded, that the Mouths of the River Indus, and the Ethiopian Eastern-Sea
should be searched out. Alexander the Great in his Voyage to Asia, took with
him Diognetus and Beton (as Pliny notes) two Surveyors and Describers of his
Journies; out of whose Annotations and Journals Geographers of succeeding Ages
took many things.

Ancient Geography very imperfect.
But the Geography of the Ancients was very lame and imperfect; for first they
knew not America in the least. 2. The Northern-Lands. 3. The Southland and
Magellan were utterly unknown to them. 4. They knew not whether the Earth might
be sailed about, or the Main Ocean with a continual trace did encompass it; but
yet I deny not, but that some of the Ancients were of that opinion; yet I
utterly deny they knew it certainly. 5. They knew not whether the Torrid Zone
were habitable. 6. They were ignorant of the true dimensions of the Earth,
although they wrote many things in this business.

The Excellency of Geography.
First, the study of Geography is commended to us by the great worthiness
thereof, because it most of all becomes Man, being an Inhabitant of the Earth,
and endued with Reason above all Living Creatures. Secondly, It is also a
pleasant thing, and indeed an honest recreation to contemplate the Kingdoms and
Properties of the Earth. Thirdly, The commodity and necessity of it is notable,
insomuch as neither Divines, Physicians, Lawyers, Historians, nor other
Professors can want the knowledge thereof. But the Excellency of Geography has
been sufficiently handled.

I place hereunder a Table, which opens the order in Special Geography, to
the observing the Explication of single Countries.

Special Geography considers in every Region, Ten Terrestrial, 1. Limits and
circumscription. 2. Longitude of place, and situation. 3. Figure. 4.
Magnitude. 5. Mountains, The Appellation, Situation, and Altitude. Their
properties, and things contained in them.
6. Mines. 7. Woods and Deserts. 8. Waters, The Sea, Lakes, Marshes, Rivers.
Their Springs, Inlets, Tracts, and Latitude. The quantity of Water, the
celerity, the quantity, the Cataracts.
9. Fertility, Sterility, and Fruits. 10. The Animals.

Eight Celestial, 1. The distance of place from the Equator and Pole. 2. The
obliquity of Motion above the Horizon. 3. The Quantity of Days. 4. The Clime
and Zone. 5. The Heat, the Seasons of the Year, the Winds, Rain, and other
Meteors. 6. The rising and stay of the Stars above the Horizon. 7. The Stars
passing through the Vertex of the place. 8. The celerity or quantity of their
Motion according to the Hypothesis of Copernicus.

Ten Human Things, 1. The Stature, Life, Meat and Drink, and the Original of
the Inhabitants. 2. The Income, Arts, Merchandise or Traffic. 3. Virtues and
Vices, the Genius and Erudition. 4. Customs about Marriages, Children, and
Funerals. 5. Speech and Language. 6. Politic Government. 7. Religion, and
Ecclesiastical Affairs. 8. Cities. 9. Memorable Histories. 10. Famous Men and
Women, Artificers, and Inventions.


CHAP. II. Certain things taken out of Geometry and Trigonometry, which it
behooves the Students of Geography to know.
Geometry and Arithmetic necessary to be understood in Geography.
PLato wisely called Geometry and Arithmetic two Wings with which men's minds
might soar up into Heaven, that is, might search out the Motions and Properties
of the Sun and Stars. Those Sciences are no less necessary in Geography, as
that man may truly understand, who desires to learn it without any hindrance.
In the mean while, Geography is content with fewer circumstances then
Astronomy. And because many men are taken up with the study of Geography, who
have no knowledge in those Arts, I shall set down such things as are most
necessary for the study ^hereof: not allowing of that naughty custom which is
too much used by many Masters in these days, in teaching Youth Philosophy
before they have tasted of Geometry* and Arithmetic. I shall suppose the
Reader to have the knowledge of Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication,
Division, and of the Rule of Three, or Golden Rule; therefore I shall not treat
thereof: and if there be any ignorant in them, they may be instructed therein
by the lively voice of a Master; my purpose being to give Geometrical Matters.

See Scheme. Three sorts of Magnitudes in Geometry.
First then, Geometry acknowledges three sorts of Magnitudes, by which it
measures forth all things, to wit, Lines, Superficies, that is, Outsides or
Surfaces, and Solid Bodies: neither is there any fourth thing given in Nature.

Sorts of Lines.
Secondly, A Line is one strait, another crooked, and the crooked Line is
uniform, or circular, or different and unlike in fashion; as Oval Lines, Lines
winding about like perwinckles or steeple stairs, or Heliacan Lines.

A Circle.
Thirdly, A Circle is called a space, or plain Superficies and Figure, included
in a crooked Line; in which space is some point, from which all strait Lines
drawn to that ending crooked Line, are equal. And that crooked Line bounding in
that space, is called the Circular Line, or Peripherie of the Circle. The
middle point is called the center of the Circle.

Diameter of a Circle.
Fourthly, The Diameter of the Circle is the strait Line drawn from either side
through the center of the circumference.

An Arch. A Quadrant. The Complement.
Fifthly, An Arch is called a part of the circumference of a circle. A Quadrant
is called the fourth part of the whole circumference. The complement of any
Arch is called the Arch by which it differs from, or fails of a Quadrant.
The Excess of an Arch is by which it exceeds a Quadrant.

The Problem.
How to draw a Perpendicular Line. See Scheme.
Sixthly, A strait Line being given, and a point in it, or out of it, to draw
from that point a perpendicular Line. Let the Line given be A B, the Point C;
let any open space of the Compasses be taken, and one foot thereof put in C,
and with the other foot let the Line be cut in D and F; then in the Center D,
let the Arch be described over the part d f: also in the Center f, let another
Arch be described in g and h, and let g h be drawn, and this shall be a
Perpendicular Line.

How to divide a Circle into four parts. See Scheme.
Seventhly, To cut or divide a circle and circumference into four parts. Let
there be drawn one Diameter, and from the center let there be raised a
perpendicular line over it: And this also shall be a Diameter, and the
circumference together with the circle, shall be cut into four equal parts or
quadrants.

To divide a Circle into Degrees.
Eighthly, To divide the circumference of a circle into degrees. But a degree is
the three hundred and sixtieth part of a circumference: for indeed
Mathematicians do cut a circumference into three hundred and sixty parts; and
they divide a degree into sixty first minutes: See Scheme.
and then again they divide the prime, of first minute, into sixty seconds.

Therefore to dispatch this Problem above proposed, there being first taken a
quadrant of the circle, let then, by the open space of a pair of Compasses, the
half diameter of the circle be taken; and by this space of the Compasses, let
the Arch be taken away from the circumference. To divide a Circumference into
Degrees.
This Arch shall be sixty degrees, and there shall remain in the quadrant
thirty degrees, which being divided into two parts, you shall have fifteen
degrees, which again being mechanically divided into three parts, you shall
have five degrees; and these again are to be divided into five parts, which
shall be the degrees themselves. But these things by the help of Mathematical
Instruments, are more readily and perfectly performed.

To find the Area of a Quadrangle.
Ninthly, To find out the Area or contained space of a Quadrangle strait-angled,
two sides of a Quadrangle being given. Let one side be multiplied into the
other, the product shall show the space contained. But it is to be known, that
Lines are measured by Lines, See Scheme.
Superficies or Spaces are measured by Measures, which may be Superficies, and
they indeed square. Lastly, Bodies of Solid things are met by Measures, which
may be Bodies and Solid Cubicks. Thus we measure the sides of an House with
Feet-lines, but we meet the floor or pavement of an House with Square feet; and
we describe the capacity or solidity of a House by Cubick feet.

The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find out the circumference of the
Circle, in the same Measure.
Tenthly, The half Diameter, or Diameter of a Circle being given, to find out in
the same Measure the circumference of the Circle: and contrariwise, The
circumference of the Circle being given, to find the Diameter thereof, and that
indeed the nearest way that can be. The solution of the Problem depends of the
proportion of the diameter to the circumference, which according to the most
famous demonstration of Archimedes, is in a manner as 7 to 22; or more
accurately, as 10000000000 to 31415926535; so 12 to the same circumference.

See Scheme.
Contrariwise, if a circumference be given, but a diameter may be demanded; let
it be wrought as 22 to 7, or as 31415926535 to 10000000000: so a circumference
given according to the diameter demanded.

The Circumference of a Diameter being given in feet or miles, to find out the
space of the Circle in feet or square miles.
Eleventhly, The circumference of a Circle being given in feet, or miles and a
Diameter: or also a circumference alone, or a Diameter alone being given, to
find out the space of the Circle, in feet or square miles. According to the
first Proposition, let the given circumference into the fourth part of the
diameter; or let half the circumference be multiplied into half the diameter;
and the product shall be the space demanded. According to the second
Proposition, it is better to find out first the half diameter, or half
circumference, by the foregoing Problem, although it may be dispatched without
it.

Twelfthly, The half Diameter, or Diameter of any Globe being given, to find
the Superficies thereof in square measure, The Globe called a round solid body.
and its solidity in Cubick measure. The Globe is called a round or solid Body,
in whose middle there is some point, out of which all the strait Lines drawn to
the Superficies are equal. And this point in the middle is called the center of
the Globe. The Line through the center, is called the diameter: and it is
called the axis, if the Globe be turned, or rolled about that diameter.
Moreover, if the Globe be cut any way, howsoever the Section is the circle. And
if it be cut through the center, or we imagine it to be drawn through the
Plain, the Section shall be the circle, whose diameter is the same, as the
diameter of the Globe it self. And such circles are called the greater circles
of the Sphere or Globe: the rest are called the lesser circles of the Sphere.

Therefore for the resolution of the Problem; first let the circumference of
the circle be found out by the given diameter. Then let the diameter be
multiplied into this circumference, and then the superficies of the Globe shall
be the product in square Measure.

See Scheme.
Furthermore, let this superficies be multiplied by the sixth part of the
Diame^^r, and the product shall be the solidity of the Globe in Cubick Measure.

A Triangle.
Thirteenthly, A Triangle is called rectangled, one side of which stands
perpendicularly upon the other side; or with it makes a strait Angle of ninety
degrees. These two sides are called Catheti; the third side is called
Hypotenusa.

The measure of the Angles ^n the Arch.
The Measure of the Angles is the Arch, which is described, a center being taken
in the top of that Angle; to wit, of how many degrees that Arch intercepted
between the shanks of the Angle is, of so many degrees that Angle is said to
be. So a strait Angle is said to be ninety degrees, because the Arch so
described is always the Quadrant, or fourth part of the circumference of the
circle.

The Sine of an Arch.
The Sine of any Arch is called a strait Line, which is drawn perpendicular from
the extreme of the Arch into the diameter, drawn through the other extreme of
the Arch.

A Tangent of the Arch.
A Tangent of that Arch is said to be a strait Line touching the Arch in one
end, and a strait ended Line, which is drawn from the center through the other
end of the Arch. But this Line thus drawn is said to be the secant of that Arch.

But the Sine of an Angle is said to be the Sine of that Arch which measures
that Angle: so the Tangent of the Angle, and its Secant.

Furthermore it is to be known, that by the labor and study of Mathematicians,
Tables were made, Tables called the Mathematical Canon or Rule.
in which the half diameter of 100000 (or of more Ciphers) being taken, the
Sines, and Tangents, and Secants of all the Arches of the circumference are
found out. For example sake; 2 degrees, 10 degrees, 20 degrees, 32 minutes,
etc. And these Tables are called the Mathematical Canon or Rule; and have
infinite Commodities in all the Mathematical and Natural Sciences. And
therefore I am willing to teach the Studious of Geography these few things: But
the principal use thereof is in the measuring as well of Spherical as plain
Angles. But because the measuring of Spherick Angles has some difficulty,
which seems necessary only for them who desire to enter themselves more
profoundly into Art: therefore we will speak only of Triangles strait angled,
whose dimension any one may easily apprehend.

Two Theorems, whose use is frequent in Geography.

Rules to be observed.
Fourteenthly, Three Angles of what Triangle soever, being taken together, are
equal to two strait Angles, or are 180 degrees: and therefore two Acute in a
Triangle strait angled, makes 90 degrees. Furthermore, if a strait Line touch a
circular Line, and from the point of their contact or meeting, a strait Line be
drawn to the center of the Circle, this makes a strait Angle with the Line
Tangent.

Fifteenthly, But these are the Problems whose use is frequent. First, the
Hypotenusa, and together the Cathetus of a Triangle strait angled, being given,
to find out the Angle contained, or another Acute. For the finding out of
which, let it be wrought according to the Golden Rule, as the given Hypotenusa
is to be the given Cathetus, so the whole Sine 100000 (which number is the half
Diameter taken in the Tables of Sines) is to the Sine of the other Angle. This
Sine sought out in the Canon, will show the Arch or quantity of the Angle,
which joyneth to the Hypotenusa. But the contained Angle is the complement of
the found out Angle, to 90 degrees. Therefore, if the found out number be
subtracted from 90 degrees, the demanded Angle is left remaining. Secondly, A
Cathetus, and an acute adjacent Angle being given, to find out the Hypotenusa.
Let this be wrought according to the Golden Rule: as the Sine of the complement
of the given Angle is to 100000 (or to 1000000 in the greater Canon) so is the
given Cathetus to the demanded Hypotenusa. Thirdly, Two Cathetuses being given,
to find the Angle adjacent to either of them. Work thus; as one Cathetus is to
another, so is the whole Sine 100000 to the Tangent of the Angle which is
adjacent to the first assumed Cathetus. Fourthly, A Hypotenusa, and one acute
Angle being given, to find either Cathetus. Let the Work proceed thus; as the
whole Sine 100000 is to the Sine of an Angle, which is opposite to the Cathetus
demanded, so the given Hypotenusa is to that Cathetus.

Measures useful in Geography.
Because the use of Measures is very frequent in Geography, and that also diverse
People use sundry Measures, therefore I shall give the Reader some
Advertisements therein.

The Foot the most famous Measure, first found out by Snellius.
The famous Measure is the length of a Foot; but this is very different. The
Rhindlandish Foot of Snellius is the now usual Mathematicians Foot, which is
equal to the Old Roman Foot. And because Snellius was most diligent, and
curio^est in measuring the Earth, therefore that Rhindlandish foot is
deservedly taken for the rule of all Measures.

A Rod, or Perch.
The Decempeda, or Land measuring Rod, contains ten foot Rhinlandish. It is
also called a Peroh, or Pole; but Geodesians or Surveyors make a Rhindlandish
Perch to be twelve Rhindlandish foot, or else sixteen foot Germish, or or
sixteen foot and an half English. The aforesaid Snellius makes a Hollandish
Mile to consist of 1500 Rhindlandish Perches (every Perch being twelve foot
long) or to consist of 18000 Rhindlandish Feet.

Measures which arise from the division of a Foot.
And these two Measures, to wit, the Perch and Mile, arise from the
multiplication and aggregation of Feet: But the Measures that arise from the
division of a Foot, are a digit or finger, a palm or hands breadth, and a
grain. A digit is the twelfth part of a foot; a palm contains four digits, and
a grain is the fourth part of a digit: but these are seldom used. It is better
to divide a foot into ten digits, and then a digit into ten grains.

And these Measures are sufficient for the use of Geography: But there are
other Measures hereunto to be added (which I have noted in the Scheams) to wit,
those of the Ancients, as Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Persians, etc. also thosr
of later times, as of the Turks, Polanders, Germans, Moscovians, Italians,
Spaniards, French, English, etc.

The Grecian Stadium or Furlong is judged to be 600 Greek feet, which makes 625
Roman or Rhindlandinsh feet.

A German Mile, of which Geographers allow fifteen to one degree, contains
14000 ^/19 feet. It is esteemed to be 4000 paces; that is, 32 stadia's or
furlongs. Its proportion to the Rhindlandish Mile is as 15 to 19.

The Italian or Roman Mile is a thousand paces, or eight stadiums.

A Geometrical pace contains five foot.

A Fathom is six foot; which is reported by some to have been the Grecian Pace.

A Cubit is a foot and a half.

Parasange, that is, the Persian Mile, is esteemed to have contained 30
stadiums; but it contained 3000 Persian Paces.

Schaenus the Egyptian Measure contains, according to Herodotus, sixty
stadiums, and according to Pliny, forty; but peradventure the size thereof was
diverse, according to the different places wherein it was used: Also, either
Herodotus's stadium differed from Plinys, or else their Books are faulty.

The French League holds proportion to the Rhindlandlish Mile, as 25 to 19, or
else as 60 to 19.

The Spanish League holds proportion to the Rhindlandish Mile, as 17 to 19. But
because in diverse places both of France and Spain, a different greatness of a
League is observed; therefore these things are not altogether certain.

The English Mile holds proportion to the Rhindlandish Mile, as 55 to 19, or
else as 16 to 19. But the English have three sorts of Miles, to wit, the
greater, of which 27 are equal to a degree: the mean, of which 50 makes a
degree; and the least of which 60 or 55 miles makes a degree.

The Danish or Swedish Miles, holds proportion to the Rhindlandish mile as 10
to 19: But in some places the Danes and Swedes use the Ge^man mile.

The Russian Mile holds proportion with the Rhindlandish mile, as 80 to 19.

The Turkish Mile or League is thought to be equal with the Italian Mile,
insomuch that 60 of them make a degree.

The Arabian League formerly was the twentieth part of a degree, so that twenty
five Arabian Leagues did equalize one degree, or ninetee^^ Hollandish Miles:
But yet the Arabians did also use another Measure, fifty five of which said to
be a degree.

An hundred Indian Miles are judged to be equal to a degree: although the
Indians commonly describe their distances by the Journeys of Days and Hours.

The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Cambain and Guz^^ratta use a certain
Measure, which they call Cosa, thirty of which makes a degree.

Those of the Country Sinae or China observe three Journey-Measures, which they
call Li, Pu, and Vchan. Li is the space from whence the voice of a man crying
aloud may be heard in a Plain, and in a calm Air, which is thought to be three
hundred Geometrical Paces. Pu contains Li ten times; so that twenty Pu's makes
a degree, and ten Pu's make an Vchan, which they determine one days Journey,
which is 30000 Paces.

The Square Rhinlandish Mile consists of square feet.

The Cubick Rhindlandish Mile consists of Cubick feet.

But the account of a square Rhinlandish Mile arises from multiplying the same
mile into it self, and the Cubick mile is complete, if the Square mile be
multiplied by a simple mile. The same is to be understood as touching square
and Cubick feet.

OF Absolute Geography.
SECT. II. Containing the General and Absolute properties of the Whole Earth,
in Five Chapters.
CHAP. III. Concerning the Figure of the Earth.
Things to be observed concerning the figure of the Earth.
FIGVRE is first the principal of all Properties of the Earth; not only in
nobleness, but also excelling the rest in the profit and necessity thereof,
forasmuch as without it nothing can be fully and solidly demonstrated or known
in Geography; and all things therein following do in a manner depend and
proceed from her alone. In the first place therefore it is manifest that our
discourse is to be begun at her.

But there have been diverse opinions concerning the figure of the Earth, for
indeed the Vulgar sort, (that is, men endued with no knowledge in Geography,)
do think that the Earth extends it self in a vast and broad Plain, whose
boundary is a Circular line, but that the Hills and Valleys meet and stop it.
Lactantius and other Fathers were of this Opinion, Lactantius his Opinion of
the Earth.
who earnestly defended and maintained the Earth to be extended downwards with
infinite Roots, and in that manner to have its foundation; this they thought,
being moved thereto by certain places of Holy Scripture, See Lactantius in his
3d Book chap. 24. And Augustine in his 16 Book de Civit. Dei, chap. 9. The
Opinions of Francis. Patric, Anaximander, Leucippus and Others, concerning the
Earth.
either misinterpreted or wrong understood. This Opinion is attributed to the
Ancient Philosopher Heraclitus: although some men write that he attributed to
the Earth the shape of a Boat, or made hollow in the bottom. Furthermore, of
these of latter days; Francis Patric, no base Philosopher, did stiffly maintain
that the Earth is extended on a plain foot. Peucer writes, that Anaximander
judged the form of the Earth to be like a Rowling-pin; but that is not likely,
seeing that he both essayed the dimension or measuring the Earth, and was
skilful enough in Astronomy, according to the manner of that Age; forasmuch as
he at Lacedemon sat up, and made Heliotropes, or Sun-dials, in which the top of
the finger or style of the Dial with its shadow, did mark out and show the day
of the Equinoxes and Solstices. See Aristotle in his 2d Book de Coelo, chapter 13.
Leucippus is recorded to have thought the Earth to be shaped in the form of a
Drum: and there are other men which dare ascribe I know not what fond Opinions
to the Ancient Philosophers. But the true Opinion maintained by almost all
Philosophers that were Mathematicians was, that the Earth is round like a Globe
or Sphere. But the Arguments, which Authors for the confirmation thereof do
use, they propose so obscurely and confusedly, that they cannot compel or
convince an obstinate and pertinacious Defender of the contrary Opinion. We
therefore, as much as may be, will most clearly set forth those very Opinions,
and examine them, that the Readers may have a distinct knowledge thereof.

Reasons to prove the Earth round.
First, I reject the slighter Reasons or Arguments, which are probable, or
rather Sophistical. First, the Spherick figure is most capacious; therefore the
Earth ought to have such a kind of figure. Secondly, all the parts of the Earth
tend to the same Center; therefore all those parts make a round figure.
Thirdly, when as in the Creation the Water as yet was confusedly mixed with the
Earth, without doubt the Earth was moist and soft; but the figure or shape of
Liquid things is round or spherical: therefore such also the figure of the
Earth remained after the separation of the moist from the dry.

These and the like Arguments being slighted, let us view and consider the
stronger and most solid. There is but one Argument of one and the first kind,
which is taken a priori; but the other two kinds are taken a posteriori: to
wit, some Arguments are taken from the Celestial appearances; some again from
them which we either observe in the Earth or in Heaven. As for the first
Argument, concluding a priori, it is taken from the nature of Water; and this
demonstration is wont to be taken either from Aristotle, or Archimedes.
Aristotle in his second Book de Coelo, chap. 5. has proposed his Demonstration
in these very words: The superficies of the Water round.
It shall manifestly appear that the superficies or surface of the Water is
round; if we shall take the Supposition, That Water of its own nature makes its
confluence always to a hollow place, and that that place is more concavous
which is nearer the Center. Therefore from the Center A let the strait lines A
B and A G be drawn, and from B unto G let the line B G be drawn, See Scheme.
unto which from A let a perpendicular line A D be drawn into E. It is manifest
therefore that the line A D is less than the lines A B and A G (by the 18th of
the first Book of Euclid's Elements Geometrical;) therefore this place D is
more concavous; wherefore the Water shall flow from B and G until the lines A
B, A D, A G may be equal: But A E is equal to A B, A G; therefore it must needs
be, that the very water should be in these lines which are drawn in the Center
(this part of the Demonstration is clearly known: but A E, etc. makes nothing
for the Demonstration.) But that line, which touches them which are drawn from
the Center, is the circumference; therefere the superficies of the Water, which
truly is B E G, is round.

Things to be noted.
This is Aristotle's Demonstration, in which, besides the confused and evil
composure thereof, these things I observe. First, that it supposes some Center
of the whole Universe: Secondly, that it takes the place more or less bending
down in regard of that Center. For he which shall deny the shape or figure of
the Earth to be spherical, would call these things into question. Yet the first
may be sufficiently, concerning the Center of the Universe, proved or
corrected: For we must say, that either the Stars are wheeled round about by a
Diurnal motion, or that the Earth is turned round about its own Center (for
this the apparent motion of the Stars forces and causes.) If the Stars, then
that point about which they are turned, shall be the Center of the Universe; if
the Earth, then the middle point of the Earth, or that about which it is
turned, shall be taken in the Demonstration for the Central point of Aristotle.
But the chiefest difficulty lies in the second Supposition, to wit, that the
lesser or greater declivity or bending downward, ought to be considered in
respect of that Center: For he which would defend the superficies of the Water
to be plain and of another figure, he would deny this Supposition, and would
say, that the declivity must be considered according to our senses, to wit, in
respect of our Horizontal plain, according to which the Earth with infinite
spaces is extended into profundity; or else he would define the declivity in
another manner. And thus this demonstration concludes nothing at all, unless
it be granted; that the declivity of the places of the Earth must be taken in
respect of that Center, about which the daily apparent motion of the Celestial
Bodies is performed: which thing, although it may be true, and all other
definitions of declivity, according to which the Water may be moved, may also
be confuted; yet notwithstanding it can scarce be admitted for a principle,
seeing that it in a manner supposes the figure of the Earth to be Spherical.

Archimedes his demonstrations by some preferred before those of Aristotle's.
Others therefore prefer Archimedes his Demonstration before this of Aristotle,
which is found in his first Book, concerning those things that are carried in
the Water. This indeed is more Artificial than that of Aristotle, yet it is
oppressed with the same difficulties, forasmuch as it supposes the Spherical
figure of the Earth, and its Center, in respect of which it takes the
depression of the Water. We will bring hither some Arguments framed from those
that are taken from Celestial appearances. First, let us conceive the Meridian
line of our place, or of any point of B in the Earth, See Scheme.
or a Section of the Earth made in plane, which through the Poles of the World
M N, passes through A B C D: this line is usually called the Latitude of the
Earth, and the line which is drawn perpendicular to this is named the Longitude
of the Earth, or another plain Parallel to the Celestial Equator, making in the
Earth the line E B F C. I say, as well the line A B C D, as the line E B F C in
the Earth to be circular. But it is a Geometrical Thorem, If any Superficies
according to one dimension be cut through any point, and the section be made in
the periphery or circumference of the Circle; then according to the other
dimension through the same point the section be made in plain, which is
perpendicular to the former plain, and the section again be made in the
periphery of the Circle, that superficies is spherical.

Therefore, because we have taken the point B in the superficies of the Earth,
according to our own pleasure, and have showed the Section A B C D, and E B F C
to be the peripheries of the Circles; The Earth a Spherical body.
therefore by the aforesaid Theorem, we conclude, that the superficies of the
Earth is spherical, and that the Earth is a spherical Body.

The Section of the Earth, according to the dimension of the latitude from one
Pole to another, is circular.
Furthermore, that the Section of the Earth, according to the dimension of the
Latitude from one Pole to another A B C D is circular, is proved by many
Celestial appearances: First, if this line A B C D, any place whatsoever being
taken in B, some man go forward toward either Pole M, or toward the Star near
it, he observes by his progresses made equally, that he approaches equally to
the Pole. But this could not be done, unless the line of his Journey B A C D
were circular, and it is commodiously showed by the Artificial Terrestrial
Globe. Secondly, because A B C D is the Meridian line, into which when the Sun
comes it is midday to us, and to all People dwelling in this line A B C;
experience witnesses, that the Sun in the line A B C does perpendicularly hang
over any place, to wit in the Torrid zone, for example P; and if we take equal
spaces equal to B Q, Q P, we shall perceive that the distance of the Sun from
the vertex or top of Q, is equal to the excess of the distance of the Sun from
the vertex of B, above the distance from the vertical point of Q: which could
by no means be accomplished, unless the line B P Q were circular. Thirdly, the
same is the reason of all the Stars, which when they come into the Meridian A B
C, their distances from the vertexes P Q B have the same reason, as the
distances PQ, P B, Q P. So when our Mariners sail toward the South, the Stars,
which before were not conspicuous, become higher and more manifest to the eye,
according to the proportion of their sailing. Fourthly, so if many Stars be
taken, and the places of the Earth, through whose Zenith they pass, in one
Meridian, you shall perceive that the distances of these places have the same
proportion among themselves, as the distances of the points of the Meridian in
which those Stars keep their Noon, or full So^th point. Now, forasmuch as
belongs to the Longitude of the Earth; for example E B F C, that is also
circular, and that the Earth has a spherical tumor or swelling according to
this dimension, Of the rising and setting of the Stars.
is proved by that, because the Sun and Stars do sooner by a great deal rise to
those People which live from us toward the East, than to us; and do also
sooner set to them, than to us: But to them that dwell from us Westwards,
contrariwise they rise and set later than to us; and indeed according to that
proportion of time, which the distances of the Meridians of those places have
from our Meridian. So if two places be taken from ours, to wit, the distance of
one Meridian toward the East 225 miles; the distance of the other 450: then we
shall find, that in this place the Sun rises two hours sooner than with us;
but in the other place it rises but one hour sooner than in ours. The Argument
becomes more clear, if this Theorem be proposed of the Suns coming to the
Meridians of diverse places. Of the rising* of the Sun.
For indeed look what is the account of the distance of places from ours, and
the same will be observed the account of times which come in between the
arrivings to those Meridians and ours, or between the Arches of the Equator
intercepted between their Meridians and ours: which is made evident by the
Eclipses; for these things are showed by the Artificial Globe, if we ascribe a
Spherick form to the Earth: but other shapes thereto applied are very absurd.

So now the Spherical form has as well been demonstrated, as touching the
latitude, as the longitude of the Earth.

Other Reasons to prove the Earth Spherical.
Yea, but the Spherical form thereof may also be proved by the only Latitude of
the Earth, for indeed all divisions of the Earth which are made according to
the latitude thereof in diverse places, are the Peripheries of the places; but
they pass through the same point of Heaven, to wit, the Pole of Conversion near
adjacent to the Polar Star. From these two Reasons we may solidly infer and
prove, that the figure of the Earth is spherical. For it is a Geometrical
Theorem, which therefore ought to be demonstrated by Geometricians thus; if any
solid body be cut in many planes, it matters not how passing through some one
point, and all the sections or divisions be performed in the superficies of the
periphery of the Circle, that body is spherical.

Other reasons.
Here comes another Reason, taken from the shadow which the Earth on her averse
part to the Sun disperseth to the Moon, whereby she suffers an Eclipse:
forasmuch as this shadow is conical, or like a spire of a Steeple, as is
declared by the obscuration of the Moon.

But if we deal rigidly, the Arguments taken from the spherical roundness of
the Earth, from the viewing and consideration of the Earth, are these following:

First, Again.
from the sailing round the Earth; because our men of Europe hoisting Sail
eight times from Europe with a direct Journey to the West and South, even unto
the streights of Magellan; afterward to the West and North; they returned
again from the East into Europe, and all those appearances happened to them which
arise from the property of the Globe; which surely had not been done, if the
Earth had not been round. And certainly, upon the supposition of that figure of
the Earth all those Circumnavigations were grounded, which therefore had not
taken such happy success, if the form had been otherwise.

Secondly, Furthermore.
when either by Sea or Land we take our departure from high Towers and
Mountains, then the lower parts thereof are absconded from us, and by degrees
more and more, till at last the very tops thereof are quite taken from our
sight. In the same manner, when as for a long distance we come to a Tower or
Mountain, first the top presents it self to our view, then the inferior
parts, till at last through our nearer distance the foot thereof is seen. And
this increase of Apparition and Occultation is altogether made according to
such a proportion, as the spherical tumor or swelling of the Earth is able to
make; neither can it be explicated by any other figure. The Diagram will make
the Proposition more clear.

Thirdly, because that the measuring the height of Mountains, or great Hills,
which is grounded upon the hypothesis of the globous form of the Earth, is
found by experience to agree with a real truth of the thing it self.

Further Reasons to prove the rotundity of the Earth.
Furthermore, that we may draw together the whole number of these Arguments
taken a posteriori into one sum, (although they might be handled Geometrically,
but that business would be of great labor and difficulty; for it must be
demonstrated, that this or that different property being put, that the line is
circular:) therefore a round spherical figure is to be assigned to the Earth.
Because all the appearances as well Celestial, (as the diverse elevation of the
Pole, the diverse altitude of the Sun of that day in diverse Countries, the
reason of the Shadows, the difference and increase of the Longest days toward
the Pole, times of the rising and setting of the Stars, etc.) as Terrestrial,
(as the direction of Navigations, the appearing and hiding of Towers and
Mountains, the distances of Places, the Ports, Coasts, Winds, etc.) are most
commodiously declared by that round or spherical form or figure: neither can
another figure be devised which can perform that, as it is manifest by the
consideration of diverse figures and forms of Bodies. And our artificial
Terrestrial Globe so justly represents all these things, as they are really
found to be in the Earth: which certainly could not be done, if the Earth had
any form or figure than that of our artificial Globe. And what other form
soever you shall choose, there will follow innumerable absurdities.: For it is
manifest, that it is not plain by the appearances hither alleged; and that it
neither can be hollow is clear from this, that the Sun and Stars ought first
then to appear to the western People, than to the Eastern, if it were of such a
figure; as we see the Sun rising first to illuminate the Valleys, before it can
give light to the averse parts of Mountains.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Dimension and Magnitude of the Earth.
The Opinions of diverse Writers concerning the Dimension and Magnitude of the
Earth.
THe Dimension or measuring of the Earth comprehends three principal Heads:
First, the Longitude or length of the Diameter, or half Diameter, that is, of a
line from the Superficies to the Center, as also of a periphery of the Earth,
or the Circumference. Secondly, the magnitude of the Superficies of the whole
Earth. Thirdly, the solidness or corporeal Dimension of the Earth.
But these things are so contrived together, that one of them being known, the
other two come to our knowledge by Geometrical Instruments, because the Earth
is a certain Sphere; as it is showed in the second Chapter. This property is
the most noble and hard to know, and has exercised the most excellent Wits for
many Ages: insomuch that some Men have written whole Books concerning this
matter. And therefore I have thought, that it would not prove ungrateful to the
Students of Geometry, if I should fully relate here the History of this
Dimension. Diogenes Laertius praises Anaximander the Milesian, the Scholar of
Thales, Anaximander the Milesian, the Scholar of Thales.
that besides other Astronomical Inventions, he first of all others described
the circuit or perimeter of both Land and Sea: But Anaximander lived about the
year 550 before the Birth of Christ. The Mathematicians of succeeding Ages seem
to have followed his Dimension, even until Eratosthenes, Aristotle.
because Authors make mention of none other; and therefore I judge that to be
the Magnitude assigned by Anaximander, which Aristotle has noted in the end of
his second Book de Coelo, saying; The Mathematicians also, which endeavor to
measure out the Magnitude of the World, report that the Earth is bounded in and
girt with four hundred Stadiums. By this perimeter, it is no difficult matter
to assign the half diameter of the Earth according to Anaximander. But because
we can find nothing noted concerning Anaximanders Invention, besides that one
place of Diogenes Laertius; Eratosthenes.
his and Eratosthenes his diligence is obscured, who next after Anaximander
undertook this business with great applause of all men: he lived about two
hundred years before Christ; and as he was most conversant in the rest of the
Mathematics and Dimensions, so he is esteemed most accurately to have
perfected G^eodaesia, or Surveying; and this glory is principally ascribed to
him. But he discovered and delivered, The circuit of the Earth.
that the perimeter or circuit of the Earth is two hundred fifty thousand
Stadiums or Furlongs; but others two hundred fifty two thousand, which Pliny
reports to make up three hundred fifteen thousand Roman miles, every one of
which are thought to be a thousand Paces.

Eratosthenes had written three Books of Geography, Eratosthenes.
which by reason of the injury of time are now not to be found. Strabo.
Strabo, the famous Geographer, relates the Contents and Arguments of each
Book: Cleomedes.
and Cleomedes has noted up his manner which Eratosthenes used for the
discovery of the Circuit of the Earth; in which, what can be wanted, we will
hereafter declare. For indeed Eratosthenes his measuring forth the Earth, was
by many Mathematicians, especially Hipparchus (a hundred years after
Eratosthenes) judged to swerve from the truth; although there is nothing
written touching Eratosthenes his Dimension or measuring forth the Earth, but
that he added twenty five thousand stadiums to the perimeter. Possidonius.
But Posidonius being not only a most knowing Astronomer and Practioner, but
also in every part of Philosophy most expert, did next after Eratosthenes enter
upon this Doctrine, a little before the birth of Christ, to wit, in the time of
Cicero and Pompey. This man by his Dimensions found the circumference of the
Earth to be two hundred forty thousand stadiums, Cleomedes.
as Cleomedes has noted; but 180000 stadiums, Strabo.
as Strabo has delivered: whereby arises a great doubt concerning the cause
of this difference between Cleomedes and Strabo his allowance; seeing this of
Strabo is the truer, although uttered in a few words: But Cleomedes his
assignation of the same is far from truth, although he read and expounded
Posidonius his Geodesie to many. Concerning his size or manner, we will speak
hereafter.

But the Dimension of Eratosthenes was used as yet of many, even to Ptolomy's
time, (the year 144 after Christ) who used a Perimeter of 180000 stadiums, and
affirmed it to be more agreeable to truth, insomuch that this very Invention
was by Theon ascribed to him. Theon.
It is gathered that Marinus a famous Geographer, Marinus.
and by whose Writings Ptolomy was much aided, did attempt something in this
business, as appeared by his Geographical Writings of the same Ptolomy.

After these times, when as the study and prosecution of the Sciences by little
and little vanished away in Greece, nothing was done in this business, neither
did the Romans undertake any thing herein.

But the Arabians and Sarazons having obtained the Empire, or glory of other
Arts from the Grecians to themselves, so likewise they left not this part of
the Mathematics untouched. Forasmuch (as Snellius relates out of Abelfedea an
Arabian Geographer, who flourished about the year of Christ 1300, and whose
Writings were printed at Rome) about the 800 year of the Christian Account,
Maimon Ring of Arabia studious in Geography, in whose days it flourished.
Maimon King of the Arabians, or the Calife of Babylon, being studious in the
Mathematics, forasmuch as he commanded the great construction of Ptolomy to be
turned out of Greek into the Arabian Language, which is called by the Arabians
the Almagest of Ptolomy. This Maimon, I say, having assembled together certain
skilful Mathematicians, commanded them that they should search after the
Perimeter of the Earth. To perform which task, they chose the Fields of
Mesopotamia, and they under the same Meridian proceeding from the North to
South, until the Elevation of the Pole had decreased one degree, found after an
even level, that the space or Journey was fifty six or fifty six and a half;
from whence it is found that the Perimeter according to them, ^is twenty
thousand and sixty, or twenty thousand three hundred and forty Miles.

From that time even to our Age no man has assayed this; but many Arabians
have used this dimension of their own Mathematicians: The dimension of the
Earth by the Latins.
But the Latins, when they began to handle Astronomy, used that of 18000
Stadiums (which Ptolomy had used) which makes 324000 Italian miles, or 5400
German miles; for 15 German, or 60 Italian miles, are allotted to one degree,
when as there ought to have been assigned thereto 15 and ^/8;, because about 38
Stadiums are given to one German mile; and so the Perimeter should be 5625
German miles. But about thirty years ago, Snellius a famous Mathematician, Its
dimension according to Snellius.
Professor of Leyden, observed that usual Perimeter of the Earth, or the
magnitude of one degree defined in 15 miles, to depend on no ce^tain
demonstration, but to be uncertain; therefore with very great industry he set
upon this dimension, and happily finished it, demonstrating the magnitude of
one degree in the Earth to be 28500 Perches or Poles (every one of which
contain 12 Rhindlandish feet, or 19 Dutch miles) and the whole Perimeter to be
8640 miles. But he defines a mile with 1500 Poles, or 18000 Rhindlandish feet.
We will now speak concerning the manner of measuring the Earth.

But indeed this Invention depends on the Figure of the Earth, which in the
foregoing Chapter we have proved to be Spherical: For indeed we conceive the
Earth to be cut by a Plain passing through the Center. This Section or Division
makes the greatest Circle of the Earth: For a Sphere being cut in any manner,
the Section is made a Circle; but if it be cut through the Center, it shall be
the greatest Circle, and therefore the Periphery of this Circle in the
Superficies of the Earth, shall be the Circumference, Circuit, and Perimeter of
the Earth. And this work of measuring begins from the magnitude of this
Periphery; The Circumference of the Sphere divided into 360 degrees.
because therefore this Periphery or Circumference, as others are, is divided
in the mind into three hundred and sixty degrees, (as has been said in the
second Chap.) but indeed we cannot perform the magnitude of the whole
Periphery, and therefore the Problem is thither reduced, that we may find out
the magnitude of one degree, or other part in the known measure. For example;
the magnitude of half a degree, the necessity of which also meets in other
Problems. And we take the Periphery of the Earth for the most part to be that
of the Meridian Circle, because this is more easily, and with less occasion of
error, determined by our own place, and by the North or Polar Star, or other
means, which we will declare in the Three, and twentieth Chapter.

The first mean or way which the Arabians, and other Mathematicians have used.
Let the Horizon therefore of our Terrestrial Meridian (which lies just under
the Celestial a bed, and is concentrical thereto) be H h, R ss; let the
Periphery A B C D, R the Center of the Earth; our place B the Vertex, See
Scheme.
or supreamest point over our heads; the Pole of the Earth A lying under the
Celestial; the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon shall be A H a h: Let us
now take another place in the same Meridian A B C D or G, lying under the same
a b c d, the Vertex g, the Horizon f F R t T. Let here now the Elevation of the
Pole be exactly observed in the place B, viz. a h or a H; also of the place G,
to wit f a, or F A; and let F A be taken away from H A, and the remainder is H
F, to which the Arch B G intercepted between the places, is equal. After that
the interval or space between B G must be measured accurately in a certain
measure. For example; how many Perches or Poles it may contain, or how many
miles? For these shall be correspondent to the Arch B G. And by the Golden
Rule, as B G is to A B G c d the 360 degrees; so the space or interval found
out, or the Perches or Miles are to the Perches or Miles of the whole Perimeter
A B G C D, or as the Arch B G is to one degree, so the Perches or Miles found
are to the Perches or Miles which are due to one degree.

Note, if your pleasure be not to measure the interval B G thus, but to follow
the vulgar determination, then according to that way the quantity must be
determined. As for example; that to 1 degree 15 such miles answer, as between B
G may be 10, etc.

Elevation of the Pole at London.
Example; B London, where the Elevation of the Pole A H, a h, is 51 degrees 32
minutes. Let G be Hartford lying under the same Meridian with London, the
Elevation of whose Pole a f, a f, is 51 degrees 54 minutes; therefore f h, or B
G is 29 minutes. But the distance between London and Hartford is 20 English
miles, or 13875 Rhinlandish Perches of 12 foot: therefore as 29 minutes are to
60 minutes, so 9 to 19 Holland miles: therefore 19 Holland miles make one
degree in the circumference of the Earth. Or the interval B G is accounted to
be 7 German miles, a German mile being reckoned to be 1900 Rhinlandish Perches:
therefore let it be wrought thus; as 29 parts are to 60, The Elevation of the
Pole at Prague.
so is 7 to 15 such German miles. So at Prague the Elevation of the Pole is 50
degrees and 6 minutes: at Lincium it is 48 degrees, and 16 minutes: the
difference of B G shall be one degree and 50 minutes; and it is thought to be
distant 26 German miles; therefore the Perimeter was 5105 miles, and the whole
Circuit of the Earth is 5400 miles.

The second manner of Eratosthenes.
Eratosthenes's manner used about the dimension and magnitude of the Earth. See
Scheme.
Let there again be two places of the Earth in the same Meridian; let B be the
City Alexandria in Egypt, let G be Syene, another City of Egypt, under the
Tropic of Cancer; let now the same places in one and the same day, in the full
southing of the Sun, when he comes into the Meridian line a b c d, the distance
from the Verticles b g be observed by a Quadrant. Let at Alexandria in the day
of the Solstice, 21 of June g f, or G F be observed, 1/50 of the Periphery, or
7 degrees 12 minutes: but in Syene let there be no distance, the Sun hangs
perpendicularly over their heads; therefore B G shall be the Arch intercepted
between those two places. And because the distance put is 5000 Stadiums,
therefore according to the Golden Rule, it shall be, as 7 degrees, 12 parts to
one degree, (or as 1/50 to 1/360, or as 5 to 36) so 5000 to 694 4/9 Stadiums,
which are requisite for one degree; or as 1/50 is to 50, or as 1 to 50, so 5000
to 250000 Stadiums of the whole Periphery A B C D according to this measure.
Yet seeing there are diverse ways to take the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, and
the distance from the Vertical point g b, Eratosthenes wrought it by a hollow
Spherical Scioterick or Sundial, which they called Scaphe, where the Style B x
shows the Vertex o x z, but the Radius or beam of the Sun terminaitng the
shadow of the Style or Pin, marks out B z how much the distance of the Sun o b
from the Vertex 7 degrees 12 firsts at Alexandria. But in the City Syene, the
Style G x makes no shadow that day; because o the Sun hangs perpendicularly
over it, and therefore there is no distance of the Sun then, because therefore
the Angle B x z is equal to the Angle b x o, whose measure is B o, or B z:
there B o is equal to B z 7 degrees 12 first minutes, or 1/50 of the Periphery.
The other things are performed as it has been said.

The third manner of Posidonius.
Posidonius's manner used about the magnitude, etc. of the Earth.
Let two places B G be under the same Meridian. Posidonius took B Rhodes, and G
the City Alexandria in Egypt: let the Altitude of some Star in these two
places, when it comes into the Meridian, above the Horizon, and that in the
same day, or in diverse days, which matters not at all. Posidonius took the
shining Star Canobus, which is of the first magnitude in Argonavi; See Scheme.
but this Star did not rise above the Horizon of Rhodes h H S, but did only
touch the Horizon in S; yet it was elevated above the Horizon of Alexandria F R
t in the Arch t S 1/48 part of the whole Periphery, or 7 degrees 30 minutes.
Therefore the distance of the Arch T s, that is B G, shall be 7 degrees 30
minutes unto 1 degree, or as 1/48 part unto 1/360; that is, as 1 to 48, so 5000
to 240000 Stadiums of the whole Perimeter of the Earth, according to these
Hypotheses of Posidonius.

The fourth manner or way of Snellius.
Snellius's way about the dimension and magnitude of the Earth.
Because in the former ways we have taken two places B G lying under the same
Meridian, and yet the places fit for this business may lie under diverse
Meridians, therefore we thought it requisite that an example, and that of
Snellius, should be also concerning this case here proposed.

Let therefore A B C D be the Meridian of Alcmaria; B Alcmaria it self, the
Elevation of the Pole h a 52 degrees 40 minutes; the distance from the Pole B A
37 degrees, 19 minutes, 30 seconds.

See Scheme.
Let the other place be P Bergenapsome, the Meridian A P V V the distance from
the Pole, that is the Complement of the Elevation (51 degrees, 29 minutes,) A P
is 38 degrees, 31 minutes: therefore P G a Perpendicular Line being drawn to A
B G, the difference of the distances from the Pole is B G, 71 minutes, 30
seconds, or 1 degree, 11 minutes, 30 seconds.

Moreover, Snellius by a laborious Geodesie or Earth-meeting, found the
distance of Alcmaria from Bergen B P, to be 34710 Rhindlandish Perches, and the
Angle of Position P B G, to be 11 degrees, 26 minutes, 2 seconds. Therefore in
the Triangle strait angled P B G, the Hypotenuse B P, and the Angle B P G is
given; therefore by the Problem of the second Chapter, B G is found 34018 (for
which Snellius takes 33930; for he detracts 88 Perches from the Stations of the
Elevations of the Pole.) But the Arch B G 71 scruples is the difference of the
Elevation of the Pole, therefore as 71 minutes is to 1 degree or 60 minutes, so
is 33930 (or 34018) to 28473 Perches for one degree, or according to the round
number 28500, or 19 Holland miles. They which understand Spherical
Trigonometry, from the given A B, A P, the Angle A B P, may find the Arch B P
to be 1 degree, 14 minutes; which when they are equal with 34710 Perches, 1
degree shall be equal to the Perches, or of 18 miles, and. But the cause that
this number differs from that of Snellius, is first, that Snellius did not
take the very points of the Towers B P, by which he obtained the Angle G B P,
for the knowing the Elevations of the Pole; but he took the places a little
distant from them: See Snellius in page 197.
Notwithstanding no man can doubt but the same may be found to be the Altitude
of the Pole. The other cause is, that he takes the Lines B G, B P, P G as
strait, which nevertheless are not strait, although this discord may seem to
make little or no difference of any moment. But let Snellius his quantity of a
degree of 28500 Perches be taken (mine of 28300 Perches) his makes 19 147/150
miles, (mine 18 miles) the Perimeter or Circuit according to Snellius, shall be
10260000 Perches, 123120000 feet, or 8640 Holland miles.

The fifth manner, being the first Terrestrial way of measuring the Earth.
The first Terrestrial way for the finding out the magnitude, etc. of the Earth.
The three following manners or ways are Terrestrial, performing the work
without the Heaven or Meridian Line. Let B P be the Altitude of the Tower; this
is to be sought out in a Land-measuring way: then let P s be the distance of
the most remote term from whence the Tower may be seen. And although P s be not
a strait Line, yet because it is the least part of the Periphery of the whole
Earth, therefore it is taken for a strait line; and the Triangle strait angled
B P s, in which by the given B P, P s, the Angle B s P is found, to whom B R s
is equal, whose measure is the Arch S P. Therefore as this Arch is to one
degree, so P s the found distance, See Scheme.
is to the quantity of one degree. As for Example; let B P the Altitude be 480
Paces, and let the distance P s of the point s, which ends the Sight, be
40000 Paces, or 10 German miles: therefore let it be wrought according to the
Problem of the second Chapter. As P s 40000 paces are to B P 480 paces, so the
whole Sine 10000000 is to 11904, the Tangent of the Angle B S P, or S R P, or
of the Arch S P, to wit, 41 minutes; therefore as 41 minutes are to 60 minutes,
so 40000 paces are to 59000 paces, that is about 15 miles for 1 degree.

Or the Diameter P R may be found without the Table of Sines, or without the
finding the Perimeter: For as B P is to P S, so P S is to P R; as 480 is to
40000, so 40000 is to 3333333 paces for the half Diameter R P.

The sixth manner of measuring the Earth, being the second Terrestrial, without
the knowledge of the distance.
The second terrestrial way for the measuring the Earth.
But truly the same half Diameter R P shall also be concluded in this manner:
Let B P be the high Tower, to wit, the Plummet being let down from the hole,
the height thereof may be found to be 100 paces. Or if the height of the
Mountain P B be known by another Geodesie, or surveying 4000 paces, afterward
the Instrument being applied in the top of B, let the Angle of the last Sight
be found P B S, 88 degrees, 37 minutes: Therefore B R S shall be one degree, 23
minutes.

Out of the Canon of Sines, let the Sine of 88 degrees, 37 minutes, be taken,
and let this be subtracted from the whole Sine 10000000. And let it be
dispatched thus: as the remainder is to the Sine of 88 degrees, 37 minutes, so
B P of 1000 paces is to the half Diameter S R in paces.

The seventh manner, being the third Terrestrial.
The third terrestrial way for the measuring the magnitude of the Earth.
This way or manner shall seem more accurate then the former ways, and shall
appear more applicable to the practice, taking two mountains or heights, of
whom, not the height but the distance may be known, which may be found
Geodetically, or by the Art of Surveying. Let B P be one Altitude of the
Mountain, Tower, etc. S T the other height; let T P be the distance of five
German miles; See Scheme.
let the Angle B T R 89 degrees, 55 minutes, be found by the Instrument, and in
the other Mountain T B R 89 degrees, 55 minutes. The Angle P R S shall be 920
minutes (because the three Angles T, B, R, are equated to two strait Angles,
180 degrees) wherefore according to the Golden Rule, Work, as 20 degrees are to
60 degrees; so 5 miles to 15 miles for 1 degree.

These are the principal manners and ways of measuring the Earth: For by the
found out measure of 1 degree, the whole Perimeter, Diameter, Superficies and
Solidity is found out.

Because according to Snellius, the Perimeter is 8640 Holland miles, or
10260000 Rhindlandish Perches, or 123120000 feet: therefore by the Problem of
the second Chapter, the Perimeter of the Earth is found to be 1088 miles, or
1633190 Perches, or 19598300 feet. The Superficies of the Earth 18811353 square
Holland miles.

And the whole Solidity is 409568^1512 Cubick miles.

The calculation of German miles usual.
But because the calculation by German miles is more usual, 15 of which makes 1
degree, therefore these may be used, but upon this condition, that such miles
may be understood, of which 15 may make 19 Holland miles, or that 1 mile may
contain 1900 Rhindlandish Perches.

Therefore the Periphery of the Earth shall be 5400 such miles, the half
Diameter 860, the Superficies 9278181 square miles, the Solidity shall be
265693384 Cubick miles.

The Italian miles most commodious.
Yet the Italian miles are the most commodious, 60 of which are allowed to 1
degree; for so 1 mile fittingly answers one minute of a degree. But such an
Italian mile ought to be understood, which may contain 475 Rhindlandish
Perches; so the Circuit of the Earth shall be 21600 such miles, the half
Diameter 3440 miles. Reasons showing errors in the differing of the dimensions
of the Earth according to the Arabians, and others, Mathematicians.
These things being thus expounded, we must allege and bring hither the causes
why the fore-rehearsed dimensions or measurings of Authors may so differ, and
what is wanting in every one of them.

In the first manner of dimensions these things occur; First, That an Error
may be committed in taking the elevation of the Pole. Secondly, that a doubt
may be made concerning places under the same Meridian. Thirdly, that the
distance may not be declared distinctly: And because the Arabians used this
manner, therefore the things that are desired in their dimension, are these:
First, the exact quantity or grEatness of their mile, (which according to
Alfraganus is 4000 Cubits) as unknown to us. Secondly, the Arabians have not
showed to us the places, whose Elevations they took, and therefore we cannot
make further search concerning their diligence. Thirdly, neither did they
demonstrate their manner by which they measured.

In Eratosthenes's dimension these things deserve correction. First, that to
the Arch found B z of 7 degrees, 12 minutes, he did not add 15 minutes, for the
Arch intercepted between the Radius Solis X Z, which was to be taken. Secondly,
that he did not prove Syene and Alexandria to lie under the same Meridian.
Thirdly, that the term of the Shadows cannot be exactly noted; and besides,
that the places about Syene, even to 150 Stadiums, have this property, that the
Style is without a shadow. Four^^ly, that he took the distance between Syene
and Alexandria, according to the opinion of the Vulgar sort, which neglects,
and has no care of exactness; neither can the magnitude of the stadiums be
certainly manifest unto us.

In Posidonius his manner these blemishes are judged to be; First, that he
thought Canobus was not lifted up above the Horizon of Rhodes, whenas
notwithstanding it may be elevated 2 degrees above it. Surely he could not
know, that it exactly touched it. Secondly, that he determined the distance
between Rhodes and Alexandria by conjectures and common journeys. Thirdly, that
his stadiasm, or measure of a stadium, is not sufficiently determinate.
Fourthly, because it may be doubtful whether Alexandria and Rhodes lie under
the same Meridian, etc.

In the Terrestrial manner^ of measuring the Earth, there is this defect:
First, that in the exact measuring of Hills, a fault may easily be committed.
Secondly, the furthermost point of the Sight cannot be known accurately, both
because of the refractions, as also for the weakness of the eyes.

It may suffice to have spoken thus much concerning the greatest Circuit of the
Earth, its half Diameter, Superficies, and Solidity. We might, if it were a
similar Body, by the solidity of the Earth, judge of its weight: but because
parts of a different weight, whose proportion is hidden from us, are in it;
therefore its weight cannot, but by a conceived supposition, be determined.

The half Diameter of the Earth is the measure of all Celestial dimensions. The
distance of the Sun and Moon from the Earth.
It is worthy observation, that the half Diameter of the Earth is the measure of
all Celestial dimensions, as well in assigning the distances of the Planets
from the Earth, and from themselves, as in numbering and computing their
magnitude. So we say that the Sun is distant from the Earth ubout 1200 half
Diameters, the Moon 40, etc.

But seeing in Geography we do not only consider the great Circles of the
Earth, as the Equator, etc. but also the Parallels of the Equator. Therefore we
must likewise determine how many miles or perches answer one degree in every
Parallel. We have taken the accounting of the Perches out of Snellius, but I my
self have reckoned up the miles; to wit, 1900 Perches for a German mile; 1500
for a Belgic or Holland mile: 475 for an Italian mile.

A TABLE of the Quantity of one Degree in every Parallel.
The Degrees in which the Parallels are distant from the Equator, or the
Elevation of the Poles of the Parallels.
Equator of the Perch of one degree Holland miles. German Italian The Latitude.
Of a Perch of one degree. Holland miles. German Italian mil. per. miles. min.
miles. min. mil. per. miles. min. miles. min. 28500 19 0 15. 0 60. 0 1 28496
18. 1496 14. 59 59. 56 46 19798 13. 298 10. 25 41. 40 2 28483 18. 1483 14. 59
59. 55 47 19437 13. 0 ^0. 14 41. 0 3 ^8461 18. 1461 14. 58 59. 52 48 19070 12.
1070 10. 2 40. 8 4 28431 18. 1431 14. 57 59. 50 49 18698 12. 698 9. 50 39. 20 5
28392 18. 1392 14. 56 59. 46 50 18319 12. 319 9. 38 38. 32 6 28344 18. 1344 14.
55 59. 40 51 17936 11. 1436 9. 26 37. 44 7 28288 18. 1288 14. 53 59. 37 52
17546 11. 1046 9. 14 37. 0 8 28223 18. 1223 14. 51 59. 24 53 17152 11. 652 9. 2
36. 8 9 28149 18. 1149 14. 48 59. 12 54 16752 11. 252 8. 49 35. 26 10 28067 18.
1067 14. 46 59. 4 55 16347 10. 1347 8. 36 34. 24 11 27976 18. 976 14. 43 58. 52
56 15932 10. 937 8. 23 33. 32 12 27877 18. 877 14. 40 58. 40 57 15522 10. 522
8. 10 32. 40 13 27769 18. 769 14. 37 58. 28 58 15103 10. 103 7. 57 31. 40 14
27653 18. 653 14. 33 58. 12 59 14671 9. 1179 7. 44 31. 0 15 27529 18. 529 14.
29 50. 60 14250 9. 750 7. 30 30. 0 16 27653 18. 453 14. 25 57. 40 61 13817 9.
317 7. 16 29. 4 17 27255 18. 255 14. 21 57. 20 62 13380 8. 1380 7. 2 28. 8 18
27105 18. 105 14. 16 57. 4 63 12939 8. 939 6. 48 27. 12 19 26947 18. 0 14. 11
56. 44 64 12494 8. 994 6. 34 26. 16 20 26781 18. 0 14. 6 56. 24 65 12045 8. 45
6. 20 25. 20 21 26607 17. 1107 14. 0 56. 0 66 11592 7. 1092 6. 6 24. 24. 22
26423 17. 925 13. 54 55. 36 67 11136 7. 636 5. 52 23. 28 23 26234 17. 734 ^3.
48 55. 12 68 10676 7. 176 5. 38 22. 32 24 26036 17. 536 ^3. 42 54. 48 69 10213
6. 1213 5. 23 21. 32 25 25830 17. 330 ^3. 36 54. 24 70 9748 6. 748 5. 8 20 32
26 25616 17. 116 13. 29 54. 0 71 9279 6. 279 4. 53 19. 32 27 25394 16. 1394 13.
22 53. 28 72 8807 5. 1307 4. 38 18. 32 28 25164 16. 1164 13. 15 53. 0 73 8333
5. 933 4. 23 17. 32 29 24927 16. 927 13. 7 52. 28 74 7846 5. 346 4. 8 16. 32 30
^4681 16. 681 13. 59 51. 56 75 7376 4. 1376 3. 53 15. 32 31 24429 10. 429 12.
51 51. 24 76 6895 4. 895 3. 38 14 32 32 24169 16. 169 12. 43 50. 52 77 6411 4.
411 3. 23 13. 32 33 23902 15. 1402 12. 35 50. 20 78 5925 3. 1425 3. 8 12. 32 34
23628 15. 1128 12. 26 49. 44 79 5438 3. 938 2. 52 11. 28 35 23346 15. 846 12.
17 49. 8 80 4949 3. 449 2. 36 10. 24 36 23057 15. 557 12. 8 48. 32 81 4458 2.
1458 2. 20 9. 20 37 22761 15. 261 11. 59 47. 56 82 3966 2. 966 2. 5 8. 20 38
22458 15. 0 11. 49 47. 16 83 3473 2. 473 1. 50 7. 20 39 22149 14. 1149 11. 39
46. 36 84 2979 1. 1479 1. 34 6. 12 40 21832 14. 832 11. 29 46. 0 85 2484 1. 984
1. 18 5. 12 41 21509 14. 509 11. 19 45. 16 86 1988 1. 488 1. 3 4. 12 42 21180
14. 180 11. 9 44. 36 82 1492 0. 1492 0. 47 3. 12 43 20843 13. 1343 10. 58 43.
52 88 995 0. 995 0. 31 2. 4 44 20501 13. 1001 10. 47 43. 8 89 497 0. 497 0. 16
1. 4 45 20152 13. 652 10. 36 42. 24 90 0 0. 0 0. 0 0. 0

CHAP. V.
The Pythagorical motion of the Earth is the cause of many Celestial
appearances.
THE Pythagorical motion, or turning the Earth about, as with a wheel (not that
quaking and shaking) is the cause of very many Celestial appearances according
to the Copernicans opinion, seeing that without it every place would have a
perpetual constancy of these. But indeed there is no property or quality of
the Earth, concerning which there can be greater disputations, fith that not
very long ago it has suffered the Censure of the Church of Rome. Yet because
to many men it seems likely to be true, that such a motion of the Earth may
be given, therefore I will endeavor briefly to unfold the same.

The Motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and their appearances.
It is not unknown to any of the very Vulgar sort, that the Sun, Moon, and all
the Stars of Heaven appear every day, that is, in the space of 24 hours to be
moved from East to West, and commonly to return to the same places of Heaven.
It must therefore needs be that either they are really moved, or that we are
moved, and that our motion or moving be imputed to the Stars: For if two things
change their d^stance, one of them at least was moved; which principle is most
manifest.

The opinion of the Ptolomaians and Pythagoreans concerning the motion of the
Stars, etc.
That the Earth stands still, and that the Stars with the Heavens are moved,
was, and is yet, the common opinion of Astronomers, which are called
Ptolomaians, or of such as follow the Doctrine of Ptolomy; yet the Pythagoreans
long ago maintained that the Stars held their place constantly without budging
from thence, and that the Earth was rouled and wheeled about its Center; one of
whom was the famous Aristarchus of Samos, who for his defending this Opinion,
was by his Adversary accused of profaning and violating Religion, before the
most famous and severe Bench of the Areopagites, but he was nevertheless
quitted by the sentence of those most sincere Judges. Yet this Opinion found
but few Abettors, insomuch that many Ages it was as it were buried in oblivion:
so that there was no mention in Schools made thereof, until such time that
eminent Astronomer Copernicus, some two or three Ages past made it famous, and
so prevailed therein, The opinion of Copernicus therein.
that very many excellent Astronomers embraced this Opinion, and confirmed it
with sundry Arguments and Reasons; among whom not long since flourished Kepler
the Emperor's professed Mathematician, and Galilaeus of Galilee the Italian
Mathematician to the grand Duke of Tuscany or Florence, and Lanthergius Belga.
And because there is a twofold motion of the heavenly Bodies perceived by us;
the first whereof is, whereby all the Stars, as well fixed, ^s Planets, seem
with equal time, to wit, in 24 hours to be carried round abo^t the Earth, and
to rise, and keep their southing and setting: The second motion is, that which
is called proper, whereby the Planets are observed with a different or diverse
motion, as also are the fixed Stars to be carried from West to East. The
Ptolomaians a^^irm that both these motions are in the Stars themselves, or
their Orbs: But the Copernicans ascribe that first motion not to the carrying
about of the Earth only from one place to another, but to the wheeling and
turning about of it remaining in her own place, about her own Axil, from West
to East, (such as is seen to be implanted in all the Stars:) yet they acquit
the fixed Stars, as also the Sun from the aforesaid second motion, and
attribute the apparent motion of these to the carrying of the Earth about the
Sun, and to the inclination of the Axil, notwithstanding they leave the said
second motion to the rest of the Planets. Forsooth they deny the Sun to be a
Planet, but place the Earth in his stead: and they prefer the Sun into the
Ptolomaian place of the Earth, to wit, the Center of the whole World, forasmuch
as that is the cause which makes the Earth, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and
Mercury to turn round about.

These are the Reasons of this Opinion.
Of the great number of the Stars which seem to perform their circuit in 24
hours.
1. Because so great is the number of the Stars which seem to perform their
Circuit in 24 hours about the Earth, and this appearance may be declared by the
motion of the Earth, only remaining in her place; therefore it is more
agreeable to reason to determine this motion, rather then that; insomuch as
when we sit in a Ship, and sailing nearer to a Station or Harbor of many
Ships, which in the mean while seem as it were to approach or sail to us, yet
we do not ascribe a motion or sailing to them. And seeing nature does in no
case work by many things, that which she can perform with a few; it is likely
in this business also that that is so observed and kept by her. Of the swift
motion of the Stars, etc.
2. Because the swiftness of that motion of the Stars would be incredible, and
such as would surpass all our imagination: for seeing that they are distant
from the Earth almost an infinite space, and that most vast circuit ought to be
run in one minute of an hour; at least, that they should be carried through
100000 miles. Contrariwise, if this motion should be ascribed to the Earth, she
remains still in her place, neither need we to fear the least swiftness,
because she is turned about her own Axil as a Wheel. The vastness of the
Celestial Bodies compared with the body of the Earth.
3. There accrues a greater force to this Argument, if we compare the huge
vastness of the Celestial Bodies with the Body of the Earth: for seeing that
the Sun at least is 200 times bigger then the Earth; but the fixed Stars are in
a manner 1000 times bigger; to what man can it not be made more probable, that
the Earth is turned about its own Axil by a natural motion, than that so huge
Celestial Bodies should be moved from place to place? Of the solidity of the
Celestial Orbs according to Tycho Brahe.
4. Because all the most famous Astronomers being compelled with Tycho Brahe by
the appearances of the Stars, etc. do now deny that the Celestial Orbs are
solid and hard, which appearances the ancients used for proving the more easy
supposition of the motion of the Stars; therefore the carrying or wheeling of
them about the Earth, seems more incredible. Yea, they deny the Orbs to be
solid, because if these were so, a mutual penetration of the Orbs must needs be
granted, seeing that some Planets are found frequently in the Sphere of some
other. No reason for the motion of the Stars about the Earth.
5. No reason can be given why the Stars can be moved about the Earth, when as
contrariwise there may some reason be given, why the Earth and the rest of the
Planets may be moved about the Sun. Of the Pole and Axil.
6. Neither is the Pole nor Axil real, about which the Stars are determined to
be moved: contrariwise in the Earth there is both Pole and Axil. The sailing,
of Ships from West to East, more easy, than from East to West.
7. Because the sailing of Ships from West to East is more easy, than from East
to West: For out of Europe into the Indies they sail in about four months; when
as in their return home it is about six months. And this is because in their
Voyage thither they are carried or moved into the same point with the Earth;
but in their return they are moved or carried into the contrary. From the
moving of the Earth, the Celestial appearances, etc. may be declared.
8. Because all the Celestial appearances, the rising and setting of the Stars,
the increase or lengthning of the days, etc. may be evidently declared, if we
maintain the Earth to be moved: But most especially the commodiousness and
necessity of this Hypothesis is seen in those admirable properties of the
Planets, to explicate which the Ptolomaicks are compelled to invent many
Circles, Epicycles, and Eccentricks without any reason: But the Copernicans do
so derive them from the second motion of the Earth about the Sun with easy
labor, insomuch that thereby they can make the cause of them manifest, and so
easy, that the very unlearned may understand them; to wit, first, why the
Planets may seem sometimes to be retrograde or go backwards, and indeed Saturn
oftener and longer than Jupiter, Jupiter than Mars, etc. sometimes to be carried
with a swifter motion, and sometimes to be stationary. 2ly, Why Venus and
Mercury can never the whole night long be seen. 3ly, Why Venus can never depart
any greater distance from the Sun than ^0 degrees, but Mercury no greater then
thirty degrees, and therefore those two Planets can never be seen to be
opposite to the Sun. Fourthly, why Venus in the evening of the same day after
the Sun and in the morning before the Sun, may be seen.

I forbear to bring hither any more appearances; but they are the principal,
from which I think an Argument of greatest moment may be fetched for this Motion
of the Earth; when as by this Motion of the Earth they may be so commodiously
declared, that it should rather be admired, if the Earth could not be moved by
such evident appearances.

These are the easier Arguments by which the Copernicans would evince the
motion of the Earth, which although they be not demonstrative; yet they make
this hypothesis more probable, than that which determines the Heaven to be
moved: for one of them must needs be admitted.

The Reasons of ^ome against the moving of the Earth, as the Ptolomaians.
But these Reasons which some men (to wit, the Ptolomaians) allege to the
contrary, are easily dissolved; which are these: First, that the Earth is
unfitting for motions by reason of its ponderosity. Secondly, that the parts of
the Earth are naturally moved with a strait motion to the Center; therefore a
circular motion is contrary to the nature thereof. Thirdly, if the Earth should
be moved, a stone cast down from a Tower could not fall to the foot thereof.
Fourthly, a bullet shot out of a piece of Ordnance toward the East, at some
mark, it could not come home to it or hit it, if the mark with the whole Earth
were moved toward the East, or at least the hitting the mark should be more
swift, than if the bullet were shot toward the East. Fifthly, neither the
Towers nor buildings could stand steadfast, but would fall by reason of that
motion of the Earth; neither could men be without giidiness, by reason of the
whirling about of the Earth. Sixthly, because we see that the Stars change
their place, but not the Earth. Seventhly, because the Earth is in the Center
of the World, but the Center is not moved. Eighthly, because the holy Scriptures
do confirm the stability or stedfastness of the Earth.


The aforesaid Reasons of the Ptolomaians answered by the Copernicans.
Yet indeed the Copernicans to these Arguments use to answer after this manner.
To the first they Answer, denying the whole Earth to be heavy; for ponderosity
is a tendency of the parts to their whole homogeneous (of the same kind) and
such a heaviness is also discovered in the parts of the Sun and Moon, and yet
notwithstanding neither the Sun nor Moon is said to be heavy.

To the second they Answer, That that right motion of the parts of the Earth,
not of the whole Earth, and the circular motion thereof, does not hinder the
strait carrying of those parts, which is evidenced by the parts of the Sun and
Moon.

To the third Argument they reply in a threefold manner: First, that such heavy
things are not primarily carried to the Center of the Earth, and therefore are
born by a very short line to the superficies thereof; as Iron tends not to
the Center of the Loadstone, but to the Loadstone. Secondly, the whole Air
cleaves to the Earth, and is moved together with her; therefore all such heavy
things being thrown together downwards, get this circular motion, and are moved
as it were in a Vessel. And Thirdly, The Opinion of Gassendus therein.
Gassendus by frequent experience has demonstrated, that if any thing be cast
from a moved body, that which is so cast is also moved with that motion of the
moved body; as for example, a stone thrown down from the top of the Mast of a
Ship moved most swiftly, is nevertheless not left by the Ship, but falls down
to the foot of the Mast; and from the foot of the Mast a bullet being shot
perpendicularly out of a hand-Gun, falls again perpendicularly: therefore the
alleged Objection is nothing worth.


To the fourth Reason, they answer in the same manner as unto the third.

To the fifth they say, That some such thing has no place, because the motion
is equal, neither does it dash against another body: and the buildings as it
were heavy bodies and homogeneous, or of like to the Earth, are moved as in a
Ship; for we find in a Ship moved very swiftly, or slowly, the bodies set
upright therein are not overthrown; yea Cups and pots full of Wine, or other
liquor, shed nothing thereof at all.

To the sixth we say, That the change of the Stars place is not perceived, but
we find the change of their situation in respect of our selves; but this
mutation of position may be observed and be, whether we be moved with the
Earth, or the Stars be moved, we being steadfast, or also both we and the Stars.

In the seventh Objection, both the major and minor proposition is false, or at
least doubtful.

To the eighth they reply, First, that the holy Scripiure in physical or
natural things does speak according to appearances and the capacity of the
Vulgar; for example, when the Moon with the Sun is called a great light,
because it was created to give light to the Night, Of the Moon.
whenas indeed the Moon is not great in respect of the Stars and Earth, neither
has she any light of her own proper nature, nor does she give light in all
Nights to the Earth. So the Scripture says, Of the Sun.
that the Sun goes to the extremest part of the Earth, and that he returns
to that end again, when as notwithstanding there is no such end or furthermost
part. So in the book of Job, a plane and square figure is attributed to the
Earth, under whom Pillars are set, upon which it leans; which indeed must not
at all be so understood, as the very Vulgar well know. There might more places
be alleged hither; but these are sufficient: For the holy Scriptures were not
given to us, thereby to play the Philosophers, but to practice Piety. Secondly,
certain places of Scripture are wont to be alleged, which speak not concerning
the immobility thereof, but concerning its constancy and durance, as that place
which we have brought hither out of Job.


Thus have we briefly declared of what sort the motion may be, which the
Copernicans ascribe to the Earth, of which a more exquisite explication is
usually given in Astronomy. But that being supposed, all those things are to be
applied to the Earth, which are wont to be considered in a Globe turned round
about, Of the Axil, Poles, Periphery, Parallels, etc. of the Globe.
to wit, the Axil about which it is turned is one of the Diameters: the Poles
are the extremities or two points, which are not moved: the greater circle or
periphery, according to which the circumrotation or wheeling about is made, and
its parallels. Now let us see concerning the swiftness of that motion. The
first motion by which the Earth is turned round about his Axil, cannot be seen
and considered in the whole Earth at once, Of the motion of the Earth; its
difference, swiftness, etc.
but in diverse places it is also different, to wit, how much the nearer the
place is to the Equator, with so much the greater swiftness and space it is
moved; but the greatest motion is in the places that lie in the Equator. For
indeed, because every place of the Earth in twenty four hours, is rouled about
by the space of a whole periphery, to wit, by 360 degrees; therefore the space
of one hour is found. If 360 be divided by 24, the quotient is fifteen, which
are so many degrees. These are the degrees, by which the place lying in the
Equator, or without it, is turned about in one hour; but they make, if the
place lie in the Equator, two hundred twenty five German miles, whence she will
be turned in four minutes of an hour through one degree, that is fifteen Miles.

But the places lying without the Equator toward either of the Poles, are in
the space of the same hour wheeled about by so many degrees, but such as are
much less; forsooth the reason is the same between the swiftness of the motion
and the distance of two places, as is between the signs of the Arches by which
those places are distant from the Pole: for example, the distance of Amsterdam
from the Equator, The distance of Amsterdam from the Equator, or the Elevation
of the Pole.
or the elevation of the Pole, is 52 degrees, 23 minutes. So the distance from
the Pole is 37 degrees, 37 minutes, whose sign is 61037. Let us take one place
to be in the Equator, whose distance from the Pole is 90 degrees, his sign is
100000. But the place under the Equator in four minutes is carried through 15
miles, and in an hour is carried through 225 miles. Wherefore by the Rule of
Three, as 100000 are to 61037, so fifteen to nine miles, or as 225 to 135
miles; therefore Amsterdam every hour by this motion is carried through 135
miles.

But the discovery of this is much easier by the Table, which we have set in
the end of the foregoing Chapter: For the division of 360 degrees being made by
twenty four hours, we find that any place every hour is moved through fifteen
degrees of his own Circle, and therefore that it is moved through one degree in
four minutes. If we therefore enter that Table with the Elevation of the Pole,
or distance from the Equator of that place proposed, we shall find the miles
set down at the degrees of the given Elevation, which are due to the motion of
the place proposed in the space of four minutes; for example, At Stockholme the
elevation of the Pole is about 60 degrees, The Elevation of the Pole at
Stockholme.
and in the Table at the degree 60, I find seven miles to answer with one
degree; therefore I say, that Stockholme is moved about in four minutes by so
many miles.

The second motion of the whole Earth, which is moved with an equal swiftness,
and by equal peripheries.
So great is the first motion considered in the places of the Earth; but the
second motion is of the whole Earth from place to place, and all the parts or
places thereof are moved with an equal swiftness, and by equal peripheries. The
quantity hereof depends of the distance of the Earth from the Sun, and is
performed in a whole years space, and thereby the Earth every day moves
through about one degree.

Concerning the third motion of the Earth, because it has a more hard
consideration, I leave it to be treated of by Astronomers, because in Astronomy
there is a necessity of supposing it. Indeed Origanus has raised a
Controversy concerning the second motion also, thinking the first motion to be
convenient for the Earth, but that the second should be left for the Sun and
fixed Stars; but the Phaenomena's or appearances in the motions of the Planets,
which we have alleged before, do sufficiently enough maintain the Motion of
the Earth.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the situation or place of the Earth, in respect of the
Planets and Stars.
THe consideration of the Earths situation in this whole systeme of the World
in respect of other Planets, has a contemplation suitable to that which we
have alleged concerning the Motion of the Earth in the foregoing Chapter: For
the common Opinion of Philosophers and Astronomers, according to Ptolomy, has
decreed, The Earth, according to the Opinion of the Philosophers and
Astronomers of Ptolomy, takes up the Center of the Universe. The Sun according
to the Copernicans, the Center of the Universe.
that the Earth takes up the Center of this whole Universe, so that she is
conversant in the middle of all the Stars and Planets. But they of Copernicus
his Sect, with the ancient Pythagoreans, place the Sun in the Center of all the
Stars; but they set the Earth as it were a Planet between Mars and Venus, and
they think that she is carried there about the Sun with a yearly course or
space, which is understood better by the Diagram or description thereof. Yet
notwithstanding therein do these two differing Opinions agree, that both
confess, that the Center of that first motion, whereby the Stars seem to us in
the space of twenty four hours to be carried about, is in the Earth. For both
Astronomy and Geography do want this Supposition, insomuch that whether you
follow the Ptolomaican or Pythagorean Opinion, See Scheme.
the firmness and certainty of General Astronomy and Geography loses nothing:
For the difference of Opinions consists in this, that the Ptolomaians will
have this motion to be in the Stars themselves; but the Pythogoreans is to be
the Earth, the Stars in the mean while resting, and never moving; neither of
which is it necessary either for common Astronomy or Geography to determine.

The placing the Sun, Earth, and other Planets, according to the Ptolomaians
and Copernicans.
According to the Ptolomaians this is the placing of the Planets to the Earth
and fixed Stars; The Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the
fixed Stars.

According to the Copernicans, such is the situation or placing; The Sun is
placed in the middle of the consistence or systeme of the World, as the heart,
or fire; next to him the Orb of Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, and the fixed Stars.

If you demand, how much the Earth, and we being on the Earth, are distant from
the Planets, you must know that the distance is not always the same, but is
changed every day, and therefore Astronomers do reckon up three degrees of
distances, viz. the least, the mean, and the greatest. The mean distance of the
Earth from the rest of the Planets, is according to many Astronomers this
following:

The mean distance of the Earth from the other Planets.
The Earth is distant from the Moon with its sixty half Diameters. From Mercury,
110. From Venus, seven hundred. From the Sun, 1150. From Mars, about five
thousand. From Jupiter, about 11000: And from Saturn, 18000.

But yet indeed the distance of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed Stars, is
altogether uncertain, by reason of the defect of the parallaxy or mutual
changing. In the Copernicans Hypothesis, the distance is varied not only from
the motion of the Planets, but also from the motion of the Earth it self.

The Reasons of either Opinion, to wit, of the Ptolomean and Copernican,
concerning the place of the Earth, are almost the same with them, which in the
precedent Chapter we have alleged: for this disputation has great affinity
with the same. For if you ascribe and allow the second motion to the Sun, which
is called the proper motion; not the Sun, but the Earth shall be in the midst;
but if you allow that second Motion to the Earth; not the Earth, but the Sun
shall be in the middle. These Arguments following may be said for the
Copernicans Opinion.

The Sun not only the fountain of Light, but also the vital Spirit of the whole
Universe.
1. The Sun is not only the Fountain of Light, which as a most clear shining
torch illuminates the Earth, Moon, Venus, and without doubt the rest of the
Planets; but he is the fire-hearth of heat and vital spirit, by which this
whole Universe seems to be cherished and sustained. Therefore it is probable
that he holds the middle place, and that these are moved round about him. 2.
It is more likely that the Earth should be moved about the Sun, that together
with the rest of the Planets, she may receive light and heat from him. The Sun
a vast body, etc.
3. The Sun being placed in the midst, some cause is rendered why the rest of the
Planets and the Earth may be carried round about him, to wit, because the Sun
is a most vast body, and endowed with great virtues and forces, therefore he
rowleth and stirs up the rest of the Planets to their motion. And this
Reason especially takes place, if we admit Keplers Hypothesis concerning the
motion of the Planets. Spots in the Sun.
4. The Observations of Galilaeus and Scheiner, concerning the spots in the Sun,
prove, that the Sun is moved about his Axil. In the same manner therefore the
rest of the Planets have their cause of going about, neither seems it
consistent with reason, that any other should be attributed to him. 5. If we
allow the Earth a place between Mars and Venus, and allow the Center to the
Sun; the motion of every Planet fittingly answers and agrees to the distance
from the Center, which in the Ptolomaick Supposition is manifest not to be
effected, by the consideration of the motions of the Sun, Venus, and Mercury.
6. Those Celestial appearances, which we have used in the former Chapter, for
the proving the second Motion of the Earth, are also valid and efficacious for
this place, which I have said must be assigned to the Earth, to wit, the
Retrograde course and station of the Planets, and the admirable apparent
motions of Venus and Mercury, etc. For indeed that second motion of the Earth,
does before hand suppose this place, and placing of the Earth, or has it
joined to it self very nearly: But this Argument in my Opinion is the chiefest.
Yet for the first motion of the Earth nothing can be fetched by way of Argument,
for gathering thence the situation of the Earth. For the Earth might be in the
Center of the World, if she were without, or wanted the second motion, as
Origanus also determines. 7. So also the variation of the distance of the
Planets from the Earth, is well declared. The Aristotelians and Platonists
Arguments about the Earth.
Yet notwithstanding the Aristotelians and Platonists oppugn the Pythagoreans
Opinion with many Arguments, and endeavor to challenge the Center of the Earth
for a place, by these Arguments. First, heavy things are carried to the Center
of the World; but the Earth is the heaviest body, therefore it takes up that
Center. Secondly, heavy things would go from the Earth toward the Center of
the Universe, unless this Center were in the Earth. Thirdly, the Center is the
ignoblest place, and the Earth also is the vilest part of this Universe:
therefore it shall have the Center thereof. Fourthly, if the Earth were without
the Center of the World, and motion of the Stars, then the Stars and
Constellations would be seen in some seasons of the year, and some days, bigger
than in others. Fifthly, neither would the middle part of Heaven always be
conspicuous, as Taurus rising, the Scorpion should set, etc. Sixthly, neither
would there be Equinoxes. Seventhly, neither the Moon rising eclipsed, would
the Sun set, etc. Eighthly, neither would the number of Miles in the Earth
equally answer every degree in Heaven.

The aforesaid Reasons of the Aristotelians, refuted by the Copernicans.
The Copernicans do easily weaken these Reasons of the Aristotelians. For the
first and second is refell'd, because the motion of heavy things is not to the
Center of the Universe, but to the homogeneal body, as is proved by the parts
of the Moon, the Sun, and Loadstone. The third Reason takes a false major and
minor proposition: For the Center is also a noble place, and the Earth is not
ignoble or base.

The other Reasons are easily disproved by Diagrams or Descriptions, this at
least being fore-supposed, that the distance of the Earth from the Sun or
Center, how great soever it be; yet if it be compared with the distance of the
fixed Stars from the Sun, it would be so little, as that it would have no
proportion to it.

The distance of the Moon, Venus, and Mercury from the Earth, not so great, as
of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
Moreover, the Explication of the Theorem belongs to this place, that the
distance of the fixed Stars and superior Planets, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn,
is so great from the Earth, that the half Diameter of the Earth has no
proportion to it; but the distance of the Moon, Venus, and Mercury, is not so
great: touching the Sun there is as yet a doubt; surely, if there be any
proportion of the half Diameter of the Earth, to the distance of the Earth from
the Sun, that will be very small.

But the Theorem is proved thus; First, the fixed Stars and higher Planets
appear to us to rise at the same moment, at which they would appear to rise by
a right contrived supputation and calculation, if we were set in the Center of
the Earth: Therefore the distance of our place from the Center of the Earth,
that is, the half Diameter bears no proportion to the distance of the fixed
Stars. Secondly, if we take the Meridian or Altitude of a fixed Star, or one of
the superior Planets, with an Astronomical Instrument, we find the same, as if
we had observed it in the Center of the Earth: Therefore the semidiameter of
the Earth vanishes away in respect of that distance. Thirdly, if there were
any proportion, then the distance of two Stars would be found to be lesser
about the Horizon, than about the Meridian, because in this position they are
nearer to the Earth almost by one semidiameter of the Earth.

The same Argument is valid as touching the Sun also; for his Diameter is not
found greater in the Meridian, than when he is yet on the Horizon.

But the Diameter of the Moon is observed to be a little greater in the
Meridian, than when as yet she is on the Horizon: Therefore in the Meridian it
is somewhat nigher to us, to wit, almost one Semidiameter of the Earth.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the substance and constitution of the Earth.
WE have in the foregoing Chapters considered the qualities or properties of
the Earth, no regard being taken of its substance or being. But now these being
declared; it is fitting we consider this also, that we may know what kind of
body the Earth is, and how its parts cohere together; the which although it may
rather rather seem natural, yet because it is requisite for the perfect
knowledge of the Earth, we will here handle briefly, leaving the accurate
consideration thereof to the Natural Philosopher.

Proposition I. To declare of what simple and similar Bodies the Earth may
consist, or be compounded of.
Of the four Elements of the Earth.
There are diverse opinions of Philosophers concerning this matter. The
Peripateticks number four Elements of the Earth, and the whole sublunary World,
being now sufficiently known to the very Vulgar, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth.
Many of the Ancients, as Democritus and Leucippus, determined that the whole
World consisted of very little solid pieces, which differ only in their various
figures, shapes and magnitude: and them many of the later Philosophers do
follow; and of late Cartesius endeavored by such an hypothesis to declare all
natural appearances.

The three Principles of the Earth by Chemists.
Chemists make three Principles, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, to whom some do
rightly add Caput mortuum or the Dead head, when as they three are fruitful.
But to me, doubtful terms and words being laid aside, and the things themselves
well considered, there seem to be five simple Bodies the first Principles of
all things, By Others, Five simple bodies, the first principles of all things.
to wit, Water, Oil or Sulphur, Salt, Earth, and a certain Spirit which the
Chemists call Mercury. For indeed all Bodies and the parts of the Earth are
resolved into those five Elementary substances. Notwithstanding I deny not that
those differ not so much in essence, as in the singular variety of their shapes
and magnitudes.

Therefore the whole Earth consists of these simple Bodies, which are diverse
ways commixed, from whence arises so great variety of Bodies, which do appear
different from one another, and similar or Bodies of like parts. But the more
exquisite declaration of these points belong to Natural Philosophy, which I
shall have occasion to treat of more at large in the first Volume of my Book of
the Arts and Sciences, now ready for the Press.

Proposition II. The Earth is divided into dry and moist parts, or into Earth
and Water, to which some join the Atmosphere.
This is the vulgar division of Geographers, and then the Water is taken in a
large signification for all that is liquid or moist, and fluid and running, as
the Land is taken for the whole dry and consistent part of the Earth, Of the
Land, and its various bodies of Nature.
and thereby does embrace and comprehend such various bodies of Nature, to wit,
First, Sand, Loam, Clay and Mineral Earths, Chalk, Cinnaber, Ochre, Terra
sigi^lata or Saracens Earth, Earth of Samos, Bole-Armoniack, with diverse other
kinds of Earth. Secondly, Stones of various sorts, the chief among which are
Diamonds, Emeralds, Rubies, Saphirs, etc. Thirdly, Metals, among which are
Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Mercury or Quicksilver, Iron, Steel, etc.
Fourthly, Brimstone, Salts, Niter, Alom, Bitumen, Vitriol, Antimony, etc.
Fifthly, Herbs, Plants, etc.

Of the Water and its parts.
To the Water are referred, first the Seas; secondly, Rivers and sweet Waters;
thirdly, Lakes and Fens, or Marshes; fourthly, Mineral Waters, as hot Baths,
sour Waters, etc.

Of the Atmosphere, which encompasses the Earth.
The Atmosphere is that thin and subtle Body, which girts and encompasses the
Earth toward Heaven, and contains the Air, Clouds, showers of Rain, etc.
Therefore into these three Parts the Earth is fitly divided.

Proposition III. To expound how the Earth and Waters cleave or hold together,
and make the Land.
The Earth not bounded with one Superficies, but has hollow Cavities.
1. The Land, that is, the dry part of the Earth, is not bounded with one and
that even superficies or surface; but she has many hollow Caves, many parts
lifted up aloft. In her Cavities, caves or hollows, which are here and there
found round about the whole Earth, the Sea or Ocean is contained; and therefore
part of the Earthly superficies is covered with Waters. Those hollows or
cavities are not made of an even hollowness, but have here and there Rocks and
elevated parts, and elsewhere they have Gulphs and swallows sunk very deep. So
the part of the Earth appearing out above the Waters, has certain (as it were)
Navels in its middle, and some parts are more or less raised up, or sunk down,
than others. So it comes to pass, that the Water environing the whole Earth is
hindered, that it overwhelms not the whole Earth, but the higher parts, and such
as appear above the Waters are Islands, of which some are great and some small.

Mouths, holes Pipes, and other conveyances in the body of the Earth.
2. Besides that continual Channel in the Earth in the outward superficies,
within also in the solid body of the Earth there are innumerable Mouths, holes,
swallows, windings, conveyances, deeps, pipes, and huge vast Receivers, in some
of which there is the Sea, which by that secret conveyance are joined to the
Channel of the common Sea; in some again there is Sweet Waters, Rivers,
Streams: In some spirits, or else a sulphury and smoking substance. Seneca
says rightly, He gives too much way to his eyesight, who believes not, that
there are in the hidden and secret bosom of the Earth Bays of a vast Sea.
Neither do I perceive what may hinder, that there may not be some Seashore,
and the Sea received by hidden passages. There is therefore no cause of
doubting of there being many hollows in the very solid Earth: For verily we
conjecture at it by these means.

First, by the Rivers, which are found in many places where Earth is dug,
even to a notable depth, which is frequent in Mines. Secondly, in some places
the profundity of the Sea is beyond all sounding or measure. Thirdly, there are
some Caves in the Earth. In the Western part of Hispaniola is a Mountain of a
great height, being hollow within with many Caves, in which Rivers of Waters
are thrown down headlong with so great sound and rushing noise of streams, that
the very fall of those Waters may be heard five miles distance. Fourthly, some
Gulphs or Whirlpools are found in the Sea. Fifthly, Earthquakes do also prove
the being of Cavities under the Earth. Sixthly, some Rivers bury themselves
under the Earth, as Niger, Tigris, etc. Seventhly, Salt-springs, which without
doubt (for the greatest part) spring and flow from the Sea, are found in many
places. Eighthly, so in many places the grounds at the entrance of men walking,
tremble and shake, as about the Abbey of St. Omer in Flanders in the Province of
Brabant, (die Peel.)
Proposition IV. The Superficies or surface of the Lands is continual; but that
of the Waters is not so.
Indeed the Superficies of the Earth or Land appearing out above the Waters is
continued, or always the same to the superficies of the Channels of the Sea;
and this of the Sea again is continued to the other parts of the Land appearing
above. One continual superficies of the Ocean, Bays, and Rivers.
So there is one continual superficies of the Ocean, the Baies, and Rivers, but
not of all Waters; because there are some Lakes, which are not joined with the
Ocean in the superficies, as the Lake Parime, and the Caspian Sea.

Proposition V. It is certain how, or in what manner the parts of the Earth,
which are removed from the surface, that is, from our habitation toward the
Center.
Some men think, that the Water is in the bottom about the Center of the Earth:
The body of the Earth within (according to Gilbert, an English man) is a hard
Loadstone.
but it is most likely true, that the Earth occupies that place. Gilbert an
English man is of opinion, that the body of the Earth within, is nothing else
but a most hard Loadstone; but that those parts to which men have admittance by
digging, and in which Herbs grow and we also live, are as it were the shell or
crust of the Earth, wherein continual generations and corruptions are made.

See Fig. But Cartesius is of a different opinion. See Scheme.
Cartesius his Opinion is not much different from this, who thinks, that
there are three Regions or Parts of diverse substance in the body of the Earth.
The most inward Region of the Earth he deemeth to be about the Center thereof;
the second he judges to be thick and dusky, of very small parts; the third he
thinks (wherein Men are employed) to be made up of little parcels, not well
cleaving together.

But indeed touching this thing, there can scarcely any certainty be affirmed.
It is manifest by the hot-Baths, that in very many places under the Earth, fire
and fumes are lifted up from Sulphur.

Proposition VI. The consistency or standing, and fast cleaving together of the
Earth, is from Salt.
In all kinds of Earths may be found a certain kind of Salt.
The Artificial resolving of the Parts of the Earth shows, that in all Earths
may be found a certain kind of Salt, and so much the more: as the harder the
body is, (a few Oily ones being excepted;) as in Metals, Stones, etc. and that
the concretion or hard growing together of all things is by reason of salt, is
manifest by stones, which we may by Art make very hard with salt: bur if you
separate the salt from the earth, she will no longer cleave or stick together,
but will be a powder; neither can it be reduced to hardness without the
admixtion of salt thereto.

Proposition VII. The kinds of Earths are diverse ways mixed together in the
Earth.
Of Metals found in Mines.
Thus in Mines are found small pieces of Gold, Silver, Lead, etc. not heaped
together, and joined apart from others, but both mixed among themselves, and
also with unprofitable earth, according to the least parts, that Artificers not
at the first sight, but by diverse signs do find out what may be contained in
any Metalline earth. In the same manner in the Fields, sand is mixed with clay
or loam, lime, salt, etc. Of the different sorts of Earths, as did appear by
the Well dug at Amsterdam.
When as on a certain time at Amsterdam for making a Well, the earth was dug
out, even to the depth of 232 foot; these sorts of earth were showed to the
beholders, viz. of Garden-earth 7 foot, of Black-earth fitting for fire, which
is called Peat, 9 foot, of Soft-clay 9 foot, of Sand 8 foot, of Earth 4 foot,
of Clay 10 foot, of Earth 4 foot, of Sand upon which the Houses of Amsterdam
are wont to be rammed and paved 10 foot, of Clay 2 foot, of White-loam 4 foot,
of Dry-earth 5 foot, of muddy 1 foot, of Sand 14 foot, of Sandy-clay 3 foot, of
Sand mixed with Clay 5 foot, of Sand mixed with Seafish shells 4 foot, then a
bottom of Clay to the depth of 102 foot, and lastly of loam 31 foot, where the
digging ceased, and they came to Water. The Figure of which see among the
Schemes.

Proposition VIII. The Cavities of the Earth, and as well the outward
disposition thereof, and the position of its parts, are not perpetually the
same, but are at diverse times diverse.
The water of the Seamaketh diverse changes and ruins in the earth, where
likewise lie hid Spirits and Sulphurous Substances.
Indeed not only the Water of the Sea makes diverse changes and ruins in the
parts of the earth; whilst certain holes are stopped up, some are made more
broad: but also Spirits and Sulphury Substances lying hid here and there in the
earth, when they begin to increase, and to be resolved into Vapors, do
impetuously shake and thrust forwards the parts of the earth, as it is manifest
by Earthquakes. And it is likely that such like motions are made in the
interior parts and bowels of the earth, the greatest part of which we feel
not, neither perceive.

But we will speak of the mutual changing of the water and earth in the
Superficies of the earth, in the eighteenth Chapter.

The Earth is divided into Land and Waters. The Superficies of the Earth extant
out of the Water by the Interflux of the Sea, is distinguished into these four
parts, 1. Into great Continents or great Islands, of which four are reckoned by
us, 1. The Old World; whose parts are Asia, Africa, and Europe.
The bounds of this Continent are On the North, the Frozen and Tartarian Ocean.
On the East, the Pacifick and Indian Ocean. On the South, the Southern Ocean.
On the West the Atlantic Ocean.
2. The New World, or America, whose parts are Meridionalis, Septentrionalis,
The bounds of it are On the North, Davis Streights. On the East, the Atlantic
Ocean. On the South, the Pacifick Ocean. On the West, the Streights of Magellan.
3. The Polary North-land, or Greenland, is every where encompassed by the Sea
and Streights. 4. The South-land, and Land of Magellan, yet undiscovered.
2. Into Peninsulas, or Chersonesus, which are parts of those Continents,
Round, whose Latitude and Longitude are equal about, Africa it self.
Peloponesus, the Chersonesus of Grecia. Chersonesus Taurica, or Tartaria
Precopensis. Cambaja.
Long, among which are The Chersonesus of Malacca, adjoining to India. Cimbrica
or Jutland, adhering to Holsatia. Borea adjoining to Tartaria. The North and
South parts of America. California. Jucatan. The Chersonesus of Thracia. Nova
Francia. Ionia, Cindensis, Mindensis.
Of Affinity to Peninsulas, Italy, Greece, Acaia, Spain, Norway, Sweden,
Lapland, Asia minor, Arabia, Beach a Region of Magellan, and New Guiney,
Indostan, Cochinchina, New England, Monomotapa, Camboia.
3. Islands, which may be considered in four sorts, viz. Great, as England
Japan Island Canada Sumatra.
Madagascar, Borneo. Nova Zembla. California.
Indifferent, as Sicilia Ireland Hispaniola Cuba Java Major Celebes Creet

Luconia, Sardinia, Friesland, Terra Nova, Mindanoa, Ceilan.
Small, as Gilolo, Amboina, Timor. Corsica, Majorca, Cyprus, Negropont.
Sealand, Jamaica.
The very small ones, in which we consider 1. The more famous, Solitaria,
Rhodes, Malta, Lemnos, Helena, St. Thomas. 2. A knot or heap of Isles together,
as The Canary Isles. The Flandrian or Caribbe Isles. The Hesperides. Those of
the Gulf of Mexico. Of Maldives. Of Japan. About Madagascar. The Moluccoes and
Isles of Bauda. The Philippine Isles. The Isles of Thieves. The Isles in the
Aegean Sea. The Isles about England. The Isles of Solomon.

4. The Isthmuses, Between Egypt and Arabia, or Africa and Asia. That of
Corinth between Peloponesus and Achaia. The Isthmus of Panama or America the
longest of all. Between Jutland and Holsatia. Between Malacca and India.


OF Absolute Geography.
SECT. III. Wherein the constitution of the Land, or the dry part of the Earth,
in four Chapters is declared.
CHAP. VIII. Concerning the natural division of the parts of the Earth, made
from the Ocean, flowing round about it.
THE things which in this Chapter we shall deliver concerning the division of
the Earth, and in the fifteenth Chapter, we shall teach touching the division
of the Sea, will greatly facilitate the young Student in the understanding the
distinction of the surface and parts of the Earth; and to fix them the faster
in the memory: they are carefully and fully to be read, and to be compared with
the Terrestrial Artificial Globe and Maps.

Proposition I.
A certain portion of Earth is covered with Water, and a certain part stands
out above the Surface of the Water; Of parts of the Earth covered, and of parts
not covered with water.
but yet there are some parts which at some time are covered with Waters, and
some parts are free from them and conspicuous, as many Islands by Norway,
Scotland, and other Countries: Add to these the beds or shelves of Sand and
Seashores. But seeing these parts are so small, we take no account of them at
present; neither will we move that Question here, Whether the Land takes up the
greater part of the Superficies of the Earth, or whether the Water? We will
treat of this briefly in the eighteenth Chapter. Now we will confider the part
standing up, or extant above the Waters, and we will call it Lands or Islands.

Proposition II.
The Earth standing out above the waters, not one but many Lands: of which may
be five sorts.
The Land or Earth standing out above the Waters is not one, and continual, but
many Lands divided and disjoined from one another by the Water flowing it
between them. We will make five differences of them, to wit, 1. The greatest
Lands or Islands; 2. The great ones; 3. The mean ones; 4. The little ones; and
5. The least ones. We will treat of the cause and original of these Lands
extant or above the Waters, or of the Islands, in the eighteenth Chapter; for
there will be a more commodious place to treat of this Matter or Subject.

But all Lands extant above the Waters were to be called Islands, seeing that
an Island is no other thing then a Land begirt with Waters; All Lands extant
above the waters may be called Islands.
yet the common use of speaking has taken away from the greatest Lands this
name, because that they are so great, and of such a huge tract and continuance,
that the Circuit of the Water is thereby the less to be perceived. Insomuch
that they are usually called the firm Land, and also great Continents. And
indeed by reason of their vast bulk and greatness, unto which the magnitude of
other Islands being compared, is small, they deserve this peculiar name;
therefore we will also call them firm Lands and great Continents.

Proposition III.
The firm Lands four.
The greatest Lands, Continents, or Islands (not contending with any about their
name) are four.

First, the Old World; Secondly, the New World or America; Thirdly, the Polar
Land Artick, or Artick World; and Fourthly, the South-Land or Magellanick Land.

The old world most famous, with its bounds, etc.
The Old World, the most famous of those four, and only known of the Ancients,
which we inhabit, is commonly divided by the Sea into two parts, but joined
together by an Isthmus, or narrow neck of Land; one whereof is Africa, and the
other Asia and Europe. It is environed by the Ocean in this manner: from the
East by the Chinean Ocean and the Pacifick Sea: from the South by the Indian
Ocean and Aethiopick Sea: from the West by the Atlantic Sea: and from the
North by the Frozen or North Sea, the White Sea and Tartarian Ocean.

The division of this Continent of which we have spoken, is made by the
Mediterranean Sea and the Arabic Bay or Red Sea. Africa divided from Asia and
Europe.
For the distance of the Bays, that is the Latitude or breadth of the
intercedent Tract, is not greater then about 30 miles, if which were away,
Africa would make a peculiar firm Land, and would increase the number.

The distance of the Old World toward the East, is but a very little space
from the New World or America, The distance of the old world from the new.
about the Straight of Anian, if only this be existent in the Universe of
Nature. And the distance of Europe from America is also very little between
Norway and Newfoundland. Also the Old World is but a very small distance from
the Pole Artick-land about the Straight of Waigats, from the South Polar or
Magellan about New Guiney.

The New World or America is thus begirt by the Ocean; On the East by the
Atlantic Sea: The new world, with its bounds, etc.
On the South by the Magellanick Straight; On the West by the Pacifick Sea; and
on the North by a Sea unknown or uncertain, except Davis Straight.

This World also wants but little, but that it may be cut into two Islands, to
wit, at Panama and Nombre de Dios, where the confluence of the Pacifick and
Atlantic Ocean is by a small Tract of earth intercepted. It is distant from
the Old World a very little space, as before noted.

The Polar Artick and South Land, with its bounds, etc.
The Polar Artick, and the South or Austral Land, are begirt round with the Sea;
the first with the North Sea, whose parts are the Streights of Davis, Waigats,
and Anian. This South-land with the Pacifick-Sea, Indian Ocean, and Magellanick
Straight.

The Polar Artick Land has a very little distance at the Straight of Waigats
from the Old World: from America at the Straight of Davis. But it is removed
from the South-land by a huge space.

The Polar Austral, or rather the South-land, is very nigh to the Old World at
the running out Tract of New Guiney; as also to America at the Straight of
Magellan.

But concerning the South-land, only we have assuredly discovered, that it is
round about environed with the Sea, and is separated from the rest. Concerning
the rest of the Lands, to wit, the Old World, America, and the Pole Artick
World, the matter and discovery is not yet certain, whether they be round about
begirt by the Sea, and separated from one another: but yet it is very likely
they are so, by reason of diverse Bays and Entrances of starts running within
the Earth. The South-land only as yet is fully sailed about; this could not be
hitherto performed in the rest. For the Old World as yet has not been sailed
round beyond Waigats Straight, although the whole Western, Southern, Eastern
shore has been viewed, and that but a little part of the North shore remains
to be discovered. America has been sailed round, only part of her
Septentrional shore being excepted, by reason of the uncertainty of the
Streights or narrow Seas. Thus have we declared the placing of the greatest
Islands or Continents.

Proposition IV.
Ten great Iland^.
We reckon up ten great Islands on the Surface of the Land, which are these
following: 1. Britain, comprehending England and Scotland; it is esteemed the
greatest of all Islands which are commonly so called, those being excluded
which in The foregoing Proposition we have related at large. 2. Japan, which in
Maps and Globes has a lesser magnitude than it ought to have: for they which
have been there affirm, that it is as great, if not greater than Britain. 3.
Luconia, one of the Philippine Isles, which also from its Metropolitan Town is
called Manilha. 4. Madagascar or St. Laurence, seated on the Eastern shore of
Africa. 5. Sumatra, one of the Indian Isles. 6. Borneo, not far from Sumatra.
7. Island, not far from Norway. 8. Newfoundland, nigh unto Canada. 9. Between
Davis Straight and Hudsons Straight in the Northern Ocean, lies a great Island
about the Polar Land, which according to Visher's Universal Tables, is in form
round. 10. Nova Zembla, nigh unto Russia.


To these is California to be also numbered, if that be an Island, which it is
esteemed to be, and not a part of America.

Proposition V.
We number up ten mean Islands on the Surface of the Earth, viz.

1. Java, one of the Indian Isles. 2. Cuba, nigh unto Hispaniola. 3.
Hispaniola. 4. Ireland, nigh unto England. 5. Crete or Candia, not far from
Greece. 6. Sicily, nigh unto Italy. 7. Ceylan, one of the Indian Isles. 8.
Mindanao, one of the Philippine Isles. 9. Sardinia, seated in the Mediterranean
Sea. 10. Celebes in the Indian Ocean.
To these may be numbered Friezland, an Isle not far from Island.

Proposition VI.
Ten little Isles.
We will also number ten little Islands on the Surface of the Earth, to wit; 1.
Gilolo, one of the Indian Isles. 2. Amboina, not far from Gilolo. 3. Timor, one
of the Indian Isles. 4. Jamaica in the Bay of Mexico. 5. Sealand in Denmark. 6.
Corsica, seated in the Mediterranean Sea. 7. Eubaea, now Negropont, seated in
the Mediterranean Sea. 8. Majorca, nigh unto Spain. 9. Cyprus. 10. Isabella in
the Pacifick Ocean.


There are more Islands which may be reduced to this rank, but we shall refer
them to the last order of them, as more commodious.

Proposition VII. The least Isles.
Of the least Islands there is almost an innumerable multitude on the Surface
of the Earth; among which these following deserve a peculiar consideration:
First, the famous Solitary Islands; Secondly, those which are found in great
numbers in some Tract of the Ocean, and for their Neighborhood are
comprehended under one name.
We shall term them in general, a body or fry of Islands, because we are left
destitute of a more fitting name. The Tract of Sea wherein these Isles lie, is
called the Archipelago. The notable Solitary Islands are in the Mediterranean
Sea, Rhodes, Malta, Ivisa, Minorca, Chios, Cephalonia, etc.

In the Atlantic Ocean between Africa and Brazile, lies the Island of St.
Helen, where also the Island of the Ascension, the Isle of St. Thomas, is
placed in the very Equator.

The Island Madera over against the Gaditane Straight.

Zocotora, seated before the mouth of the Arabian Bay.

Gothland in the Baltic Sea.

Among the notable Solitary Isles, those are also worthy of remembrance which
swim on the waters, of which see Chapter eighteenth.

Proposition VIII.
There are fifteen fries or files of the least Islands numbered on the Surface
of the Earth; The lesser Isles.
to wit, 1. The Canary Islands in the Atlantic Sea. 2. The Isles of Azores in
the Northern Sea. 3. The Islands of Hesperides, or the Green Islands, over
against Cape Verd. 4. The Islands of Maldives in Indian Ocean. 5. The Lucar
Islands between Florida and Cuba, nigh unto America. 6. The Princes Islands
between Hispaniola and America, to which I refer and reduce all the least
Islands seated in the Bay of Mexico. 7. The Camercan Isles lying before
Hispaniola. 8. The Mascarenian Islands between Madagascar and Africa. 9. The
Molucco Islands, seated in the Indian Ocean. 10. The Philippine Islands in the
Pacifick Ocean. 11. The Aegean Islands. 12. The Japonian Isles. 13. The Islands
of Solomon in the Pacifick Sea. 14. The Isles of Thieves in the Archipelago of
St. Lazarus. 15. The Isles of Banda nigh unto Java. 16. The Islands situate
near England and Scotland; as the Hebrides, Orcades, Sourlings, Sporades, etc.
17. The Islands between the Magellanick Straight and the Straight Le Maire.


Other Isles may be reckoned.
Here I do not reckon to these those Islands which lie close on the shore of
some Continents in great numbers, as on the Coast of China, Norway, Brazile,
Davises Straight, etc.

Unto this rank also the Islands in great Rivers are to be referred and
marshalled, as such as are found in the River Nile, in the River of St.
Laurence of Canada, in the River Wolga, and in some other Rivers; as also those
which are in certain Lakes, as in the Lake Zembre, a Lake in Africa; in South
America, where the Islands of Lead are situate in a Lake, etc. But all (or
most of) these Isles, especially these aforegoing, together with several
others, I have largely treated of in the Geographical Description of the four
Parts of the World in their fit places, to which I refer the Reader.

Proposition IX. The Parts of all Lands or Islands are not of the same shape or
figure, but are unlike. The more famous differences of these are a Peninsula
and an Isthmus.
A Peninsula.
A Peninsula or Chersonese, that is, such a Tract of Land that is almost
encompassed by the Sea, except at one only narrow place, where with a strait
neck of Land, (called an Isthmus) it is knit to the Main Land.

An Isthmus.
An Isthmus is that narrow or strait neck of Land that couples and joins the
Peninsula to the Continent or Main-land, and that by which we pass out of one
broad Land into another.

The Peninsula's, Chersonesusses, or Chersoneses, that is, running out Lands,
are these following, to wit; 1. Italy, 2. Spain, 3. Part of England, Of Lands
which are (or may be termd) Peninsula's.
4. All Greece and Macedonia, 5. Norway and Swedeland, with Lapland, 6. Asia
minor, 7. India, 8. Camboia. 9. New Guiney of the South-land, 10. Beach, a
Country of the same Land, 11. Part of Virginia and New England, 12. The Tongue
of Africa, etc.

Proposition X.
Other Lands termed Peninsula's. The Chersoneses of the Ancients.
We will number up further fourteen Peninsula's or Chersoneses; and these we
will divide into longish ones, and somewhat round ones.

The longish ones are, first, the Golden Chersonese of the Ancients, now called
the Malaccan Chersonese, and joins to the Indies. 2. The Cymbrick Chersonese,
now called Jutland, adjoining to Holsatia. 3. California, on the Western side
of North America, near the Sea Vermejo: But late Observations report it to be
an Island. 4. New France, on the Eastern side of North America. 5. The Jucatan
Chersonese in the Bay of Mexico. 6. The Thracian Chersonese on the Hellespont.
7. The Cassandrian Chersonese by the Bay of Thessalonica in the Grecian Sea.
There are also certain Peninsula's less celebrious, of the lesser Asia, to
wit, Ionia or the Smyrnensian Peninsule; 2. The Cnidensian, or the Country of
Doris; and 3. The Mindensian Peninsula's.

Concerning Corea, it is doubtful whether it be a complete Island or a
Peninsula. Some Maps join it to Tartary, some again begirt it round with the
Sea: yet notwithstanding the latest Observations make it a Peninsule.

The somewhat round Peninsula's are,
1. Africa her self, a huge part of the Old World, is such an one: it is
environed with the Mediterranean Sea, the Atlantic Ocean, the Aethiopick,
Indian and Red Sea: It sticks fast to Asia by a narrow Tract of Land at
Egypt. 2. Three parts of America, to wit, Mexican and Peru stick fast together
at Panama by a narrow passage of the Earth. 3. Peloponnesus, now called the
Morea, being part of Greece. 4. Taurick Chersonese, or Peninsula in the Euxine
Sea, and the mouth of the Fen Maeotis, now called the Precopensian Tartary. 5.
Cambaia in India.
Proposition XI.
Of the chief Peninsula's.
We reckon as many Isthmusses as Peninsula's; the more famous are five in number.

1. The Isthmus between Egypt and Asia, whereby Africa joyneth to Asia. 2. The
Corinthian Isthmus between Peloponnesus and Greece. 3. The Panamensian Isthmus
between Mexico, America, and Peruvia. 4. The Isthmus between the Chersonesus
Aurea, or Golden Chersonesus, and the Indies. 5. The Isthmus of the Taurick
Chersonese.
CHAP. IX. Of Mountains and Hills in General.
Of Mountains and Hills.
TOuching Mountains, very many things worthy to be known in Geography will here
occur and meet us, partly because they seem to hinder the roundness of the
Earth, and partly because diverse things amongst renowned Authors are here
delivered concerning them.

Proposition I.
But a Mountain or Hill is said to be a part of the Earth rising aloft, which
if it be lesser, is called a Hillock or Clift.

Of Promontories and Rocks.
Also a Promontory is said to be a Hill, or Mountain running out at length into
the Sea. Rocks are called parts jutting or appearing forth in the Sea, or also
arising up out of huge stony Bulks or Bodies. But it must be generally known,
that the parts of the Earth which appear plain, are not all of the same height,
but some are sunk lower, especially at or near the Sea shores, insomuch as the
height increases from Maritine places, or such as abutt upon the Sea, even to
the Inland Regions. This also is proved by the Fountains and flowing Streams of
Rivers: For seeing that that part of the Earth, to which the water flows, is
lower than that from which it flows, and that the Fountain-heads and Springs
of Rivers are seldom in the Inland places, and such as are far remote from the
Sea: It is clearly manifest thereby, that the Inland places are more elevated
than those adjoining to the Sea Coasts. Inland places higher than those near
the Seacoasts.
So Bohemia is higher then Holsatia; which is perceived by the streaming course
of the River Elbe, which flows from Bohemia to Holsatia. In like manner we
take apparent Signs and Arguments of the greater height of Inland places, from
the Rivers Danubius, Visurgis, Rhene, Mosa, etc. The Swishers and Rhetians
Countries are judged by some men to be the highest of all Europe, because the
Rivers Rhene, Roan, and the greater Danou do flow and stream down from thence.
Moreover, look how great the declivity or bearing downwards of the Rivers are,
so great is the height of the Inland places above the Maritine places.

Proposition II. To find out the height of a Mountain by Geodesie or
Land-measuring, commonly called Surveying.
This is performed in the same manner which we use in the searching out the
height of Towers, if so be the top of the Mountain or Hill is remarkable by
some peculiar sign.

For the finding out the height of a Mountain by Geodesie.
Let A B be the Mountains height, A the foot, B the conspicuous head thereof. We
will take the line F C by a mean distance from it, so that neither of the
Angles A F C, A C F may be made very acute, but may in a manner be equal. Then
let the Angles A F C, A C F be observed by a collimation, or levelling with
winking be made to B, and these being subtracted to 180 degrees, the remaining
degrees shall show forth the Angle C A F. After that the distance of the
stations of F C is exquisitely to be measured; See Scheme.
and let it be wrought, As the sign of the Angle F A C to the sign of the Angle
C F A (or F C A, if you would take F A) so F C to A C, the distance of the
Mountain from C. Then the Instrument being hanged up, or placed upright in C,
and levelling with the Eye to B, let the Angle B C A be taken. And because the
Triangle C A B* is strait angled, to wit, the Angle B A C is strait, therefore
also the Angle A B C of 90 degrees shall be given.

Let it therefore be wrought by the Triangle BAC: As the whole sign 10000000 to
the Tangent of the Angle B C A, so the distance A C to the perpendicular height
of the Mountain A B.

The height of the Mountain Olympus measured by Xenagoras.
For Example, Let us put it, that Xenagoras the Son of Eumelus used this manner
or way of Measuring in finding out and knowing the height of the Mountain
Olympus, and to have found the Angle A F C to be 88 degrees, 29 minutes: but
the Angle A C F 57 degrees, 30 minutes. Therefore C A F shall be 34 degrees, 13
minutes; and by measure he found F C to be 400 Grecian foot, or two third parts
of one stadium. Therefore it shall be; As the sign of the Angle C A F 34
degrees 13 minutes, to the sign of the Angle A C F 57 degrees 13 minutes: So C
F 400; the foot of the Mountain to the distance F A: to wit, as 50226 to 84339,
so is 400 to 600; therefore F A is 600 foot. Furthermore, let the Angle B F A
be found 84 degrees 23 minutes. It shall be in the Triangle F A B, as 100000 to
the Tangent of the Angle B F A 1016000: so 600 to 6096 foot for A B, the height
of the Mountain Olympus: but 600 foot make a stadium. Therefore 6096 being
divided by 600, there are found 10 stadiums, and 96 Greek feet for the height
of the Mountain Olympus, just so much as Xenagoras found it to be. But these
stadiums make of a German mile with 2/32, or about 1/16.

The Mountain Olympus said to be very high by Aristotle.
Aristotle, with many other Writers, affirms, that the height of the Mountain
Olympus is so great, that the top thereof feels no motion of the Air, or
showers of Rain, and also that it is elevated above the second Region of the
Air: and the Ancients gathered that, by the Ashes left thereon, being never
moved thence by any Wind; and by the draughts and forms of Letters, being no
whit consumed, but found there after diverse years, fresh, and as they were
there drawn at the first.

It is to be noted, that in diverse places the height of the Mountain is also
diverse; therefore the consequence avails not. The Clouds do likewise cover
this Mountain, therefore it is as high; for indeed in the Northern parts and
Coasts of the World, the Clouds are a great deal lower.

There is also another manner of Measuring in plane, the Mountains by two
stadiums in the same strait line with the Mountain; but it is prone to error,
by reason of the small difference of the Angles.

Another way to find the height of a Mountain. See Scheme.
Yet by one height known; as for example, by a Tower, whose height is known, and
the distance from the Mountain, we shall more accurately gain the height of the
Mountain, viz. if we suppose F to be the Tower 300 foot high, and on the top
thereof, or in some commodious place, the Angle B F P be observed to be 83
degrees 30 minutes. P B shall be found to be 5896 foot, to whom B A the height
of the Tower must be added.

Proposition III. The height of the seen Mountain being given or known, to find
out Geodetically, or by Land-measuring, how great distance we are from it, if
we have either a Geometrical Instrument or Radius, or Altimetrical Scale with
us, that is to say, a Height-measuring Scale.
Another way to find the height of a Mountain.
Let A B be again the height of the Mountain, being now known by the
descriptions of the other 10 stadiums, and 96 Greek feet, or 6096 feet. Let F
be our place* and let us desire to know the distance F A. Let the Angle B F A
be taken by a Geometrical Instrument or Quadrant; let it be for example 48
degrees 23 minutes: Therefore the Triangle strait Angled B A F, when three are
known, it shall be, As the whole sign to the Tangent of the Angle A B F, See
Scheme.
5 degrees 37 minutes: So B A the known height shall be to the demanded A F.

As 100000 are to 9234, so 6096 to 600 foot, or one stadium: Therefore at so
great a distance, which is F A, we are from the Mountain. If we use a
Land-measuring Quadrant, or Square, or Radius, we shall not then need the Canon
of signs, which is manifest by the declaration and explication of the
Instruments; but yet the calculation or computation becomes thereby not so
accurate, by reason of the want of true proportion.

Note, In these two Problems I have added Geodetically, because the manner of
measuring is otherwise, when we use a Semidiameter, or Periphery of the Earth,
as we shall now propose: For in the former we have taken the distance F A as a
strait line, because there is but a small difference between that and a crooked
line.

Proposition IV. A distance being given, from whose term or extremest boundary
the top of the Mountain is first seen, to find thereby the height of the
Mountain by Geography.
A distance of a Mountain being given, to find the height. See Scheme.
Let us take the most high Mountain of Teneriff, called El Pico, or the Pike,
and let A B C D F be the periphery of the Earth, and indeed the Meridian of
that Mountain: Let the Center be R, the Mountain it self A B; let from B a
strait Tangent-line be drawn to the periphery B F. F then shall be the
furthermost or first point, from which the top of the Mountain B shall be seen:
let F R be drawn.

But some Mariners do testify, that when they are four degrees distant from it
in the Meridian, they can descry the top of that Mountain. Therefore the Arch A
F shall be four degrees: Let us therefore suppose that this Relation of our
Seamen is true, and that the first visive ray B F come directly from the top of
the Mountain B; and let us search out, how great the height of the Mountain may
be, if the matter were so. The Angle B F R is strait, and because F A is four
degrees, therefore also the Angle B R F is four degrees, and R F the half
diameter of the Earth is known; and in the Triangle B R F are the three given,
and it shall be,

As the whole sign to the secant of the Angle B R F four degrees, so R F to R
B. As 10000000 are to 10024419, so 3440 Italian miles R F, or 860 German miles,
The height of the Mountain El Pico in Teneriff.
) to 3448 Italian miles for R B: take away thence 3440 for R A, and there
remains 8 Italian miles, or 64 stadiums, or two German miles for the height of
the Mountain A B; which is almost incredible, and altogether against the
Ancients and Old Geographers. Therefore it is to be known, that there are two
things taken in the Problem which are false; first, that that Radius or Ray,
which coming from B first strikes the Eye, is direct, when as yet by reason of
the thickness of the Air it is refracted or turned. Indeed from B the top of
the Hill, there cannot be a strait line drawn to F (if F A be four degrees,)
but that first it must incur or run upon the Earth; and therefore the top B
cannot be seen directly in the place of F, but by a refracted Radius, to wit, B
T F, which is broken, and indeed the first of the broken rays, which may reach
to F.

If therefore we suppose, that this refraction brings it to pass, that this
Mountain may be sooner seen by one degree, than it would be seen, if it were
without this Refraction, to wit, with a direct ray B F to be seen from three
degrees A F, the height A B shall be found out according to the declared form
of five Italian miles, or 40 stadiums. But because it is also likely (which is
the second) that our Seamen speak more at large, and not with so accurate a
dimension; if we therefore subtract yet half a degree, so as we may resolve
that it is seen 2 degrees thence, or 38 German miles for F A: This I say being
put, and our Calculation being ordered as at first, the height of the Mountain
A B shall be found to be about one mile.

If the Mountain may be seen from the distance of two degrees (the refraction
being set apart) it shall be 2 Italian miles high.

But if it can be seen at one degrees distance, or 15 German miles, it shall be
in height half an Italian mile, or about 5 stadiums high. To this end we add
the Table following: If the height of the Mountains be mile Germ. 1/7 mile 1
Then it shall be seen from the distance of miles 14 18 20 25 26 27 28 29

But all these things are to be understood without Refraction, which for the
most part increases the seen height of the Mountain, and the distance of the
sight, as you may perceive by the description; for the refracted Radius T F
produced, gives the height N A.

Proposition V. The top of any Mountain being first seen, whose height is
known, to find by Geography how great space we are from it.
See Scheme. The top of a Mountain whose height is known, to find at the first
sight its distance.
This is the consequent of the former Proposition, and the solution thereof may
be fetched from the Table before described: but the Calculation will show a
more accurate solution. Let therefore the known height of the Mountain be A B,
and let it be seen in F, it may please us to know the distance A F, B F
touches the Periphery. In the Triangle strait angled B F R, the Angle F is is
strait, and the two sides R F, the half diameter of the Earth, and R B the same
half diameter with A B are known, which we may put to be half a German mile.
And because R F and R A is 860, R B shall be 860: And it may be wrought, As R B
is to R F, so the whole sign to the sign of the Angle R B F.

In Rhindlandish feet As 860 to 860, so 10000000 to As 19609700 to 19598300, so
10000000 to 9994186, the sign 88 degrees, 2 minuees, 40 for R B F.


Therefore B R F, that is, the Arch A F shall be one degree, 55 minutes, 20
seconds. Therefore from this distance the Mountain shall be seen with
refraction of Rays, if it is half a mile high; to which for the Argument of
Refraction we may add eight miles, insomuch that it may be seen at the ordinary
distance of 37 miles: But the refraction also varies according to the diverse
Altitude of the Sun, neither is it absent before the rising, or after the
setting of the Sun. But we will treat more at large concerning this business in
the Chapter touching the Air, and the Third part of this Book, where we shall
discourse of the visible Horizon.

Proposition VI. The length of the shadow being given, which any mountain
casts, and the height of the Sun being given to that time, to find out the
Altitude of the Mountain.
To find out the Altitude of a Mountain by its shadow, knowing the height of
the Sun. Of the Mountain Athos, its height, etc.
We will propose this Problem rather for its Antiquity and pleasantness, than
that we think that the Altitude may accurately by the shadow be obtained.

Plutarch and Pliny have written, that the Mountain Athos will cover or hide
the sides of the Lemnian Heifer, because the Mountain Athos situated on the
shore of Macedonia, is so highly elevated, that its casts its shadow into the
Island Lemnos, the Sun being in Cancer, and indeed into the Market of the City
Myrrhina, where the boundary or end of the shadow was signified by a Brazen
Heifer there erected, which the Inhabitants placed there for the strangness and
wonder of the matter: And Pliny writes, that the interval or distance between
the Mountain Athos and the Isle Lemnos, is judged to be 87000 paces, or 87
Italian miles. But Writers have not noted the Alitude of the Sun, according to
the shadow thereof: but yet it is likely, that this shadow cast from the Sun
being at the point of setting, or when it began to be hidden from the City
Myrrhina by the Mountain Athos; (for Athos stands Westward from the Isle
Lemnos;) or when in it, it was hid from the Vertical point of Myrrhina, which
is drawn through the Mountain Athos. But although we may put, that the Sun was
then as it were in the Horizon of Myrrhina F O, and so that the Radius O F
passed through the top of the Mountain B, See the Scheme to the fifth
Proposition.
and cast the shadow A F, and O F shall be the Tangent of the Periphery; and
because F R is given, and the Angle F R B (or by taking the Triangle B A F, and
F A as a strait line) B A shall be found to be eight stadiums, the height of
the Mountain. But because notwithstanding in this position of the Sun, the term
or boundary of the shadow cannot be noted, because it is infinite; and besides
that, the buildings of the City Myrrhina might hinder both the shadow and the
near Rays of the Sun near to the shadow: Therefore it is to be determined, that
the Sun at the least was elevated two degrees above the Horizon of Myrrhina.
For example, In S, that the Angle S F O be two degrees, and the Radius of the
Sun passing through the top of the Mountain T, and ending the shadow in F.

Therefore in the Oblique angled Triangle R T F, the given Angle shall be T F R
92 degrees, and F R T is given one degree 16 minutes: And therefore F T R is 86
degrees 45 minutes; and the half diameter F R is known, 860 German miles.
Therefore T R shall be found according to the proportion,

As the sign of the Angle F T R 86 degrees 54 minutes, to the sign of the Angle
T F R 92 degrees: so F R to R T, 860.

Therefore R T shall be 861 German miles, and A T the height of the Mountain
Athos, somewhat above one German mile.

If we take the Altitude of the Sun one degree, the height of the Mountain
Athos will be found to be 20 stadiums.

Yet notwithstanding I esteem the over great distance of Lemnos from the
Mountain Athos, assigned by Pliny, to be the cause of the overgreat Magnitude
arising from the Calculation: For Sophians Tuble of Greece, and Blavius his
Table of Modern Greece, do only exhibit and allow 55 Italian miles, the
distance for F A. Therefore the Angle F R T shall scarcely be one degree, to
wit, 55 minutes; and the Altitude of the Sun, one degree 30 minutes: and
therefore F R T, 87 degrees 35 minutes; and if it be done in the Triangle F R T,

As the sign of the Angle F R T 87 degrees 35 minutes, to the sign of the Angle
T R R 91 degrees 30 minutes: so F R 860 to R T. Or in the Triangle T F A strait
angled to A, the Angle T F A shall be one degree 30 minutes; and F A is assumed
as the strait or right of 55 miles The Altitude A T shall be found according to
this Proportion: As the whole sign to the Tangent of the Angle T F A, one
degree 30 minutes: So F A 55 miles, to A T the height of the Mountain*

Here also is the Problem to be answered, viz. How the height of any Mountain
may be found, if it be fully searched out? how much sooner the Sun is seen to
rise in the top of that Mountain, than at the foot thereof? And contrariwise,
if the Altitude be given, how, and in what manner this difference of time is to
be found out? touching which matter Aristotle and Pliny have delivered
incredible stories, and such as the true Calculation and account do teach to be
evidently otherwise. But seeing this cannot be explicated without the solution
of another Problem, which we have referred to the second part of this Book:
therefore we will defer these two Problems to the Thirtieth Chapter.

Proposition VII. The Altitude of Mountains has no sensible proportion to the
half diameter of the Earth, or else so little, that it hinders the roundness of
the Earth no more, than a pointed note upon the surface of the Artificial Globe.
The height of the Mountains no hindrance to the roundness of the Earth.
For we have shown that the Mountain of the Island Teneriff, called El Pico de
Tayde, to have no greater Altitude than one mile, or at most 1 mile. And
certainly, Experience can scarcely find out a Mountain higher than that. Seeing
therefore the half diameter of the Earth is 860 miles, it shall be the model
and account of the greatest height of the Mountains to the half diameter of the
Earth, which is 1 to 860, to wit, of which parts the half diameter of the Earth
or any Globe is 360, one of such the greatest height of the Mountains shall
have. And whereas there are very few Mountains of so great height, but that
very many of them scarcely ascend to the fourth part of a mile, it is manifest,
that they heave or lift up the roundness of the Earth no more, than certain
ruggednesses in Globes made by the hands of Artificers, do disproportion the
roundness of those Globes. For indeed there is no body in the whole nature of
things, that can have an exact Geometrical roundness.

Proposition VIII. Why showers of Rain, Mists, and Snows, are frequent on the
tops of Mountains, when as in the neighboring Valleys the Air is serene and
calm without any such Meteors?
Showers of Rain, Snow, Mists, etc. on ^he tops of Mountains, when not in the
Valleys.
They which have traveled on the high Lands or Mountainous places of Asia,
Peruvia, and other Countries, aver, that it often falls out, that they which are
conversant on the top of Mountains, do there feel and find showers of Rain,
Snow, and thick and foggy Mists; but descending thence to the Valleys lying
thereunder, they feel no such thing, but find a clear and calm Air. We
sometimes observe the same in the Mountains of our own Country.

Some say, that the cause of this Phenomenon or appearance is, that the
Mountains attract thither the Air and Clouds; but they do not declare, by what
faculty or power they may do it, and therefore they say nothing to the purpose.
It seems to me, that it is done in this manner: The vapors and exhalations,
when as in the middle Region of the Air, (in which very many tops of Mountains
are) they are condensated into small drops, begin to decline downward. And
because the top of Mountains are nearer to those vapors and exhalations
condensated in the middle Region of the Air, than the Valleys lying under them;
therefore those small drops, which are above those Mountain tops, coming first
to the ground, leave a place in the Region of the Air, which presently the next
small drops do enjoy; because they are forced and thrust forth by others;
either by reason of Natures abhorring and shunning of vacuity or emptiness, or
because this is the nature of Water, that it flows and runs to that place where
its flux or flowing first began, or where the place is more low and sunk.

Proposition IX. Whether the Superficies of a Mountain be more capacious, than
the plane underneath it, upon whom it stands?
Of the Superficies of Mountains.
Geometry proves it to be greater; but yet it is another Question, Whether
therefore it can sustain the more Men, or bear the greater plenty of Provision?
I prove the Affirmative: for although all things placed in a Mouatain ought to
be perpendicular to the under sunk or placed Plane, yet greater store of Earth
and a greater surface is there.

CHAP. X. Of the differences and tract of Mountains; and in special, concerning
Burning Mountains.
Proposition I. Some Mountains are bounded about with a little space; Others
extend themselves out, and march forth at a long reach and trace.
Of Mountains or Hills.
AND these Mountains or Hills of the later sort are called tops, yokes, or
chains of Mountains or Hills. There are found such like Chains of Mountains or
Hills almost in all Countries in the World, so that they may be judged to be
thereby continual, but that small spaces interpose and thrust in themselves;
but they march out at length into diverse Coasts: some from the North into the
South, some from the East into the West, and othersome to Coasts collateral to
the Cardinal points.

The most famous Chains or Cliffs of Hills are these following.
Of the Hills or Mountains called the Alps.
1. The Alps; which separating Italy from the neighboring Countries, extend
themselves out by a vast tract of Earth, and do as it were send forth their
Arms into other Provinces and Countries, to wit, through France to Spain, where
they are called the Pyrenean Hills or Mountains; and to Rhetia, where they are
called the Rhetick Hills; and to Hungaria, where they are named the Hungarian
Mountains, and doubtful ones; then above Dalmatia, the Dalmation Hills; and
they are stretched out through Macedonia to Thrace and Pontus. But because
there comes in a little space between the Julian and Dalmatian Hills;
therefore some men determine, and make the end of the Alps to be in the Julian
Mountains. It sends out one Arm with continual chains and yokes of Hills, and
with a winding course, like a crescent, passing through all Italy, and dividing
it into two parts, it runs along even to the Sicilian Sea: Neither does it
march forward in one form every where, but in many parts it puts forth
collateral, or side-Companions and fellow Branches, as it also sends forth
some Mountains styled with several Names, as the Mountain Massicus, the Hill
Gaurus, Monte di Capua, or the Mountain of Capua; and the burning Vesuvius, etc.

The Hills of Peru.
2. The Hills of Peru or Peruviana, the longest of all others; for they pass
through the whole South America, even from the Equator to the Magellanick
streigths, and do separate the Kingdom of Peru from other Provinces, insomuch
that the whole tract of this Chain of Hills is about 800 German miles. And the
heads or cliffs of the Hills are so high, that they are reported to weary Birds
in their flight over them: and there is but one only passage over these Hills
(which as yet is discovered,) and that very cumbersom. Many of those are
covered with perpetual Snows, as well in Summer as Winter; and many of them are
also wrapped up and involved with the Clouds, and some likewise are elevated
beyond the middle Region of the Air. Truly it has happened, the Spaniards
sometimes passing out of Nicaragua into Peru, that many of them, These
Mountains exceeding Cold.
together with their Horses, on the tops of those interposed Mountains, have
suddenly died, and if they had become stiff with cold Frost, they remained
there immovable like standing Images. The cause of which seemeth-to have been
the want of Air, such as our breath or Lungs require. There are also found in
these Mountains Sulphury and smoking Hills.

The Hills between Peru and Brasil.
3. There are very many other Mountains between Peru and Brasil, which also
stretch themselves out through the Country of China to the Magellanick
streights, where the high tops of the Hills are perpetually hidden with Snows,
although they lie under the Latitude of 52 degrees.

The Hills of Canada, and New England.
4. Add to these Chains of Hills, those of Canada and New England, and very many
others in North America, covered with continual Snow, although they are less
famous.

The Mountain Taurus,
5. The top of Taurus, a Mountain in Asia. This was amongst ancient Writers
accounted the most noble and greatest Mountain of the World. It rises up in
Asia Minor, from the Pamphilian Sea nigh to the Chelidonian Islands, and thence
marches along through diverse Countries and great Kingdoms under diverse Names,
from the West into the East, unto India, and divides all Asia into two parts,
one whereof which looks to the North is called Asia within Taurus, and the
other which faceth the West is named Asia without Taurus. It is fenced in on
either side with many Companions, amongst which the famous and most notable
ones are the greater and the lesser Anti-Taurus, which cut and divide the
greater and lesser Armenia into two parts, where Taurus it self passes between
Armenia and Mesopotamia; it sends forth many Arms toward the North and South.

The Mountain Imaus.
6. The Mountain Imaus marches forth in form of a Cross two ways, as well
toward the East and West, as toward the North and South. The Northern part
is now called Alkai. It is stretched out forward toward the South, even to the
very ends of the Indies, and the fountain heads of the River Ganges in length
about four hundred German Miles. It divides the Asian Scythia into two parts,
of which that which looks on the west is called Scythia within the Mountain
Imaus; but that which beholds the East, is named Scythia without the Mountain
Imaus.

The Mountain Caucasus.
7. The top of the Mountain Caucasus is stretched out from the North to the
South toward Pontus Euxinus, from the Caspian Sea (to whom it is a neighbor)
at the breadth of fifty miles, and to those that sail in the Caspian Sea, it is
an infallible mark to govern and steer their course by: It reaches to Mount
Ararat in Armenia, where Noah's Ark rested, which the Turks and Persians
believe to be there kept to this day. But the Mountains of Ararat are
neighbors to Taurus; because all these Mountains are contiguous. We will
speak of the height of Caucasus in the Thirtieth Chapter.

The Hill of China.
8. The Hill of China, which embraces and comprehends the Damasian Mountains,
so called by the Ancients toward the West, and Ottoro^ora toward the North.
This Clift or Chain of Hills consists of many Mountains, not indeed
continually yoked together, but here and there affording a passage between
them. And the Mountains of Camboja seem to be a part of that gang of Hills.

The Mountains of Arabia.
9. The Hills of Arabia, which march forward in a triple rank, of whom the Holy
Mount Sinai is a part.

The Mount Atlas.
10. The most famous Hill, and which is celebrated with innumerable figments of
the Greek Poets, is Mount Atlas in Africa. It rises at the shore of the
Western Ocean of Africa, and extends it self through all Africa, even to the
borders of Egypt. It has the Fountains and Springs of almost all the Rivers of
Africa; in many places it is full of Snow and Cold, although it lies in the
Torrid Zone.

The Mountains of the Moon.
11. The Clift of Africa nigh to Monomotapa, which is called the Mountains of
the Moon. It compasses in almost all Monomotapa; and the arms or branches
thereof are many, as the Hill Zeth, and the Snowy Mountains. There are found
very many, and in a manner innumerable other yoaks or chains of Mountains in
Africa, severed and disjoined by a small space, insomuch that they are almost
all contiguous, and seem to be parts of one Chain of Hills.

The Riphean Mountains of Europe.
12. The Riphean Mountains of Europe, which are also called the Obian Hills;
they march on forward from the White Sea or Muscovian Bay, to the very mouth of
the River Ob, and the Muscovites call them Weliki Kameypoyas, that is, the
great Stony Girdle; because they think that the whole World is girted in with
them. There is here another yoke of Hills, which the Russians call Joegoria. It
begins at the Southern boundary of Tartaria, and extends it self unto the
North Sea, and very many Rivers rise and spring out of this, viz. the Rivers
Wissagda, Neem, Wissera, and Petsora the greatest of all. Besides a triple yoke
of Hills runs down between Siberia and Russia, from the North toward the
South. One of them the Russians call Coosvinscoy Camen, whose breadth or
passage is two days Journey. To this some Valleys coming in betwixt them, is a
second bordering called Cirgins Koy Camen, also of two days Journey; the third
is Podvins Coy Camen, the highest of these three Mountains, which in many parts
throughout the whole year is covered with Snow and Clouds, and therefore it
affords a very difficult passage, which is of four days. The City Vergateria
Siberiae is nigh unto it.

The Mountains of Norway and Lapland.
13. The Mountains of Norway and Lapland, which begin from the Southern
Promontory of Norway, and separate Sweden in part from Norway, then in many
orders proceed even to the farthest part of Lapland, and are distinguished by
diverse names, as Fillefiel, Dofrefiel, and the like.

The Mountain Hercinium in Germany.
14. In Germany, the famous Mountain Hercinium encompassing all Bohemia, and by
various windings extending it self into diverse Regions, and that also by
various names. In the Duchy of Brunswick it retains its Ancient appellation,
the Mountain Bructerus is part of it.

Proposition II. In most Islands, and in the procurrent parts of the Continent,
the Mountains are so situated, that they pass through the middle of the Land,
and divide them into two parts.
The division of Lands by Mountains.
So in Scotland the Mountain Grampius, (called by the Inhabitants Gransbaine)
which extends through this Island from the East to the West, and divides it
in two equal parts, both which differ not only in the nature of the Soil, but
also in the Inhabitants. So in the Islands of Sumatra, Borneo, Luconia,
Celebes, Hispaniola, Cuba, Mountains are found, which arise from the Seashore
by degrees toward the midst of the Islands unto a very great height.

The Mountain Gatis.
So the Mountains Gatis pass through the middle procurrent part of Asia, which
is called India: For they arise from the extremities of Caucasus, and proceed
to the Promontory of Corus, vulgarly called Cabo de Comerino, from the North to
the South, and so divide this procurrent into two parts, whereof that part
which is on this side Gatis toward the West, is termed the Region of Malabar,
and the other beyond the Mountain Gatis toward the East the Region of
Choromandel. This very same ridge of Mountains passes through the other part
of India which is now called Bengala, through the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, and
the whole Chersonesus of Malacca.

The Mountains in Camboja, California, Corea.
So also the Mountains of the procurrent of Earth termed Camboia: The like
Mountains are in the Peninsula or Isle of California, in the procurrent Africa
from the Lake Zair to the Promontory of Good-hope: In the Peninsula Corea, the
Apennine in Italy.

How these Mountains came, whether created with the Earth it self, or whether
they afterward sprung from natural Causes, is uncertain.

Proposition III. Of Mountains famous for their exceeding Altitude.
The Mountain of El Pico the highest in the world.
1. El Pico in Teneriff, esteemed the highest in the whole World, whose top is
conspicuous at Sea 60 miles; there is no ascending up it, but in July and
August, by reason that it is covered all the other part of the Year with Snow,
although that Snow is never seen in the Island it self, or the adjacent Canary
Isles. The Vertex is manifestly discovered to be advanced above the Clouds,
seeing that these encompass the middle of the Mountain, and the Vertex is
beheld to be above this Cloud; but because it suffers Snow, thence it is
certain that it is not protended beyond the middle Region of the Air. Three
days are required to ascend to the top of this Mountain: for it is not a spiral
top, but plain, and the Air being serene, and without Clouds, one may
distinctly discern from it all the other circumjacent Canary Isles, of which
some are 50 miles remote from it. In those two Months many Sulphurous stones
are brought from the Mountain, and carried in great abundance into Spain. 2. In
one of the Azores near to the Isle Fayal, The Mountain Pico de St. George.
there is found a Mountain called Pico de St. George, whence the Isle is called
Pico. It is reported to have an equal Altitude with the Mountain of Teneriff.
The Mountain Cordillera
3. The Mountain called Cordillera in the Southern America, separating Peru from
the other Provinces, is said to be of that exceeding height, that it gives
place to no Mountain of the Earth for Altitude. It extends from the Streights
of Magellan to Panama. Mount Aetna.
4. Aetna, a Mountain in Sicilia, from the top of which fire is discerned to be
ejected in the Isle of Malta, whence it is supposed to have at the least an
entire mile in Altitude: but in the preceding Chapter we have given a reason
of this apparent Altitude. 5. Hecla, a Mountain of Island. Hecla.
Pico de Adam.
6. Pico de Adam in the Isle of Geilam. 7. The Mountain Bructerus in Germany and
Abnoba. 8. The Mountain Figenojamma in Japan, Figenojamma.
is supposed to exceed the Clouds in Altitude. 9. The Mountain Caucasus much
celebrated by the Ancients for its great height. Caucasus.
The Mountain Pelion.
10. The Mountain Pelion in Macedonia. Pliny says that Dicaearchus the
Mathematician, by the command and expense of some Kings, measured the Altitude
of this Mountain, and found it to be 1250 paces, that is, 10 Stadia, or of a
German mile. Geminus says that the Mountain Cyllene was found by Dicaearchus
to be of the same Altitude. The Mountain Athos.
11. The Mountain Athos (as Mela in Lib. 2. Chap. 2. relates) is so elated,
that it is believed to rise higher than that showers should fall thence. This
Opinion received credit, because that the Ashes are not washed away from the
Altars that are on the top of it, but remain in the heap as they were left in.
It runs along with a great broad Ridge into the Sea, where it adhereth to
the Continent. Xerxes making his Expedition against the Graecians, dugg it
through, and made it Navigable. 12. Olympus, a Mountain of Asia minor, Olympus.
of which we have spoken in the former Chapter. 13. Casius, Casius.
a Mountain in Asia, which Pliny writes to be four miles in height. 14. Mount
Haemus, Haemus.
which Martianus Capella describes to be 6 miles in Altitude. 15. Atlas, Atlas.
a Mountain in Africa, of which we have spoken in the preceding Proposition.
The Poets feigned this Mountain to be so high, that it upheld Heaven, but
experience has found the contrary.
Proposition IV. The many differences of Mountains.
In the former Propositions we have showed three differences, viz.

The differences of Mountains.
1. Some are extended in a long Tract, and some are terminated in a small
Circuit. 2. Some divide the Regions in two parts; others pass through any Tract
of the Regions. 3. Some are of an exceeding height, some of a mean, and some
but low. To these differences these may be added: 4. Some are Sandy, some
Rocky, Clay or Chaulky. 5. Some include or contain the Springs of Rivers,
whereas others are without them. 6. Some are adorned with Woods, and other some
destitute of Trees. 7. Some are burning and smoking, whereas others are
without fires. 8. Some are rich in Metals, and others without them. 9. And some
Mountains are covered with Snow all the Year, whereas others have no Snow at
all.
Proposition V. To enumerate the burning Mountains, and those that cast out
flames.
Of Vulcan's or burning Mountains.
Such Mountains at this day are called Vulcans, which Appellation the Portugal
Marines first introduced, and now are commonly so called; and such are 1. The
most famous is Aetna, Mount Aetna.
a Mountain in Sicilia, at this day called Gebel, from whose top the ejected
flames and smoke are discovered at a long distance in the Mediterranean Sea,
even to Malta, which is 40 German miles. Howbeit that the ejaculation of the
flames be continual, yet notwithstanding sometimes it rages with a greater
force. In the Year 1537. from the first of May to the twelfth, A great strange
Earthquake.
all Sicilia was shaken with an Earthquake, then a great and horrible noise was
heard, as if Canons had been fired: there followed the destruction of many
Edifices throughout the whole Isle, when that this storm had continued for
eleven days, the Earth was rent in twain, or opened it self with a vast Gulf,
whence a great flame and fire brake forth, by which, within the space of four
days, all was consumed and burnt which was not distant above five miles from
Aetna. A little after the Funnel, which is on the top of the Mountain, for
three days cast forth an abundance of Ashes and Coals, which were not only
dispersed throughout all the Isle, but also beyond the Seas into Italy. And the
Ships in the Sea about 200 Leagues distant, steering toward Venice, were much
damnified. Farellus has at large described the fires of this Mountain, and
does also say that the foot of it is 100 Italian miles in Circuit. And in Anno
1669. the flames broak forth in a violent manner, to the great damage of the
Inhabitants of those parts. Mount Hecla.
2. Hecla, a Mountain of Island, does sometimes rage as much as Aetna, and cast
forth great stones: And continual fires in it wanting a free evacuation,
oftentimes send forth noises like unto lamentations; thence many simple people
supposed that there was the place of Hell, where the Souls of the damned were
tormented. Vesuvius, or Monte de Soma
3. Vesuvius, at this day Mont de Soma, not far from the City of Naples; is
planted with most fertile Vines, which, without the time of the Conflagration,
makes the best Falernum, but it is obnoxious to frequent burnings. Dion
Cassius relates, that in the Time of Vespasian its Conflagration, and the
force of its Flames were so vehement, that the Ashes cast forth from its bottom
with the Sulphurous smoke, were not only carried by the wind to Rome, but also
beyond the Mediterranean Sea into Africa, even to Egypt: moreover, the Birds
being suffocated in the Air, fell to the Earth; the Fishes perished in the
adjacent, infected warm and frequent water. Concerning this Conflagration, and
the sad mutation of the Mountain, there is an excellent Epigram in Martial, who
lived at that time, and saw the Mountain in its Verdure, and afterward buried
in its Ashes. But then the Conflagration ceasing, and the Showers watering the
Sulphurous Embers and Ashes, in the Superficies of the Mountain here and there
was great fertility of Wine. But again within these few years this Mountain
burned a fresh, and sent forth an abundance of Smoke. The adjacent Land was
burnt, and became dangerous to Travelers, by reason of the various Pits which
the flame caused. A Mountain in Java worthy of note.
4. A Mountain in the Island of Java, not far from the City Panacura: This in
the Year 1586. when it had never burned before, first was rent with a violent
eruption of flaming Sulphur, so that about 10000 persons were said to have
perished in the neighboring places; and it ejected exceeding great Stones into
the City; and for the space of three days it vomited forth so much black Smoke
mixed with Ashes and Embers, that it obscured the face of the Sun, and almost
clothed day with nights dark Mantle. The Mountain Gonnapi.
5. Gonnapi, a Mountain in one of the Isles of Banda. This in the Year 1586. in
the Month of April, when that it had burnt for 17 years, was rent with a great
noise, and cast forth such an abundance of great Stones of Sulphur and ardent
matter on the Sea and Land, that it astonished all persons: The abundance of
Ashes and Embers also rendered the Cannons of the Hollanders in their Castle
unserviceable, such a vast heap overwhelmed them. Vast Stones were found in the
Sea, with a multitude of small ones, so that the Barks had scarce a free
passage. The water on the shore so boiled, as if that fire had been placed
under it: An abundance of Fishes were killed and seen floating on the water.
Balaluanum.
6. Balaluanum, a Mountain in the Isle of Sumatra, casts forth Smoke and
Flames as Aetna. Many places in the Molucco Isles cast forth fire.
7. In the Molucco Isles the Land in many places belcheth forth fire with an
huge noise; but it is chiefly noted for the Funnel of Turnate. The Mountain is
advanced to the Clouds, and very steep, the lower parts of which are covered
with thick Woods, the upper naked by reason of the fire. On the top is the
Funnel of a vast wideness, which is in the form of an Amp^^^heater with many
Circles, the greater including the lesser; thence in the Equinoctials,
especially those in the Spring and Autumn, certain Winds blowing, chiefly the
Northern, with an horrible noise, Flames mixed with black Smoke and Embers,
break forth, and fill all places to a great distance with Ashes. There are
annual seasons of seeing it; neither can one ascend but by Ropes or Chains in
certain places. See Maffaeus.
Here in some places of this Mountain the Inhabitants gather good Sulphur. 8.
One of the Islands of Maurice (60 Leagues distant from Moluccoes) oftentimes
the whole Isle is shaken with an Earthquake, and vomiteth Fire and Ashes: and
there is so great an abundance of Fire, that whole Mountains and Rocks do burn.
Oftentimes fiery Stones break forth of a vast bigness. When the Wind is more
vehement, so vast an abundance of Ashes is poured forth, that people laboring
in the Fields are forced to return home, being covered with Ashes: those Ashes
also kill their living Creatures. From the top of the Mountain this black and
dismal Fire breaks forth with a dreadful noise, like unto Thunder or great
Guns: And from thence comes abundance of Pumice Stones and other Stones burnt
in the fire. A Mountain in Japan worthy of note.
9. In Japan (as Maffaeus relates) there is a Mountain which continually
vomiteth Flames, on the top of which the Evil Spirit shows himself to certain
Persons, after that they have macerated themselves for a Vow sake. 10. Many
Vulcanelloes are found in the Isles of Japan, distant 70 miles from Ferando.
Also in a certain small Isle which lies between Tanaxuma, and the Isles called
the Sisters, a burning Mountain is discovered, at other times smoking. Certain
Vulcanes in the Isle Tendai.
11. In Tendai, one of the Philippine Isles, where the Promontory of the Holy
Spirit is, certain Vulcans are found: One also in the Isle Marindique, another
of the Philippine Isles. 12. In Nicaragna, a Province in America, a lofty
Mountain casts forth flames in such great abundance, that they may be seen 10
miles distant. Vulcan Mountains in Cordillera.
13. In the Ridge of Peru called Cordillera, here and there are certain Rocks
and Vulcan Mountains, partly smoking and partly burning, and they are said to
cast out fire: Especially in the Province of Carrapa, there is a Mountain from
whose top, when the Heaven is serene, much smoke is discovered to be elevated.
Others in Peru.
14. Near to Arequipa a City of Peru, 90 miles distant from Lima, a certain
Sulphurous Mountain continually ejaculateth fire, which is found dangerous to
the City. 15. In Peru, near the Valley Mulahallow, about 50 Leagues from Quito,
there is a Vulcan, which once rending, cast forth great Stones, and terrified
also the remote places with the huge noise. Other Vulcans.
16. In one of the Islands which they call Papoys, which Le Maire discovered
(except peradventure it may adhere to the South Continent) on the Oriental
Coast of New Guiney is a Vulcan, which at that time burned. 17. Certain
Mountains lying on the Oriental Shore of the River Jeniscea, in the Country of
the Tingesi beyond Ob, toward the East, by a journey of some weeks, there are
Vulcans as the Muscovites do report. 18. Certain Mountains at the River Pesida
beyond the Region of the Tingaesi. A Vulcan in Liburnia.
19. In Liburnia, near the City Apollonia, is a rocky Mountain, from the top of
which continually issues smoke and flame. In the Land adjoining there are hot
Fountains; there are also certain Mountains which have now ceased to burn. So
the Isle Queimoda, on the Coast of Brasil, not far from the mouth of the Silver
River, in time past did burn: so the Mountains in Congo or Angola, which they
term Vesbrande Bergen. In the Isles of the Azores, especially Tercera and St.
Michael, formerly the Earth burned in many places, but now the smoke in some
places is sometimes expelled; hence also they have often Earthquakes. The Isles
of St. Helena and of the Ascension, have also its Earth like unto these, viz. a
Dust, Embers, and Ashes, so that in times past it is probably the Mountains of
these Isles burned, which is also manifest from the Sulphurous Earth and
Coals, which they call Smitskolen. Now the cause of these Vulcans or burning
Mountains, is a Sulphurous bituminous Substance, which is contained in such
like Mountains.


Proposition VI. The Tanges of the Mountains, some admit of no passage or
opening, some of many, other some of one or another only.
Of the Tanges of the Mountains.
They are called Portae and also Thermopylae. Of which the more noted are, 1.
The Thermopylae in Phocis, from which this name was communicated to the rest.
2. The Caspian Portae, which, as through a narrow passage, are admitted into
the Caspian Mountains. 3. The Port of the Mountain Cordillera in Peru. 4. The
Port of the Mountain which is extended between Abyssiue and Arabia
Troglodytica, through which they carry Provision and Grain from that Region
unto this. 5. In Caucasus the Sarmatick and Albanian Ports.


Proposition VII. That Mountain is termed a Promontory which runs forth in a
certain Tract to the Sea, or on the Shore is elevated above the adjacent places.
Of Promontories or Capes.
In Mapps they are called Capes or Heads; among which the more noted are, Cape
of Good-hope.
1. The Cape of Good-hope in Africa, which must be passed by those that sail
into India. Cape Victoria.
2. Cape Victoria in the end of the Streights of Magellan. Cape Verd.
3. Cape Verd in the Angle or Point of Africa, where the Shore windeth from West
to East. Cape Vincent.
4. Cape Vincent in Spain. Promontory or Cape of Atlas.
5. The Promontory of Atlas, so anciently called, not a Cape, because that
Mariners some Ages past supposed that it could not be passable; or that if any
one had sailed beyond it, yet he could not return back safe: therefore this was
the bound of their Navigation on the Coast of Africa. Other Promontories may be
seen in the Mapps.


Proposition VIII. Unto Mountains are opposed Caves and deep Abysses, which are
found in few places of the Earth.
Of Caves or deep Abysses.
In times past that Mephitick Cave in Island, called the Cave of St. Patrick;
and that Cave in Italy, called Grotta del Cane, was famous. In the Mountain of
Fessano Beni Guazeval, is a Cave that vomiteth forth fire.

In the Island Baruch, adjoynig to Wales in England, near the Sea is a Rock, in
which there is a Cave, unto which if you apply your ear, a noise like strokes
of Hammers upon Iron, as in a Smith's shop, may be heard.

Not far from the City Bessa in Aquitain, is a Cave, vulgarly called Du Souley,
in which, in the Summer season, a noise is heard like unto Thunder.

In many places betwixt the midst of the Mountains, there are found Valleys so
profound, that they strike the Beholders with horror, and cause a giddiness.

CHAP. XI. Of Mines, Woods, and Deserts.
MInes, Woods, and Deserts do ennoble certain Parts or Tracts of the Earth; Of
Mines, Woods, and Deserts.
concerning which, although little can be proposed, yet for an exact knowledge
of the Terrestrial Superficies, it will not be unnecessary to consider those
Places, and to design the Tracts and Limits of them; which we shall briefly
perform in this Chapter.

Proposition I. A Mine is a place in the Earth from which Metals, Minerals, or
other sorts of Earth are dugg.
But because what is dugg up out of the Earth is various, therefore all these
Mines receive various denominations, Of Mines.
as Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Marble, Mines of precious Stones, and
the like.

The most famous of the Gold and Silver Mines are those of Peru and Castella
Aurea, Peru and Castella Aurea, and Potosi, rich in Mines.
the richest in the world: for throughout all the Provinces of Peru are found
Mines abounding with Gold and Silver (yet not excluding the other Metals); so
that the Natives of Peru, and the Spaniards in times past did boast that the
Ground or Soil of this Kingdom was Gold and Silver. Girava, a Spanish Writer
testifies, at the City Quito are Mines which yield more Gold than Earth;
therefore when that the Spaniards first arrived in this golden Kingdom (which
for that reason they have fortified with strong Castles and Forts) in many
Cities, especially the Regal City, called Cusco, they beheld many Houses spread
within and without with Plates of Gold. The most rich Mine of Silver is in the
Mountain Potosi, in which 20000 men are employed to digg the Earth, descending
by at least 400 steps, and by these Mines the King of Spain receives a vast
Revenue annually, to the envy of all other Emperors and Potentates.

2. The most excellent Silver Mines are in the Isles of Japan, hence termed by
the Spaniards the Silver Islands. There are also Mines of Gold found there, but
now less rich than formerly.

3. Arabia had more abundance of Mines of Gold, than at this day.

4. In the mountainous parts of Persia, as also in China there are certain
Mines of Silver.

5. In Guiney are many Mountains producing Gold, but yet remote from the shore.
This Gold is called Seed Gold.
The Gold is not dugg up that comes from thence, but is gathered by other
ways. Every one of their Kings are said to have their proper Mines, and sell
the Gold, for which the Europeans give in exchange other Commodities.

6. In Monomotapa there are found rich Mines of Gold and Silver, as also in
Angola.

7. Of all the Provinces of Europe, Germany is the most rich in abundance of
Mines, whereof some afford some little Gold, diverse Silver, and very many
Copper, Iron, Lead, Vitriol, Antinomy, and the like.

Rich Mines in England.
8. In many parts of England are rich Mines of Lead and Tin, which are sound
very profitable to the Kingdom, not only by that which is used here at home,
but also by the great quantities which are transported to other Countries.
Likewise Mines of Iron, Coals, some of Silver, etc.

9. Sweden has the most rich Copper Mine of any hitherto known, in a vast
Mountain which they call Den Copperberg: such a great quantity of Copper is
dugg, that it is said to make up the third part of the King's Revenue. There
are also Mines of Silver and Iron, but they hardly discharge the expenses in
digging it.

Mines of Jewels.
10. Mines of Jewels are found in the Island of Ceiland, where there is also a
Silver Mine, and a great Marble Mine.

11. In the Region of Chili are rich Mines of Jewels, as also of Silver and
Gold, but the warlike Natives having more esteem to Iron Weapons than to Gold
and Silver, have vanquished the Spaniards and demolished the Mines.

12. In the Isle of Madagascar, Iron and Gold does much abound; there is a
moderate quantity of Silver, little Gold, no Lead; whence it comes to pass
that the Natives more value leaden dishes and spoons; than those of silver.

13. In the Isle of Sumatra, they write, that there are large Mines of Gold,
Silver, Brass, and Iron, insomuch that their King in the Year 1620. had by him
1000 l. weight of Gold.

14. In the Philippine Isles, Java, Hispaniola, Cuba, and the rest, Histories
record that Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, and Iron are found. In the Mountains
of Siam also they relate that Gold, Silver, and Tin are found.

Salt Mines.
15. Mines of Salt are found in Poland at Poch^iam, four miles from Cracovia,
where they cut of huge lumps of lucid and white Salt from the Earth. In
Transylvania; in the County of Triol; in Spain; in Asia minor; in Kilisim a
Mountain of Persia; in places near the Caspian Sea, not far from the River
Volga, where is the Island Kostowata. Hence the Russians digg their Salt, and
boil it up to a more pure Substance, and transport it throughout all Russia.
There is a salt Mountain in Cuba. All the Mountains of the Isles of Ormus in
the entrance of the Persian Gulf, consist of a Christalline salt; yea, the
whole Isle is almost nothing else but salt, out of which they make the Walls of
their Houses. In Africa there is no other salt but what is dugg out of the salt
parts of Caves, as Marble is, of a white, red, and ashy color. In Peru, 80
miles from Lima, in a certain Valley great plenty of Salt is found, whence
every one may take what they please, because it continually increases, neither
does it seem possible ever to be exhausted. In the Kingdom of Musulipatan, near
the City Baganaga, great abundance of salt is dugg up, whence all the Indians
fetch it. Of salt Fountains we shall speak in another Chapter.

Proposition II. A Wood is a multitude of Trees stretched forth in a long and
continued Tract of Earth, and propagated without any Culture, or dressing and
planting.
Of Woods.
Most Woods have only Trees of one sort, and are denominated from them;and
seeing that there is great variety of Trees; there are also various differences
of Woods, as a Wood consisting of Palm Trees, is termed Palmetum; of Oak,
Quercetum, and the like. Although these terms are frequently used for Groves or
less Woods. But they are diverse in several Regions, especially in those more
remote. In Africa at Cape Verd, are Woods of Citrian and Orangetrees, such as
are also found in other places. In France are whole Woods of Chesnut-trees. In
the Isle of Ceiland are Trees whose bark does afford Cinnamon. In Banda are
Nuces Muscatae. In Brasil are Woods of Trees called Brasil of great use for
Diers. In Madagascar are Tamerind Trees, as also in other places. Cedars on
Mount Lebanus, of which whole Woods are also found in Japan, so that they use
them for Masts for Ships. In Spain, France, and Italy are Olive and Myrtle
Trees. In Germany the Woods consist of Beech, Oak, Alder, Pine, Juniper, Maple,
Firr, Ash, and Elm. The most noted Woods or Forests are, that of Hercinia,
which in times past almost overspread all Germany; part of it is the Bohemian
Wood, and Bacen or Semana in the Dukedom of Brunswick, Gabrata, Martiana, and
others. In England the Woods consist of Oak, Elm, Ash, Beech, and Maple Trees.
In Scotland the famous Wood called Caledonia, and others in other places,
especially in Norway, where there is an abundance of vast Trees above all other
Countries in Europe, called Firr Trees, whence all the Masts of Ships almost
throughout Europe are made. Lithuania has almost naught else but Trees, whence
the King of Poland has a great Revenue.

Proposition III. Deserts are vast Tracts of Land not inhabited by man.
They are twofold; those properly so termed, and those improperly: The former
are those whose soil or earth is steril: Of Deserts.
The latter, which indeed is fertile, but not inhabited by man, as in many
places in Muscovia about the Caspian Sea, from the shore of Volga, are many
fertile and fat Fields which lie uncultivated, and chiefly by reason of the
sloth of the Inhabitants; as also by reason of the Wars of Tamerlane, by which
those Countries were depopulated: but these are less properly termed Deserts.
Of those properly so termed, these are most noted, which may be divided into
four kinds, vi^^. Sandy, Ericose, Stony, and Marish or Boggy Deserts: Those
that are Ericose have for the most part here and there in many places Woods and
Forests, are the more useful, and easier to be cultivated.

1. All the Deserts of Africa are almost Sandy, neither is any part of the
Earth more pestered with Deserts; the greatest are found in Lybia; they also
encompass all Egypt. 2. The Deserts of Arabia are partly Sandy and partly
Stony; but the most famous is that Sandy Desert in Arabia, termed vulgarly the
Sandy Sea. 3. The Deserts of Tartaria about the Mountain Imaus: Also the Desert
Belgian about the Moguls, where hitherto it has been (though falsely) believed,
that the rich Kingdom of Cathaie is seated. 4. The Deserts of Camboia. 5. The
Deserts of Nova Zembla, which are rocky. 6. The Deserts of Norway, Lapland,
Sweden, and Finmarch. 7. All the Deserts of Germany are Ericose, they term them
Even Heide, whence they call the Desert in the Duchy of Luneburgh. 8. The
Deserts of America, and the like.
OF Absolute Geography.
SECT. IV. Containing the Hydrography or the description of the Water,
explained in Six Chapters.
CHAP. XII. Of the division of the Ocean throughout the Earth.
The division of the Ocean.
BY reason that we have treated in the precedent Chapters of the division of the
parts of the Earth, order requires that we contemplate the division and
situation of the Waters, which compose the other part of the Earth, and also
take a survey of their Properties which do appertain unto Geography. In Chapter
VII. Proposition II. we distributed the Waters into four sorts; which are, 1.
The Ocean; 2. Rivers and Fountains of Fresh-waters; 3. Lakes and Marshes; and
4. Mineral Waters. In this Chapter we shall treat of the division of the Ocean.

Proposition I. The Ocean in a continued tract encompasseth the whole Earth,
and the Terrestrial parts, neither is the Superficies of the same any where
altogether interrupted by the Lands interposed; but the more large continuity
and free congress is only impeded.
The truth of the Proposition can only be proved by Experience, especially from
the Circumnavigation of the Earth, which has now for a long while been so
often attempted, and hapily performed first by the Spaniards, under the conduct
of Magellan, who first found out the Streights: then by the English twice, viz.
under Drake and Cavendish; and lastly, five times by the Hollanders.

The opinion of the Ancients concerning the Old World.
The Ancients nothing doubting of this continuity, by reason that they accounted
the Old World only for the extant Earth, and thought it on every side to be
encompassed by the Ocean; yea some supposed it to float. But when that America
was detected (which is extended from North to South in a very long tract, and
impedeth the continuity of the Ocean;) and moreover the Polary Land North and
South, then not undeservedly was it doubted concerning it: For many supposed,
and that not without probability, that America and the South Continent were
conjoined, as many Geographers now think, that the Northern America is
contiguous to Greenland; which two, if both true, the Ocean could not encompass
the whole Earth. But in truth Magellan removed the doubt, when in the Year 1520
he found out the Streights between America and the South Continent; by which it
was manifest that the Pacifick Ocean was joined with the Atlantic. What
therefore the Ancients imagined from a false Opinion that they knew, that we
know from infallible Experience. The like happened with Africa, for then also the
Ancients without any hesitation placed the Ocean without or beyond it, and
thought Africa to be extended beyond the Equator in a far less space than in
truth it is; but when the Portugals had sailed the Coast of Africa, and had
found vast Lands in a long tract beyond the Equator; and then also it was
questioned whether Africa could be sailed about, that they might sail into
India; that is, whether it were encompassed with the Ocean? This doubt was
removed by Vasques Gamma, under whose conduct in Anno 1497. Africa was first
sailed about, the Promontory of Good Hope being found to be the ultimate bound
of the same toward the South; which appellation it received from the King of
Portugal in Anno 1494, when that Diaz, which first related concerning (although
he passed it not, Victuals failing him, and the Tempests forcing his Return)
the storm and raging Ocean of this Promontory, and spoke much more to the King.

Proposition II. The difference in the parts of the Ocean, which arises from
the Earth, is threefold; or the Water of the Ocean may be divided into three
kinds, which are, 1. The particular Ocean or Seas; 2. The Bays of the Sea or
Ocean; and 3. The Streights.
The Water in the Ocean may be divided into three kinds.
The word Ocean is taken in a twofold acceptance: Sometimes for the whole Ocean
or Water, which encompasseth the Earth; sometimes, and that frequently, for any
part of the large Ocean, which adhereth to another part by a large tract, and
that from on both sides: So we say the Atlantic Ocean, the German, the
Ethiopick, the Indian, and the Chinesan Oceans. In this latter signification by
use of Speech we sometimes use the word, although we sometimes call a part of
the entire Ocean the Sea; but by reason of the homonymie of the word Mare, or
Sea, which shall be explained by and by, the word Ocean is usually used in that
sense.

A Bay.
A Sinus or Bay of the Sea is said to be a part of the Sea or Water which
runs between two Lands from the Sea, or some other Bay until it stop at some
Land. It is also commonly termed a Sea.

A Straight.
A Fretum or Straight is a part of the Ocean, or part of a Bay of the Ocean or
Sea, running between two Lands in a narrow tract, and conjoyning of two Seas,
or conjoined with the Sea from both extremities, by which they Sail from one
Sea into another.

Proposition III. We reckon four principal Oceans, Four principal Oceans.
or great parts of the whole Ocean or Seas, in respect of the situation of the
four Continents or Quarters of the Earth.
Atlantic Ocean.
1. The Atlantic Ocean is that part of the Ocean which is situated between the
Occidental Coast of the Old World, and the Oriental of the New. It is vulgarly
termed Mare del Nort, or the North Sea; but improperly, seeing that it
extends it self beyond the Equator toward the South. It is more aptly
divided into two parts, one from the Equator toward the North, the other
stretches toward the South. It has therefore on the Eastern quarter, the
Occidental Coast of the Old World, and on the Western, the Oriental Coast of
America. Toward the North it conjoyneth with the Hyperboreal, or Northern
Ocean; and toward the South with the Southern Ocean. Pacifick Ocean.
Hyperboreal Ocean. Southern Ocean.
2. The Pacifick Ocean lies between the Occidental Coast of America and Asia,
in a long tract, even to the Isles of India and to China. 3. The Hyperboreal
Ocean about the North Polary Land. 4. The Southern Ocean about the South
Continent, part of which Ocean is the Indian Ocean.
Other Geographers make the four parts of the Ocean by another difference or
division; one of which they make the Atlantic, but extend it not beyond the
Equator; for here they begin the second, which they call the Ethiopick: For the
third they reckon the Pacifick with us; the fourth they make to be the Indian
Ocean. But we in our division have regard unto the four great Continents of the
Earth, or to the greatest Isles: We may make three parts, viz. the Atlantic,
the Pacifick, and the Indian Ocean; but then we extend the Atlantic further.
The matter is of no great moment, so that either may be chosen: for this
division rather depends on our Invention, than on Nature.

Proposition IV. The parts of the Ocean receive denominations from the names of
the Lands they pass by.
So we say the Cantabrian, the British, German, Indian, Chinesan Ocean, and the
like.

Proposition V. The Bays of the Ocean are twofold, long, and broad; The Bays in
the Ocean.
they are also twofold in another respect, to wit, primarily, and secondarily;
they begin from the Ocean, these from another Bay; or they are a part of the
primary Bay. The long primary are these:
Mediterranean Sea.
1. The Mediterranean Sea, it breaks in from the Ocean between Spain and
Barbary, and for a long space runs between Europe and Africa, even to Syria,
Asia Minor, and Thrace. It is called the Internal Sea. It makes many secundary
Bays, viz. the Adriatic (Gulf of Venice,) the Bay of Thessalonia, the Aegean
Sea, and the like.

Euxine Sea.
As for the Euxine Sea we may doubt, whether it may be said to be a part of this
primary Sinus, of which see Chapter Fifteen.

The Mediterranean Sea is distinguished by diverse Names, taken from various
Regions that it waters; for toward the North it has Spain, France, Italy,
Sicilie, Illyricum, Greece, Creet, Thrace, and Asia minor; toward the South
Morocco, Fess, Tunis, Algier, Tripoli and Egypt. Thence are the Names of the
Iberian, Gallick, Ligustick, Sicilian, Baledrian, and Cretian Sea. It is
extended from the West to the East.

Baltic Sea.
2. The Baltic Sea, or Sinus Codanus, breaks in from the Ocean between the
Lands betwixt Zeland and Jutland; first it flows by a long way from the North
to the South, and then reflecting by a long space it runs forth to the
North; between the Provinces of Germany, Megapolis, Pomerania, Cassubia,
Borussia, Livonia, etc. from one side, viz. the Oriental quarter. On the
Occidental quarter it has Sweden and Lapland. It makes three secondary Bays,
whereof two are long, viz. the Botnick and Finnick; the third is broad, viz.
the Livonick. It receives Rivers of great Magnitude.

The Red Sea.
5. The Red Sea, Arabian Gulf, or Sea of Mecca, flows from the Indian Ocean
between the Promontory of Arabia to the City Aden, and between the Promontory
of Africa, and runs between Africa toward the West, and Arabia toward the
East: it stops at the Isthmus of Africa at the City Suez, where is the
station or harbor of the Turkish Navy; it receives very few Rivers, and those
of small Magnitude: but none from Africa, as some observe. It extends from
the South quarter of the East, to the collateral quarter of the North quarter
toward the West.

The Persian Gulf.
4. The Persian Gulf runs between Arabia and Persia from the Indian Ocean,
about the Isle of Ormus. It has Persia on the East, and Arabia on the West: it
stops at Chaldaea. It extends from East and by South to the West and by
North quarter; and receives very few Rivers except Euphrates and Tigris, long
before conjoined.

The Bay of California.
5. The Sinus or Bay of California, Mer Vermejo, runs between California and
the Occidental Coast of Mexico from the South toward the North: it is
terminated at the unknown Province of America Tatonteac: It receives few
Rivers. The Modern Mariners affirm California to be an Isle; and if so, this
tract of Water cannot be a Sinus, Gulf, or Bay, but a Straight.

The Bay of Nanquin.
6. The Bay of Nanquin, runs between Corea and the Coast of China and Tartary
unto the Northern parts of Tartary, where Tenduc the Kingdom of Cathay is
placed; yet falsely as those suppose, who will have Corea to be an Isle. It
receives few Rivers: it extends from West to North.

These are the long Gulphs, unto which lesser may be added; as the Gulf of
Cambaia, and others. The four last rehearsed do not afford secondary Gulphs,
viz. Arabia, Persia, California, and Nanquin, but only the Mediterranean and
Baltic.

Proposition VI. Broad Gulphs are in number Seven, viz.
Gulf of Mexico.
1. The Gulf of Mexico flows from the Atlantic Ocean, between the North and
South parts of America, which it separateth from the Oriental quarter to the
Occidental. It stops at a long Isthmus between those Lands; which impedeth
the conjunction of the Pacifick and Atlantic Ocean on this quarter. It
receives many Rivers, and for multitude of Isles may compare with the Aegean
Sea.

Gulf of Ganges.
2. The Gulf of Ganges, (Gulf of Bengala) flows between India and the
Chersonesus of Malacca, from the Indian Ocean: it stops at the Kingdoms of
India, Bengala, Pegu, and others. It receives noted Rivers, besides the Ganges.

3. The Gulf between Malacca and Camboja, not far from the Gulf of Bengala,
and likewise flows from the South toward the North: it stops at the
Kingdom of Siam.

The Gulf Lantchidolinum.
4. The Russian Gulf, or White Sea, flows from the North Ocean, between
Lapland and the utmost Coasts of Russia, toward the South: it is terminated
partly at Finland, and partly at the Kingdom of Moscovia: it makes a certain
small long Gulf, which is extended to Lapland; where is that noted and well
frequented Mart Archangelo. It receives eminent Rivers.

The Gulf Lantchidolinum.
5, 6. The Gulf Lantchidolinum flows from the Indian Ocean, between the
Provinces of the South Country Beach and New Guiney: it stretches from the
North to the South, and terminateth at the unknown parts of the South Continent.

Another Gulf is near unto it toward the West, between Beach and the other
procurrent Land of the South, where is the Land called Anthonij a Diemen, which
is the Name of a Dutch Master of a Ship by whom it was discovered.

Hudson's Sea.
7. Hudson's Sea is a Gulf between New France and Canada, and other parts of
the Northern America; it is terminated at Estotiland.

Proposition VII. Fretum, or Streights are threefold. For either they conjoyn
the Ocean with the Ocean; or the Ocean with a Gulf; Of Streights.
or a Gulf with a Gulf.
We will enumerate fifteen, whereof three are of most note.

Streights of Magellan.
1. The Streights of Magellan of a very long Tract; it conjoyneth the Atlantic
Ocean with the Pacifick, and affords a passage from one into the other. The
Longitude of it from East to West is 110 miles: the Latitude is various,
sometimes two miles, sometimes one, and sometimes a quarter of a mile. Magellan
was the first that found it, and sailed it in Anno 1500: its Latitude from the
Equator is 52 degrees 30 minutes. On the North it has Chica, a Province in
South America: On the South the Isles of Magellan and Terra del Fuego.

Fretum le Maire
2. Near unto this is Fretum le Maire, between the South Continent and the Isles
of Magellan; through that the way is far shorter through the Ocean of Atlas
into the Pacifick Sea. It is distant from the Equator 54 degrees 30 minutes.

Streights of Manilhas.
3. The Straight of Manilhas extended between Luconia, Mindanoa, and other
Philippine Isles; it is reported to be 100 Leagues. It is dangerous to Ships by
reason of the abundance of Sands. It is extended from the East to the West. It
conjoyneth the Pacifick Ocean with the Indian on that part, albeit there be
more free conjunctions in the Vicine.

4. There be many Streights among the Indian Isles, as also between the Isles
and Vicine Continents. As first between Ceilan and India. 2. Between Sumatra
and Malacca. 3. Between Sumatra and Banda.

Waigats Streights.
5. Waigats Streights, through which there is a passage from the North or
Russian Sea into the Tartarian Ocean, but as yet is stopped with Ice, at least
from the Europeans. It lies between Samojeda and Nova Zembla.

Glacick Streights.
6. The Glacick Streights between Nova Zembla and Spitzberga, or by another name
termed Terra Polaris.

Davies Streights.
7. Davies Streights between Groenland and the Northern American, but the Exit
of it is not yet discovered, and therefore it is doubted whether it be a
Straight or a Gulf.

Forbischers Streights.
8. Forbischers Streights afford a way to the Atlantic Ocean, if not by the
Pacifick Ocean, yet at least by Hudson's Passage.

Streights of Anian.
9. The Streights of Anian between North America and Tartaria, through which
there is a passage from the Tartarian Ocean into the Pacifick; but as yet
uncertain. But yet that there is some Straight between the North part of
America and Tartaria; and also another between America and Groenland, skilful
Mariners do hence collect, because that in that part of the Pacifick Sea, which
lies between Tartaria and the Occidental Coast of the Northern America, 70
miles from Japan to America, the names of the Sea, and motion of the same is
from the North, and West and by North, although diverse winds, or those from
another quarter do blow; but for 100 miles before that Shore of New Spain,
those floods and motions cease altogether, for they are carried to some open
Straight beyond New Spain, situated toward the North. Add moreover, that in
those 70 miles, many Whales and Fishes which the Spaniards call Albacores,
Bonetos, and Arum are found, which kind of Fishes, for the most part, move
about Streights; so that it is probable that they come from the Streights of
Anian into this part of the Pacifick Ocean, seeing that they are not found in
any part of the Ocean. But very many of the Moderns altogether deny this
Straight, and place the wide Ocean between Tartaria, Corea, and America.

Straits of Gaditanum.
10. The Streights of Gaditanum, Herculeum, or of Gibraltar, through which the
Atlantic Ocean flows into the Mediterranean Straight: The least Latitude is
about one mile; the Longitude greater. It lies between Spain and Africa.
Writers affirm that in times past there was no such Straight, but that it
proceeded from the Oceans breaking through into the Land.

The Sound.
11. The Streights of Denmark, or the Sound, lie between Zeland and Scandia;
through it the Atlantic Ocean flows into the Baltic Sea. The Latitude is
about a mile where it is narrowest. Unto this Straight we must add another
between Zeland and Funen; and a third between Funen and Jutland, called the
Belt.

Arabian Gulf
12. The Mouth of the Arabian Gulf; it is near the Emporium Aden, through which
there is a passage from the Indian Ocean into the Red Sea.

Persian Gulf.
13. The Streights of the Persian Gulf, yet improperly so termed, by reason
that the entrance is no more narrow than the Gulf it self.

The Hellespont.
14. The Hellespont, a Straight sufficiently famous amongst the Greeks, through
which there is a passage from the Euxine Sea into the Propontis. Near unto this
is another Straight termed the Thracian Bosphorus, by which they sail from the
Propontis into the Aegean Sea.

15. The Streights between Sicily and Italy.

Thus have we explained the differences of the Parts of the Ocean existing from
the situation of the Land, as in the eight Chapter we have showed the
differences of the Lands proceeding from the Oceans flowing between. For the
more facile retaining of the same, it will be advantageous to have a prospect
or periplus of the Maritinate Coast of the Lands and Tract of the Ocean.

For the more easy remembering of the situation of the Parts of the Earth, it
will be necessary to know the Shores of the Continents of the Maritine Coasts,
and their conjunction; also the conjunction and situation of the Parts of the
Sea.

The Periplus of the Maritine Coasts of the old world.
The Periplus of the Maritine Coast of the Old World is that which comprehends
Europe, Asia, and Africa. The bound of the same toward the North is Waigats
Streights; hence therefore it is best to begin. The Province of Samojeda
adjoyneth to Waigats Streights, and in proceeding forwards toward the West of
Muscovia, where also the Land by a Gulf made receives the white Sea from the
North: Then Lapland and the Coast of Norway toward the West, lying from the
North to the South. Here a bending being made toward the East, the Coast of
Scania and Gotland, where another bending being made, whose other Coast is
Jutland, receives the Sea, which is called the Baltic Sea, flowing to
Swedeland, Finland, Livonia, Borussia, Cassubia, Pomerania, Megapolis,
Holsatia, and Jutland. Then follows the other Coast of Jutland and Holsatia,
Friesland, Holland, Zeland (where the Sea is termed the German Sea) France and
Spain. Here again is a divarication, and a Gulf being made, the Internal Sea
is received in and flows by Spain, France, Italy, Illyricum, Graecia,
Thracia, Asia Minor, Egypt and Barbary, where at Morocco, the Shore again is
opposite to the Spanish Coast; and afterward follows the Occidental shore of
Africa at Cape Verd, where the Coast bends to the East, viz. here is Guiney,
Angola, Congo, toward the South at the Cape of Good-hope, where again the
Shore bends toward the North, Mozambique, Soffala, and a Gulf is made for
the Red Sea: then follows the Coast of Arabia; here the Coasts of the Persian
Gulf; and toward the East, the Coast of Persia, Cambaja, Indostan, India,
Malacca, Bengala, Camboja, China, Tartary at Corea, or the Straight of Anian,
whence by or through the Northern Coast of Tartary and Samojedia, you return to
Waigats Streights.

The Circumscription or Periplus of America is thus:

The Periplus of America.
We begin from the Shore of Davies Streights, whence in a Gulf being made, the
Sea named from Hudson is received. Here by a reflection are the Coasts of
Estotiland, New England, New-France, Virginia, Florida, Mexico, the American
Isthmus, Castelle del Oro, Guiana, Caribana, Brazilia: Here the Coasts of the
Streights of Magellan looking toward the South, but extended from the East to
the West: hence from the South to the North runs the Shore of Chili, Peru,
the American Isthmus, Mexico, where at California, the Sea of Vermejo is
received in a Gulf; hence the Coast of California New England, Quivira, Anian,
where are the Coasts of the Streights of Anian, which now they deny, and follow
unknown Shores, which are extended to the Streights of Davies.

The Circumscription of the North Polary Land is thus: From Davies Streights
the Coasts of Groenland do begin, which run a little toward the South, and
then return to the North, and are termed the Coasts of Spitzbergh.

Then the Shore runs from the Region of Nova Zembla, and is opposite to the
Tartarian Ocean; where the other Coasts, even to Davies Streights, are unknown.
The Periplus of the Land of Magellan.


The Periplus of the Land of Magellan is thus: The Coast begins from the
Streights of Magellan or Le Maire, and making diverse w^ndings to the Region
Beach, where the Lantchilonium Sea is received in a Straight: hence the Coasts
of New-Guiney run forward to the North, and then return to the South, then they
go strait on to the Streights of Magellan. Thus the Periplus of the Land is
finished.

Now let us take a prospect of the Circumscription of the Ocean: We will make
entrance between Davies Streights and Nova Zembla; and here is the Hyperborean
Sea, the Frozen Sea, the Caledonian or Sea of Groenland: then it runs
between the Coast of Europe and America, and is called the British Sea, the
Danish Sea (where it makes a Gulf) the German, French, Spanish, (where it
makes the Mediterranean and Sea of Mexico) the Atlantic in part, here, viz.
where it runs between the Coasts of Brasil and Africa, by and by it is
called Aethiopia; and the Streights of Magellan on one side enter in, from the
other Eastern quarter is the Indian and South Sea, where it is extended between
Africa and the Land of Magellan, then between Asia and the same Land of
Magellan, and comes into the Pacifick Sea, which is extended to the Streights
of Waigats and Anian; and to the South Straight of Magellan (by the middle of
which it is joined to the Atlantic) it directly tends to the Oriental Coast
of America, Chili, Peru, Mexico, California, New England.

To these I should subjoyn two Tables, whereof one contains the division of
the Parts of the Earth; the other the division of the Parts of the Ocean, but
having made use of the former in the eighth Chapter, I omit it here, and only
make use of the latter, viz. the Parts of the Ocean.

The Earth is divided into Land and Waters. The Water is divided into Rivers,
Lakes, Marshes, and the continued Ocean or Sea is distinguished through the
Lands by these differences. 1. The OCEAN, whose chief parts are four, 1. The
Atlantic, Mer del Nort, following with the Ethiopick Sea, between Europe and
Africa on the one part, and America on the other, obtains diverse Names,
according to the parts; as the Ethiopick British, French,
Ocean. 2. The Pacifick Ocean, Mer del Zur, between the extreme parts of Asia,
the Indian Isles, and the Occidental Coast of America. 3. The North Ocean,
about the North Continent, the Tartarian, Hyperborean, Frozen
Ocean. 4. The South Ocean, about the Land of Magellan, part of which is the
Indian Sea.
2. BAYS, or GULPHS. Long; whereof there are six, to wit, 1. The Mediterranean,
running between Africa and the Regions of Europe, whose parts are The Iberian,
Sicilian, Cretan Sea, etc. The secondary Gulphs, which are many, The Adriatic,
Gulf of Venice, Euxine Sea, The Bay of Corinth, etc.

2. The Baltic Ocean' whence are these secondary Gulphs, as that of Livonia,
Botnia, Finmarke.
3. The Gulf of Arabia, between Africa and Arabia. 4. The Persian Gulf,
between Arabia and Persia. 5. The Gulf of California, between California and
New Granada. 6. The Gulf of Corea, between Corea and the utmost bounds of
Tartaria and China.
Broad or Wide, as 1. The Gulf of Mexico, between the North and South America.
2. The Gulf of Bengala, between the Coasts of Indostan and Malacca. 3. The
Gulf between Malacca and Camboja. 4. The White Sea from the North Ocean,
between Lapland and the utmost Coasts of Moscovia. 5. The Lantchidol Sea,
between the Beach and New Guiny of the Land of Magellan. 6. Hudsons Sea,
between New France and Canada, arising from the Northern Ocean. These want
Streights.

3. Streights, as the Streights of 1. Magellan, by which you come from the
Atlantic or Ethiopick into the Pacifick; and this is the longest Straight of
all others. 2. Le Maire, near to that of Magellan, and of the same use. 3.
Waigats, by which you sail from the North Ocean into the Tartarian. 4. Anian,
by which you sail from the Tartarian into the Pacifick Ocean; which is now
denied. 5. Davis and Forbischers, by which you sail from the Atlantic into the
Tartarian or Pacifick. 6. Nova Zembla, by which a way might be granted from the
Hyperborean and Frozen-Sea into the Tartarian, but that the Ice does hinder. 7.
Gibraltar, by which a passage is from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean. 8.
Denmark, (or the Sound) by which you pass out of the Atlantic into the
Baltic Sea. 9. The Mouth of the Arabian Sea, by which you arrive in the
Arabian Gulf. 10. The Mouth of the Persian Sea, by which you come into the
Persian Gulf. 11. The Hellespont and Bosphorus, by which you come from the
Aegean Sea into the Sea of Pontus.


As concerning the Caspian Sea, whether that it be peculiar, or whether that it
belongs to the broad Gulphs of the Ocean, of which it is a subterranean
passage, is yet doubted.

CHAP. XIII. Of some Properties of the Ocean, and its Parts.
Proposition I. The Superficies of the Ocean, and all Liquid Bodies, is Rotund,
Spherical, or else is part of a Spherical Superficies, whose Center is the same
with that of the whole Earth or Land.
The verity of this Theorem is manifest from those Arguments, by which we
proved in the third Chapter, that the Superficies of the Earth is Spherical,
which is true concerning the Water as the Earth, as I have there proved. But
because those probations only conclude a posteriori, I here therefore determine
to make demonstration a priori, by which Archimedes proved concerning all
Liquid Bodies that the superficies was spherical, this supposed as a thing
certain, consisting in the Earth, or in part of the Earth. For Archimedes
supposes in his demonstration three things; The demonstration of Archimedes.
1. In the middle of it the Earth has some kind of Center, and therefore is of
a spherical figure. 2. That this is the nature of all liquid bodies, that the
parts of them lying equally, or in an equal distance from the Center of the
Earth, and continuous amongst themselves, the lesser pressed is expelled by the
more pressed, which he shows from experience. 3. That every part of a liquid
body is pressed by the liquid body above it, to the Perpendicular in respect of
the Center of the Earth, if so be that this liquid body be descending or
pressed by some other body.
Besides these three Suppositions, Archimedes uses a certain Geometrical
Proposition, which is not found demonstrated in the Elements, and therefore he
demonstrateth the same, which is this: If any superficies be cut from
whatsoever places passing through one point, and every section be the periphery
of the Circle, having that point its Center, this superficies is spherical;
whose Center shall be the point named. Now this is very easy to show: For let
the superficies of any body be cut through the point D in the plain I F K E P,
See Scheme.
and let the line of the section I F K E P be the periphery of the Circle,
having it for its Center, and in every section made by D, let the periphery of
the Circle, having the Center D, be found. We must show that this superficies
is spherical, and D is its Center, D its point, that is, all the points of this
line are equally distant from the point D; for we may conceive as many right
lines as we will draw from the point D to the other points of the proposed
superficies. Therefore these must be demonstrated to be equal mutually one to
the other, let any one of those drawn from D to the superficies be taken, and
through that and through the right line D F let a plain be drawn, this plain
therefore cutting the superficies will make the periphery according to the
Hypothesis: wherefore that being drawn, shall be equal to the right line D F,
and so we shall show concerning all drawn from the point D, that they are equal
to D F it self, by reason that they are all mutually equal one to another: from
whence we infer, that this superficies is spherical, having for a Center the
point D: for a spherical superficies is a crooked superficies, within which is
a certain point, from whence all the right lines being drawn are equal at the
superficies.

This premised, the spherical superficies of every liquid body is demonstrated
in this manner: Let any consisting matter be E F G H, let D be the Center of
the Earth, and let us conceive this liquor to be cut in a plain passage through
D; let the section made on the superficies of the liquor be the line E F G H:
but we must first show that this line E F G H is crooked, viz. the periphery or
arch of the periphery of the Circle whose Center is D: But if it may be brought
to pass, that there may be no such periphery, the right lines drawn from D to
that will be unequal: let the unequal drawn lines be D E, D G, to wit, D G will
be greater than D E, and let D G be the greatest of all which are drawn from D,
and let D E be the least: let the other right line D F be drawn twice cutting
the Angle G D E at EFGH, so that this line D F shall be greater than D E, but
less than D G: then let the periphery or arch of the Circle I F K H be
described in the Center D, the internal D E in this same plain, the periphery
of which will cut the right line D E protracted beyond the point E, viz. in the
point I, but the right line D G on this side G, viz. in the point K.

Moreover, in the Center D, the interval D L, which is lesser than D E, let the
periphery or arch L M N be described beneath or within the liquor in the plain
I F K H; therefore the parts of the liquor contained within D L N, or about the
periphery L M N by an equal distance are placed, and are continuous from the
Center D; but those parts which are about M N are more pressed than those that
are about L M, because they are pressed by a greater weight, viz. a greater
quantity of water being above them, than those at L M.

Therefore the parts near L M being less pressed, are expelled from the parts
near M N, and these shall possess their place, neither shall the liquor
consist; but let the liquor be supposed to consist and be quiet, there shall be
then a liquor consisting; and not consisting which will be absurd: wherefore
the right lines drawn from D to the line E F G H are not unequal, but equal,
and therefore the line E F G H is the Arch of the Periphery of the Circle,
whose Center is D. The same is the demonstration concerning all places cutting
the Superficies of the Liquors, and passing through D, viz. it will show the
Section of the Arch of the Periphery of the Circle of the Center D. Now by
reason that the Superficies of Liquors is such, that if it be cut by Planes in
any sort passing by D, the Section may always be the Periphery of the Circle:
Therefore it follows from the aforesaid demonstrated Proposition, that the
Superficies of Liquors is Spherical, having the Center the point D, which is
the Center of the Earth; therefore the Superficies of the Ocean is Spherical,
having the same Center, which is the Center of the Earth; which will also be
manifest from the confirmation of the following Proposition.

Proposition II. The Ocean is not of a greater height than the Shores of the
Earth are, and therefore the Earth and Water are almost of the same Altitude,
high Mountains excepted.
The truth of this Proposition is demonstrated from the former Proposition: For
if the Superficies of the Ocean be Spherical, The Earth and Water are almost of
the same Altitude.
and of the same Center with the Superficies of the Earth, and the Sea be no
higher about the Shores than the Earth, therefore neither shall the middle of
the Ocean be higher than the Earth, but its Superficies with the Superficies of
the other shall make one and the same Spherical Superficies: But without the
former Proposition we shall show this Theorem a posteriori after this manner,
as the preceding Proposition may be showed from this, if that they confide not
in the former demonstration by reason of the assumed Hypothesis.

1. Experience testifies that Water being free, and not hindered, does flow
from more high places to places more low: If therefore the place about the
Shore was not so high as in the middle of the Ocean, part of the Sea would flow
from the middle of the Ocean to the Shore, and would neither consist or be
calm, which yet is not found in the tranquillity of the Air.

2. If that the Ocean far remote from the Shores, were more high than the Sea
at the Shore, that Altitude would be discovered a far longer interval, than a
Spherical Superficies does admit of; yea, it would be seen from the same
distance from which the parts of the Ocean intercepted between that Altitude
and the Shore are seen. And experience testifies, that it cannot be beheld
from a greater distance, but that by degrees the more remote part is detected
after the more near, when we come to Mediterranean places to the Shore: And by
how much any part is more vicine to the shore, by so much it is first, or by a
larger interval beheld from the shore: Therefore the part of the Ocean removed
from the shore is not higher than that part that is nigh unto it. Wherefore the
Ocean is of the same Altitude every where, both in the middle, and at the
shore, and not higher than the Earth.

3. Mariners in the midst of the Ocean and deep Sea, although they apply their
Mathematical Instruments, yet find it no higher there than in the parts near
the shore: which certainly could not be, if that the Sea had any Altitude
elevated as a Tower or Mountain. For as by Instruments we find the Altitude of
Towers or Mountains above the subjected parts of the Earth, so also if that
there were any Altitude of the middle Ocean above the vicine parts, it could
not be obstructed, and avoid the subtilty of Instruments.

4. Also here and there in the middle of the Ocean are found Islands, and that
in great number in some parts, which are near to the Continents or great
Islands. Therefore the middle of the Ocean is not higher than the Earth,
because it is not higher than the Shores of those Islands.

5. No cause can be showed, why Water in the middle of the Ocean should be
higher, and not flow into the Channels of Rivers, if that their Waters be more
depres^ed: For by experience we find that Water any where situated moves to
the vicine parts, and these are less high, which have been the cause of so many
inundations.

From these I think we sufficiently collect, that the Waters of the Ocean are
not higher than the shoars of the Land. Seeing therefore the Altitude of very
few shoars is elevated little more than the vicine Mediterranean Land, and in
most lesser, seeing that the Altitude of the Lands from the shoars to the
Mediterranean places increases and rises into Hills; thence we conclude, that
the superficies of the Ocean is not higher than the superficies of the Land.
Now that the Altitude of the Land from the shoars to the Mediterranean places
augmenteth, or that the Mediterranean places are higher than the shoars, is
proved from the flux of Rivers, most of which arise in Mediterranean places,
and flow to the Ocean. So then at least the Mediterranean parts are somewhat
more elevated than the shoars, because the flux is from these unto them; for
Water flows from the more high parts to places more inferior. Now that some
are somewhat depressed lower than the Water, we shall not go about to deny; but
they are either defended by the height of their shoars, or by banks or other
interposed earth. Now these Banks are raised for the most part, not because of
the great Altitude of the Ocean, being tranquillous and in its natural state;
but by reason of its impetuous motion, caused by the Winds, or from some other
cause.

Corollary. Corollary.
Therefore they are deceived who will have the Waters of the Ocean to be higher
than the Earth, and fly to a miraculous providence, by which the inundation of
the Ocean on the Land and drowning of the World is hindered and restrained: For
we have showed, that the superficies of the Water and Earth are one and almost
the same, to wit, spherical; and that many parts of the Earth, at least the
shoars, have a greater Altitude than the middle of the Ocean, and that this is
the cause that the Ocean cannot overflow the Lands. Which greater Altitude, if
it be elevated in some shoars, the Banks being broken, or the Water being
augmented or forced to them in great abundance, cause inundations. Neither is
it altogether impossible or contrary to nature, that the whole Earth should be
covered with Water, as we shall show in the end of the Chapter.

Proposition III. Why the Sea being beheld from the shore, seems to arise in
a greater Altitude and tumor, by how much it is more remote.
The middle of the Ocean by some said to be many miles higher than the Shoars.
It is a fallacy of the sight, or of the estimating faculty, which has brought
many into this error: so that they have endeavored to defend, that the middle
of the Ocean is many miles higher than the Shoars. But it is a wonder that none
of them have taken notice of daily Experiments in the ordinary course of our
life, in which this fallacy is sufficiently manifest: For if that we look on
any Pavement or floor stretched at length, or any row of Pillars, the more
remote parts of the Pavement will appear more high than the vicine parts, so
that from thence, from our place to the most remote, the Floor will seem by
degrees more and more to elevate, which yet notwithstanding it is every where
of the same Altitude. After the same mode it is with the Waters of the Ocean;
for if on the Shore you use a Geodetical Instrument, commodious to measure
places withal, you shall find no elevation of the remote part of the Ocean
above the Shore, but rather a little depression; so that the Waters sink
beneath the Horizon of the Shoars.

Those that are versed in the Optics declare the cause of the fallacy: Let A
be the Eye, See Scheme.
and let it survey the pavement or superficies of the Water extended at length
unto the long space a e. Let the Angle a A e be divided into equal parts or
four Angles, which are e A d, d A c, c A b, b A a from the right drawn A b, A
c, A d, to wit, the more remote shall be far more great, as appears from the
Diagram, viz. e d is greater than d e, and d e greater than b c, and b c than a
h. Although these parts are very unequal, yet they will appear equal, because
they appear under the equal Angles a A b, b A c, c A d, d A c, and the
Estimative faculty will judge them to be removed an equal distance from the Eye
A (in which there is a great deception) and therefore will judge the lines A b,
A c, A d, A c, to be A f, A g, A h, A k, as they are equal a b, f g, g h, h k;
whence the parts b c, cd, d e seem elevated, as if they were f g, g h, h k. Or
more briefly, because the Eye is more elevated to behold Objects remote, than
it is depressed at things near; therefore remote things are judged to be
elevated, and those nigh, depressed: or because we compare the elevation of our
Eye to parts vicine, therefore we judge them depressed; but we cannot so
compare the elevation of our Eye to parts remote, wherefore they seem more
elevated than in truth they are.

So therefore we see from this, that the Ocean, to one that beholds it from
the Shore, seems higher, by how much it is the more remote; from thence, I
say, it is no probation that it is more elevated.

Some render another Reason, viz. that therefore a greater Altitude is to be
attributed to the middle of the Ocean than to the Earth, by reason that they
suppose that otherwise it cannot come to pass, that water should flow from the
Ocean to Fountains of Rivers; which Fountains are in Mediterranean planes,
seeing that no water flows, but from an higher place unto one more low
depressed. But I shall show it to be performed by another way in the Chapter
where I treat of the Original of Rivers or Fountains.

And so also any one may infer, that the Mountain of Teneriff is not so high
(as also other Mountains) as to be beheld in the Ocean for so long an interval
at four degrees, except that the foot of the Mountain or the Ocean be higher
than the Sea at the Shore of Teneriff. But what Answer is to be returned to
this is manifest from the Eleventh Chapter, See Chap. II.
whee we have treated of the Original or heights of Mountains.

Proposition IV. To exhibit the cause and Original of Gulphs, Bays, and
Streights of the Ocean.
The cause of Gulphs, Bays, and Streights in the Ocean.
These Bays in proper manner of Speech are the Sinus of the Land, not of the
Ocean, but rather Arms, branches, and procurrent parts of the Ocean: But more
properly we may term those to be sinus or Bays of the Ocean, where the Ocean
receives into it self Peninsula's of the Earth; as where it receives Jutland,
the Chersonesus of Malacca, California, and the like.

But the usual mode of Speech has so obtained, that contrary to the nature of
things, the word is so taken in the first signification, and a Sinus or Bay of
the Ocean is the same with a branch or procurrent part of the Ocean.

The cause of Bays.
The cause of these Sinus or Bays is, by reason that the extant parts of the
Earth are in some places mutually rent from one another and divaricated; so
that the part of the Earth interposed between the divaricated parts, is more
depressed than the superficies of the Ocean; therefore the water always tending
to the more depressed part, flows into the divaricated parts, and runs
forward so far until it meets the elevation of the Earth: for here it can go
no farther, and therefore it receives its end or bound.

The same is the cause of the Streights of the Ocean or Sea. The cause of the
separation or divarication of the parts of the Earth (which is required to the
existence of Bays and Streights) is the violent motion of the Sea, when it is
forced by Winds or some other cause: which seeing that it is done almost every
day, so that it beats the Lands with its waves, thence it comes to pass that
in progress of time, in some parts of the Shoars the Land is so shaken, that it
falls on the rushing in of the Ocean, and makes way for it: and if the Land
adjoining to the shore be depressed, Bays do more easily arise, viz, when the
Land of the shore is broken through, the water will overflow the adjacent
Lands, and so make a Bay, if that the land be so depressed, or consist of so
much matter, which may easily be removed by the violent waves.

And so it is manifest, that Bays and Streights may be made and exist anew; but
thence we may not conclude, that all Bays and Streights that are at this day
were so generated: for it may be that some existed with the Earth it self or
Ocean, and therefore coeval with the very Ocean. For there is no record of the
making of any new Bay of the Sea or Straight, although the Ancient Grecians
fabulously reported such concerning the generation of the Gaditan or Herculean
Streights; viz. they said, that the Mountain Calpe on the Spanish Coast, and
the Mountain Abyla on the African Coast were one Mountain, but separated by
Hercules; whence they called these Mountains Hercules Pillars, and the
Streights, Hercules Streights.

The Streights between Sicily and Italy.
But as concerning the Streights between Sicily and Italy, which the Ancients
believed to be caused by an incursion of the Sea, we ought less to doubt, that
such small Streights should be generated; for we deny not, but such like may be
generated at this day. Also Bays may be made of Streights, and Streights may
become Bays: For Example, If that either of the Mouths of Magellans Streights,
or of the Streights of Manilhas should be obstructed, those Streights would
become long Bays: on the contrary, if that the Isthmus between Asia and Africa
should be taken away, then the whole Red Sea would become a Straight, through
which a Ship might sail from the Indian Ocean into the Mediterranean Sea.

Proposition V. Whether the Ocean every where be of the same Altitude.
That all the parts of the Ocean are of the same Altitude, being in its natural
constitution, and all impediments removed, is manifest from the first
Proposition, by which we showed, that the superficies of the Ocean is
spherical, and that its Center is the Center of the Earth: hence it plainly
follows, that it must be of the same Altitude in all its parts. But here is a
doubt, whether there be not some causes that may render some parts of the Ocean
more high than other? This is most worthy of consideration, and is also of
great moment, when we consult concerning the digging through of Isthmusses, and
conjoyning parts of the Sea.

Many will have, that the Ocean and Earth is higher about the North, and lower
about the Equator. So Aristotle, lib. 2. De Coelo, Cap. 2. they allege this
Reason, That the Ocean seems to flow from the North Regions, as from a
Fountain. But we cannot conclude any thing certain from this: for whether the
Northern Lands (especially the North Channels) be more high or lower than the
Channels of the Lands near the Equator is yet doubted: neither is it
sufficiently proved from the motion, because this is not general, or is not
found in all the Northern Regions. And if this motion of the Ocean from the
North should be granted, yet thence it would not follow, that the Ocean was
there higher, for to avoid this excess of Altitude, the Ocean flows from
those places toward the Equator.

Now the original of the Opinion concerning the greater Altitude of the North
Land, more than of others, seems to spring hence, because that the face being
turned to the North, we discover the Pole elevated above the Horizon and our
place; and therefore the Pole of the Earth, and the vicine tracts of the Land,
in their supposition, is higher than other Regions.

Some determine the Indian Ocean between Africa and India to be higher than the
Atlantic Ocean, which they endeavor to prove from the Bay, viz. the Arabian
and Mediterranean: where also the doubt is to be considered, Whether the
Altitude of the Bay be the same with that of the Ocean, or lesser especially in
the extreme parts of the Bay, and chiefly in those Bays which are joined by a
narrower Straight of the Ocean.

The Indian and Atlantic Ocean higher than the Mediterranean.
But it is not improbable but that the Atlantic and Indian Ocean are higher
than the Mediterranean Bay, especially in the extremes parts of this at Asia
Minor and Egypt. For the Atlantic Ocean flows through the Streights of
Gades into the Mediterranean Bay, and it is probable that the Altitude of the
Ocean is some what greater than that of the Straight, because a free Influx is
impeded in these. Here indeed will be a small difference, but then proceeding
forwards in so long and large a tract between Europe and Africa, the depression
of this Bay will seem to be made greater than that of the Ocean, especially
when it meets many Rocks, Islands, and procurrent Lands, which repel the
current Water, and therefore either diminish or beat back the Influx. Yea, if
that be true, which is reported by credible Authors concerning Sesostris King
of Egypt, Darius, and other Egyptian Kings, we ought no longer to doubt of this
inequality of Altitude: For those Kings attempted to draw a Trench or Channel
from the Red Sea into the Nile, so that by this passage a Navigation might be
performed from the Indian and Red Sea through Egypt, and hence through the
mouths of the Nile into the Mediterranean Sea, which would have offered great
profit and convenience to many Regions of the Mediterranean Bay: But they were
forced to leave their enterprise, when it was discovered by those that were
skilful, that the Red Sea was much higher than the interior Egypt. Now if the
Red Sea be higher than the Land of Egypt, it will also be higher than the Water
of the Nile, and by consequence than the mouths of the Nile, and then the
Mediterranean Sea it self, for that the water of the Nile is not of a lesser
Altitude than the Mediterranean, is hence manifest that it flows into it;
wherefore the Red Sea, and therefore also the Indian Sea is higher than the
Mediterrean, at least at the extreme parts of it about Egypt, Syria, Thrace,
and in the Aegean Sea.

The Isthmus, which conjoyneth Asia and Africa, endeavored to be cut by the
Egyprian Sultans.
Moreover, other Egyptian Kings in times past, and of late the Egyptian Sultans
and Turkish Emperors have consulted how to digg through the Isthmus, which
conjoyning Africa and Asia, disjoyneth the Mediterranean and Red-seas: but the
reason why they proceeded not, is reported to have been the Altitude of the
Indian and Red Sea, above the Mediterranean, and the Coasts adjacent to it, and
therefore they feared least that the water flowing from the Red Sea should
overflow and drown the Regions of those Coasts, especially Egypt, concerning
whose low situation all Writers do consent.

If therefore the Isthmus between the Red Sea, and the Mediterranean should be
cut or dugg through, then by an open passage the Indian Ocean would immit much
water into the Mediterranean Bay; but whether it could let in so great a
quantity that there should be any danger of an inundation of the Regions
adjacent to the Mediterranean sea, I doubt: For peradventure it may be thus; if
that the Indian Ocean should let in somewhat overmuch, then the Atlantic Ocean
would let in less through the Streights of Gades, from whose Altitude somewhat
would be detracted, if that the motion were made from the Indian Sea into the
Mediterranean.

But although I deny not but that this may be, Reasons why the Egyptian Sultans
and Turks did not digg a passage through the Isthmus.
yet I suppose that the Egyptian Sultans, and the Turks were moved by other
reasons, and Political Causes for the omitting the digging through of this
Isthmus. As

1. The vast expense, it being forty German miles, and the Earth rocky, also
banks must have been made by the advice of skilful Artists, which they wanted.

2. They supposed that the Inhabitants of the Christian part of the World, as
the English, French, Dutch, Italians, etc. would have reaped more benefit by
that means than they themselves: For then through that Straight they might have
sailed into Persia and India, whereas now they fetch a vast circuit compassing
all Africa, and have laden themselves with their rich Commodities, which they
are now contented to have at Aleppo, See Massius in his third Book of his
Indian History.
being thither brought on Camels through the Turks Territories, and in many
places receive customs for the same, which is no small benefit unto them.

3. That the Sultans and Turks knew that the Christians excelled in the
abundance of warlike Ships, which they were deficient in, and therefore feared
least they should be invaded by a strong Navy, which might land a powerful
Army, and so overrun their Country.

These were necessary to be explained concerning the Altitude of the
Mediterranean Sea compared with the Red Sea, the Atlantic and Indian Ocean, by
reason that some thence take occasion to maintain, that the Altitude of the
parts of the Ocean is diverse.

But we may confirm them also by another example, if that we may compare small
matters with great. The German Ocean, which is part of the Atlantic, flowing
between Friesland and Holland into a Bay, which although it be small in respect
of the more noted Bays of the Sea, yet it is also called a Sea, and waters
the Empory Amsterdam. Not far from thence is the Lake Harlame, which is also
termed the Sea of Harlame, whose Altitude is no less than the Altitude of that
Belgic Bay, which we have spoken of, and sends a branch into the City of
Leyden, where it divaricateth into many Trenches. Now seeing that neither this
Lake, nor that of the Belgic Sea, do cause the inundation of the adjacent
Lands; it is thence manifest that they are not higher than the Lands of
Holland: But the Inhabitants of Leyden have experimentally found the German
Ocean to be higher than these Lands, when they undertook to make a Trench or
Channel from this City to the Coasts of the German Ocean near the Town of the
Catti, (it is the space of two miles) that they might sail through this
Channel, the Sea being conveyed into the German Ocean, and hence into various
parts of the Earth; but when that they had perfected a great part of the
Channel, The Water of the German Ocean higher than the Land.
they were compelled to desist, by reason that at length they found by
observation that the water of the German Ocean was higher than the Land of
Leyden, and the Shores of this Ocean; therefore the German Ocean is higher than
the Belgic Bay.

But we must esteem otherwise of those Bays which flow between the Lands, not
by an oblong, but by a broad tract, as the Bays or Gulphs of Mexico, Bengala,
and others; that these are of the same Altitude with the Ocean, from which they
are separated by no strait passages, is not to be doubted of. Although I am not
ignorant, that the Spaniards formerly did question this latter, ( viz. whether
the Pacifick Ocean were higher than the Bay of Mexico) when they consulted of
digging through the American Isthmus, or that of Panama, that they might have a
free and convenient passage from the Bay of Mexico to Peru, China, and the
Indian Isles, viz. the Spaniards feared least the English, Dutch, and other
Nations should use this Straight, and stop the mouth of it, and so invade Peru.

Wherefore to conclude, it seems that we must determine that all the parts
and broad Bays of the Ocean are all of the same Altitude (as the first
Proposition proves; See Proposit. I.
) but that the long Gulphs or Bays, especially those let in through an angust
Channel or Straight are somewhat more low, chiefly in the extreme parts.
Concerning which yet I could wish that more diligent Observations were made,
viz. these are the doubts, 1. Whether the Indian, Atlantic and Pacifick Ocean
be of the same Altitude; or whether the Indian or Pacifick be higher than the
Atlantic? 2. Whether the Northern Ocean, properly so called, viz. that which
is near to the Pole, or in the frigid Zone, be higher than the Atlantic Ocean.
3. Whether the Red Sea be higher than the Mediterranean? 4. Whether the
Pacifick be higher than the Gulf of Mexico? 5. Whether the Baltic Ocean be
equally as high as the Atlantic? The same should be observed concerning
Hudsons Bay, Streights of Magellan, and such other. Concerning the Euxine Sea,
we shall treat in the fifteenth Chapter.

The continual flux and reflux of the Sea, and other fluxes, altogether cause
the diverse Altitudes of the parts of the Ocean, and in the same part in a
diverse time and hours of the day. But these are external causes, and we at
present only consider the natural constitution of the Water: moreover they do
not so vary the Altitude in the Ocean it self, as it appears at the shoars.

Corollary. Therefore we cannot assent to Papyrius, Fabianus and Cleomedes,
which made the greatest Altitude of the Ocean to be fifteen stadia's, (half a
German mile) except we must take their Opinion concerning the profundity, and
so Altitude is ill placed there for profundity.

Proposition VI. The depth of the Sea or Ocean, in most parts may be sounded by
the Load or Plummet; there being very few places whose bottom has not been yet
found out.
The depth of the Sea in most places may be sounded.
The profundity of the Ocean is various, according to the more or less
depression of the Channels it is found 1/80 of a mile, 1/20,,; in very few
places about a German mile, where they have not line enough to sound the depth,
albeit here it be probable that it is not terminated at any vast distance. But
yet we deny not, but that in the profound Channels there be as it were some
hollownesses.

The profundity of the Sea is far lesser in the Sinus or Bays, than in the
Ocean, which Channel is less profound or hollowed by reason of the vicinity of
the Land; as for the same reason the Ocean is less deep at the shore, than in
places more remote from the Land, which happens only by reason of the hollow
figure of its Channels.

Of the Mariners Plumet.
Mariners sound the profundity with a Plumet of Lead in form of a Pyramid of
about 12 pound weight, if that the line be of three or four pound, such as is
sufficient unto 200 perches, although others require a plumb of more weight.
Yet there may be a deceit in this Observation, if so be that the line being
snatched by the Vortices of the waters, or waters themselves do not descend
perpendicularly, but obliquely.

But where the profundity of the Ocean is so great, that neither Cables or
Chains are sufficient is uncertain, although some have invented something for
finding out of this: For they determine, that you must observe how much time
passes in the space whilst a Plumet of noted weight descends to the
profundity of the Sea: Then you must apply a Cork or Alder-pith to the Plumet,
or a blown-up Bladder, so that this may presently be separated from the lead,
when that the lead has hit the bottom of the Sea, and so an application being
made, the lead must be let down again to the bottom, and the time must be noted
until the Cork return to the superficies of the Sea. From this Observation, if
it be compared with the observations made in another place, they suppose that
the profundity of the Ocean may be found by the use of some Canons: But the
uncertainty of the Rules, and the fallacy of the Observations, and the so great
brevity of time is such, that I think the knowledge of the depth can never be
obtained by this method. Yet this is sufficiently manifest, that the depth of
the Ocean is no where infinite, but every where has a bottom: For seeing that
the Earth it self is not infinite, but round, and in a figure returning into it
self, it is manifest that the profundity of the Ocean is not infinite; neither
does it extend from one part of the superficies through the Center to the
opposite superficies, so that it may separate the parts of the Earth mutually
from one another, because the Earth is heavier than the Water, and therefore
the parts of the Earth, if that they were separated by the interceding Earth,
yet presently would be conjoined again.

But from the profundity observed hitherto in most places it is manifest, that
it is almost equal to the Altitude of the Mountains and Mediterranean places
above the shore, viz. as much as these are elevated, and are extant above the
Horizon of the shore, so much are the Channels of the Sea depressed beneath it;
or as much as the Earth rises from the shoars toward the Mediterranean
places, so much by degrees more and more is it depressed, even unto the places
of the middle of the Ocean, where for the most part is the greatest depth. The
profundity is changed sometimes in this, sometimes in that part, for diverse
reasons; 1. By reason of the flux and reflux. 2. With the increase and decrease
of the Moon: 3. From the Winds: 4. From the ruin or subsidency of the Channels
or Shoars; also if that the bottom of the Channel be made higher in progress of
time by the fall of the Sand or Mud.

Proposition VII. The Ocean has no Fountains, but is contained within the
Cavities of the Earth; yet it does not remain always the same.
The Ocean has no Fountains.
Experience testifies, that waters of Rivers proceed from Fountains or Springs;
and because that this has been for so many Centuries of years, it thence
necessarily follows, that that water which continually flows from the
Springs to the Sea, returns through subterranean passages, or some other ways
to the same Fountain. After the same manner there were Philosophers in Old time
said, that the Sea sprang from certain Fountains. Neither could the magnitude
and perpetuity of the Ocean withdraw them from this Opinion; for they said,
that it returned unto the same Fountains by some hollowness of the Earth, or by
some other mode, that so they might render a cause of the perpetual flux. This
Opinion may be answered after this manner: If that the Ocean have Fountains,
they must either be in the extant part of the Earth, or in that part which is
covered by the Ocean, that is, in the very Channel or bosom of the Ocean; but
they are not in the extant part of the Earth, for Men have no where found them.
Neither may you object, That peradventure they are in the unknown Lands of the
North or South: for this would be a part of high confidence to require that to
be granted, which carries no weight of reason with it, especially seeing, that
at not a few of the Northern lands the Sea is found frozen up with Ice, and in
most of those Regions, hitherto discovered, no Springs are found: Therefore the
Fountains of the Ocean are not in the extant part of the Earth. It remains
that we prove, that they (...) neither in the part of the Earth covered with
waters, that is, in the bosom of the Sea. If that they were in this, there
would be no more distance from the Center of the Earth, than the waters of the
Ocean it self, and therefore there would be no flux from them, but the water
would rest in them, whose nature it is not to be moved from places depressed to
places more high: For the Fountains of all Rivers are more elevated than the
waters that they send forth.

But some may object, That this is a violent motion, because that the Channel
of the Ocean, and the Land is perforated within with many hollownesses and
pits, call them what you please, which proceed for a long Tract under the
Earth, until they are let into some other place of the Channel of the Ocean: So
that there are two Orifices of these Channels, which may have a sufficient
great Latitude and Extension within the Earth, going forth into the Channel of
the Ocean; therefore it may be, that the water from the Ocean may flow into one
of these two Orifices, and some forth of the other, as from a Fountain, which
may be illustrated by an easy Diagram: And by that reason that nothing
hinders but that there may be many of these subterraneous passages, and no
absurdity thence follows; therefore it may seem probable to some that there
are many of these Fountains in the very Channel of the Sea. But this
imagination is vain, and not agreeable to the properties of water; for water
having fallen into either of these Channels would not go forth by the other
Orifice, but would rest filled in it, (except moved by some violent cause): For
although water should be pressed and stirred, by water forcing in on the
Orifice, yet it could not exonerate it self by the other Orifice;, because that
water incumbeth on this Orifice also, no less than the incumbing water at the
former Orifice, which may thus be proved by experience. See Scheme.
Let there be in any Vessel water ABCD, AB is the superficies of the water
lying equally and spherically, but let in a stick RPEF into the middle of the
vessel, which may perforate it by an oblique passage, so that the part of the
vessel A shall be higher than the whole of the part of the vessel B, therefore
the water, as well on the part A as on the part B, should, for example, flow
through g h into this passage, and fill it up, and should not be effused
through either of the Orifices, not through g, because this is higher; nor
through h, because though it be more depressed than g; yet the water flowing
from the part B, and perpendicularly tending to the bottom of the vessel, would
prohibit the influx.

From these it is manifest, that the Ocean has no Fountain, but is perpetually
contained within its own Channel.

But somewhat may be objected against this, Objections.
which is worthy of consideration: First, That at some part or other of the
Ocean there is always a violent external moving cause, as Winds, Fluxes,
Refluxes, mutations of the Earth, and the like. Therefore these cause, that
sometimes in some one part of the Ocean, and sometimes in another, there is a
greater Altitude, and abundancy of water, than in the other parts; and
therefore that higher water falling into the subterraneous passages, is again
poured forth into another part of the Channel of the Ocean, where there is a
lesser Altitude of water by reason of that external cause, and where the
incumbent water then less resists the eruption or efflux, because it is moved
another way by an external cause: for although this may be, yet it cannot be
proved by experience, neither can the contrary, that is this, be demonstrated
to be so; therefore at least the truth is uncertain, and we must doubt
concerning this Problem. Now that there are such subterraneous pits or passages
in the Channel of the Ocean cannot be denied, and those places of the Ocean
seem to show them, to wit, where there is an immense profundity, seeing there
is no such in the vicine parts. To this I answer, although we should admit of
those subterraneous passages, yet therefore it does not follow that we should
grant, that they proceed to another part of the Channel of the Ocean, or go
forth into it: and if that this should be granted, yet seeing that there are no
such passages in all places, and that these external causes sometimes are
predominate in one part of the Ocean, and sometimes in another there is no
consequence from the objection, that the Fountains of the Ocean are in any
certain place, but that it flows sometimes from one part of the Channel, and
sometimes from another; so that that flux continues no longer than the
external cause continues.

2. Some one may thus seem to argue: The flux of the Ocean is perpetually
discerned from the Northern Land or quarter toward the South, between Europe
and the Northern America; also between Asia and the Northern America. Yet
notwithstanding, no part of the Ocean or vicine place is to be found whereby it
may come unto those Northern Regions. Seeing that therefore this flux is
perpetual, neither does the water come by a manifest way unto those Regions,
whence the flux is made, therefore it seems necessary to conclude, that the
waters come through subterraneous passages unto those Northern Regions, and so
there to be effused from the holes of the Channel, as from a spring, and that
the water moves hence toward the South. There falls in another cause taken
from the former: For the water of the Ocean in the Torrid Zone is more heavy
than that in the Northern places, by reason of the great abundance of Salt, as
we have proved in the Eighth and Twelfth Proposition. Therefore the water or
Ocean in the Torrid Zone does more press through the Orifices of the
Subterranean passages, than in the Northern places; and therefore in these
places the water less resisting, suffers the water to flow from the Orifices
of the Channels. Unto this I answer, That that flux of the Ocean is not only
from the North, as the Objection seems to infer, and as some, especially the
Ancients conceived of it, (who would have the water to flow in four Channels
from the very Pole, as also some Geographical Maps do exhibit it) neither is it
continual, but is observed by reason of the frequency of Northern Winds:
moreover the great and perpetual abundance of Snow and Rain in those places
augmenteth the water, and causes it to flow toward the South. Add likewise,
that in other parts another motion of the Ocean is found, concerning which see
the following Chapter.

3. It seems not absurd, but rather most true, that all the Fountains of
Rivers taken together, disburthening themselves into the Ocean, are the very
Fountains of the Ocean: For seeing that in perpetual progress of time, so great
an abundance of water flows from them into the Ocean, questionless the water
comes from the Ocean to the very Springs and Channels of the Rivers, partly
through the Subterranean passages, and partly by Rains.

4. It may seem to prove, that the Fountains of the Ocean may be in the very
Channel, because that in the bottom of the Ocean, in some parts sweet or fresh
water is found, which could not be but by some Fountains flowing in the bottom.
Linschaten relates, that in Ormus fresh water is drawn by diverse in the Ocean,
at the depth of four or five Orgya: and the like Fountains are found in other
parts of the Ocean and Bays. Unto this I answer, That few such Springs have yet
been found, which suffice not the vast Ocean. Neither do we dispute concerning
these Fountains, as we have said before.

Hence it is manifest, that in some sort it is true; and we may well say, that
the Ocean has Springs, but not in that sense that we are wont to speak
concerning the Springs of Rivers, and in which we would have our Proposition to
be taken. Hence also it is manifest what we ought to think concerning that
Question, viz. Whether the Sea is always one and the same, and perpetually so
remains, or whether it be another thing, whose parts are perpetually consumed
and generated again?

Proposition VIII. The saltness of the Waters proceeds from the particles of
Salt, which are mixed with it; but whence they may exist or are so augmented,
is the doubt.
Of the Saltness of the Seawater.
Experlence proves the first member of the Proposition, by which it is commonly
known that Salt is made of Seawater, by decoction of the water, or by the heat
of the Sun, or the fervor of the Fire: In Germany and other places the water
is separated by the help of the Fire: In France, the greater heat of the Sun
performs the same, the Ocean being let into certain Trenches made, in which
in the space of some Months the water being exhaled by the force of the Sun, Of
Salt, and of what made.
concreted and hard Salt is found. On the shoars of many Regions, as of England
and other parts, plenty of Bay Salt is found, the Seawater continually
overflowing those shoars, leaves daily some particles or humors, from which
the water exhaleth, and concrete Salt is left, whose blackness is taken away by
boiling; although it be washed away and dissolved from many Coasts by the
violence of the Ocean, which is the cause that it is not found on all Coasts.
Seeing therefore that this Experiment is common, Aristotle had small reason to
allege a false Experiment concerning a waxen Vessel let down into the Sea.

Hence it is manifest, that the proximate cause of the Saltness of the
Seawater, or the true subject of this saltness is the Saline particles, which
are contained in that water. Therefore the Aristotelians with their Master
spoke improperly and obscuredly without cause, when they defend and say, That
the saltness of the Sea proceeds from the adustion of the Sea, caused by the
Sun, or from the adust particles. But of this more anon.

The chief difficulty and controversy is concerning the other member of the
Proposition; Whence these Salt particles of the Ocean exist.

Aristotle supposes, that dry exhalations or fumes (all which he says are of
an adust and Saline nature) elevated from the Earth, are mixed with humid
vapors, and when that these have met together in Rain, they fall with these
into the Sea, and that thence proceeds the saltness and Salt particles in the
Sea; See Aristotle lib. 2. chap. 7.
and on this account he seems to defend this Opinion, because that from
thence he may render a reason, why the Sea is always salt.

But other Peripateticks will have it, and so do endeavor to draw Aristotle to
their part, that this saltness is in the Sea it self, by reason that it is
perpetually scorched by the heat of the Sun: a sign of which is, that the water
is found by so much the less salt, by how much it is more deep or remote from
the superficies; for in the superficies we discover it to be most salt.

Both these Opinions are obstructed with great difficulties and absurdities, so
that it seems wonderful that the minds of Philosophers and Learned men could
acquiesce in them. First, the opinion of Aristotle is thus obstructed, that
Salt-rain should be found in the Ocean, which never yet was found to be void of
all taste of salt. Secondly, the Sea should be less salt, when it raineth not
for a long time; the contrary of which yet is found.

The other Opinion has these difficulties; 1. It is false, that the waters of
the Ocean are found the less salt, by how much they are nigh to the bottom; for
there are few places, viz. in those bottoms where Springs of fresh water do
flow. 2. Experience testifies, that fresh water, although long exposed to the
Sun or heat of the Fire, yet does not become salt. This Objection Scaliger
endeavors to avoid by an over-nice subtilty; for he says, that this happens
in these Observations by reason of the exiguity of the water, which does not
grow thick, but resolves: For although you take a great quantity of water, and
that you provoke with a light and gentle fire, that the resolution may be
impeded, yet the water acquireth no salt taste. 3. Lakes and Marshes, though
heated by the Sun, yet wax not salt. This Objection also Scaliger endeavors
to avoid, saying, that this happens by the succession of fresh water. And the
same is found in those standing Pools and Lakes, which only proceed from Rain
or Snow dissolved, where there is no place for that refuge of succession for
those Lakes are rather dried, when that it raineth not for a long space, than
turned into Salt, or rendered salt.

Therefore rejecting those false Opinions concerning the cause and original of
Salt in the Ocean, let us lay hold of one of the most probable Opinions, with
little or no difficulty in it, viz.

1. That these particles are Coeternal with the very Ocean, and therefore we
should no more dispute concerning their original, than concerning the original
of the Ocean it self, the Earth, yea and of the original and generation of the
World.

2. If that this Opinion be less complacent, we may make choice of another,
viz. that these salt particles are here and there pulled from the Earth, and so
dissolved into water. Now it is certain, that there are many saline Mountains
or Rocks in the bosom of the Sea. Isle of Ormus a salt Rock.
The whole Isle of Ormus is nothing else but a white and hard Salt, of which
they make the Walls of their Houses, and therefore no Fountain of fresh water
is found in that Isle. And none can be ignorant, how that many mines of Salt
are found on the Land; and we have related concerning some in the Eleventh
Chapter; but we need not particulars. Let us consider the whole Earth, The
greatest part of the Earth has much Salt in it.
the greatest part of which is nothing else but a Salt; for it has its
consistency from Salt; for the Chemical Philosophers do rightly prove, that the
consistency and compaction of every thing proceeds from Salt; and Experience
is answerable to the Assertion: for if that you take an hard piece of Earth,
and burn it to ashes, much Salt will be found in it.

Nothing can be alleged against this Opinion that is of any value, and is not
easily refuted: for some say, that it is impossible that those salt parts of
the Earth should perpetually suffice, and should not at some time or other be
consumed by the water of the Ocean, which continually takes away some part of
them? Unto this I answer, That the Salt of the Ocean is not consumed in so
great abundance, that it should stand in need of much instauration; and if that
any be consumed, yet notwithstanding that is laid up in another place, seeing
that it is not removed out of the Earth.

Proposition IX. Whether that Water be the fresher in the Ocean, by how much it
is nigher the bottom? and why in some parts of the Ocean, fresh Water is found
in the bottom?
Of the freshness of Water in the Sea.
Unto the first I Answer, That experience does not testify concerning that
sweetness, but in some places, of which the other Question speaks; that in
these places, in the bottom of the Sea are Fountains of fresh water, I have
sufficiently said; for it cannot naturally be, that the more Salt Water should
exist above water less Salt, seeing that that is more heavy.

Those places of the Sea, where fresh water is found to spring at the bottom,
may be collected by those that are studious, from the Writers of Geography.

Proposition X. The Water of the Ocean becomes less salt by how much it is
nearer the Poles; and on the contrary, the more salt, by how much it is more
near the Equator or Torrid Zone.
Although this may be understood of most parts of the Ocean, yet the
Proposition admits of some exceptions. The cause of this inequality in
saltness is sixfold.

The Causes of the inequality of the saltness of the Sea in different places.
1. That the heat of the Sun in the Torrid Zone lifts up more vapors from the
Ocean into the Clouds, than in the Northern places, which are the vapors of
fresh water; because that the particles of Salt, by reason of their gravity,
are not so easily lifted up. Seeing therefore that from the Water of the Ocean
of the Torrid Zone, or where the place is more near the Torrid Zone, so much
the vapors are separated by the heat of the Sun; thence it comes to pass,
that the water that is lest is found more salt there, than in the Northern
places, where there is not so much fresh water separated by reason of the weak
heat of the Sun.

The 2d Cause.
2. The second Cause is the heat or cold of the water; for the same numerical
water, or salt meat, as also pickled meat, sauce, and the like, afford a more
sensible saltness to the taste when they are eaten hot, than when cold; for the
heat or particles of the fire do move and render the particles of the salt
contained in such meat, more acute; and separates them from the admixtures,
whence they bite and prick the Tongue more sharply. Now because the water of
the Ocean is the more hot by how much it is nigher the Equator, or the
parallels of the Sun at every day; and contrariwise the more cold, by how much
it is more near the Pole; thence it follows that waters, though they should
contain the same quantity of salt, yet they must seem and appear so much the
salter to the taste, by how much they are nearer to the Torrid Zone; and by how
much they are more near the Pole, by so much they have less sensible Salt.

The 3d Cause.
3. The third Cause is the more or less quantity of Salt in the diverse parts of
the Channel of the Ocean: for as we find in the parts of the Earth, that there
are not pits of Salt in them all, neither where they are found is there the
like quantity of Salt, must be held concerning the part of the Earth that the
Sea washes or covers, that is, the Channel or the Shoars: where there is
therefore most quantity of Salt or Mineral in the bottom or shore of the Ocean,
there the water is more salt, because that it is impregnated with a greater
quantity of Salt. So the Isle of Ormus consists all of Salt; therefore the
adjacent Ocean has very Salt waters. But whether there be greater plenty of
Salt in the Channel and shoars of the Ocean in the Torrid Zone, or more saline
Mines than in the North, is very doubtful, by reason of the want of
observation; yet it seems probable unto some, that there is greater quantity
of Salt in those places, by reason of the greater heat of the Sun, by which the
parts of the water are separated from the Terrestrial and Salt; but this is a
deceitful sign.

The 4th Cause.
4. The fourth Cause of the unequal saltness is the frequency or scarcity of
Rains, unto which we may add Snow: and in the Northern places Snow and Rain is
frequent; in the places of the Torrid Zone they are less frequent in some parts
of the year, and in othersome they are almost continual. And therefore in these
places, in the pluvial Months, the water of the Ocean is not so salt on the
shore, and has less Salt in it than in the dry Months. Yea in many Regions of
the Coast of Malabar the Ocean is fresh in the pluvial Months, by reason of the
abundance of water that flows from the top of the Mountain Gatis, and falls
into the Sea: for this very reason, in diverse Seasons of the year the same
Ocean is of a various saltness; yet because in the Northern places, the Rains
and Snows are continual throughout the whole year, therefore this Sea is less
salt than in the Torrid Zone.

The 5th Cause.
5. The fifth Cause is the dissimilary solution, or unequal faculty of the Water
to dissolve this Salt and unite it to its self; for hot water sooner uniteth
Salt unto it self than cold Water: although therefore in the Northern places of
the Ocean, the shoars and Channels of the same contain more, or the like
quantity of Salt, that those places of the Torrid Zone do; yet because the
water is there more cold, it is not so able to dissolve and unite the Salt to
it self so subtily, us the water in the Torrid Zone, which is more hot.

The 6th Cause.
6. The sixth cause is the exoneration of many and great Rivers into the Sea;
but this cause only takes place in the parts of the Ocean that are vicine to
the shoars; but is not discovered in the remote parts: So Mariners affirm, that
the Ocean on the Coast of Brasilia, where the Silver-River disburtheneth it
self, loses it saltness, and affords fresh waters fifteen miles distant from
the shore. The same is observed of the African Ocean on the Coasts of Congi,
where the River Zaire exonerateth it self, and of many more Rivers. Unto these
add running Fountains in some parts of the bottom of the Ocean.

These are the Causes which seem to concur to the variety and diversity of
saltness in diverse parts of the Ocean, from which the saltness of every one of
the Seas may be explained.

From whence also it is easy to give an account, why the water of the German
and Northern Ocean is less apt to separate Salt from it self by coction, than
the water of the Spanish Ocean, the Canary Isles; and that of Cape Verd,
(whence the Dutch fetch Salt in great abundance, and transport it into the
Northern Regions) viz. this Ocean is more near the Torrid Zone, and receives
water from the Ocean of the Torrid Zone; the other is more remote from the
Frigid Zone: yet I cannot deny the constitution of the Channels themselves to
be more or less saline. The Seawater at Guinee, in the Ethiopick Ocean,
affords Salt at one coction as white as snow, such as neither the Spanish
Ocean, nor any other in Europe, do produce at one coction or boiling.

Proposition XI. Why Rainwater in the middle of the Ocean is found sweet; but
the water which we separate from the Marine or Salt Water, either by decoction
or distillation, is yet notwithstanding found salt, when yet the Rainwater
proceeds from the Vapors exhaled from the Sea.
Fresh Water abstracted from Salt Water.
The Learned Chemists, or true Naturalists, have hitherto labored in vain, that
they might find out an Art by which they might distill and abstract fresh water
from the water of the Ocean, which would be of great advantage; but as yet
their Labors have proved fruitless: for although, as well in the decoction as
distillation, Salt may be left in the bottom of the Vessel, yet the water
separated by decoction as well as distillation, is yet found salt, and not fit
for men to drink, which seems wonderful unto those that are ignorant of the
cause. Yet Chemistry, that is, true Philosophy, has taught the reason; for by
the benefit of this we know that there is a twofold salt in Bodies, or two
kinds of salt, which although they agree in taste, yet they much differ in other
qualities: one of these Artists term fixed, the other volatile salt. The fixed
salt, by reason of its gravity, is not elevated in distillation, but remains
in the bottom of the Vessel; but the volatile salt is full of spirit, and
indeed is nothing else but a most subtle spirit that is elevated by a very
light fire, and therefore in the distillation ascends with the fresh water,
and is more firmly united by reason of the subtilty of the Attoms: neither is
this volatile salt found only with fixed salt in Seawater, but almost in all
bodies, as Chemistry proves by experience; but in some in a greater, and in
othersome in a lesser quantity: in a greater quantity in sharp tasted Herbs, in
a lesser in oily Herbs. Therefore difficulty consists in the separation of
this salt spirit or volatile salt from the water.

But why the pluvial water in the midst of the Sea is no less fresh than on the
Land, seeing that yet it is generated by abstraction of the exhalations of the
Ocean caused by the fervor of the Sun, or from some subterraneous fire, which
evaporation does little differ from distillation.

The cause seems to be Fourfold; 1. A slow operation, by which the tenuous
part is only elevated from the Ocean, which although, it contains a saline
volatile spirit, yet it has it in less quantity, than if that this exhalation
were caused by a more forcible heat. 2. The long way that this vapor passes
through, before that it arriveth unto that Region of the Air, where it is
condensated into rain, in passage it is possible that the saline spirit is by
degrees separated from the watery particles. 3. The admixture of other watery
particles existing in the air. 4. A Refrigeration, Coition, and condensation of
the vapor: for these exhalations exhaled from the Ocean by degrees are more
and more refrigerated, and being conjoined with other obvious and admixed
vapors, they condense into a more thick vapor or cloud: in this Refrigeration
and condensation or coition of the saline spirit with the fiery particles they
fly into the more exalted part of the Air.

Now why the same is not performed in distillation (where the vapors exalted
are also condensed) the cause is, 1. That by reason of the small passage, the
saline spirit is as yet over straightly conjoined to the watery particles. 2.
That the vapor restrained in the vessel, admits not a free passage to the
evolant spirit.

Proposition XII. Seawater is more ponderous than fresh water, and the water
of one Sea is more heavy than another.
Sea water more heavy than fresh water.
The cause is manifest from what has been said, by reason that the Sea water
contains a fixed salt, which is a far more weighty body than fresh water. And
we have showed that in diverse parts of the Sea, there is a diverse quantity of
salt. Yet does it not follow, that water is more heavy by how much it is the
more salt, which does not augment the gravity, but lesseneth it, and yet
renders the water very salt.

Proposition XIII. Salt water does not so easily freez as fresh, or a greater
degree of cold is required to the congelation of Sea water than of fresh.
Salt water does not so soon freez as fresh.
Experience sufficiently shows this against the Aristotelians, who defend that
water is so much the lesser obnoxious to congelation, by how much it is the
more pure, and therefore should more easily congeal, as receding more from the
elementary water, which is false. Now the cause is, that in the salt it self
their is a certain spirit, which resists congelation, and being separated
from the salt, admits of no congelation from the hardest frost, as those
that are skilful in Chemistry know. For the spirit of salt is a medicament
sufficiently known, and of frequent use.

Proposition XIV. Why the Ocean is not bigger, seeing that it receives so many
Rivers.
The cause is, 1. That the water returns to the Sea, through subterraneous
passages unto the fountains of the Rivers, as shall be explicated in the
following Chapter. 2. Because that many vapors are elevated from the Ocean,
whereof many being resolved into rain fall into the Ocean, and part on the land.

Proposition XV. Certain parts of the Ocean differ in color.
The water in the Ocean in all places not of one and the same color.
Experience testifies, that in the Northern places the Sea seems of a more
black color; in the Torrid Zone, of a duskish color; in other places of a
blew. About certain shoars of new Guinee the Ocean is found of a white color,
in some other place of a yellow. In Streights the water appears to incline to
white, at the Shoars of Congi not far from Bay a D'Alvaro Gonzales a Rivulet or
an Arm is disburthened into the Sea of somewhat a Redish color, taken from a
mine of red earth, through which it flows. But the Arabian Gulf called
therefore the Red Sea, by reason of the property of the color, some will have
the denomination taken from King Erythreus, others from the splendor which the
Rays of the Sun repercussed does effect. But the more probable opinion, and
that which is confirmed from experience, is, that the redness does arise from
the sand of a red color, which is found in the bottom of this Sea, and on the
Shoars, and is frequently admixed with the water. The water in the Red Sea only
red by reason of the red s^^^^ in it.
The cause of this admixture which seems contrary to the ponderousness of
sand is the vehemence of the flux and reflux of the water; or its swiftness and
agitation in this Sea; by which it comes to pass that the sand or gravel is
agitated and moved up and down, and so hindered by the continual motion of the
Sea, that it cannot rest. Mariners affirm that the water of this Sea sometimes
appears as red as blood, but if taken up in a vessel, the sand will sink
down, and then the water appears otherwise. It often happens that storms from
the Red Sea rushing into Arabia, or Africa, carry with them so great an
abundance of sand, and cast it on the earth, that it covers whole troops of
men and beasts, whence proceeds the true Mummie.

Whether from the same or another cause the Sea between California and America
be termed red (Vermejo) I have not as yet found it observed by Writers.

Proposition XVI. Certain peculiar things are found in certain parts of the
Ocean.
Of things in the Ocean peculiar to certain places.
The Sea termed Di Sargasso by the Portugals, which begins not far from Cape
Verd in Africa, about the Isles of Salt, and extends it self from the 20th.
degree of Northern Latitude, unto the 34th. of South Latitude. The color of
this Sea seems to be green, which is not the color of the Sea it self, but
of a certain small leaved herb in the bottom of it, called by the Portugals,
Sargasso. The leaves of this weed mutually complicated one into another, swim
on the face of this Ocean in so continued a tract, that the water can hardly be
seen, so that the Seamen afar off discovering this Ocean, take it for an
Island, and green Land, neither can they pass through this knot of weeds except
that they be helped by a moderate wind at least: the herb bears a small
berry, whence it arises is not yet known. Seeing that this Sea is not so near
any land, that it should have its original from them, neither is it probable
that it should come from the bottom of the Sea, by reason that the profundity
of this Sea is such, that in many places it exceeds the length of any line or
cord. In the Ocean not far from the Promontory of Good Hope, are many floating
red-like shrubs of a great thickness discovered, unto which the herb Sargasso
is implicated. Seamen take it for a certain, that if they see them thereabouts,
that they are near to the Promontory of Good Hope, or else have just past it.

Corral found on the Shore of Madagascar.
On the Shore of the Isle of Madagascar the Ocean casts up red and white
Coral, which augment like shrubs under the water, and although that they be
soft in some places, yet between Madagascar and Africa there are reported to be
Rocks of hard Coral.

In the Baltic Ocean, nigh to the Shore of Borussia, the Shore casts forth
most excellent succinum, which the Inhabitants are taught, when certain winds
do blow, to draw up with certain Iron hooks.

Amber only in the Ocean in the Torrid Zone.
The Ocean casts up Amber only in the Torrid Zone, viz. at the Shore of
Brazile (where a piece of 500 l. weight was taken up by a Dutch Soldier, and
presented unto Count Nassaw) at the Isle of Madagascar, at Cape Verd, at the
Isle of Maurice; at the Isle of Sumatra, and other Indian Isles. Garcias
relates that a piece of 200 l.weight was found; yea that some Islands consist
wholly of Amber, but he does not name them.

In the Aethiopick Ocean at Guinea, Congo, and Angola, this is peculiarly
observed, that at the sides of the Keil of the Ship, whilst that they remain
there, green Cockles like unto grass do stick, which hinders the sailing of
the Ships, and eats the wood.

On the Coast of Languedock in France, Birds unshaped first of all, then by
degrees they receive form, and fixing of their bill in the wood; when they
begin to move, by degrees they are pulled off, and swim on the water like Geese.

The excrement of the Ocean, termed the Scum of the Sea, is found floating in
many places; but in some in greater quantity than in others.

Serpents on the Coast of Malabar.
On the Coast of Malabar, and at Cambaja, Serpents are discovered on the
superficies of the water: this is a sign to Seamen, that they are near to
those Regions.

About four miles from New Spain many Roots, Bulrushes and Leaves like unto
Fig Leaves float on the water, which they eat, and are in taste like unto
Coleworts.

In the description of the first Navigation of the Dutch unto the Streights of
Magellan, we read that on the 12th of January in Anno 1599. the water of the
Ocean not far from the Silver-River, or Rio de laplata, in Brasil, appeared of
a red and bloody color; but being drawn up in a bucket, or the like, when that
they had more thoroughly viewed it, they found that an innumerable multitude of
Worms of a red color were contained in that water, and being taken up in the
hand they leaped like unto Fleas: And these Seamen call Sea-fleas; and they are
supposed to come from an innumerable company of small Crabs, which being found
on the South Continent, fill the Sea.

Here is no place to treat of the Animals, of which there are various kinds in
diverse places of the Sea.

Proposition XVII Why the Sea in the Night season seems to glitter,
especially if that the Waves be raised the more vehemently by the Winds.
The Sea in the Night seems to glitter or shine.
This question requires the knowledge of that difficulty concerning the causes
of Colors. Diverse are the resolutions of Philosophers concerning them; but as
for the explication of the proposed phenomenon or Question, that Opinion
seems the most commodious, which shows how Colors do exist, or rather
appear from a certain and various motion; but we leave the accurate explication
of the same to Naturalists.

Proposition XVIII. The Ocean, or rather all Water casts out Terrestrial
Bodies on the shore, especially in the Full Moon.
Terrestrial bodies are cast out of the Ocean on the Shore.
It is not difficult to render an account of this property, which Experience
sufficiently testifies: For Water is never without some motion, which if it be
swift, and toward one quarter, it carries Terrestrial bodies with it, until
it meets with the shore; where, by reason of the ceasing vigor of the motion
of the water, those Terrestrial bodies are laid down; but in the Ocean the
Waves are carried hither and thither. By these the Terrestrial bodies are
carried after the same mode; and because that all Waves tend to some coast of
Land, therefore all Terrestrial bodies are carried toward the shore.

In the Full Moons is the greatest motion of the Ocean: therefore vain is their
Opinion, who believed the Ocean to be an Animal, and to have sense, by which it
purges it self from all dregs, Terrestrial bodies; but here the cause is
sufficiently manifest.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Motions of the Sea in general, and in particular of the Flux
and Reflux.
Proposition I. Water has no natural Motion, except one, by which it moves
from a more higher place unto these that are more low; but if the vicine place
or body be equal, or of a greater Altitude than the superficies of the Water,
then the Water naturally rests, that is, it is not moved, except that it be
compelled by a violent cause.
Water has no natural motion, except one.
THe truth of this Proposition is manifest from Vulgar experience; for if that a
vessel containing water be moved, the water so long fluctuateth in it until no
part be higher than the other, that is, until they compose a Spherical figure
or superficies, as we have said in the Thirteenth Chapter. For although this
Motion has a violent cause, viz. the motion of the Air about the Earth; yet
because that there is a great question concerning this cause, and it is so
manifest in the water, that it seems not to come unto it from an external
cause, so for to distinguish this motion of the water from other motions, we
term it Natural. Now this motion is unto that quarter, unto which the place
more depressed is situated.

Proposition II. When part of the Ocean is moved, the whole Ocean is moved, or
all the other parts of it are also moved; but by so much the more that every
one is nearer the part moved.
For because that if part of the Ocean be moved, it does necessarily change
place, and therefore this place is more low than the place of the vicine water,
this nearer water shall be moved into this place, and the vicine water of that
into the place of that, and so forward in the other parts: But there is lesser
motion in the places of the more remote parts.

Proposition III. To observe the quarter into which the Sea that is moved,
tends.
The quarter into which the Sea that is moved, tends.
Choose a time, if you can, when no violent Wind blows, and cast into the Water
a body almost of the same gravity with the water; let the place be observed
where it was cast in, to wit, let the Boat remain there immovable: then when
that this body is carried by the Sea a moderate space from the place where it
was cast in; then let another Boat be placed of that, and let the quarter be
observed into which the situation of this second Boat vergeth from the former:
For this also shall be the quarter, in which we say that the Sea at that time
is moved.

Proposition IV. The Motion of the Sea is either direct, or a Vortex, or a
Concussion.
I call that direct which tends unto some quarter; a Vortex, when the water
moves into a round, and is in some part rejected: a concussion, when it
trembles. But laying aside the two latter unto the end of the Chapter, we
shall treat of the direct motion, and therefore we shall call this by a general
term, the Motion of the Sea.

Proposition V. Of the Motions which we find in the Sea, some are general, some
proper and singular, other some contingent.
General, proper and singular motions of the Sea.
I call that General which is found almost in all the parts of the Ocean, and
that at all times. I call those proper and special motions by which only some
parts of the Ocean are moved, and they are twofold, perpetual and anniversary:
the former are those which persist without mutation or cessation; the other,
which are found at certain months or days of the year in some certain Sea.

I call those motions of the Sea contingent, which without any certain order
sometimes do cease, and other some begin; such are infinite.

Proposition VI. Wind is the cause of the contingent motion of the Sea, forcing
the Sea to a quarter opposite to the Wind; neither is the Sea ever free from
such motions.
Wind is the cause of the motion of the Sea.
For seeing that the Air touches the Sea, and the Wind is nothing else but a
strong commotion of the Air, and a pressure toward the Earth; therefore the
Air being forced to the Sea, endeavors to drive it from its place, and by
reason of the Sea is fluid, and not able to resist the forcing Air; therefore
it is moved from its place toward the place of the opposite quarter, and
forces another water, and this another, and so on.

Now seeing that there is always some wind in the Air, sometimes in this place,
and sometimes in that, and sometimes diverse in diverse places at one and the
same time, thence it follows, that there are certain contingent motions
always in the Sea, which are more discernable in the parts nearer the Wind, and
therefore the rather, by reason that the Sea does most easily receive an
impression, because it is fluid.

Proposition VII. The general motion of the Sea is twofold; one continually
from the East to the West, the other composed of two contrary Motions, which is
termed the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, in which the Sea at certain hours
flows to the shore, and in certain others flows back again. We shall first
treat of the first.
The motion of the Sea twofold.
That the Sea moves from the East to the West continually, is chiefly proved
from the motion of that Sea, which lies in the Torrid Zone between the
Tropicks: For because the motion is more strong, hence it is less hindered by
other motions.

This Motion of the Sea is manifestly found by those that sail from India to
Madagascar and Africa, also in the Pacifick Ocean, between New Spain, China,
and the Moluccoes; also in the Ocean, between Africa and Brasil. So through the
Streights of Magellan the Sea is carried from the East to the West with a
vehement motion. So through the Streights Manillan, through Channels between
the Isles Maldives, the motion of the Sea carries Ships from the East. The Sea
glideth impetuously between Cuba and Jucatan into the Gulf of Mexico; and
flows out into Cuba and Florida. At the Gulf of Paria there is a violent
influx, so that that Gulf is termed Os Draconis, the Dragons Mouth. Famous
also is the flux at the Land of Canada. From the Tartarian Ocean the Sea moves
through the Streights of Nova Zembla, and Waigats Streights, which is proved
both from the very motion it self, and also from the abundance of Ice, which
the Tartarian Ocean casts up at the Streights of Zembla. And at the Northern
shore of America in the Pacifick Ocean, the motion is toward the Straight
Anian; also from Japan the Sea is moved toward China. So in the Straight
Manillan, the motion is from East to West; so also in the Straight Java. And
when the Atlantic Ocean is moved toward the Coast of America, the contrary is
found in the Pacifick Ocean. For this is moved from the shoars, which is the
most conspicuous at Cabo dez Correntes, between Panama and Lima.

Proposition VIII. The winds oftentimes change the general motion of the Sea,
especially those fixed winds, which we shall show to be termed Motions, in the
XXI. Chap.
The motion of the Sea ofttimes changed by the winds.
For because that most of these do blow from the South and North, or from the
Collateral quarters of these, thence it comes to pass that the Sea by reason
of its general motion tends toward the West, it moves toward the
Collateral quarters of the West, viz. North-west, or South-west: yea the
general wind, when that it seldom blows from the East, but most commonly from
the Collateral quarters of the East, changes this general motion of the Sea.
Much more do the North winds in the Northern Sea, where the general motion is
little discernable in the parts of the Ocean.

Proposition IX. The cause of this general motion of the Sea from the East to
the West is uncertain.
The Opinion of Aristotle and Copernicus concerning the general motion of the
Sea from East to West.
The Aristotelians suppose (although it were unknown unto Aristotle and his
followers; and indeed to all the European Philosophers, before the Navigation
of the Portugals through the Ocean of the Torrid Zone) that it is caused by the
prime motion of the Heaven, which is not only common to all the Stars, but also
to the Air in part, and to the Ocean, by which all are carried from the East to
the West. But some that follow Copernicus, as Kepler, although they also
acknowledge the Moon also the cause of this motion, yet they determine that the
motion of the Earth does not a little contribute unto this motion, viz. they
suppose that the water, seeing that it is not continuous, but only contiguous
unto the Earth, cannot follow the circumrotation of the Earth, and resist it
toward the West, whilst the Earth withdraws it self toward the East, and
therefore that the Sea moves not from one part of the Earth unto another, but
that the Earth leaves part of the waters one after another.

Othersome, who are not pleased neither with the solution of Aristotle nor
Copernicus, having recourse unto the Moon, will have her to be Empress of the
waters; and that she leads about with her, and draws the Ocean from the
East to the West. If it is demanded how? they reply, there is an occult faculty
influence, sympathy, vicinity to the Earth and such like: indeed it is very
probable that the Moon is the causer of this motion, by reason that in the new
and full Moons this motion is more violent than in the quarters, where the
motion for the most part is very little.

The most acute Cartesius has explained a Mathematical mode by which the Moon
causes both this motion of the water and Air; for he supposes according to
his general Hypothesis, that an infinite number of Atoms do move round about
the Earth, by which the space even unto the Moon is filled without any Vacuum,
which space he calls the vortex of the Earth, viz. Let the Earth be FEGH. The
water 2143, the Air 6587. the vortex of the Earth B A D C, the Moon B.
Therefore says he, if that there were no Moon in the vortex B A D C, the
particles of its vortex would be turned round about the Center T: but because
that the Moon is in it, therefore the space through which the Celestial matter
flows between B and T, is rendered more Angust, and thence it follows that
the Celestial matter flows there more quick (between B, and T) and therefore
more presses the superficies of the Air in 6, and also the superficies of the
water in 2. than if the Moon were not in the Diameter of the vortex B D: and
seeing that both the bodies of the Air and water are fluid and easily plyant to
this pression, it must not be so high above the part of the Earth F, as if the
Moon were without the Diameter B D. and on the contrary must be more high
toward E. But whilst that the Earth is carried from E through F toward G, or
from the West to the East, the tumor of the water 412, and also of the Air
856; which now incumbs over the part of the Earth E, by degrees do move unto
other parts more Occidental, so that after six hours they incumb over the part
of the Earth H; and after twelve hours over the part of the Earth G. Whence it
comes to pass that the water and the Air are carried from the Oriental parts
of the Earth, unto the Occidental parts of the same by a continual flux; thus
Cartesius. The stress of the Demonstration is in this, because the Earth E F G
H with the water 1234 is moved round, and also the Celestial matter of the
vortex between B A D C and 6587. The Moon being in B, makes the space B 6 with
a certain pressure passing through the Air and water, whilst that it passes
through B, is expressed toward J H G, and whilst that ^ passes through B, is
expressed toward H G F, and so forwards. Neither does the part of the
Celestial matter at the Moon having allapsed in B D mount upwards, because it
is repelled, and that all are full of bodies. And although it press the Air and
water 62 F, not only toward the West, E 15, but also toward the East, 73 G.
yet because the parts situated from 62 F, toward 73 G, do more and more
recede from these Streights, but the parts toward E 15, do more and more draw
near, therefore by these chiefly is that force received.

But in this explication of this ingenious person, these things are required or
wanted.

1. From that it should follow that the Sea should cease to swell when that the
Moon approaches unto it, and that it should swell in the parts, which are a
quadrant, or six hours absent from the Moon: viz. The tumor is in E 15, but in
F 26 where the Moon is vertical, the Altitude is least. But this is repugnant
to experience, for in F 26 the Sea swells, but in E 15 the tumor is very
little. How this absurdity may be avoided, we shall show in the following
Proposition.

2. It is not sufficiently showed ( Cartesius has omitted this) why, whilst
the Celestial matter in the narrow space B 6, presses the Air C, and the water
2; it is not equally moved toward G 37 from both the water and the Air, and
the Celestial matter is carried with the Earth toward G 37, and therefore the
water and the Air is rather carried toward the East than the West. And it is a
doubt whether it can be avoided by the only subduction of the parts from 6 D B,
toward G 37.

3. The Moon drawing near to any Sea, a more vehement wind is found in that
part toward the West, from the East, than another time; but this happens not.

4. It is more manifest that the Sun makes that motion of the Air from East to
West, or that a general wind does it; for we find that in the morning before
the rising of the Sun, and also with the rising of the Sun, in many places; for
then it is distant a quadrant from the vertex of the place. These things
deserve consideration in the Cartesian Explication, to say nothing of the
Hypothesis it self.

But whether this motion can be referred to a general East Wind, is doubted:
For seeing that that Wind is always under the Torrid Zone, it would seem to
cause that motion of the Sea to be perpetual. For it is evident, that with the
augmentation of the Wind, the motion of the Sea is augmented; but that it is a
sufficient sign, that the motion it self does depend on the Wind. For the
connection hinders, which this motion has with the Moon, viz. that the Moon
approaching to the Sea, it causes that 2 to swell, because in the Full and New
Moon that motion of the Sea is more vehement from the East to the West, which
the Demonstration of Cartesius excellently explaineth, viz. because the Moon in
the New and Full is more near unto the Earth, and so the port B 6 is rendered
more angust for the transition of the Celestial matter, and therefore the
pressure is the greater. And although when the Moon is at Full, that
intumescency may be referred unto the greater light of the Moon, yet the Moon
being in the New, this cause cease; and therefore it is evident, that the
Moon is not the cause of this motion, but rather that pressure of Cartesius, as
we shall observe in the following Propositions.

Proposition X. The second general Motion of the Sea is the flux and reflux of
the Sea, in which the Sea in the space of twelve hours and about half an hour,
flaweth unto most Coasts, and flows back again: It flows when that the Moon
approaches unto the supreme or lowest Meridian; and refloweth, when the Moon
recedeth from the Meridian toward the West, and toward the East.
The flux and reflux of the Sea is the second general motion.
Where we must first discover, whether the Ocean by this motion be moved unto
one certain quarter, viz. from the East to the West, or from West to East?

For the shoars of Gulphs and Channels of Rivers, in which this flux and reflux
is more manifestly found, than in the vast Ocean, are extended nigh unto, or
according unto diverse quarters, some toward the East from the West, as the
Mediterranean; some from the South toward the North, as the Arabian Gulf. And
in every one of these Gulphs and Shoars, the water flows toward the quarter
of extension. Therefore in diverse Gulphs and Shoars, this motion of the Sea or
Ocean tends into diverse quarters: therefore our first Inquiry must be,
Whether this motion of the Ocean observes any certain quarter; and whether it
be moved elsewhere unto other quarters: or whether it observe two quarters,
viz. the Occidental quarter in the flux, and the Oriental in the reflux? Or
whether one and the same quarter, both in the ebbing and flowing? viz. the
Occidental. Unto this may be answered, That the last is true, viz. that the
whole Ocean in the flux is moved from the East to the West; but in the reflux
it is moved indeed by a general motion again from the East to the West: but yet
in the flux more quantity of water flows unto a certain part; but in the
reflux, (or to speak more properly, the deflux) it is not moved into a contrary
quarter, but unto the same Occidental quarter; but yet a lesser quantity of
water does flow in.

So then we must determine, that the flux and reflux of the Sea is not a
distinct motion from the general motion of the same, which we have explained in
the former Proposition, by which the Ocean continually moves from East to
West, but that it is a certain mode or affection of this general motion; and
therefore if that this motion be considered in the whole, or in the middle of
the free Ocean, it is not so properly termed a flux or reflux of the Sea, but
rather a flux or deflux, yea those terms are not apt enough; but it is better
to call it an Intumescency and Detumescency, so that by these peculiar
appellations, the quality of the flux or motion may be distinguished from the
motion or flux it self. For the Sea always flows from the East to the West,
and only appears to re-flow, by reason that when in one place there is a
greater quantity of water, and that it flows with vehemence to a certain
place, afterward in another time this impetus cease. But it is therefore
termed a reflux, because that the Sea seems in Bays and Shores to draw near
and depart. According to the extension of bays and shores, which happens not by
reason of the quality of the Motion it self; but by reason of the situation of
Coasts and Channels, viz. that the Water does return back to a contrary
quarter, but that the Sea falls down; this proceeds not from the situation
of the Coasts, but from the condition of the place it self.

Neither ought or can the motion of the Sea be regarded from the appulse to the
shore; for whatsoever the motion of the Sea be, or unto what quarter soever it
be made, the flux is always toward the shore, which is by reason of the fluid
nature of the water.

Now seeing that both the flux or reflux, or in the intumescency and
detumescency, the Sea is moved toward the same quarter, viz. from the East to
the West, and does not re-flow again, is collected from hence. First, that in
the Ocean removed from the shores, under the Torrid Zone, no other motion is
found than that by which it is carried from the East to the West. Secondly, In
the Streights which directly extend from East to West, and in which the parts
of the Ocean are joined; as the Streights of Magellan, Manillan, Java, and
others amongst the Indian Isles: In these Streights, I say, the Sea indeed
swells and falls in twelve hours; but yet the Sea in the detumescency does
flow back from out the Streights from the West to the East; therefore another
orifice of the Straight into the West, which is a manifest sign that this
intumescency and detumescency is not a peculiar motion, but a modification of
the general motion, neither does the Sea flow back into the East. Therefore
Scaliger and all others are deceived, which here introduce a double motion
replicated into it self.

But yet this must be understood, that when we say, that this motion is made
from the East to the West, the Cardinal quarters are not only understood, but
also those quarters that are collateral, viz. the Sea is moved also by this
flux, from the Collateral quarters of the East unto the Collateral quarters of
the West, yea unto the North and South; but not by so forcible and valid motion.

Proposition XI. To declare the cause of the intumescency and detumescency of
the Sea, or the flux and reflux, vulgarly so termed.
The cause of the flux and reflux of the Sea.
There is almost no phenomenon of Nature, that has more exercised the wits of
Learned men and Philosophers, and that has deluded more endeavors. Some have
made the Sea and Earth to be an Animal, which by its inspiration and
expiration, has caused the flux and reflux. Others make the cause to be a
great Vortex near to Norway, which for six hours sucketh up the water, and for
so many spueth them out again. Scaliger and Others supposed the Coasts,
especially those of America, to be the cause thereof, by reason that they repel
the appulse of the Sea, which proceeds from the general motion: But many,
when that they discover the connection of this intumescency and detumescency
with the motion of the Moon, determined, that it only depended on that. But how
this should be, is a more than ordinary task to discover; seeing that they
reply nothing else, but that the Moon does attract upwards humors by an occult
quality and sympathy. But these are only words, which signify nothing else,
but that the effect is caused by the Moon after some mode that we are ignorant
of: but this is the mode demanded.

Cartesius deduceth it from his general Hypothesis after this manner; Let the
Diagram of the Ninth Proposition be taken, See Scheme.
in which let A B C D be that Vortex which has the Earth for its Center, which
with it and with the Moon is carried in a greater Vortex about the Sun. M the
Center of the Vortex, E F G H the Earth, 1234 the superficies of the Sea; from
which, for the greater perspicuity, we do suppose the Earth to be encompassed
on every side; and 5678 the superficies of the Air encompassing of the Sea. Now
if that there were no Moon in this Vortex, the point T, which is the Center of
the Earth, ought to be in the point M, which is the Center of the Vortex; but
the Moon being toward B, this Center of the Earth T ought to be between M and
D, by reason that the Celestial matter of this Vortex, is somewhat more quicker
moved than the Moon or the Earth, which it carries with it. Except that the
point T were a little more distant from B than from D, the presence of the Moon
would hinder, that that should not so freely flow between B and T: so seeing
that the place of the Earth in this Vortex is not determinated, exc^^^ from the
equality of the strength of the Celestial matter flowing about it; therefore it
is evident that it ought somewhat to approach toward D. And after the same
mode, when the Moon shall be in C, the Center of the Earth ought to be between
M and A, and so always the Earth departs a little from the Moon. Moreover,
because by this means, from this that the Moon is toward B, not only the space
through which the Celestial matter flows between B and T, but also that space
through which it flows between T and D is rendered more angust; thence it
follows that this Celestial matter there flows more swiftly, and therefore
does more press both the superficies of the Air in 6 and 8, and also the
superficies of the Water in 2 and 4, than if that the Moon were not in the
Diameter of the Vortex B D: Now seeing that both the bodies of the Air and
Water are fluid, and easily obnoxious to this pression, they ought not to be so
high above the parts of the Earth F and H, as if the Moon were without this
Diameter B D; and so also on the contrary they ought to be higher toward G and
E, so that the superficies of the Water 1 and 3, and of the Air 5 and 7, do
there protuberate. Now because that part of the Earth which is now in F, on the
opposite quarter of the point B, where the Sea is very little high, after six
hours it will be in G, on the opposite Region of the point C, where it is most
high, and after other six hours in H, on the Region of the point D, and so
consequently, or rather because that the Moon in the mean space does somewhat
proceed forwards from B toward C, as running in a Months space through the
Circle A B C D, part of the Earth that is now in F, on the opposite Region of
the body of the Moon after six hours and twelve minutes, either more or less,
shall be beyond the point G in that Diameter of the Vortex A B C D, which
intersecteth that Diameter of the same Vortex in which the Moon shall then be
at right Angles, and then shall the water be there most high: and after six
hours with twelve minutes it shall be beyond the point H. in the place where
the water shall be very low, etc. whence it is clearly discovered, that the
water of the Sea in every twelve hours and twenty four minutes, shall flow and
re-flow in one and the same place.

This is the Demonstration of Cartesius, in which that is especially ingenious,
that it aptly shows not only how the flux or intumescency is made at the
place, when that the Moon is moved at its Vertex or Meridian; but also when
that the Moon beneath the Horizon is moved to the Meridian of Midnight.

We have said in the end of the Ninth Proposition, what any one may seem to
require in this Demonstration, especially that which seems to be admired at,
that Cartesius should not so much as think that according unto this
Demonstration, That the least Altitude of water and all kind of Detumescency,
ought to be when that the Moon comes to the Meridian; as the Moon being in B,
the least Altitude of water is in 2 and 4, and on the contrary the water
increases with the departure of the Moon or Earth, so that when F shall be in
G. that is, six hours from the Moon, it shall have the greatest Altitude; which
in truth is contrary to all Experience; for with the access of the Moon to the
Meridian, the water increases, and with the departure of the same, decreaseth.
But the words of Cartesius, as well as the Diagramma, assert the contrary. But
I suppose this absurdity may be removed from the Demonstration, and that by
this mode (so that it may be approved of by Cartesius;) for let us place the
Vortex of the Earth A B C D to be without the Moon, and the water 1 2 3 4 to be
equally distant from the Center T without any Tumor, but yet to be moved round
with the Earth and Celestial matter, between A B C D and 5 6 7 8. Now let the
body of the Moon draw near unto this Vortex; for Example, into B, and therefore
the space T B becomes more narrow; and the Celestial matter, whilst that it
endeavors to pass through it, presses the Water in 2 toward E.

Therefore whilst that the Water is expelled from 2 toward E, it is demanded
where the greatest tumor of Water will be, whether in the place E, which is a
quarter distant from the place F, (unto which the Moon is vertical;) or whether
in a place nigh unto F toward E? If that you assert the first, viz. that the
tumor ought to be in E, Experience does then gainsay; but that the second is
truly so, Experience confirms, and Reason does induce to believe, viz. whilst
that the Moon consists above the place E, the Water is expelled from 2
toward I: but the greatest tumor will be in the place near to 2, not in I. For
this is manifest by Experience, because the Occidental places do later discover
the intumescency; but reason and the motion of the Water do altogether require
the same Laws: for if the Water be poured forth into 2, that it may flow
toward E, the greatest quantity will be in the place E, a little less in the
place near to that, and yet far less in the place nigh to that, and least of
all in E. So also, when that water is driven from 2 toward E, its greatest
quantity and accumulation shall be in the place near to 2; and so much the
lesser, by how much the place is more remote from 2; but because the Earth is
moved round that E may come unto F, then at length shall the greatest tumor be
in E, and the water shall be forced toward H.

Therefore the Diagram of Cartesius, with the Demonstration it self, ought to
be changed, that the tumor may be in the place near unto the very 2, that is,
to that unto which the Moon is vertical. What else may be here said, we shall
handle in our treatise of the consideration of the Cartesian Philosophy.

Proposition XII. In Full and New Moons the general motion of the Sea from the
East to the West is more violent; also the intumescency of the Sea is found
great in most parts: but in the quarters the motion is found the least of all,
and so also in the intumescency.
In Full and New Moons, the motion of the Sea from East to West, most violent.
Experience sufficiently proves this Proposition: for Mariners testify, that
the Sea does foam and swell in New and Full Moons, and in the quarters is calm.
Now it is easily demonstrated according to the Hypothesis of the preceding
Propositions: for the Moon, when it is either Full or New, is more near the
Earth than at any other time; and in the quarters more remote, as Astronomers
do demonstrate. Now when the Moon is more near the Earth, that is, when that
the space B T is less; the Celestial matter being hindered, more vehemently
presses the water from 2 to 1 (because it is more near) but on the contrary in
the quarters.

Yet the motion is observed to be more violent in the Full Moons than in the
New, at least in some places, which except you will ascribe to the light of the
Moon, I see no other cause, neither can we otherwise show, why in the Full Moon
both Trees and Animals have greater humors, than in the New, seeing that the
Sea is equally augmented in the New Moon. Yet that is mavelous, that one
Twistius a Dutchman relates in his description of India concerning the
Kingdom of Gazaratt, where for many years he dwelt; that Cockles, Crabs, and
other shelly Fishes, are less fleshy and juicy in the Full Moon than in the
New, which is contrary to the nature of all Regions. Neither is it less
admirable, that on the shoars, near to the mouth of the River Indus in the same
Kingdom, that the Sea is augmented and swells in the New Moons; and not far
from thence, in the Sea of Calicut, the increase is in the Full Moon.

Proposition XIII. In the time of the Vernal and Autumnal Equinox, or in the
Spring and Autumn, the intumescency of the Sea is greater than in the other
seasons of the year, but least in the Solstices.
In Spring and Autumn the intumescency of the Sea is greatest.
Cartesius indeed pretends to show a demonstration of this propriety from his
Hypothesis, but I cannot apprehend it from his words, neither do I see how it
can follow from his Hypothesis. It is probable that the Sun and general winds
do very much contribute to this intumescency of the water, and seeing that the
Sun in the Aequinoctials does incumb on the middle of the Sea of the Torrid
Zone, therefore either he, or the winds cause that the Sea then swells more
than at another time. But as concerning the Solstices we must say, in a
contrary mode, or that the same is the cause of the greater intumescency of the
Sea, in the time of the Aequinoctials either of the Spring or Autumn, which is
the cause of more frequent rains, winds and inundadions in those seasons.

Proposition XIV. In some parts of the Ocean, Gulphs, and Shoars, great is the
increase and decrease of the water in the influx, and deflux: in other some it
is very small, in some not discernable, and so there is no flux and reflux, or
intumescency and detumescency.
The increase and decrease of the water in several parts of the Ocean.
Those places receive great Augmentation and decrease, 1. That are under the
Torrid Zone, between the Tropicks, for then the Moon pressing for the most part
is there carried round. 2. In places that are directly extended from East to
West, or nigh the Collateral quarters. 3. In those Gulphs that are long and
less broad, the Augmentation is the more sensible. 4. In those places in which
few Islands or procurrents adjoyn to the Earth.

The greatest flux and deflux in the Straight of Cambaja.
The greatest flux and deflux hitherto observed, is that which is in the
Straight of Cambaja in one of the inlets of the River Indus, and it has struck
many with admiration, for the water recedeth to an high distance, and that very
speedily. Whence not without reason the River Indus, or the Gulf of Cambaja is
thought to be that unto which when that Alexander the Great came, and
endeavored to pass his Army over, as it is there related; the water presently
went back and left his Ships a ground; hence he went no farther, but judged
that the Gods had here fixed the bounds of his Expedition, with a prohibition
of proceeding any farther. The cause is the small or narrow, and deep
depression of the Channel; but yet it is probable there was some other cause.

Fluv and reflux at Damman.
At the City Damman in India not far from Surat, the Altitude of the water by
flux and reflux is varied at two and a half Orygas, and the Sea departs from
the shore the space of half a mile.

In the Gulf of Cambaja the flux augmenteth the Altitude five Orgyas, others
say seven, which unusual augmentation has been the cause of the loss of many
Ships by unexperienced Mariners; for the water falling, they have been split on
the Rocks.

No constant time of the flux and reflux in the Streights of Magellan. The flux
and reflux in the Red Sea.
In the Gulphs and shoars of the Streights of Magellan, no constant time of the
flux and reflux is observed, for sometimes the water flows and refloweth in
three hours, othersome in twelve hours; which inconstancy is to be ascribed to
the violent irruption of the Ocean into that Straight, and from the various
agitations of the wind.

About Malacca, also at the Straight of Sunda, a notable flux and deflux is
observed.

In the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea, some of the Ancients have written that there
is so great a reflux (as Scaliger writes) that Moses and the Israelites passed
over without any Miracle. But it is false, because the reflux is not there so
great as to leave the Channel dry.

On the Coasts of China the flux and reflux is very sensible, as also at the
Isles of Japan.

At Panama on the Coast of America lying at the Pacifick Ocean the Sea is very
much exalted, The Sea at the flux much exalted at Panama.
and by and by depressed again; in the full Moons the flux is so much
augmented, that water enters into the Houses of the City. Yea in almost all
the shoars of the South Sea, the Altitude of the water is wonderfully augmented
and diminished, so that in the reflux, the decrease is sensible for two miles.
In the Gulf of Bengala at the shore of S^am the flux augmenteth the Altitude
ten foot.

The flux not perceivable in the Mediterranean Sea.
But in the Mediterranean Sea, which flows in through the Streights of
Gibralter, from the West to the East the flux is not perceivable, because the
situation is contrary to the quarter into which the Sea is moved, and
therefore the water of it is little augmented by the flux, so that it is not
discernable, unless in the Gulf of Venice, which by reason of its long
extension and small Latitude, shows the flux and reflux, when in the other
part of the Mediterranean Sea by reason of its notable Latitude, that little
augmentation and decrease is not discovered. Whence this flux and reflux was
unknown to the Grecians, as also to the Romans in the time of Scipio Africanus.
And the Grecians as well as the Romans, accounted it as miraculous what
sometimes they discovered in other places, as is manifest from the Expedition
of Alexander the Great, and of Scipio in the expugnation of Carthage; but in
the time of Cicero it was known to the Romans. Yet some observed it a little at
Massilia; also at certain Coasts of Barbary, it is noted enough.

The flux and reflux in the Baltic Sea not yet found out.
In the Baltic Ocean, as also in the whole Northern Sea beyond England, toward
Norway, and Greenland, the flux and reflux of the Sea is not yet found out, as
neither in the North Coast of the Pacifick Ocean. But the cause is not yet
sufficiently known, unless you will say that those Seas are remote from the
course of the Moon, and also that they are extended from the West to the East
and North; moreover that many Isles, and procurrencies of land do hinder. These
three must be conjoined to impede the flux of the Sea in these places.

Proposition XV. The flux and reflux of the Sea is a violent motion, viz. an
impulse, but the reflux is a natural motion of the water.
For the flux is caused by the pression of the Moon, or matter between the Moon
and the Earth, or also because that the Sea does not remain in that situation
which is received in the flux, this is a sign that it was a violent motion. But
in the reflux the Sea is moved from a more high place to a more depressed
place, which is the natural motion of water.

Lemma.

The place of the Moon being given in the Ecliptic, and the Latitude and hour
of the day, from an Ephemerides, or by Supputation or Astronomical observation,
to find on the Terrestrial Globe the place, unto which the Moon at the hour
given is vertical, also to exhibit all those places of the Earth unto which the
Moon will be vertical that day, viz. one after another.

See Proposition 13. in Chap. 19.
The use of this Problem is great, yea very necessary in the Doctrine concerning
the flux and reflux of the Sea. The mode of performing of the same you shall
find in the Nineteenth Chapter, and the Thirteenth Proposition. For there it is
more conveniently explained: yet the Explication of that Proposition may be
anticipated, and demonstrated to the studious in this Chapter.

Proposition XVI. In those places of the Sea, to which the Moon is vertical,
the flux and deflux is greatest, except that there be other impediments, which
we have reckoned up in the XIV Proposition. And by how much the parts of the
Sea are more remote from the place, by so much the flux and deflux is lesser,
other things being equal.
For because in that place the pressure is greater, and the tumor of the water
greater, which is more vicine to the Moon pressing, and the Celestial matter;
thence follows that, that the Proposition intimates the objections
concerning some other places, in the comparison of which the contrary is found,
are to be excused by the admixtion of other causes.

Proposition XVII. The quantity of the flux and reflux is unconstant in every
place, and diverse on several days, and by so much the greater, or lesser, by
how much the Moon is more remote, or near unto that place.
The Moon every day changes her place in the Ecliptic.
For the Moon every day changes her place in the Ecliptic, and so on other
days is vertical to other places, and by consequence is more remote from any
place, or more near. Which being observed, we conclude from the preceding
Proposition, that there is a diverse quantity of the flux and reflux in one and
the same place, on diverse days, whether that the diversity be sensible or
insensible.

Proposition XVIII. The greatest intumescency of water in any place, and term
of the flux, ought to be when that the Moon does occupy the Meridian of the
place. But in many places it is found to be in another situation of the Moon.
For then is the Moon most nigh to any place of the Earth, when that it is in
the Meridian of that place, because that the Hypotenusa of a right angled
Triangle, is lower than the Cathetus. Whence it is inferred by the XVI
Proposition, that when the Moon is in the Meridian, See Proposition 16.
there ought to be the greatest intumescency, and Altitude of water, and
immediately a decrease to succeed. But when the Moon is in the lowest of the
Meridian, then the narrowest of the vortex of the Earth opposite to it in the
upper Meridian; and therefore does effect the same, as if that the body of the
Moon were present.

But here arises a great difficulty. For there are many places and Coasts of
the Earth, in which we find that the term of the flux is not when that the Moon
comes to the Meridian, (as the Philosophers held before this age) but sooner
or later, viz. when that the Moon comes to a certain quarter, not Cardinal,
and this quarter is not constantly observed, but in new and full Moons; for the
most part the greatest intumescency is, and the beginning of a detumescency,
before the Moon comes to this quarter or vertical Circle. So at London the
water is at the highest when the Moon comes to the quarter which is between
the South and West, or North and East; that is to the South West, or North East
quarter. At the Coast of China, in the Port of the City Maccau, The greatest
flux at the Coast of China, observed by a Portugal.
a certain Portugal Mariner observed the time of the greatest intumescency by
this mode. The Elevation of the Pole is 22 degrees, 20 minutes; in the Year
1584 on the 19 of September, the Moon was at full, then the intumescency or
Altitude of the highest water was observed in the morning at or of an hour past
8. therefore then the Moon was removed from the Meridian 3 hours. Whence the
quarter or vertical Circle in which the Moon at that moment of time was, is
found according to the Problem of the 30 Chapter.

Anno 1585, on the 16 of February, in the full Moon, the greatest hight of
water was observed at half an hour past a eleven a Clock at Noon.

Certain observations taken by a Dutch Mariner of the flux of the Sea in many
places.
A certain Dutch Mariner on the days of the new and full Moon, noted the hours
of diverse places, for the term, or intumescency of the flux, from which I have
extracted these.

At the twelfth hour (on the days of the new and full Moon) on the Coast of
Flanders, at Enchusen in Holland, at Horn, at Embden in East Freezland, at the
mouth of the Elve, at Eider, at the Isles of Jutland, and at Dover, at England.
At 45 minutes past 12 at Flushing in Zealand, half an hour after one a Clock,
at the Occidental Coast of the Isle of Wight, at Calis, at the mouth of the
River of Thames, at the shore of Zeland, in the mouths of Scald, in Mosa, and
at Gored. A quarter after two, before the mouth of Scald, and the mouth of
Mosa. At three a Clock at Amsterdam, Roterdam, Dort, in Holland, at Newcastle
in England, at Arment in Flanders, in the mouth of the River of Bordeaux in the
South Coast of Britain, Gallocia, Gascoyn, Biscay, Portugal, and Spain, and on
the Western Coast of Ireland, even to Hitland. A quarter after four in the
evening at Roan in France, between Mosa and Rochel, in the River of Bordeaux,
in the Bays of the Spanish, Portugal, and Gallecian Coast; in the South Coast
of Britany in France, Gascoyn, and on the Western Coast of Ireland. Half an
hour past four from the Texel, at the South Coast of Ireland. A quarter past
five in all the Ports of the Southern Coast of Ireland, at Plymouth in England,
and other Southern places of it, even to the Coast of Wales. At six in the
evening and morning before Hamburgh in the Elbe, before Bremen, the Texel,
Antwerpe, in the Channel between England and Brabant, without Sorlis. A quarter
before seven in the evening, between Fawick and Vaelmuya, in the Channel even
to Bristol; before St. Nicholas and Podessembe, even to Waymouth, and
Hartepole. At half an hour past seven in the Haven at the Texel, at Kilduyna,
in the middle of the Channel, nigh Plymouth, and in the Sea, even to the
Promontory of the Lizard. A quarter past eight in the evening, nigh the Isle of
Wight, in the Channel, even to Bevesier, without the Fly on the Coast of
Holland. At nine before the mouth of the River Ems in Freezland, before the
Fly, before the Coast of Freezland, at the Eastern Coast of the Isle of Wight.
At half an hour past ten before the mouth of the River Thames, on the Coasts of
Normandy and Picardy. And at a quarter past eleven a Clock in the River Thames,
and other places of England.

A difficult task to explicate the cause of this difference.
Now it is a most difficult task to explicate the cause of this so notable a
difference, and that in all places, although it be incumbent on the
Philosopher, or Geographer. Yet it is probable that the various windings of the
shoars, the situation of the Coasts in respect of the Sea, the obstacles of
Islands, the mutual meetings of the water, the distance of the places from the
Lunary way, various ways, especially those that are constant and general, the
declining of the shoars, and other things, do very much conduce to this
propriety of the flux. For example: at the Port of London, in the Coast of
England, the water increases until the Moon comes unto the quarter of the
South-West, viz. when it declineth from the Ecliptic toward the South; for
then water begineth to flow back again, but not when the Moon comes to the
Meridian. Therefore we say, that whilst the Moon moves to the Meridian of
London, toward Brazile, (or from Brazile toward London) the Sea does not
recede from London, but is yet augmented, by reason that the Coasts of America,
unto which the Ocean is moved by the Moon, do repel that water toward England,
and this happens therefore, because it affords not a passage for the water.
But why, when the Moon is declining from the Ecliptic toward the North, is
the greatest Altitude of the water, and the beginning of the decrease observed,
before the Moon comes to the Meridian, viz. in the North-East?

I answer, that this comes to pass, because that the Moon is then far more
near to England, than when it declineth from the Ecliptic toward the South:
and therefore then it more swiftly fills; but the cause, why then the flux is
no longer protracted, even until the Moon comes to the Meridian, may be, by
reason that the Moon forces the Sea more near the Sea of Mexico, and Hudsons
Streights, where there is found a great intumescency and detumescency.

On the Coast of China, we therefore say, that the intumescency does anticipate
the appulse of the Moon at the Meridian; by reason that a continnual East wind
drives that Sea toward the West.

But these allegations I leave to be farther examined, by the searchers of
nature. But for the finding out of the true cause, it is altogether necessary
that we acquire accurate observations how the flux and reflux of the Sea is
made in diverse places, viz. in what vertical the Moon is in that flux; how the
quarter is varied in a diverse place of the Moon, as in the full and new;
especially in those places where the Moon becomes vertical, also in those
which directly respect the East, West, and North. Also that must be diligently
observed, how the flux is here made in those hours of the day, whilst that the
Moon being in the North part of her Circle, has not the Sea placed vertically
under her, but Lands in a long tract, viz. from Cambaja and China, even to the
Occidental Coasts of Africa. For because then that it does not directly press
the water, it being depended over the Mediterranean places; I thence suppose
that some variety must happen to this motion. Also what then it does, whilst
the Moon ruling in the South Hemisphere, passes over the Mediterranean parts
of Brazile, or Southern America. Without these observations we shall hardly
arrive at the true cause, neither shall we neglect this argument.

Proposition XIX. The Sea flows to most Coasts in six hours and twelve
minutes, and refloweth also in so many hours.
The Sea in few places flows in more hour; and refloweth in less.
In very few places it flows in more hours, and refloweth in less: and on the
contrary, in very few places it flows in fewer hours, and refloweth in more:
yet so that the time of the flux and deflux ( viz. between the two greatest
intumescencies) together make twelve hours, with 24 minutes, and two such times
make 24 hours with about 50 minutes, (48) and therefore on every day the
greatest intumescency falls out later almost by an hour, because that the
Moon almost an entire hour, returns more slowly to the same Meridian every
day.

We have sufficiently explained the first part of the Proposition in the
Demonstration of the Eleventh Proposition, although in this demonstration we
have taken the Altitude of the Sea, the Moon possessing the Meridian: but in
this Proposition, by reason that in the proceeding we have showed that in many
places that Altitude does happen, the Moon being constituted without the
Meridian; we do not reckon in them the hours from the time in which the Moon
possesses the Meridian, but for that time in which the Moon occupies that
vertical place, in the which when that the Moon is, it is manifest that the
greatest intumescency is. Yet in these places the period of the increment ot
decrement does not exactly observe these twelve hours witih twenty four
minutes, or twenty four hours with fifty minutes; because that the Moon by
reason of its various and mutable distance from the vertex, either in more or
fewer hours returns to the same vertical, which difference notwithstanding is
not great.

Although therefore in all places the flux and reflux be completed almost in
twelve hours and twenty four minutes, (when that there are no tempests) also in
most this time is equally divided between the flux and reflux, so that in six
hours it flows, and in so many refloweth; yet in some places the time of the
flux is unequal to the time of the deflux, viz. more or less. The flux and
reflux of the Ocean at the River Garumna in France.
The Ocean enters Garumna a River in France in seven hours, and resloweth in
five. So at the Port of Maccoa, on the Coast of China, the flux is in nine
hours, and refloweth in three, yea in less, if that the Eastern winds blow.

On the contrary at the Coast of Zenega (a River of Aethiopia) the Sea flows
in four hours, and refloweth in eight.

The causes of these differences are difficult. Some refer them to the swift
and valid efflux of the Rivers, or also to a simple efflux; for therefore the
Shore of Garumna discovers the flux in seven hours, because that its strong
motion retardeth the flux, but yet assisteth the deflux; therefore the Sea
refloweth in five hours. Others have added those hours to the flux, by reason
that the Sea reflowing from the more Northern place, hinders least the Sea
should hinder the egress from Garumna, but rather be more forced on it. But I
suppose therefore to be, by reason that Garumna pours forth it self by a
strong Motion from its inlet or mouth into the Ocean for some distance; this
efflux is prohibited on some part from the Sea, and so the water of Garumna is
at a stand also for some space, before that the Sea by reason of the Moon
enters its Channel.

As for the increase of Zenega, which only has four hours, whether the cause
ought to be ascribed to the extension of the Channel from the West to the East;
or unto the swift deflux of Zenega, which may prohibit the influx for two
hours: or whether to some other cause, I question, and require a more accurate
observation. viz. Whether it decreaseth eight hours, or only six hours; and in
the other two do neither increase nor decrease, because the strong flux of the
River hinders the flux.

That also must be considered, that depressed and low places may have the flux
in more hours, and the deflux in fewer.

Proposition XX. Whether the flux does begin when the Moon touches the
Horizon, or in the increment be in the place, whose the Horizon is.
So they commonly say: but yet we hold the contrary in those places, in which
the water is at the highest, when that the Moon is in the Meridian. For when
the Moon declineth from the Equator toward the South, then she arriveth at
the Meridian in less than six hours, and therefore the flux should begin when
that the Moon is yet depressed beneath the Horizon. On the contrary, when that
the Moon declineth from the Equator toward the North, she requires more than
six hours to come from the Horizon to the Meridian; and therefore when that the
Moon is elevated above the Horizon unto the horary Circle of the sixth hour,
then at length the flux begineth, and so it is observed in most places; but the
contrary is at London, as we have said in the precedent Proposition. See
Proposition xix.
And the reason seems to require, that although the Moon decline from the
Equator toward the North, yet that the flux should begin in the place where
the Moon comes to the Horizon: for then the place is distant by a quarter from
the place unto which the Moon is vertical. And therefore the pressure of the
Sea comes or extends hither: and here more accurate observations are
required.

Proposition XXI. The hour being given, in which the greatest or least Altitude
of the water is on the day of the new or full Moon in the place where the
ordinary flux and reflux is ( viz. of six hours, with twelve degrees) to
determine the hours of the days following after the new Moon, in which the
greatest or least Altitude shall be.
See the foregoing Propositions.
We have said in the foregoing Propositions, that the time of the greatest
increase and decrease (if we have respect to the middle motion of the Moon from
the Sun) in one day after places 48 horary minutes, in half a day 24 minutes.

If therefore the greatest increase in any place happen on the day of the new
or full Moon, on the twelfth hour of the day, these hours of increase shall be
on the following days.

The age of ^he Moon. The hours of the day. Scruples. 1 12 48 2 1 37 3 2 27 4 3
17 5 4 5 6 4 55 7 5 59 8 6 49 9 7 23 10 8 12 11 8 56 12 9 51 13 10 40 14 11 29
14 12 Mid night. 15 12 Mid day.

Viz. In the end of the first day of the age of the Moon, the greatest
intumescency falls out later by 48 Horary minutes. But in practice it is
sufficient to add to the hour of the new Moon for the end of the first day 48
minutes, or of an hour.

For the end Hours. of the second 1 for the third 2 for the fourth 3 for the
fifth 4 for the sixth 5 for the seventh 5 for the eighth 6 for the ninth 7 for
the tenth 8 for the eleventh 9 for the twelfth 9 for the thirteenth 10 for the
fourteenth 11 for the fifteenth 12

This Supputation of time supposes the middle or equal motion of the Moon from
the Sun, which notwithstanding is unequal, so that the Moon in her Perigee
departs more swiftly from the Sun than in her Apogee, and therefore then the
greatest increase is longer protracted than six hours and twelve minutes. But
when the Moon is in the Apogee the increase is more quick. For certain true
Lunary Months exceed 30 days, others are less than 29 days, True Lunary
Months exceed 30. days.
when that the mean of 29 days, twelve hours, 44 minutes is assumed.

But in places where the greatest, or least Altitude is made by the appulse of
the Moon to a certain vertical place, although it be done after the same
manner, yet for all that the time is not so accurately discovered.

For neither does the same time, in which the Moon is joined to the Sun, fall
out on the hours of the day, or the same moments of the same hour in diverse new
Moons.

How this is performed by the Terrestrial Globe, See Chap. 30. and 37.
we shall show in the XXX Chapter. And in the Thirty seventh Chapter, we shall
treat more of the use of Navigation concerning a more accurat Method.

We may also use this method for those places where the time of the flux is
more or less, than in the time of the deflux; so that we are certain of the
difference. The consideration of the thing it self and practice will more
easily teach this, than our discourse.

Proposition XXII.
The winds do oftentimes protract, and often diminish the time of the flux or
reflux in some places: Neither are winds of that place only able to do it, but
winds blowing in an other place may also effect the same.

The truth of the Proposition is so manifest, that it needs no demonstration.

Proposition XXIII. Great is the variety of peculiar or proper motions of the
Sea, viz. in which a certain part of the Ocean is moved either perpetually, or
in some certain months.
Peculiar motions of the Sen.
The first of those peculiar motions which are most considerable is that motion,
by which part of the Atlantic or African Ocean about Guinee, is moved from
Cape Verd, toward the bending of Africa, which is called Fernando Poo, that
is, from the West to the East, which is contrary to the general motion from the
East to the West; now this motion is vehement, so that it violently tosseth the
Ships approaching to the shoars, unto this Gulf, beyond the imagination of the
Mariners and supputation of their Voyage. Thence it comes to pass, that Ships
which have sailed in two days from the Coasts of Mourrae to Rio de Benin,
(which are one hundred miles) scarcely in six or seven weeks can return from
Rio de Benin to Mourrie; except they launch out into the middle Sea, which is
not easily to be performed, seeing that the Sea is moved with a strong motion
to the North-East quarter from the Isle of St. Thomas to the Gulf of Fernando
Poo, carrying in with it the Ships; although they have a fair North East wind:
and they can hardly get from that Coast, except they be forced thence by those
sudden winds; termed Travados, which sometimes for some months are less
frequent, or not at all. For either they perished by Shipwreck, being carried
or forced on the Rocks that lay hidden beyond all expectation, or else the
Seamen perished by famine, being detained in this Gulf.

But yet this Motion is not common to the whole Aethiopick Ocean; but only to
that part which adjoyneth to the Coast of Guinee, even to that Gulf or Bay;
for in the Sea it is not found to be above the distance of fourteen miles from
the shore, at the distance of one degree from the Equator. Therefore Mariners
sailing by those Coasts, are very cautious not to approach over near unto them,
so that they may Steer their Course according to their minds and the situation
of the appointed place.

Now it is difficult to find out the cause of this literal motion, especially
seeing that the neighboring Ocean is moved by a contrary way from the East to
the West, yet two things may be said, 1. That the Ocean being repulsed from the
Coasts of America, flows back somewhat toward the East; and because that the
Aethiopick Ocean is extended in a long tract to the Gulf of Fernando Poo,
therefore it refloweth into this, which yet is only discovered at the shoars,
not in the deep Ocean, because in this the contrary motion renders it
insensible: but toward the shore the Sea is moved more violently, and
therefore is chiefly discovered in that Bay of Fernando Poo, because that the
Sea by reason of the Rivers flowing in with a great violence, is repelled from
the Shoars of the rest of Africa (as of Congo). 2. There may be a certain
subterraneous Channel in this Gulf of Fernando Poo, into which the Sea may
fall and attract the rest of the Ocean with it.

Proposition XXIV. The second peculiar perpetual motion.
The second peculiar motion of the Sea.
About Sumatra the Sea flows from the South toward the North, into the Gulf
of Bengala, and that with a violent motion, so that it is probable that by the
violence of the Sea this Gulf was made, and that the Cherfonesus of Malacca
was separated from India. Whether the cause be that the Ocean which tends
toward the West, be forced from so many Islands, and the Promontory of the
Land of Magellan; so that it should be carried violently flowing toward the
North, or whether a subterraneous Channel be in that Gulf, is to be questioned.

Yet I suppose it is not directly carried to the North, but to a Collateral
quarter, which declineth toward the West. Yea, this very same motion is found
between Java and the Land of Magellan. Therefore the Dutch sailing toward the
Indies, direct their Course to that procurrent part of the Land of Magellan, or
the South Continent, and then sail from the South toward the North, viz. to
Java.

Proposition XXV.
The third special perpetual motion of the Sea.
The third special perpetual motion is observed between the Isle of Madagascar,
and the Promontory of Good Hope; especially on the Coast of Africa, between
Terra de Natal, and this Promontory of Good Hope. This motion is found from the
quarter of the North-East, to the South-East (and from the North to the South,
according to the extension of the Coasts) so vehement, that Ships with a stiff
gale can hardly overcome it, and hold the contrary course to Madagascar. On the
contrary, those who sail from Canali, into Madagascar, and Africa, toward the
Promontory of Good Hope, without any help of the winds, are carried unto it by
the motion of the Sea alone. I suppose the cause to be, the forcing of the
Ocean by a general motion to the Coasts of Africa, where it finds a passage.
For this motion is not found in the middle of the Ocean, or that part removed
from the shoars, between India and Africa, from a Collateral quarter. But the
Ocean is moved from the East to the West.

Proposition XXVI.
The fourth special perpetual motion.
The fourth special perpetual Motion is in the Pacifick Ocean on the Coast of
Peru, and the rest of America, where the Sea is moved from the South to the
North: questionless the cause is a perpetual South wind; which is found to
predominate on those Coasts, as we have showed in our Chapter of Winds. In the
Sea remote from the Coasts this motion is not discovered, neither this wind.

Proposition XXVII.
The fifth special perpetual motion.
The fifth special perpetual motion is observed in the Sea on the Coasts of
America, from the Promontory of St. Augustine in Brazile, to the Isles Antilles
in the Gulf of Mexico toward Florida, that is, from the South to the North.
Peradventure the cause is that the Ocean being carried by a general motion
toward Brazile, is repelled, and by reason that a more free and broad passage
is granted toward the North, thither is carried. The like motion is observed
in the mouth of the Straight of Manilla near the Phillippin Isles. So in Japan
a most strong motion proceeds forwards from the Port of Xibuxia toward Arima.

Proposition XXVIII.
The sixth special perpetual motion of the Sea.
The sixth special perpetual motion is in the Straight Le Maire, where the
Mariners of the Prince of Nassau found the Sea to be carried from the West into
the East. But one observation suffices not, especially seeing that Le Maire
writes the contrary.

More special motions are found in the parts of the Ocean at or near the
Coasts, but as yet they are not accurately enough observed, or described.

Proposition XXIX. Unto the special perpetual motions of the parts of the
Ocean, also those do pertain, which great Rivers cause where they exonerate
themselves into the Sea.
So on the Coast of Africa, Loango, Congo, for ten or twelve miles from the
shore, is a strong motion of the Sea, from the Coasts toward the West, because
many Rivers, (amongst which is the great River Zaire) cast themselves with a
violence into the Sea, The River Zaire casts it self with a violent motion into
the Sea.
and so repel the Sea, which motion is helped by the general motion. Therefore
some days are required that Ships may touch those Goasts, although they may be
distant only one or two miles from them.

So at the Isle Lamon adjacent to the Coast of China, the Sea is moved from the
shore toward the East, contrary to the general Motion which is from the East
toward China: this contrary Motion is caused by the impetuous flux of the
great River Thoucoan in China, but in the Sea more remote from China, this
motion is obstructed by the general Motion: neither is it discovered, beyond
the Isle of Branco.

Hitherto concerning the special perpetual motions: a little must be subjoyned
concerning the special fixed, and anniversary motions.

Proposition XXX.
Great is the variety of the special ceasing, or periodical motions; and those
periodical fixed, and anniversary motions do all almost arise from anniversary
and stated winds. And stated or fixed winds of one place may make the motion of
the Sea fixed in another place.

The flux of the Sea in diverse places at certain times.
So between the Isle Celebes, and Madera, when that the motion is West, viz. in
December, January, and February, the Sea flows to the South East, or a more
near Collateral wind than the East.

So at Java in the Straight Gallappa, when the motion is West, viz. in May, the
Sea flows toward the East, contrary to his general Motion.

At the Isle of Ceilan, from the middle of March, to October, the Sea flows
toward the South. on the rest of the Months toward the North, viz. because
that in those Months the North winds are frequent, in others the South winds.

Between Cochin and Mallacca, the Sea flows with a Westernly motion from
April to August, contrary to the general motion toward the East: then the rest
of the time toward the West the winds assisting the general motion: the Sea
flows here with so great a noise, that those who know not the same, suppose
Rocks to be there, against which the waters beat so for some months: after the
15 of February, the Sea is moved from the Maldivian Isles, toward the East,
and India, contrary to the general motion.

At the Coast of China and Camboja, in October, November, and December, the Sea
is moved toward the North-West; but in January, toward the South-West, with a
very swift course to the Sands de Champa, so that they seem to exceed the
celerity of a stone that is slinged.

At Pulo Cato even unto Varella (on the coast of Camboja) when motions or winds
do not blow, the swift motion of the Sea is toward the South; but the motions
or winds move toward another quarter.

On the Coast of the Gulf of Bengala, from Patana to the Promontory of
Malacca, in November and December, a swift course of the Sea is observed
toward the South.

In a motion or wind from China to Malacca, in June, July and August, there is
a vehement motion of the Sea from Pulo Cato to Pulo Cambir on the Coast of
Camboja.

Many more Examples, but less accurately consigned, are to be read in the
Journals of the Mariners.

At the Coast of Aguada de san Bras, not far from the Promontory of Good Hope,
this is peculiarly observed, that the Sea is always moved from the East to the
West toward the land so much the more vehemently, by how much the Occidental
wind opposite unto it is more violent. Questionless some adjacent Coast higher
than it, is the cause of it.

Proposition XXXI.
The circular motions of the Sea are threefold.
The circular motions of the Sea, termed Whirlpools and Vortices, are
threefold: For some only move the water in a round; othersome suck in the
water, and in certain hours let it forth again; and others suck it in, but cast
it not forth. Although without doubt there be a fourth sort in the Channel of
the Sea, which casts out and sucketh not in the waters. Yet I do not
remember, that I have read in any Author such a Vortex to be found in the Sea;
but many are found on the land.

The Chalcidican Euripus or Vortex is famous in Greece, especially by reason of
the Fable concerning the death of Aristotle; it receives water at certain
hours, and casts them out in others.

The Vortex at Norway is the most noted and greatest of all, for it is related
to be 13 miles in circuit; in the middle of it is a Rock called Mouske. This
Vorago in six hours sucketh in all that approaches near it; as Water, Whales,
laden Ships, and in so many hours vomiteth them all out again with a great
violence, noise, and circumgyration of water. The cause is unknown.

Between Normandy and England is a Vorago or Whirlpool, unto which Ships are
carried with a great swiftness, and being near the Whirlpool are repelled back
again.

Proposition XXXII. The motion of the Sea, which we call a Concussion or
Trembling, comes from a spiration or wind, which moves the Earth or Water it
self, and causes it to rise.
Of the conc^ssion of the Sea, and its cause.
On the Coast of Biscay is a place which the, Inhabitants call Capbreton; there
sometimes the Sea swells without any winds, so that it seems to overflow
the shore it self, and on a sudden falls low. The like intumescency is found
in a Lake of Scotland, called Loumond, moved by a subterranean wind.

The Portugals in Anno 1523, in the Sea of Cambaja discovered a trembling of
the water; for in a great calm (as Maffeus writes) all winds being still, the
Sea on a sudden swelled from the bottom; thence the Ships began to roll, and to
fall foul of one another, to their great astonishment: Now in this great
confusion and disturbance, some cast the lead, some pumped, others more wise
bethought themselves of escaping, and got barrels on which they might swim; but
on an instant it was found to be an Earthquake, which thus also disturbed the
Ships on the Sea as well as the Land.

Proposition XXXIII. Why the Pacifick Ocean is more calm, and without great
floods or waves; and why it is easily moved, or rough with a wind.
The cause without doubt is, because its motions toward the West are not
hindered by the intercourse of shoars, as the Atlantic Ocean is.

CHAP. XV. Of Lakes, Pools, or standing Waters, and Marshes.
Proposition I. Definitions.
Of Lakes.
A Lake is a quantity of Water in any cavity of a Mediterranean place, of a
notable amplitude and tract, on all sides encompassed with the Land, and at the
least having a moderate profundity: But more properly, that is termed a Lake
which receives in, and lets forth Rivers.

A Pool is a small Lake, Pools.
which does never receive or send forth Rivers.

A Marish is water in a Mediterranean place, Marshes.
here and there having the lands extant and about it, or mixed with the Earth.

Proposition II.
Lakes are fourfold.
Lakes are Fourfold: 1. Some neither send forth or receive Rivers, and such
Lakes, if small, are termed Pools; but if large, they are called Lakes. 2. Some
send forth Rivers, but receive none. 3. Others receive Rivers, and send forth
none: And 4. some both receive and send forth Rivers; and some of those send
forth greater than they receive, some equal, and some lesser. Also some send
forth a River almost in the same line with that which they received; others in
another line, or to another quarter: also some receive more than they send
forth; some more few, and some equal.

Proposition III. To declare the generation and conservation of those Lakes,
which neither send forth nor receive Rivers.
Those Lakes are either great, moderate, or small. Some of the moderate and
small perpetually remain so in the Summer, and when it has not rained for a
long space, are dried up; and both these are termed Pools. Now it is easy to
declare the generation of those that are dried up, viz. the plenty of rain, and
cavity and depression of the place in which such standing Pools are: For if
that any place be situated in the midst of elevated places, all the rainwater
runeth unto it, and so causes a Pool.

In India are many Pools.
So in India there are many Pools or standing-waters made by the industry of the
Inhabitants, whereof some are in compass a mile, and some two, encompassed with
a Stone-wall, which are filled in the Pluvial months, that in the Summer months
they may furnish those with water, who live far from Rivers or Fountains.

After the like mode small Lakes and Pools are made by the exundations of the
Sea and Rivers.

So the River Nilus and Niger exundating, when that they have reflowed, leave
many Pools behind them, which either the Natives fortify or make, that thence
they may draw water on the other Months of the year. For the same reason, in
Moscovia, Finland, Lapland, in the Spring, Summer and Autumn, are many Lakes,
partly by reason of the shores, and partly because of the dissolving of the
Snows and Ice. But although some Lakes be dried up in the Summer, and after a
long cessation of Rains; we may not thence firmly conclude, that they had all
their waters from those Rains, for they may be dried up.

As for other Lakes without Rivers that are not dried up, their generation may
be also referred to the Rains, viz. if that they have a profound Channel, in
which so great a quantity of water collected from Rains may be kept, as that
the heat of the Sun is not of force enough to consume it all before that
another Rain falls: but it is more probable, that these Lakes have peculiar
Rivulets in the bottom, from which they receive so much water, as is consumed
by the exhalation. And this cause alone takes place in those Pools that are
found on the tops of Mountains; as in the Mountain Bructerus in Cenisius, and
others. Now it is probable, that some of these also were generated long since
by a great inundation of Waters, and thence conserved by Rivers: nay, without
question some of these Lakes that are near the Sea, and also salt, had their
being from some inundation of the Sea through some passage; as the Lake Harlem,
and others in Holland. There are also many salt Lakes in Peru.

Not many Lakes without Rivers, and those not large.
Neither is there any great number of these Lakes without Rivers; some small
ones are found in Moscovia and Finland, the Lake or Pool Lychnitis in
Macedonia, the Lake Appollonia in Mysia; one in Carniola, called Zrinzee; a
round one in China; another called Hilam in Cochinchina; one in Zanhaga; one at
the City of Mexico, twelve Leagues in length. All these are small, except that
in China, in comparison of great ones.

The Lake Parima the greatest Lake.
There is only one great Lake of this kind in the whole Earth, and which
exceeds all others, to wit, that of Parima in America, which is about 300
miles in length from East to West, and about an hundred in breadth, where
broadest; yet nevertheless it does not receive, nor send forth any Rivers. How
it had its original, is no mean doubt; whether long since caused by the
inundation of the Ocean, or flowing from some subterranean Fountains or
Springs? Also, whether it be conserved by Rains, or from the same Springs? It
seems to me probable that it has Springs at the bottom, that supply as much
as the heat of the Sun consumes.

Proposition IV. To declare the generation and conservation of those Lakes that
neither receive, nor send forth any Rivers.
Of the Generation and Conservation of Lakes, that neither receive nor send
forth Rivers.
There is an infinite namber of these Lakes, seeing that most Rivers flow from
Lakes, as from Fountains or Springs; especially those that arise in Moscovia,
Finland, and Lapland, viz. where there is any cavity in the place of a Spring,
but not so large as to contain a quantity of running water; then it becomes a
Lake; thence proceeds a River, the water gliding to the adjacent places.
Neither may we doubt, but that these Lakes have their generation and
conservation from Springs in the bottom, whether it be a true Spring, or an
apparent Spring, viz. Water flowing from another place thither through a
subterraneous passage; which last appears more probable in reference to
certain Lakes which immediately send forth great Rivers. Of such small Lakes
there is a great multitude, as I have said; as Volga, from whence is the first
original of the River Volga; Odoium, from whence flows Tanais; Adac, the
original of one of the branches of the River Tigris; Osera in Moscovia; the
Spring of the River Sosnam, which is discharged into Volga; and many other
small ones, we only reckon up the greatest of most note.

1. The famous Lake Chiamy, not far from India, in the latitude of 31 degrees,
from which run four Rivers of note, magnitude, and inundation into the Kingdom
of Sian, Pegu, and the like, viz. the Rivers Menam, Axa, Cosmum and Martavam;
but some Maps have a very small River which runeth into this Lake. 2. The Lake
Cincuyhay in China, which sends forth a great River toward the North, which
joined with another enters China. 3. The Lake Titicaca in America meridionalis
of 80 miles compass; it sends forth a great River, which terminateth in a
small Lake, neither is it seen any farther: and about this Lake are many Cities
and Towns. 4. In Nicaragua in America is a Lake so called, about four miles
from the Pacifick Ocean, and 100 miles from the Atlantic, into which it runeth
in a great Channel. 5. The Lake Iroquois in Canada, the original of the River
of St. Lawrence. 6. The Lake Annibi in Asia, under the latitude of 61 degrees.
Proposition V. To declare the generation and conservation of those Lakes that
receive Rivers, and let out none.
Of Lakes that receive Rivers, and lets our none.
Now it is manifest, that these Lakes are generated and conserved from those
Rivers which they receive, and that flow into them: For when that Rivers having
gone from their spring; and arrived in their passage at any noted and ample
cavity, the water is collected in this, and makes a Lake.

Now if the Earth at the bottom prove porous, it sucketh in the water, and
transmitteth it the to adjacent Earth, or that which I suppose to be more
frequent, if there be a Subterraneous passage, or that such an one be caused by
the water; through this part of the flowing water is carried away, so that on
that account the Lake does not flow over.

Of these kind of Lakes there is but a small number on the Earth.

1. In the preceding Proposition we have said, that the Lake Nicaragua sends
forth a River, which ends in a small Lake; this Lake therefore shall be one
of this number.

2. The Lake Asphaltites in Palestine, termed also the Dead-Sea, receives the
River Jordan, but sends forth none; it is seventy miles long and five broad.

3. A small one in Asia minor.

4. A small one in Macedonia, called Janna, which receives little Rivers.

5. The Lake of Geneva.

6. A Lake in Persia.

7. The Lake Soran in Moscovia, which receives two small Rivulets.

8. The River Ghir in Africa, rising in Mount Atlas ends in a Lake, as Leo
Africanus writes, and so some Maps do represent it; but others bring the River
into Nubia.

Proposition VI. To explain the generation of those Lakes, which both receive
and send forth Rivers.
Of Lakes which both receive and send forth Rivers.
There is a threefold difference of them, as we have said in the second
Proposition; for either they receive a greater quantity of water than they send
forth, or an equal quantity, or a lesser. If that they send forth a greater
quantity, it is manifest that that Lake has occult springs. If less, it is a
sign that there are secret Aqueducts in the bottom, or a spungious Earth: but
if it be equal, we gather that there are neither occult Aqueduct nor hidden
springs in the bottom. The cause of the generation therefore is partly the
same, which we showed in the fourth Proposition, viz. the cavity and depression
of the place, and the quantity of water, unto which are adjoined occult springs
and much rain, and dissolved Snow and Ice help on the same.

Those that are generated from the influx of one River, they are placed in the
middle tract of the Rivers, and render the Rivers directly, and of these there
are a great number. So the River Niger makes four Lakes in its passage. The
Nile makes many Lakes in its passage, which the Maps do not show. The River
Duina pasteth through six or seven at least: and you shall see other Rivers in
Moscovia and Finland, in the great Maps, to make sixteen Lakes before that they
come to their mouth. But it is best to consider those, which produce other
Rivers than they have received.

The most famous for magnitude are these:

The Lake Zaire.
1. Zaire; a Lake of the procurrent of Africa, lying between the thirteenth and
sixth degrees of South latitude, and therefore in Longitude has 105 miles; in
the midst of it lies an Island (besides other small ones) of that magnitude,
that they can bring into the field at least twenty or thirty thousand fighting
men. This Isle does in a manner twice cut the Lake; so that one part is
accounted for a peculiar Lake, it is called Zembre: from this Lake flow three
mighty Rivers, Nile, Cuama and Zaire; but certain small Rivulets do flow into
the same, which do not only seem sufficient to supply the greatest of the same;
so that it is probable, that it has certain springs at the bottom, although
the inundation to be ascribed to be the showers that fall in the pluvial months.

The Lake Zaflan.
2. Zaflan; a Lake not far from Zaire between the tenth and sixth degrees of
South latitude, and therefore about sixty miles in Longitude: It sends forth
a branch into the Nile, and receives small Rivers.

The Lake Sachaf.
3. The Lake Sachaf, not far from Zaire, toward the Promontory of Good hope,
sends forth a Rivulet, which being augmented with other waters, at length
makes the River of the holy Ghost: It receives small Rivers.

The Lake Aquilunda.
4. The Lake Aquilunda receives a branch from the Lake Zaire, and sends forth
many Rivers into Congo.

The Lake Onega.
5. Onega; a Lake in Finland, between the 60 and 63 degrees of Latitude, has 44
miles in length and 30 in breadth, where it is at the broadest: It receives
many small Rivers, which proceed from other Lakes, and sends forth the
moderate River Sueri into the Lake Lodoga.

The Lake Lodoga.
6. The Lake Lodoga, 30 miles long and 15 broad; it receives the River Sueri
from Onega, and many lesser from other places; a moderate one from Ilmen, a
noted Lake in Moscovia. It sends forth a River into the Baltic Sea.

The Lake Osera.
7. The Lake Osera, receives the River Kousam, and others, and sends forth
Sosnam, which runeth into the Volga.

The Lake Enaraok.
8. Enaraok; a Lake or Marish in Lapland, in length 40 miles, in breadth 15: It
receives the River Avilan, and other lesser Rivers, and sends forth the
River Paes into the Lappian Sea.

The Lake ula.
9. Vla, a Lake in Moscovia 30 miles long, and 15 broad; it has in the midst of
it an Island, as in the Lake Zaire: It receives a River that passes through
10 Lakes, and sends forth a famous River. There are many more in Moscovia,
Finland, and Norway.

Lakes in China.
10. In China are four famous Lakes, which receive Rivers, and again distribute
them into diverse parts.

Lakes in Brasil.
11. In Brasil, in the same manner as in China, are the Lakes Euparia, and
Puerto de los Reyes, in which the Rivers Argenta and Omoranna do meet and pass
through.

Proposition VII. Many Lakes contain fresh Water, very few salt or Marine.
Diverse Lakes contain fresh water, very few salt.
Those that have their being from Rains or Rivers, as also those that have their
own proper springs more remote from the Sea; but those that are caused by an
inundation of the Sea through a certain passage, are salt, as also some which
have springs of Salt Water in the bottom: So the Lake Harlem and others in
Holland, are salt. There is a salt Lake found in the Isle of Madagascar, in
Peru, in Cuba, which has two Leagues in circuit^, ^scituate not far from the
Sea, and although it receive certain Rivers of fresh water, and breeds Fish
and Tortoises, yet it is salt. So the Lake Asphaltites, although it receive the
fresh water of Jordan, yet it is not sweet, but sends forth so stinking and
violent a vapor, that the circumjacent land for the space of half a mile is
barren.

Proposition VIII. Whether the Caspian Sea be a Lake, Straight, or Gulf of the
Ocean.
The Caspian Sea, whether a Lake, Straight, or Gulf.
Some will have it to be properly termed a Sea; but no Sea can properly be
termed a Sea except it be a part of the Ocean, that is, except it does adhere
to the Ocean by some manifest tract; but they will have it joined to the Ocean
by some subterraneous passage. The Ancients indeed would have it to be joined
with the Indian Ocean, others with the Northern; but experience sufficiently
shows both to be deceived. Concerning a subterraneous passage the matter is
uncertain; yet it seems to be probable from thence, that it receives so many
Rivers, and those noted for great quantities, which quantity of water the
Channel could not possible contain, except that it exonerated the same by
subterraneous Caverns and passages into the Ocean. But others suppose that
quantity of water otherwise to be consumed, viz. that it penetrateth not into
the Ocean, but into the vicine Mountains, of which there is a great number, and
almost all send forth springs. Scaliger and others assert, that this Caspian
Sea is carried by a subterraneous passage into the Euxine Sea; but he alleges
no probation of it: yet that may be a sign, by reason that the Euxine Sea
perpetually sends forth waters in great abundance through the Bosphorus,
which abundance of waters some think that it does not receive from the Rivers,
but by a subterranean passage from the Caspian Sea: But it seems not so to me
to have any conjunction with the Sea, and therefore I suppose it to be a Lake,
and so rather to be called, than a Sea. Now whence it was first generated is a
greater difficulty: Some say, that great Mountains of Salts are found in its
bottom, and that thence it has its saltness; but the water they suppose to
proceed from the multitude of Rivers that exonerate themselves into this Lake
or Sea. Yet although these waters make to the conservation of it; yet I think
it more probable, that this Sea for some Ages since was conjoined to the Ocean;
neither do I question but that the Euxine Sea will at length become a Lake for
the same reason, the Bosphorus being obstructed.

Proposition IX. To make a Lake in a place, if that it be possible.
Of making Lakes.
It may be done, if that there be a River in the land adjoining, or that a
Spring be found in the place, and that the place be somewhat more depressed and
low than in the adjacent places; although small Lakes may be also made on the
tops of Mountains: therefore the place must be hallowed, and the earth dug away
unto so great a depth and amplitude as we require, and its sides must be fenced
with banks upheld by wood, if need so require; then an Inlett being made from
the Channel of the river, the water must be let in; or if that a Fountain in
that place affords a sufficient quantity of water, there is no need of that
inlett or aqueduct.

Proposition X. To take away, or dry up a Lake.
Of drying up of Lakes.
That may be performed two ways; 1. If the bottom of that Lake be higher, or of
almost an equal depression with the vicine place, an Aqueduct being made, the
water will flow from the place or Lake, and at length will render the bottom
dry, the heat of the Sun assisting, and Earth being cast in. 2. If that the
bottom of the Lake be lower than the vicine place, it must first be fenced with
a trench in its whole circuit, leaving only some Channels or open passages;
then making use of Water-mills, the water must be expelled and drawn out, and
then the bottom must be covered with earth and dung, and such seeds cast in,
which suddenly will take root, as Mustard Seed, Coleworts, and the like. By
this mode the Dutch very well know how to drain Lakes, and to make fruitful
lands of them.

Proposition XI. Marshes are of two sorts; some are ouzey, and consisting of a
mixed substance as it were, viz. of Water and Earth, so that it will not suffer
the footsteps of a man: others have small standing Pools, with small portions
of dry land here and there.
Marshes are of two sorts.
Of the first sort are those that receive or send forth no Rivers; such Marshes
are in Holland, Brabant (where is the Marish de Peel,) and many in Westphalia,
to which some of the second sort are admixed. But many of the second kind are
found at the originals or springs of Rivers, whence some are wont to call these
Springs or Fountains, Marshes; as the Marshes of Tanais in Moscovia, of the
Nile, etc. Such Marshes also seem to be in Savolax, a Province in Finland in a
great tract of land; also the Marshes of Enarack; the Chelonides Marshes of
Africa, the Marshes of Chaldea; through which the Euphrates does pass. These
Marshes are frequently found in Woods and Deserts that are Ericose, because
that the rain which irrigateth those lanes, and collecteth in its cavities, is
not attracted by the Sun, by reason that the Leaves of Trees do repel its Rays.
Such kind of Marshes are found here and there in Germany and Moscovia.

Moreover these Marshes of the second sort are fourfold; viz. some both
receive and send forth Rivers; some only receive, some only send forth, and
some neither receive nor send forth. The first sort are generated and
conserved, partly by occult springs and water effused before that it be brought
to a certain Channel, and also from a greater quantity of water than can
possibly be brought through a Channel; many of which sort are in Moscovia and
Finland: Marshes of the last kind probably are conserved, and spring from rain
and small springs. Aristotle calls the Palus Maeotis a Lake, and that more
rightly.

Proposition XII. Marshes have a sulphurous, bituminous, and fat Earth.
This is discovered both from the black color, and from the Reeds which are
generated from it, Of the earth of Marshes.
and easily take fire, as is found in Holland and other places. The cause is,
by reason that such substances are contained in the raise of the earth, where
these Marshes do exist. Yet all Marshes are not such; but where the Earth is
stony and hard, there are no Marshes: for where there is a soft earth, there
for a certain is a fat and sulphurous substance.

Proposition XIII. To drain Marshes and Fens.
Of draining of Fens.
Although some Fens have an high profundity, yet no more is required to drain
them to such a depth; which we may do, if that we cause the water to flow away
by some Channel or Aqueduct. 2. If that after some weeks they have been dried
by the Sun, we cast in a great quantity of dry earth. 3. If that we make a fire
upon them: and 4. If that we hinder water from flowing into them; as rain, and
the like.

CHAP. XVI. Of Rivers in General.
Proposition I. We comprehend in this Proposition the definitions necessary for
this doctrine.
Of Rivers, and their definition.
1. A River is water flowing from a certain place of the Earth to another place
in a long tract, and within its Channel. A Channel is that cavity in the Earth
in which the water is contained, which is more depressed and lower than the
shore of that water.

2. A Rivulet is a River that has not the profundity and breadth, as to admit
of small laden Vessels.

3. That is termed Amnis which admits of those Vessels; but if they will
bear moderate Vessels, great ones laden, then it is called by the general term
of Fluvius, and Flumen.

4. That water is termed a Torrent which flows from the Mountainous places
with a violence.

5. Where two Rivers meet, that place is called a Confluence.

6. A River or Rivulet which flows from another, is termed a Branch or Arm;
yet for the most part it is taken for such an arm which is lesser than the
other part of the River. Yet those are also frequently termed Arms which
proceed from a River divaricated into two Channels.

7. A Fountain or Spring, is water bubling and flowing forwards from a certain
place of the Earth.

8. A Well is, when the water bubleth up, but flows not forwards.

Proposition II. Torrents and Rivulets may sometimes proceed from a quantity of
rain, and dissolved Snow.
From whence Torrents and Rivulets do proceed.
For in the Mountainous, or more elevated parts of the Earth, are found many
Cavities, small Lakes, and standing Pools: Now if that so great a quantity of
water flow into these from the falls of Rain or Snow, that they cannot well
contain them, they overflow and run down on the more depressed places; and
because that on every year this happens, it makes a Channel for it self: but
sometimes Torrents do flow without any Channel. From this cause, viz. Rains and
the dissolution of Snow, many Rivulets are made also Torrents, and moderate or
indifferent Rivers in those places, which have ridges of Mountains in a long
tract, as the Procurrent of Africa, India, Peru, Sumatra, and the like. And
these Rivulets flow neither in the Summer, nor in the night, but only in the
day.

Proposition III. Most Rivulets proceed from Fountains. But Rivers of a great
magnitude, have their Original either from the congress of many Rivulets, and
indifferent Rivers, or flow from Lakes and Marshes. For no Rivers of any
considerable magnitude ( as the Albis, the Rhine) do flow from one Fountain,
but exist from many small Springs, or Lakes: Rivulets proceed from Fountains.
But these proceeding from Lakes, are augmented by the accession of other
Rivers. The River Volga, or Rha, receives two hundred and more partly
Rivulets, and partly indifferent Rivers, before that it discharges it self
into the Caspian Sea; and the Danube, as many before she flow into the Pontus.
And although that Pliny and Cardan write, that no Rivers flow into the Nile,
yet experience testifies the contrary to them that have traveled in Abyssine.
The Proposition is easily proved by an enumeration of Examples.

Springs proceed commonly from Hills and Mountains.
The Springs of some Rivulets and Rivers are in Mountains, and elevated places;
and some on a Plane. As for the Springs of those Rivers that proceed from
Lakes, we have said in the former Chapter, that those Springs are in the
bottom, or Channel of the Lakes: and that such Lakes are as it were Conduits
and effusions about the Spring, before that the water flows in a Channel, or
in a greater quantity. For some Springs are covered with Earth or water, others
open.

The Springs on a Plane are of those Rivers, from which Tanais and Albis exist
in their first tract, unto which others do accede. It were easy to collect
other Examples.

Cardanus deny ^^h these Fountains to be generated in these plane places, but
to be derived from the vicine Mountains, by some subterraneous passage. But I
suppose that such Springs first make a standing Pool, or Marsh. For Tanais
seems not to flow from a Spring, but from a Marsh, or some less profound Lake.

Many are the Mountainous Springs of Rivulets, as of those of the Rhine, Po,
Danube, Borysthenes, etc.

The Nile, Wolga, and the great River of St. Laurence in Canada flow from a
Lake.

Yet there is one mode, by which from one Fountain a great River may proceed,
viz. if that the Fountain be on an Elevated place; but the Channel of the River
must be a little higher than the Altitude of the inlet. So the flowing water,
first in a more swift Current, then in a more slow, is collected in the
Channel, and in course of time may be a very great River, by reason that so
much did not flow out in the first generation.

Proposition IV. Rivers are very much augmented by frequent Rains, and
dissolved Snow, and that in diverse seasons and months of the year.
Rivers are much increased by rain and snow.
So in the Region of Peru, and Chili, some Rivers are so small that they flow
not in the night time, but only in the day; because that then the water flows
from Snow dissolved on the Mountain^ of the Andes, through the heat of the Sun.
So the Rivers both in the Oriental and Occidental Coast of the procurrent of
Africa, as in congo, Angola, and the like, are bigger in the day than in the
night. So it is also in the shoars of Malabar, and Chormandel in India. Yea in
those four Regions in Summer time the Rivers are almost dried up, and in the
Winter, or wet season, are overflowing. So Wolga in the Months of May, and
June, abounds with water, so that the Lands and Islands, are then covered
with water, in the other Months the Sands will hardly admit a passage over them
for Ships that are laden. The reason is, because that then, the Snow is
dissolved on the Mountains, whence those Rivulets proceed, which being more
than one hundred, do exonerate themselves into the Volga. So the Nile, Ganges,
Indus, etc. are augmented from rains, or Snow: so that they overflow the Lands.
But these augments happen in a different season, because that they arise from
diverse causes, and diverse places; for by reason that rains are more frequent in
the Winter; therefore Rivers are more high at the season, except another cause
intervene from the dissolution of Snow, which sometimes happens in some
places and Mountains in the Spring, in others in the Summer, and in others in
the intermedial time, by reason that the Snow is then dissolved on the
Mountains that are adjacent to the Rivulets of these Rivers. Moreover some
Rivers, especially the greater, proceed from remote places, where it is then
Summer, when it is Winter in the place through which they flow; and those
variations cause the swelling of Rivers in diverse seasons. But most Rivers do
so in the Spring, because that then Snow is dissolved in most places. The
variety of these causes must be showed in the particular description of every
River.

Concerning that peculiar Spring of Japan, which flows every day only for two
hours, we shall speak in the following Chapter.

Proposition V. What may be the Original of that water which flows from
Springs? Or whence are Rivers generated?
The cause of water flowing from Springs.
We have before our eyes the great River Rhine, Albis, and others, the
generation of which by reason of their abundance of waters, seems more
admirable than that of Rivulets: but we have showed in the precedent and third
Proposition, that the water of Rivers partly proceeds from (...), and the
dissolution of Snow, partly from Lakes, and partly from the meeting of Rivulets
and Rivers. Therefore the question is not so much concerning the Rise and
Springs of Rivers, as the Original and perpetuity of Fountains and Springs.

The Opinion of Philosophers, and Geographers, are various.
The Opinions of Philosophers and Geographers concerning it are various.

1. Some think that all the water of Springs of Rivers proceed from Rain, or
dissolved Snow. And this they take for a sign of it, that Rain, and dissolved
Snow do much augment the Rivers, that oftentimes they extend beyond their
Channel, and overflow Regions: also that Rivers do much decrease, and some
lesser sort of them are altogether dried up, when no Rain; for a long while in
the Summer season, has fallen; because that their Channel is not very
profound, and therefore have collected little water: but those that have a deep
Channel are not dried up in the Summer, by reason that they have gathered so
much water from the Rains that fell, and dissolved Snow, so that all cannot be
turned into vapors, except by a daily and continual heat. 2. Because that
there are very few Rivers in those places where there is little rain; as in the
more inward part of Africa there are few Springs.

But these allegations resolve not the question, because we are not to demand,
or seek the Original of Rivers, but only the Original of the Water of
Fountains. Therefore those that speak thus, have not well considered the sense
of the question, as we have taken notice before; although also the experience
that they allege, is not general, because that there are Rivers found in
places, where there is little rain and no snow; although it be true in the
Region of Peru, and Egypt, which they assert. Moreover rain moistneth not the
Earth above ten foot deep: but Fountains spring from a far greater profundity.

The Opinion of Seneca.
2. Others suppose, that we should not demand whence the water of Fountains does
arise, by reason that water is an Element as much as Earth, Air, and Fire,
concerning the Original of which we do not dispute; thus Seneca discourses.
But other Authors cut in twain this Gordian knot with the Sword of Alexander.
For it is not enquired after, how that water has a Being, but how it comes to
the places of Fountains, and not to other places. Moreover, the Earth does not
so flow forward as Rivers do: But for the Air, it is false that we should not
seek concerning it, as they determine.

3. Aristotelians follow the opinion of their Master, See Aristotle li^o. 1.
Chap. 11.
who in the whole Eleventh Chapter of his first Book of Meteors, endeavors
to prove, that the water of Fountains is generated from Air, contained in the
bowels of the Earth. He alleges these reasons; 1. Waters are generated from
Air above the Earth, viz. Rain: therefore seeing that Air is in the bowels of
the Earth, and that there is the same cause of condensation, viz. Cold:
therefore he says it is absurd for any one to think that water is not produced
from Air there. 2. Experience testifies that more great drops that fall, are
made of small ones, and therefore the Original of Rivers must be, as it were,
certain Brooks of water that meet in one part of the Earth; for therefore those
that make Aqueducts, are wont to bring the water down by trenches, and small
Channels. 3. Because that many Springs, and those of the greatest Rivers are
found in mountanous places, very few in Plains, or Valleys: which is an
evidence, that the water of Fountains proceeds from a condensed Air or
Vapor; which Air and Vapor tend toward higher places, and mountainous places
are as it were spunges incumbing over lower places. Those are the reasons of
Aristotle.

The Opinion of Cardanus.
4. Cardanus with others, suppose, that the water of Fountains proceeds from
Rivulets, which are generated of watery vapors, condensed both within, and
without the Earth, but that these Fountains alone scarce make up Rivers, unless
assisted by rain, or dissolved Snow. His Reasons are these, 1. If betimes in
the morning one view the Mountains, they will appear moist. 2. Rivers overflow
in the morning, and so much the more, by how much the part of it is more near
the Fountain.

But the perpetual and constant impetus of the water bubling and leaping from
the Springs, does not seem to have its Original from so weak and inconstant a
cause. Neither does this opinion of Cardanus much differ from that of
Aristotle; but that Aristotle places Air with the generation, Cardanus
vapors, with the generation, to be the cause of Springs, and indeed small is
the difference between Air and vapors.

5. Some of the Ancients supposed Rains to be coacervated within the Earth in
Cavities, and thence to break forth as from a mighty belly, and that all Rivers
sprang from one of them, or from some other of them; neither that there was any
other water generated, but what were collected in the winter months into those
receptacles, they supposed to evade into the multitude of these Rivers, and
therefore that they flowed more in the winter than in the Summer, and that some
were continual, and some not. They added the same cause that we have laid down
in the first opinion. But Aristotle receives this opinion, because that more
water in one year flows out from the mouth of the River, than the bulks of
that whole part of Earth, or Land.

6. Of Modern Philosophers many, as also of the Ancients, determined that the
Earth again received whatsoever waters flowed out from the mouth of the Rivers
into the Sea. For the water of the Sea by an hidden passage went under the
Earth, and is beaten in its passage through diverse windings of the Earth, and
strained through Sand and Chalk, which removes its saltness, and so passes
into pure water. I also defend this opinion, and suppose it true, yet so as not
to exclude the cause laid down in the first and third place: the reasons are
these. 1. Because more than one thousand Rivers exonerate themselves into the
Sea, and the greater of them in such an abundancy, that that water, which they
send forth into the Sea throughout the whole year, exceeds the whole Earth;
as the River Volga into the Caspian Sea, and also other Rivers. Therefore it
cannot otherwise be, but that water must be sent forth into many places of the
Earth, even to the Fountains of Rivers. Now if that this were not so, we could
not possibly imagine, how that the Sea should not be augmented unto an
immensity, or why Fountains should not cease to send forth water. Neither may
it be objected, that so many vapors are elevated from the Sea, that are
equivalent to the water, that the Sea has received from the Rivers. For first,
only Rain makes those vapors: then again it is most false that so great a
quantity of vapors should be elevated from the Sea, as are generated from the
water which flows from the Rivers into the Sea.

Fountains the nearer the Sea, are salter than those farther distant.
2. This opinion is proved from that, to wit, that the Fountains near the Sea
are salt and brackish; and by how much they are nigher to the Sea, by so much
they are the more salt, as on the Coast of Africa, especially on the Coasts of
Choromaudel in India, where no Vines do grow, and where that all Wells are
salt. In the City of Suez at the Termination of the Red Sea, all Wells are
salt, or brackish, and the water two miles distant is somewhat salt. So in many
Islands in the Sea, no Wells of fresh water are found, (though not so salt as
the Sea water it self) as in the Isle of St. Vincent and others. In Peru in the
low Region, the Lakes are salt by reason of the vicinity of the Sea. Yea in the
Oriental Maritimate places, the Nuts called Coco Nuts are found somewhat salt.
Also in the Mediterranean places themselves, Fountains of salt water are found,
as in Lorrain, Lunenburgh, and the like.

3. Because that it is manifest, that the Sea emitteth its water through
subterraneous passages, from the salt Fountains of Lunenburgh, where beneath
the Earth those Aqueducts full of salt or Seawater are found.

4. Because that digging to a great depth, as also in Mines, much water is
found, of which neither the Rain, nor the Air can be made the efficient cause.

How water comes from the Sea to the places of Fountains, so as to become
sweet, we have now showed, viz. the bottom of the Sea is not every where Rocky
or Stony, but in many places Sandy, Muddy, Gravelly, Spungy, drinking the water
of the Sea, and by a continuation of the Earth, brings it by degrees to a long
distance from the Sea, where at length the Guttulae unite; especially in a
narrow space, such as are Mountains, and make a Fountain in the given place, or
Cavity: but if so be that Cavity be hidden from the Earth, then the water so
collected either follows another way, wheresoever it be made, and so a
Fountain seems to break forth in another place, which yet is not in than
place; but is a River derived from the former place by a subterraneous passage.
Or if that the water of that Cavity finds no way about it self, neither by
violence can break through the Earth that covers it, then that water is not
augmented; but what water flowed unto it to have been its increase, that is
averted to another place. For that is the property of all humid bodies, that
all their parts and particles are moved toward that place where the deflux is
made. So if you fill a Vessel with water, that the swelling or tumor may be
above the brim of the Vessel, then all the parts of the extant water have an
equal inclination, and power of deflux in the vicine part of the brim. But yet
by reason of the mutual coherence of the particles (whose cause is declared in
Natural Philosophy) if that the deflux be made in one part of the brim, all the
other parts leave the vicine brim, and draw to that part of the brim, or they
follow where the deflux is made. So if you immerge a long crust of Bread into
water, you shall see the water born upwards, and and the part of the Bread that
is not immerged, to be humid. The Sea goes under the Earth through Caverns.
Moreover the Sea goes under the Earth through Caverns, from which, after the
same mode the water may glide or creep forth, unless you had rather ascribe it
to evaporations, which are carried upwards, and uniting the drops in a narrow
place.

But because there are many things, which may seem to render this opinion less
probable, these ought also to be considered, that it may be evident, that they
weaken not this assertion laid down.

Things to be noted.
1. The places of Fountains are more elevated than the Superficies of the Sea,
by reason that most of them are in Mountanous places, therefore water cannot
flow from the Sea to those places, because the nature of water is to move to
places more depressed, or less elevated, as it is manifest from Rivers, and the
Artifices of Drainers.

2. Although the bottom of the Sea be gravelly, muddy, and sandy, so that the
water may penetrate it self through its particles; yet the reason does not
appear evident enough, but that it may more moisten the adjoining Earth, and
that which is not so high, than to glide upwards to the places of Fountains,
seeing especially that the Earth is Rocky and Stony, as in the Mountains of the
Island of St. Helena.

3. There is no reason, why the water, so gliding from the Sea, should not
break forth in a middle way between the Sea and the Fountain.

4. In the most profound Mines, none, or very little water is found, as
Thurnheuserus witnesses.

5. This water of the Fountains should be salt, because that it does proceed
from the Sea. These are the chief Arguments which may seem to weaken the
opinion proposed. For I pass by those slight ones alleged by others, Other
Arguments Answered.
viz. that they suppose that the Sea is not sufficient to supply so many
Rivers; then again that Rivers then should never be diminished, if that were
the true cause of Rivers that we have laid down. But unto these two, the answer
is easy, because that the Sea again receives the water again from the Rivers,
that it sent forth into the Fountains. Then as for the other we have showed
before, that the question is not, neither do we determine, that all the water
of the Rivers is from the Sea; but only concerning the water of Springs, which
is not the alone cause of Rivers, as we have said already: and we also assert,
that the water of Fountains is augmented from rains, and Dew; because that
these, moistening the Earth, glide, or are drawn toward the places of
Fountains, Four Other Arguments of great concernment.
where the efflux of the water is made, which we have explained by other
Examples. We come now to those four Arguments alleged, which may seem to carry
some weight with them.

The first is esteemed very valid, as being taken from multiplicit experience:
therefore many solutions are brought, and alleged by Learned men. First, they
the most easily discharge themselves, who defend the Ocean to be more high than
the Earth, for so they deny the assertion, and they say that this Altitude of
the Ocean is the cause of Springs, because that Springs are less high than the
water in the middle of the Ocean. See Olearius his Voyage into Persia.
Moreover Olearius in the Description of his Voyage into Persia, relates that
he ascended the Mountain that adjoyneth to the Caspian Sea, and with an
Astrolabe (or rather a Gaeodetical Instrument) to observe the Elevation of this
Mountain above the superficies of that Sea, but found none, but that the
extreme superficies of that Sea was seen in the Horizontal Line, yea somewhat
elevated above it, so that the Tumor of this Sea was found a little more high
than the vertex of the Mountain, on which he made his observation. But in truth
this solution cannot be admitted of, See Chap. 13.
because we have showed in the Thirteenth Chapter, that the water of the Ocean
is not higher than the Mountains and shoars of the Earth: and the frequent
observations of Mathematicians, made on Towers, or shoars testify it. And as
for the observation of Olearius, that seems to cause no small difficulty
here, for that the Caspian Sea is no higher than the vicine Lands, much less
than the Mountains, is collected from hence, viz. that many Rivers do exonerate
themselves into the Sea, therefore we must say, that refraction obstructed the
observation of Olearius, and caused the water of the Sea to appear higher than
in truth it was: and peradventure the waves of the Sea increased the cause, and
the Mountain that he ascended was none of the highest.

Some discovering the weakness of this Argument, bring this; that the natural
place of water is above the Earth, and therefore that it must cover the whole
Earth, because that it is higher than the Earth. Now by reason that it is
impeded from its natural place by the Mountains above the Earth, arising
toward the Mediterranean places, therefore that part of the Ocean which ought
to be where the Mountains and Elevated parts of the Earth are, seeing that it
is not in its natural place, does press down the subjected water, which indeed
is in its natural place, but yet is driven or pressed to the bottom, by the
Superior water, which is not in its natural place, where when it finds no
way, neither can give place, it retireth toward the sides, and passes under
the Roots of the Mountains, where being collected as in a Cistern, it is
squeezed out by the water of the Ocean, pressing toward the vertex of the
Mountain. No other than in a Vessel which has on the side a Funnel touching
the very bottom of the Vessel, from whence we infuse water or other liquor into
Glasses; If, I say, we drop in a stone into such a Vessel full, or half full of
liquor, the liquor flies out through the Orifice of the Funnel. This is the
subtilty of Scaliger; but in truth it is very thick. For water is not expelled
so from the bottom of Mountainous places toward the vortex, because that
experience testifies the contrary in Trenches; and if that were so, all Spring
waters should be salt: moreover it is false that he assumeth, that part of the
water is not in its natural place, and therefore presses down the subjected
part. for this is taken up gratis, and contrary to experience; because that the
water presses not down the subjected part, except when it is higher than the
vicine water, and therefore where the Superficies of the Ocean is Spherical, it
rests: but if that any motion were made from the pressure, this would drive
the water of the Sea to the Coast, where the place is more broad, not through
the small Caverns of the Earth. Now it is certain that water flows in from
the bottom of the Sea through the great Caverns, but they make not the Fountain
fresh, because they take not away the saltness of the water.

I think not the solution of the Argument to be difficult, if that we consider
how water comes to the Fountain, viz. not from any Channel from the bottom of
the Sea, or foot of the Mountain (for so it would retain its saltness) but by
or through a continual progression of the watery particles, or a creeping in
the Terrestial matter, to the places adjacent to the Fountain, where at length
it is gathered into drops by reason of the cavity, and continual succession of
the water, and so causes a Spring. Veins of water in the bowels of the earth.
For this we find in the Earth dug to a great depth, that here and there drops
of water do consist, and are forced by those that are nigh, so that a little
Rivulet is made, which are termed Veins of water. Many such Rivulets, if
collected into one Cavity, make a Fountain; as those persons well known that
are skilled in making of Fountains, or Aquiducts, or Wells. For in Wells water
is collected from many drops, which meet together in the bottom of the well,
from the adjacent Earth. And those that make Aquiducts, bring the water by
gutters and trenches into one place, so that the drops may fall from the higher
places into the Cavity.

But if that you object that many Fountains bubble up in the midst of stones,
by reason of which it is not probable that the watery particles should so creep
forwards; to that I Answer, that this confirms our Opinion: For those stones
do not go through from the top to the foot of the Mountain (at least in those
Mountains, where the Fountains are found) but only occupy the Superficies of
the Mountain, and a certain small profundity within the Earth of the Mountain
is more soft, or less stony, or at least such as may receive and attract water.
Therefore when by penetration it is come to the stony part, because that it can
penetrate no farther, there it stands, and is collected into drops, and
makes a springing Fountain between the stony parts; to wit, if that a passage
be granted; and that the Mountains and Rocks of the Isle of St. Helena, and
almost of all Islands, are not within so rocky and hard, is collected from
hence, that almost all those Mountains have sometimes burned, or at the least
smoaked, which is discovered from the Ashes on the Earth, and also the
Brimstone, or Sulphur found in those places: add moreover what we observed
before, that the spring of the water is not always there where it seemeh to
be, but flows from some higher place through a subterraneous passage to the
Fountain, and so causes the water to leap up with some force, which I suppose
to be done in many Fountains, and the more, if we consider, that fire is moved
also downwards, by reason of the continuation of the matter, when in truth, if
that the same be free, it tends upwards. So if you put the end of a long
piece of Iron in the fire, this will penetrate through the whole Iron, until
it come to the other extreme, although this other extremity does not tend
upwards but downwards.

The second Argument answered.
So much for the first Argument; unto the second I answer, that a reason may be
given, why the Sea water should not penetrate so much into the Earth toward
the Center, as toward the Mountains, viz. because the Earth is there more full
of Metals, and hard, as experience testifies: but where it is not so hard,
there the water penetrateth; and therefore we deny not but that Rivers, or at
least sweet or salt Lakes may be found beneath the bottom of the Sea, within
the Earth, toward the Center, where any such Cavity is. But because that there
are few such Cavities, and that every where the Earth is Metallous, and hard
beneath the bottom of the Sea, therefore it cannot continually imbibe water,
but when it is full it cease to imbibe any more; neither does it receive
more. Therefore then the water glideth toward higher places, unto the motion
of which, it is probable that the mutation of the height of the Sea avails
much; sometimes in this, and sometimes in that part, by reason of the floods,
waves, or tempest. For the water being made higher, more presses the water,
and promoteth its ingress through the Earth to the Springs. And seeing that
every day the Altitude of the Sea is augmented, and diminished in the parts of
the Ocean, not only by storms, but also by the flux, and reflux; therefore such
a pressure happens every day: but I question whether this cause can effect
much.

The third Argument answered.
Unto the third Argument, I say that the reason is the disposition of the
places, and of the Earth it self; and as I said, that the humor is moved, and
glideth toward that part, where the flux is made: neither do I think it
needs any farther explication.

The fourth Argument Answered.
The fourth Argument taken from the saltness, has a more difficult solution:
because that it seems not possible, that the saltness should be taken away
only by transcolation; for the saltness of the water consists in a double
Salt (which the Aristotelians never observed) the one of which, the Chemists
aptly call fixed, the other volatile Salt. And the fixed Salt may indeed be
separated from the marine water, as well by continual transcolation, as by
coction, and distillation of the water: but the volatile Salt because it is
spirituous is immediately advanced with the water, neither can it be separated
by frequent and often repeated distillation: Therefore it is hard to give a
mode, by which this volatile salt spirit in its passage between the Sea and the
Fountain, may be separated from the Sea water. Yet in the mean while these will
suffice for the solution. 1. Although we have not discovered the mode, and
artifice, by which this volatile salsitude may be separated from the Sea water,
yet we must not deny, but that it may be separated: for by nature we find it
separated; viz. for fresh showers fall into the Ocean, which yet were generated
of the vapors taken up from the Sea. 2. Those particles of Salt water
penetrating the Earth before they flow to their Fountain, are mixed here and
there with other waters proceeding there from rain, or vapors, and so that
small saltitude, that they yet had, is rendered altogether insensible. 3. It is
not true that the salsitude is altogether insensible in all Springs, because
that some Fountains are salt, as we said before; other-some brackish a little,
as those, two miles from the City Suez, and in places less remote from the Sea.
Therefore there is need of a long transcolation, and gentle evaporation, to
separate the water from the volatile Salt, and by this artifice we make Sea
water less salt, and such also is the generation of rain water, which therefore
is not salt, or at least less salt. For it is certain that sometimes saltish
kinds of rain do fall into the Sea.

Therefore the waters of Fountains proceed partly from the Sea or subterranean
waters, partly from Rivers, and Dew, that moisten the Earth. But the water of
Rivers partly proceeds from Springs, and partly from Rain and Snow.

Proposition VI. Certain Rivers hide themselves in the midst of their passage
under the Earth, and in another place rise up again as if they were new Rivers.
Of Rivers which in the midst of their passage hide themselves under the Earth,
and rise again.
The most celebrated of them are,

1. The River Niger, which meeting the Mountains of Nubia, is observed under
them, and comes sorth again from the other Occidental quarter.

2. Tigris having passed the Lake Arethusa, meeting the Mountain Taurus, is
hidden in a Cave, and flows out on the other side. Then when it has passed
the Lake Thospites, it is again obscured in subterranean Caverns, and then
after it has thus run the space of about six German miles, it breaks forth
again.

3. About Arcadia in Peloponnesus many such Riverets are to be found, as
Aristotle writes in his first Book of Meteors, Chapter Eleventh.

4. Alpheus, a River of Achaia, is absorbed by the Earth. The Grecians write,
that it keeps its course under the Sea, and beneath the Earth, even unto
Sicilia, where they will have it to emerge on the Coast of Syracuse, and to be
that River that is called Arethusa in Sicilia. Now this they especially
collected from this, viz. that Arethusa in Sicilia every fifth Summer cast up
the dung of those Beasts at that time, when the Olympian Games were celebrated,
and the dung and garbage of the slain Victims were cast into Alpheus. Therefore
being carried with a direct Current, they were cast up in Sicilia.

5. The River Guadiana, between Portugal and Biscay, in times past called Anas,
wholly obscureth it self at Medelina; and about 8 German miles further
discovers it self again.

6. Dan (which flowing with the River Jor, makes Jordan) breaks forth some
miles from its Fountain Phiala. Straw or rushes being cast into the same, are
found and discovered in the Fountain or proruption of the River Dan.

The Reasons why these Rivers hide themselves under the Earth, and again
emerge, are, 1. The obstacle of a more elevated place, than the Channel of the
River. 2. Either perchance some cavity existing in the Earth, or some
inconstant matter, which easily gives place to the gliding River.

There are also other Rivers, which hide themselves under the Earth; but do not
again emerge, as we shall show in the following Propositions.

Proposition VII. Most of the great and indifferent Rivers, as also a great
part of the lesser, do exonerate themselves into the Sea, or a Lake; and the
place where this exoneration is made, is termed the Mouth of the River. Some
Rivers have one, some three, and some more such Mouths. Some of the Rivers of
indifferent magnitude, as also the lesser sort, discharge themselves into
greater Rivers: the others either stagnate, or are sucked up by the Earth.
Most Rivers, both great and small, lose themselves in the Sea, or in Lakes.
Concerning the greater Rivers, the thing is evident by the Example of the
Rhine, the Danube, the Wolga, and such like: For the Danube is exonerated into
the Euxine Sea by seven Mouths; the Wolga has at least seventy Outlets or
Mouths; the Nile has seven, and where it overfloweth, more.

The cause why greater Rivers do exonerate themselves into the Sea, is their
abundance of water and vehement course. Now why they have more outlets than
one, there is a twofold reason for the same; 1. The abundance of water. 2. The
generation of Sands and ridges in the mouths, which in progress of time was so
augmented, that they become either part of the Land or Island, and so cause,
that the River gliding is divided into two branches. And when many such ridges
are generated, the River is divided into many branches, or one mouth into many;
but then for the most part the mouths are carried forwards, and the Sea
recedeth from the Land.

Courses of water often made by the Industry of Men.
The Ancients testify, that the Nile in times past let it self into the Sea by
one mouth, which was termed Canobus. Unto these two former causes a third may
be added, viz. Human Industry; for men oftentimes from some River derive
courses of water, and prepare a passage or Channel for them into the Sea,
partly to water their Fields, and partly for the convenience of Navigation;
which Aqueduct in progress of time, by the violence of the water, becomes
greater. Therefore the Ancients write, and that not without probability, that
all the mouths of the Nile, except Canobus, were made by men. But of this we
shall treat more fully in the following Proposition; where also shall be
declared, how it comes to pass, that one River flows into the Channel of
another.

Wolchda in Moscovia (not Wolga,) arises from a Lake, and exonerateth it self
into another Lake.

Rivers, and Riverets, which neither exonerate themselves into the Sea, or into
other Rivers, are either Arms or Branches of other Rivers, or else peculiar
Rivers. Those which are branches of other Rivers very probably do stagnate, and
go not under the Earth. Now the cause why they tend not toward the Sea is
twofold; 1. Because the Channel is not so deep, and therefore they have not
much water. 2. The more hard Earth hinders the progress. 3. Many of them are
made to water the Fields, and for the more easy use of water. 4. The Mouth is
obstructed, the Sea departing, and the Land augmenting or promoting toward the
Sea, or the banks or ridges generated in the Channel, are so augmented, that
they admit of no water, but repel it; so that branch of the Rhine, which
formerly discharged it self into the Belgic Ocean near the Village of the
Catti, now stagnates in the midway, between Leyden and that Village.

But those peculiar Rivers, which neither exonerate themselves into the Sea,
nor into other Rivers; but rising in the Earth, seem to be absorbed by the
Earth; these Rivers are very small, also few; as also those that flow from the
Mountainous places of Peru, India, and Africa, are swallowed up either within
the Sandy soil, or are absconded in the Earth. So at Meten, a Village in
Arabia, near the Gulf, is found a River with a glorious Channel. Under these
Reeds, in the Summer season, the streams hide themselves with such a silent
course, that there appears nothing of humidity on the top; but if that no way
be admitted to these Riverets under the Earth, they make Marshes and small
Lakes. Notwithstanding some run with so slow a stream; that almost so much is
separated by exhalations, as they receive by the Stream, and so are stayed on
the Earth, and neither make Lakes, nor are absorbed; as the Riverets Conitra,
Salle, Marefsa, Jeleesa, and others in Moscovia.

Proposition VIII. Whether the passage or Channel, through which the Rivers
run, be made by the Industry of men, or by Nature?
Of the Channels of Rivers.
It is probable, that the Channels of those Rivers which were not generated with
the Earth, were made by hands, on those very accounts: 1. Because that
Experience testifies, that when new Fountains do flow, the water so flowing
out makes not a certain Channel to it self, but does dilate it self through
the adjacent Land. And therefore, if that it must flow, there is need of the
help of man to hollow a Channel. 2. It is manifest, that men have made many
Channels: So the Chinese made a Channel, by which water runeth from the yellow
River into another River. 3. Because Lakes and Marshes do confirm the same;
such as are found about the Fountains of many Rivers that are on a plain; such
as are those Lakes or Marshes, from which the Nile, Tanais, Wolga, and others
do flow. Which Lakes we doubt not, but to be generated and conserved from the
effusion of water, made round about by the Fountain; and therefore men made a
certain Channel to defend their Fields from such a water, into which Channel
the water might fall and drain the Lands. The same must be understood of
Rivers, whose Springs are on the Mountains.

Of affinity to this Proposition is this other, viz. Whether that Rivers, which
exonerate themselves into others, or meet together, made that passage by their
motion; or whether they were brought into them by men which made a Channel? The
latter seems more probable, for the reasons before alleged. The same must be
observed concerning the branches of Rivers and Circumductions, by which Islands
are made in the Tanais, Wolga, etc. Of Isles made in Rivers.
So one Arm of the Euphrates formerly passing through the Ghaldean Marshes,
was let out into the Sea; afterward it left its course, many Aqueducts and
Channels being made by the Natives to water their grounds; neither does it
arrive to the Sea, its mouth being obstructed, and its water is partly taken up
in the Aqueducts that are made, and partly averted into the other Arm, which
exonerateth it self into the Tigris. And so it seems to be the case of other
Rivers, which we now see do not go forwards into the Sea, but to stagnate. It
is probable, that in times past they did exonerate themselves into the Sea.

Proposition IX. Why no salt Rivers are found, seeing that Salt-springs are
found in many places.
The reason, why no Salt Rivers are found.
The reason is, because that men have no need of Salt Water, and therefore make
no Channel, by which the water of the salt Fountain may flow, by reason that
they can have Salt at an easier rate: But if that a fit Channel were prepared
from those salt Springs, we should have salt Rivers; such as are in Lunenburgh
and other places, under the Earth. Neither do we question, but that many Rivers
of Salt Water do flow from their Fountains under the Earth.

Proposition X. The Channels of Rivers, by how much they are the more near
their Fountains, by so much they are the more high; and by how much they are
the more near the Mouths of Rivers, and the Sea, by so much (for the most part)
they are the more depressed.
Furthermore, of Channels of Rivers.
But in some Channels some parts more removed from the Spring, are higher than
that part more near to the Fountain; either by reason of the Hills and Valleys,
as I may so say, in their Channels, or by reason of their Whirlpools: yet no
part of the Channel is higher than the Fountain.

The flowing of water.
The cause or reason of the Proposition is manifest, because that water flows
not but from a place more high to a place more low, and so every part of the
Channel (especially the mouth of the River) is lower than the Spring: for
otherwise it would flow back again to the Fountain. Now that the elevation of
the Channel does decrease even to the mouth of the River, that at least is true
concerning many parts of the Channel; for because here and there are found
Whirlpools in a River, places more depressed; and on the contrary, ridges and
little hills; thence it comes to pass, that one part of the Channel, although
more removed from the Springs; is higher than the other part of the Channel
which is more nigh the Fountain; and yet notwithstanding the water flows from
this to that, because that quantity of water flows into the places depressed,
that the superficies of it becomes higher than the little hillocks or ridges,
or the vicine patts, which being more elevated, lie toward the mouth. And
there is scarce any River to be found, whose Channel has not these
inequalities; especially in the Nile and Wolga these ridges do abound.

A Cataract, what.
And where the water falls from a higher place to a more depressed part of the
Channel; if the depression be great, the place is termed the Cataract of the
River, where the River runeth downwards with a great violence. Such Cataracts
great Rivers have, especially the Nile.

For the Nile in two places of his Channel falls down between the Mountains
with that noise and rapidness, that the Inhabitants are reported to be deafned
by the same, Wolgda also, a small River in Moscovia (not Wolga) has two
Cataracts near Ladoga.

So the Zaire, a River in Congo, six miles from the shore, has a Cataract,
where it falls from a Mountain: also the Rhine at Belefilda and Scaffusia,
falls with a great noise. But Drainers have observed, that if the bottom of
the Channel be depressed one pass in 200 paces, it will hardly be navigable by
reason of its celerity. Seeing therefore that all great Rivers are Navigable,
we infer, That the depression of the Channel is no greater than one pass or
mile in 200: but particular Cataracts and Whirlpools are excepted. Now this
depression of one part of the Channel beneath the other part is termed
Libramentum; and the depression of the mouths of the River beneath the place of
the Fountain is termed, the Libramentum of the River.

Proposition XI. Why Rivers have, or acquire a greater Latitude in one part of
them, than in the other.
Of the Latitude of Rivers.
The causes are fourfold; 1. If that the bank or shore be more low in this part,
than in that. 2. If that the Earth of the shore be less hard and coherent, as
not being sufficient to resist the violent access of the River, which sometimes
proceeds from the winds, or plenty of water. 3. If that the Channel on that
part be less profound, or hallowed, or have ridges: And 4. If that it flow from
any Cataract into that part.

Proposition XII. The Channels of Rivers become more or less depressed,
sometimes in this, and sometimes in that part.
They become less depressed, or elevated, and not so hollow; 1. If that Ridges
be generated. 2. If that the River become more broad on that part. 3. If that
the flux become less swift.

The depression or cavity of the Channel is augmented, if that the flux of the
River be more vehement and swift, especially from some Cataract, or between the
narrownesses of the shoars; more especially, if that the whole bottom consist
of earth less coherent.

Proposition XIII. Why some Rivers run with a more swift current, and others
with a more slow. And why one and the same River is carried with a swift
current in one place, and with a slow in another, which is observed of the
Rhine in many places.
Of the motion of Rivers.
The causes are, 1. The Altitude of the Spring. 2. The depression in the parts
of the Channel, or bottom (especially in the mouth,) for if that the bottom be
depressed one mile in two hundred; Drainers have observed, that the water is so
swiftly moved, that there is great danger in sailing: For where there are
Cataracts, there the Rivers rush with a mighty violence; and therefore Torrents
are carried so furiously, because that they flow from Mountains. 3. The
streightness of the Channel, and profundity joined with an abundant quantity of
water; as when Rivers pass between two Mountains or procurrent Lands.

Rivers famous for their swift course, are the Tigris, Indus, Danube, Yrtiis,
Malmistra, that flows with so great a noise, that it may be heard a great
distance off.

Proposition XIV.
The mouths of Rivers may be by so much the more easily obstructed, by how much
they are the more broad, and by how much they are the deeper, or less
depressed, and by how much there is less quantity of water, and the flux is
less swift and vehement. For these causes make the River to be carried with a
lesser violence, neither does it thrust forth the Terrestrial matter, which is
collected in its mouths, but rather suffers it to sink.

Proposition XV. Very few Rivers are carried in a direct course from the Spring
to the Outlet, many seek diverse quarters in their flux, and some flow with many
windings.
The course of Rivers from the Spring.
The cause seems partly to be the industry of men, partly the motion of the
water, partly the interposition of a ridge or bank in its direct course.

Winding Rivers are, 1. Rio de Orellana in Brazilia, making innumerable
windings, so that its Passage or Channel is reckoned to be above 1500 miles,
when in a direct line from the spring of it to the mouth are only 700 miles. 2.
The River De Madres in Anatolia, which has 600 windings. 3. The River Toera
arising in Siberica, flows with so many curvatures, or windings; and the
Russians and Siberians, when they sail in it, carry the Boat or small Vessel
and its lading by land from one winding to another, to avoid greater expense.

Proposition XVI. Whether the Lakes, through which some Rivers do seem to pass,
(or to enter into, and to go out from) be caused by Rivers? or whether they
have their peculiar Springs, and augment the water of Rivers? also whether that
a River flowing from a Lake be the same with that which flows in?
Of the cause of Lakes.
All Rivers have not such Lakes, but some only. Nubia, a River of Africa, has
five; the River Niger four; Rhodanus, the Lake Lemanus, etc.

Concerning those Lakes we have spoken in the preceding Chapter, viz. that a
River going forth must be compared with that which enters in: if that which
goes forth be greater than that which enters in, there will be peculiar
Springs in the bottom of the Lake, which causes that River: but if that a
lesser, or at least no greater, goes forth, this Lake is made and conserved by
the River entering in, and the cause or original of its generation was the
latitude and cavity, or depression of the Channel; and a Lake may be made from
any River, as we have said in the preceding Chapter.

Although the River going forth be situated almost in a direct line with the
River entering in, yet those two Rivers shall be accounted one River, or the
parts of one River, viz. when that which goes forth is greater than that which
enters in: for if it be lesser, or no greater, I think we ought not to
question, whether that which goes forth be the same with that which comes in.

Other Notes or Signs are in some, as the Rhodanus enters the Lake Lemanus,
and again goes forth* and yet causes not that Lake; which is discovered,
besides other tokens, from the color, which this River bears contrary to the
Lake; neither does the Rhine cause any Lake, but is produced and conserved from
waters bubling under the earth; yet I do not propose these as undoubted.

Proposition XVII. Most Rivers are by so much the broader, by how much they are
near to their mouth, or removed from their Spring, and great is their Latitude
in their Mouths or Outlets.
The Mouths of Rivers broader than at their Springs.
The cause is, 1. Because other Rivers enter into that which exonerateth it self
into the Sea, and so the quantity of water is augmented. 2. Because the Channel
is less depressed in the parts nearer the mouth. 3. Because that the water is
forced back by the wind blowing from the Sea from the mouth to the Fountain,
which violence is only discovered in the parts near to the mouth, not in those
remote and near the Fountain. 4. The Sea it self, when such a wind blows,
enters the mouth, and rendereth it more large and broad by vehement agitation.

And by so much the outlets are larger and broader in great Rivers, by how much
they are the fewer. Great are the mouths or outlets of the River Maragnon in
Brazilia; of St. Laurence in Canada; of the Zaire in Africa; of Rio de la Plate
in Brazilia: for this River is carried into the Sea by an outlet of 40 miles,
as some have observed; or as others, of 20 miles only. And I suppose those that
write of 40 miles, comprehend the other mouths of the River together. Those who
have been in Congo, relate that the mouth of the Zaire is 28 miles: and these
Rivers sending forth such a large quantity of water, overcome and obscure both
the salt taste of the water, and the motion of the Sea toward the shore, and
that unto 10 or 12 miles in the Sea.

Proposition XVIII. The water of Rivers carries with it many particles of
various Metals, Minerals; Sands, of oily or fat Bodies.
Rivers in their course carry various things with them.
Some Rivers carry gold, that is sands mixed with some grains of gold, and such
are 1. some in Japan; 2. In the Islands of Lequeo not far from Japan; 3. A
Riveret called Arroe in Africa, which springs in Monomotapa from the foot of
the Mountains of the Moon, in which Mountains there are golden Mines; and it
flows into Magnice, a River in Soffalae. 4. In Guiney, where the Negroes
separate these grains from the sand, and sell it, or exchange it with the
Europeans for Toys or slight Commodities. 5. In the Riverets about Mexico,
grains of gold are also gathered up, especially after showers of Rain. Which
must be understood of all these Riverets: For except in the times of showers,
scarcely any, or very little, is found. 6. In Peru. 7. In Sumatra. 8. In Cuba.
9. In Hispaniola and other adjacent Isles. 10. In Guiana a Province in America.
11. In the Rivers of Caribana great grains are found after showers. 12. Many
Riverets and Springs are found in the Regions about the Alps in Germany,
especially in the Province of Tirol, from the water of which gold and silver is
extracted, although nothing of grains be conspicuous in them, because they
carry very small Particles or Atoms. The Rhine also carries golden clay in
many places, as also the Abbis. In times past the River Tagus was famous for
rolling down Sand-gold; but at this day no such are found in it: neither do I
remember that any River in Europe is celebrated for such riches. Also in Hassia
at this time a small River is reported to be found, in the sands of which were
grains of gold; but I have read no Author worthy of credit concerning it.

No Silver Rivers or Riverets are taken notice of by Writers, yet I doubt not,
but that there as many, or more Riverets, which carry grains of gold; but
because they are not so easily discovered from the sand, and no great gain can
be obtained, therefore it has not yet been observed by any. The same is also
the cause why we meet with no mention of those Riverets that carry grains of
Iron, Copper, Tin, except of very few, of which questionless there are a great
number, the admirable effects of which being discovered, men admire and are
amazed, and vulgar Philosophers fly to an occult quality. Let us only cast an
eye on that River in upper Germany, A strange River in Germany.
which changes Iron into Copper, as the Vulgar think; so that if you hang an
Iron shoe in it, you will draw it out Copper. But the Iron is not changed into
Copper, as is vulgarly supposed, but the grains and particles of Copper and
Vitriol that are in this River, corrode the Iron by the assistance of the
motion of the water, and the particles of the Iron being removed, those of the
Copper succeed in their places. This the Modern Physicians, that are skilful in
Chemistry, have learned by another experiment.

Much less are the Riverets that are impregnated with many particles of kinds
of earth and salts observed: But we shall explain in the following Chapter the
Mineral and Metallic Springs.

From this admixture of various particles proceeds the great diversity of
waters in Rivers and Wells. The water of some, if that you use it to boil Meat,
makes it black, (which is a sign that it is impregnated with Iron;) neither
are Pease so easily softened, as when they are boiled in other water which is
somewhat more fat. Of diverse waters the same or like Beer cannot be made. Now
the Albis is of the number of these fat ones, as I may so say. The cause of
this variety is to be sought from the variety of the Lands, through which the
River runeth, which are either stony, gravelly, or metallic. And experience
testifies, that Rivers, whose water is fat, do run through clayie Lands, so
all the places that adjoyn to the Albis are fruitful.

Proposition XIX. The waters of most Rivers differ in color, gravity, and
other qualities.
The waters of most Rivers are of different qualities
For some waters are black, some inclining to black, some inclining to red, some
to white.

And this diversity of them is chiefly noted, when that two Rivers do meet; for
we may discover for many miles those waters where now they exist in the same
part of the Channel: From whence also it is manifest, that they differ in
gravity, when that one rather sinketh to the bottom of the Channel, than the
other; although this is made more manifest by the examination by weight.

The water of the Ganges is accounted the most wholesome, and the most light;
and the great Mogul, in whatsoever place he is, causes this water to be
brought him, of which he only drinks. Some will have the water of the Nile to
be the most fruitful, and the most wholesome. Most heavy waters are impregnated
with Iron or Mercury.

In great Rivers we must have respect to the Riverets, of which they are
compounded: For the Rhine receives many Mineral Riverets; so also does the
Danube of Gold, Iron, and Vitriol: and hence have they their quality, although
many Fountains have little of them.

Proposition XX. Some Rivers every year at a set time are so augmented, that
they overflow their Channel, and inundate the adjacent Lands.
Of the increase and overflowing of Rivers.
The most famous of those is the Nile, that so increases, that it overspreadeth
all Egypt, except the Hills. In Congo, Angola, Monomotapa, Soffala, Mosambique,
from those it is known that the Fountains of the Nile are the great Lake Zaire,
River Nile.
(or in the Lake Zaire) which is situate in the procurrent of Africa, in a
middle place between the Eastern and Western shore, under the tenth degree from
the Equator toward the South, as we have said in the former Chapter.

Near unto this Lake are many ridges of Mountains, which are called the
Mountains of the Moon; so that the Lake lies, as in a Valley, between
Mountains. Now because that these places lie from the Equator toward the
South, therefore the reason of the Solary motion requires that they should
have Winter when that we have Summer: but by reason of their small distance
from the Equator, they feel no cold; but instead of Snow they have almost
continual Rains two hour before and after Noon in the Kingdom of Congo; the
Clouds hardly permitting the sight of the Sun: with the same Clouds the tops of
the Mountains appear as covered; and in these Mountainous places rains and
showers are almost continually, which run down like Torrents, and all flow
together into the Lake Zaire, and from thence into the Channel of the Nile,
Zaire, Cuama, and others that arise from the same Lake, but yet do not abound
with so great a quantity (yet the Zaire does overflow every year) as the Nile,
because the Channel of them is more deep; and after a short Tract they
exonerate themselves into the Sea: yet all of them increase at the same time,
and disgorge themselves of a great quantity of water into the Sea.

River Niger.
The second River among those that overflow the adjacent Lands at a certain
time, is the Niger, of no less Tract than the Nile, though not so famous. It
overfloweth at the same time that the Nile does.

The third River of the overflowing Rivers is the Zaire, a River in Congo, of
which we have spoken. River Zaire.
Add to this the lesser Rivers of Congo.

The fourth is Rio de la Plate, a River in Brasil, which overfloweth the
adjacent Fields at the same time with the Nile, Rio de la Plate.
as Maffaeus writes.

Rivers* Ganges and Indus.
The fifth of the overflowing Rivers is the Ganges.

The sixth is the River Indus: these two Rivers in the Pluvial months of those
Regions, pour themselves forth upon the Lands without their Channels, where
then the Natives do gather the water into standing Pools, that in the other
months of the year, when there is almost no Rain, they may thence fetch water;
and this inundation causes great fertility in the Fields.

The seventh comprehends many, viz. four or five, which flow from the Lake
Chiamy in a moderate Channel, and exonerate themselves into the Gulf of
Bengala, passing through the Kingdoms of Peru, Sian, and others. That which
passes through the Country of Sian is called Menan. And at the time of the
inundation, the Fields and Streets of the Cities are covered with water, so
that they are forced to make use of Boats to sail from one house to another.
And this inundation also causes exceeding fertility.

River Macou.
The eighth is Macou, a River in Camboja, which overflows in the Summer months.

River Parana.
The ninth is the River Parana, which overfloweth after the same manner as the
Nile does.

The tenth in Choromandel a part of India, the Rivers overflow by reason of the
plenty of waters that flow from the top of the Mountain Gatis in the Pluvial
months.

River Euphrates.
The Eleventh is the Euphrates, which at set-times of the year overfloweth
Mesopotamia.

The Twelfth of these overflowing Rivers is Sus, a River in Numidia, River Sus.
which overfloweth in the Winter.

I have not read of any other Rivers, that I can remember, that do overflow in
an Anniversary time of the year, although some may do it in most years; to wit,
the River Obius, and Flavius a River of China.

There are many- Rivers that overflow without any order, or in a set-time, yea
there is scarcely any River of noted magnitude which overfloweth not its Banks
sometimes: So it is evident concerning the Albis, the Rhine, and the like. And
but that the capacity of the Channel, and the height of the Banks obstructed,
all great Rivers (in an Anniversary time) would inundate, because that most of
them are much augmented in the Spring season. And it may so happen, that a
River that did use to overflow, may begin to do it in an Anniversary time, viz.
if that any part of it, by reason of ridges or sands, or any other way, become
higher, and the Coasts or shoars become more high: but then men are accustomed
to raise Banks.

The only cause of these Inundations, is the abundancy of Water, which in some
Examples alleged, may proceed peradventure from dissolved Snow; but in most,
from frequent Rains. Yet that is a wonder, that the Indus and Ganges should
overflow in other Months, than the adjacent Rivers, from the Lake Chiama; but
the cause of this diversity, which is observed here in this Season, must partly
be taken from the Anniversary rains in the adjacent places, partly from the
Mountains and Rains about the places of the Fountains. But we, to avoid
prolixity, shall supersede to discuss every Example. The River Bibara in
France, near to Paris, sometimes without any Rains, or at least with those that
are usual, so swells, that it causes desolation unto the Suburbs of St.
Marcellus. Now the reason why almost all these Inundations make the Lands
fruitful, is, because that water that inundateth is either Rain or Snow-water;
which waters, both by reason of their Spirituous levity, and also, because of
their Sulphurous substance, which they have admixt in the Air. Above all
other, Minerals are very prevalent to fructify, and are also wholesome. Now that
there is such a Spirit and Sulphur in Rainwater, is proved, 1. From the Worms
that are generated in it. 2. From its easy putrefaction. 3. From the very
Chemical distillation.

Yet some Rivers by their Inundation, do not make the Earth fertile, but rather
cause sterility; as Ligeris in France; when that Sequana makes them fruitful
by its fat water.

Proposition XXI. To explain, how Springs or Fountains break forth.
Of the breaking forth of Springs and Fountains.
In the fourth Proposition we have showed, whence the water arises that flows
from Fountains. Now here we demand, by what force that water collected in the
Earth is thrust forth, seeing that it seems not possible to be done without a
violent removing of the Earth: But the causes are various, which make way for a
Spring in any place. 1. If that in any place there be a certain cavity; the
water distilleth into that. without the help of any other cause, when that by
creeping it comes into it, and then in course of time, makes greater passages
for it self, until that cavity being filled, it flows out and makes a River.
The same also happens without a cavity, if that the Spring be on the top of a
Mountain. Also for this reason frequent Springs are found in Woods and shady
places: For the Rainwater moistneth the Earth; and because it is not extracted
by the heat of the Sun, and an open and free Air, by degrees it allureth to it
self the hidden water of a future Fountain. 2. A way is prepared, and the Earth
removed by the Spirits, which are admixed with the waters, yet in the Earth;
also the rarefaction of water in the Earth, by which it requires the larger
place: For the Waters, whilst that yet they are hidden within the Earth, carry
many Spirits. Also Subterranean fires add not a little to this. 3. Oftentimes
Fountains are brought to light by showers, for showers do render the Pores of
the Earth more ample and large, when that they conjoyn with the water of the
hidden Fountain; and so this follows that, by reason of the mutual
conjunction and coherency. 4. Sometimes Springs are opened by an Earthquake: so
an Earthquake sent forth the River Ladon. 5. Sometimes they are discovered by
the Industry of Men, by digging the Earth. 6. Many Fountains have been
discovered by Animals, which are wont to dig up the Earth with their Snouts: so
a Hog first discovered the first Salt Spring in Lunenburgh; for when he had
rooted up the Earth and made a gutter, the water spouted out, which filling the
gutter, the Hog (according to their custom) lay down in it; then when he
arose, and that his back was dry, some discovered a very white color on him,
which when they had more accurately contemplated, they found it to be white
Salt: then they went to the Spring, and from thence forwards many more were
sought and found out; from which the City obtains almost ^ll its riches and
splendour: And in Memorial thereof the Hog was quartered and smoak-dried, and is
kept at this very day in the Palace of Lunenburgh to be seen.

Proposition XXII. A place being given in the Earth, to enquire, whether a
Spring or Well may be made in it.
See Vitruvius in the Eighth Book of his Architecture, See Vitruvius, Lib. 8.
Cap. 1.
Chap. 1. At this day we perform the same by digging up the Earth oftentimes to
a great depth; and for the most part veins or heads of Springs or Wells, or the
Wells and Springs themselves are found.

Proposition XXIII. A place being given, to make a Spring or Well in it, if
that it be possible to be made.
We will allege the words of Vitruvius, as being a man excellently skilled in
these affairs, See Vitruvius, Cap. 7.
seeing that we never used our selves to this kind of Exercise. In his Seventh
Chapter thus he speaks, Reason must not be contemned in digging of Wells, but
the natural reasons of things are to be considered with sharpness of wit and
great prudence, by reason that the Earth has many and various things within
it, for it is compounded, as other things, of four Principles, and the first is
Terrene, and has from the humidity of the water Fountains; also heats, whence
proceed Sulphur, Alom, Bitumen, and gross Spirits of Air, which being thick,
when by the fistulous intervenings of the Earth they come to the place where
the Well is dug, and find men digging, by their natural vapor they stop up the
Animal spirits of those that work, at their Nostrils: so that those that fly
not quickly away, are there choked: Now to avoid this, we must thus act; Let a
Candle be lighted and let down, and if that it continues burning, you may
descend without danger; but if that the light be extinguished by the force of
the Vapors; then let Aestuaries be dug on the right and left hand, near the
W^ll, so as by the Nostrils the Spirits will be dissipated. When those are so
explicated, and that you are come to the water, let the structure be so senced,
that the veins be not stopped: But if that the places should prove hard, or
that the veins shall not be altogether at the bottom, then assistance must be
taken from the coverings of Plaster-works. Now this must be observed in
Plaster-work, that the roughest and purest Sand be gotten, that the Cement be
broken with a Flint, that the most vehement Chalk be mixed with the Mortar; so
that five parts of Sand answer to two of Chalk or Lime: Let the Cement be added
to the Mortar; of it, let the Walls in the depressed trench, unto the measure
of the future altitude be spaged, the Bars being made of Iron. The Walls being
plaistered, let that which is Earthy in the midst, be evacuated to the lower
measure or libration of the Walls; and the bottom being levelled, let the
Pavement be plaistered with the same Mortar, unto the thickness that is
appointed. Now these places, if they shall be made double, or treble, that they
may be transmutated by the percolations of the water, will make the use of it
far more wholesome; for the Mud, when that it has found a place to sink in, the
water becomes more clear, and will keep its taste without any scent; if not,
you must of necessity add Salt, and extenuate it.

Proposition XXIV. To prove, whether the Water of a Spring be wholesome.
Of Spring Water, whether it be wholesome, or not.
Concerning this, Vitruvius thus writes; Their probations must be thus looked
after: If that they flow and be open before that they begin to be drawn, look
on them and observe of what membrature they are; what Inhabitants dwell about
those Fountains, whether they be of strong Bodies, of good colors, not lame,
blear or sore-eyed; if so, the Waters are very excellent. Also, if that a new
Spring be dug, and the water be put into a Corinthian Vessel, or any other kind
made of Brass; and if it causes no stain, it is then most excellent water.
Also, if that that water be heated, and afterward settled and poured forth, and
that no Sand or Mud be found in the bottom, that Water is also very good. Also,
if that Roots put in that water be quickly boiled, they show the water to be
good and wholesome. Also that the water in the Fountain be clear and pellucid, if
that no Moss or Reeds grow about it: Or if that the place be not defiled with
any filth, but a pure show. These signs show it to be tenuous and very wholesome.

Proposition XXV. A place being given, to make an apparent Fountain in it, if
that it be possible.
See Proposition V.
That is termed an apparent Spring, as we have showed in the th Proposition,
where the water spouteth out, being sent from a more high place through a
Subterraneous passage. Now such a Spring may be made, if that any Lake, River,
or Fountain be in the adjacent Land, viz. a Pipe or Channel must be made under
the Earth, from the given place to the adjacent Lake or River, through which
the water may flow to the given place, as we shall show in the following
Proposition.

Proposition XXVI. To bring a River, from a given Fountain or River, to the
place given.
If that the Fountain or River given be higher than the place given, the work
will be easy: Now this is found out by Geodetical or Surveying Instruments; and
the operation it self is termed or said to wash the places, for the leading of
the water; and the difference between the Altitude of the Fountain and the
place given, is termed the Libramentum of the River to be lead. Therefore a
Channel must be dug from the Fountain or River unto the place given, the
Librament of which must be greater or lesser, as we will have the River to be
swifter or slower: For the Problem is undeterminated for the most part in
Aqueducts, that the celerity of the flux may be moderate. It is thus observed,
that in the Longitude of a Channel of two hundred foot, the depression is no
less than half a foot, (for otherwise the water will not flow, or else it will
overflow: Vitruvius in one hundred foot requires no less depression than half
a foot,) neither ought it to be greater than an whole foot, or at most a foot
and a half (otherwise it will flow with an over violent and quick course.) But
if that the Fountain be not higher in the given place, there will be need of
Instruments; concerning which you must consult Mechanics, as also concerning
many other things, which are to be considered in this Affair. By this Problem
also is made a conjunction of two Rivers, when that a Channel is drawn from one
River into another, that a Navigation may be made from one into another; as
from Duina into the next River; from Tanais into Wolga; from the River Flamus,
in China, into Nanchina.

Proposition XXVII. Some Rivers are noted and famous for long Tracts, some for
Latitude, some for quickness of Course, some for the peculiar properties of the
Waters that they carry; some for one or two of these causes.
Rivers are noted for several occasions.
The truth of the Proposition needs no probation. I will only reckon up here
those Rivers which are the biggest of all, viz. those of a long tract, which
also are famous for Latitude: such only are sixteen in the whole Earth, as yet
known, viz. the Nile, Ob, Jeniscea, Orellana, Rio del Plata, Parana, Maragnon,
Omarranna, Ganges, Danube, Canada or St. Laurence, Niger, Nubia, Wolga, Jansu,
and Flavus.

After those, these following are famous for the breadth of their Channel, but
not for the length of their Course, and which are about twenty in number, viz.
the Indus, Zaire, Cuama; the Rivers from the Lake Chiamay, Euphrates, Tanais,
Petzora, Pesida, Tabat, Yrtiis, Santa Esprit, Amana, Magdalen, Julian, St.
Jaques, Rhene, Albis, Mosa, Borysthenes, and Totouteack.

We shall only here contemplate the courses of the ten greater Rivers, leaving
the more accurate explication of them, and the other Rivers, to Special
Geography.

The River Nile.
1. Nilus, Niger, Ganges, run almost a strait course; the rest have many, and
those vast Curvatures. The Spring of the Nile is placed in the Lake Zaire in
the South latitude of 10 degrees; its mouth Canobus is in the North latitude of
31 degrees; it flows from the South to the North: in some places it sends
forth it self in a broad space, in other places it is very narrow: it has two
Cataracts; its tract or Longitude is about 630 German miles, or 2520 Italian
miles, for which may be set down 3000 by reason of the windings; it overfloweth
every year, as I have elsewhere treated of.

The River Niger.
2. Niger, a River in Africa, whose Fountain or Spring is in the 11th degree of
North latitude from the Lake. Some write, that it is derived from the Nile by a
Subterranean passage: the sign of it is, that it overfloweth every year at the
same time as the Nile does. One of its Mouths is in the same degree of Latitude
in which the Spring is; but it is more removed from the Equator than 15
degrees of Latitude; it flows from the East to the West. In some places it
hides it self under the Earth, and again emergeth. Its tract is about 600
German miles; but it will be lesser, if that you wholly neglect its great and
noted bendings; and larger, if that all should be reckoned.

The River Ganges.
3. Ganges in Asia; its most remote Fountain is placed in the North Latitude of
43 degrees in Tartaria, but some bring it back to 33 degrees; its Mouth is in
the Latitude of 22 degrees: it flows from North to South. Its course is about
300 German miles: it overfloweth every year.

The River O^.
4. Ob also in Asia, very great, and every where broad; its Spring is placed in
the 48 degree of North latitude in the Mountains of Tartaria, near the
Stone-Tower. Its Mouth is in the 69 degree of Latitude; its tract is about 400
German miles, omitting its windings. It divaricateth it self into two Arms in
Siberia, or rather sends forth a branch from its self, which having finished
a crooked passage, returns into its self and so forms an Island, in which
there is a City built by the Moscovites and Siberians, called Jorgoet.

The River Jeniscea.
5. Jeniscea, another River in Asia, heretofore unknown to Geographers, but
observed by the Moscovites. It is found to be greater than the Ob, from which
it is distant ten weeks voyage toward Tartaria; at the Oriental shore of which
a ridge of Mountains are extended in a long tract: on the Occidental shore
inhabit a People called Tingaesi. Every year in the Spring it overfloweth the
space of 70 miles toward the Western lands, at which time the Tingaesi betake
themselves with their Cattle and Housholdstuff into the Mountains, on the
Eastern shore. Its Fountain and Outlets are unknown; its tract is supposed to
be no lesser than that of the Ob.

The River Pesida.
6. Pesida, removed some days Journey toward the East from Jeniscea: its
Oriental shore is thought to touch on China, and the Kingdom of Cathay: its
Fountain and Outlets are unknown. It is none of the number of the great Rivers;
but I have briefly touched on it, because that no Geographers have hitherto
made mention of it; as also of the River Jeniscea and Yrtiis.

The River Orellana.
7. Orellana, in America, (so called from Francis Orelli) is accounted amongst
the greatest Rivers of the Earth. Its Fountain is in the Kingdom of Peru, in
the Province of Quito, in the South latitude of 72 degrees, (but this is not
altogether certain; its Mouth is fifteen miles, in Latitude two degrees
Southerly. Its tract is said to be 1500 Spanish miles, by reason of its great
number of bendings, when that in truth it extends not 700. Others confound
with it, or make the River Maragnon to be a branch of it. It is in some places
four or five Leagues broad; but it receives not its water so much from a
Spring, as from Rains falling on the Mountainous parts of Peru; so that in the
dry mouths of those Mountains it carries little water. And indeed the Moderns
do much detract from its magnitude.

Rio de la Plata.
8. Rio de la Plata, in Brasilia; its Fountain is in the Mountains of Peru: Its
Mouth is in the South latitude of 37 degrees, and that is said to be about
twenty miles; but when it overfloweth it has many Outlets, which some account
for one; at that time it carries not much water. The Natives call it
Paramaguasu, that is, a water like the Sea, as some observe.

The River Omaranna.
9. Omaranna also, a River in Brasilia, flowing from the Mountains of Peru in a
long tract. These three great Rivers in Brasilia, viz. Orellana, Rio de la
Plata, and Omoranna, meet somewhere in some Lakes in the Mediterranean places
of Brasilia; and emorge again, being disjoined.

The River Canada.
10. and lastly, Canada or St. Laurence, in America Septentrionalis: its Spring
is in the Lake called des Iroquis. Its large Mouth is in the 50th degree of
North latitude, and its tract is no lesser than 600 German miles.

Proposition XXVIII. Whirlpools are found in the Channels of some Rivers.
So in the River Sommona, between Amiens and Abbeville, in Picardy in France,
is a secret Whirlpool, into which the waters rush with such violence, that
their found may be heard for some miles.

Proposition XXIX. River-water is more light than Seawater.
Seawater more heavy than River-water.
The cause is easily known, to wit, Seawater carries much Salt in it.

Thence it happens, that many things sink to the bottom in Rivers, which float
on the Sea; which frequently is seen in Ships heavy laden, that are raised up
in the Sea higher than when in Rivers. Now various is the proportion betwixt
these waters, because that the Seawater is not every where of the same
gravity, nor the water of diverse Rivers; but yet the proportion is about 46 to
45, so that 46 ounces of River-water do equally ponderate 45 of Seawater.

CHAP. XVII. Of Mineral Waters, Baths, and Spaws.
Because that there are many kinds of liquid Bodies, or Waters, the peculiar
properties of which men do admire at; therefore Geographers are wont to treat
of them: But all of them hitherto, except a bare recital of their Names, and a
reckoning up of some wonderful Fountains, or Springs, have added nothing to
solid knowledge. But we shall treat more clearly of them, and that with a
declaration of their causes.

Proposition I. No Water is pure and Elementary, but contains or has admixed
particles, such as are found in Terrestrial Bodies: These particles are not
only Earth, but also they are various; as Oils, Spirits, and the like. That is
termed Mineral-water, which contains so many, or such particles of a
different nature from the Water, so that from them it gains, or has notable
qualities, which we discover by sense, or the properties are notable by sense.
No Water is pure, but has admixed particles.
THe truth of the Proposition is manifest by Experience, and is proved both from
the differences of tastes, and from distillation: and all Naturalists agree,
that simple or pure water, as the other Elements separated from others, do not
exist in nature. The cause is, the various and perpetual agitation of the
particles; but in Waters, that I may say somewhat in particular concerning our
matter in hand, by the cause of admixtion of Heterogeneous, they receive
Spiritual particles. The Rain, and the Air it self, touching the water,
consists of diverse particles; therefore all waters, have admixed particles of
another nature; but there is not the like quantity in all of them. Into the
Rhine indeed, the Danube and Albis, and into all great Rivers, other Riverets
do flow in, impregnated with innumerable particles, and in such quantity, that
they are evident to the senses: but because besides these, many other Riverets
do flow into them, not impregnated with so great a quantity of Heterogeneous
particles as are discoverable to the eyes; and because that the greatest part
of the water that they carry, consists of Rain and Air, therefore also in these
greater Rivers, those Heterogeneous particles are not easily discovered, but
must be separated from them by Art, if that any one will have them discovered
to the sense. But we shall especially call them Mineral waters, which have some
notable property beyond the common waters; that is, that contains such an
admixture of Heterogeous particles, that thence possess a notable and sensible
quality.

Proposition II. Mineral Waters are of three kinds.
Of Mineral waters.
Some are Corporeal (we want an apter word,) others Spiritual, othe^s both
Corporeal and Spiritual. I term those Corporeal Mineral waters, which contain
solid and fixed particles of Minerals; so that these may be discovered and
separated by the sight. These Corporeal Bodies are twofold; some carry those
particles of Minerals of a very great magnitude, that without any trouble, or
very little at the least, they may be beheld in the water, and to speak
properly, they are not commixed waters. Such are those of which we have spoken
in the former Chapter, because that the grains of Gold, Silver, and the like,
are contained in their waters; therefore they are termed Gold and
Silver-bearing Rivers: but these waters in property of Speech, are not to be
termed Mineral* because that they have not these particles commixed with them,
but free; neither do they recive any property or quality from them: Yet because
that men also admire such Rivers, and the explication of them has great
affinity with the enodation of Mineral waters, properly so termed; therefore I
comprehend them under the general ^ppellation of Mineral waters. Bituminous
Fountains, and the like, may be reduced under this Classis.

Corporeal Mineral waters.
But those are termed more properly Corporeal Mineral waters, which contain
indeed solid particles of Minerals; but so little, small, and altogether
commixed, that they are not presently discovered by the sight, but either by
Art, or a long tract of time, subsiding and concreasing, and are reduced into a
sensible quantity; as are sa^^ Springs, sulphurous Fountains, and such like;
and Chemical waters, in w^^^ Metals are dissolved.

Spirituous waters.
Spirituous waters are (...), that contain only a volatile Spirit, such as is
found in Minerals; but no fixed particles, and therefore none can be elicitated
from them apparent to the sight.

These are termed Corporeal and Spirituous waters together by me, which have
both fixed or solid, and volatile or Spirituous particles of Minerals in them.
We shall allege Examples of the Species of them in the following Propositions.

Proposition III. To explain, how Mineral Waters are generated.
Of the generation of Mineral waters.
1. If that Waters be carried by a violent torrent or course through
Subterraneous passages, in which Metallic Earth and Minerals are less thick;
it is manifest, that the water may take and carry away from these with it
grains of those Mineral waters: this therefore is the generation of Corporeal
Mineral waters, that carry grains.

2. If that the Minerals be imperfect, or less dense; as Vitriol, Sulphur, and
the like: or also the Salts, which of their own nature are easily united to the
waters, if that the Waters or Riverets be carried through these Earths (without
Channel or Aqueduct, as we have explained in the generation of Fountains) the
water comes to the Fountain; this will have the Atoms of these Minerals
admixed, and it will be a Corporeal Mineral water of a subtle conjunction,
according to the Atoms. Now whether that the water can unite the Atoms of
Metals after this manner to it self, is questioned, because that they are hard
and solid, neither are they easily united to the water. I suppose it possible
to be done, but not by simple water, but by a salt vitriolated water, which is
like unto the Aqua fortis of the Chemists: For as these waters of Aqua fortis
dissolve Metals into Atoms, and intimately unite them to themselves, so that
they sink not to the bottom, unless that they be separated by Art: So also if
that such waters be carried through metallary earth, they are able to dissolve
the metallic particles, and unite them to themselves. After this mode is the
generation of mineral corporeal waters of the second Classis explained.

3. In the bowels of the earth, before that Metals are generated, vapors and
fumes are condensed unto the extant Angles of the Rocks unto which they adhere;
and first they meet together in a soft substance, and at length they are
condensed: therefore if that the waters are carried or glide through the earth
where such vapors are, and are raised, they are impregnated by them, and so
spirituous mineral waters are made. But imperfect Minerals, after another mode,
cause mineral waters of their own nature, viz. because that being heated by
their own or subterraneous heat, they send forth spirits and vapors, as Salt,
Sulphur, Vitriol, Coals, and such like: and such fumes and exhalations are
continually made in places of such Minerals, through which if that the water
glide, it is impregnated with the spirit. There are some that suppose these
spirituous waters may be generated only by being carried through the metallic
earths, or by a continual stay upon them, or in their Mines: but it is certain
by experience, that the waters receive no quality from the Metals and Minerals,
if that they should lie 100 years immersed in them: therefore laying aside this
opinion, we affirm that those waters are generated, or spirit received, from,
first, the seed of Metals, as I* may so say, or their Primordia; or secondly,
we may say, that those waters are now impregnated by other subtle Spirits of
Vitriol or Salt, by the benefit of which a Spirit is extracted from the hard
Metals: But I attribute the less to this cause or mode of generation, because
here arises a question again concerning the generation of the spirituous water
of Mineral, Vitriol, and Salt.

4. From these together, it is evident how mineral waters, that are both
corporeal and spirituous, are generated.

Proposition IV. There are innumerable kinds of mineral waters, according to
the variety and diversity of the particles which they contain of diverse
Minerals.
In the precedent Proposition we have explained, how that mineral waters may
receive those particles (from which their admirable qualities do arise) from
Minerals or Fossils. Many kinds of Mineral waters.
Now because that there are various sorts of Minerals, thence it comes to pass
that the mineral waters are various and different in their qualities; yea, they
are almost infinite: For neither only are every one of these waters impregnated
by one kind of mineral, but together many of many; wherefore mineral waters
will either be simple or mixed, and the mixed will have something either from
three or four, or from many Fossils or Minerals.

Thence 1. are Metallic waters, viz. of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron.
2. Salt waters, viz. of Common Salt, Niter, Alome, Vitriol. 3. Bituminous
waters, Sulphurous, Antimonial, of Coals, and of Amber. 4. The waters of the
Earth and Stones, viz. Lime-waters, Chalk, Ochre, Marble, Alabaster. 5.
Mercurial waters, and the like.


These denominations, or kinds of waters, See Prosition II.
are to be understood according to the triple mode, by which in the second
Propasition we said, that Mineral waters were, 1. Some Corporeal, and even
manifest to the sense; or Corporeal by a subtle and accurate commixion. 2.
That others were Spirituous. 3. That others were Corporeal, and also
Spirituous. These differences must be applied to every kind of Mineral-water,
viz. (to demonstrate by one or another Example) Gold-waters are, 1. Corporeal,
which carry grains of Gold of that magnitude, that with little trouble they are
discernable to the sense, neither have they any accurate coherencies admixed
unto them. 2 Corporeal waters, which possess very small particles of Gold, and
indeed very closely connexed to the water; such waters I suppose to Be.
Although the nature of Gold be such, that the least grains in the water sink to
the bottom, yet that such may be, is manifest from the Aqua Regia of the
Chemists, in which Gold is dissolved into Atoms. But this Aqua Regia is not
simple; therefore neither do those waters, that are found in nature to have
Atoms of Gold admixed, want other particles of Minerals. 3. Spiritual
Golden-waters, which conceive a spirit and vapor in the Earth, from whence
Gold is wont to be generated. 4. Golden Corporeal-waters, and also Spiritual,
which possess both Atoms of Gold, and a vapor generating Gold.

A fourfold difference of Mineral waters.
After the same manner the Readers must apply this fourfold difference unto
every kind of Mineral waters, both simple and admixed, (whence innumerable
kinds do exist; for either the bodies of the Minerals, or the Spirits, or the
body of one with the spirit of another, are conjoined in the water:) so
Leaden-waters are fourfold, viz. 1. Manifestly Corporeal. 2. Corporeal, of a
subtle mixture. 3. Infected with a Spirit of Lead: and 4. Impregnated both
with the Spirit and Atoms of Lead. So those four diverse participations of
Minerals are to be applied to Vitriol, Sulphurous, and Mercurial waters, and
the like; and more especially to these, to wit, to Salt, Vitriolate, and
Sulphurous, because in these, Nature it self does exhibit this fourfold
variety. I doubt whether that Corporeal waters of a mixed subtilty do exist.
Spirituous Metallic waters are very rare; but Sulphurous and Salt waters are
frequent. But the Corporeal and Spirituous, because these sorts of Metals are
both found in many places of the Earth, and also in a greater quantity, and
easily suffer their particles to be gnawed off; they send out also frequently,
a fume and vapor. We will explain by one Example this fourfold variety of
participation, and that in Gold; 1. In the preceding Chapter and the sixteenth
Proposition, we have enumerated those Riverets which carry grains of Gold, and
with this Treasury make glad the Natives; such are many in the Earldom of
Tirol, and the places adjacent: and we have said that the Rhine it self, Albis,
Danube, and most great Rivers in some places carry grains of Gold (as also of
other Metals and Minerals;) by reason that they receive Golden, or Gold-bearing
Riverets. The Rhine carries grains of Gold commixed with Clay and Sand in many
places; but especially at these, 1. Near Curia in Rhetia; 2. At Meinfield; 3.
At Eglinsan; 4. At. Secningham; 5. At the Town Augst, not far from Basil; 6. At
Norinburgh; 7. At Worms; 8. At Seltz; 9. At Mentz; 10. At Bacherack; 11. At
Bononia, and the like. The Reader may see those Gold-bearing Riverets which the
Rhine receives in Thurnhuserus, as also those that the Danube and Albis do
receive. In the water of this, viz. the Albis, are found grains of Gold: 1. At
Leutmeritz in Bohemia; 2. At Puru; 3. At Dresda in Misnia: 4. At Torga; 5. At
Magdeburgh; 6. At the Tower of Lunenburgh, fifteen miles from Hamburgh.
Concerning the Gold-bearing Riverets consult the forecited Book of
Thurnhuserus; where also you may see those that carry other Metals and
Minerals.

These Waters are therefore the Corporeal Golden-waters of the first mode, viz.
those that carry grains of Gold; which less properly are termed Mineral or
Golden, because the Golden-grains are not permixed with the water, but are
carried down by the rapid Current of the water; and the waters themselves are
simple or uncompounded. 2. Golden Corporeal-waters of a subtle commixtion, to
wit, the Atoms of whose waters are mixed with the Atoms of the Gold; as we have
said of the Aqua Regia of the Chemists, which dissolveth the Gold, and uniteth
it to it self by Atoms. And now, because there may be like waters, which
whether they be carried through Golden-lands or Mines, may gnaw off and
dissolve some Golden-Atoms of it with Earthly ones; such Golden-waters many
Riverets seem to be, which Thurnhuserus writes to participate of Gold, and
reckons them up in the description of the Danube, Rhine, and other great
Rivers.

3. The Golden Spirituous-waters are very few, and some of those are they
peradventure, which Thurnhuserus enumerateth. Now such waters are less noted or
sensible, because Golden-Earth and Mines are very rare, and that in a small
quantity: Moreover where the Mines are, a quantity of other Minerals are also
together with the Gold, whence the water receives many more Spirits. Yet some
Riverets in the high Alps of Bohemia, are said to participate of these
Golden-Spirits; also in Silesia, and the Mountain that they call Fitchtelberg.
The Pepper-Baths, in the Bishopric of Curia, are believed to be impregnated
with such a Spirit; but by reason of the admixture of other Minerals in greater
quantity, the waters receive a less sensible quality from it.

4. Golden-waters, which carry both Atoms of Gold and Spirit, are some of the
Riverets mentioned by Thurnhuserus.

We will add the Example of Salt-waters:

Example of Salt-waters.
1. Salt Corporeal-waters, viz. which carry the more gross particles of Salt,
and not accurately mixed; they are many, and sufficiently known to any person,
as certain Springs of which Salt is made: Hitherto appertains the Seawater,
if that it be made more gross by the heat of the fire.

2. Salt Corporeal subtile-waters, which contain the Salt reduced into little
particles; they are those, which when they are most Salt, yet withal they are
very pellucid and subtle, as many salt Springs and tenuous Seawater; although
that there be great difference in this subtle commixtion: Hitherto
appertains the Vrin of all Animals.

3. Salt Spirituous-waters, which contain not the particles of Salt, but the
spirit of Salt: they are such, that if you should boil many Vessels of them,
yet notwithstanding you should receive no Salt. Not a few of these are in
Germany, and elsewhere; but they are rarely found simple.

4. Salt Corporeal, and Spirituous-waters, which have particles of Salt and
Spirit.

Almost all the Corporeal have also some portion of Saline spirit, but most of
them very little: So, near the City Saltzinga, not far from the Rhine, the
Fountains are salt; the water of which, though more salt than other waters, yet
it affords less Salt, because its sharp and salt sapor is sharpened by a
spirit or volatile Salt, that flies away in the boiling. Hence it is manifest
how this fourfold difference of participation is to be applied unto every sort
of Mineral waters, viz. Vitriolate-waters, Alom-waters, Lead-waters, and the
like.

Proposition V. To reckon up the noted differences of Mineral Waters.
The noted differences of Mineral Waters.
In the foregoing Propositions we have explained the true kinds and differences
of Mineral waters, taken from the very essence of them, viz. from the particles
of the Minerals which they carry, or by which they are impregnated; but those
differences, because they do not so strike the senses; and moreover, by reason
of the various mixture of Minerals, communicate various properties to the
water, wherefore they are less vulgarly known; for the denomination of all
Bodies arises from manifest qualities on the Sense, as also does the celebrity
of waters amongst men. The explication and cause of which apert qualities and
properties must be sought from the inmost composition of things. Therefore the
noted and famous differences or species of Liquors flowing from the Earth, and
also known to the Vulgar sort of men, are these ten; to wit, 1. Sowr-waters: 2.
Bitter: 3. Hot: 4. very Cold: 5. Oily and Fat: 6. Poisonous: 7. Colored: 8.
Ebullient: 9. Water that converts less hard into harder, or after any other
mode, changing any Bodies cast in or stained with them: 10. Salt-waters: And in
the 11th place we may add those, which are endowed with any other wonderful
property. Unto these Classes, those that are studious in these things may
reduce all Waters, which are found described in Authors. We shall only in brief
show their generation and differences, and allege some Examples.

Proposition VI. To explain the cause or generation, difference or kinds of
Acid or Sour Waters.
Of Sour Waters.
Great is the celebrity of Acid waters or Springs; they commonly call them Spaws.

1. They arise from the admixture of a Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, and Alom; which
Minerals, being partly simple, and partly more or less admixed with other
Minerals, are found in the cavities of the Earth, especially in Iron. We prove
this to be the true cause of Acidula's and Spaws: 1. By reason that almost
every where, where such Acid waters break out, Mines of Vitriol, Salt, and
Alom, are found. 2. Because the Spirits of Vitriol and Salt, are Acid, as also
some Spirits of Sulphur; as is evident from Chemistry. 3. Because that from
these kind of Acid waters, no Acid body, but Spirits, is separated, which are
altogether like unto the Spirits of Vitriol and Salt.

2. Great is the quantity of Acid waters or Spaws in diverse Regions, where
Mines especially abound. The cause is, because that an Acid, Sour Spirit is
almost in all Bodies; (by reason that we have showed, that it is Elementary, in
the Seventh Chapter and first Proposition) it is found in all herbs and fruits.

The difference of Spaws.
3. The difference of Spaws is found to be notable: Some are found to be so
sharp or sour, that men make use of them instead of Vinegar. Such a Spring is
found in Nicana, a Province of Sicilia: In Germany, the Fountain at Elleboga is
of a wonderful Acidity. Other Acid Springs are termed Winy, because that by
their sharpness they come near the grateful taste of Wine; amongst which, that
is famous which is in the Earldom of Catzenellebocen in Germany, at the Town
Schwalbach. In the Province of Lions in France, at the Town of St. Baldomare,
is a Fountain termed Fontaine forte, that is, the strong Fountain: it supplieth
the want of Wine, and if that one fourth part of it be mixed with Wine, it will
want nothing of the taste of Wine; if it is poured on Flour it will presently
ferment. They can boil no Meat in it, for by reason of its subtilty it flies
away: It is very wholesome, so that the Inhabitants seldom use a Physician.

In Aquitaine, not far from the City Bessa, is the like Winy sharp Spring; unto
the waters of which, if that you only admix the sixth part of Wine, you will
imagine, that you drink pure Wine without any admixture of water. Nigh to Rome
is an Alomy sharp Fountain, which being mixed with Wine, makes a very grateful
Drink. Great is the number of Acid Springs in the Upper Germany, whereof some
flow into the Danube, and others into the Rhine. Very many are in the
forementioned Earldom of Catzenelleboch, in the Province of Triers, in Tirolis,
Rhaetia, Vindelicia: a noted ane is near Anderna, called Heilbrun. In the
Province of Toledo in Spain, near the Village Valentiola, are Springs, which at
the bottom are found Acid, and of a Winy taste, and in the upper part, sweet;
which Baccius thinks to happen, because that the Nitrous and Acid parts do
subside and sink to the bottom. But I suppose, if that the Relation be true,
that it proceeds from the subtilty of the Spirit, which being brought to the
superficies, presently do expire.

Other Acid Fountains are astringent, and contracting the palate, which is a
token of Iron particles, or of the admixture of Vitriol, as also of Alom.

The Water of Acid Fountains, in Rainy and Cloudy weather, is found less Acid;
which is a sign of an admixture of condensated Air. Also, if that the water be
exposed to heat; or if it stand in an open Vessel for some hours; or if it be
carried a long Voyage not well covered, in cold Vessels, it presently loses
its Acidity; which is a sign, that the Acidity of them depends on a subtle
Spirit.

Yet they also have Atoms, and the very Vitriol, Alom, Iron, Salt, Gravel, and
the like. This is proved from the matter that is discovered to adhere to the
Conduit-pipes.

The Studious may collect Examples by reading of Authors: At least two hundred
Acid Springs or Riverets run into the Rhine; but by reason of the subtilty of
the Spirits, nothing of acidity is discovered in the Rhine.

Do you demand, why there are no Acid Fountains in the Northern places? I
suppose that cause to be the defect of Subterraneous heat, and an over great
condensation of the Earth; as also for that cause it comes to pass, that
little or no Gold is found in those Regions.

Proposition VIII. To explain the generation of hot Springs, termed Baths, and
the places of the more famous of them.
Of the generation of hot Springs or Baths.
A Spring in Izland is judged the most fervid of them all, whose water little
differs from that, which has arrived to the highest degree of heat and
boiling on the fire. But Caronius writes, that in Japan there is a Spring so
hot, that no water can be brought to that degree of heat by the most vehement
fire. It flows not continually, but twice in a day for one hour with a great
force of spirits, and makes a great Pool; which another has informed me to be
called by the Natives, Singacko, that is, Hell.

After those, the hot Fountains or Baths of Baden in Helvetia, are famous. Then
the Baths of Appona in Italy. Of Vulgar Baths there is a great number in the
Upper Germany, as also in other places. In Scotland is the Lake and River
Nessa, which is not hot, yet it is never congealed with Cold.

The cause and generation of Baths, is first the admixture of Sulphurous
particles, whilst the water is carried through Subterraneous passages; or
rather, whilst that it glideth through the Sulphurous Mines to a collection
about the Springs. 2. The vapors of Smoke and exhalations within the Earth,
where Sulphur is pure or impure, as Peat, Coal, Amber, and the like; for these
materials continually send forth a calid or warm fume, which heat the waters
carried thither, or gliding through those places. Yet particles of Alom are
admixed to many, nay the most Baths; as also of Iron and Niter, whence they
have somewhat a sharp and astringent taste or sapor. Almost all the Baths, which
we know, flow without ceasing, except the Pepper-Baths of Germany, which are
famous in Rhetia, not far from Curia. And besides Sulphur, they contain
something of Gold, and not a little Niter. The water of these Baths breaks
out every year about the third of May, and it cease to flow about the
fourteenth of September. The famous Baths in Germany are the Plumbariae in
Lorrain; Emsebadae, above Constantina in Alsatia, near Gebersweil in the
Marquisate of Bada; Wildbad, in the Dukedom of Wertebergh; The Blasianae near
Tubin. There are many also in Japan, and the Indian Isles. There are such hot
ones in the Islands of the Azores, that an Egg may be boiled in them.

Proposition IX. To explain the generation of oily and fat liquors flowing from
the earth, and to enumerate the places of the earth in which they are found.
Of oily liquors.
Some Fountains send forth a bituminous liquor, some a fat water, or water on
which drops of oil do flow. In Scotland, two miles from Edenborough, a Fountain
flows, on the whole Superficies of which drops of black oil do swim: the
Inhabitants use it to mollify the skin, and to take away scabs. So the River
Cilicia, termed Liparis, was famous amongst the Ancients, in which those that
washed themselves, were anointed by the water: whether it be so at this day, I
much doubt. So likewise there was a Lake in Aethiopia, which anointed those
that swam it. Also there was a Fountain in India, which on a clear day sent
forth a great quantity of oil. In Zant, and about Dyrrachium and Appallonia (as
Vitruvius writes) there were Fountains which vomited out abundance of pitch
with water. There was a Lake in Babylon of great magnitude, called Limme
Asphaltis, it had liquid Bitumen swiming upon it, with which, the black
Semiramis, encompassed Babylon with a Wall. At this day also at Monasterium in
Bavaria, is the Fountain Degemsce, on the top of which oil swimmeth, and is
daily taken off. The Acid waters of Schwalback, if they be taken in a Vessel,
and have been settled for some days, small drops of oil swim on the top of
them. There is a greater quantity in the Fountain termed Oelbrum, not far from
Hagenaw, at the Village Lamperscholch. Also in the many Bathes are found
bituminous particles, if so be that they stood quiet for some days; as in the
Baths of the Kingdom of Naples, termed the Bath of Petrolei.

Now the Fountains that send out not an oil swimming on the water, but a mere
fat or bituminous liquor, are also many. Near Gersbachium, in the Valley called
Lebersthal, from an antiquated and exhausted Mine, oil or bitumen flows, with
which the Country Swains besmear their Cart-wheels. Neither do the Inhabitants
know its excellency. In the Isle of Sumatra is a Spring from which Naptha, like
unto oil, flows; others say that it is a kind of Balsom: they report
Fountains of Amber to be there likewise. In Peru, near the sea, is a bituminous
Fountain, sending forth a Branch or Riveret into the Sea. The Natives use it
instead of pitch, neither do they use any other matter. In Persia, not far from
Schimachia, at or near the high Mountain Barmach, in a Valley, are about thirty
Fountains of Bitumen or Naptha, but running in deep Wells with a great force;
the Depth is about two Else, wooden steps being made for the convenience of
descent, it sends forth a Sulphurous and strong Spirit: it is of a twofold
color, in some red, in others white.

The cause of these bituminous Fountains is a sulphurous and bituminous matter
in the bowels of the earth, thrust forth by a heat and spirit. The cause of the
differences is to be sought from the differences of the fat matters themselves;
as Succinum, Amber, Oil of Petrolei, Pitch, Naptha, and the like.

Proposition X. To explain the generation of bitter water, and to reckon up the
places of the earth in which they are found.
Of the generation of bitter waters, and the places where they are found
Many Fountains and Wells in the Regions of India, on the Choromandel, have
bitter water, although that they ebulliate in, and flow from Rocks. In Pontus,
a Region of Asia minor, a little River termed Exampeus, at the Town
Callipadus, is very bitter, it rendereth the River Hypanis, into which it
flows, also very bitter.

They arise from impure Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, Ink, Copper: as water left a
long time in a Copper vessel acquireth a bitter taste.

The Lake Asphaltites in Palestine, which is called Mare Mortuum, or the Dead
Sea, has a bitter water by reason of the impure Bitumen, whence it ought to be
referred to the fat waters of the former Proposition. It sends forth a
stinking scent and vapor: all things without life sink to the bottom; but it
suffers not any Animal to sink; neither does it grow sweet, although that it
continually swalloweth up the River Jordan. It is venomous by reason that it
contains Arsnick.

Proposition XI. Yo explain the cause of very cold Springs, and to enumerate
the places of the Earth where they are found.
The cause of cold Springs.
In the Province of Dauphin in France, not far from Vienna, is a Fountain of so
great cold, that the mouths of those that drink it are swelled with it, neither
can they endure their hands in it: it is not diminished for the water that is
drawn out of it, nor augmented by the water poured into it. In Arabia or
Aethiopia are most cold Springs, although that the heat of the Sun be most
excessive there. In Stiria, not far from Gretz, are Fountains so cold at the
bottom, that none can drink any water running or drawn from thence.

In a mile from Calma, a Spring sends forth water as it were boiling, with a
great wind, when yet it is very cold; hence they call it The mad water. The
cause of the coldness of these Fountains are,

1. The admixture of Nitre and Alom, also of Mercury, Iron, and the like.

2. The depth of the Spring, by reason of the defect of the Solary Beams, and
of the sulphurous subterraneous heat.

There are also some Springs which are sometimes cold and sometimes hot. In
Gatalonia, the Lake and Fountain Salsula in the Winter is hot, and in the
Summer very cold. This is common to it, with many others. I think the cause to
be, that in the Summer the pores of the Earth are open, through which the hot
Spirits break forth; in the Winter they are closed, whence within there are hot
Furnaces that heat the waters: So some Fountains are more hot in the night than
in the day.

Proposition XII. To explain the generation of those waters which seem to
change bodies into another kind; and to reckon up the places of the Earth where
they are found.
There are some waters which change wood into the hardest stone. In Ireland, Of
the generation of waters which change bodies into another kind, etc.
above the City Armagh, in a Pool not very large, a stake of wood if it be
fixed for some months, the part that sticks in the Mud will be iron, the part
which is touched with the water is turned into stone, and the rest remains
wood; so Giraldus and Maginus relate: but Brietius says, I know not by what
authority, that it is a mere fable. The waters of Loches in Blois, a Province
in France, turn all things put into it into stone. At the City Senon in
Burgundia, near a Lake, a Spring flows which hardneth into stone. Vitruvius
says, that in Cappadocia, between Mazaca and Tuana, is a large Lake, which
changes a reed or wood put into it in one day into stone. In Bohemia, near the
Baths of Charles, is a Fountain, in which wood lying long, is changed into
stone. Other waters are thought to change Iron into Copper, which yet really
they do not; but by reason that waters themselves carry particles and spirit of
Copper and Vitriol, therefore they dissolve the particles of Iron, and by
degrees take away from it, which whilst that they do, the Copper particles of
the water are reposed in the place of the Iron ones taken away, or there adhere
whilst that they glide with the running water.

The reason of those that change wood into stone are these:

1. Some do not change the wood it self into stone, but earthy, stony, and
saline particles contained in the water, do apply themselves to the wood, and
so, as it were, cover the wood with a stony crust, and do not really change it.

2. Some do not change the wood into stone, but cause a stony hardness to the
wood, which some mineral waters may possibly do.

3. If that some waters have truly changed wood into stone, I conceive it to be
done after this manner; that chief difference is found by sight between the
wood and the stone, that in the wood there are certain long Fibers or Veins,
unto which the particles do cohere, and those are less thick: but in stone the
particles are like unto Atoms, without any certain extension into long Fibers.
If that therefore any water dissolve, and as it were grind the particles
cohering in the wood, according to a long line, so that now they do no more
cohere after this mode, but yet are more condensed; there will be no more any
great difference between the wood and stone, as may be observed by our Eyes;
yet it is probable that these mineral waters communicate some substance to the
wood it self.

There are other waters whose faculty is reported to be able to change the
colors in the hair of man or beast.

Proposition XIII. To explain the cause of poisonous and death-causing waters,
and to reckon up the places where they are.
Of poisonous waters.
Such is the Lake Asphaltites by reason of its Arsenical Bitumen. In times past,
famous was the Fountain of Terracina, which was called Neptunicus, in the
Region of the Volsci, of which those that drank were deprived of their lives;
therefore it was filled up with stones by the Inhabitants. In Thessalia a
Fountain springs of which no Cattle drink, nor no kind of Beast approaches.
Famous, or rather infamous, is the water, which in the Region of Arcadia,
called Nonacris, the Ancients write to drop exceeding cold from stony Rocks,
therefore called the Infernal and Stygian water, which no vessel, either of
silver, brass, or iron, could be preserved in, without breaking. And by this
water Historians report that Alexander the Great was killed by Jolla Son of
Antipater, and that not without the infamy of Aristotle. At this day many
mortiferous waters are found in the Places or Regions called the Alps; but
most of them are stopped with stones, which is the reason that so few
death-causing Fountains are known.

Now the generation of such water is, if the water glide or flow through
Arsenical, Mercurial, or Antimonial Earths, and are impregnated with their
fumes: For as the smoke or fume of Arsnick kills living creatures, so waters
impregnated with such a fume, do the same.

Proposition XIV. To explain the generation of colored waters, and their
differences, and to enumerate the places of the Earth in which they are found.
At Chinen in France, water flows from a Cave of somewhat a yellowish color.
Of colored waters.
In the Kingdom of Congo a Riveret flows of a red color into the Sea. In
some places waters flow of a black, of a green, and such like colors, but they
are but few.

The cause of the color of these waters is, that they glide or run from lands,
before they come to the Fountain.

Proposition XV. To explain the generation of Salt-waters, and to reckon up the
places of the Earth in which they are found.
Of the generation of Salt-waters.
The generation is twofold: 1. From the Ocean they come through Subterraneous
passages, and flow to the Superficies of the Earth. 2. They are generated of a
Salt contained in the Earth, such as is found in many places, through which
whilst the water glideth, it conceives Saline particles and spirits, before
that it arrive at the Spring. Great is the plenty, and that known to every one,
of Salt Fountains. We have spoken in the preceding Chapter, and this matter is
easily known, by reason of the abundance of Salt, almost every where lying
hidden in the Earth, seeing that Salt it self is an Element.

Proposition XVI. To explain the cause of Ebullient Fountains, and those that
break out with a great spirit and wind; and to enumerate the places of the
Earth wherein they are found.
The cause is partly a Sulphurous spirit, and partly a Nitrous spirit commixed
with water in the Earth: Of ebullient Fountains.
if that it be a Sulphurous spirit, the waters are hot; if Nitrous, cold: For
neither are all the waters which ebulliate like to those that are hot, hot, but
many of them are cold, as is evident from that near to Culma, called a mad
water, of which we have spoken in the Twelfth Proposition. The River Tamayus in
Galaecia, arises from a Lake; in its rising, for some months of the year, it
sends forth a mighty noise. In Japan that wonderful hot Fountain, of which we
have spoken in the Eighth Proposition, not above twice every day breaks
forth, for the most part for one hour; now when that the water begins to
flow, it is carried with so great a force and vehemence of wind, that it moves
the vast stones incumbent on the Well, and leapeth to the height of three or
four Else with so great a noise, like unto the discharge of Cannon. In
Westphalia a Fountain breaks forth, termed Bolderborn, from its noise.

Most of the Spaws and Baths break forth with an abundance of wind, and
ebulliate as if they boiled; a Sulphurous spirit causes this in the Baths,
and in the Spaws, the Spirits of Vitriol, Nitre, and the like.

Proposition XVII. To enumerate the kinds of waters which have other certain
wonderful properties, and to explain the causes of them.
Unto this Classis all others ought to be reduced, which cannot conveniently be
referred unto the former sorts. Other kinds of waters of wonderful properties.
So there is a Fountain in Portugal termed Cadina, devouring all that is cast
into it: Also in times past there was another near to it, rejecting all things
cast into it; but this latter is obstructed. In Andalusia, not far from the
City Guadiana, Eusebius Nierenburgius relates, that there is a Lake which
shows the Seasons or Tempest; for when that this is approaching, it makes an
horrible noise, which is oftentimes heard for the space of 18 or 20 miles. In
Calice in France is a Well, into which if that a stone is cast in, a noise will
be heard like Thunder in the cavities of the Well. In the Alps are Wells,
whose water being drank off, contracteth swellings of a great bigness hanging
from their necks. In the Kingdom of Granada, at the Town Antiquarius, is a
Fountain of so great force, that it dissolveth stones.

Near unto Tours in France are Caves to be seen, termed commonly Les Caves
Gouttieres, from the roof of which the water which falls is formed into
diverse shapes, as Nuts, Almonds, and the like.

The hot Fountain of Japan burns all things, and devoureth cloth, iron,
flesh, etc. The studious may collect diverse other examples from other Authors,
and reduce them to this Classis, if that they seem not possible to be reduced
to any of the former. The Causes must be sought from the peculiar situation and
property of each place.

Proposition XVIII. To enumerate those Fountains which break forth at a set
time, not continually; to explain the cause, and those which ebb and flow.
Of Fountains which break forth at a set time, not continually.
This Proposition belongs not to this Chapter, but to the preceding; yet
because it belongs to the wonder of waters, and was neglected in the former
Chapter, here it shall be explained.

In a Fountain situated on the top of an high Hill, in the Province of Canaugh
in Ireland, the water ebbeth and flows every day with the flux and reflux of
the Sea; yet the water is fresh. The same is observed in the Fountain Louzara,
which is in the mountainous places of Galaecia, called Cabreti, 20 miles from
the Sea. Also in Aquitain, in the Village Marsacus, is a Fountain which
imitateth the swelling of the Sea, and swells with the increase of Garumnae
in Bordeaux. Elsewhere there are said to be Fountains which augment and
decrease contrary to the swelling of the Sea.

In Wales, near the mouth of the River Severn, is a Pool called Linliguna,
which swalloweth in the Marine floods, whilst that they arise, but it is by no
means filled with the same; and the flood of the Sea ceasing, then it rises
with a great force, and vomiteth out the water, with which it covers the
Banks.

In Biscay there are the four Springs Tamarici, whereof three every day are so
dried twelve times, as if that no water were in them, as Pliny reports: But I
question whether they be to be found at this day.

In Savoy is a Fountain of noted magnitude, callen Wonderful, which sinketh low
twice in an hour, and twice flows; and before that it flows, and does break
forth with a great noise, it flows into the Lake Burgites.

In the Mountains of Foix in Languedoc rises the River Lers, which in the
Months June, July, and August ebbeth and flows 24 times in a day. See Bertius.


In a Region of Westphalia, called Paderborn, is a Fountain which ebbeth and
flows twice every day, although it sends forth so much water, that not far
from the Fountain the water drives four Water-mills; and it breaks forth
with a mighty noise.

In the Province of Wallis in Germany is a Fountain, called the Fountain of St.
Mary; it cease to flow in the Autumn at the day dedicated to St. Mary, and
returns in May.

The Pool or Lake Maron in Palestine is so dry in the Summer, and brings
forth Herbs and Shrubs so high, that Lions, Wolves, and other wild Beasts do
abide there.

In Spain, two miles from Valindolid, is a Fountain which arises in May, and
falls in November.

All Baths flow without any cessation or change, except those that are in
Rhaetia, and are called the Pepper Baths: for they flow only in the Summer;
from the third of May to the fourteenth of September, then they cease.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mutation of the places of the Water and Land, or of the
Mutation of the watery superficies into the earthy, and the contrary.
Proposition I. To know the Superficies of the Earth, which the water
possesses, how great it is, and that which the Earth occupies.
Of the Superficies of the earth, which the water possesses.
WE cannot accurately know this, because we are ignorant whether the Sea or Land
does possess the Superficies of the North or South Polaryland. Moreover,
because the Superficies of the water, as also of the land, is terminated on the
Globe by an irregular bending of the lines, therefore it would be a very
difficult task to compute the quantity of the Superficies of the water and
land; but as far as we are able to collect in gross from the inspection of the
Terrestrial Globe, the Superficies of the water and land seem almost equal, so
that the Superficies of the water is half to the Superficies of the land, and
so also is the Superficies of the land.

Proposition II. The Superficies of the Water, as also of the Land, is not at
all times of the same magnitude, but sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser;
and when the Superficies of the Water is augmented, the Superficies of the Land
is diminished.
For the Sea overfloweth sometimes here, sometimes there, or takes away and
carries with it: so therefore his Superficies is augmented more or less, as it
has overflowed a great or less tract of Land, as in times past it did in
Thessaly. Yet this variety, as far as it is yet known, has a very little
proportion unto the whole Superficies of the water: it may be made great, as we
shall show in the eighteenth Proposition.

Proposition III. To compute what quantity of Water the Earth contains, and
what quantity of Land.
Of the quantity of Land and Water which the Earth contains.
For the finding out the accurate and true quantity of water and land, first we
ought to know both the whole Superficies of the water, as also its depth in
diverse parts of the Sea: also the subterraneous heaps of water ought to be
examined. All which, seeing that we cannot find out by any method, therefore we
cannot find out the accurate quantity of the water or land; but only from
certain Hypotheses, viz. we laid down the Superficies of the water to be half
the Superficies of the earth; the profundity to be quarter or half a mile:
neither do we reckon the waters in subterraneous Channels.

The quantity of water may be thus found out: Take a quarter, or half a mile
from the Semidiameter of the earth, and the solidity of the Sphere may be
found, whose Semidiameter is equal to the residue; let this solidity be taken
from the solidity of the earth; the half of the residue is the quantity of the
water: the same half subtracted from the solidity of the whole earth, leaves
the quantity of the earth, unto which must be added a fourth or fifth part of
the bulk of water, or of the former half. But these are uncertainties from
supposed uncertainties, or at least nigh unto truth.

Proposition IV. The Water may leave the shore and place of the Earth which it
does occupy, for diverse causes, so that the Land may appear dry, where the
Water or Sea was before, and so a new Land may seem to be generated.
A Sevenfold Tract of Waters.
There are a sevenfold Tract of waters, viz. 1. the Ocean, 2. Gulphs or Bays of
the Ocean, 3. Streights, 4. Rivers, 5. Lakes, 6. Pools, and 7. Marshes.

1. Marshes may be exsiccated or drained either by subduction of the water, or
by exsiccation of the earth, as none can doubt; for in many Regions the Soil is
fruitful where there were Marshes some years since, as in Westphalia,
Gelderland, Brabant, Holland, Muscovia.

2. The same is the account of Pools, seeing that they differ not much from
Marshes.

Proposition V. Rivers leave their Channel or Shore, (that is, part of their
Channel) and afford new Land.
Rivers quit their Shore, and afford new Land.
1. If that they carry much Terrestrial matter, Sand, or Gravel with them, which
sinketh to the bottom, in progress of they time so augment the Altitude of the
Channel, that it is no more depressed than that place from whence the water
flows from the vicine earth; but if that that matter sinketh into one place
in part of the Channel, it will separate one part, which then at length will be
dried up.

2. If that the River take another Channel, whether it be done by Art or
Nature, and a violent cause, as by Wind, Inundation, or the like.

3. If the Springs of the Rivers be obstructed, or cease to send forth water,
the earth being fallen in or condensated, or a great quantity of Sand being
driven by the winds into the Fountains or adjacent places.

Examples of Rivers whose Channels are exsiccated at this time, either in
whole, or in part, are every where obvious in Writers, yet not of great Rivers,
but of small, or of the parts of any great Rivers: So a Channel of an Arm of
the Rhine, which flowing by Leyden, flowed in times past into the German Ocean,
now for some Ages deserted by the water, at this day is land, the Rhine
stagnating between Leyden and the Vicus Cattorum.

The Shoars are uncovered from the waters of Rivers, and that some Rivers run
in a more narrow Channel than they did formerly, is manifest from many
examples, and from thence that some at this day are not Navigable, which
formerly were, may easily be collected; the Altitude of the water being
diminished, and none at all to be left in their Channel, at some time or other,
as in the River Scaldis: Therefore Governors of Commonwealths have a great
care that the Mud and Sediments be drawn from out the Channels of Rivers, that
they may remain navigable, as is seen in many places.

But great Rivers cannot be dried up or changed into land, except in many ages,
because that many lesser Rivers flowing from diverse parts, make them, (of which
though some may be dried up, or change their course, yet all do not suffer the
same, except in a long space of time) and the Channel is deeper. But one heap
or ridge of Sand may cause the River to run through another Channel, and the
former to be dried up, yet it takes not away the River, except the Fountains
or Branches of it be obstructed: Therefore it is true, that neither the Nile,
Tanais, Albis, or the Rhine, or other Rivers, always flowed, or shall
perpetually flow, but that there was earth before, and shall be afterward
where they now flow.

Proposition VI. Lakes are dried up and changed into Land.
Lakes dried up and changed into Land.
1. If that a Lake be constituted from Rivers that flow in, that mutation is
made by the abduction, withdrawing, or cessation of the River, and also by
evaporation.

2. If that a Lake receives waters by a subterraneous passage from the Ocean
or Sea, there will be a mutation of that Lake after that those subterraneous
passages are obstructed; and so Lakes are first changed into standing Pools and
Marshes, then at length into dry Land. It is evident, says Aristotle, that
because a force of waters has brought in Mud, or something of that sort, (he
speaks of Lakes made of Rivers) therefore standing Pools are made, and the
earth is dry, and that their water being left and standing, in succession of
time it is exsiccated, and altogether vanishes. So the Lands that touch upon
the Lake Maeotis, by the Soil brought down by the Rivers, are increased so
much, that Ships now, far less then those about 60 years since, for traffic
sake, enter into it. There are many examples found of small Lakes changed into
dry Land, especially in Holland.

Proposition VII. Streights are exsiccated and changed into Isthmusses or
Continents.
That happens, Streights
when that by reason of the continual sinking of the Terrestrial matter made in
a long time, the channel of the Straight is become so high, that it denies a
passage to the Sea.

So it is very probable that the Isthmus between Africa and Asia, was a
Straight, by which the Mediterranean and Red Sea were conjoined, as we shall
show in the following Proposition. In many Streights at this day, the Altitude
of the Sea, and the Altitude of the Channel is found lesser than in former
time; which is a certain token that those Streights shall have no water in them
in the time to come, and shall be changed into a dry Isthmus. So the Straight
through which the Atlantic Ocean makes a Gulf, which the Hollanders called
Snyder-zee, and the Texell, at this day receives no larger landing Ships, and
the depth of the Sea is every year found lesser, and the Land higher; therefore
where the water is at the Texell, there, after some Ages, will be dry Land.
Concerning the Vlier, the same in time to come will also happen.

Proposition VIII. The Bays or Gulphs which the Ocean makes between the
Mid-lands, in course of time do become dry places.
Bays or Gulphs in time do become dry Land.
This is done by a double cause; 1. If that the Straight, by which the Bay is
conjoined to the Ocean, becomes an Isthmus, or else be stopped by Sand and
Gravel, which is done in progress of time, as we have said in the preceding
Proposition: For by this cause the Bay of the Ocean, and a part or member of it
shall be cut off from the body, and shall become a Lake; and then a standing
Pool and Marish, and by exsiccation become earth, and no water shall be seen
there.

2. If that the very Channel of the Bay become higher by reason of the Rivers
flowing into it, and carrying Sand along with it, that it in time cannot
receive the Sea; so by degrees the Sea will recede from the shoars of that Bay.

Therefore the Mediterranean, the Baltic, the Red, Persian, and other Seas
that are Bays of the Ocean, will cease in time to be Seas, and will be changed
into Lands, which shall be fully proved in the following Proposition.

Proposition IX. The Ocean for saketh some Shoars or Coasts, so that it
becomes Land, where the Ocean formerly was.
Where the Ocean formerly was, is now Land, by its forsaking the shoars.
That happens for these causes; 1. If that the force of water be broken at the
shoars by Rocks, here and there on the Coasts or Clifts in the Sea: for that
force being broken, the Terrestrial parts of the water subside and sink, and
augment the Altitude of the banks of Sand; whence it comes to pass, that the
impetus of the Ocean is more and more broken, and therefore more Terrestrial
matter subsideth: so that the ridges being augmented, they exclude the Ocean,
or make the Channel more shallow. 2. It conduces much to the Augmentation of
the shoars, if that the shoars be sandy and stony, that the Ocean running by,
can separate or take away little with it: so that when it can take away
nothing, it always leaves some particles, that in progress of time the shoars
become more high, and force or stop the Ocean from its accustomed place. 3. If
that another adjacent shore has less solid Earth, that is light and full of
Caverns: for the Ocean carries the dissolved and broken parts of Earth to the
vicine shoars. 4. If that great Rivers discharge themselves by the shore into
that Sea: for these Rivers carrying with them much Sand and Mud, or Gravel,
when that they arrive to the mouth and shore, where they endeavor to exonerate
themselves into the Sea, they leave it, partly because the Channel is there
more broad, and partly, because that the Sea resists the flux of them: and
this is chiefly observed in Regions, which Rivers overflow every year. 5. If
that frequent Winds blow from the Sea to the shore, and the shore be rocky and
firm, not sandy. 6. If that the flux of the Sea be swift and vehement, and the
reflux slow and gentle; for the gentle reflux takes not away the matter that
the swift flux brought, but suffers it to sink. If that the shore descends
obliquely into the Sea for a long space, and bend not down directly and
perpendicularly: for so the violence of the Sea decreaseth, and leaves the
matter behind.

The Land of Egypt. caused by the Nile.
There are many places of the Earth, which it is evident were formerly taken up
by the Ocean. Where Egypt is, in time past was the Sea, as is proved by the
testimony of the Ancients, and by Experience at this day: For the Nile flowing
from the remote Regions of Aethiopia, and every year entering the Channel, where
it swells, it expandeth it self through all Egypt, where, when the force of
the River cease, the Mud sinketh, and also the Terrestrial matter, which the
swift course of the River brought in; and so Egypt becomes higher. And before
that so much matter was brought in by the Nile, then the Sea covered the Land
of Egypt; but now the Sea is not admitted, by reason of the height. Of this,
Aristotle and Others are Witnesses; his words are these, This place, and the
whole Region of Egypt, which was only made by the River, seems always to
become more dry; and because that the Marshes by degrees drying up the
adjacent places, began to be inhabited, the length of time obliterated the
beginning of it; therefore all the mouths of the Nile, except that of Canopus,
seem to be made by the Industry of Man, and not by the River. Moreover, all
Egypt anciently consisted of a City called Thebes, as is very manifest; which
Homer also declares, who flourished (as I have said) after this Mutation: For
he makes mention of that place, as if that Memphis as yet had no Being, or at
least not so big. Seneca here explaineth it more clearly: All Egypt, says he,
is made up of Mud; for (if that we may credit Homer) Pharos was so far from the
Continent, as that a Ship with a full spread Sail could harldly measure or
encompass it in an whole day; but it is now adjoined to the Continent: for the
Nile flowing muddy and troubled, and drawing much Mud with it, and so adding to
it the former Lands, has made Egypt larger by an Annual increase. Hence the
soil is muddy and fat, neither has it any Intervals in it, but has increased
to a solidity.

The Rivers Ganges and Indus, by their Inundations, both cause also Land.
Ganges, and Indus in India, both famous Rivers, have caused the same by their
Inundations that the Nile has; also Rio de la Plata in Brazil. And it is
probable, that China was generated, or at least augmented after the same mode,
by reason that a violent River, which they call the Yellow River, flowing from
Tartary into China, often overflowing (although not in an Anniversary time,)
has so much Sand and Gravel, that it makes the third part of its water.

These Examples demonstrate the cause laid down in the fourth place, viz. why
Rivers should cause the Sea to forsake the Shore: but the Sea it self is also
oftentimes the cause of its departure in diverse Regions, viz. whilst that it
carries and lays down the matter, by which the Channel and Shore acquire the
greater Altitude, and admit not the approach of the Sea: so Holland, Zeland,
and Gelderland were made; for that the Ocean in time past possessed these
Countries, is known both from Ancient Histories or Monuments, as also from the
quality of the Soil it self. The shells of Fishes, found on the Clifts or
higher parts of Gelderland, not far from Noviomagus, do sufficiently testify
the same; as also shrubs and ouzey matter found in the profundity of the soil:
Add, that the Sea is higher than the Land of these Regions, and has overflowed
it, and would cover it again, if that it were not obstructed by banks of Sands
and Ramparts. Yet there are some that say, they suppose that Holland and Zeland
were brought from the Rhine and the Mosa; which is not improbable.

Proposition X. To show the Generation of Sandy-banks in the Sea, and elsewhere.
The generation of Sandy banks.
We term those banks of Sand, that are elevated above the Channel of the River*
to that height, that they hinder the passage of Ships. Neither do they differ
from Rocks, but that their parts do cohere and are condensated; but the
Sand-banks do not consist of parts very coherent. But these words are
oftentimes confounded.

The Sand-banks do either lie in the Channels of Rivers, (as many are in the
Wolga, and the Albis,) or at the mouths of Rivers, (which is frequent, as in
the Wolga, and the Albis) or on the Sea-shoar, or amidst Seas. The mode of the
generation is the same, by which we have said in the foregoing Propositions,
that the Channels of Rivers are dried, and the Sea forsakes the shore; for so
oftentimes it comes to pass, that the Ocean, before that it leaves part of
the Earth altogether, first generateth this ridge of Sand not far from the
shore, and so by degrees retreateth back, and these banks become parts of the
Continent. After the same mode it happens in the Channels of Rivers, before
that they are wholly dried and forsaken by the water. The most frequent cause
is, when Rivers are augmented by rain, or dissolved snow, and so run violently;
for then where their motion is more vehement, and Channel more narrow, they eat
off the mud and sand from the shoars or some banks; also the substance of the
bottom is advanced and lifted up, and is carried by the impetuosity of the
River, until it come to a more large and ample Channel, and be removed from the
Fountain or cause of abundancy of water; for here the vehemence of the motion
is remiss, and then the Terrestrial parts subside, and Sand-banks are
generated: of which, many are found in places where there are broad Rivers, but
none almost in narrow.

Neither is there any mischief, which takes away more splendour from the most
flourishing and rich Empories or places of trade, without any hope of recovery,
or brings greater detriment to Ships. That we may pass over those Ancient
Cities, now for many Ages buried in oblivion, we have Examples before our eyes
of Stavoren in Friezland, Armuyen in Zeiland, of Dort in Holland, Antwerp in
Brabant, and Stade in the Bishopric of Bremen.

Nothing took away the power of Traffic from these Cities, (which was the
cause of all their splendour and riches) but the banks of Sand arising in their
Rivers, or the Neighboring Seas.

Neither is there almost any Empory that is Maritimate, that is free from the
fear of these Sand-banks. Those that are in the Albis or the Elbe, have
destroyed many Hamburgian Ships, that have escaped the grand storms of the
Ocean. The same is manifest in others, to him that considers, especially in
the Texel and Vlie of Amsterdam.

They are discovered in a great number on the Seacoasts of Flanders and
Friezland, and the suff of the Sea going down, many of them are discovered to
be part of the Continent; for the Channel interceding has then little water,
and admits of no sailing. The famous, or rather infamous amongst Mariners,
by reason of Shipwreck, are those that are found in a great number in one part
or place of the Sea. They are these; 1. The Sand-banks of Brazil, Abrolhos de
Brasilia, Het riff van Brasilian, also de Droogte van Brasil. They lie from the
Coast of Brazil for the space of 70 miles, which the Mariners that sail to the
Indies, ought to avoid with great diligence, whilst that to shun the calm of
Guinea, they sail toward Brazil: yet they come as near to those Sands as they
may, that they may have the greater Wind; but they must be cautious, that they
be not carried between Brazil and the Sands. 2. The Sands of St. Ann, not far
from Guinea, six degrees at the elevation of the North Pole. Ships being
carried upon these, come not off without great danger and labor, and are
detained for many days, when that Seamen suppose that they have passed beyond
them: For these Sands are not continual, but they are disjoined by broad and
deep Whirlpits or Gulphs; so that in a small distance, here is a depth of about
eight fathom, by and by about two. 3. The Sands between the Isle of Madagascar
and Arabia, called Baixos de India; they are sharp Rocks of Coral of diverse
Colors. 4. The Sands of China. 5. The Sands of Flanders. But more may be seen
in Geographical Sea-charts. We have declared one mode of the generation, by
which these Sands have an Original, by sinking of the Sandy matter, which the
Sea carries with it. The second mode to be adjoined to this is, by which such
Sands can, or may have a Being; to wit, if that the Sea overflow the Earth, in
which the hills and risings are sandy, (for then those hills are, or shall be
called, Sand-hills:) they are discovered in a large tract; but the Land it self
is more low.

If therefore the Sea by an irruption, should inundate and cover those Lands,
then those Hills would be Sand-banks: so we must judge of others.

Therefore at the Mouths of Rivers, Sand-banks are most frequent, because the
Channel is there broader, and therefore the impetus of the efflux of Rivers is
there diminished; and therefore the matter sinketh, which the violent Flood
brought with it: Also the waves of the Ocean repel the Waters flowing from the
Mouths of the Rivers, whence all the force cease.

And it is worth our labor to distinguish, and consider these two modes of the
generation of Sand-banks.

Proposition XI. To conjecture, whether the Sand-hills, which lie in the Sea,
not far from the Continent, shall be part of this future Continent.
Of Sand-banks or Hills in the Sea, not far from the Land.
We have said in the former Proposition, that these Sand-banks are generated two
manner of ways; one truly by the subsidency or sinking of the Sand into the
Sea, the other by denomination, viz. all Hill, the water encompassing and
overflowing the Earth. If that they are generated by the former mode, and are
found to increase more and more, it is a sign that they will join to the
Continent of the Earth; that is to say, that the Channel of the Sea will be
dried between these Sand-banks and the adjacent Land; But if that the
Sand-banks are generated after the second mode, then we may conjecture, that
those Sand-banks will not so easily be conjoined to the adjacent Earth; but
that the Sea rather will farther overspread the Land.

Proposition XII. Islands are produced in the Sea and Rivers after the same
mode that Sand-banks are; yea Islands may proceed from Sand-banks, yet they are
also made after another mode.
Of the generation of Islands.
For if that in any part of the Sea, so great a quantity of Sand, Gravel, Mud,
and Ouze, be aggregated in progress of time, that it becomes higher than the
Sea, it will become an Island; which is the first Mode. Then by the second
mode, If that the Sea breaking into the Land, overfloweth only the lower parts,
but not the higher, and the Hills, those will be Islands. And by this latter
Mode it is probable, that those Islands were generated, or had original, which
arise to an huge Altitude; as St. Helena, Ascension, and the like; especially
those which are rocky and stony.

Sicilia separated from Italy by the Sea.
Hitherto appertain Islands, which the Sea has cut off from the prominent
Lands: So Writers testify, and the Poets Verses are known, that Sicilia was
separated from Italy by the violence of the Sea.

By the first Mode, viz. the subsidency and congregation of many Terrestrial
particles, the Islands of Zeland, Denmark, and Japan, had their original. The
same seems to have been the original of the Molucco Isles: for if that you
dig on the Plain to a small depth, you shall meet with an abundance of sand and
shells.

Other Isles separated from the Continent by the Sea.
The Inhabitants of Ceiland relate, that the Isle was separated from the
procurrent of India, and it is very probable so. The Isle of Sumatra is
supposed formerly to have been united to Malacca.

The Isles of the Maldives in times past was were said to adhere to India, and
were a continuous Continent; yet at this day they are far in the Sea, and
divided into an innumerable many Isles, (esteemed about 1100,) neither ought we
to doubt of it, seeing that narrow Euripuses pass through every two of these
Maldivian Isles, so that in some places they exceed not four or five Else; but
in progress of time many of them unite into one, the Euripus being diminished,
and all of them at length will conjoyn in one oblong Island. Yea all the
Oriental Isles, situate between the Continent of Asia and the Land of Magellan
in a great number, seem to arise from the violence of the Ocean, the Land being
separated: For the Pacifick Ocean, in the Torrid Zone, is moved by a perpetual
motion and force from the West to the East, that is, from America to those
Oriental Isles: Moreover, a perpetual Wind greatly augmenteth the violence of
the Ocean toward that Oriental quarter. Therefore it is not improbable, seeing
that all these Islands are in the Torrid Zone, but that Asia formerly did
adhere to the South-land, or that of Magellan, in a continual tract of Land:
then at length the violence of the Ocean eat off, and separated sometimes here
and sometimes there, until that a way being made on every side, it was
conjoined to the Indian Ocean, and made so many Islands, as that we stand
amazed at this day, in that quarter being distant a very small space, Java,
Celebes, Borneo, Madera, Amboina, etc.

Concerning the Islands in the Gulf of Mexico, as also in the Streights of
Malacca we conjecture altogether the same.

The Isles of the Aegean Sea, whether they had a Being from the divulsion made
by or from the Sea (the Sea flowing from the Euxine Sea, and the Mediterranean
raising up of contrary floods,) or after the former mode, by a subsidency of
the Terrestrial matter, which the Propontis had carried from the Euxine Sea, as
yet I doubt: It is more probable, that a divulsion was made; and peradventure
that famous Inundation of Deucalion, here also exercised its force. It is
certain, that the Isle Euboea, at this day called Negropont, did formerly
adhere to Greece, as Authors of no mean Credit do relate; for so small an
Euripus interfloweth, that it may be joined by a Bridge.

We shall show, that Islands may be made of Sand-banks by many Examples So the
Islands in the River Nile, and in the River of St. Laurence, were formerly
Sand-banks. Rivers make Islands after another manner, when that they send forth
a branch, which they receive into themselves in another place, as may be seen
in the Wolga, Tanais, and other places. That this was not done by Nature, but
by the Industry of Man, we ought not to question. the River Ob does the same.

These two Rivers, Rengo and Coanza, made the Isle Loanda, situated on the
Coast of Africa, which exonerated themselves into the Sea in that place; by
reason that they bring great store of Mud and Rubbish with them, they falling
with an exceeding force from Mountainous places, so that they lest this, and as
yet the same in their Inlets, and so in course of time made the Island Landa;
first made a Sand-bank, now most fertile and likewise populous: And so we
suppose that many Sand-banks formerly made the Islands, situated at the
Coasts; although that some were also caused by a divulsion made by the Sea, as
Norway. And it is more probable, that this is the mode of generation of Islands
in stony and rocky Isles: But in the Indian Sea, Islands may have an original
both by divulsion and subsidence, or sinking of matter; because that whilst it
forces away, it also eats between the middle of the Earth, which at length
it puts in another place; unto this many furious Winds, which are very
frequent in the Pluvial months from May to September, do much conduce: For by
these the Sea is mightily troubled, so that the Sand and gravel is separated
from its bottom, and from other Regions, which matter is forced on the Coasts
of India. So the Mouths of the Port of Goa, by the violence of the Winter-winds
(from May to September) are so obstructed with congested heaps of Sand, that
they hardly afford a passage to smaller Vessels. So these heaps of Sand shut up
the Port of Cocin, on those Months, so that neither small nor great Vessels can
pass.

For a continual Rain on the Mountain Gatis, and a frequent Ecnephias or
impetuous wind from a Cloud breaking forth with an abundance of water from the
Clouds, which are beheld to hang as it were on the top of Gatis, send forth
such an abundance of water, and with that violence, that it carries much Sand
with it to the shore, where the Ocean resists; which Sand, when that the
Winter ends, is taken away by the Ocean, and the Ports are opened.

There are some Lands so nigh the shore, that the flux of the Sea does make
them Islands, and in the reflux they are in appearance part of the Continent;
and if that the interposed Channel acquire a greater Altitude in progress of
time, at length the flux of water is excluded, and the Islands become part of
the Continent without reciprocal mutation.

And also the Nile overflowing Egypt every year, causes the Cities and Hills
of Egypt then to seem Islands: So the River Wolga does so increase in the
Months of May and June, that it covers the Sands and Islands, and many of the
Isles that adjoyn unto India become Sands in the Pluvial Months, where that the
Nile and the Ganges do overflow the Regions.

Proposition XIII. There is yet another Mode, besides the two already related,
by which Islands have a Being or Original; viz. for the coherent Earth suddenly
to be carried from the bottom of the Sea to the superficies.
Another Mode by which Islands have an Original.
Others suppose this Mode, and that not undeservedly, to have proceeded from the
fabulous Grecians and Poets: But Seneca a grave Author relates, that the
Island Thracia in his time sprang up in the Aegean Sea, whilst that the
Mariners looked on. Although therefore that very few Examples of such
productions of Islands are to be found, yet it ought not to be supposed
impossible; for it may be, that a porous, spongy, sulphurous Earth does exist
(as there is a various difference and mixture of sight Earths,) which even now
has increased to a notable altitude, yet so, as that it yet remains beneath
the superficies of the water. Now, if that such a Sand or Earth adhere less
firm at the bottom of the Sea, it may be separated by the violence of the Sea,
because that it is little lighter than the water, or almost of the same levity,
therefore it will ascend to the superficies of the water, and suddenly an
Island will seem to spring up: or a Spirit or Wind included in the bowels of
the Earth, without any violence of the Sea, and endeavoring to break forth,
may send forth such an Island above the Water: for great is the force of Winds
included in the Earth, and requiring a larger space, as is evident from
Earthquakes. By which it is manifest, that sometimes Mountains are sent forth
of the Earth, and sometimes swallowed up: the same is manifest from Warlike
Mines, where the Wind breaks up great Towers and Walls and carries them into
the Air.

If that therefore such an Island of a sudden springing in the Sea adhere to
the bottom of the Sea, we must necessarily say, that it was forced upwards by
the violence of some subterraneous Wind: As some write, that Mountains
sometimes are thrust forth of the Earth; but if that it no longer adhere to the
bottom, as well the Wind, as the violence of the water, may separate it from
the bottom; so that at length, by its own levity, it is carried upwards to the
superficies.

Proposition XIV.
Whence another doubt does arise, viz. whether that there be certain Islands
that swim on the Sea, as Thales supposed the whole Earth to swim on the Ocean?
For the Opinion of Thales it is sufficiently refuted, seeing that the Channel
of the Sea is found continuous to the Land: but reason persuades us, that there
may be swiming Islands, if that the Land be light and sulphurous. Seneca
adds Experience; for he says, that he saw the Isle Catylias swiming, which
had Trees, and brought forth Grass and Herbs; that the water sustained it; and
that it was not only driven hither and thither by the wind, but also by the
Air; and that it continued not in one station either by Day or by Night.
Moreover there was another Island in the Lake Vadimon: another in the Lake
Station. So the Ancients relate, that Delos and all the Cyclades formerly swam
in the Sea. Neither may you object, why do not those Islands swim at this day?
For unto this the Answer is easy, That such a swiming cannot continue long;
for seeing that those Islands almost touch at the bottom of the Sea, whilst
that they are moved hither and thither, they are carried more or less elevated
to the Sands or Channels, especially if that they come in the midst between two
Sands, that motion is stopped, and other collected Earths are united with this
Sandbank or Channel, and so of swiming Islands they become firm. In Fondura, a
Country in America, at this day is a Lake in which are many Hills, which are
moved to and fro with the wind.

In the great Lake of Scotland, called Loumond, is an Isle that swimeth, and is
moved about, although that it be apt for Pasturage, as Boethius writes.

Hitherto we have treated of the generation of the Lands, or of the Acid part
of the Earth that is extant on the superficies: we shall now consider how the
Ocean and Waters may change their places, and possess new.

Proposition XV. Rivers possess certain tracts of Land, which they possessed
not before, and that for diverse reasons.
Certain tracts of Land which Rivers possess, which they possessed not before.
1. When that they first arise from their Fountains, and receive a Channel
either from Nature or by Art, of which we have spoken in the fifteenth Chapter.

2. If that a River, makes another Channel for it self, or sends forth a
branch from it self; which is most commonly done by men, viz. that they may
bring part of the Rivers unto Cities, or into another River; Examples of which
we have alleged in the forecited Chapter.

3. If that Rivers more and more possess the banks in progress of time, which
happens, 1. If that the Channel become higher from the sinking down of the
Earth or Sand. 2. If that it eats off the sides of the Bank by its swift
course. 3. If that it be augmented by another River, and by an abundance of
Rain, or an Exhydria or impetuous wind, accompanied with a mighty fall of
water.

4. If that they overflow the Earth, which if not going back again, but do more
and more augment, they become Lakes; or if they return to their Ancient
Channel, the water being effused into the Fields, becomes a Marsh, if that
there be great abundance of it.

Corollary. It is probable therefore then, that there was a time in which those
tracts of Land, which now the Rhine, Elbe, and the Nile possess; as also other
Rivers, were dry, and possessed by the Earth.

Proposition XVI. Lakes, Marshes, and standing-Pools, occupy parts of the
Earth that before they possessed not.
Lakes, Marshes, and Pools, possess parts of the Earth, which formerly they
did not.
1. When that they first spring up, and are augmented in progress of time; of
which we have spoken in the fifteenth Chapter. 2. If that abundance of Rain
fall. 3. If that Rivers bring store of water with force into the Lakes. 4. If
that the Channel become more high. 5. If that the Lakes being agitated by often
and more vehement floods, by degrees do more eat the banks and cover the land
with water. So the Lake of Harlem within thirty or forty years, has extended
beyond its former Bank, about the space of the twentieth part of a mile.
Corollary. Therefore it is probable, that there was a time when those tracts
of land, which now the Lake Zaire, Lemanus, Parina, Harlem, Maeotis, or the
Marshes of Westphalia, and all others formerly possessed, were dry Lands.

Proposition XVII. The Ocean possesses part of the Land, which formerly it did
not possess.
Land possessed by the Ocean, which former^y it did not possess.
This happens after various manners; 1. When that breaking through the middle of
the land it makes Streights and Gulphs; as the Mediterranean, the Arabian,
that of Bengala, Camboja, and such like: So the Straight between Sicily and
Italy; between Geilan and India, between Greece and Euboeja, between Manilla
and Magellan, and also the Danish, etc. Neither is it improbable, but that the
Atlantic Ocean was so generated, and that America was so divided from the Old
World, or at least from Europe, which some do the more easily embrace, that
they may thence only deduct the Original of the American Nations from Adam.
Indeed the Egyptian Priests related unto Solon, about six hundred years before
Christ, (as you may see in the Dialogue of Plato, termed Timons,) that there
was formerly opposite to the Herculean Straight of Gibralter, an Isle bigger
than Asia and Europe together, called Atlantis, and that part of it afterward
by a great Earthquake, and a great deluge of one day and one night, was
swallowed up in the Ocean. From which Narration we may collect, that in former
times amongst the Egyptians there was a fame, especially amongst those that
were Learned, of the separation of America from our World, made many Ages
before. But it is far more likely, that the North part of America, in which is
New France, New England, Canada, and the like, did in former Ages adhere to
Ireland. The Ancients write, that the Streights of Gibralter were dug through
by Hercules.

2. When with a violent Wind the Ocean is forced, and overfloweth the land by
breaking through, or over the banks that are made by Nature and Art. There are
many Examples of the Inundations of the Ocean; as formerly in Thessaly, and not
long since in Friezland and Holsatia.

3. When by reason of the same causes, it penetrateth the firm Land, and makes
Islands. By this Mode we have said in the former Propositions, that it is
likely that that Sea had its original which interfloweth between those
innumerable Oriental Isles, and that which flows between the Maldivian Isles
and India, and also between the Gulf of Bengala and Camboja.

4. When it by degrees eats and consumes the Coasts or Shoars, and so in
progress of time covers some parts of the shore and of the adjacent land. So
the Baltic Sea invaded the Coasts of Pomerania, and destroyed the famous Town
or Empory of Vinetam: so taking away the Islands from the Coast of Norway, it
let in it self between these Isles and the Continent. So the German Ocean has
possessed the shore of Holland, near the Village of the Catti, in a great space
of Land: so that the Ruins of the British Tower, formerly a Fortress or Castle
of the Romans, now lies inconspicuous, being covered with water far from the
shore in the Sea. The Ocean has taken from the North part of the Island of
Ceilan the space of 20 miles, so that at this day it is far lesser than it was.
And there are many more Examples of the like kind.

Corollary. From hence we may collect, that those places of the Earth, where
now the Ocean is, in times past were Land; and again shall be land, to wit, if
that we do suppose, that the earth has continued so many thousand years, and
shall yet continue. Concerning this Argument you may consult Aristotle in the
first Book of his Meteors, and the twelfth Chapter; and Stevinus in his
Geography. If that you demand, how the Ocean shall occupy the place of
Mountains, that then the Mountains shall not be covered by the Sea, but shall
then become either Rocks or Islands, other earth being forced unto them; that
is, confirmed by the example of many Islands, yea almost of all; because that
Experience testifies, that almost all Isles have Mountains in the midst, as
Ceilan, Sumatra; Java: furthermore, some are nothing else but Mountains, as St.
Helena, Ascension, the Hesperides, and the like. Seeing therefore that those
places of the Ocean in which those Isles lie, in Ages to come shall be, or
already have been land, then indeed the Mountains of these Isles shall be
Mountains of the Continent.

Proposition XVIII. Whether it is possible, that the whole superficies of the
Earth should become dry, or Land? Or, that it should be all liquid or covered
with water? That the most parts should be of an Earthy superficies at one time
more than at another, or that more should be covered with water.
Of the whole Superficies of the Earth, whether it may become all Land or all
Water.
1. That sometimes the land should possess a greater part of the superficies of
the Earth, than at another. Also that which is a consequence to the former,
that water at one time should possess the greater part of the superficies of
the Earth, more than at another, has been sufficiently showed in the second
Proposition of this Chapter.

2. Whether the Water or Ocean can cover the whole Earth, so that there shall
be no Earth or Island above it, and so cause a Universal stood? Unto this I
answer, That a mode may be conceived and explained, by which it may naturally
be done; but yet by reason of the compaction of the Lands, and Altitude of the
Mountains, it is scarcely probable that any such thing will be. The mode by
which it may be done, is the same with that explained in the second
Proposition: For if that the Ocean continually eats the land from the shore,
and lays it down in the profoundest parts of its Channel, and do this in a
perpetual course of time, then it shall take away all the Lands of the
superficies, or extant parts, and it self shall cover all the Earth. And the
Mountains shall either be made Rocks, or shall by degrees sink and fall, their
Foundations being consumed by the vehement force of the water. But this may be
done more easily, if that we will follow their opinion, who attribute a greater
height to the Ocean than to the Land. But we have in the precedent discourse
sufficiently confuted that opinion.

3. Whether that the Land can so occupy the whole superficies of the Earth, so
that all the water and the whole Ocean may be contained in the Caverns of the
Earth, or in the subterraneous passage, and covered by the Earth? Unto this I
answer after the same manner, that it is not impossible, and that a Mode may be
conceived by which it may be done; but yet scarcely ever shall be. Now there is
only one Mode to be conceived, viz. that if now there are or may be so many
cavities within the depth of the earth, within the which the Ocean may be
contained: for neither has it been demonstrated by any, as hitherto, that such
cavities are not in the depth of the earth; and if they be not, but that they
may be done, 1. by the violence of the earth, and 2. by subterraneous winds.

Proposition XIX. Why, in the middle of the Ocean, no Islands are found, and no
abundancy of Isles, but most at great Continents, or great Islands?
No Isles found in the middle of the Ocean.
Of the truth of this Proposition we ought not to doubt, for experience
manifestly proves it. In the midst of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between Africa
and Brasilia, besides the Isle of Sancta Helena, and that of the Ascension, few
are found: but about the shoars of the Continent, or in the Ocean, not far from
the Coasts of the greatest Continents, all Islands are (those few only excepted
which I have spoken of): this may especially be taken notice of in those
numerous ones that we term troops of Isles, which are all near the Continent.
The troop of the Isles of the Aegean Sea adjoyneth to Europe and Asia; the
Hesperides to Africa; the Maldivian Isles to India; as also all the Indian
Isles between Asia and the South Continent; only the Flandrian Isles, or
Azores, seem to be situated in the midst of the Ocean, between the old World
and America, although that they are more near to that than to this.

The cause of this Phenomenon or situation of the Islands without doubt is,
that they had a Being from the irruption of the Ocean into the Continents, by
which violence the Lands of the Continents were separated: but because the
Altitude of the Ocean was not so great, that it could cover all the Lands
intercepted, thence here and there between the Continents, and at the
Continents, troops of Islands did arise: also it is likely that some of them
were generated by another mode, viz. because the Ocean cannot carry the Lands
separated, and cut off any long space with it, but suffers them by degrees to
subside not a long distance from the shoars, which subsidency or sinking
continued for many Ages, at length caused Isles: therefore in the middle of the
Ocean are few Islands. 1. Because that place is more remote from the shore than
that any of the eaten off parts should be carried thither. 2. Because that the
commotion and force of the water is greater there, which moves the earth of
the Channel, or rather promoteth the depth, than suffers Islands to be
generated there. 3. Because there are no Continents there, therefore neither
can troops or heaps of Islands be according to the first mode, by which we have
showed such heaps of Isles to be produced; yet in times past, when that the
middle of the Ocean was not where it is now, it is not unlikely that such Isles
were here, and by degrees were swallowed by the Ocean.

OF Absolute Geography.
SECT. V. Containing an explication of the Atmosphere, and the Winds. In three
Chapters.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Atmosphere and Air.
Proposition I. From the parts of the Earth, as well dry as moist, or from the
Earth and Water, vapors and fumes do continually exhale into that space, which
is about the Earth.
THE Cause is twofold; first, the Celestial heat of the Stars, especially the
Sun and Moon. Of vapors and fumes.
The other is a Terrestrial heat, or subterranean or rather terrestrial fire,
or which is admixed with the parts of the earth: For we see that almost all
bodies, the least fire being moved toward them, send forth a fume. Seeing
therefore that both the Celestial and Terrestrial heat is naught else but a
certain fire, therefore it is also necessary that vapors and fumes should be
advanced by it from the parts of the earth. So the truth of the Proposition is
evidenced a priori; Experience also confirms the same. For those that travel
in the night time, especially when the Moon shines, and that toward the
water, discover many vapors to wander and be advanced about the Superficies of
the earth. Also it is vulgarly known, that in the day the Sun does raise many
vapors: also when that a mist arises upwards, which is a certain token of
rain to follow,

Proposition II. The Atmosphere is a space about the whole earth, in which the
exhalations raised from the earth are always present, And it is uncertain
whether that anything or body else be contained in it besides these exhalations.
It is also taken for the exhalations themselves about the whole earth. There
is no small controversy amongst modern Philosophers, Of the Atmosphere.
concerning the body which consists about the earth. For many Mathematicians
of sound knowledge determine, that there is nothing besides exhalations
elevated from the earth, and therefore they take the Atmosphere and Air for one
and the same, and immediately after the Atmosphere, place the Aetherial
substance. But other Philosophers suppose, that besides these exhalations in
the space about the earth, that there is a certain peculiar and simple body,
which they call Air, although that they freely grant, that exhalations may be
changed into Air, and contrariwise into clouds and thick vapors. The same
Persons, after this Air even to the Lunary Orb, place another subtle thin body
different from the Ether, which indeed they term Fire, but they confess that
it is less properly done, and that it does not agree with our fire; for it is a
calid substance (not burning) dry and very subtle, not to cause the
refractions of the rays of the Sun and Stars, which yet they will have to be
done in this Air. Those being well considered, these two opinions of the
Philosophers seem rather to differ in words than in matter it self. For as for
the Air, because that they grant it so gross, that a refraction of rays may be
made in it, and that it may be generated from exhalations by a light mutation,
the Air seems nothing else but a subtle exhalation, although it was not
exhaled from the earth. As for the Sublunary Fire, when that they confess that
it is so improperly termed, but they affirm, that it is so tenuous that it
causes no refraction of rays; this seems little to differ from the Ether.
We affirm therefore, that the Atmostphere and Air are a body about the earth,
on which the rays falling are refracted, (laying aside the controversy whence
this body has its original) which definition agrees with the former: For
neither is it likely that any exhalations can be elevated from the earth so
subtle, that they should cause no refraction or impediment to the luminous
rays proceeding from the Ether: yet if that such be granted, we cannot know
their Altitude, and whether that they be excluded from the Atmosphere; which
yet if that any one will sharply urge, supposing that the little fires or rays
cast from the Sun on the earth, again recoil to the Sun; he will not deny but
that the latter definition is commodious: Therefore the Atmosphere and Air are
naught else but a contexture of many small bodies which adhere to the earth, as
a down or wool circumvesteth a Peach.

Proposition III. Sometimes more, sometimes lesser exhalations are drawn from
the earth, especially in diverse places.
Of exhalations
The cause is, 1. The various elevation of the Sun above the Horizon, or
depression beneath it. 2. The diversity of the age of the Moon, and its
elevation above the Horizon. 3. The rising and setting of the other Stars, and
their constitution above the Horizon. 4. The diversity in the parts of the
earth them selves; for watery and humid places do more easily send forth
vapors than earthy and dry.

Proposition IV. The exhalations which constitute the Atmosphere, are of a
diverse kind (especially in sundry Regions) viz. watery, saltish, earthy,
sulphurous, spirituous. The sensible compounded exhalations, or parts of the
Atmosphere are diverse, viz. mixed of simple particles.
Of the exhalations which constitute the Atmosphere.
The cause is, because that in the parts of the earth such bodies are of a
diverse sort, and are advanced by heat, some more easily, and other some with
greater difficulty. Concerning the earthy particles some one may doubt, because
that those are scarcely apt to be elevated. 1. By reason of the smalness of
their dusts, which are light; seeing that gravity is an affection of compacted
bodies. 2. By admixture of sulphurous particles which violently carry those
earthy ones with them.

Moreover, that there are sulphurous particles in the Air is proved from the
fiery Meteors, Lightnings, Thunder, and the like: yea, a sulphurous odor or
scent after Thunder and Lightning manifestly asserteth the same.

As for the watery parts we ought not to question; for saline and spirituous
exhalations, by reason of their tenuousness, are easily exhaled from the earth.
Little Animals generated in great number and abundance in the Air, confirm the
same.

The Aristotelians divide exhalations into two kinds, to wit, vapors and
fumes. Vapors are generated of water, and easily return into the same again.
Fumes proceed from dry bodies. So Sal Ammoniac vanishes into smoke, fire being
placed under it. This also is the cause that in diverse Regions a different Air
is discovered. Also that it raineth in one place, and not in another.

Proposition V. The least particles of the Air, and those all insensible,
repel or reflect the rays as a Looking-glass, but some of the particles of
the Air being sensible and compounded, do transmit many rays, but reflect
fewer; others, on the contrary, transmit fewer rays, and reflect more.
Therefore the parts of the Atmosphere are divided into those that are opac and
pellucid: The parts of the Atmosphere.
these are those that transmit many rays, the former are those that transmit
fewer.

Therefore because that the least particles (both water and earth) being Atoms,
are solid little bodies without any pores, so that they transmit no rays, but
repel them; because that it is very probable that a perspicuity, or a
transmission of rays does require pores orderly placed in a body, and empty
little spaces.

But the parts of the Air or Atmosphere composed of little particles, if that
they shall have ordinate and many pores, they will be perspicuous and transmit
many rays: but if that those particles shall be composed or aggregated very
confusedly, they will transmit rays without any pores; thence it comes to
pass that the Sun discussing a thick cloudy opac Air, does make it perspicuous,
to wit, more porous.

Now that the least particles reflect rays, is manifest from hence, that the
rays of the Sun in a most serene Air be admitted into an obscure Chamber
through a narrow hole, you will see manifestly from the particles flying in a
great number in the Air, that the rays are reflected to the eye as from a
glass. Now seeing that those particles are yet sensible, the same must be
concluded concerning the least particles, and those that fly the sense.

Now those, who will have humid attenuated vapors to be perspicuous, but not
dry ones and smoaks, they are refuted by experience and reason. By reason,
because that fumes and dry exhalations may be made equally subtle and porous,
as those that are watery; but they suppose that perspicuity does not consist in
the mode or reason of the pores, but in a peculiar quality: But it is manifest
by experience, because that the Air is serene, it has more dry than moist
particles; for in that new kind of Wind-gun, which is not discharged by powder
or fire, but by the help of wind and air, the Air is so condensated, that it
scarcely comprehends the sixtieth part of the former space; yet neither do
they create any kind of humidity in the Gun, which must altogether happen, if
that the particles of the serene Air were watery.

Proposition VI. Exhalations do not ascend of themselves, and of their own
nature upwards, but they are forced by a violent motion; or the Air is not
light but heavy in a proper mode of expression.
Of exhalations
All that is to be termed grave or heavy, is moved to the Center of the Earth,
except that it be hindered; but the Air does that: for the Earth being dug
up, the Air descends into the space made. That therefore it is carried
upwards, is thus performed.

1. That heat rarifieth it to seek a greater space. 2. Because that it is
forced by another vapor.
So in cold places, as in Nova Zembla, and with us in the night season no Mist
ascends, but the heat of the Sun approaching rarifieth it, and causes one
part to force out and thrust forwards the other: For if that those small
particles of Air were free, neither mutually implicated one within another,
then at length it would be light.

Proposition VII. The upper parts of the Atmosphere are more subtle than the
lower, yet it may so come to pass, that the middle parts may be more gross and
condensed than the lower parts about the Earth.
Therefore the more light parts fly to the upper place, they are more subtle
and light; hence the truth of the member of the former Proposition is manifest:
Now the cause of the latter member is, that the parts in the middle Air easily
counite again, and so become thicker: for the hot or calid Particles being
carried up with them, have forsaken them, and the Rays refracted from the
Earth, in that middle Region, by reason of their distance, have no force.

Thence it comes to pass that after Rain, the middle Air is more serene,
because the more thick parts are separated.

Proposition VIII. The Atmosphere or Air being heated, possesses more space
than before; now by how much it is more destitute of heat, by so much the more
it contracteth it self, and occupies the lesser space.
The Air being heated possesses more space than before.
This is excellently showed by that Instrument which we call a Thermometer, or
Weather-glass, because that we measure the temperature of the Air and heat by
in, in hot and cold, in which we discover the Air to become more condensed, and
to occupy lesser space in the Glass, by how much the Air acquireth less heat,
as we shall show in the following Proposition. Now the cause of the Proportion
is a priore, because the calid Particles, either of the Rays of the Sun, or of
another fire, are most subtle of all the Particles of the whole world, and in
continual motion. Therefore those Atmospheres, whilst that they are admixed,
separate and divide these Particles with a great force, and so cause more
pores; and these little fires departing, the Particles of the Air left to
themselves unite again, or are mutually complicated within themselves.

Corollary. Therefore the Altitude of the Air or Atmosphere is not constant,
but decreaseth and increases, viz. at Noonday it ought to be greater, at
Midnight least, about the time of the rising and setting of the Sun moderate,
as in Proposition XIV.

Proposition IX. To make a Thermometer, Thermoscope, or Weather-glass, by which
we may discover the mutations of the Air in heat and cold.
Take a Glass of an oblong and cylindrical neck with the spherical small head L
H, How to make a Thermomemeter or Weather-glass.
let this be fixed to the Table or Board M N P Q, the head being erected. Let a
Vessel with water be placed under the Orifice (which is best to be colored) so
filled that part of the pipe or neck L F may be hidden in it: Now let the time
of the moderate constitution of the Air, or at that time at whose temperature
you will compare the temperature of the Air of the other days, and at that time
let the water be poured into the Vessel, so it will happen that the Air
becoming more frigid, Sec Scheme.
the water will ascend upwards beyond F, because that the Air being condensated
with cold, which before filled up the space F A, now possesses less space. On
the contrary, the Air being rendered more hot, the water will descend from F
toward L, because that the Air F H being rarefied now requires more space.

Now you will find the degrees of accretion and diminution of the heat and
cold, if that you divide the Line F A on the Table into certain parts of
numbers. Or without putting a Vessel under, set the Glass L H even at the
extremity L, have a Globe with a little hole from the side, and let this
Globular Vessel be filled with Air; for so also the degrees of heat will be
showed by the ascent and descent of the water.

Proposition X. The serene Air may be carried so by a most vehement fire that
it may occupy a space 70 times greater than it did before: On the contrary, it
may be so condensed in a Wind-gun, that it may only possess a 60 part of the
former space, but the heat of the Sun brings not so great a rarification, or
the cold so great a condensation to the Air,
The same is proved from that, that if you take an Aeolopile and heat it with
fire, so that it may then contain 13 ounces; but the same being cold, and
returning to its former natural estate, it will contain 13 ounces, a dram and a
half: Therefore the space that the Air occupied whilst that it was hot, is
greater than the space that the Air possessed when refrigerated, that the
difference of the space is that part of the Aeolopile that receives half a
dram of water, if that the whole receives 13 ounces with half a dram; and the
part of this Aeolopile is almost the 70 part of the whole space in the
Aeolopile, therefore the Air being hot, has possessed a space 70 times greater
than it does when it returns to its natural estate.

Proposition XI. Why in the places in the Frigid Zone, at the time in which the
Sun arises not altogether unto them, on some days the Air is clear and serene,
and for the most part cloudy and foggy.
Of the Air in places of the Frigid Zone.
I answer, the cause of this gross and almost perpetual Mist or Fogg, is the
small heat of the subterraneous Earth it self; or else it is derived from the
Sun, and likewise the Moon (which in the time of the obscurity of the Sun
remains many days and nights continually above the Horizon) and the other
Stars; which heat because it is weak, cannot dissipate this Mist. Now that some
days or nights afford a serenity of the Air; this happens not because the
thick vapors are attenuated, but because that they either sink down into the
earth, or else are forced into other places by the winds.

Proposition XII. Why oftentimes in the greatest cold of the Winter, the Air is
yet subtle and serene, when that yet the cold condensateth and contracteth the
Air?
The Air subtle and serene in the greatest cold of the Winter.
Cold is twofold, Moderate or Extreme. Moderate cold rendereth not the Air
serene, but cloudy, by reason that vapors are elevated, but not discussed by
that little heat which is mixed or adjoined to that cold. But an extreme cold
makes the Air serene for a twofold reason. 1. Because it rendereth the grosser
vapors of the Air more gross, and so causes them to fall, and make the Air
more subtle. 2. Because that the pores of the earth are shut and bound up, and
the vapors themselves cannot exhale and render the Air turbid. The Sea it self
indeed is not bound up with Ice, yet the particles are so condensated with Ice,
that it is not so apt for exhalations, although it sends forth many; for the
condition of it, and the earth, are different.

Proposition XIII. Why the Air being beheld at the Horizontal Line, appears
more thick and cloudy than that in which we are?
The cause is twofold: 1. Because that the Air about the Horizon is indeed more
cloudy. The other is a fallacy or deception of the sight, or judgment from our
sight; for the eye apprehends the distances of columns placed in a long order
and series, and therefore as the judgment supposes the remote columns to be
conjoined, so also it apprehends not the distances of the particles of the
Horizontal Air, but imagines them conjoined: but the eye beholds the
distances of the elevated Air under greater Angles, and therefore better
apprehends it. The same is the reason why the Air, which appears cloudy to
us, removed from it, when we come to it, or are in it, seems less misty or
cloudy.

Proposition XIV. Whether that the Altitude of the Atmosphere or Air above the
Earth, be the same in all places at one and the same time; and whether its
figure be spherical.
Of the Altitude of the Atmosphere.
That the Altitude is not the same, but diverse in sundry places, seems to
follow from thence, that the Sun is only Vertical to one place at one time, and
it sends forth oblique rays; and therefore more weak unto other places, by
how much the place is more remote from the Sun, and nearer to the Poles:
therefore the pores of the rays of the Sun are very different to the elevating
of the vapors, and therefore they are raised to different Altitudes, to wit,
in a place unto which the Sun is vertical, his Altitude is the greatest, in the
opposite place the lesser, in the places about the Pole moderate, so that the
Air receives an oval figure.

But the contrary is more probable, viz. that the Altitude of the Atmosphere is
the same in all places; for although that the Vapors and Air be more elevated
in some places than in others, yet because that the Air is fluid and tends by
its gravity to the Center of the earth: therefore the more elevated part of the
Air presses down the Air placed under it, and this thrusts down another more
depressed, until all the parts acquire the same Altitude.

And after the same mode the Spherical Figure of the Air shall be demonstrated,
as in the thirteenth Chapter we have proved, with Archimedes, concerning the
water, by reason that the same Hypotheses are prevalent here, which we there
assumed, to wit, that the part of the Air less pressed is expelled by that
which is more pressed; for every part is pressed by the Air that is above it:
wherefore the Figure of the Air is spherical, not oval as some will have it:
but if the forementioned Hypotheses be not granted, the demonstration falls.
Des Carts also makes the Air oval in figure for a peculiar reason; see
Chapter fourteen.

Proposition XV. Condensation or Rarefaction of Air changes not its Altitude.
Condensation of Air changes not its Altitude.
Because that the whole Atmosphere is not condensed, but only some parts: and at
all times some parts are condensed, sometimes these, sometimes those; wherefore
the condensation or rarefaction of one time, does no more alterare the Air than
the condensation or rarefaction of the first time. There only seems to be a
difference, that at one time there may be a greater condensation or rarefaction
than at another: but this difference can little augment the Altitude.

Proposition XVI. The Altitude of the Atmosphere or Air is not only the same in
diverse places, but it remains the same, and that constantly at all times both
Winter and Summer.
The Altitude of the Atmosphere is always the same in diverse places.
For although that heat in the Summer of our place may more elevate also our Air
more than in Winter, yet because that the Winter is at the same in another
place of the earth, the Air is less raised in it; wherefore part of our Air
shall be moved toward the Air of those places, where the Air is less elevated,
viz. to the more depressed place, as we have showed in the fourteenth
Proposition. And on the contrary, whilst that the Air of the place where we
are, is depressed by reason of the cold of the Winter, part of this Air, where
the Summer or the greater heat is, shall be moved toward our place, viz. until
the whole Air be equally distant from the Center of the earth.

The same is the reason concerning the Day and the Night, for whilst that the
Air is depressed and contracted in the Night to us, in another place it is more
rarefied, and so is moved toward the Air of our place, until it again make a
spherical figure; and because that all are equal on every side, therefore the
name Altitude shall remain in every time. But because that the Air is condensed
more in one time and place than in another, that difference seeing that it is
very small, can very little vary the Altitude, as we have showed in the
precedent Proposition.

The same is the account of Rains or Mists, or Vapors that are in ours, or in
another place: for to these it seems that the Altitude of the Air should be
less or more. But I answer, that there is scarce any time, in which in some
place of the earth it raineth not, and that the Mists fall not: and therefore
when that it raineth in one place, the Air becomes not lesser than it was
before, because that before it rained in another place: and so the reason is
equal, and the quantity of the Air is neither augmented nor diminished.

Proposition XVII. By how much the Air is more cold, by so much the more it is
condensed; and therefore for the most part, more condensed in the Winter than
in the Summer, (to wit, in some places of the Earth;) also in the Night than in
the Day: Now watery thick exhalations in the Winter and the Night, cause and
augment that condensation, especially in the Morning and Evening.
The Colder the Air the more condensed.
The truth of the Proposition is manifest from the preceding Propositions:
neither does it obstruct, for that part of the more not Air is moved to the
more cold, as to a more depressed place; because that not that it self, but
another adjoining approachment, by reason of continual protrusion, and if that
that happens, yet in a cold place that becomes also cold.

Proposition XVIII. There are three Regions vulgarly made in the Air, whereof
the middle is that in which the Snow, Rain, and Hail is generated: The first is
that in which we are, extending it self even to the middle Region: the third is
that which begins the uttermost bound of the middle Region, and extends it
self to the utmost superficies of the Air (even to the Sublunary fire, as the
Aristotelians affirm.)
Three Regions in the Air.
The middle Region is more cold than the first and third, which are reckoned
more hot; but the third, by reason that it contains more subtle, fiery, and
sulphurous parts of exhalations, which fly to it about the place of the watery
particles, or are thrust down as more light: (The Aristotelians say, that it is
hot by reason of its vicinity to the fiery-Sphere.) But the first, because that
the Rays of the Sun falling are ^ea^ there reflexed, and so duplicate the heat.
It happens that some particles of subterraneous fire exhaling, are in this
Region. But the middle Region i^ more cold, by reason that the reflected Rays
are there vicine to those that fall in on the Earth: neither do they contain
any fiery sulphurous particles.) but watery ones; for the sulphurous and
fiery ones, that have carried up the watery ones, fly higher.

Proposition XIX. By how much that place of the Earth, unto which the Sun is
vertical, recedeth to the Pole; or by how much the place is more near the
Poles, by so much the less distant the place of the Air is from the Earth, in
which the Rain, Snow, Hail begin to be generated.
The reason is, That the Rays of the Sun do fall more obliquely on the places
about the Poles, than on the places about the Equator; and therefore the Rays
refracted are much withdrawn from those falling in, and so cause lesser heat;
and for a lesser space than the Rays, under the places of the Sun, or under the
Torrid Zone: and so in a more nearer place, the watery vapors may unite to
generate watery Meteors.

Corollary. The Superficies terminating the first Region of the Air, is of an
oval figure, or rather Elliptical or Sphere like, protuberating in the Torrid
Zone.

Proposition XX. By how much the place of the Earth is nearer the Pole, by so
much distance the Region of the Air is distant from that Earth that begins
the third, or in which the more subtle and Sulphurous particles are.
For there are the fewer and more subtle particles in part of the Atmosphere,
by how much it is nearer the Pole, because that the heat of the Sun elicitateth
fewer from the Earth. Therefore, because that there are fewer particles of the
third Region under the Frigid Zone, than in the temperate, and in this fewer
than in the Torrid; and yet the utmost bound of that third Region is equally
distant from the Center of the Earth, See Proposition 16.
according to the sixteenth Proposition. Thence it follows, that the
beginning of the Region under the Torrid Zone, is far more distant from the
Center of the Earth, than the beginning of that in the Torrid and Temperate
Zone.

Corollary. The Superficies terminating the second Region of the Air, or
distinguishing it from the third, is Spherical, and protuberating in the Frigid
Zone.

All these must be showed to Youth by Diagrams.

Proposition XXI. The Rays of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, do not directly arrive
at our eyes from the Ether through the Air; but where they enter the Air, they
are withdrawn or deflected a little from a direct passage, which the skilful in
the Optics term to refract the Rays, and so those Rays refracted come to our
eyes, and show us the Star.
Of the Rays of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
This part which treats of the refraction of light, is the most subtle part of
the Science of the Optics; for Experience testifies, that Rays proceeding
from any visible body, if from one medium, they fall in upon another, that is,
either more thick or subtle than the former, they are refracted where they have
entered at this other Medium, or deflect from a strait direct course to the
sides. The Explication is easy from a Vulgar Experiment: Let any Vessel be
taken, and let a ball of Gold or Copper, or Gold money, be affixed to the
bottom; then depart back from the Vessel, by reason of the obstacle of the
sides of the Vessel, you can no longer see the Money at the bottom. Then pour
water into the Vessel; which being done, you shall see again in the former
distance, the Money at the bottom. From hence it follows, that seeing no Ray
could directly come from the Money to the eye, by reason of the interposition
of the sides of the Vessel, and yet afterward the water being infused, the
Rays arrived at the eye: It follows, I say, from hence, that the Rays
proceeding from the Money, where they enter into the Air, from the water, do
deflect, or are refracted from the direct way, and being so refracted, they
arrive at the eye. It is called refraction, by reason that for this cause an
Oar being partly in the water, does appear refracted or broken.

See Scheme.
So let the Center of the Earth be T, L the eye in the superficies: let d r f p
be the superficies of the Atmosphere or Air. Therefore no ray can directly
arrive at the eye L, because it is beneath L f g: for other inferior rays
would fall in on the tumor of the Earth L o. Wherefore no Star can appear in a
direct ray until it come to the Horizontal line L f g: And the Stars appear
before, viz. whilst that they are yet beneath L g; for Example, in S; and yet
from S to the eye L, no ray can directly come, because that it should first
fall on L o. Therefore of necessity, the ray which comes from the Star S to
the eye L, is not a direct, but a refracted ray, viz. L f, which refracted ray
is propogated from the incident ray S f, to wit, S f falling from the Ether,
on the more thick Medium, viz. the Atmosphere in f is refracted and becomes f
L, when that it was direct in n, And so the Star appears before that it could
truly appear by a direct ray, that is, before that it arriveth at the
Horizontal line L f g.

So a Star being in S, is not seen by the direct ray S L, but by the refract r
L, whose incident ray is s r, and direct r m; and therefore the Star S
appears higher, by reason of refraction, than it is; and in another place it
appears high in the Arch x g, or in the Angle r l g, as if it were in x, when
indeed it is in s.

For this is the nature of refractions, that the rays falling from a more
rarefied medium on a more thick, as from the Ether upon the Air, they become
refracted, or decline toward the perpendicular, drawn through the point of
incidency, or falling into the superficies of the incidency or medium. For
Example, the ray S f falls in from the Ether on the Air: f is the point of
the incidency, T f the perpendicular drawn through f to the superficies d r f
p; therefore the ray S f n shall be refracted f T, that of f n may be made f L.

So of r m is made r L; but the contrary is, when that the rays proceed from
the water to the Air, for then they more recede from the perpendicular line
drawn.

Lastly, this also is the nature of refractions, that the rays falling in
perpendicularly on the superficies of another medium, are not refracted, but
only those that fall obliquely, and not perpendicularly; and by so much they
are the more refracted, by how much they fall in the less perpendicularly, or
by how much the more they depart from the perpendicular. So the rays S T, f T,
H d T, are not refracted, because that they are perpendicular on the
superficies d r f p; but the rays S f, S r, are refracted, because that they
fall obliquely, and indeed S f more than S r.

From whence it follows, (which Experience also testifies,) that by how much
the Stars are more near the Horizon, by so much the more they refract their
rays; by how much the higher, by so much the less. And Astronomers have
observed, that the refraction is insensible where the Star has attained the
altitude of 20 degrees; not that there is no refraction, but that it is very
small.

And for many Examples the skilful in the Optics, and later Mathematicians,
have derived the Rule of refraction of all Rays falling in obliquely, viz. that
in every medium there is one constant account between the sign of the Angle
falling in, and the sign of the Angle refracted; to wit, the Angle n f T is
termed the Angle of incidency, L f T the Angle refracted, n f L the Angle of
refraction: and so in the refraction of the ray s r m. Therefore as the sign of
the Angle T f n is to the sign of the Angle T f L, the same is the reason of
the sign of the Angle T r m to the sign of the Angle T r L. Thence it
follows, that if from observation we have the quantity of refraction to the
elevation of one Ray, we may thence know the quantity of the refraction of all
others, howsoever elevated.

Proposition XXII. The Atmosphere or Air, causes the Sun, or the rest of the
Stars, to be seen before that they arise in the Horizon; also to appear for
some small space of time after that they have set; also that they appear higher
than they are, and in another place of the Heavens, as long as that they are no
higher than 20 degrees.
The Air causes the Sun and Stars to be seen before they arise in the Horizon.
We have sufficiently explained the Cause in the precedent Proposition; only we
shall add some Experiences or Natural Phaenomenons. When that the Dutch
wintered in Nova Zembla, the Sun appeared to them sooner by sixteen days than
it was in the Horizon, that is, when that it was as yet depressed beneath the
Horizon about four degrees, and that in a serene Air. And famous Astronomers
have found it out with Tycho Brahe, that in our places the Morning-sky or Air
being serene, we may behold the Sun elevated above the Horizon 34 minutes, when
that as yet he is wholly under the Horizon, yet so that his limbus or skirt does
enlighten the Horizon. And the Sun seems to arise, when that as yet he is
depressed about 34 minutes beneath the Horizon, to wit, the Air of the place
where we are, being serene.

So the Spica Virginis, a bright Star, seems to rise to us, when that yet he
is depressed 32 minutes beneath the Horizon, which is thence collected, because
is seems to arise, when the Cauda Leonis is 34 degrees 30 minutes high, and
in the same quarter in which this Star of the Lion then is. And the Cauda
Leonis and the Spica Virginis, are distant thirty five degrees and two minutes.

Proposition XXIII. By how much the Air or part of the Atmosphere, on which the
ray of the Star falls, is thicker, by so much it makes the greater
refraction, other qualifications being equal; viz. the same elevation of the
Star, and the same altitude of the Air.
So the Angle n f L (which is, and is called Refraction,) is by so much the
greater; or the refracted Angle f L. approaches so much the nigher to f T, by
how much the Atmosphere is more gross: For so the Studious in the Optics have
found it true in all sorts of Mediums.

Proposition XXIV. By how much the Air is thicker, by so much the more the Star
is depressed beneath the Horizon, when that it first begins to appear.
The thickness of the Air causes the depressing of the Star.
L f is the refracted ray, which first makes the Star to appear: L f T is the
refracted Angle; and let S f n be the incident ray, and n f T the Angle of
incidency, n f L shall be the refraction.

Now let us suppose the Air f n L o to be thicker than where it makes the
refraction of the ray n f L. If therefore it be thicker, it shall make the
Angle of refraction greater, viz. c f L, and the incident ray shall be K f c.
Therefore the Star being in K, the ray K f shall be refracted, that the
refracted Angle f L may show the Star: but the Air being less thick, the Star
in S shall be first seen.

Proposition XXV. By how much the Air is the lower, by so much the Star is the
more depressed beneath the Horizon, when that at first it begins to appear,
(that is, if there be the same serenity and thickness of the Air.)
See Scheme.
For the Air being supposed lower, the refracted Angle T f L shall be greater.
For Example, If that T 4 be the altitude of the Air, the refracted Angle shall
be (for the ray refracted coming first to L) T 4 L. Let 49 be drawn parallel
with f n, because that so it is from the Hypothesis of the 21 Proposition, as
the sign of one refracted Angle T f L is to the sign of the other refracted
Angle T 4 L, (for they are supposed to differ so much in altitude, not in
density;) so is the sign of the Angle of incidency n f T, to the sign of the
Angle of incidency 3 4 T, for the refracted 4 L, and the incident 3 4 6. Now
the sign of the Angle T 4 L has a greater respect to the sign T 4 9, than the
sign T f L to the sign T f n, as is easily demonstrated by a Diagram described
according to this draught. Wherefore the sign of the Angle T 4 L has a greater
respect to the sign T 4 9, than the same sign T 4 L to the same sign T 4 3. And
therefore the Angle T 4 3 is greater than the Angle T 4 9, and 3 4 L is greater
than 9 4 L, that is, than the refraction n f T: The sign T 4 L is greater than
the excess of the sign T f n above T f L. Wherefore the Angle 3 4 L is greater
than the Angle n f L; and therefore 43 protracted, viz. 346 the ray incident,
for the refracted 4 L shall fall beneath S f, and the Star shall be in 6, that
it may make the refracted ray 4 L; and therefore it is more, depressed, than
when it is in S, where the altitude of the Air shall be L f.

Proposition XXVI. The same may be the refraction of any Star to the same
situation of it, although the altitude of the Air be different, if that there
be only a difference in the thickness of the Air.
The form of the Problem is more rightly propounded thus: The altitude of the
Air, and the refraction being given, which the Star makes at the given
Altitude; and moreover another altitude of the Air being given, to find the
density of this Air, or proportion of this refraction, such, that the same
refraction may be at the given Altitude of the Star, which was in the first
altitude of the Air. For Example, In the altitude of the Air T f, See Scheme.
the ray of the Star S f makes the Angle of refraction n f L. If now that
there be another altitude of the Air T 4, and yet of the Star S in the same
situation of the incident ray 54, (which by reason of its great distance is as
it were parallel with S f) the refraction 34 L is equal to the refraction n f L.

It is demanded, whether that this can be done; and if that it can, whether
that this other Air ought to be thicker, and in what proportion of density or
rarity?

I answer, that it may be done, and that if the other latitude of the Air be
greater than the former T f, the density of this other or second Air ought to
be greater; but if that the other given altitude be lesser: for Example, T 4,
the thickness of the other ought to be lesser, or rarity greater. Now how great
this density or rarity ought to be, is thus known.

First, let the Angle T 4 L be found out (from the given T 4, and T L) also T f
L; then the sign of the Angle T 4 L, also the sign of the Angle T 43 (which is
the Angle of the incidency of the ray 34 b:) therefore you have the proportion
of the density of this Air, or rarity of the same to the rarity of the Ether,
from whence the incident ray comes. After the same manner let the signs of the
Angle T f n and T f L be taken, so these signs will show the proportion of the
rarity of the former Air to the rarity of the Ether, and by the comparing of
these accounts you will know, how much the latter Air of a lesser altitude
ought to be more rare, or of a lesser thickness than the former.

Yet in proper manner of speaking, the refraction is not the same, because we
understand the same refraction, if that the rays falling in equally are
elevated above the superficies of the Mediums.

Proposition XXVII. If that the Air of one place be both thicker and lower than
the Air of the other place, the Sun and the other Stars shall be more depressed
beneath the Horizon of the former place, when that they begin first to appear,
than in the second place.
The Air causes the depressure of the Sun and Stars beneath the Horizon.
The Demonstration of this Proposition is manifest from the 25 and 26th
preceding Propositions. It follows from thence, that if the Air be thicker
and more low in the places of the Frigid Zone, than in the places of the
temperate and Torrid Zone; that the Sun may be seen in those places, far sooner
before his rising, and longer after his setting, than in the other places: for
when that he is more depressed beneath the Horizon, and therefore ascends
more obliquely, and in a longer time to the Horizon of those places; thence it
follows, that he is seen far sooner before his rising in the Frigid Zone,
than in the Torrid. But it is a question, whether that the Air be lower in the
Frigid Zone, and though the Sun appears sooner before his rising, whether
that only a thickness of Air is sufficient; of which more afterward.

Proposition XXVIII.
Of the thickness of the Air.
If that the Air of one place be of a more thickness, and than the other, it may
be an excess of thickness, so that they may not see the Stars before the rising
in so great a depression beneath the Horizon, than in the other Air: also the
excess of thickness may be such, that the Stars may begin to be beheld in the
same depression. Lastly, the excess of thickness may be such, that the Stars
may be beheld in a^ar distanter or longer depression beneath the Horizon, than
in the other Air. Yea this thickness may bring with it a far greater depression
than the lowness of the Air; and instead of refractions in Nova Zembla, a
notable altitude of the Air with thickness is required.

Proposition XXIX. It cannot be, that the refractions of any one Star in two
Altitudes in one Air, should be equal to the refractions of the same Star in
the same Altitudes in another Air, that is higher or lower, or thicker or more
subtle.
In the former Proposition we have demonstrated, that if in the altitude of the
Air T f, See Scheme.
the incident ray S f n makes the refraction n f L, viz. T 4, the ray S 4 in
another altitude (which is parallel with S f, by reason of its great distance,
and the rays are from one point) make the same refraction 34 L, which is equal
to the refraction n c L, viz. if that the Air 40 L W be less thick than f o L
d. Now therefore it is demanded, whether that this may be done in the two
altitudes of the Star: For Example, It being supposed that in the situation of
the Star S, the Air f o L d, and the Air f o L W are so, that they cause an
equal refraction: whether that in the altitude of another Star, for Example, in
S, in the same Atmospheres f r d L o, 4 W L o can again be an equal refraction,
or the same m c L. And I say, that it cannot be; for let the Periphery of this
Air T 4 be described in the Center T, the interval of another Altitude, cutting
L r in 3. Therefore 3 L shall be the ray refracted in this other Air, through
which the Star S is seen: for the ray 3 L is the same with r L, by reason that
the same apparent altitude x g, or Angle r L f, of the Star S is laid down.
Moreover for this refracted Angle, let the incident ray be drawn through 3, 73
W, which shall be parallel with S r m, if that the refraction L 3 W were equal
to the refraction L r m: for let T 3 be also drawn, the Angle T 3 W shall be
the Angle of incidency, T r L the Angle refracted, W 3 L the refraction.

Therefore as the sign 34 T is to the sign L 4 T, so is the sign W 3 T to the
sign L 3 T.

And as the sign n f T is to the sign L f Y, so is the sign m r T to the sign L
r T.

And now 34 L is equal to n f L; wherefore W 3 L is not equal to m r L, or W 3
is not parallel with m r.

Now this consequence requires a more difficult and operose Demonstration than
can be propounded in this place, seeing that it rather belongs to Geometry;
yet it shall be made manifest from the Analysis of the following Proposition.

Proposition XXX. The two refractions of any Star being observed in two
Altitudes, to find thence both the altitude of the Air and the thickness of the
Air in respect of the Ether, or the rule of Refraction in this Air.
Of refractions of Stars.
The refraction of a Star is of an equal difference between his observed
Altitude and the true one, which is known by calculation, and therefore it is
easy to know the refractions of the Stars: Now to come to the purpose, let the
refraction n f L of a Star in S, and ejaculating his ray S f be given; then
again in the altitude of the same S g, the same refraction m r L.

Then in the Circle d r f p d, whose Center is T. T L is given (the
Semidiameter of the Earth,) and T r, T f, L f, L r being drawn, let the Angles
T L f, T L r be given (compounded of the Altitude of the Star and 90 minutes,)
and the Angles n f L, m r L are given; and we know besides, that the same is
the account of the sign of the Angle n f T to the sign L f T, which is the
account of the sign m r T to the sign L r T. From these we must find the
Semidiameter of the Circle T f or T r, and moreover the account or equality of
the sign n f T to the sign L f T, or we must find out the Angle T f L.

Indeed the Analysis does teach that it may be found out, but by a most
difficult Solution, so that the Synthesis or collection cannot be found out
without many Propositions premised, like so many Indexes, which are altogether
improper to this place. Yet we will produce the Analysis, both that we may show
this Problem to be determinated, and also that the truth of the preceding
Proposition may also be confirmed.

Let T L be f, The sign of the right Angle T L f S. b The sign T L r S. c The
sign n f L S. d The sign of the Complement S. g. The sign m r L S. h The sign
of the Complement K. The sign L f T S. a


Let us seek the Angle L f T, because that after we have gained this, also T f
and the rest will be known.

Therefore it is in the Triangle f L T.

As the sign L f T is to the sign T L f, so T L is to T f. As a to b, so is f
to ^
And because that the sign of both the Angles T f L, L f n is given, the sign
also of the whole Angle n f T shall be given, viz. if that the signs of both
Angles be multiplied alternately unto the sign of the Complement of the other;
and the aggregate of the produced be divided by the ray b; therefore the sign
of the Angle n f T, is ^.

Then in the Triangle T L r are now known T r, T L, the sign T L r. Therefore
as T r is to T L, so is the sign T L r to the sign Y r L.

As ^ is to f, so is c to ^ for the sign T r L.

And let the sign m r L be also given, and you shall find according to the
former Rule of the whole Sinus, m r T, viz. if that ^ or if ^ be equal to m,
and ^ be n n, that the sign shall be ^ Therefore we shall have the signs of
four Angles L f T, n f T, L r T, m r T: now we know these to be proportional;
therefore as the sign T f L shall be to the sign T f n, so the sign T r L shall
be to the sign T r m.

As a to ^ so ^ to ^.

And therefore as b to c, so is ha + db - d v ( bb - aa) to g f + ma - v ( g g
f f - nn aa.)

And b g f + c d b - b m a + c h a + b u ( g g f f - n n a a) equal to + d v (
bb aa.)

For ^ take ^, and for - b m a + c h a place q q a.

And ^. Equal 2 v ^

And the division being made by ^, and other signs being substituted, it shall
be ^ equal to (^.) And ^. -- ^ equal to ^.

So a division again being made by tt - ss, and other signs being substituted,
it shall be ^ equal ^.

For by this equation it is manifest, that the Problem is determined, and this
very letter a, that is the sign of the Angle T f L, may be found as well by
Geometry, as by the Arithmetical Analysis of Vieta: or also more easily, if
that the equation may be reduced to a lesser power by the division: and from
hence it is collected, that two refractions may suffice to find out the
altitude of the Air, T f, and the very rule of Proportion; which I therefore
take notice of, See Kepler in his Epitome of Astronomy, page 65.
because that I see Kepler in the Epitome of his Astronomy, page 65. to require
three refractions, although that he has not attempted this way.

Although therefore it has been showed, that the solution of this Problem may
be had both by Geometry and Arithmetic; yet because that both are very
laborious and difficult, especially to those that are studious in Geography;
wherefore most understand not this, therefore for their sakes I shall
demonstrate another Method, by which the Problem may be more easily absolved,
although it be less Mathematical, viz. by the Rule of Position: Therefore let T
f be taken in a certain measure at T L.

See Scheme.
Therefore in the Triangle f L T from f T, T L, T L f, the Angle T f L shall be
found: So in the Triangle T L r, from T r, T L, T L r, the Angle T r L shall be
found.

Then let the signs of the Angles T f L, T f n, T r L, T r m be taken also, let
a fourth part proportional be taken at the signs T f L, T f n, T r L. If that
therefore the sign T r m be equal to this fourth proportional part, then the
assumed magnitude or altitude of the Air T f shall be true and legitimate; but
if the sign T r m be greater than that fourth proportional, the lesser sign T f
shall be taken; but if that the Minor be greater, then the Major must be taken,
and this must be done so long until the sign T r m be found equal unto the
fourth found out proportional part.

Example.
Let the Spica Virginis, or any other Star, or the Sun be placed to be beheld
in the Horizon L f, when that it is yet depressed 40. 32 minutes, viz. in S.
therefore the refraction n f L is 32.

Then when that the same Star or the Sun has the altitude g x 1 degree 22 min.
or the true altitude g S 1 degrees. then the refraction L m r is found 22 minutes.

The Semidiameter T L is 860 German miles, let us put it to be 1000, and the
Altitude, o f let us suppose to be of such part S, ( viz. 5/10000, or 1/3000 of
the whole Semidiameter T L, that is (...) of about one mile.)

Therefore the whole assumed sign in the Triangle T L f 10000000.

As f T is to T L, so is the sign T f L, 2001-2000-10000000-9995992 signs, 88
degrees. 22 min. 40 seconds.

Therefore T f n is 88 degrees. 54 min. 40 seconds, whose sign 9998200.

Again in the Triangle T r L.

As T r is to T L, so is the sign of the Angle T L r to the sign T r L.
2001-2000-9997155-999-2159. Signs 87 degrees. 43 min. 40 seconds.

Thorefore T r m is 88 degrees. 5. min. 40. seconds, whose sign 9994500.

Let the fourth proportional part now therefore be found at the sign T f L, T f
n, T r L, viz.

As ^ to ^, so is ^ to 9994366.

With this fourth number, let the sign of the Angle T r m, which is 9994500, be
compared.

Therefore we find, that this sign is almost equal to that fourth part, and
therefore the assumed altitude of the Air (^/8; of one mile) does not much
differ from the true Altitude. But if that you desire to have it more
accurately, you may take another Altitude and work after the same manner, until
the sign T r m be more equal to this fourth proportional part; or else apply
the rule of Falsehood, or from the defect of two Positions, to collect the true
Altitude as far as you may; for you cannot well find it altogether accurate,
because that signs in little numbers do very much vary, although at least there
be only the escape of half a minute: moreover the Canon of signs ought to be
most accurate.

We conclude therefore, that the altitude of the Air is the 2000th part of the
Semidiameter of the Earth: this Semidiameter is 1633190 Perches; therefore the
altitude of the Air is 816 Perches; wherefore one Perch contains 12
Rhindlandish miles. but half a German mile is more truly taken, because that
the refraction L f n, by Tycho, is greater than that we took, and 36 yea 38 may
be taken, which being laid down, the altitude of the Air cannot be less than
one mile.

The altitude of the Air being known, an account must also be given of the
density of the Air to the thickness or subtlety of the Ether, or a rule of the
refraction in this Air, viz. which makes such refractions at such scituations
of the Star; viz. the account of the sign T f L, found before at the sign T f
n, is the account or reason demanded.

As 9995992 to 9998200. And the reason why these refractions are so small, is,
because that we have taken the most serene Air, which differs not so much
from the Ether in rarity, as some imagine to themselves.

Moreover, whether that the found out altitude of the Air be the same every
where, and at every time, if from the two refractions observed at the two
altitudes of the Star in another Air and in another time, the altitude of the
Air be calculated after the same mode, as we have now done.

And that those that are studious in nature may have whereon they may exercise
their calculation, and make a trial of the matter (whether that the Altitude be
the same every where, and at every time,) I will give them here Examples from
the Observations of Tycho, who has observed the refractions of the Sun and
Moon at every degree of their Altitude. And because that the Observations of
Lansbergius (because that he observed them in a different Air, if that he
observed them at all) differ from those of Tycho's, I will also add them.

The TABLE of Refractions.
The degrees of Altitude. The Refraction of the Sun, according to Tycho. The
Refraction of the Moon, according to Tycho. The Refraction of the Sun and Moon
according to Lansbergius. Degrees. Minute 1. Minute 1. Minute 1. 1. 0 34 33 34
1 26 25 26 2 20 20 21 3 17 17 18 4 15 15 15 45 5 14 14 14 0 6 13 14 12 30 7 12
13 11 15 8 11 12 10 5 9 10 11 9 5 10 10 11 8 15 11 9 10 7 35 12 9 10 7 5 13 8 9
6 40 14 8 8 6 19 15 7 8 6 0 16 7 7 5 42 17 6 7 5 24 18 6 6 5 7 19 5 6 4 50 20 4
5 4 33 21 4 4 4 16 22 3 3 4 0 23 3 3 3 44 24 3 3 3 28 25 2 2 3 12 26 2 2 2 56
27 2 2 2 40 28 2 2 2 24 29 2 2 2 9 30 1 1 1 54 31 1 1 1 39 32 1 1 1 24 33 1 1 1
9 34 1 1 0 55 35 1 1 0 41 36 1 1 0 27 37 0 1 0 13 38 0 1 0 0

The refractions of the Sun and Moon, according to Lansbergius and Tycho.
Lansbergius places both the same refractions of the Sun and Moon: but Tycho
makes them somewhat diverse, viz. about the Horizon he makes the refractions
of the Sun greater than those of the Moon; then the fifth degree of Altitude,
he makes them equal from this; then at length he makes the refractions of the
Moon a little bigger than those of the Sun. Indeed I confess my self ignorant
of the cause of this, except it be to be ascribed to the weakness of the light
of the Moon. Moreover; Tycho omitted the second Minutes, which yet should not
be omitted, if that they come near to 60; because that there is use of them in
the calculation of the altitude of the Air. Now you must know, that the
refractions of all the Stars are the same, or else that the difference is
insensible, viz. in one Air: But if that the Air be thick, the refractions will
be greater. An Example of it is this (whereof a cause has not yet been rendered
sufficiently hitherto by any,) The Dutch Wintering in Nova Zembla, beheld the
Sun after the night of some Months, when that as yet the Limbus or edge of the
Sun was yet beneath the Horizon four degrees at least; therefore the refraction
n f L is 4 degrees. 30 min.

Then at length, when that it was depressed beneath the Horizon 3 degrees 40
minutes, they saw him elevated above the Horizon 30 degrees ( viz. his upper
Limbus;) therefore the refraction m r L (we conceive m r S to fall beneath the
Horizon, and r L g to be 30 min.) shall be 4 degrees. 11 min. and L L T 90 degrees. 30
min. From hence shall be found the altitude of the Air L f, and the reason of
the density of that Air at Nova Zembla, which yet was serene at the time of the
Observation. Now the Altitude is found much greater than the other refractions
admit of, viz. of almost two miles; neither is it corrected by the position of
a greater thickness of Air (as shall be showed in the following Proposition) by
reason that the Angle T f L cannot be greater than 85 degrees. 30 min. (if that n f
L is 4 degrees. 30 min.) it becomes greater, if that d f be placed less than 2
miles. Therefore we do not undeservedly doubt of the truth of the observation
of the Mariners, seeing that no like Example has been observed, yea the
contrary has been observed in the same place. See Chap. 26. Proposit. uit:
Moreover, no reason can be rendered, that in those places (after so long an
absence of the Sun) the Air should be higher, than at the time wherein after so
long a stay the Sun departed; seeing that rather the contrary does follow, viz.
the Air becoming more thick and lower (by reason of contraction) if that any
one will urge the altitude of the Air to be inconstant. Yet when I more
accurately weigh all the matters, three things fall in with me, by which that
apparancy and great refraction may be salved, (for seeing that the Master or
Pilot was skilful in Astronomy, and also that they saw the Sun elevated above
the Horizon, in which he was yet depressed; therefore we ought not to deny the
Observation, neither ought we to be suspicious concerning an Error in the
numeration of the days by reason of that long night; for when that they
returned to their own Country, they reckoned the same day of the year that
their Countrymen reckoned, which they could not have done, if that before they
had made a false reckoning of the days: For if that we will admit so great an
altitude of the Air, such as the refractions of the temperate and torrid Zones
do not admit of. we must say, that the Air is every where the same both in the
torrid and temperate Zone, as it is in the frigid; but the supreme Region of
the Air, both in the torrid and temperate Zone, is so subtle, that it makes
no refraction, but only the middle Region: Whence it is no wonder, if that the
refractions in the torrid and temperate Zone be lesser; for although the Air be
lower that causes them (for which cause the refraction ought to be greater)
yet its far more rare than the other Air.) But yet an Objection may be made
against this, viz. that the observation of the Mariners was made in a serene
Air, as they themselves testify. Unto this I answer, That yet it seems not
so probable that the Air should be so subtle, as in the torrid and temperate
Zone, when that the Sky is most serene. Secondly, it may be said, That that Air
of the frigid Zone, when that the Sun after a long absence, returns unto it,
is first attenuated in the superior Region, and the middle is yet somewhat more
thick; and therefore the Sun was seen through two refractions, as the Stars
through the Air and a Glass.

Now a double refraction does far more depress the Star beneath the Horizon,
than a simple, and so the altitude of the Air, the space of one mile or.
Neither may you here object, why the same does not happen at that time, when
that the Sun departs from the Air, and makes the beginning of the ^ong
Night: For then it is probable, that there is less difference in the thickness
of the Air, by reason of the long stay of the Sun; or shall we say, that a
thicker exhalation consists in the Morning times in that Zone, after that
long absence. Thirdly, If that you are not pleased to admit that double
refraction, neither are you willing to grant, that the supreme part of the Air,
in the torrid and frigid Zone, makes any refraction; I say, if that the two
premised Responses or Explications please not, then you must confess, that the
Air in that place of the torrid Zone at that time was much higher than in our
temperate Zone, and likewise more thick (^or only the altitude diminishes the
refraction;) but if that there be a great thickness, refraction is much more
augmented by this, than it is diminished by the altitude decreasing. But I am
most taken with the first of these three Causes, which makes the altitude of
the Air two miles, for we may not in the Horizontal refraction of 4 degrees 30
minutes, make a less in Nova Zembla: the other two are perplexed with many
difficulties. Now why they beheld not the Sun for so many days, the same
altitude remaining, after he ceased to rise the third day of November; I say,
that the cause was the thickness of the Air. The same answer must also be
given, why the same Dutch Mariners in the year 1596, on the 30th of May, beheld
not the Sun at Midnight under the elevation of 69 degrees. 24 minutes, when that
yet it was not under the Horizon 1 degree: Why here it made no refraction the
cause may be the same. But we have been too large concerning this matter, which
prolixity the Reader must ascribe to the difficulty of the Doctrine: For to
accurate knowledge of this matter, most accurate Observations are required;
neither yet may we, if that the Observations made at diverse elevations of the
same Star on one place make not the same altitude, assert, that therefore the
altitudes of it are diverse: for the cause may be the diversity of the rarity
of the Air, viz. by how much it is nigher the Horizon, by so much it is less
rare. If that this be so, the Observations will in no wise produce the same
altitude, although it be the same; because that we suppose in the Calculation,
that the same rarity of the Air is in both parts of the Air; and therefore the
same rule of Refraction.

Proposition XXXI. The depression of the Star beneath the Horizon being given,
when that it first begins to appear (that is, the Horizontal refraction of
the Star, being given) to find out the least altitude of that Air, as may be;
the thickness of that Air for such are fraction, and the greatest excess of
density (as may be) of that Air above the density of the Ether, that is the
greatest Rule that can be of Refraction. Also more generally, the refraction of
a Star being given unto the given apparent altitude of it above the Horizon, to
find the greatest Altitude that may be.
Of the depression of the Star beneath the Horizon.
So let the given Horizontal refraction n f L, or the depression of the Star
beneath the Horizon g f S, or g L S, when that it first begins to appear,
such as it was in Nova Zembla. 4 degrees. 30 min. It is manifest therefore from the
Optics, that if the radius S f touch the Air in f; that is, if that the Angle
N f T be strait, See Scheme.
then indeed that ray is not refracted; but if that no Star be beneath the
Tangent i n, then no ray can immediately come near to f. Therefore it is
required, that the Star should be about the Tangent, and the Angle n f T should
be lesser than the right Angle, or than 90. Let it therefore be supposed, that
89 degrees. 59 min. (or 90 degrees) although very great, yet not greater than 90.
Moreover, let n f T the Angle given, or the Horizontal refraction 4 degrees. 30
min. the Angle T f L 85 degrees. 29 min. is left, the greatest which may be;
whence, if that it comes to pass, that as the sign T f L is to the sign f L T,
so is L T to T f: And the found out T f shall be the least altitude of the Air
that may be; the fourth proportional T f shall be the least that may be, if so
be that the middle bounds or terms, viz. the whole signs T L f, and T L, remain
the same, if that the refraction T f be not given to the apparent Horizontal
ray, but to the altitude of the Star x L g. We shall act after the same mode
in, T L r T.

Also the reason of the sign of the Angle n f L, 89 degrees. 59 min, to the sign T
f L, 85 degrees. 29 min. shall be the greatest reason which may be, of the density
of the Air to the density of the Ether.

Proposition XXXII. The altitude of the Air, and one refraction of a Star in
it, being given to a certain altitude of it, to find out from it the rule of
refraction or proportion of the signs of the Angles of Incidency, to the Angles
refracted, or to the thickness of that Air, for the given refraction at the
given Altitude.
Now the given altitude of the Air ought to be greater than that, which
according to the precedent Proposition, is found to be the least: See Scheme.
For if that it be not greater, it is a sign that the refraction is not
observed, and that the Problem is impossible. Let therefore the T r given be
greater: for Example, let x L g act the apparent altitude, let the known
refraction be m r L; therefore in the Triangle T L r, is given T r, T L, and
the Angle T L r. From these is found out T r f, the refracted Angle; unto
which, if that you add mr L, you have the Angle of Incidency m r T, and the
reason or account of the sign m r T to the sign L r T shall be found: This
shall be the rule of Refraction in this Air, or the reason of the thickness of
it to the density of the Air.

Proposition XXXIII. The altitude of the Air, and Refraction being given to the
one altitude of a Star, to find out the Refraction in another altitude of a
Star.
See Scheme.
For Example, Let the altitude of the Air T f or T r, and the refraction n f L
at the apparent altitude o be given, viz. the Horizontal ray f L is that
refracted. Then let the altitude of the apparent altitude of the Star r L g or
x L g be given. Let the rule of Refraction, or the reason of the sign n f T, T
f L, or the sign n f T, T f L be found by the precedent Proposition. Then on
the Triangle T r L, from the notes T r, T L; and on the Angle r L T let the
Angle T r L be found. And as the sign T f L is to the sign T f n: so is T r L
to the other sign, which shall be that of the Angle m r T: from which, if that
you take away T r f, the refraction m r L demanded is left.

The Ancient Optics used another far more intricate, but yet a more false
method.

Proposition XXXIV. The Altitude and Rule of Refractions of the Air being
given, to find the refraction at the given apparent altitude of the Star, and
thence the true Altitude.
Of Refractions
This is the same with the former; Because in the former, from the given
refraction at the given Altitude, that rule of Refraction was to be found.
Examples for Exercise may be taken from the Table laid down before.

Of the Reflection of Light in the Air.
Proposition XXXV. The Rays of the Sun and Moon having entered the Air, or
Atmosphere, are not only refracted, but are also reflected or repercussed from
the particles of the Air, as from a rough Looking-glass, by reason of the
inordinate situation of the particles.
Of the Rays of the Sun.
For except the Rays of the Sun were reflected from the particles to our eyes,
no part of the Air would appear lucid unto us, except that above, which the Sun
is; and so the Sun being in the Oriental part, neither the Meridian or
Occidental Air would be lucid: Therefore some rays being refracted, pass
through by the Atmosphere; some are refracted here and there with many
reflections from one particle unto another, and so they make the Air luminous
or light.

Proposition XXXVI. The reflection of the rays of the Sun from the particles of
the Air, is the chief cause of the Twilight; that is, of the light before the
rising, and after the setting of the Sun.
Chief cause of Twilight is the reflection of the Rays of the Sun from the
particles of the Air.
It is manifest from the precedent Proposition: for as the Sun being in the
East, his rays being ejaculated to the West, do reflect to our eyes, and so
make the Occidental part conspicuous: so the Sun being beneath the Horizon, his
rays sent forth into our Air are reflected to our Eyes and to the Occident, and
from the Occident to our Eyes.

Proposition XXXVII. The beginning of the situation of the Morning Twilight,
that is, the Oriental Air is illuminated, and is so beheld, the Sun being
depressed about 18 degrees beneath the Horizon: and the end of the Evening
Twilight (that is, no more illumination appears in the Occidental Air,) is,
when the Sun is depressed 18 degrees beneath the Occidental Horizon.
Of the Morning Twilight.
This Proposition depends on Experience and Observation, for if in the Morning
season (that is, after the first and second hour after Midnight,) we diligently
observe, our Eyes being turned toward the East, when that any bright color
shows it self in the Oriental Air about the Horizon, and that we know at that
time the hour, and minute of the hour, we may thence know the depression of the
Sun beneath the Horizon. Now we understand a serene Air, of which seeing that
there is or may be a great difference; thence it comes to pass, that some do
extend the Twilight to the twentieth degree of the depression of the Sun
beneath the Horizon; others unto the sixteenth: for by how much the Air is more
thick, by so much the less will the light of the Twilight be discovered,
contrary unto what we said, may happen in refraction.

Proposition XXXVIII. The Altitude of the Air, or matter, may be found from the
quantity of the Twilight, which by reflection creates the light of the
Twilight, as hitherto they have thought; neither does the beginning of the
Twilight arise from a simple, but at least from a double reflection.
See Scheme.
Let T L h be the Earth, g f o m the bound of the Air; L the place of the Earth
in which the Twilight appears, or the light in the Horizontal Air f, the
incident Solary ray f g s. Therefore Mathematicians, that have hitherto written
concerning Twilights, say, that the ray incident on f, which makes the
reflection f L to come from the very Sun S, and because that no ray can come
from the Sun to f, so long as the Sun is beneath the Tangent f h s; for Example
in S, then its ray may come to f first: or because that they will have
reflection to be made from f, as from an hollow Looking-glass; therefore T f h
ought to be equal to the Angle T f L: wherefore because that the Sun is found
depressed 18 degrees beneath the Horizon, therefore the Angle n f s shall be
found 18 degrees, and L f h 162, and T f h or T f L 81 degrees, and L T f 9
degrees. whence T f is found about 874 German miles, and the altitude of the Air 11
miles, as Clavius and Nonius make it. Alhacen and Vitellio make it 13 miles.

This so great an altitude of the Air must in no sort be granted, when that
other Phaenomenons do repugn: Now that it is found so great according to that
method, that happens from a false hypothesis that they assume, viz. the ray g
h f, which makes the reflected f L to come from the very Sun: for this is
false, because that it comes by reflection from another ray; for Example, g L.
Now that to make the small light in f, it is not necessary that the ray f g
should come from the v^ry Sun, but another reflected ray may do the same, is
proved from thence, that in the Occidental Air we behold the light before the
rising of the Sun; when yet it is certain, that no direct ray then comes from
the Sun S to the Occidental Air m, but from another point of the Air; for
Example, from f and o, and so the reflected ray L m proceeds from the
incident ray f m, which very f m is reflected from the incident g f, and this g
f from another g L, which perchance also comes from another. Secondly, that
also is worthy of note, That they have determined, that reflection is caused
from the Air as from an hollow Looking-glass, the Center of whose cavity is T,
viz. the same with that of the Earth: for this also is false, for the rays are
reflected from the particles of the Air, no regard being had to the Center of
the Earth, but according to the superficies of those particles: this is
manifest from the ray L m, which slideth from the Occidental Air m to T; for if
that it came from M as from the hollow-glass of the Center T, its incident
ought to come from the quarter x; but now it comes from o, or between f and o:
therefore the ray L m is so reflected from the particle m, as the figure of it
required. And there are in the Air particles of a most different figure, and
therefore it is no wonder, if that diverse reflections are here and there caused
into all quarters.

Proposition XXXIX. It being supposed, that the light of the Twilight is not
generated by a simple, but by a double reflection, to find thence the altitude
of the Air, which may more agree with other Observations.
See Scheme.
In the former Proposition it is said, that that ray g h f, which makes the
first reflection f L in the beginning of the Twilight, comes not from the Sun
it self, but that it is also reflected in g; let therefore his incident be g l
(which may touch the Earth in p, for so L g is the first ray that can come to
g:) and this we place to come now immediately from the Sun it self, yet by
reason of refractions it may a little deviate, viz. let Q L be the very ray it
self of the Sun, l p g the refract, g h x the reflex, f L the second reflex.
The altitude of the Air T x is to be found out; because that therefore the ray
g l x is the refract of the incident Q L, let us suppose the refraction to be
made 30 minutes, viz. the Angle Q l x: moreover, the Center of the Sun to be 17
degrees beneath the Horizon, when that the Twilight begins; therefore the
Limbus of the Sun Q, which shall be distant beneath the Horizon 16 degrees. 45 min.
and 30 min. being taken away by reason of refraction; the Angle n K x 16 degrees.
15 min. shall be the refracted depression of the Limbus of the Sun beneath the
Horizon: And moreover, because that K L, K p are equal, and also f L, g p,
therefore Kg, Kf are also equal, and the Angle K f g is equal to the Angle K g
f. Now both of them taken together are equal to the Angle n K g, 16 degrees 15
minutes; wherefore K f g is 8 degrees 7 minutes, and f T L is 4 degrees, and T
f L 86 minutes, whence is found that T f, 86 miles. And therefore the altitude
of the Air is found 1 mile, which is far lesser than the Mathematicians
formerly deduced from the Twilight, and it will yet be found far lesser, if
that a threefold reflection be placed to make the beginning of the Twilight,
which is not impossible; and this twofold or threefold reflection is more
rightly admitted of for the cause of the duration of the Twilight, than that
which Kepler alleges concerning the splendid matter in the vicinity of the
Sun. See the other things concerning the time of the Twilight, and variation of
Longitude, in the second part of this Book.

Proposition XL. To find out the Altitude of the Clouds by a Geodetical
dimension.
By a Geodetical dimension to find out the Altitude of the Clouds.
The Air being serene and quiet, let any point, or little Cloud more observable
than the rest be taken, and measure the altitude of this, as the top of an high
Tower, from two stations; so that at the same time one Observer may be in one
station, and the other in another: so you shall find the altitude of this
Cloud, which is never found to exceed a quarter of a mile.

Proposition XLI. To suppute the quantity of the Air, its altitude being given.
This is nothing else, but to suppute the space between the Earth and the
outward superficies of the Air, which is easy, if so be that we know the
altitude of the Air: For let the solidity of the Sphere be supputed, whose
Semidiameter is composed of the Semidiameter of the Earth, and the Altitude of
the Air; and from the found out solidity, let the solidity of the Earth be
taken away, that which is left is the solidity or quantity of the Air.

Proposition XLII. The Air in some places has some things peculiar.
Of Rains. In Egypt it seldom or neraineth.
So in Egypt it very seldom Raineth, or rather not at all: and if at any time a
light Rain falls, Catarrhs, distempers of the Lungs, Fevers, and other
Diseases do follow. The inundation of Nilus, and almost a quotidian Erost in
the Morning, do supply the stead of Rains. So in Peru, Rains are never seen.
Also in Peru.
In many places under the Equator it raineth for an whole half year, and in
the other half it is fair. See in the Second Part, Chapter the 26th.

The Island Puton Timor, is for the most part covered with Clouds and Frost.

The Air of Sumatra.
In the Island of Sumatra the Air is very heavy and cloudy, by reason of many
standing Pools. The like is in many other, places: so in Old Mexico; also in
Malacea, and the like.

The Isle of St. Thomas, lying under the Equator, St. Thomas.
is reputed to have the most unwholsom Air of all Regions, although that it
abound in all Fruits.

In the Province of Chili the Air is so subtle; Chili.
that a Sword sheathed in its Scabbard without any wiping, yet receives no
rust.

Isles of the Azores.
In the Isles of the Azores the Air and Wind is so sharp, that it eats plates
of Iron; and the Walls, covered with the same, in a short space, and reduces
them to dust.

Aristotle relates, that on Mount Olympus there is no motion of Air, (yea no
Air at all, if that that be true which follows); and that Characters written
in the Dust, are found there after many years without any disturbance; and that
those that ascend that Mountain cannot continue their lives, except that they
carry moistened Sponges with them, by the help of which they breath.

In America, when that the Spaniards passed through from Nicaragua into Peru,
on the tops of the Mountains interposed, many suddenly died, or were frozen to
death, with their Horses, like unto Statues, even unto the return of those that
escaped. Some think, that a defect of Air was the cause; but that is not
probable. Neither do I receive that for truth, which Aristotle writes
concerning Mount Olympus, because the contrary is found in higher Mountains,
whose tops are covered with Snow. Whence we formerly conclude, that they are
not above the Air, but that the Air flows over them. Busbequius, an
Eyewitness, declares, See the Chapter of Mountains. The Authors relation of
the Mountain Carpathus in Hangaria.
that Mount Olympus in the Summer is also covered with Snow.

About the Isles of the Indian Ocean the Air is fragrant with the scent of the
Odours, especially at that time when that Aromaticks are mature. Mariners
discover this scent when that as yet they are three or four miles distant from
these Isles, viz. when that a Wind contrary to their course blows.

The Air of the Sea is more heavy than that of the Land, and less acceptable
unto those that are not accustomed unto it: the difference is manifestly
discerned when that Mariners approach near the shore; for by the distance of an
whole mile they will discover how nigh the Land they are, by the very Air.
Mariners relate this especially concerning Soffala, which is situated in the
Oriental Coast of Africa.

When that I had printed these, I happened by chance on a certain Observation
made by David Froelichius on the Mountain Carpathus in Hungaria, which because
it made not a little to the confirming our Judgment concerning the altitude of
the Air, and the constitution of its Regions, I therefore have thought fit to
annex it here, although it ought to have been adjoined to the 18th Proposition.
Of the Mountains of Hungaria, Carpathus (says he) is the chief, by which
vulgar appellation all the tract of the Sarmatian Mountains is denominated,
which separate Hungary from Rutheni, the Polonians, Moravians, the Silesians,
and that part of Austria which is on this side the Danube. Their more high and
astonishing tops are in the Earldom Sepusia, at my Native Country,
Caesariopolis. Now by reason that they are almost covered with perpetual Snows,
they are termed by the Sclavonians, Tatry or Tarczal, as it were the shaved and
bald Mountains. And these Mountains, by reason of their roughness and
precipices, far exceeding the Italian and the Helvetian Alps, and those of
Tiroli, are almost unpassable, and are seldom traveled over, except by the
Searchers of Nature. Now I my self (that I may relate this by the by) in the
Month of June, Anno 1615, being desirous to try and discover the height of
these Mountains (with two others of my Associates) when being on the top of the
Mountain with great pains, I thought that I had attained unto the uttermost
height, of a sudden another sublimer Mountain offered it self, unto which I
arrived through vast and tottering Stones, which if moved falls down toward
the Valley, and that with so great a noise to the astonishment of the
Passenger. After I was ascended, another more high was discovered by me, and so
some lesser tops, the latter of which always exceeded the former in altitude,
through so many Valleys was I forced to pass, with the great hazard of my life,
until I had arrived unto the uppermost top of all; and when that I surveyed the
Valleys beneath beset with huge Trees. From the declivities of the Mountains, I
could observe nothing but an obscure Night, or a bluish color, like unto
profound Air; and it seemed to me, that if I should chance to fall from the
Mountain, that I should not light on the Earth, but fall directly into the
Firmament: For by the overmuch declivity, the visible Objects were extenuated
and dulled. But whilst that I ascended a more high Mountain, I was pendent, as
it were, amongst most thick Mists. Having overcome these, after the space of
some hours, when that I was not far from the highest top of all, reposing my
self, from aloft I beheld and discovered, that in those places, where I
supposed my self before to be lodged amongst Mists, that there moved compacted
and white Clouds; above which for some miles, and beyond the bounds of Sepusa,
I had a commodious prospect. Yet also I saw some Clouds higher, likewise some
more low, and also some equally distant from the Earth. And hence I understood
three things: Three things observed by him.
1. That then I had passed the beginning of the Middle Region of the Air. 2.
That the distance of the Clouds from the Earth was not equal, but according to
the mode of the Vapor, in some places higher, and elsewhere more low. 3. That
the distance of the Clouds near the Earth, was far lesser than what some
Philosophers do determine, and that not 72 German miles, but only half a German
mile. When that I came to the highest pitch of the Mountain, I found the Air so
calm and subtle, that I discovered not the motion of an hair; when yet
notwithstanding, I had found in the more depressed parts of the Mountain a
vehement Wind: whence I gathered, that the highest top of this Mountain
Carpathus arises a German mile from its lower root or basis, and extends to
the supreme Region of the Air, unto which the Winds ascend not. On the top I
fired a Pistol, which gave no greater a Report at first, than if I had broken a
small Stick; after a short space of time, a great rumbling or murmuring
increased, and filled the lower parts of the Mountain, Valleys and Woods, like
unto the report of a Canon: (here I feared, least that the whole Mountain being
shaken, should have fallen with me;) and this noise continued for about half a
quarter of an hour, until that it had penetrated the most obtruse Caverns, at
which the Air being multiplied on every hand rebounded. And indeed such concave
Objects did not present themselves on the top of the Mountain; therefore the
sound at first was repercussed almost insensible, until that by descending it
became more near to the Caves and Valleys, it more forceably struck against
them. Also in these high Mountains, for the most part, in the midst of Summer
it Snoweth or Haileth, when that it Raineth in the adjacent Plain; as I also my
self have found. The Snows of diverse years may be known from their color and
hard Crust.

CHAP. XX. Of the Winds in general, and the Quarters of the World.
A Certain affection of the Air is the Wind, and therefore the consideration of
the fame does appertain to the absolute contemplation of the Earth, especially
seeing that its cognition is required in Hydrography, and most of all in the
Art of Navigation, which is a part of Geography: which although I grant more to
belong unto Natural Philosophy; yet because that it contains many things
belonging unto Geography, therefore I shall briefly treat of the same here.

Proposition I. The Wind is a commotion of the Air, sensible by touch, or with
some force.
Of the Wind.
So I think it may be defined with the consent of all Nations: neither shall I
here contradict some Conceited persons. If that the commotion be higher, it is
termed an Air or Breez; but if that the agitation be so small, that of it self
it asserteth not the sense of Touching, then it is not termed a Wind: And the
Air is never without such an agitation of particles, as a ray of the Sun let
into a Chamber by a narrow passage, does evidence; therefore we add the word
Touch in the Definition, for that motion of the Atoms is only perceivable by
the Eye.

Proposition II. Most Winds tend from one quarter to the opposite quarter, and
force Bodies with them.
Winds force Bodies with them in their motion.
This is perceivable both from the force of the Winds, or our Bodies; and also
from the Vanes fixed on the top of the Masts of the Ships, which are extended
by the Wind to the contrary quarter.

Yet this is not done altogether directly and continually, but with some motion
of the Vanes hither and thither. There are some that suppose, that we ought to
have added in the Definition, A commotion made toward one quarter, or toward
the same parts: But we thought these more fit to be omitted, seeing that also
some circular Winds are found, and to speak properly, no Wind constantly
observes the same quarter.

Proposition III. A Quarter is an imaginary point, which we conceive to be
extended from any place of the Earth perpendicularly, toward one point of
those which circularly stand about that place.
Of Quarters.
Such the true and common Notion seems to be; in the finding out of which I
have not a little endeavored: sometimes the Points standing about are termed
Quarters.

Indeed the Explication of the Quarters does not belong unto this Section of
Geography, but unto the third, concerning the Complete Affections; but because
that the sorts or kinds of Winds are denominated from them, or these from the
Winds, therefore here we shall anticipate that Tractation. Now this is the use
of the Quarters, that seeing various things and appearances do appear in a
various situation from ours, we may be able to explain the same.

Proposition IV. The Quarters are infinite in number, seeing that Plains may be
drawn through every point of the Horizon; but only 32 have obtained peculiar
appellations at this day, which are also common to the Winds, that blow from
such Quarters.
But 32 particular Winds.
The Quarters are twofold (as also the Winds) Cardinal and Collateral; the
Cardinal are those which pass through by the four circumstantial Points
depending on the daily circumvolution of the Stars. Such are the North, South,
East and West: by which names, both the Quarters and also the Winds are
designed. For we say, the North and South quarter and wind, the West, South,
East quarter and wind: and the Winds are called by one term Aquilo or Boreas,
the North Wind; Auster or Notus the South Wind; Eurus, the East; Zephyrus, the
West-wind. Those are collateral which stand between two Cardinal Winds, of
which there are infinite. At this day are accounted only 28, viz. seven between
two Cardinal Winds, as between the North and East, the East and South, the
South and West, and the West and North. Of these intermedial ones, four are
primary Quarters or Winds, viz. that are exactly in the middle between the
Cardinal ones, and are distant from them 45 degrees, which are the North-east,
the South-east, the South-west, and the North-west.

Proposition V. These 32 Quarters are equally distant one from another, viz.
every one from that which is next; whence it comes to pass, that 11 degrees of
the Horizon, and one quarter, do intercede between two quarters. The Cardinal
Quarters are distant from one another 90 degrees.
The 32 Quarters are equally distant one from another.
For seeing that the Horizon, as a Circle comprehending all the Points about any
place, has 360 degrees, as all other Circles; if that 360 degrees be divided
between 32 Quarters, every one shall receive 11 degrees 15 minutes; but if that
they be divided amongst four Cardinal Quarters, every one of those Cardinals
shall receive 90 degrees. Therefore the quarter from the North toward the East
is the first, which is distant from the North toward the East, 11 degrees. 15
minutes: the second, which is 22 degrees. 30 minutes: the third, which it 33
degrees 45 minutes: the fourth, which is 45 degrees; this is in the midst: and
so in the other Quarters.

The terms given to these 32, both Quarters and Winds, by the Germans, are most
commodious; but are very difficultly imitated by other Tongues. Therefore you
may see the order of the Quarters in the Table annexed with their degrees. We
have also added the Latin and Italian appellations.

Proposition VI. Now because as yet Intervals very great interceded between the
two Quarters, from which the Winds may blow, and in which other Bodies are
often placed, the situation of which unto our place we desire to know;
therefore some cut twice every one of these 32 Quarters, and interplace one, so
that they reckon 64 Quarters and Winds, which some Mariners observe in long
Navigation.
The 32 Quarters, by some divided into 64 Quarters.
But Mathematicians, seeing that these do not sufficiently suffice to an
accurate designation, they reckon so many quarters as there are degrees and
minutes in the Horizon, and they denominate and design them by the number of
the degrees and minutes by which they are distant from any Cardinal quarter; or
by how much the Arch of the Horizon is intercepted between the Cardinal
quarter, and any point of the Horizon: so the quarter of the first degree, from
the South toward the East, and the like. But in the Sea-mans observation of
the Winds, so subtle a division ought not to be required.

Yet a Mode may be thought on, by which the 32 Winds may more commodiously be
denominated, that it may be easy to the Tongue and Speech of all Nations, viz.
if that they be named from the order in which they mutually follow from one
Cardinal quarter to the other.

For Example; the first from South to East, or the first South-East; the second
North-East; the third, fourth, and so on.

Proposition VII. The Ancients both Greeks and Latins reckoned less Winds, or
that we may speak more truly, they imposed names on fewer Winds; neither do
they consent in these, but call the same Winds by diverse names, which they took
not from the Order, but from somewhat else. Whence there arises no small
difficulty concerning their distribution of the Winds.
The Greek and Latins reckon fewer Winds than twelve.
In time past amongst the Grecians only four Winds had names, viz. the Cardinal
winds; Eurus blowing from the East, Zephyrus from the West, Boreas from the
North, and Notus from the South. Neither does Homer make any other mention of
the Winds. Then at length unto these they added four others, to wit, of those
that blow from these quarters: 1. In the quarter in which the Sun does arise,
when the Winter Solstice is between the East and South, which quarter is called
the Winter Solstice of the East: and the wind is termed Eurus; for they call
the East Wind it self Subsolanus: but Gellius calls it Vulturnus, and he will
rather have the Eastern wind called Eurus. 2. In which the Sun sets, which
is called Africus and Lybs. 3. In which it rises in the time of the Summer
Solstice, between the East (Eurus) and the North, which quarter is called the
Solstitial rising absolutely; and the wind is termed by them Aquilo. 4. In
which he sets in time of the Solstice, which quarter is termed the Summer or
Solsticial setting of the Sun. This wind was termed by the Grecians, Corus.

The annexed Diagram represents the Order of the Winds, See Lib. 5. of
Seneca's Natural Philosophy.
according to the annumeration of Seneca, in the fifth Book of his Natural
Questions.

Proposition VIII. This designation of the Grecians is very inconvenient for
Navigation, and other uses, which inconveniency they did not much discover,
when for a long space they departed not from Greece in their Navigations.
For in places of a diverse Latitude, or of a diverse distance from the Poles,
diverse also is the distance of the VVinter and Solsticial rising from the
quarters, North, South, and so on. Yet the Grecians retained it, augmented with
other appellations of the four intermedial Winds, so that there were 12 winds,
every one of which they designed by their proper terms; although that some
others reckon otherwise. The Latins besides these twelve, added the names of
twelve more, which blow between two of the former twelve; the following Diagram
shows their appellations and order, in which the Greek winds are noted by
Greater letters, and those which the Romans have interposed between every two,
are noted by Lesser letters: yet Seneca notes, that this inconveniency was
long since observed by Varro, and that therefore he ordered these twelve Winds
thus, that every two should be distant by equal distances, not having any
regard of the rising of the Solary quarter; but in that Seneca affirms, that
there are no more Winds than twelve, is false and ridiculous, for they are
infinite.

Proposition IX. Hitherto we have explained the distribution of the Winds taken
from the quarters; and have also showed, that both the divisions of the Ancient
Grecians and Romans, is less adapted to the use of Navigation and Geography.
Therefore we deservedly retain the more recent distributions, which constitute
32 Winds blowing from quarters equally distant. Now those are called Opposite
Winds, or contrary, which blow from quarters diametrically opposite: For we
conceive the Winds, as coming from another place to our place; but we suppose a
quarter to be extended from our place to another place.

Proposition X.
The Causes of the Winds are various; for seeing that the Wind is nothing else
but a continued protraction of the Air, all those things which are able to
effect such a protrusion, will be the causes of Winds. Now they are these:

The Causes of the Winds are various.
1. The chief and general cause is the Sun it self, which attenuateth and
rarefieth the Air by his fiery beams, especially that on which he sends forth
his perpendicular rays, or over which he stands; for the Air being rarefied
requires far more space. Thence it comes to pass, that the Air being forced
by the Sun, does protrude the vicine Air with a great force; and when that the
Sun is moved round from the East into the West, the chief force of the Air
caused by him is toward the West. And a sign of it may be, that in many places
of the torrid Zone, and every where in the Sea, a continual Easterly wind does
blow, viz. the Sun thrusts forwards the Air from the East toward the West,
and exceeds not the torrid Zone. Indeed the rarefied Air is thrust forwards
circularly toward all the quarters, North, East, South, West; but yet it is
not admitted in all quarters: But the more vehement protrusion is toward the
West, because that the Sun moves toward that quarter; therefore the wind is
almost, continually more sensible in the torrid Zone toward this quarter. But
in our Zone for many days in the Morning before the rising of the Sun, and
after that, where for the most part other Winds do cease. Of other quarters,
some are sometimes more disposed than others to receive this force: therefore
where the protrusion becomes greater toward the North, the South Wind is said
to blow; when that it is thrust toward the East, then the West Wind blows;
when toward the South, the North, and so for other quarters. And it is to be
noted, that when this protrusion is made to any quarter lying without those
four Cardinal Quarters, then in diverse Regions a diverse Wind shall be seen:
For although that that quarter be one in respect of the place unto which the
Sun is vertical, yet in respect of other places it is diverse; and so the same
cause makes the same Wind to be termed by diverse names in several Regions. Now
this cause is either assisted or hindered by other causes; if that it be
assisted, it makes the Wind vehement; if it he hindered, it makes it less
vehement from that quarter, and oftentimes another Wind then blows, which is
rather assisted by that general cause. 2. I make the second cause of the Winds,
and that more frequently, Exhalations elevated copiously, and with a violence
from the Sea and Land; but they scarce cause any Winds, except that when they
begin to be rarefied. 3. The attenuation and rarefaction of the Clouds and
Mists, whether that it be caused by the Sun, or from other Stars; or whether
from included or adjoined fires, or sulphurous particles. 4. The dissolving of
Snow and Ice, especially of that which lies on Mountainous places, and are not
wholly dissolved into water. 5. The various situation and rising of the Moon
and the other Stars. 6. The condensation and rarefaction of the Air and Vapors
by any heat or cold. 7. The descent of the Clouds, by which the subjected Air
is pressed.

The consideration of the Aeolopila conduces much to the more easy
understanding of these causes, into which the water included, fire being put to
it by an arrow orifice, sends forth the winds with a great force, until that
all the water be exhaled. Now these retain the place of a narrow orifice in the
Air; 1. The more dense circumstantial Air. 2. If that the same vicine Air be
forced by, or prohibited to give place by other Vapors or Mists. 3. If that
the Air be more condensed toward one quarter, and so lays open a way to
Blasts.

Proposition XI. Why the Winds blow so that they make a perpendicular line over
the Horizon; or why the going forth of the Winds is perpendicular to the
Horizon.
The Winds so blow, that they make a perpendicular ^ine over the Horizon.
The cause is, by reason that the Air in a Spherical figure does encompass the
Earth, and the protrusion of the Air is made for the most part through the
greatest circle of the Sphere, which passes through the Center of the Earth:
for although we may suppose the Air to be forced according to a transverse
line, yet because that there is a lesser force from the sides, and greater
resistance; thence it comes to pass, that the winds incumb into the midst of
the passage. But we shall more commodiously conceive this mode, if that we do
but consider the first cause of the winds: for the Sun thrusts forwards the Air
toward all the quarters of that place, unto which it is vertical; but that
force is not received in all, as I have said. If that now we consider the great
Circles drawn from that place, and amongst these, those in which the Air is
thrust forwards, all those places of the Earth seated in this circle or
semicircle, shall find the wind falling down perpendicularly, by reason that
every great Circle of the Earth, passing through any place of it, is
perpendicular to the Horizon of that place. The same is the reason, if that at
any time the wind breaks forth from a thick Fog, or dissolved Clouds; but
those places that are situated without these Circles, feel not the wind,
although that the Air be moved above their Horizon; because that it is not
perpendicular to that Horizon, but oblique.

Yet it is not general, that the wind proceeds in a perpendicular way to the
Horizon, because that oftentimes in the Air transverse Blasts are found. So we
see, that Smoke coming forth of a Chimney, is not carried by the wind toward
one quarter, but part of it is carried unto other quarters.

Proposition XII. Why the Winds blow by an interrupted force, so that sometimes
they cease, and other some, as it were, with redoubled strength they return
with the greater importunity: And why that they seem more continually to blow
on the Sea, so that it is discovered less calm.
The Winds (...) blow by an interrupted force.
I suppose the reason to be, that the cause that moves or stirs up the
Winds, continues not always, but that some space is required unto the
collection of such a quantity, which by such a vehemence may break through the
Air; and therefore, because that Exhalations are more continual in the Air, and
the motion is less impeded, there the calm in the Ocean is less discovered,
although that it be not wholly removed.

Proposition XIII. Why no Wind, blows perpendicularly from the Air unto the
places of the Earth.
Concerning this question, See Aristotle, lib. 2. chap. 9. of Meteors.
Aristotle in his Second Book, Chap. 9. of Meteors, treats very absurdly; so
that the Peripateticks are not agreeing concerning his Opinion: neither shall I
in this place relate their Sentiments. The cause seems easily to be
explained, viz. that the Air being thrust downwards toward the Center of the
Earth, cannot break through this way, by reason that other vapors are expelled
or born upwards; and therefore the overmuch resistance of the Air, which is
directly situated under the Air moved, causes the protrusion to be made to
the sides of the place in which the violence begins. Which is therefore the
more probable, seeing that the matter of the Wind is for the most part more
light than that Air, and that is more rarefied than that which is more near
unto the Earth.

Proposition XIV. Why Westerly-winds are less frequent than Easterly-winds.
See Proposition 10.
The cause of this is manifest from the Tenth Proposition, where we have made
the Sun to be the first cause of Winds, who so rarifieth the Air proceeding
from the East to the West; and therefore the Air is more thrust toward the
West. Therefore that this general cause may be impeded, of necessity very many
Exhalations must consist in the Western quarters, which does happen less
frequently.

Proposition XV. Why the Northern and Eastern-winds are more impetuous and
stormy: and on the contrary, the Southern and Western more relaxed and weak.
The Northern and Eastern Winds more stormy, than the Southern and VVestern.
The cause is by reason that the Northern Air is more thick, by reason of Cold;
and the Southern (in our Zone,) by reason of the greater dissipation caused by
the Sun and Heat is more rarefied. Now by how much the Air is more rarefied, by
so much the lesser is it carried with an impetuous force. Yet you must know,
that the South-winds are cold, dry and violent in the Temperate Zone or the
Artick Zone, opposed to ours, no less than the Northern-winds are unto us; but
the Eastern-wind is more rigid, or more intense for another cause, viz. because
that it arises for the most part from the refraction of the Air, made by the
Sun, which being continually carried from the East to the West, the Air also is
thrust forwards with the greater violence from the East to the West: But it is
probable that other causes may accede, that may either help or obstruct that
violence.

Proposition XVI. Why the Southernly and Westernly-winds are found more hot
than the Easternly and Northernly, which have a wonderful power of causing Cold
in respect of them.
The Southern and VVestern Winds are found more hot, than the Easternly and
VVesternly.
So this Question is wont vulgarly to be propounded; yet we must know that in
must not generally be understood of all places, but only concerning the places
of our Zone: For in the other temperate Zone situated toward the South from
the Equator, the contrary holds true; because that in these places the
Northern-winds are hot or warm, and the Southern are found more cold. And so
the nature of the thing, and the condition of the cause required: For the
reason why the South Wind is discovered more warm to us, and the North more
cold, proceeds hence, viz. that the South-winds come from a quarter and
places more near unto the torrid Zone, or way of the Sun; but the Northern
places more remote from that way of the Sun, that is, from more cold places.
But the contrary is found in places situated toward the Antartick Pole from
the Equator, because that the Northern-winds approach to them from the way of
the Sun, the Southern from the places more near the Pole.

But as concerning the Eastern and Western-winds I must answer otherwise,
neither does that diversity of the places of our Zone, and that of the
opposite, here take place. Therefore first, it is said in the preceding
Proposition, that the Western-winds are less frequent in all places; the cause
of which is the same with that, by reason of which the Occidental winds are
discovered more warm, viz. because that for the most part they blow in the
Night, and after the setting of the Sun; where the Air that is thrust forwards
toward our place, is more calid or less frigid, than the Air of our place,
which is more remote from the West, than that which lies between the Sun and
our place. There is also another cause (which also is of force in the
difference between the Northern and Southern-winds) viz. that the Western-winds
blow with less violence, and not so intense, but with some relaxation. Now it
is known, that any Air or Wind is discovered so much the more cold, by how much
it blows with the greater or more intense force, although in truth it be no
hotter or colder, which is evident by our expiration, which we can exhale
either cold or hot.

Proposition XVII. Why Mariners from the sight of a Cloud, especially such a
one that is of a pale or duskish color, predict a wind from that quarter: also
to declare the other signs of future winds.
Mariners from the sight of a Cloud, predict a Wind from that quarter.
A twofold Reason may be rendered; for either Clouds of that color do show, that
by and by they shall be dissipated and dissolved into Blasts: or else the
Clouds sinking by their own weight, and segregated from other Clouds, press
down the Air beneath them, and so cause it to blow. Concerning the peculiar
Clouds, termed by the Dutch the Bulls-eye, see the following Chapter.

1. The Sun appearing spotted in his rising, and lying obscured under a pale or
black Cloud, foretells either showers or winds. 2. If that the Sun at his
rising appears concave, so that it shines from the middle and sends forth
rays, it signifies a moist and windy season. 3. If that the Sun be pale in his
setting; but if it be red, the Air will be quiet and serene the next day. 4. If
the Sun being pale sets in black Clouds, it signifies a North Wind. 5. If
that the Moon be red like unto gold, it is deemed a certain sign of a Wind,
according to the Verse, Pallida Luna pluit, rubicunda fiat, alba serenat. 6. A
circle about the Moon. 7. If that the Northern-horn or corner of the Moon
appear more extended, a North Wind is approaching: 8. If that the Southern, a
South Wind is at hand. 9. The rising of the Moon, and the more noted Stars; as
of the Bear, Orion, and especially the Goats, with the Sun. 10. If the small
Stars in Cancer, termed Asellos, be covered with a Cloud, if the Northern of
them be covered, the Wind will be South; if the Southern be covered, it will be
North. 11. For the most part Winds begin to blow, when that the Wind cease.
12. When a certain noise and murmur, like to an Ebullition, is heard in the
Sea. 13. The Ancients also prognosticated from the Raven, the Dolphin, and
other Animals. 14. From fiery Meteors, as from Lightning and Falling-Stars; but
not from the Ignes fatui.

Proposition XVIII. Why in the Spring and Autumn the Winds are more frequent,
and blow with greater force, than in the hot Summer or cold Winter.
Greater and more frequent Winds in Spring and Autumn, than in Summer and cold
VVinter.
In the Spring it is supposed to be partly by reason of the dissolving of Snow,
especially in Mountainous places; partly, because that the Pores of the Earth
are then opened, and send forth many exhalations: partly, because that the Air
and Vapors are then more thin, when that they were condensed in the Winter.
Add, that for the most part in the Month before the beginning of the Spring,
and in the very Spring, many Rays do fall, by reason that humid Constellations
then have possessed those houses of the Zodiac, into which on the entrance of
the Sun we account the beginning of the Spring; and also in Autumn the frequent
Rays and Exhalations are to be accounted the cause of the Winds, as well as in
the Spring, by reason that a moderate heat proceeding from the Sun, advances
the Vapors and Exhalations; yet such as are more thick and less attenuated.
But in the heat of Summer there are no Winds, for the most part, for the same
reason, by reason of which Rays are very seldom seen at that Season, viz.
because that the Sun overmuch attenuateth the Exhalations, and does not permit
them so to conjoyn or meet in such a quantity, as is required to the generation
of the Winds. Which cause is not general or always true: and neither is it
generally true, that in the heat of Summer there are no Winds; for here we are
only to understand it concerning that which oftentimes happens: But in the
sharp Winter the winds are more rare, and that by reason that both fewer
Vapors are raised from the Earth; and those also that are elevated; are either
condensed into Clouds, or are so dissipated by Frost, that they cause no wind.

Proposition XIX. In what Altitude of the Air, or in what Region of the Air the
Winds begin to blow.
In what Region the Winds begin to blow.
There are some that suppose the winds not to exceed the lower Region of the
Air, because that they discover, that the tops of the high Mountains, as
Olympus, feel no Blasts. But I question the Observation, seeing that the Smoke
cast forth from the top of Mount Aetna, is discerned to be moved to and fro by
the wind: therefore I suppose, that such a windy commotion may be caused also
in the upper Region of the Air.

Proposition XX. Unto what space one and the same Wind may extend it self.
How far one and the same Wind may extend it self.
There is great diversity in this matter; for the winds blowing from the East to
the West, under the torrid Zone, seem to encompass the whole Earth: and those
also that blow either from the North or South, for many days and long spaces,
are wont to accompany and follow Mariners. The same seems true concerning
collateral Lines; but this diversity is, because that the same wind is
different in diverse places, as we have showed in the Tenth Proposition, in the
end of the explication of the first cause.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Winds in particular, and Tempests.
IN the foregoing Chapter we have alleged the distribution and differences, or
rather the denominations of the Winds, which they receive from the quarter from
whence they blow, or seem to blow; which division also is accidental, by reason
that they are taken in respect of a certain place of the Earth unto which those
Quarters are related. Now in this Chapter we shall allege the divisions and
Phenomenon which are in a certain time of the year, or else are proper to
certain tracts of the Earth, although that we desire to have more, and those
likewise more accurate Observations concerning these things. But we will
produce what we have collected with much labor from the Diaries of the Seamen.

Proposition I. One Wind is constant, and another inconstant.
Of Winds constant and inconstant.
That is a constant wind, which at the least for one or two hours blows from
the same quarter.

That is an inconstant wind, which sometimes blows, and other some is changed
into other winds blowing from other quarters.

The causes of the more or less duration of the same wind: also of the swift
immutation seems to be, 1. if that it be from a general cause, or from a
cause less constant. So Winds proceeding from the motion of the Air, with the
motion of the Sun in the torrid Zone, are constant: so those also that blow
from the dissolving of the Snow, especially in the Mountains. 2. If that by
chance there be no such vapors in other quarters, which are apt to generate
Winds. 3. If that the circumambient Air about the Cloud, of which the Winds are
generated, be more thick, and grants no passage to the Exhalations: but if
that the Air be not so thick, or more relaxed, and that few Vapors be here and
there in diverse places and quarters; and lastly, if that the general causes do
cease, then indeed the Winds are found variable, which are for the most part
gentle.

Proposition II. One Wind is general, and another particular.
Of general and particular Winds.
The general Wind is termed by M^riners a Passant wind, which at many places at
once, in a long tract of Earth, blows on the Sea almost for a whole year.
That is termed a particular on the contrary, which blows not at once in many
places for a whole year.

Now a general Wind is hindered, 1. In the parts of the Sea near the Earth; for
here Vapors from other quarters do interpose or force in: and therefore a
general Wind is considered, especially in the midst of the Sea, most remote
from the Land. 2. Yet another wind may also blow in the midst of the Sea, viz.
if that in another a Cloud, or other cause generating of a wind, be very great.
From these two Causes it happens, that a general wind is less or more
constant, or continual in diverse placer.

Now the general winds are only found in the Sea of the torrid Zone, or that
which lies between the Tropicks, about the whole Earth; yet in some places it
extends it self without the Tropicks the space of 7 degrees, and they are
called Eastern, that is, the East Wind or collateral to the East, as the
South-East, North-East, viz. which blow from the East toward the West for the
whole year. But they do not consist with the like constancy in all the parts of
that Sea; but in some they are more hindered, and in some less. They are more
constant in the Pacifick Ocean ( viz. in that part of it which lies between
the Tropicks,) so that Ships that loose from the Port of Aquapulco in New
Spain, in America, toward the Philippin Isles; that is, such as steer their
course from the East to the West, oftentimes for 60 degrees Sail continually,
without any alteration or furling of the Sail, with a constant East, or
North-East wind; neither unto this day has any Ship in that most long Voyage
(of 1650 miles) been cast away. Whence the Mariners say, that they may sleep
securely in this Voyage; neither is there any need of guiding the Ship, seeing
that the general Wind brings the Ship to the wished Port: for here other
winds do impede the general Wind. The same constancy of this same Easterly
wind, is found in the Sea from the Cape or Promontory of Good-hope in the
bounds of Africa, or rather from that procurrent part of Africa which lies in
the Torrid Zone even to Brazil; in the midst of which Voyage lies the Isle of
St. Helena, unto which Mariners returning from India unto Europe, are wont to
direct their Course. The Isle of St. Helena is distant from the Promontory of
Good-hope 350 Miles, and is oftentimes accomplished in sixteen days, or also in
twelve (as the general wind is either vehement or slack, for in this there is
not a perpetual likeness) the Seamen using the same security (when that they
have first sailed to the Parallel of that Island, for the Promontory of
Good-hope lies without the Tropicks) which we have said that they use, who
Sail in the Pacifick Ocean, from Aquapulco to the Philippins: yea, when that
they have passed the Promontory of Good-hope, they judge themselves to have
escaped all danger and variation of the winds, and sleep securely, the wind
constantly filling their Sails toward that Island and Brazil: But yet this
only is their great care, that they may not Sail beyond the Island, seeing that
it is a very small one; for if that they have passed it the eighth part of a
mile, they cannot regain it, viz. an Easterly wind forcing them toward the
West: therefore then they are forced with great loss of their Voyage to make to
the Coasts of Brazil, or the other Isle called Ascension, to water at. If then
you demand by what course they Sail, when that the Ships make a contrary Voyage
in this Sea, viz. whilst that they steer from the Philippin Isles unto New
Spain, or from Brazil and the Isle of St. Helena, unto the Promontory of
Good-hope, whilst that they Sail from India; in these Voyages the Reader must
know, that Mariners use a threefold mode; for either they navigate the Sea
situated without the Tropicks (therefore they do not touch at the Isle of St.
Helena, whilst that they Sail from Europe into India) or where necessarily they
must pass by this, they do not directly steer their course from the West to the
East, but obliquely from the North, the Collateral quarter of it, to the South
or the Collateral quarter of it: or lastly, they choose such a time of
Navigation in which they know, that that general wind is impeded often by
others. But this latter, because that it happens rarely, therefore they
rather make choice of the two former Modes, of which we s^ll speak more in the
Chapter of Navigation.

Therefore there are two Seas of the Torrid Zone, in which that general
Oriental wind, with its Collaterals, reigns throughout the whole year, viz.
that which lies between the procurrent of Africa and Brazil: the other is that
which is extended between New Spain, or rather between America and the Oriental
Islands, of which the Philippins are a part. The third part of this Sea under
the Torrid Zone, viz. between the Procurrent of Africa and the Philippins, or
Oriental Islands, is not indeed destitute of this general wind; but oftentimes
it is hindered in this Sea, by reason of the frequency of Islands, which
hindrance yet in some places is more frequent than in other some. Between
Mozambique and India, the general wind is of most force in January, February,
March, April; in other Months other winds do blow, of which we shall speak in
the following Proposition. This general wind is more hindered in the Sea of the
Indian Isles. At the Isle of Banda, in the Month of May, the Oriental winds
begin to be prevalent, being very violent, and accompanied with rain: at
Malacca in September, and in other places otherwise, as we shall show in the
following Proposition. See Proposition 3.


Yet this you must know, that this general wind does not equally extend it self
in these Seas toward the Tropicks in all parts, but that there is a great
difference in this. For the Tropicks are distant from the Equator on both
sides 23 degrees. but the general wind may be discovered in one Meridian unto the
Latitude of 20 degrees, in another Meridian unto 15, in another unto 12.

So in the Indian Ocean, when in the Months of February, and January, the East
wind, or South, or South-East blows, it is not discovered until you come to
the 15 degree of Latitude. So unto those that Sail from Goa unto the Promontory
of Good-hope: here a general wind meets them at the 12 degrees. of South
Latitude, and at the 28 degree of the same Latitude accompanies them.

So also Mariners have observed that no general wind blows between the 4.
degree of Northern Latitude, even unto the 10, or 11 degrees. between Africa and
America; for when they have Sailed by that wind from St. Helena toward the
Equator, even unto the 4 degrees. of Northern Latitude; then are they destitute of
that wind, even until they come unto the 10 degree of Latitude. And from that
degree, even unto the 30, the North-East is again manifestly found continually
to blow, although that the 30 degrees: be 7 degree from the Torrid Zone. Yet
notwithstanding in the 6, 7, and 8. degree of Parallel Latitude it also blows
in some places, but in all places almost in the Parallels of the 10 degrees. even
unto the 30 degrees. North. After the same manner beyond the Tropic of Capricorn,
in the Sea between the Promontory of Good-hope and Brazile, the South-East wind
blows even unto the 30 degrees. of Latitude, that is 7 degrees beyond the Torrid
Zone toward the South, and that through the whole year.

And although as we have said, that this general wind is not discovered on all
Coasts, much less in Mediterranean places, yet in some it is sufficiently
observable. So on the Coasts of Brazile Easterly unto the Coasts of Loango, the
South-East is a Quotidian wind, although that other winds do admin themselves.

There is a threefold Cause of this continual general wind alleged by Modern
Philosophers, (for both it, and the Torrid Zone were unknown to the Ancients,
who have not so much as mentioned it). Some Determine that the Sun is the cause
of this wind, blowing from the East to the West; by reason that by its great
faculty it rarifyeth the Air in the Torrid Zone, and so it thrusts it
forwards from the East to the West, seeing that the Sun it self goes this way.

Some and those of the Opinion of Pythagoras, that Determined the Heaven to
stand still, and the Earth to moved round; some of them I say, supposed this
general wind to Proceed from hence, viz. that whilst the Earth is moved round,
and the Air with it; this less follows the motion of the Earth, but is
somewhat more slower to motion: and therefore whilst that we are carried with
the Earth from the West to the East, the Air moved with less celerity to the
same quarter, seems to meet us, and to be moved from the East to the West,
when that yet we do rather meet it.

See Des Carts in his 222 Proposition of his Principels.
Des Carts alleges the third Cause, and that altogether new in the 222
Proposition in his Principles. Where he endeavors to show that the Moon
causes this motion, as well as the motion of the Sea from the East to the
West. But because that his Opinion cannot be understood, except that all his
Philosophical Hypotheses should be Explained; therefore we shall say nothing
concerning it here, especially seeing that we shall show in another place, that
that Cause is not true. I approve of the first Cause; the second seems
therefore not to be received, because that many Copernicans approve not of it;
and no reason can be given, why this wind should be found to blow only between
the Tropicks, or to the 30 degrees. of Latitude, and not in the whole temperate
Zone.

Proposition III. Some Winds are Periodical and fixed, others wandering and
Erratick.
Some winds fixed, others wandering.
Those are termed fixed, and periodical, which blow on certain days, and then
cease for a certain number of days, until that they begin to blow again. Some
return in the space of half a year; othersome are Monthly, which return in the
interval of one or two Months. Also the fixed winds are otherwise subdivided,
viz. some when that they begin to blow, continue for some Months, others for
half a year, others for a Month, others for a few days.

Amongst these those are chiefly observed by Mariners, which blow for some
Months in certain places of the Sea, (and they call these winds, as also the
times wherein such winds blow, Motions, or Moussons). And such Motions are more
especially notable in the Indian Ocean, from Africa to the Philippine Isles,
although that they be not wanting in other places: there is a very great moment
to be placed in the observation of these Motions; for Seamen ought to choose
the time of them for the Voyage that they intend to that same quarter, (or that
which is collateral unto which that wind blows;) neither to undertake a
Voyage to the quarter of this Motion, but to expect the contrary Motion. For in
the parts of the Indian Ocean, where that one wind cease to blow for some
Months, another succeeds contrary to the former, and continues with the same
constancy, until that it has completed its time, and therefore they call
these, Contrary Motions. They term those the time of the mutation of those
Motions, which intercede between the end of one Mousson, and the beginning of
the contrary. For one Motion ceasing, another does not presently begin to blow,
but some days fall between, some times more, sometimes fewer, also more in some
places, and fewer in other some. And in these intermedial days, in which no
certain Motion blows, the wind is variable; the calm dangerous, and for the
most part the Sea is tossed with uncertain waves, and sudden Tempests arise:
some of these Motions return twice in a year, but not with the same vehemence,
whence Mariners term the one the great Motion; the other the lesser.

1. In that part of the Atlantic Ocean, that lies in the Torrid Zone, as also
that which is in the Temperate Zone, the North wind perpetually blows in the
Months of October, Months most fit to taka a Voyage from Europe to India.
November, and January. And therefore these Months are chiefly fit to undertake
a Voyage in from Europe to India; that they may pass the Equator by the help
of those winds. For it is manifest by experience, that some Ships that have set
Sail from Europe in March, have arrived no sooner at Brazile, than those that
have set Sail in October; viz. both of them have come thither in the Month of
February, being helped by the North wind. Yet because that this wind is not so
continual and certain, therefore Mariners are not wont to call it a Motion.
Neither is it an easy matter to render a cause of this wind in these Months,
unless you will refer it to copious thick vapors, or to a continnual pressure
made from thick Clouds. But those that have wintered in Nova Zembla, testify
that there is a most frequent North wind all the time of the Winter, where this
effect cannot be ascribed unto the Sun, rarifying the Air, seeing that he lies
obscured under the Horizon. Yet I suppose that in general the Cause may proceed
from the dissolving of Snows or gross Vapors, or Clouds, collected in the
Winter in the Northern and Southern places, especially on the Mountains. Which
I am induced to believe by this Argument more especially, because that these
Motions blow for the most part from the North and South quarters, or the
Collateral unto them. Therefore by reason that Snow and thick Clouds are
dissolved in the Northern places by the Sun, especially in that half of the
year in which he passes through the North part of the Ecliptic; therefore
those Motions shall then be Northernly. After the same manner in the Southern
or Antartick places for the other half of the year, the Sun dissolveth the
Snow, and the thicker Clouds, therefore then the Motion shall be discovered
Southerly.

Now that these Motions blow more from the Sea in the Collateral quarters, to
wit, In the South-East, and North-East, or in the quarters more near to the
North, and South; its cause seems to be referred either to the diverse
situation of the places, in which the Snow and the more thick Clouds are there
collected, or rather unto a general wind, which is very forcible to attract
those Motions unto another quarter. For seeing that a general wind of its own
nature tends directly from the East, to the West, and these Motions tend from
one Pole unto the other, thence arises a mutual hindrance; and thence it may
come to pass, that the wind may gain an intermedial quarter between the East
and South, and East and North. The South-West, and North-West Motions are
unconstant, rare, and weak; and therefore are scarce reckoned amongst Motions,
when that the North and South by accident seem to decline sometimes to the
West, but they are attracted to the East by a general wind. Now to render a
reason concerning the great diversity of these Motions in diverse places, more
accurate observations are required, and those not of one year but of many, with
the notation of the Winter, Rainy, Snowy Seasons: and the Mountains of these
places from the quarters of which these state winds do blow; we should also
know the Phasis and Motion of the Moon, and what variation this makes.

Several winds blow at certain times in set places.
2. In July South winds blow at Cape Verd, (for then there is the Winter in the
time of Rain) and this seems to produce from no other Cause than that, by
which in our Zone North winds blow in the Winter.

3. At the Promontory of Good-hope, in September, the North-East wind blows.

4. At Patanen in India, in November, December, and January, continual Rains,
and a North-East wind predominateth, but in other Months an East wind blows,
and it is Summer.

5. About Sumatra, there is a mutation of the Motions in November and December.

6. In the Isle of Mayo, one of the Azores, in the end of August, a vehement
wind blows from the South and brings Rain, which moistens the Earth,
otherwise dry, and then first of all Grass springs up, which feeds many
Goats at the end of December.

7. In Congo from the middle of March, to September, (at what time it is Winter
there) the North and North-West wind blow, or other intermedial winds, which
force and gather the Clouds on the tops of the Mountains, and generate an
obscure Air with Rain. But from September, to March, the South and South-East
and other intermedial winds blow that are contrary to the former. See the
following Proposition.
We have taken these differences of the state and Anniversary winds, from the
Observation of Mariners, that term them Moussons, or Motions, if that they blow
in a long tract of the Sea. And now we should Treat of their Causes, but that
we are ignorant of the Mountains of the Regions, of the times of the Snows, and
their meltings, and many other matters. Moreover those Observations of Seamen
are not sufficiently accurate, so that they deserve a diligent inquisition
concerning their Causes.

The more noted Motions are these,
More noted Motions.
1. In the Indian Ocean, between Africa and India, and to the very Moluccos, in
an Oriental Motion toward the West, which begineth in January, and blows for
six Months, even to the beginning of June: In August, and September, a contrary
Motion begineth, viz. Western winds. In June, July, and August, is a mutation
of Motions, and great Tempests from the North. Now when that we speak of
Oriental and Occidental winds, we do not only understand the East and West
winds, but also the Collateral winds.

2. The Oriental motion varieth very much at the Shoars, so that Ships can only
Sail from India on this side Gatis, or on the Coasts of Malabar, from January
to the middle of May, to Persia, Arabia, Mecha, and Africa: for seeing that in
the end of May, and all June, July, and August, the Tempests rage violently,
and often a North wind, or furious North-East wind frequently intermixing it
self: therefore in these Months no Ships pass from India on this side Gatis:
but on the Coast of India beyond the Gatis, or Ganges, that is on the East
quarter, or on the Coasts of Choromandel, such Tempests are not known. A Voyage
is undertaken from Ceilan, Java, and other Isles, to the Moluccoes, in
September, because that then the Oriental motion begineth, which hinders the
general wind. But when you depart to 15 degrees of South Latitude, beyond the
Equator, this Occidental motion is not discovered in the Indian Ocean, but a
general South East wind fills the Sails.

3. From Cochin to Malacca, that is from the West, to the East, they begin
their Voyage in March, because that then there the Western motion begineth, or
rather the North West wind frequently blows.

4. In the Kingdom of Guzurat, half the year the North winds blow from March to
September, and in the other half the South winds, and that without any other
hindrance caused by other winds.

5. The Dutch set Sail from Java for the most part in January, or February,
when that they return for Europe: then they Sail with an Easterly wind even to
18 degrees of South Latitude: and here the South or South-East wind begineth to
blow, by which they Sail even to St. Helena.

6. Although in the Indian Ocean from January, even to June, the motion be
Oriental, and then from August to January, the motion be Occidental; yet
nevertheless in diverse parts of it, when we must Sail from one place to
another, diverse seasons are discovered more or less convenient, by reason that
the Collateral winds do more or less blow, or the motion is more or less
vehement at those times, or other winds more often or more seldom intermix at
that time: therefore those that are to Sail from Cochin to Malacca, observe
another motion, another from Malacca to Maccou, the Emporium of China, another
from Maccou to Japan.

7. At Banda the Western winds cease with the end of March, and at the end of
April there are variable winds, and calms: with the Month of May, violent
Easternly winds with Rain begin.

8. At Ceilan about the Promontory called Punto Gullo, on the 14th. of March,
the first Occidental wind begins, viz. the West-South-West. then the
South-West constant and continnual from the end of March, to the first of
October: then the North-East begineth, which blows there even to March, but
some days at ten, or also more, these State-winds or motions happen sooner or
later.

9. In the Voyage from Mozambique to Goa, in May, and June, the South-East
winds are predominate even to the Equator, but from the Equator to Goa, the
South-West and South winds reign in July, August, and the following Months.

10. In the 35 degrees. of the Elevation of the Meridian which passes through the
Isle of Tristan de Conha, in May, on the New Moon the West wind reigns.

11. At the 2 of North Latitude, in the Sea seventy miles from Guinea, a
South-East wiad predominateth from the 20th. of April, to the 5th. of May, but
not on the Shore, or in Guinea it self: after the 5th. of May, the same wind is
also discovered at the 3 degrees. and 3 of Latitude.

12. At the Isle of Madagascar, from the 15th. of April, unto the last of May,
the North, and North-West wind blows; but in February, and March, the winds
blow from the East and South.

13. In April or May, in the tract of Land, and Sea, from Madagascar to the
Promontory of Good-hope, the North wind, and the wind Collateral to the North
blow continually to the East, so that it is esteemed a Miracle if that the
Southo South-East wind blew for two days.

14. After the 20 of April, in the Sea of Bengala, the South wind is violent
before that day, the South-West, and North-West, and those being very
impetuous, do predominate.

15. There is a Motion for Navigation from Malacca to Maccou, in July, October,
November, December, viz. the South winds, and South-West winds, and oftentimes
the South-East winds, but in June, and July, at the beginning the West winds
rage, about Malacca, and in the Sea of China.

16. The Motion by which they Sail from Java to China, (from the West, to the
East) begineth with the Month of May.

17. The Motion by which they Sail from China to Japan, from the West, to the
East, is in force in June, and July: viz. the South-West wind; but the North
and Collateral wind to the North, at the East oftentimes interpose, and that
especially at the day time, but in the night season the South-East and the
first Collateral wind at the East do interpose, and let.

18. A contrary Motion, viz. from Japan to Maccou, from the East, to the West,
is in February, and March, viz. the East, and North-East winds, but these
predominate not in the Sea, but on the Coasts of China, which those that Sail
in that Voyage from Japan, observe, they term them the Winds over the Land.

19. The motion by which they Sail from the Phillippine Isles, or China, to
Aquaepulco in America, viz. the Western winds are observed in June, July, and
August, but they are very weak, except in the Full Moon; now they are the
South-West winds: but they avoid the Torrid Zone, and choose the Coasts of
America Septentrional is to shun the wind that is general from the East, which
yet then is less vehement. This therefore must be known in general, that the
Occidental Motions, or West winds, are more weak than the Oriental, because
that these are helped by a general wind, but these are diminished by it.

20. In the Sea of China, a South, and South-West Motion reigns in July,
August, and October. But if that these winds be changed into an Oriental
Motion, they never presently return to the South; but first to the North: hence
when they have blowed some days, they return to the East, and lastly to the
South: sometimes the North-East, is immediately changed into the South-West,
sometimes presently from the North to the South, and that here is sufficiently
frequent.

So in the Sea anniversary winds are more constant, unto which I add those that
are less constant, and those which on the Coasts, and also on Maritimate places
are observed to be Anniversary.

Proposition IV. The Etesian winds, so termed, that are Anniversary in Greece,
proceed from Rain and Snow dissolved on the Mountains.
Of Etesian winds and from what they proceed.
The Grecians observed a twofold kind of Winds on every Year, which were Stated
and termed Etesian winds. Viz. 1. Those in the Summer, or Canicular winds;
which they called by the General term Etesiae, because that they were more
strong and sensible. 2. The Winter winds, which they called the Chelidonii, or
Ornithiae.

The Canicular Etesian winds are Northern, in the placing of the beginning of
which to a certain, Writers do much differ. When that Aristotle had added that
they blow after the Summer Solstice; he mentions nothing of the true time,
which certainly is a very great negligence, which at length he augmenteth,
where making mention of the Ornithiae, he omitteth both the time, and the
quarter of these winds: but those that have noted the time of the Etesian
winds, they have observed that the forerunners of them begin to blow either on
the 6 of July, or on the 15 of July, at the rising of the Canicular or Dog
Star. Now those winds blow 40 days, the whole space of the Dog dates, and
therefore end with the Month of August; but others extend them to September
they only blow in the day, and cease in the night, therefore Mariners formerly
called them, the sleepy and delicate winds.

The cause of these winds questionless is the dissolving of the Snow caused by
the heat of the Sun on the Northern Mountains, which at that time is very
great, by reason that now for diverse Months together, almost he has
continually shined on those Mountains without any setting; and with this cause
it aptly agrees that the Etesian winds cease on the night, because that then
the resolution of the Snow cease, or at least is lesser than the generation
of the wind requires, because that the Sun then is over or near the Horizon,
or else sets wholly.

The same Northern Canicular wind is not only in Greece, but also in Thrace,
Macedonia, the Aegean Sea, and the Isles of the same, (all which Regions are
sometimes comprehended under the general term of Greece,) yea in Egypt also;
and it is probable that the wind which we have said in the former Proposition,
blows in Congo, (situate beyond the Equator,) that that wind that blows
from the North, between March, and September, is the same with these Etesian
winds of the Grecians, or at least proceed from the same cause: as also that
North wind which we have said blows in the same Months in the Kingdom of
Guzurat, from March, to September; these I say, we ought to Determine to
proceed from the dissolved Snows of the Mountains of Asia, termed the Sarmatian
Mountains, and the Girdle of the World, and therefore we reckon it amongst the
Motions.

The second Anniversary wind of the Grecians, is the Chelidonian, which they
relate to begin after Winter, but have not noted the day of the beginning. Now
these are South winds (contrary to the Canicular or Etesian winds) and very
weak, without violence. Moreover inconstant, and not so continual, whence they
render the Sea calm.

Aristotle relates that they blow by Course even unto the middle of Summer,
until the Northern Canicular Etesian winds begin, but that they are not so much
discerned.

The Cause also of these winds, is the dissolving of the Snow on the Mountains
of Monomotapa, which Snow the Sun rarifyeth, because that in the time of
Winter, and that of Greece, they have Summer, the Sun passing through the
Southern parts of the Zodiac; and this wind is also found in Congo, Egypt,
and the Aegean Sea, and the like is in Guzurat, but for very many Months, when
it begins to blow in Congo, and Guzurat, in September, it continues even to
March.

The Anniversary wind of the Grecians, which they call Ornithia, or the Bridges
wind, this they say blows after the Vernal Aequinox, the Sun ascending to the
Vertex of the Europeans.

Proposition V. Why the Etesian winds blow not in Italy, France, Germany,
Persia, and other Regions? especially seeing that they are more near the
Northern Mountains, from whence we assert the Etesian winds of the Grecians,
Congo, and Guzurat do arise and blow.
The Etesian winds blow not in all Regions, though near the Northren Mountains.
The Question is of no small moment, and I wish that we had more accurate
Observations concerning this matter, viz. the notations of the winds, which at
that time are observed in each Region, whether in every Year the same never
return?

Yet if that any thing must be said to the Question, these seem convenient. 1.
We cannot deny but that the North wind often blows in our Canicular, or Dog
days. 2. That it is discovered less continual and in each year, peradventure
the Cause is the often blowing of other winds, which hinder the discovery of
the same. 3. We may say that the Mountain from which this first resolution of
the Snow begineth, is situated directly from Greece, and therefore the first
Canicular wind is carried hither, but the Vapors are carried hither from the
Snow of the other Mountains, because that here they find a free passage made,
but I shall reject these my extemporay thoughts, when that I shall see a better
reason, and more accurate Observations.

Proposition VI. Some winds are proper and almost perpetual to some place or
tract of Land, others are ceasing.
Places which have a certain wind at a fixed time.
Those places of the Earth are very few which have a certain wind at a fixed
time, viz. these:

1. The places of the Torrid Zone, especially of parts of the Pacifick and
Aethiopick Sea situate in the Zone, enjoy a perpetual wind, viz. an Oriental
wind or its Collateral, which they call a General wind, as we have showed in
the second Proposition, where we have treated largely of it. Yea this wind is
not so much to be reckoned amongst the proper winds, but rather to be
determined to be common to all places; for although by accident it happens
that it be not discerned in all places, viz. because other winds blow more
strong, yet it is proper to some: the Cause is alleged in the place cited.

2. On the Coasts of Peru, and part of Chili, and to the adjacent Sea, the
South wind is almost perpetual, and his Collateral wind at the West. It
begins at the 46 degrees. of Latitude, and blows to Panama the American
Isthmus, and causes that in few days Ships arrive from Lima at Panama laden
with Gold, Silver, etc. But it requires many days sail from Panama to Lima.
But this wind blows not in the Sea remote from the Coasts of Peru. It is
difficult to render the cause of this wind, by reason that the South Land from
whence it seems to blow, is not yet known unto us. Yet I think it probable,
that because that Mountains are found in it covered with perpetual Snow;
therefore the winds are generated from a continual resolution of them. But I
will not infect the mind of the Reader with these my suspicions, or
conjectures. For peradventure the Snows which are found all the year long in
the high Mountains, at the Streights of Magellan, are the cause of these winds,
but yet it may be Objected, that those Mountains lie from the South toward the
West, declining from the South: wherefore we shall leave this to a more
diligent inquisition, or a more full knowledge of the South Continent.

3. At the Coasts of the Land of Magellan, or Del Fugo, about the Straight Le
Mair, continual or at least very frequent Westernly winds do blow, and that
with that force, that they make the Trees to bend toward the East from their
perpendicular rectitude; neither is there any part of the Earth in which those
Occidental winds so often blow: but on the other part of the Streights Le Mair,
at the Coast of the South Land the South wind blows. I can render no other
cause of those Occidental winds, but that I suppose them to be raised from Snow
and Clouds in the South Continent, which extends it self from the side of
that Occidental Straight, from the South toward the North. But these are
doubtful and more diligently to be inquired after.

4. On the Malabarian Coasts of India; for almost the whole year, the North and
North-East winds blow: the cause proceeds from the resolution of the Snows of
the Mountains of the Asiatick Sarmatia, viz. Imaus, or Caucasus from the Clouds
on the other Mountains of Asia, which are collected and press the subject Air.

5. In the Sea near to Guinea, the North West wind is frequent, and in the
remote Sea the North East.

6. In the middle passage between Japan and Liampo. a Maritimate City of China,
even unto these are found Occidental winds, which blow in Japan in November,
and December.

7. At the Isle Guotou, not far from the Isle Dos Cavallos in the Sea of China,
is a frequent South wind, when that yet in the neighboring Ocean a North wind
is predominate.

Proposition VII. Unto these Periodical or state Winds, appertain those also
that are termed day Winds, which in some Regions, and at a certain time of the
year blow for some hours every day.
Of Day Winds so called.
Now they are found to be twofold, and that only in some Maritimate places, for
some blow from Mediterranean places to the Shore toward the Sea; and others on
the contrary from the Sea to the Shoars.

1. On the Malabarian Coasts in the Summer season, viz. from September to
April, the Terrestial winds, or Terrinhos do blow from the twelfth hour of the
night to the twelfth hour of the day, now these winds are Eastern winds. But
from the twelfth hour of the day to the twelfth hour of the night, the Sea
wind, or Viraconus, to wit, the West wind blows: but this is very weak, so
that by its assistance the Ships can hardly arrive at the Shore. I suppose the
cause of those Oriental winds from twelve at night to twelve in the day, partly
to be a general wind, and partly Clouds on the Mountain Gatis. But the cause of
the Occidental Winds, that blow from twelve in the day to twelve at night, is
the resolution of thick Clouds caused by the setting of the Sun, which Clouds
before by the Oriental wind were forced toward the West. Out of those named
Months, the North wind predominateth, also the East and North-East, neither by
reason of the often Tempests are these Terrestrial and Marine winds discerned.

2. In Musulipatan a City on the Coasts of Charomandel, these Terrinhos begin
to blow on the first day of June, and continue only fourteen days, and then
the Ships depart thence. But these are rather to be referred amongst the
motions, because that as far as I can conjecture from the words of the Nautick
Description, these Terrestrial winds on those days are there continual,
neither do the Marine winds succeed them.

3. On the Coasts of America, and new Spain, unto the Pacifick Ocean,
Terrestial winds blow in the middle of the night; and Marine winds in the day.

4. In Congo, and the Provinces at Lopo Gonsalvo, Terrestrial winds blow from
the evening all night; and Sea winds begin in the morning, and so lessen the
heat of the day.

5. The Subsolan winds also, which are found to blow before the Sun, and with
the Sun rising every day, in all places, especially in Brazile, where it
happens every day in the morning. It is no difficulty to explain the cause of
it: for either we say that it is a particle of the General wind, or that the
Sun discusseth and rarifieth the more gross particles condensed by the night.

6. The Etesian and Chelidonian winds of the Grecians, appertain to the Diary
or day winds.

7. On the Coasts of Camboja from Varrella to Pulo-Catte, from the 28 of July,
to the fourth of August, Terrestrial and Sea winds successively blow often
every day, because that the motions then cease there, and cause a calm. The
West and North-West are the Terrestrial winds. But the Collateral are the East,
to pass through the North, and presently are reflected at the South; then a
calm succeeds until the Terrestrial winds begin to blow again, which yet are
discovered on the Sea not above two miles from the Shore.

8. Those Terrestrial and Sea winds are found to blow in the night in America
at Havanna.

Proposition VIII. By how much you draw near the Equator from the Artick Pole,
by so much the Northern-winds are found to be less vigorous; and having passed
the Equator in part of the South Continent, Southern-winds are vigorous, which
in these places are cold and dry, especially in Chilis and Peru.
The cause of both are the same, by reason that they both proceed from the
Polary places; yet South-winds are found in the North Continent, and Northern
in the South.

Proposition IX. From what has been said it is manifest, that there are four
differences of Winds.
Four differences of Winds.
1. Those that are common, which blow at all times, and in every place, except
that they be hindered by other winds; such is only one, viz, the General wind.

2. Proper winds, which blow at all times; but yet only in a certain place or
tract of the Earth, not in all the Earth.

3. Those that blow in many places, but not continually, or at all times; as
are Motions, Anniversary winds, and some Diary winds.

4. Those that blow not at all times, nor in many places.

Proposition X. Some Winds are sudden, impetuous and violent, not continuing
long.
Of sudden and violent Winds, and not of long continuance.
Such are the Winds termed Prester, Typhon, Turbo, Exhydrias, Ecnephias. These
Winds are Anniversary in some places; and some are more frequent in some places
in the Sea.

The Wind called Prester is a violent wind, breaking forth with Lightning; such
are seldom observed, and it is seldom solitary without a wind termed Ecnephias.
But Seneca says, that a Prester is a Typhon, or Whirlwind, with an inflamed
Air.

An Ecnephias is a sudden Wind, and violent breaking through some Cloud or
Vapor; such Ecnephiae are often in the Ethiopian Sea between Brazil and the
Procurrent of Africa, especially at the Promontory of Good-hope, and from the
other side of Africa to Terra de Natal, also at Guinee under the Equator.
Mariners call them Travados, by a Portugal word: also in some Months of the
year it is more frequent in some Seas.

That Cloud, and sometimes many thick and dusky Clouds, are manifestly beheld
by the Mariners to collect and augment by degrees, and that in a most serene
Sky, before that the Wind breaks forth: and therefore when that they see it,
they ought to furl their Sails, and defend themselves against a future Storm.
But before that Seamen had learned the nature of these Clouds, and their
Prognostics, many Ships having entered into this Sea were cast away, which the
Portugals first experimented; for that Nation first of all the Europeans sailed
the Ethiopian Ocean: For India being discovered by Gamma, the King of Portugal
sent thirteen Ships, a new Navy of great burden, thither, under Admiral
Caprali, in Anno 1500. This Navy first of all the Europeans arrived at Brazil
to the great joy of the Portugals. Here, when that they had stayed sometime,
viz. the Month of April, they set Sail thence on the Month of May toward the
Promontory of Good-hope; but they had a most cruel Storm from an Ecnephias, the
approach of which they saw, yet were not acquainted therewith. Which Maffaeus
thus describes: From Brazil to the Promontory of Good-hope they reckon almost
two thousand Leagues (that is, about a thousand German miles,) those are the
Kingdoms especially of the raging Ocean and violent Winds. The Portugals having
entered into that space more adventurously than fortunately on the Month of May,
a flaming Comet appeared incontinently even to the tenth day. And now the Sky
often changing, as also the Sea, black and sordid Clouds were conglobated to
the North, and collected all the Wind into it self, as it were by
reciprocation, the Sea was languid, and the Calm treacherous; the Seamen
unskilful both in the Places and Tempests, spread their Sails to receive all
the gale of Wind; when from those Clouds, as I have said, the North Wind
pouring it self suddenly with an universal violence, it Shipwracked four of
their Ships that were not so well disposed to hand their Sails in a moment, the
rest looking on, so that of so great a Company of men none escaped. See Maffeus.
The sudden striking of the Yards or Sails rent by the wind, preserved the rest
by accident. Then the North Wind blowing furiously, the Sea swelled, the Floods
sometimes advanced to the Skies, and sometimes sunk to the depths of Hell: the
water in the day time appeared as black as Pitch, and in the night time of a
fiery color. This dismal Tempest continued the space of 20 days.

The Promontory of Good-hope is especially infamous for such Ecnephiae or
Travados.

There is not far from the Shore a very high Mountain not ending in an Apex,
but having a plain on the top, like to a Table. From that top an Ecnephias
breaks forth with a great violence, and wonderful Prognostic. For the Sky
being very clear, and the Sea calm, a Cloud is beheld to stand on the Table of
the Mountain, which is so small at first, that it seems not to exceed the
bulk of a grain of Barley, and at length it increases to the bigness of a
Walnut. The Dutch call it the Oxes-eye, because that this Cloud is said to be
like unto it, then after a while the Cloud augmenteth, and extends it self
over the whole plain of the Mountain. Then on a sudden an Ecnephias breaks
forth from the top of the Mountain with so great violence, that it over-setteth
and sends to the bottom Ships that are unprovided and not well strengthened;
but Seamen being now more cautious, when that they once discover that Bulls or
Oxes-eye, presently depart from the Shore as far as they can, and then furl
their Sails, and use other Artifices to preserve their Ships; neither does this
Prognostic ever fail: therefore they fly this deadly Banquet. After the same
mode an Ecnephias rages at Terra de Nata: the Bulls-eye fore-runing it, by
which many Ships have been cast away. And so it is also in that whole tract
between that and and the Promontory of Good-hope. In Dauphin in France, not far
from Vienna, is a high Mountain, on the top of which is a standing-Pool, from
whence all Tempests seem to arise in these places: on the top of it is
procreated a Cloudy exhalation, which foresheweth immediately Thunder or Storms
to succeed.

In the Sea between America and Africa, and near the Equator, such Ecnephiae
and Travados are frequent, especially in those Months in which no Winds blow
constantly, or if they do, it is very seldom, viz. throughout the whole year,
especially in April, May, and June (in other Months it is more rare,) and they
are very observable on the Coasts of Guinea: The Portugals, as I have said,
call them Travados, which word also the Dutch keep; but the Inhabitants of
Guinea call them Agremonte. They often happen, viz. three or four times in a
day, by and by they cease; for they continue for the most part above an hour
and a half, but the first shock is very violent. They break out of black and
dusty Clouds, the Sky being clear at hand. By their assistance Seamen
oftentimes pass the Equator, because that other continual Winds are often
wanting there, especially in those three Months; neither do they hinder Ships
to sail, except at the first onset. But in the Sea that is near to that part of
Africa, in which the Kingdom of Loango is situated, there is a frequent
Ecnephias in January, February, March and April: so on the Promontory of
Africa, called by the Ancients Aromata, and now Guardafu, not far from the
Mouth of the Red Sea, in May every year the North Wind rages, and a most
violent Ecnephias.

For you must know, that as some Anniversary winds are less violent: so also
Tempests and Ecnephiae are Anniversary in some places. In such an Ecnephias,
not far from that place, the Portugal Admiral Sodrens was lost Anno 1505; who
being forewarned by the Africans would not follow good Advice.

But in the Mouth of this Arabian Sea, as also in Arabia and Aethiopia, a
peculiar and wonderful Ecnephias does somewhat happen, viz. a thick and black
Cloud, mixed with Nubicular flames like to a burning Furnace (dismal to behold)
cloudeth the day in darkness, of an instant a Storm breaks forth, the rage or
which is by and by pacified; but it casts forth red Sand in great abundance
on the Land and Sea, so that the Arabians say, that it has often happened,
that such Storms of Sand have overwhelmed the Annual Company of Merchants and
Travelers with their Camels, they term them Carawanen, Caravans, or Cassila,
viz. every year once or twice Merchants being met together from diverse parts of
Asia in Syria, go from Aleppo into Arabia about six thousand persons, by reason
that the wonted Robberies of the Arabians, and the difficulty of the way, cause
them to fear to Travel alone: which also they do from India to China and
Tartary: and thence they say, that the Mumia of the Arabians and Egyptians
has its original. Viz. those Bodies covered with the drifts of Sand, are-dried
up by the great heat of the Sun. Now this Ecnephias arises from the Northern
quarter into which the Red Sea is extended; and therefore it is probable, that
seeing so great a quantity of this Sand is sound on the shore of this Sea, that
it is raised aloft by the Wind, and that thence that Red color is seen in the
Clouds, and thence also the Sand is ejected from the Clouds.

That such an Ecnephias arises in Lybia, by reason of the great quantity of
Sand, is not improbable, and was in some measure known to the Ancients; who
therefore writ, That the access to the famous Temple of Jupiter Ammon in Lybia,
was difficult, neither were they altogether ignorant of the generation of
Mumia. Twistius a Dutchman, that lived a long time in India, says, that in
the Kingdom of Guzurat Clouds of Sand, or an huge quantity of Dust (that are
elevated by the heat of the Sun) do oftentimes overwhelm the Travelers. Now we
must speak of the Causes of this Tempestuous wind, whence the Ecnephias
proceeds. It is evident, that it breaks forth of a Cloud. Now there are two
Modes by which such a Wind may seem to be generated from a Cloud: 1. If that a
Cloud tending downwards by its gravity strikes the Air with a great force, as
we discover by Experience, if that stretched forth Sails fall, the Air is moved
with an impetus. And thence it comes to pass, that by how much the Cloud or
Bulls-eye appears less, by so much the Storm is the greater that follows,
viz. because that the Cloud is more high, and therefore appears small; and
descending down from a higher place, it more vehemently strikes the Air; the
other is the motion of the generation, if that the Wind included in the Cloud
breaks forth suddenly, or by reason of some fire or Sulphurous matter, the
way being rendered strait, and other outlets being restrained, the Vapors
strike, as from a Vessel of a narrow mouth containing water, if that it be
heaped, the wind breaks forth; but the first cause seems more probable.

Proposition XI. An Exhydrias is a Wind breaking from a Cloud with great
abundance of water.
A Wind called an Exhydrias.
It is little different from an Ecnephias, but that the Cloud from whence it
seems to break, is now condensed into water, and so long upheld by other
circumstantial Clouds, and peradventure forced into one by the winds, until by
its ponderosity it rusheth downwards, and strikes the Air, whence a great Wind
proceeds. But these Exhydrias are very rare: yet the Ecnephias has for the
most part Rains. Showers, or thick Clouds accompanying him; and therefore only
differs from the Exhydrias, according to the more or the less. For a Nimbus
is nothing else, but a Wind with a violent Rain, and therefore is more general
than an Ecnephias: but an Exhydrias oftentimes falls perpendicularly from the
top.

Proposition XII. A Typhon is a violent Wind, passing swiftly through all the
quarters about a place, and for the most part rushing from the top.
A VVind called a Typhon.
The Saracens call it Olifant; the Indians, Orancan. It is often in the Oriental
Sea, especially in the Sea of Sian, China and Japan, (between Malacca and
Japan.) This violently breaking almost from the Western quarter, and being
whirled about the Horizon with a rapid course, perfects its circumference by
continual increase in the space of twenty hours, raising those vast Seas with
an horrid violence and swellings; the Billows beating one another, take away
all hope of safety from the Mariners: and so both by reason of these Typhons,
and also other Storms, sailing from India to Japan is very dangerous, so that
it is accounted an happy Voyage, if that one Ship of three keeps its course.
At the Autumnal Season a most furious Typhon does especially predominate, and
that often with so great violence, that those that have not seen it, can hardly
believe it; so that it is no wonder, that some mighty Ships have been weakened
by those great Waves: you would think in this Storm, that Heaven and Earth
would meet.

Neither does it only rage on the Sea, but also on the Shoars, and overwhelmeth
many Houses, and throws up huge Trees by the roots, and forces great Ships
from the Sea on the Land for about a quarter of a mile.

The Mariners term it a Wind that runs round the Compass. In the Indian
Ocean it seldom continues above six hours, and makes the Sea so level at the
first, as if that it were plained; but on a sudden horrible Waves do follow. So
about the City Ardibil in Persia, in June and July every day, when that the Sun
is at his Meridian height, a Whirlwind arises for an hour, by which a great
dust is raised.

Questionless the cause of a Typhon is, that a wind breaking forth with
violence from some one quarter toward another, finds an obstruction in this,
and therefore is wreathed and turned into it self; as we see, that if water be
suddenly moved, if that an obstacle be put in its way, it moves in a round
suddenly, and with a force. It may be, that a Typhon may arise from opposite
winds blowing together violently, which render the superficies of the Sea so
plain, and comprehend the Ships in the middle. If that it rush from above, it
is called Caetegis: and then it makes the Sea so plain, as if that it had been
plained; but presently mighty Floods or Waves arise.

Proposition XIII. Whether that some Winds break forth from the Earth, or Water.
Of Winds breaking forth from the Earth or Water.
We easily apprehend that this may easily be, seeing that Cavities are here, and
also Winds, Sulphurous substances, and Moisture. Now nothing hinders, but that
a gust sufficiently vehement may be there generated, viz. if that it be any
thing hindered, as it is procreated, to go forth; or if that it be presently
generated in a great quantity, as much as the winds require.

If that the Outlet be hindered, an Earthquake is generated, or a wind with a
violent force makes wey for it self, and thrusts forwards the Earth. So
oftentimes a Smoke breaks forth from the Earth in the Isles of Maarice: so
also from some Caves. In Japan is a Fountain, breaking forth at certain hours
of the day with great noise.

Yet I do not remember, that I have read of any Wind breaking forth out of the
Sea.

Proposition XIV. Whether that a certain Wind may arise from the flowing of the
Sea, and of the Rivers?
Of a VVind that flows from the Sea and Rivers.
Experienced testifies, that in those places where the flux and reflux of the
Sea is discovered, if at any time the Air be free from other winds, from the
most part with the water flowing from the Sea, a wind also blows from the Sea.

Therefore it seems probable, that the Air, by reason of the contiguity, is
carried with the water to the same quarter: But this should be more diligently
observed, Whether, when that the Air is still, the same wind is discovered with
the afflux of the Sea? I think yet, that another cause of this Wind may be
given, viz. that the Air is forced from the place by the flowing water. Now the
Air is much moved at a very little impression: so they will have the Air moved
with the Rivers that run swiftly.

Proposition XV. Why Ignes fatui, Castor and Pollux, and Helena, are amongst
Tempests.
The Portugals call them Corpo Santo; the Spaniards, St. Elmo. Now not only
one, but many are oftentimes beheld in Ships at the Masts, wandering with an
uncertain motion, as other Ignes fatui, although that sometimes they may seem
to fix on the Sails and Masts: But sometimes leaping up and down they appear
like a flame, or a Candle burning obscurely. If that four such vicine Lights be
seen, the Portugals term them Cora de Nostra Seneora, the Crown of our Blessed
Lady, or Virgin Mary. And these they account of as a most certain sign of the
Tempests to cease. The cause of those Fires is a Sulphurous part, full of
Bitumen, forced downwards through that great motion of the Air, and forced or
fired into one by agitation or congregation. So we see by agitation, that the
Butter of Milk is separated: from this Phenomenon is also collected, that for
the most part those violent Tempests proceed from a Sulphurous spirit,
rarefying and moving the Clouds.

Proposition XVI. Why there is so frequent a Calm in the Sea near Guinee, and
under the Equator in the Atlantic Ocean, between America and Africa.
Frequent' Calms in the Atlantic Ocean.
This is one of the Phaenomenons about Winds of no small difficulty, That at
Guinee, which is two degrees from the Equator, and under the Equator, is
almost a perpetual Calm, especially in April, May, and June, where no motions
are found there, when that no such thing is observed in other parts of the
Ocean situate under the Equator. Indeed an Ecnephias is sometimes
sufficiently frequent there; but this also is desired oftentimes by the
Seamen, because that by the force of frequent Ecnephiae they endeavor to sail
beyond the Equator: For it happens very often, that Ships sailing from
Europe to India, are detained a whole Month at the Equator before that they
can pass it. Now especially they avoid the Coasts of Guinee, and the Calm
there; and therefore with some hindrance to their Voyage, they sail toward
Brazil: yea some Ships are detained here for three Months, before that they can
depart from the Coasts into the Mid-Sea. I have not yet found out the cause of
the Phenomenon, unless perchance this be it, that Snows are found intercepted
in no Mountains of Africa between Guinee and Barbary, which may generate the
Winds.

Proposition XVII. In some Regions the Tempests are Anniversary.
Of Tempests Anniversary in some Regions.
We have given some Examples of these in our former Propositions, viz. 1.
Concerning the mutation of Motions. 2. Concerning our Ecnephias. 3. Concerning
a Typhon. 4. At the Promontory of Good-hope, in June and July. 5. In the Isle
Del Majo, with the Southern-motion in the end of August, in 35 degrees of the
Meridian of Tristian de Cunha, in May, in the New Moon, the West-wind rages,
and Shipwracks: but in 33 degrees of the same Meridian, the North and
North-east Winds predominate. 8. In June and July in the Sea of China, at Pulon
Timor, the West-winds are violent and dangerous. 9. Between China and Japan,
many Storms are from the New Moon of July to the twelfth day of the Moon. 10.
There, if in June other winds blow besides the motion, sometimes from this,
sometimes from that quarter, until that they are settled in the North-east
quarter, of a certain a Storm follows.

astrological charts illustrating the systems of Rene Descartes, Nicolaus
Copernicus and Tycho Brahe

THE SECOND BOOK OF General Geography, CONCERNING The Affections of the places
of the Earth depending on the apparent motion of the Stars.
CHAP. XXII. Of things requisite to be foreknown in the knowledge of Geography.
Itherto we have been employed in an absolute contemplation of the Earth; we
now draw near the Second Part of this Doctrine, in which we shall consider
those Properties or Affections which happen to the Earth from the apparent
motion of the Sun and Stars: Neither would they be, except this Motion were
evident. The Explication of which Affections will, with greater right,
appertain unto Geography; if so be that same Motion be attributed unto the
Earth it self, of which we have treated in the Sixth Chapter. Now for the right
knowledge of these Affections, these following Hypotheses and Definitions are
necessary to be understood.

Definitions.
An Artificial Terrestrial Globe termed a factitious Gl^be.
First, the Artificial Terrestrial Globe is termed a factitious Globe, from
whose Superficies the parts of the Earth, and their situation, a^ (...)
presented, as they have an existence in the Earth it self, according ^o the
proportion of this Superficies to the Superficies of the Earth.

A Map, a plain Figure, and of what Lines it consists.
A Map or Geographical Card is a plain figure, in which the scituations of the
Terrestrial Superficies are represented. And this again is either Universal or
Particular: The first exhibiteth the whole Superficies of the Earth; the other,
some one or other Region.

Some Maps consist of strait Lines, and others of crooked: These of strait are
such in which the Peripheries or Circumferences of the Terrestrial Circles are
represented by right Lines; the other in which the same Peripheries are
exhibited by crooked Lines. But as for the composure of a Terrestrial Globe,
and Geographical Maps, we shall take an occasion to treat of in the end of our
Book, by reason the same cannot be understood before the Doctrine, which we now
handle, be well apprehended.

Of the Poles and Axis of the Earth.
Secondly, The Poles of the Earth are two points diametrically opposite in the
Superficies of the same, which remain immovable in the Diurnal circumrotation
of the Earth, or which are subjected unto the Poles of the apparent Quotidian
motion of the Stars. But the Axis of the Earth is said to be the Diameter
conjoyning the Poles: Or thus, The Axis of the Earth is that Diameter of the
Earth, about which the Diurnal motion of the Stars, or Earth it self, is
perfected. Now the Poles are said to be the Extreme points of the Axis in the
Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe; and that Pole which is subjected to the
Constellation termed the Bear, is called the Artick, Septentrional, or Northern
Pole: the other is called the Antartick, or Southern Pole. These are by more
facility explained by an Artificial Terrestrial Globe, than by words. If the
former be wheeled round, those two immovable points will appear, which are the
Poles, and the Diameter imaginarily drawn from one Pole to the other through
the Center of the Earth, shall be the Axis.

The Equator, or Aequinoctial Line.
Thirdly, The Equator is said to be the Periphery or Circumference of the
greatest Circle in the Globe of the Earth, equally distant from both the Poles,
or placed in the middle between the Poles, or whose Poles are the same with the
Poles of the Earth. It is also termed the Aequinoctial Line, and that by
Mariners. All the Stars in their Diurnal motion, make Peripheries equidistant
or parallel to the Equator; wherefore the Equator is the Rule of Diurnal
motion.

Parallels.
Fourthly, The Parallels of the Equator are said to be lesser Peripheries,
which are parallel to the Equator. In an Artificial Globe the Equator, by
reason of its Magnitude, is more conspicuous than the others, and its name is
ascribed, and it is divided into 360 degrees. The Parallels are also
conspicuous, which are likewise termed the Circles of the Latitude of Places,
as we shall show in the following Chapter.

Of Maps.
These may also be showed in Geographical Maps that are Universal. Indeed in
Maps of Right Lines the Poles are not represented, but the Extremities of every
Meridian are the Poles: but in Maps consisting of Crooked Lines, the Poles are
those points in which the Crooked Lines do meet the Equator, being transverse
in both kind of Maps, passes through the middle of them, and has a greater
Latitude than the other Lines, and withal it is a strait Line; although in the
particular Maps of Asia and Europe it be made crooked. The Parallels of the
Equator in strait-lined Maps, are strait-l^^^s; and in crooked-lined Maps,
they are crooked.

The Ecliptic.
Fifthly, The Ecliptic is the greatest Circle of the Heavens, which the Sun
describes in his Annual motion. In truth it existeth not in the Earth; but by
reason of its notable use it is marked in the Artificial Globe, as also in
Geographical Maps.

The Tropicks.
Sixthly, The Tropicks are two Parallels of the Equator, which are distant from
the Equator by so great an interval, as the greatest recess of the Sun is from
the Equator toward the Poles, or as the greatest declination of the Sun, or
obliquity of the Ecliptic.

The Tropic of Cancer is that which is interposed between the Equator and
Pole Artick.

The Tropic of Capricorn is that, which is between the Equator and the
Southern Pole.

The Polary Circles.
In the Globe, and in Maps, they are wont to be noted by a double Periphery, and
the same appellation is ascribed. The Polary Circles are two Parallels, so
called; whereof one is distant from the Pole Artick, the other from the
Antartick, so many degrees as the Sun is from the Equator in his greatest
recess; and the first is termed the Artick Circle, and the other the Antartick.

The Circles hitherto explained do not depend on certain Places, such as the
following do, which in diverse places are various and different.

The Meridian.
Seventhly, The Meridian of any place in the Superficies of the Earth, is a
Line, so termed, which passes through that place, in which, when the Sun
comes, the Meridies is in that place. Now the Meridies is that moment of the
day, which is equally distant from the rising and setting of the Sun.

Theorem. The Meridian of every place passes through both the Poles of the
Earth.
The Meridians are drawn through every ten degrees of the Equator, which are
the Meridians of all those places through which they pass. But instead of the
Meridians of all other places, that does supply the place, which is made of
Brass, and in which the Globe does hang. For Instance; If that any place in the
Superficies of the Globe be brought unto the Brazen Meridian, that shall be the
Meridian of the place.

In Maps of Strait lines the Meridians are Strait lines drawn from the top, or
uppermost part, unto the bottom. In Maps of Crooked lines, they are those
Crooked lines which join in the Pole.

The Norizou.
Fightly, The Horizon of any place in the Superficies of the Earth, is the
greatest imaginary Circle in the Heavens, which terminateth the visible part of
the Heaven in that place. It is also termed the Rational Horizon, that it may
be distinguished from the Visible Horizon, which is improperly so called. It
has no place in the Artificial Globe, but a Wooden Circle, in which the Globe
is sustained with its Brazen Meridian, and serves instead of the Horizon of
any place, as shall be showed in the next Chapter; and therefore it is termed
the Wooden Horizon, and simply, the Horizon.

These are the Definitions, whose knowledge is necessary for the attaining the
following Doctrine: besides which, it behooves us to borrow from Astronomy the
mode of the Motion of the Sun and Stars.

The Motion of the Sun, Moon and Stars.
The first and common Motion is that, by which the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars
seem to be carried round about the Earth, to arise to us, to make the Meridian,
and to set; and that in the space of twenty four hours. Every one of the Stars,
and the Sun, every day by this their common Motion, seem to deseribe Parallel
Circles unto the Equator; because that this motion is performed upon the Axis
of the Earth, and the Poles of the same; and therefore the Equator is the
greatest Circle of this Motion, and the Rule and Square by which we measure the
Motion of the other Parallels. In every hour they pass fifteen degrees through
the Meridian, both of the Equator and every other Parallel: for 360 degrees
divided by 24, the hours, gives unto every hour fifteen; and therefore one hour
and fifteen degrees of the Equator, make an equal proportion. The Horary
Circle shows the hours; which Circle being affixed unto the Artificial Globe,
is seen in the Brazen Meridian, where the Pin or Hand adhereth to the extremity
of the Axis of the Earth, and it is turned about in the Horary Circle to show
the hours.

The second motion of the Sun.
Secondly, The proper and second Motion of the Sun, which is also Annual, is
that in which the Sun, (or rather the Earth) is moved from West to East, or
contrary to its first motion. The time or number of the days, in which the Sun
returns unto the same point from whence it departed, or in which it
performs its whole Period or Circle; is termed a Year. Now such a Year is 361
days, and one fourth part of a day, or thereabouts. The Way of this second
Solary motion is termed the Ecliptic, as we have said before, which is divided
into twelve parts, which are called Signs: For Astronomers have observed these
Constellations of the Heaven, through which this Way of the Sun does lie; and
from these Constellations denominated the twelve parts of the Ecliptic. And
because that all Constellations represent the forms of Animals, therefore the
Ancients termed that Way or Ecliptic, The Zodiac, Zone or Girdle in the
Weaven.
the Zodiac: Yet those which spoke more distinctly, call the Zodiac, a Zone
or Girdle in the Heaven whose middle is the very Ecliptic it self, or Path of
the Sun; but the extreme parts from both sides of the Ecliptic, are distant
from it eight degrees, by reason that the rest of the Planets have a certain
peculiar motion from East to West. In which motion they do not describe the
Ecliptic it self, but paths declining somewhat from the Ecliptic, which
declination, by reason that it exceeds not 8 degrees, therefore they do
attribute 16 degrees of Latitude unto the Zodiac, viz. Eight from both parts
of the Ecliptic, so that the Zodiac is that space of the Heaven in which the
Planets are always moving, neither do they ever move out of it: and the
Ecliptic is the middle Line of the Zodiac, which the Sun passes through by
an Annual motion, in which it always keeps its fixed course. Moreover, the
Signs or Constellations of the Heaven, through which the Ecliptic and the
Zodiac passes, are these: March 21. The Signs of the Zodiac.
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, June 21. Cancer, Leo, Virgo, September 21. Libra,
Scorpius, Sagitarius, December 21. Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.

Moreover the Ecliptic obliquely cutteth the Equator, Ecliptic.
so that its greatest distance is twenty three degrees, and about thirty
minutes. Where therefore the Ecliptic cutteth the Equator, which he does in
two points, in one of these is placed the beginning of the Ecliptic, and also
the beginning of the accounting of the Sigus. In those points the Sun then
being in, causes the equality of the days and nights in all places, as also
the beginning of the Vernal and Autumnal quarters. We begin to number from that
point in which the Sun makes the beginning of the Spring to us; that is, we
being situate from the Equator toward the Pole Artick; the first Sign, or
first twelfth part of the Ecliptic; is termed Aries, the second Taurus, the
third Gemini, and so forth as aforesaid; because about twenty Ages past, those
Signs of the Heaven were in these very parts of the Ecliptic.

Every one of these twelve Signs are divided into thirty Degrees, for the whole
Ecliptic has three hundred and sixty Degrees, which being divided by 12 makes
30.

Moreover, seeing that the Sun passes over the whole Ecliptic (that is 360
Degrees) in 365 days, and one fourth part of a day, hence we collect, that in
every day he passes 59 Minutes, and 8 Seconds, which is something less than a
Degree.

The Motion of the Sun.
Now as the Sun in a years time, or 12 Months, runs over the whole Ecliptic,
or 12 Signs of the Zodiac, so also in every Month he passes about one Sign,
but his entrance into the Sign is not at the beginning of the Months, but on
the 21th day of every Month; and this is according to the Gregorian Calendar,
and on the 11th day of every Month according to the old Julian Account, viz. on
the 21th of March, he enters the Sign of Aries, or the very Section of the
Ecliptic with the Equator: then on the 21th of April he enters Taurus, and
so on. Now this his entrance does not happen on the 21th of every Month, but in
some Months before, and in some after. Therefore when we desire to know the
precise place of the Sun, we must look for it in an Ephemerides, or in our
Almanacks. The place of the Sun is found also in the wooden Horizon of the
Artificial Globe for every day of the year, when one may search when the Globe
is at hand: for it is a grand fault in a learned or knowing person to be
ignorant of the Motion of the Sun, seeing that from thence all the seasons of
the year, also the days and nights, with many other things do depend, of all
which there is great use in the life of man.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Latitude of places, and the Elevation of the Pole.
Proposition I. The Latitude of a place in the Superficies of the Earth is the
distance of the same from the Equator.
Of the Latitude of the Earth.
Now a Perpendicular Line or Arch drawn from the place given to the Equator,
measures this distance, and by reason that the Meridian of every place is
perpendicular to the Equator, therefore the Latitude of the place is the Arch
of the Meridian of that place intercepted between the place and the Equator.

The Longitude of the Earth.
This is termed the Latitude of the Earth, whose extension is in the Superficies
from one Pole to the other: as the Longitude of the Earth is the extension of
the same returning from the West by the East, unto the West; which is the same
with the Aequinoctial Line.

Proposition II. The Elevation of the Pole of any place, or above the Horizon
of any place, is called the Arch of the Celestial Meridian of that place
intercepted between one or other Celestial Pole, and the Horizon of that place.
Elevation of the Pole.
It may also be said to be the Arch of the Terrestrial Meridian intercepted
between one or other of the Poles of the Earth, and the Horizon. For by this
Mode it may be more justly desired, if that the Earth cause the first motion:
but Astronomers for the most part apply the definition to the imaginary
Celestial Pole.

Proposition III. To find the Latitude of a place given in the Superficies of
the Globe of the Earth, in degrees and minutes, (if that the Globe be great)
the same Latitude in Geographical Maps.
For the finding the Latitude of a place by a Globe, or by Maps.
In a Globe, let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the degrees
be numbered from the Equator to the place; they shall be the sought for
Latitude of the place.

In Geographical Maps; if the Map consists of Right lines, let a Right line be
drawn through the place given, parallel to the Equator, except it be already
drawn in the Map; or let a Rule only be applied to the place, so that it be
parallel to the Equator: and so the bounds of this Line in the Side-lines of
the Map, will show the Latitude of the place.

But if the Map be of Crooked lines, so that no parallel can pass through by
the place given; one foot of the Compass shall be placed in the Pole of the
Map, and the other foot in the place given: and in this space the Parallel of
the place to be described in the Side-line, again will show the Latitude of the
place; if that the Parallels be described from the Pole.

Also the distance of the place from the Pole may be found out.

Proposition IV. The Place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, so to
constitute the Globe, that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of that place.
Let the Place given be brought to the Meridian, and let 90 degrees be numbered
from it toward the adjoining Pole in the Meridian. Let the term of the
Numeration be placed in the Crena of the Horizon: so the Wooden Horizon shall
be the Horizon of the place proposed. Nevertheless in the Corollary of the
following Proposition, we shall show an easier method of performing the fame.

Proposition V. The Latitude of the Place is equal to the Altitude, or
Elevation of the Pole, above the Horizon of that place.
This is showed by the Globe, thus; Take a place as you please in the
Superficies of the Globe; then so place the Globe, that the Wooden Horizon may
be the Horizon of the place. Now let the degrees of Latitude of the place, and
the Elevation of the Pole be numbered, and they will be found equal.

The Theoried showed by a Mathematical Demonstration. See Scheme.
The Theorem is thus showed by a Mathematical Demonstration: Let C be the Center
of the Earth, L and place in the Superficies, P the Poles, H P L Z shall be the
Meridian, and H Z the Diameter of the Horizon; P H the Elevation of the Pole; Q
T the Diameter of the Equator, or the Section of the Meridian and the
Equator: and P Q shall be the Quadrant of the Meridian, or of 90 degrees,
because that P is the Pole of the Equator. For the former reason L H shall be
the Arch of 90 degrees, because L is the Pole of the Horizon: Therefore L H is
the Arch of an equal Arch P Q, and the common part L P being taken away, the
remainder of the Arch P H L Q will be equal.

The Latitude of any place being known, you have also the Elevation of the Pole
for the same place. Now the distance of a place from the Pole, and the distance
from the Equator joined together, makes 90 degrees, wherefore one being known,
the other is also.

A Place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, to elevate the Pole so,
that the elevation of the Place requires the elevation of the Pole. This is
the same with what was propounded in the preceding Proposition, viz. to cause,
that the Wooden Horizon become the Horizon of the place given. First find out
the Latitude of the Place, and let the Latitude be numbered from the Pole in the
Meridian, descending downwards toward the Horizon. Let the Terminus of the
Numeration be constituted in the Crena of the Horizon: so the Pole will be
elevated, as the situation of the Place given requires.

Proposition VI. A Place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, or the
Latitude of any Place being given, to show all the Places of the Earth, which
may have the same Latitude or distance from the Equator, or Elevation of the
Pole: Or, to find all the places of the Earth, which may have the distance
given from the Equator.
Further Rules to be observed concerning the Latitude of places.
In the Globe; Let the Place given be brought to the Brazen Meridian, or let the
Latitude given be numbered from the Equator in the Meridian toward the Pole:
then let a pointed Chalk be applied unto the term of the Numeration, and turn
the Globe round: so the Chalk will describe the Periphery, which shall contain
all the places, whose Latitude is the same with the Place given.

In Maps of strait Lines, let a strait Line be drawn through the Place given
parallel to the Equator; all the Places through which that Line passes, shall
have the same Latitude with the place given. In Maps of Crooked lines, let the
Periphery be described passing the place given from the Pole of the Maps, as
from a Center: so by the same means as before, the Places sought for shall be
found. But if no certain Place, but a Latitude be given, let one fool of the
Compass be placed in the Pole of the Map, and the other on the side Line to the
degree of Latitude, and then the Parallel shall be described.

Proposition VII. To find the Meridian, or the Plaga, and point of the North
and South in the given place of the Earth, or in the given plane.
There are diverse ways by which the Line fought for may be found.

Rules for the finding the Meridian.
First, The most easy Mode is that, which makes use of the Magnetical Needle:
For seeing that the Magnetical Needle, or Needle of the Compass, with one
extreme looks to the South, and the other to the North, the extension of it
will show the Meridian Line. But because in very few places it has respect to
the Northern and Southern Point or Clime, and in very many declineth from them,
as we shall show elsewhere; See in Chapter the 38th.
therefore the Meridian line is not accurately found by that, but only an
adjoining line, which although it may serve, when the matter is not much
material for which we desire it; yet in concernment of greater moment it may be
the cause of a great error.

First draw the Line which the Magnetical Needle shows, then taking any point
in this Line, let the Periphery of the Circle be described from it, as from a
Center, in the which let the Degrees of the Declination of the Needle be
numbered, beginning from the false drawn Meridian Line, and that toward the
East, if the given Declination be toward the West; and contrariwise toward
the West, if the given Declination be toward the East. Lastly, let a straight
Line be drawn through the term of the Numeration of the Center of the
Periphery. This shall be the true Meridian Line.

The Mariners Compass useful.
There is no need of this labor, if that you have the Mariners Compass at hand,
in the which the Declination of the Magnetic Needle is corrected to the place
proposed.

Secondly, The Meridian Line is more accurately found out by the benefit of the
Stars: The Meridian Line found by the Sta^^.
First when the Sun shines, a style or pin being erected, the shadow of it
will show the Meridian Line. But by reason that it is not safe to conside in
Dyals, therefore this mode is not altogether accurate, and it shows a true
Line, yet a little distance from the true.

Thirdly, A Periphery being drawn in a plain given, let a style or pin be
erected from the Center of the same, and let the term of the Shadow before the
Meridies be noted: or first, the extremity of the Shadow being noted, let the
Periphery or Circumserence be described by the extremity of the Shadow from the
place of the style. Then you must expect so long after the Meridies, until the
extremity of the Shadow touch the same Periphery.

The Latitude being known, the Meridian Line by the help of the Globe may be
sound out.
Fourthly, If that the Elevation of the Pole or Latitude in the place of the
Observation be known, we may be the benefit of the Globe find out the Meridian
Line by this means: First by observation, let the Altitude of the Sun above the
Horizon be found out; then let a strait Line be drawn on a plain, in which the
Sun then seems to be; and a point being taken as a Center, in this Line
whatsoever it be, the Periphery is described: then let the Pole be elevated in
the Globe according to the elevation of the place given; let the place of the
Sun in the Ecliptic for the day given be noted; let the Quadrant be applied to
the Vertex, and in that let the observed Altitude of the Sun be marked. Then
let the Globe and the Quadrant be moved together until the point of the
Quadrant and the noted place of the Sun do meet. The Globe thus remaining, let
the intercepted Degrees between the Meredian and the Quadrant of the Verrical
point be numbered in the wooden Horizon: let so may Degrees be cut off in the
Periphery before described, beginning from the Line of the Plaga of the Sun
toward the East or West, as the time of the observation shall be, and let a
right Line be drawn through the term or bound of the Resection and Center of
the Circle. This shall be the true Meridian Line.

The invention will be far more easy, and without the use of the Vertical
Quadrant, if the Plaga be observed, or a Line drawn in the plain, in which the
Sun either rising or setting is beheld: For then a Circle being again
described, let the place of the Sun be brought to the Horizon, and let the
intercepted Degrees between the place of the Sun, and the North or South be
numbered; let so many Degrees be cut off in the Periphery described from the
Line drawn; and let a right Line be drawn through the term or bound of the
Resection and Center. This shall be the true Meridian Line.

Proposition VIII. To place a Globe, so that the Cardines of the same may
respect the Cardines of the Earth; that is, that the Brazen Meridian may be
seated in the true Meridian of the place.
Of the placing the Globe.
Let the Meridian Line be found in that plain on which the Globe stands, and
let the Globe be so placed that the Brazen Meridian may exactly hang over the
Meridian line: so the Globe shall be fixed according to the Plagas or Climates
of the World. Or let the Mariners Compass be placed at the foot of the Globe,
and let the Globe, with its foot, so long be moved in the plain, until the
Brazen Meridian and the Meridian line of the Compass, be found to be in the
same plain: so the Globe shall be again constituted according to the Plaga or
Climates of the Earth; that is, so that the North part of the Globe, shall have
respect to the North part of the Earth; the South to the South, East to the
East, and West to West.

A Problem may be propounded concerning Geographical Maps, (and the use is also
in the Art of Navigation) viz. so to place them on a plain, that the Northern
places of them may look toward the North of the Earth, the Southern to the
South, and the like. The Solution is easy, if that a Meridian line may be
found in that plain, or if you have an accurate Mariners Compass: for the Side
line of the Map shall be placed on the Meridian line of the plain; and so the
Map shall have its required situation.

Proposition IX. To find the Latitude of the place from the Heaven, or the
Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon of any place, by the benefit of the
Stars.
To find the Latitude of a place above the Horizon, by the Stars.
Although the Latitude of a place exist in the Superficies of the Earth, viz.
its distance from the Equator; yet it cannot be found without the Stars. The
modes of finding the same are various.

First, Let the Altitude of the Sun above the Horizon be observed, when he
comes to the Meridian line, and let its complement or distance from the Vertex
of the Sun, be taken. For this, take away the declination of the Sun to the day
of the Observation; that is, if that the Sun be fixed in the Southern part of
the Zodiac; but let it be added, if that it be in the Southern, the residue
shall be the Latitude of the place. But the declination of the Sun, that is,
his distance from the Equator, in the day of the Observation, is found from
the place of the Sun, and that from a Table of the declination of the parts of
the Ecliptic, or from the Globe; for let the place of the Sun be noted in the
Globe at the day of the Observation, and brought to the Meridian, the degrees
of the Meridian being intercepted between the Equator and the place of the
Sun, exhibit the declination of the Sun at the day given.

Secondly, The Sun rising or setting, by the benefit of the Globe, the Latitude
shall thus be found: Let the Plaga, or part in which the Sun rises or sets,
be observed, which Mariners are accustomed to do by their Compass; (but the
true Meridian line is required to this.) Let the same Plaga or degree be marked
in the Wooden Horizon of the Globe: Let the place also of the Sun in the
Ecliptic, for the day of the Observation, be noted; then let the Brazen
Meridian in the Crena of the Horizon be turned thereunto, the Pole being more
or less elevated, until the noted place of the Sun meet with the noted place of
the Horizon: so the elevation of the Pole in the Globe, shall be the same which
the place has, where the Observation was made. The Solution will be more easy
by Calculation; but by reason very few Students of Geography understand the
solution of Spherical Triangles, therefore I omit the same, which shall also be
observed in the following Problem.

Note, That in the time of the Aequinoxes, when the Sun is in the beginning of
Aries or Libra, then this method has no use, because that then the Sun, in one
and the same Plaga or part, rises and sets to all places, viz. in the part
of the true East or West, or in the Plaga of the Aequinoctial rising or setting.

Thirdly, When the Sun shines at Noon, let the style or pin A B be
perpendicularly erected on an Horizontal plain, See Scheme.
and let the Longitude of the shadow A C, and the style A B be taken in some
divided line. Therefore in the right Angled Triangle A B C shall be both the
noted sides A B, A C, whence the Angle A B C shall be found to be the distance
of the Sun from the Vertex: viz. if that it may be, that as A B has its self
to A C, so the whole sign has it self to the Tangent of the Angle A B C; from
thence the Latitude of the place shall be found, as we have showed in the first
Mode. But if the Observation be made on the day of the Aequinox, then the
distance of the Sun from the Vertex being found, the same is the Latitude of
the place.

The elevation of the Pole at Rome and Carthage.
So Pliny writes in the 72 Chap. of his Second Book, that in the City of Rome,
the ninth part of the Gnomon or pin is wanting unto the shadow; whence the
elevation of the Pole is collected to be 41 degrees, 25 minutes. At Carthage
the Gnomon has the same proportion to the shadow, as 11 has to 7; whence the
elevation of the Pole is collected to be 32 degrees, 13 minutes.

Fourthly, In the Night time, when the Stars can be seen, if we take the
Altitude of any Star in the Meridian with an Instrument, or from a Table know
the declination of the Stars; thence with little trouble we shall find the
Latitude of the place.

For if that Star be situate between our Vertex, and the Semicircle of the
Equator elevated to us, we must then add:

But if the declination of the Star be Northernly, and the Star seated between
our Vertex and the Polary Star, we must then subtract from that declination the
distance of the Star from our Vertex; the remaining number shall be the
Latitude of the place.

If that the Declination be Northern, and the Star be seated between the Pole
Star, and the proximate part of the Horizon, the complement of the declination
shall be added to the found out Latitude of the Star. The aggregate number
shall give the Latitude of the place, or the elevation of the Pole.

If the Declination shall be Northern, and the Star is placed between our
Vertex, and that part of the Horizon remote from the Polary Star; that
declination shall be added to the distance of the Star from the Vertex, or to
the Complement of the Altitude. The aggregated number shall be the Latitude of
the place.

Finally, if that the Declination of the Star be Southern, this must be
deducted from the Complement of the Altitude observed; and the remaining number
will show the Latitude of the place. Neither in this casualty does any variety
occur, as in the Star of the Northern declination; which is to be understood of
the places situated between the Equator and the North Pole: for it is
otherwise with the places which lie between the Equator and the South Pole.

Fifthly, If the Plaga or part be observed, in which any Star rises or
sets, the Latitude of that place may be found by the benefit of the
Celestial Globe, according to what we have said in the third Mode.

Sixthly, If that you have not a Table of the Declination of the Stars at hand,
you may obtain the thing required, if that you observe some Stars not setting,
viz. such a one, which in its whole circumrotation is remaining above the
Horizon: for those Stars come twice to the Meridian, and therefore their
Meridian altitude is twofold, one greater, and the other less. Both these must
be observed, and the half difference must be added to the lesser Altitude, or
taken from the greater: so we shall obtain the Latitude of the place.

Seventhly, If we enquire not after an accurate Latitude of a place, but would
be contented with one, not much receding from the true; we must take the
Altitude of the Polary Star, when that it has far departed from the Meridian:
for that is equal to the Latitude of the place.

Proposition X. The Places of the Earth situated under the Equator, have no
Latitude or elevation of the Pole; but both the Poles lie in their Horizon. The
places under the Equator have no Latitude.
The places under the Pole have the Latitude of 90 degrees, viz. the Pole in
the Vertex, and the Equator in the Horizon. The places between the Poles and
the Equator, have a less Latitude than Ninety Degrees.
The truth of this Proposition is evident, therefore it needs no Explication.

Proposition XI. If we are either on the Sea or Land, and know not the place
where we are, let the Latitude be found to exhibit that Parallel in the Globe,
that we may be certain that we are in one point of it.
This is done after the same manner, that we have showed in the sixth
Proposition, viz. a Parallel must be described at the given or observed
Latitude: and this is the Parallel demanded. The same is also easy in Maps.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the division of the Earth into Zones; and the Celestial
Appearances in the diverse Zones.
Proposition I. From the proper or Annual motion of the Sun, there arises a
certain division of the Superficies of the Earth into five parts or Zones.
THe division of the Earth into 5 Zones. See Scheme.
SEEing that the Sun does not always continue in the Equator, but declining
from it, describes by his Motion a path which cutteth the Equator, so that
his greatest declination is in 23 degrees, as well toward the North from the
Equator, as toward the South, in which declination he describes the Tropicks
of Cancer and Capricorn: thence it is, that he is not perpetually vertical to
the Places lying under the Equator; neither does he always keep one distance
from other places, for sometimes he is more nigh, and sometimes more remote
from a certain place; and variously changes heat, cold, rain, and other
conditions of the Seasons. These which we have now spoken of, may be showed as
well on the Globe, as in Maps.

A Zone is termed a part of the Earth included within the Tropic and the
Polary Circle. A Zone, what
And because there are two Tropicks, and two Polary Circles; thence it comes
to pass, that there are five Zones, viz. 1. Torrid, 2. Temperate, and 2. Frigid.

Torrid zone.
The Torrid Zone is that part of the Earth, which lies between the Tropicks of
Cancer and Capricorn.

Temperate Zones.
The Temperate Zones, which lie between one of the Tropicks, and the adjacent
Polary Circle: the Northernly Temperate Zone, is that which lies between the
Tropic of Cancer, and the Artick Circle: the Southernly temperate Zone, is
that which lies between the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Antartick Circle.

Frigid Zones.
The Frigid or Cold Zones, are those parts of the Earth which lie about the
Poles, even to the Polary Circles; and they are as well Northernly, as
Southernly, cold Circles.

Proposition II.
The Places, according to their Latitudes, in what Zones they are in.
Those places of the Earth, whose Latitude is less than 23 degrees and 30
minutes; they lie in the Torrid Zone.

Those whose Latitude is 23 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Tropicks,
viz. in the extremity of the Torrid Zone.

Those whose Latitude is greater than 23 degrees and 30 minutes, and less than
66 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Temperate Zone.

Those whose Latitude is 66 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in the Polary
Circles, viz. in the term of the Temperate Zone.

Those whose Latitude is greater than 66 degrees and 30 minutes; they lie in
the Frigid Zones.

These are manifest from the definitions of the Tropical and Polary Circles,
which we have treated of in the 23th Chapter.

Proposition III. The Equator of the Earth passes through these Places.
Places which the Equator passes through.
Through the Island of St. Thomas in the great Bay of Africa, which is called
the Ethiopian Ocean.

Through Aethiopia.

Through the Indian Ocean.

Through the middle of Sumatra.

Through the Chersonesus of Malacca, and other Islands in the Indian Ocean.

Through the Moluccas themselves, and the Pacifick Ocean.

Through the entrance of the Province of Peruana.

By the Lake Parima.

Through the Atlantic Ocean, even to the Island of St. Thomas.

The Equator divides the Torrid Zone into two equal parts, so that they may
deservedly be termed two Torrid Zones, one Northern, and the other Southern.

These Places lie in the Torrid Zone.

Places which lie in the Torrid Zone.
The greatest part of Africa, the Indian Ocean, Abyssine, part of Arabia,
Cambaja, India. The Isles of the Indian Sea, Java, Ceilan, Peruvia, Mexico,
great part of the Atlantic Ocean, the Island of St. Helena, Brazil, New Guinee.

Places which the Tropic of Cancer passes through.
The Tropic of Cancer passes through these places, viz. through the Confines
of Lybia, and other places in the Inland Africa; through Syena in Aethiopia.
Thence passing the Red Sea, beyond the Mountain Sinai; and Mecca, the
Birthplace of Mahomet, it passes through Arabia Felix: hence it enters the
Indian Ocean, and touches the borders of Persia, and passes over Cambaja,
India, and the Borders of China, until it come into the Pacifick Sea; which
being passed over, it falls in with California into the Kingdom of Mexico;
and again entering into the Atlantic Ocean, passing the Gulf of Mexico, it
sweepeth the Coast of the Isle of Cuba, and thence returns to the Occidental
shore of Africa.

Places which the Tropic of Capricorn passes through.
The Tropic of Capricorn passes through very few places of the Earth; its
greatest part lying in the Sea. The places through which it passes, are,
through the Tongue of Africa; through Monomotapa, Madagascar, the Indian Ocean,
New Guinee, the Pacifick Ocean, Peru, Brazil, and through the Atlantic Ocean.

Places situate in the Northern and Southern temperate Zones.
Many places in the Earth lie in the Northern temperate Zone, and those almost
all known and inhabited; viz. all Europe, all Asia, (except part of India,
Malacca, and the Isles of the Indian Ocean,) great part of America
Septentrionalis, and part of the Atlantic and Pacifick Ocean.

In the Southern temperate Zone few places lie, and those not fully known, with
a large portion of the Sea; viz. part of the Prominent, part of Africa,
Monomotapa, a great part of Terra Magellanica, part of Brazil, Chili, the
Streights of Magellan. and a great part of the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacifick
Ocean.

Places which the Artick and Antartick Polary Circles pass through.
The Artick Polary Circle passes almost through the middle of Izland, through
the Upper Norway, the North Sea, Lapland, the Bay of Russia, Samojeda,
Tartaria, America Septentrionalis, and Groenland.

The Antartick Polary Circle passes through Terra Magellanica; of which we
have little or no knowledge at this day.

Places which lie in the cold Northern, and Southern Zones.
In the Cold Northern Zone lies part of Izland, the Utmost part of Norway and
Lapland, Finmarch, Samojeda, Nova Zembla, Groenland, Spitsberga, and some part
of America Septentrionalis, not yet discovered.

In the Cold Southern Zone, what it is, whether Land or Water, is unknown.

What we have spoken on hitherto, are showed by the Globe and by the Maps; but
they are proved by the Tables of the Latitude of Places, which are made by
Observations.

Proposition IV. In the Places which lie in the Tropicks, the Sun once in every
year is only vertical in the Meridies or Noonstead; but in places lying under
the Torrid Zone, he is vertical twice a year, viz. two days, which are equally
distant from the Longest day. But in Places without the Torrid Zone, and
situated without the Tropicks, the Sun never in any day of the year is
vertical.
The Sun, how often, and in what places; Vertical.
For when the Sun is in the first degree of Cancer, which is about the one and
twentieth of June, then he describes the Tropic of Cancer in the Heaven; and
by how long a space this Tropic is distant from the Celestial Equator, by so
much the Terrestrial Tropic of Cancer is distant from the Terrestrial
Equator; and so the Terrestrial Tropic is subject to the Celestial, and the
Sun therefore becomes vertical to the Places seated in the Tropic of Cancer.
In the places of the Tropic of Capricorn, it happens after the same manner
about the twentieth of December, the Sun then entering the Sign of Capricorn.
These are manifest from the Globe, and from Maps.

But for further Explanation, to show the Sun to be vertical twice a year in a
place:

Take a place lying in the Torrid Zone, Explanation.
and let the place taken be brought to the Meridian, and a pointed Chalk being
applied, let the Globe be turned round, that the Parallel of that place may be
described, that will cut the Ecliptic in two points, which will be equally
distant from the first degree of Cancer or Capricorn. And the Sun being in
these points of the Ecliptic will be vertical in the place taken; for the
Parallel which the Sun in those days describes, will directly hang over the
Parallel of the place described Wherefore the Sun will pass through the Vertex
of that place, and therefore will be vertical to it in the Meridies of these
two days; but not so in other days. Now that it is only vertical in the
Meridies unto places, is perspicuous from his diurnal revolution.

Now that in places situate without the Torrid Zone, and the Tropicks, the Sun
is never vertical, is manifest, by reason that no Parallel of the Sun is
imminent over the Parallel of those places: for the Sun is never vertical in
the Temperate and Cold Zones.

Proposition V. To places seated in either of the Frigid Zones, the Sun every
year some day or other sets not, and so many days rises not; and that so
many days the more, by how much those days are nigh the Poles: so that in a
whole place of the Pole, for six Months space it sets not, and arises not
to another. But in places in the Artick or Antartick Circle, the Sun sets
not, one only day in the year, and one day arises not; but other days it
sets and rises.
The rising and setting of the Sun in places seated in the Frigid Zones.
Take any place you please of the Frigid Zone in the Globe, and let the Pole be
so elevated as the Latitude of the place requires, or that the Wooden Horizon
may become the Horizon of the place, as in the preceding Chapter. Then let a
pointed Chalk be applied to the Crena of the Horizon, which is more nigh the
Pole elevated; and let the Globe be turned round, so that the Chalk may mark
some Parallel of the Equator. This Parallel shall cut the Ecliptic in two
points, which shall be equally distant from the first degree of Cancer; and the
Sun being in any of these points of the Ecliptic, and in all Intermedial
points, shall not set; which hence is manifest, because the Parallels of the
Sun, existing in these points, remain above the Horizon in the whole
Circumrotation.

On the contrary, If that the Chalk so pointed be applied unto the other Crena
of the Horizon, and the Parallel be described, we shall find those points of
the Ecliptic, or the Arch, about the beginning of Capricorn; in which, whilst
the Sun is, he does not arise to that place of the Frigid Zone, but remains
beneath the Horizon. The contrary appears, if the place be taken in the cold
Antartick Zone.

What we have said of the places lying under the Artick or Antartick Circle, is
showed after the same manner, viz. the Pole must be elevated to 66 degrees, 30
minutes: so the Wooden Horizon shall be the Horizon of any place lying under
the Artick Circle. And it will be manifest, that the Tropic of Cancer sets
not, and the Tropic of Capricorn arises not, but that they touch the Horizon;
therefore the Sun in the first degree of Cancer sets not, and in the first
degree of Capricorn arises not, but on both days radiateth the Horizon: But in
other degrees of the Ecliptic it will arise, and set, which may be discerned
by the Oriental and Occidental points of the Ecliptic.

Proposition VI. In places seated without the Frigid Zone; that is, in the
Temperate or Torrid Zones, the Sun every day rises and sets.
In places without the Frigid Zones, the Sun rises and seteth every day.
Take any place in the Globe lying without the Frigid Zones, and Polary Circles,
and let the Poles be elevated according to its Latitude, so that the Wooden
Horizon does become the Horizon of that place: If that now you turn the Globe,
it will be apparent that all the points of the Ecliptic do rise and set; that
is to say; sometimes they are depressed beneath, and sometimes elevated above
the Horizon. The Sun then being in those points does the same.

Proposition VII. A place being given that is seated in the Torrid Zone, to
find those two days in the which the Sun is vertical to that place.
Let the place given be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and let the degree of
Latitude be marked with Chalk: then move the Globe, until one point or other of
the Ecliptic to pass through this noted point of the Meridian. Let these two
points be noted, for they are those in which when the Sun is, he is vertical to
the place given: let also the days of the Year be found, in which the Sun
occupies those points of the Ecliptic, which may be done either in the Wooden
Horizon, or from a Table, or by the method of the 22th Chapter, those will be
the sought for days; whereof one will be before the Solstice, the other after
it, in which the Sun is vertical to that place, when he comes to the Meridian.

This Problem is also easily resolved in Universal Maps.

For if a Parallel line be drawn through the place given to the Equator,
right, or circular from the Pole of the Map in Crooked lines; this being drawn
will cut the Ecliptic in two points, from which the days of the year will be
manifest.

But if you require the resolution of the Problem on a Globe, or on Maps, you
ought to know the Latitude of the place; with this enter the Table of the
Declination, placed in the 22th Chapter; and except the days in which the Sun
has such a declination: they shall be the days required.

Proposition VIII. A place being given, seated in the Frigid Zone, to show
those days in which the Sun does not set to that place, and in what days he
rises not: Also the first and last of those days in which he sets not to
that place, or in which he rises not to the same.
Of the rising and setting of the Sun in the places seated in the Frigid Zone.
In the Globe, let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the Pole
be elevated for the Latitude of the place: then turning the Globe round, let
the points of the Ecliptic, which set not, be marked in the Crena of the
Horizon, and in the other Crena, those that do not arise. Therefore that
degree, which is between the first degree of Aries and the first of Cancer,
will show the first day, in which the Sun sets not to that place: and the
other degree, between the first of Cancer and the first of Libra, will show the
last day. And in these days the Sun radiateth the Horizon, yet he will remain
above it: which yet must be understood of the Center of the Sun. But in the
Intermedial days, he will perpetually remain above the Horizon. By the same
method, those days will be found, in which the Sun will remain beneath the
Horizon, in the opposite part of the year, and the first and last day of them.

This performed by the Globe.
By a more easy method this may be done upon the Globe, yet with less manifest
demonstration. As many degrees as the place given is distant from the Pole, let
so many be numbered in the Meridian from the Equator, and let the term be noted
on both sides of the Equator: then the Globe being turned round, observe what
points of the Ecliptic pass through the noted points of the Meridian: For
those that are near to the beginning of Cancer, and the Arch comprehended, will
show the days of the perpetual stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place
given. The other Arch within the points, about the beginning of Capricorn, will
show the days of the perpetual absence of the Sun beneath the Horizon of the
place given.

Also by Maps.
In Maps, let the Complement of the Latitude of the place, or distance of the
place from the Pole, be numbered in the Side-line of the Map from the Equator
toward both the Poles, and the Parallel to the Equator be described through
the term of the Numeration, whether the Map consists of Strait, or Crooked
lines, as we have showed in the forecited Propositions. These Lines so drawn
shall cut the Ecliptic each in two points: these Points will show the first
and last da^^ of the perpetual stay of the Sun above the Horizon, and the Arch
intercept^^g all the days of the perpetual stay. The other Line in the opposite
points (...) the Ecliptic, will show the perpetual delitescence of the Sun
beneath the Horizon.

Likewise by a Table of the Declination.
By a Table of the Declination it is thus done; If the Latitude of the place be
known, enter with the Complement of the Latitude the Table of the Declination;
and seek that declination, such as is the Latitude of the place, which you
shall find four times, and take those four days in which the Sun has that
declination. Two of them, whereof one is between the 21th of March, and the
21th of June; the other, the 21th of June, and the 21th of September, are the
first and last of the perpetual stay of the Sun above the Horizon. The other
two, of the perpetual stay beneath the Horizon of the place propounded; the
Intermedial days will be of the perpetual stay of the Sun above, or under the
Horizon.

Proposition IX. The day of the year being given, to find those places of the
Earth in the Globe, or the Map, in which the Sun that day is vertical in the
Meridies, viz. one place after another.
From the day given, the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic may be found,
according to the method of the 22th Chapter.

In the Globe; Let the place of the Sun be brought to the point of the
Meridian, which it hangs over, let the Globe be turned round: so all the
places, which pass through the marked points, are those which are sought for.

In Maps; Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic be marked, and through it
let a right Parallel of the Equator be drawn, or otherwise a crooked; as the
Table shall either consist of strait or crooked Lines. So all the places of
this Parallel shall be those demanded; but it ought to be in the Hemisphere of
the Maps.

By the Table of the Declination delivered in the precedent Chapter, the
Latitude of those places may be found.

Proposition X. The day of the year being given, to find those places of the
Earth, in which the Sun, viz. his Center does not set, so that this day may be
the first of all those, in which the Sun does not set in those places: And to
find those places in which the Sun does not arise, with the same condition.
The day of the-year being given, to find those places of the Earth, in which
the Sun does not set, nor arise.
The day must be one of those, which fall between the 21th of March, and the
21th of June; or the 21th of September, and the 21th of December.

First of all, let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic at the day given be
found, then the rest will follow so.

In the Globe; Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic be brought to the
Meridian; and how many degrees are intercepted between that and the Equator in
the Meridian, let so many be numbered from the Pole toward the Equator: or how
many degrees are between the place of the Sun and the Pole, let so many be
numbered from the Equator toward the Pole; let the Term of the Numeration be
noted with a Chalk, or let a Parallel be drawn to it.

All the places seated in this Parallel satisfy the first demand; but those
places which are sought for in the second place, shall be in the Parallel
equally distant from the other Pole.

In Maps; Let the Declination of the Sun noted, be numbered from the Pole
toward the Equator, in the Lateral line, and let the Parallel of the Equator
be drawn through the Term. All the places lying in this Parallel of both the
Planispheres are those demanded: The places of the second demand shall be found
in the same degrees in the Parallel, distant from the other Pole.

In the Tables of the Declination, let the Latitude be found for the place
demanded.

Proposition XI. To compute the Latitude and Magnitude of all the Zones, in
Miles, or some other famous Measures.
The computation of the Latitude and Magnitude of the Zones in Miles, etc.
The Latitude of the Torrid Zone is 47 degrees, viz. 23 from both parts of the
Equator: the Latitude of both the Temperate, is 43 degrees. The Latitude of
both the Temperate, is 43 degrees. The Latitude of both the Frigid, 47 degrees.
These Degrees, if changed into Miles, one degree being estimated at 15 German
miles, the Latitude of the Torrid Zone will be 705 miles: one of the Temperate,
645; and one of the Frigid, 705.

The place requires, that we should now treat of the Seasons in the diverse
Zones and places; but because some of them do appertain unto the following
Chapter, I have omitted them here.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Longitude of the Days in diverse Places of the Earth: And of
the division of the Earth into Climates, which proceed from them.
Proposition I. In two Days of the year are the Aequinoxes, or the Night equal
to the Day in all places of the Earth.
The Days and Nights in all places are equal in two days of the year.
THe Days are those in which the Sun enters the Equator, whether he describes
the same by Motion, or Diurnal circumvolution; which is, when that he enters
the first degree of Aries, and the first degree of Libra, viz. on the 21th of
March, and the 21th of September, according to the Gregorian Calendar. Now we
shall show, that on these days the Night is equal to the Day, consisting of
twelve hours in all places of the Earth: Now this Day notes the stay of the
Sun above the Horizon; and the Night, the stay beneath the Horizon.

Take any place in the Globe, and let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of
that place, so that the Wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of that place.
Then let the first degree of Aries or Libra be placed in the Oriental Horizon,
the Index at the twelfth hour of the Horary Circle: then turn the Globe, until
the first degree of Aries come to the Occidental Horizon, you shall see that
the Index in the Horary Circle has passed twelve hours. The same method may be
used to manifest the Night, consisting of twelve hours.

In Places situated in the Poles of the Earth, which are only two; the Sun
neither rises nor sets in these two days of the year, but his Center shall
be wheeled round in the Horizon (which is the same with the Equator,) so that
they shall have at one time both Day and Night. Seeing therefore that in other
places, the term of the Days and Nights is a moment, there, on the contrary,
the entire revolution or Natural day, is the term or medium of the perpetual
appearancy or disappearancy of the Sun. And in these two days of the
Aequinoctials, (the 21th of March, and 21th of September) the half Sun shall be
above the Horizon in those two places, and half beneath it. And on the 21th of
March in the Pole Artick, it shall make the beginning of a long day of six
Months; and on the 21th of September, shall be the beginning of a long night of
six Months, as we shall show anon: therefore it is no absurdity, that some
places for twenty four hours should neither have night or day. Here I shall
mention many things peculiar to the Poles above other places of the Earth, viz.

Several things here noted peculiar to the Poles, above other places of the
Earth.
1. The Sun in a whole year only once rises, and once sets; that is to say,
it rises in one Aequinox, and sets in the other. 2. They have no Meridies,
or Midnight, at a certain time; but at all hours they have a perpetual Meridies
for six Months, or perpetual Night for six Months. 3. No Fixed Stars arise, nor
set; but some remain perpetually above the Horizon, and some always beneath it.
4. The Stars keep the same Altitude above the Horizon, and distance from the
Vertex, as the Sun also does in his whole Diurnal circumvolution. 5. No Winds
there can be called Northern, for they are all Southern in the Artick Pole and
contrariwise in the Antartick Pole, all Northern, and none Southern, Western,
or Eastern. 6. If the Stars and Sun do not move, but the Earth, according to
Copernicus his Hypothesis, then if the Eye were a point, that it could be
seated in the Pole, all the Stars, Sun, and Moon, would appear immovable in the
same Plaga.
All these are easily showed by the Globe.

Proposition II. In places situated in the Equator, the days and nights are
always equal. In the places of the Poles, there is only one day, and one night
in the whole year. Now the day is longer than the night in the North Pole; but
in the South, the day is shorter than the night.
The days and nights always equal in places seated in the Equator.
Take any place you please in the Globe, you must show that in every day in the
year, the night is equal to the day; that is, that the Sun for so long time
remains beneath the Horizon, as he does above it. Take the day of the year as
you please, and let the place of the Sun be enquired after to it, which is
noted in the Ecliptic: then let the place taken be placed in the Vertex, that
the Poles may hang over the Horizon; for so the Wooden Horizon shall be the
Horizon of the places of the Equator. Let the place of the Sun be brought to
the Meridian, and the Parallel described, which the Sun perfecteth that day.
Then let the two Points of this Parallel in the Horizon be noted, and it will
be manifest, that the Arch of this Parallel above the Horizon, will be equal to
the Arch which is beneath the Horizon. And because the Motion of the Sun
Diurnal is equal, as that of all the Stars, therefore in an equal time, it will
pass through the equal Arches of the Parallels. So that the first part of the
Proposition concerning every day is showed. Now for the showing of the other
part of the places of the Poles, either of the Poles must be placed in the
Vertex of the Wooden Horizon, so shall this be the Horizon of the Pole.

And the Globe being turned round, we shall see that one half of the Ecliptic
remains above the Horizon, and the other beneath it. Therefore whilst the Sun
is in this, he sets not, whilst in that he rises not. And he is more days
in the Northern Semicircle of the Ecliptic, than in the Southern by nine
days. Therefore his perpetual stay above the Horizon shall be longer than
beneath it of the Pole Arctick. But it is otherwise in the Antarctick Pole.

Proposition III. In places lying beneath the Equator, and the Pole, no days
are equal to the nights, except the two days of the Aequinoctials, but all the
rest are either greater or lesser than the nights.
The days not equal to the nights in places lying under the Equator.
Let any place in the Globe be taken beneath the Equator, and the Pole, and let
the Pole be Elevated according to the Latitude of the place, and any day of the
year being taken, (except the days of the Aequinoxes). Let the place of the
Sun for that day be found, and so be noted in the Ecliptic, and being brought
to the Meridian, let the Parallel be described, which the Sun makes by his
Diurnal Circumrotation. Let the two Points of this Parallel in the Horizon be
noted, and it will be manifest, that the Arch of the Parallel above the Horizon
is greater or lesser than the Arch of the Parallels lying hid beneath the
Horizon, and so the day, or stay of the Sun above the Horizon, will be greater
or lesser than beneath it.

Or in the place of the Sun brought to the Oriental Horizon, let the Index be
placed above the 12th hour of the Horary Circle, and let the Globe be turned
round, until the place of the Sun does come to the Occidental Horizon. The
Index in the Circle will show the number of the hours of the day. Then let the
Index be brought back to 12, and the Globe turned round, until the place of the
Sun passing beneath the Horizon, returns to the East. The Index again will show
the number of the hours of the night, and the inequality will be manifest.

Proposition. IV. A place being given in the Globe, or the Latitude of a place
being given, and the day of the year also given, to find how many hours the Sun
in that day remains above the Horizon of that place, and how many beneath it;
that is, to find the Longitude of the day and night for that place at the day
given.
Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic at the day given be found. And let
it be noted in the Ecliptic of the Globe. Let the Pole be Elevated according
to the Latitude of the place given. Latitude of places.
Let the place of the Sun be brought to the Oriental Horizon, and the Index of
the Circle to 12, let the Globe be turned round, until the place of the Sun
come to the Occidental Horizon; the Index will show the number of the hours of
the day; the other at 24 will show the hours of the night.

Proposition. V. In all places seated between the Equator, and the Pole
Arctick, the longest day and shortest night, is when the Sun enters the first
degree of Cancer; and the shortest day, and longest night is when the Sun
enters the first degree of Capricorn. But in the places seated between the
Equator and the Antarctick Pole it is just contrary.
Of places seated between the Equator and the Pole Arctick. The days longest,
and nights shortest, when the Sun enters into Cancer; and days shortest, and
nights longest when into Capricora.
To show this on the Globe, take what place you please, and let the Pole be
Elevated according to its Latitude. Then according to the preceding
Proposition, find out the number of the hours, when the Sun is in the first
Degree of Cancer, then any other point of the Ecliptic being taken for any day
of the year, let the number of the hours again be found for that day. And it
will be manifest, that the number of the hours of the day, when the Sun is in
the first Degree of Cancer, is greater than the number of the hours of another
day. And because this other day is taken at pleasure, and in every day the same
Demonstration is in force, therefore the day, when the Sun is in the first
Degree of Cancer, is the longest of all days, and consequently the shortest
night.

After the same way we may show, that the day is the shortest, when the Sun is
in the first Degree of Capricorn, and the nights the longest.

The same Method of Demonstration shall be observed for places situated on the
other side of the Equator, toward the Antarctick Pole.

Proposition VI. In the Northern places of the Earth, whilst the Sun moves
from the first degree of Capricorn, to the first of Cancer, the days
continually increase: and whilst he moves from the first of Cancer, unto the
first of Capricorn, they continually decrease. But it is contrary in the places
Southernly, for they increase from the first of Cancer, to the first of
Capricorn; and decrease from the first of Capricorn, to the first of Cancer.
Of the increasing and decreasing of the days in the Northern places of the
Earth.
Take any Northern place you please in the Globe, which lies between the
Equator, and the Pole Arctick, and let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude
of that place. Then taking two, or more of the Points of the Ecliptic, which
he between the first of Capricorn, and the first of Cancer, he quantity of the
day may be found for these Points, or for the Sun then in those points; And it
will be manifest, that the day from the day of the first of Capricorn being
more remote, will be greater than that day which was more near to the same day
of the first of Capricorn.

The same way we must use in the days situated between the first of Cancer,
and the first of Capricorn. And in places seated Southernly, we shall show the
Proposition by such like Method. The Demonstration will be more perspicuous, if
that it be done through the Parallel Arches, which are above, and under the
Horizon.

Proposition VII. If the place of the Earth be more remote from the Equator,
or more propincate to the Pole, than another place, According to the situation
of the places of Earth to the Equator and the Pole, the days and nights are
longer and shorter.
the difference is greater between the days and the nights, and the longest
day is greater, and the shortest night is less. Contrariwise, if the place be
more nigh the Equator, the difference between the quantity of the days and
nights is lesser, and the longest day besser, and the shortest night greater;
so that the places near the Equator, or situate in the Torrid Zone, have
almost all the days equal to the nights, as the places of the Equator it self,
and the excess of the longest day above that of the Aequinoctial about one hour.
Take in the Globe two places, one more remote from the Equator, the other
more nigh, and take what day of the year you please (except the Aequinoxes) you
may show that in the place more remote, the day more differs from the
quantity of the night, than in a place more near the Equator.

Let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic be found at the day taken, and noted
in the Ecliptic of the Globe. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude
of the Earth of the one place taken, and let the Longitude of the day and the
night, (or the stay of the Sun above or beneath the Horizon) in that place at
the assumed day be found by the sixth Proposition of this Chap. Then let the
Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the other place; and let the Longitude of
the day and night, or stay of the Sun above or beneath the Horizon, be found at
the same assumed day. Let this Longitude so found, be compared with the other,
and the truth of this Proposition will be manifest.

So that the place more remote has all the days of one half year longer, than
the place more nigh. On the contrary, it will have all the days of the other
half year shorter.

Corollary, What has been showed of all the days of the year (except the
Aequinoctials) the same is also of force in the quantity of the longest and
shortest day. And in this it is most observed, and noted, because here is the
greatest difference between the Longitude of the night and day, not so great in
other days of the year. Therefore of the two places, that which is more remote
from the Equator, or more near to the Pole, has the longest day greater than
the place more Vicine to the Equator: and the shortest day lesser.

Proposition VIII. All places of the Earth situated in one of the same
Parallel, have all the days of the year equal, and therefore the same quantity
of the longest day.
The Demonstration of this Proposition is easy by the Globe. Let any Parallel
be taken in the Globe, and what places you please. The equality of the days
according to their situation in one of the same Parallel.
Let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of this Parallel, and let any
Parallel of the Sun be taken for any part of the year: Out of the Degree let
the Tropic of Cancer be taken for the longest day; let one of the places taken
be constituted under the Meridian, that so it may possess the Vertex of the
Horizon; or that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of the place. Then let
the Arch of the Tropic above the Horizon be noted, or the two points of the
same which are in the Horizon; for the Arch in these, denotes the stay of the
Sun above the Horizon of the place; then let the second place be brought to the
Meridian or Vertex, that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of it, and let
the Arch of the Tropic above the Horizon again be marked, which if it be
compared with the former, we shall find that they are equal. The same may be
showed also by hours on the Horary Circle.

Therefore the Sun remains an equal time above the Horizons of those places,
and therefore the days shall be equal, as also the nights.

Definitions.

From these aforesaid Propositions, the Original of the division of the Earth
into Climates, is easily to be understood.

Observations concerning a Climate.
For a Climate is said to be one part of the Earth of those parts into which the
Superficies situated between the Equator and the Pole is so cut by drawn
Parallels, that the longest day in the Parallel more remote from the Equator,
exceeds the longest day of the Parallel more near the Equator in a certain
part of an hour, or number of hours. Viz. Half an hour in places situated even
to the Artick Circle; in other places a whole hour, or some hours, and days.

The beginning of a Climate is called a Parrallel, with which the Climate
begineth, and is more nigh the Equator: The end of a Climate is called a
Parallel terminating the Climate.

The middle of a Climate is called a Parallel, drawn almost through the middle
Superficies of a Climate, so that in that the longest day exceeds the longest
day of the beginning of a Climate, by a quarter of an hour, or an half
difference, wherein the longest day of the end of a Climate, exceeds the
longest day of the beginning of a Climate.

A Parrallel space, is said to be that, which the middle Parrallel of a Climate
comprehends, with the beginning, or end of a Climate.

Proposition IX. If more places of the Earth be taken from the Equator,
toward the Pole. whose distance from the Equator equally augmenteth, from one
degree, to 10, 20, 30, 40 degrees. The longest days in these places shall not
be equally greater, or not equally augment; but they shall more augment in
places more remote, and where the place is more near to the Pole.
Touching the length of days of Places taken from the Equator toward the
Pole.
To show the Verity of this Proposition by the Globe, let places be taken remote
from the Equator toward the Pole by an equal increase of distance, viz. for
convenience, Parallels of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 degrees of Latitude. For these
Parallels in the Globe, let the Pole be Elevated to the Latitude of 10 degrees,
and the first degree of Cancer being brought to the Oriental Horizon, and that
being noted; let the point of the Tropic be also noted, which then is in the
Occidental Horizon. For the Arch of the Tropic then being above the Horizon,
shows the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place 10 degrees of
Latitude. The hours of this his stay may also be known by the Index and Horary
Circle.

Then let the Pole be Elevated according to the Latitude of the second place 20
degrees, and the first degree of Cancer, being again brought to the Oriental
Horizon, let the point of the Tropic be noted in the Occidental: for the Arch
above the Horizon will again note the stay, which also may be known by the
Index, and the Circle in the Hours.

The same may be used with places whose Latitude is 40, 50, 60, 70 degrees, and
the like; which being done, let the Diurual hours of the Suns stay above the
the Horizon, or the Arch of the Tropic be compared, and it will be manifest,
that the quantity of the longest day does much more increase in places more
remote, than in the places more adjacent to the Equator, and therefore the
increase of the longest day does more augment, than the increase of the
distance of the places from the Equator.

Note, what has been said, and showed concerning the longest day, that is true
of all the days of one half of the year, and is demonstrated after the same
manner, if instead of the Tropic of Cancer, the Parallel of the place be
taken. And therefore although Generals must be delivered generally, yet because
the Doctrine of Climates especially requires the Explication of the increase
of the longest day, therefore we do not observe in this Doctrine that Law,
(...).

Proposition X. If so many places or Parallels are so taken between the
Equator and the Pole, that the longest day of one place, exceeds the longest
day of the Vicine place, (which is more nigh the Equator) every where equal in
excess, or that the longest day equally may increase, Of Parallels between the
Equator and the Pole.
these Parallels shall not equally be distant one from another, ( viz every
vicine Couple) but these which are more remote from the Equator, shall have a
less distance than those more near the Equator.
The truth of this Proposition is showed from the precedent, for if these
Parallels should be equally distant from one another, viz. every two Vicine,
the quantity of the longest day in these Parallels would not Augment by an
equal increase, as we have here showed. And it is now laid down that the places
or Parallels so taken equally increase, that the longest day may equally
increase in them; wherefore every two Vicine or near Parallels, shall not so
equally be distant one from another, but many Parallels being taken from the
Equator toward the Pole, on this condition, that the longest day may equally
increase. These Parallels shall not be equally distant from one another, but
the distance of the third from the second, shall be lesser than the second from
the first, that of the fourth less from the third, that of the fifth lesser
from the fourth, and so forwards.

Corollary, and because that many of the Climates are so taken, that the
longest day in the final Parallel of the Climate, exceeds the longest day of
the beginning at the Climate by half an hour; it follows from this
Proposition, that the Climates more remote from the Equator, are less broad,
or more narrow, then these more near the Equator; and therefore the Latitude,
and Magnitude of the Climates, decreaseth toward the Pole. Hence it comes to
pass, seeing that the Climates at length would become very narrow toward the
Pole, if that the same excess should be kept, viz. the excess of half an hour,
so that Geographers define the bounds of the Northern Climates not by half an
hour, but first by whole hours, and then by whole days.

Proposition XI. The number of the hours of the longest day being given in any
place or Parallel of the Earth, to find the Latitude of the place, or Elevation
of the Pole of this Parallel, and to exhibit the Parallel it self in the Globe;
or to exhibit those places where the longest day is so great.
For the finding the Latitude of a place, etc. The longest day in all Northern
places, is when the Sun is in the first Degree of Cancer.
Let the place of the Sun of the longest day, be brought to the Meridian, Let
the Index be brought to the 12th. hour of the Horary Cycle: let the Globe be
turned, until the Index show that hour of the Cycle, from which the given
number of the longest day is denominated, and then let the point of the Tropic
in the Meridian be noted. Then let the first degree of Cancer be brought to the
Oriental Horizon, and the Meridian in the Crena, be so moved to the Pole,
Elevated or depressed, until the other noted point of the Tropic be in the
Occidental Horizon; but so that the first degree of Cancer be yet in the East:
which being done, number the Degrees of the Elevation of the Pole. For that is
the sought for Elevation, or Latitude of the Parallel, which you shall find in
the very Globe it self, if you number so many Degrees in the Meridian from the
Equator toward the Pole, and a Chalk being applied, you may turn round the
Globe to the term of the Numeration. For the described Parallel is that which
is sought. The Probation of the Method is easy.

Proposition XII. The number of some days being given, to find out the Latitude
of the places, or Parallels, and to exhibit the place of the Frigid Zone on the
Earth, when the Sun for so many days sets not, and for so many more arises
not.
Further concerning the Latitudes of places.
Let the number of the days be divided in half, and let so many Degrees be
numbered in the Ecliptic from the first Degree of Cancer, as that divided or
half number is, or as many Unites as this has, (the Numeration may be made
from both parts of this beginning.) Let the term be be noted with Chalk, if the
days be more than thirty; the number of the Degrees must be taken lesser than
an Unite. Then let this noted point be brought to the Meridian, and let the
Degrees interrupted between that and the Pole be numbered. For these are the
sought for Elevation of the Pole, or Latitude of the places, wherein so many
days as are given, the Sun sets not, and in so many days rises not. You
shall find the very places and Parallels in the Globe, if that you number the
found out Latitude from the Equator, toward the Pole in the Meridian, and
design the Parallel by Chaulk applied to the Term. For this is that sought for,
and it contains all the places sought for.

For the Demonstration of this Solution, let the Pole be Elevated for the
Latitude of the places found out, and it will be manifest, that the noted
Degrees of the Ecliptic about the first Degree of Cancer set not beneath the
Horizon, but remain above it. The Sun therefore passing over these points of
the Ecliptic, sets not: now he passes through these points in so many
days, as are given, as is apparent by the connstruction. After the same manner
we shall show the truth of this Solution concernig the days, in which the Sun
does not arise at all in the places Parallel found.

Corollary, It is easy therefore to find the Elevation of the Pole of those
places, or Climates, which lie in the Frigid Zone, where the longest day
increases not by hours, but by a number of whole days.

Proposition XIII. To frame or compose a Table of the Climates.
Of the making a Table of the Climates.
This is called a Table of Climates, in which at the beginning, middle and end
of every Climate, the Elevation of the Pole, or Latitude of the Parallel, and
the very quantity of the longest day is found noted, as also the interval of
the Climates, or distance of the Parallels.

The Construction is easy, for from the order of the Climates, the quantity
for the longest day for the beginning, middle, or end of every Climate is
found, by adding of an hour, to twelve hours by a continual Succession.

Then from the quantity of the longest day of every Parallel, is found out the
Elevation or Latitude of the Pole of every one of them, according to the XI.
Proposition.

Lastly, you have the interval, or Latitude of the Climates, if you take the
Latitude of the beginning Parallel, from the Latitude of the ending Parallel.
All these being noted in the Table, we shall have a Table of the Climates,
which I have hereunto annexed.

A Table of the Climates and Parallels.
Climates. Parallels. Longest days. Elevation of the Pole. The Interval. hours.
min. degrees. min. The first. The beginning, middle, end, and beginning of the 2. 12
0 0 0 12 15 4 15 0 1 12 30 8 25 8 25 12 45 12 30 The second. The middle. the
end. 13 0 16 25 8 13 15 20 15 The third. The middle, the end. 13 30 23 50 7 25
13 45 27 40 The fourth. The middle, the end. 14 0 30 20 6 30 14 15 33 40 The
fifth. The middle, the end. 14 30 36 28 6 8 14 45 39 2 The sixth. The middle,
the end. 15 0 41 22 4 52 15 15 43 32 The seventh. The middle, the end. 15 30 45
29 4 7 15 45 47 20 The eighth. The middle, the end. 16 0 49 1 3 31 16 15 50 33
The ninth. The middle, the end. 16 30 51 58 2 7 16 45 53 17 The tenth. The
middle, the end. 17 0 54 27 2 49 17 15 55 34 The eleventh. The middle, the end.
17 30 56 37 2 10 17 45 57 32 The twelfth. The middle, the end. 18 0 58 29 18 15
59 14 The thirteenth. The middle, the end. 18 30 59 58 18 45 60 40 The
fourteenth. The middle, the end. 19 0 61 18 19 15 61 55 The fifteenth. The
middle, the end. 19 30 62 25 19 45 62 54 The sixteenth. The middle, the end. 20
0 63 22 20 15 64 40 The seventeenth The middle, the end. 20 30 64 6 20 45 64 30
The eighteenth. The middle, the end. 21 0 65 49 21 15 65 6 The nineteenth. The
middle, the end. 21 30 65 21 21 45 65 35 The twentieth. The middle, the end. 22
0 65 47 22 15 66 57 The 21st. The middle, the end. 22 30 66 6 22 45 66 14 The
22d. The middle, the end. 23 0 66 20 23 15 66 25 The 23d. The middle, the end.
23 30 66 28 23 45 66 30 The 24th. The middle, the end. 24 0 66 31

The Climates were wont to be extended no further, because that in the
following places the Longest day does not increase by hours, but by whole Days,
or Diurnal revolutions; and it is lost labor to compute them. Notwithstanding
the following Canon will show the Elevation of the Pole, or Latitude of the
Places, where the Longest days increase by whole Months.

Months, 1 2 3 4 5 6 The Latitude of the places degrees. min. degrees. min. degrees. min.
degrees. min. degrees. min. degrees. min. 67 20 69 30 73 20 78 20 84 0 90 0

Proposition XIV. To explain the method of other Geographers in reckoning of
the Climates, and making the Table of the Climates.
The division of the Earth into Climates, by the Ancient Geographers.
The Ancient Geographers, especially the Grecians, who supposed only a small
portion of the Earth to be inhabited, because that as well the places
Northernly, as those of the Torrid Zone, they denied, as impossible to be
inhabited; therefore they divided only that portion of the Earth, which they
knew, into Climates, and so only numbered seven Climates from the Equator
toward the Pole Artick, and named them from some noted place, through which
the Parallel of the Climates passed; viz.

The first Climate they called, the Climate through Meroe, (which is an Island
and City in Africa, encompassed by the Nile.)

The second, through Syene, a City of Egypt.

The third, through Alexandria in Egypt.

The fourth, through the Island of Rhodes.

The fifth, through the Hellespont. Others through Rome.

The sixth, through Borysthenes, a famous River of the European Sarmatia.

The seventh, through the Riphaean Mountains of Sarmatia.

The Ancients numbered not the other Climates from the other side of the
Equator toward the South, because all those places were unknown to them; and
many thought, that the Sea possessed all the superficies of the Earth. Which,
seeing it seemed somewhat improbable to the latter, these also numbered the
Climates from the other side of the Equator: and they named them, not from any
noted places, (for they had no knowledge of any,) but by the same appellations
with those of the Northern, only preposing the Preposition (...), as the
Climate (...); as if you should say, the Climate opposite to the Climate
through Meroe or Syene, etc.

Other Climates added by the Ancients.
But when through progress of time, they discovered many parts of the Earth
lying toward the South Pole to be inhabited, many more Climates were numbered
and constituted. Some named the eighth Clime from the Palus Maeotis; the ninth,
from the Baltic Sea; the tenth, the eleventh, and the rest, from other places.
Which denominations, although not necessary for the construction of a Table,
yet they may be added unto our Table in those Areae, where we have placed the
number of the Climates: for so the Climates will stick closer in our memory, as
also the Places in every Climate; and we may be able to make a better
comparison between the difference of Cold and Heat. But this is better to leave
to the Industry of the Reader, and to those that are Studious, than to add it
to it, that so we may afford them a greater occasion of contemplating the
Terrestrial Globe; and by this means may more easily commit them to Memory.

Where the Ancients began the Climates.
You must also take notice, that the Ancients did not begin the Numeration of
the Climates from the Equator it self, as our Table does, but from the Place
or Parallel, where the Longest day consists of 12 hours; and therefore their
first Climate is the second in our Table, their second our third, and so on:
for they supposed those places, which we ascribe to the first Climate, could
not possibly be inhabited by men, by reason of the excessive heat of the Sun,
The first Climate of 9 degrees of Latitude.
that therefore they judged it not meet to reckon those places; but seeing that
Experience has demonstrated the contrary, we would observe their Mode of
naming and constituting of those Climates.

Ptolomy begins the first Climate from the Parallel, where the Longest day
is 12 hours; or where the Latitude or distance from the Equator, is four
degrees 15 minutes.

The matter is of no great concernment; yet it is better to begin from the
Equator, that all the places may lie in some Climate.

Proposition XV. To show the use of the Table of the Climates.
1. The Latitude of some place, or Elevation of the Pole, being given, to know
the quantity of the Longest day in that place, and the Climate in which it
lies.

Let the given Elevation of the Pole be sought in the Table, and on the
opposite Region we shall find both the quantity of the Longest day, as also the
Climate and the Parallel. If that the given Elevation cannot be found in the
Table, then take that Elevation which is less near, or the like, which is found
in the Table.

From the Longitude of the Longest day of any place, to know the Latude of the
place, and the Parallel and Climate.
2. The Longitude of the Longest day of any place being given, which any person
has observed, or received by relation, to know from thence the Latitude of
that place, the Parallel, and the Climate in which that place lies.

Enter the Table with the Latitude given, and you shall see on the opposite
Region both the Latitude and the Place demanded; as also the Climate and
Parallel.

3. A Climate being given, to determine the Longitude of the Longest day, and
the Elevation of the Pole.

This is facil from the very sight of the Table.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Light, Heat, Cold, Rains, in the diverse parts of the Earth
or Zones, and other properties of the Zones.
Proposition I. These Causes are efficacious to generate and procure Light,
Heat, Cold, and Rain, with other Meteors in the places of the Earth, and the
vicine Air.
Of the causes of Heat.
1. THe more, or less, or no obliquity of the Rays of the Sun coming to, or
emitted on any place. For the Rays falling perpendicular on any place cause
great heat, and the other Rays sliding obliquely, have for that very reason a
less power of heating, by how much the obliquity of them is the greater; that
is, by how much the more they decline from the perpendicular Ray. 2. The
diurnal stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place. For the same heat
makes more hot, and changes the Air in a longer time, than in a shorter. 3.
The depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon, being more or less in the Night
season. For this difference of depression causes, that either more or less
Light is perceived in the Air; also more or less Heat, Rain, thick Clouds.
Hitherto belongs the Twilight. 4. The more or less Elevation of the Moon
above the Horizon, the more or less depression of the same beneath the Horizon;
the more or less Diurnal stay of the same above the Horizon. The Causes are the
same with those alleged in the three foregoing Paragraphs. The Planets and
fixed Stars, raise Vapors, etc. in the Air.
5. The same may be said of fixed Stars, especially of those more noted ones,
and of the five other Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury. For
they generate some light and heat in the Air, although it be but little, and
change the Air diverse ways, and raise Vapors, if that we may credit
Astronomers. 6. The propriety or species of the Earth of every place. For where
the Earth is more stony and rocky, there for the most part it is more Cold,
than where it is sulphurous and fat; and here again it is more fertil^ Where
there is much Sand, and no Rivers, there is greater Heat. Fumes and Mists
proceed from Lakes.
7. Lakes, or the Sea adjacent. From thence also Fumes and Mists are raised more
moist and frequent in the Air; and the Rays are less powerfully reflected from
the Sea, than from the Earth. 8. The situation of Places. For the Sun acts
otherwise on Mountains and Mountainous places, than on Valleys and Plains.
Moreover Mountains hinder the free access of the Rays of the Sun to the subject
places; for to them the Vapors of the Air are in some sort attracted; See
Chap. 20.
whence the Mountains change the seasons of the adjacent places, as Heat, Rain,
and the like. For these would be otherwise in the Subject places, if that the
Mountains were absent. The Winds cause difference in the weather.
9. The Winds especially, the general. So the Etesian winds temperate and allay
the Canicular heat. A general Wind in the Torrid Zone, especially the Subsolan
winds in Brasilia, render the Heat temperate; when in Africa, which is
Occidental, the Heat is vehement, because these places feel not so general a
Wind. The Northern winds are cold and dry; the Southern, warm and moist in our
places. 10. Clouds, Rain and Fogs, take away and diminish light and heat. I
suppose that there are not many causes of this variety in light and heat, etc.
which is observed in diverse places of the Earth, or also in the same places;
but yet in a different time or season.
Proposition II. How are the Seasons of the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn and
Winter, to be defined?
The four Seasons of the Year.
Although in Sciences we ought not to contend and dispute concerning
Definitions; yet because certain Homonymes or Likenesses do here occur, without
the Explication of which there will arise much confusion in the following
Doctrine: therefore I will so propose this Question, that you may the more
cautiously avoid this Homonyme, that they may not be deceived and entangled by
the same.

The Question comprehends two difficulties: first, Whether these Seasons
ought to be defined from the entrance of the Sun, and his stay in certain sings
of the Ecliptic and Zodiac? According to Astronomers and Astrologers.
For so Astronomers and Astrologers commonly do, saying, that that is the
Spring, whilst the Sun moves from the first degree of Aries to the first of
Cancer: that is Summer, whilst the Sun moves from the first of Cancer to the
first of Libra: that is Autumn, whilst the Sun moves from the first of Libra
to the first of Capricorn: and that is Winter, whilst the Sun moves from the
first of Capricorn to the first degree of Aries. Now it is manifest, that these
Definitions are not general and agreeable to all places, because they are only
of force in the Northern places (situated from the Equator toward the Pole
Artick,) and not in the Southern: so that for these Definitions, the same
persons bring Definitions contrary to the former; saying, that in these places,
the Spring begins from the first degree of Libra, proceeding unto the first
of Capricorn: the Summer, from the first of Capricorn to the first of Aries:
the Autumn, from the first of Aries to the first of Cancer: and the Winter,
from the first of Cancer to the first of Libra.

But from thence it would follow, that those Seasons cannot possibly be
defined; which is false; and Generals ought to be defined by Generals.
Secondly, Definitions so made, cannot have place in the places of the Torrid
Zone; for when the Sun passes through the Vertex of those places, then every
one will then confess, that there ought to be Summer, except some other cause
obstructed, in respect of the Celestial cause: and so in places situated in
the Equator, the Spring or Summer ought not to be in the entrance of the Sun
into the first degree of Aries, or Libra; but rather the Summer, because then
he passes through the Vertex of those places, and causes great heat; except
some other cause hinders. Neither can the Summer be transferred unto the first
degree of Cancer, or Capricorn. The same also holds, concerning places
situated between the Equator and the Tropicks; because the Sun passes
through their Vertex, before that he draws near to the first degree of
Cancer, or Capricorn, and therefore first causes the Summer there. For we must
know, that although Definitions may be free, yet seeing that by the common
notions of all Nations, they define the Summer by Heat, and the Winter by Cold,
or at least, by a lesser degree of Heat; and so the Definitions ought to be
made, that they may render as little as may be from these Notions, and in no
sort be contrary to them.

The same difficulty is, concerning the Spring and Autum of the places of the
Torrid Zone; yea, they do not seem to have place here, especially in places
which lie in the Equator.

Of Heats and Cold.
The second difficulty, for which this Question is proposed, is this, Whether
the Seasons are to be defined from the very degree of heat and cold, viz. the
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter; or from the access or recess of the Sun? For
the common notion of the Men of Europe, which they form concerning those
Seasons, or in which they do conceive them, comprehends both, although they
have more respect to heat than cold: But Astronomers are more attentive to the
access and recess, or entrance of the Sun into certain Signs of the Zodiac, as
we have said before. Moreover it is observed in many places of the Torrid Zone,
that those Seasons answer not the access and recess of the Sun; but that
contrary to the Celestial motion of the Sun, they are tried by a Winter
(raging, not with cold, but with storms and rains,) when they should have
Summer, by reason of the vicinity of the Sun; and on the contrary, they have
Summer when the Sun is remote, when they should have Winter, (of which more
anon,) and so those People define not the Summer and Winter, by the access of
the Sun, and his entrance into certain Signs; but they define the Summer by its
serenity, and the Winter by its rain and somewhat cold Air. And so it is
impossible to make definitions of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, as to
be general and agreeable to all these places, according to the notions of the
People.

These difficulties thus considered, I thus think; First, seeing that in many
places of the Torrid Zone, (as we have spoken in the second difficulty,) and
also some certain places of the Temperate Zones, Heat and Cold happen contrary
to the Celestial mode or motion of the Sun; yet notwithstanding those
definitions cannot be made accurately by Heat and Cold: therefore these terms
of the Seasons must be distinguished, as being Homonymical, so that we must
make some Seasons to be Celestial, and others Terrestrial. I confess these
terms to be less fit, but the want of better does compel me to use them: so
that it is termed the Terrestrial Summer of any place, in which, in that place
a great heat is caused every year by the Sun; but the Celestial Summer is
termed that season of the year, wherein a great heat ought to be in that place,
by reason of the vicinity of the Sun. So that is termed the Celestial Winter of
a place, in which season Cold should be in that place, by reason of the great
distance of the Sun; but that season is termed the Terrestrial Winter of any
place, in which there is very great Cold in that place every year. And although
in many places the Celestial and Terrestrial Winter happen in one season of the
year; as also the Celestial and Terrestrial Summer; yet there are some places
of the Torrid Zone, where they observe diverse seasons of the year, as we shall
show in the following discourse. The same should be said of the Celestial and
Terrestrial Spring, and likewise of the Autumn.

Secondly, Seeing that there are few places, where the Terrestrial Summer and
Winter differ from the Celestial in the season of the year; but in most places
fall in with the same time of the year: therefore the Celestial Summer may be
absolutely termed the Summer; so also the Winter, the Spring, and the Autumn.
But when we speak of the Terrestrial, we must add the word Terrestrial; but
where we simply say, the Summer, the Winter, Spring and Autumn, we are to
understand the Celestial seasons agreeing with the Terrestrial.

But how shall we make distinct and accurate definitions of the Summer ( viz.
the Celestial) the Winter, the Spring, and the Autumn, so that they may be
general for all places, and also take place in the Torrid Zone?

I know no other Mode, whereby such definitions may be made, but only this: The
definitions of the sous Seasons of the year.
1. The Celestial Summer of any place, is that season of the year, whose
beginning is that day in the Meridies of which, the Sun has the least distance
from the Vertex of the place, (and that in the first season, if the Sun become
vertical to that place in two seasons.) The end that day, in whose Meridies the
Sun receives a moderate distance from the first Vertex of that place, or
whether it be lesser than that of all other days of the year. 2. That is termed
the Winter of any place, the beginning of which is that day, in whose Meridies
the Sun obtains the greatest distance from the Vertex of that place. And the
end that day, in whose Meridies the Sun acquireth a moderate distance from the
Vertex of that place. 3. That season is termed the Spring of any place, which
falls between the end of the Winter, and the beginning of the Summer: or
whose beginning is that day, in the Meridies, of which the Sun has acquired a
moderate distance from the Vertex, when he has come from a great distance. And
the end is that day, where in whose Meridies the Sun has acquired a very small
distance from the first Vertex of the place. 4. The Autumn of any place is
termed that season of the year, falling between the end of Summer and the
beginning of Winter; or whose beginning is that day, in the Meridies of which
the Sun receives a mean distance from the Vertex of the place coming from a
lesser. And the end that day, in the Meridies of which the Sun has obtained a
very great distance from the Vertex of the place.


According to these Definitions, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, may be
attributed to all places of the Earth. Neither is it easy to find out any
other Mode of defining them, so that they may agree with all places. Now these
Definitions being laid down, let us come to the matter it self.

Proposition III. The Celestial Summer of the places of the Earth, which lie
between the Tropic of Cancer and the Pole Artick, begins with the entrance
of the Sun into the first degree of Cancer ( viz. the 21 of June) and ends with
the entrance of the Sun into the first degree of Libra ( viz. the 21 of
September,) and that together at once in all those places. So that Autumn is in
those places, the Sun going from the first of Libra unto the first of
Capricorn: the Winter, whilst the Sun moves from the first of Capricorn to the
first of Aries: the Spring, whilst the Sun moves from the first degree of
Aries unto the first of Cancer.
Further, concerning the Seasons of the Year.
The truth of this Proposition is easily showed by the antecedent Definitions,
and may be demonstrated on the Globe, and in Universal Maps: For the Sun coming
to the first degree of Cancer, has the least distance in the Meridies from the
Vertexes of every one of the places of the Northern, Temperate, and Frigid
Zone. After the same Mode, the Sun in the first degree of Libra has a moderate
distance from those Vertexes: In the first of Capricorn a greater: In the first
of Aries a moderate, and he ascends to a more great, which is apparent, both
from the declination of the Sun, and from the Globes and Maps. Therefore it is
inferred, by the Definitions laid down before that the Summer, the Winter, and
the Spring of those places, begin and end in those days we have spoken of.

The Summer of those places of the Earth, which lie between the Tropic of
Capricorn and the Antartick Pole; or those of the Southern Zone, temperate and
frigid, begins with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Capricorn (
viz. 21 of December,) and ends with the entrance of the Sun into the first of
Aries, ( viz. the 21 of March.) The Autumn of those places begins with the
entrance of the Sun into the first of Aries, and ends with the entrance of the
Sun into the first of Cancer ( viz. the 21 of June.) With this the Winter of
those places begins, which ends with the entrance of the Sun into the
first of Libra ( viz. 21 of September:) And with this their Spring begins,
and ends with the entrance of the Sun into the first of Capricorn ( viz. 21
of December,) where the Summer begins again.

These are showed after the same Mode, by the Definitions delivered, and by the
Globe or Maps, by which we showed the former, because in the first degree of
Capricorn the Sun has the least distance from the Vertexes of those places: In
the first of Aries, a moderate, and descends to the less: In the first of
Cancer, the greatest: In the first of Libra, a moderate, and ascends to a
greater.

But the Celestial Summer, Spring, Autumn, and Winter of the places of the
Earth, which lie in the Torrid Zone, between the Tropic of Cancer and
Capricorn, do not begin on one and the same day of the year, but on diverse days
in every place of diverse Parallels, or of a diverse Latitude of this Zone. Now
the places of the Torrid Zone are threefold, viz. the places of the Equator;
the Northern places of the Torrid Zone; and the Southern places of the Torrid
Zone.

1. The Places lying in the Equator have this peculiar to them, that they
enjoy two Summers, two Winters, two Spring seasons, and two Autumns, and that
in every Year: so that in half a year they have, or ought to have those four
Seasons, according to our Definitions, and the Celestial Law. They have again
the same four Seasons, from the 21 of September to the 21 of March, Half a
year, is from the 21 of March to the 21 of September.
viz. one Summer, whilst the Sun moves from the first degree of Aries to the
second of Taurus, (from the 21 of March to the 22 of April.)

Autumn, whilst the Sun moves from the second degree of Taurus to the first of
Cancer, (from the 22 of April to the 21 of June. The motion of ^he Sun in the
12 Signs of the Zodiac.
)

Winter, whilst the Sun moves from the first degree of Cancer to the second of
Leo, (from the 21 of June to the 19 of August.)

The Spring, whilst the Sun moves from the 28th degree of Leo to the first of
Libra, (from the 19 of August to the 21 of September.)

The other Summer, whilst the Sun moves from the first degree of Libra to the
second of Scorpio, (from the 21 of September to the 22 of October.)

The other Autumn, whilst the Sun moves from the second degree of Scorpio to
the first of Capricorn, (from the 22 of October to the 21 of December.)

The other Winter, whilst the Sun moves from the first degree of Capricorn to
the 28th of Aquarius, (from the 21 of December to the 19 of February.)

The other Spring is, whilst the Sun does move from the 28th degree of Aquarius
to the first of Aries, (from the 19th of February to the 21 of March.)

All these are easily demonstrated from the Definitions laid down, because that
the Sun in the first degree of Aries, and in the first of Libra, has the less
distance in the Meridies, from the Vertices of the places lying under the
Equator; for it has none, because it is vertical unto them: therefore then do
the Summers begin. Then in the second degree of Taurus and the second of
Scorpio, (where the declination of the Sun is 11 degrees 45 minutes) it
acquireth a mean distance, departing to a greater: then therefore the Autumns
do begin. Moreover, when he is in the first degree of Cancer and the first of
Capricorn, he has a greater distance from the places of the Equator:
therefore then do the Winters begin. Finally, on the 28th degree of Leo, and
the 28th of Aquarius, he receives a moderate distance from the places of the
Equator (10 degrees 45 minutes,) ascending toward the least: and therefore
then does the Spring seasons begin. These are understood more perspicuously
from the Globe; therefore here these Seasons may be distinguished thus,
according to the Celestial Laws, notwithstanding the Terrestrial Seasons are in
many places of the Equator otherwise observed, as we shall show in the
following Propositions.

2. All the Places of the Earth, lying under the Torrid Northern Zone, have the
end of the Autumn and the beginning of the Winter together, both at one time,
viz. the 21 of December; but they have not together the beginning and end of
the Summer and Spring, as also the Autumn; but different places have them in
several days.

Other Observations about the beginning of the Seasons.
For the end of the Autumn, and the beginning of the Winter in those places, is,
when the Sun obtains the greatest distance that possibly he can from the
Vertex of those places, as it is laid down in the Definitions. And it is true
concerning all the places of the Torrid Northern Zone, that the Sun entering
into the first degree of Capricorn acquireth the greatest distance in the
Meridies from the Vertex of those places, because that in all the other days he
is more near to those places. Therefore the Sun being entered into the first
degree of Capricorn, the beginning of the Winter happens to all those places;
and also the end of Autumn, which is the first part of this Proposition.

The other part is also easily proved; for if these places be of a diverse
Latitude, then the Sun is not vertical in the Meridies to those places in the
same days, but in diverse: for then is the beginning of the Summer of any place
of this Torrid Zone, when the Sun by his ascent from the first of Capricorn
comes to that degree of the Northern Ecliptic, that he is vertical to that
place. So that in diverse days the beginning of Summer may be in those diverse
places; yet in all those places its beginning falls between the 21 of March,
and the 21 of June. The Summer shall also end in different days, and the Autumn
begin, because the Sun in diverse days comes to his mean distance, (or to the
points of the Ecliptic, which have a moderate distance from those places,)
because these points are differently seated between the first of Libra and the
first of Capricorn: notwitstanding this beginning falls out between the 21 of
September and the 21 of December. After the same Mode, in diverse days the
Winter shall have an end, and the Spring begin, because the points of the
Ecliptic again of a moderate distance, are diverse from the Vertices of those
places. Now the Sun touching them causes the beginning of the Spring, which
yet happens in all between the 21 of December and the 21 of March.

3. All the places of the Earth situated in the Torrid Southern Zone, have
also the end of the Autumn, and the beginning of the Winter, together at one
time, viz. the 21 of June: but they have not the beginning and end of the
Spring, as also the beginning of the Autumn, together; but diverse, places have
it in different days; yet so, that the beginning of the Summer of all those
places, does fall between the 21 of September, and the 21 of December: The
beginning of Autumn, and the end of Summer, between the 21 of March and the 21
of June: the beginning of the Spring, and the end of Winter, between the 21 of
June and the 21 of September.

The parts of this Proposition are proved after the same manner as the former:
For on the 21 of June the Sun is in the first degree of Cancer, and therefore
has the greatest distance that is possible from the places of the Austrial
Torrid Zone. Then therefore all of them shall have the beginning of Winter; but
the beginning of Summer, the Spring, and Autumn, shall happen on diverse days,
because the Sun in sundry points of the Ecliptic becomes vertical unto diverse
places, and acquireth also a moderate distance from those places, in many
places.

4. Those Places of the Earth in the Torrid Zone have something peculiar, which
lie between the Equator, and the Eighth degree of Latitude, as well toward
the North, as South: For the Sun by his proper Motion, or by his access or
recess, make two Summers in them, two Springs; but yet but one Autumn, and one
Winter, and that by a confused kind of order, viz. this, the Spring, the
Summer, the Spring; the Summer again, then Autumn, and then Winter.

The places in the Torrid Zone have something peculiar to them, which lie
between the Equator and the 8th degree of Latitude.
The cause of this Paradox is, because the Sun receding from the Vertices of
those places, which lie between the Equator and the 8th degree of the Boreal
or Northern Latitude (where it makes the beginning of the first Summer,) and
going forwards toward the beginning of Cancer, it acquireth here a a moderate
distance; when it returns from the Vertices toward those Vertices, it shall
not make Autumn after that first Summer, but another Spring, seeing that it
made the first before it began the first Summer; where it obtains a mean
distance between the first of Capricorn, and the first of Aries. For Example,
let us take a place which is four degrees from the Equator; because therefore
also the Sun in the tenth degree of Aries declineth, and is distant from the
Equator four degrees; therefore he being in the tenth of Aries, shall cause
the beginning of Summer in that place. Moreover, the greatest distance, which
this place can have in the Meridies is 27 degrees, 30 minutes, ( viz. in the
first degree of Capricorn, where his declination from the Equator is 30
minntes, 23 degrees, to which let the Northerm distance of the place from the
Equator 4 degrees be added) therefore seeing his meanest distance is 0
degrees, let 0 degrees be his middle distance 13 degrees, 45 minutes. Wherefore
when the Sun shall be in the points of the Ecliptic, which are distant from
the place taken, or the Parallel of the place, 13 degrees, 45 minutes. Then the
Sun shall make either Spring or Autumn in that place; the Spring, if the Sun be
moved from those points toward the Vertex of the place; but Autumn if the Sun
tend from that point to a remote distance. Now the points of the Ecliptic,
which are distant from the place assumed 13 degrees, 45 minutes, are found to
be four, to wit, the 25th degree of Libra, the 3d degree of Gemini, the 27th of
Cancer, and the 5th of Pisces, which is proved from the declination of these
points. Because that therefore the Sun coming to the fifth degree of Pisces
from the first of Capricorn, acquireth here a middle distance from the Vertex
of the place assumed, and tends toward the place he shall then make, ( viz.
he being in the fifth degree of Pisces) the beginning of the Spring in that
place; which Spring shall continue until the Sun does come to the tenth of
Aries, where he shall become Vertical to the place, and that shall be in the
beginning of the Summer, when the Sun by his motion has departed from the
place, to the third of Gemini. Again, he shall have a moderate distance from
the Vertex of the place in the Meridies, viz. 13 degrees, 45 minutes, and then
shall that Summer have an end, and the Spring begin; not the Autumn, because
that the Sun does not tend to the greatest distance from the Vertex, from the
third of Gemini; but returns to the least, viz. whilst he moves through
Cancer and Leo, he comes to the twentieth of Virgo: For then again he becomes
Vertical to the place assumed, and makes the beginning of a new Summer, which
continues until the Sun comes to the five and twentieth of Libra: For then
again he obtains a middle distance, and tends to the point of the greatest
distance ( viz. the first of Capricorn) therefore then he shall make the
beginning of Autumn: and in the first of Capricorn the beginning of Winter. So
then we have showed how such a place which lies between the Equator and the
eighth degree of Northern Latitude in the Torrid Zone may have two Summers, two
Springs, one Autumn, and one Winter, which by the same Mode may be shown
concerning the places lying between eight degrees of Latitude from the other
side of the Equator.

But in places situate eight degrees beyond toward the Tropicks, this holds
nor, because those points of the first degree of Cancer, or the first of
Capricorn, have not a middle distance from them, but lesser than a middle: For
the greatest distance of the Sun from the place of the ninth degree of Latitude
(that is possible) is 32 degrees, 30 minutes;. Therefore the middle is 16
degrees, 45 minutes; and therefore if the place be in the ninth degree of
Northern Latitude, the Sun being in the first of Cancer, shall have a less
distance from it than the middle distance is; for that is only 14 degrees, 30
minutes, but this is 16 degrees: Therefore in that place the Summer, which
begins with the first access of the Sun to the Vertex (in the four and
twentieth of Aries, the fifteenth of April) is not finished before the Tropic
of Caner, but shall be continued in the whole course of the Sun through Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and Libra, in the four and twentieth degree of
which, viz. about the fifteenth of October, it ends.

But here seem to arise two new difficulties; 1. That these Months must not be
ascribed to Summer, because the Sun does not recede by a direct course from the
Vertex, but first he acceedeth to another distance again and again, whilst he
receedeth from the Vertex of the place to the Tropic of Cancer: but the Summer
must be defined only by the time of his recess or departing back. But I answer
to this, that the Summer ought to be defined by a departure, but not by a
departure to every distance, but by a recess to a moderate or middle distance.
Neither by this is a mixed access excluded from a recess, so that the recess be
not greater than a middle distance. 2. For the places lying between the
Equator and the eighth degree of Latitude, seeing that before the first degree
of Cancer (or if the Latitude be Southernly, before the first of Capricorn) the
Sun acquireth a moderate distance from those places where we said the end of
the first Summer is, it appears not that we should place the entrance of the
Spring, because the Sun is not directly moved from that point again toward the
place, but first it more departs, viz. from the first of Cancer, and from
thence it returns to the place. But we must know that the departure is so
small, that we ought little to regard the same, because it scarce makes one or
another degree, and that time of a greater recess cannot be ascribed to another
season, except we will feign some new fifth and sixth Season.


Also it may otherwise seem concerning these places to some one, viz. that an
intermedial Spring should not be placed between two Summers, but one continued
Summer; and that time of an intermedial Spring should be attributed to this
Summer, making no account of it, that the Sun is removed to a middle distance
from the place, seeing that he remains so near the place, and so little
receedeth beyond his middle distance, that he can hardly diminish the heat of
the Air, but by reason of his continuity rather augment at that time. I shall
contest with none about this; but I think it more advantageous to insist on the
explained Method; but here is overmuch concerning this Subject.

Proposition IV. A place being given in the Torrid Zone, to find out the days
of the year, in which the Summer, Autumn, Spring, and the Winter, begin and end
in that place.
The finding out of the days of the year in which the Seasons begin and end in
places of the Torrid Zone.
1. If the place be situated in the Equator, we have showed in the preceding
Theorem of the Proposition, in what degrees these Seasons of the year begin and
end, which are there double.

2. If the place be without the Equator, and removed from it beyond the eighth
degree of Latitude or Distance, let it be brought to the Meridian, and let the
imminent point of the Meridian be noted with Chalk; then let the Globe be
turned round until some point of the Ecliptic, seated between the first degree
of Aries and the first of Cancer, come to the same point of the Meridian (if
the place given be in the Northern Torrid Zone; but if in the Southern Torrid
Zone, then the point ought to pass between the first degree of Libra and the
first of Capricorn) this shall be the point, which when the Sun enters, he
makes the beginning of the Summer in the proposed place. Then let the
intercepted degrees between the noted point of the Meridian, and the Tropic of
Capricorn (of Cancer if the place given be South) be cut into two equal parts,
and let the middle point in the Meridian be noted, and let the Globe be moved
until the point of the Ecliptic, seated between the first degree of Capricorn
and the first of Aries (between the first degree of Cancer and the first of
Libra, if the place be Southern) pass through the last noted point of the
Meridian. Again, let it be moved until another point between the first degree
of Capricorn and the first of Libra (the first of Cancer, and the first of
Aries, if the place be Southern) pass through the same point of the Meridian:
the first point will note the day for the entrance of the Spring, the l^tter
for the beginning of Autumn. But the beginning of Winter is in the first of
Capricorn if the place given be Northern, but in the first of Cancer if
Southernly.

They may also be resolved by Maps, but most accurately from the Tables of
Declination, viz. with the Latitude of the place enter the Table of the Solary
Declination, in which seek that Latitude, to which you see the four days of the
year apposed: from those take that which is between the 21 of March and the 21
of June, if the place given, or the Latitude of it given be Northern; but if it
be Southern, take that day which happens between the 21 of September and the
21 of December, this day shall be the beginning of the Summer.

Then take away half of the given Latitude of the plain from 11 degrees, 45
minutes, and seek the remaining Number in the Table of the Declination, you
shall see again opposite four days of the year, in two of which the Sun shall
obtain a middle distance from the place given; if therefore the place given be
North, take two of those four days, whereof one happens between the 21 of
December and the 21 of March, (this shall be the entrance of the Spring) the
other between the 21 of September and the 21 of December, this shall be the
entrance of Autumn: But if the place given be South, from those four days you
must take the day between the 21 of June and the 21 of September for the
entrance of the Spring; and for the beginning of Autumn that which happens
between the 21 of March and the 21 of June. The beginning of Winter shall be
the 21 of June, if the place be South; but if North, the 21 of December.

3. If the place given be between the Equator and the eighth degree of
Latitude, it shall have two Summers and two Spring seasons, besides Autumn and
Winter, except peradventure we will cast away that second Spring which is
intermedial between the two Summers, as we said in the end of the preceding
Proposition, and attribute a continual Summer to that time; which if you do, we
must act no otherwise with the given place than in the former Mode. If we will
attribute two Summers and two Springs to it, as the definitions of Summer and
Spring accurately observed do require, we shall first act by the first Mode, as
in the former Theorems, viz. we shall find the entrance of Summer and Winter,
and except the four days of moderate distance found in the Table of those four,
those two which we advised to take in the former Mode, for the entrance of the
Spring and Autumn, here again we shall take on the same conditions; but of the
other two days, that only which is proximate to the day of the Summer shall be
taken.

For this will show the end of the Summer, and the beginning of the second
Spring; but for the day of the second Summer, another day of the three
remaining shall be taken in that Area, from which the beginning of the first
Summer was taken, viz. that which is distant by an equal number of days from
the 21 of June, and (the 21 of Capricorn if the place be South) the first day
of the Summer: So the days shall be found in which the Summer, the Spring,
Autumn, and the Winter do begin and end in the places of the Torrid Stone.

Proposition V. In the places in the temperate and frigid Zones, the four
seasons of the year are almost equal, or consist of an equal number of days:
But in the places of the Torrid Zone they are unequal: Neither are only the
times of the diverse seasons unequal, but also the time of the season in the
diverse places of the Zones is unequal.
The seasons of the year in the places in the Temperate and Frigid Zone are
equal.
1. For the places of the temperate and frigid Zones, what I have said is easily
demonstrated: For seeing that the Sun in every time of those four quarters of
the Year runs through three Signs, therefore the times of the Spring, Summer,
Autumn, and the Winter shall be equal, or of equal days, except some days, viz.
five in which the Summer, and four in which the Spring of the Northern places
exceed the Autumn and the Winter: but in the Southern places it is otherwise;
for Autumn and Winter exceed the Spring and Summer, which as we have showed
before, proceeds from the excentricity of the Sun. 2. In places lying under
the Equator, there are two Summers (as also other Seasons) but hoth short, as
also both the Springs, viz. each Summer and each Spring has only 32 days,
which is 64 days; but the Autumns and Winters are longer, viz. 55 days, which
is 110 days. 3. In the places of the Torrid Zone, by how much the less they are
remote from the Equator, by so much the more they have the longer Summer, the
less Winter, and more or less moderate Autumn and Spring: for in places not
remote above 10 degrees from the Equator the Summer continues six Months. Now
the greatness of the Summer, Autumn, Winter, and Spring, is known by the
preceding Proposition.
What has hitherto been said, is only to be understood concerning the
Celestial Seasons, that is, those which depend on a Celestial Cause, or from
the access or recess of the Sun: for from this alone comes not light, heat,
and cold, as we have said in some places before; therefore we shall consider
the other causes in the following Propositions.

Proposition VI. In places of the Tornid Zone, as the Sun by day is very near
the Vertex, so on the contrary by night he is beneath the Horizon, Of the
Motion of the Sun in places of the Torrid, Frigid, and Temperate Zones.
and very much removed from the Vertex of those places, so that those places by
night lie almost in the middle shadow of the Earth, neither can the Air
possibly any ways be warmed by the Suns rays by frequent reflection.
In places of the Frigid Zone, as the Sun by day is not very nigh the Vertex,
so by night he does not profoundly remain beneath the Horizon; but for the
greatest part of the night does so turn round beneath the Horizon, that many
rays from him by reflection do penetrate into the Air.

In places of the Temperate Zone, as the Sun by day comes to the Vertex of
those places by a moderate Vicinity, so by night by an easy distance he is
depressed beneath the Horizon, so that some rays at least are in the Air.

To show this by the Globe, first let the Pole be elevated for some place
situated in the Torrid Zone, or rather let the Pole be placed in the Horizon
it self, that the places of the Equator may be in the Vertex of the Horizon,
or that the wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of the places of the
Equator; then consider the depression of the Parallels, which the Sun
describes by his circumrotation, beneath the Horizon, and the truth of the
member of this Proposition will appear.

Then let the Pole be elevated for the places of the Frigid Zone, or let the
Poles be placed in the Vertex of the Horizon, and the Parallels of the Sun
beneath the Horizon from the first degree of Libra to the first of Aries, being
considered, it will again be manifest that they are very little depressed below
the Horizon. And so we have showed the second member or part of this
Proposition.

Lastly, let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of any place situated in
the Temperate Zone, and the depression of the Parallels beneath the Horizon
again being considered, the third part of this Proposition will be proved.

Proposition VII. A place being given in the Globe, and the day of the year, to
find the Longitude of the Crepusculum or Twilight in the place given at the day
given.
That time is termed the Longitude of the Twilight, in which either before the
rising of the Sun, or after his setting, some light is discovered in the Air.

For the finding the Longitude of the Twilight by the Globe, of any place and
day of the year.
For the finding out of the quantity of this time, we must suppose that which is
observed by Astronomers (as we have said in the nineteenth Chapter) that the
morning twilight begins for the most part, if the Air be serene, the Sun
drawing nigh to the eighteenth degree of depression beneath the Horizon, and
the evening ends when the Sun has come to that degree of depression.

Let therefore the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given, and
let the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, being found from the day of the
year, be sought in the Ecliptic of the Globe, and let his opposite point be
noted; then let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and the point noted be
found to the Horizon; the Index to the twelfth hour of the Cycle; then let the
Globe be turned round until the noted point be elevated 18 degrees above the
Horizon, which is known by the help of the Quadrant; for so shall the place of
the Sun be depressed so many degrees beneath the Horizon; and the Index in the
Cycle shall show how many hours, or parts of an hour, the serenity of the Air
being laid down, the twilight continues that day in the place given. It is
convenient by three examples to learn the use of this Problem, choosing a place
for one of the Torrid Zone, another of the Temperate, and a third of the Frigid
Zone.

Proposition VIII. In places of the Torrid Zone the twilights are small, very
long in those of the Frigid, and moderate in those of the Temperate Zone.
Of the difference of the Twilights in the several Zones.
For in places of the Equator, and those near, the Crepusculum, according to
the Hypothesis laid down in the former Proposition, is of about one hour, which
yet experience testifies is only half an hour, or little more, because the
more thick and gross Air is not so high there, as is required to make the
twilight to the 18 degree of depression; both also because the Hypothesis of
the 18 degree is to be taken concerning very small light, with which the
twilight begins, such as yet is not accounted by the Vulgar for a twilight.

In the Frigid Zone the twilights continue for many days when the Sun remains
beneath their Horizon.

In the Temperate Zone it continues 3, 4, 5 and 6 hours, and in some places
all night; and in the days of the Summer, according as the places are more or
less nigh the Frigid Zone. All these are proved by the Mode proposed in the
precedent Proposition.

Proposition IX. A place being given in the Temperate or Frigid Zone, and
another in the Torrid Zone, and moreover the day of the year being given, to
find out the hour of the place of the Torrid Zone, in which hour the Sun may
have the Altitude above the Horizon of that place (and so strike that place
with his rays equally elevated) as great as it has in the place of the
Temperate Zone in the Meridies it self.
Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place of the Temperate or
Frigid Zone, and let the place of the Sun found from the day given be brought
to the Meridian, and the Altitude of it reckoned, for this is the Altitude of
the rays heating that place, and illustrating it in the Meridies.

Then let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given in the
Torrid Zone; let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and let the degree of
Altitude before found out be noted in it; let the place of the Sun be brought
to the Meridian, the Index to the twelfth hour of the Cycle, then let both the
Globe and the Quadrant be moved till the place of the Sun agree with the noted
degree of the Quadrant: for so the Sun shall have the same Altitude above the
Horizon of this place, as it is in the Meridies of the former. The Index will
show the hour demanded in the Cycle; therefore this hour, and the rays of the
Sun illustrating and beating of the place and Air of the Torrid Zone, are as
equally elevated over the Horizon of it, as the rays in the Meridies of the
former place; it thence follows, that the same heat will be in the Torrid
Zone at the hour found out, as in the place of the Temperate Zone in the
Meridies, except other causes intercede, Some hindrances.
viz. first, that the Sun in the foregoing days has introduced some one or
other calid Constitution to the place, and the Air of the Torrid Zone; and not
such, and so great in the places of the Temperate or Frigid Zone. Then
secondly, that the Sun straightly ascending toward the Meridian above the
Horizon of the places of the Torrid Zone, sends forth all his rays to the
place, as in one plain, and to one plaga, and therefore causes greater heat
than in the Temperate or Frigid Zone, where the Sun moves obliquely from the
Horizon to the Meridian, and sends forth his rays from one and another plaga:
therefore the rays are not contracted into a place so narrow, nor do they
continually heat.

For example, let us seek in what hour of the day in places being under the
very Equator, on the day of the Aequinoctials, the Sun will have that Altitude
as he has at Amstelodame on the Meridies of the same day.

Proposition X. How the causes of light, heat, and of the seasons, which we
have reckoned up in the first Proposition of this Chapter, have themselves in
the Torrid Zone, and how to show them.
Of the seasont, light, and heat in the Torrid Zone, and how they are showed.
First, every day of the year ascends directly above the Horizon of those
places (especially of the Equator) toward the Meridian and the Vertex of
them; and therefore about the ninth hour of Forenoon, he heginneth to ejaculate
to those places rays about 40 degrees declining from the perpendicular rays,
which rectitude of the rays, or perpendicular of the rays, augmenteth toward
the Meridies, and again decreasing, continues to the fourth hour after the
Meridies or Noonstead, where the Sun departing toward the Occidental Horizon,
begins to send forth his rays more obliquely to those places; therefore the
greatest heat in those places ought to be from about the ninth hour before
Noon, even to the third or fourth after Noon, if that this cause be only
regarded: but yet because the Sun now departs from the Vertex of those places,
and sometimes approaches nearer, therefore the Winter of every one of those
places shall be, when the Sun goes from the points of the Ecliptic much
remote from those places; that is, from the first degree of Cancer or
Capricorn, toward the points having a middle distance from the place assumed;
the Spring when he goes from a point of moderate distance toward the very
Vertex of the Pole, or to the point of the Ecliptic, which is Vertical to the
place, or to the Parallel of the place: the Summer, where the Sun goes from
this other point of middle distance to a point of greatest distance, that is
the first degree of Capricorn or Cancer.

2. In the places of the Equator it self, the Sun no day of the year remains
above the Horizon more or less hours than twelve, and so many beneath the
Horizon. In other places of the Torrid Zone one hour, or an hour and an half at
the most ( viz. in the extreme places of this Zone about the Tropicks of Cancer
and Capricorn) when the day is at the longest, the Sun remains above the
Horizon twelve hours, and in the shortest day about eleven hours, and in the
intermedial days that time of the stay of the Sum above and beneath the Horizon
does not much differ from twelve hours. And therefore this is the cause that
the nights are not without cold, and the heat of the day continues not long
about the eveningtide.

3. In the night time the Sun is profoundly depressed beneath the Horizon, for
that he illustrateth the Air with none of his rays, nay not reflex. This is
the cause that most dark nights are there, and the cold of the night is
augmented, the Air is condensed, and contracteth it self, and being cold, it
descends toward the earth by its own ponderosity. Moreover, in a very short
time (about the space of half an hour) before the rising of the Sun, and after
his setting, those places have the light and heat of the Twilight.

4 The Moon almost after the same manner as the Sun ascends directly from the
Horizon toward the Meridian of those places, yet a little more obliquely,
because it departs from the Ecliptic, and therefore toward the Torrid Zone
about five degrees; and it remains after the same manner as the Sun a little
above twelve hours above the Horizon; and is depressed beneath it almost so
many hours, and that profoundly, as we have spoken of the Sun. Therefore with
her direct rays, or those near to the perpendicular, she will augment the
warmness of the night, especially when she is Vertical to any place, and
diminish it by her recess: but by reason of her short stay above the Horizon,
the effect of it is little discerned in any place, except when it is Vertical
to it.

5. All the Stars arise, and set in places nigh the Equator (but those Stars
which are near the Pole in places more remote from the Equator do not arise,
and those are but very few) and therefore they can cause little heat and light;
and that also insensible in the Air.

6. In many places of the Torrid Zone, as in India and its Isles, in the Tongue
of Africa, and in Mexico the earth is Sulphurous, which sends forth more
calid vapors, whence it communicates a certain heat to the Air, and a
peculiar property. In some places it is sandy, as in the North part of Africa,
lying in the Torrid Zone, in part of Lybia, and the Land of the Negroes, in
many places of Arabia, in Peru, and in the places between Peru and Brazilia:
whence in these places a very great heat is raised by the Sun; because the
particles of the Sand do very long retain the heat received from the Sun, and
soon communicate the same to the vicine Air.

In other places the Rivers are many, and in those Sandy ones few; there are
many in Abyssine, in Guiney, Congo, India, and in Brazilia; hence humid vapors
are raised, which do very much blunt the force of the Suns rays, and render
his heat more tolerable.

7. The most places of the Torrid Zone have the Sea adjacent; as India and its
Isles, the Tongue of Africa, Guiney, Brazilia, Peru, Mexico; some places of the
Torrid Zone are Mediterranean, as the more inward Africa, the Regions between
Peru and Brazilia; whence it comes to pass, that in those places the heat and
drought is greater: and in some, or most of them, the Air is more moist, and
less fervent then can be caused by the Sun, except other causes happen.

8. Most of the Regions of the Torrid Zone, seeing that they are almost
encompassed by the Sea, have in the middle places more or lesser ridges of
exceeding high Mountains, as India and its Isles, the Tongue of Africa and
Peru. These rows of Mountains do very much vary the light, heat, and rays of
those places: somewhere they hinder the Oriental rays of the Sun, otherwhere
the Occidental. Moreover, the humid vapors condensed in the Air are moved to
the Vertices of these Mountains, as we have showed in the twentieth Chapter,
whence rains and clouds proceed, by which the heat and light of the Sun is very
much obstructed, and the Celestial cause of the Seasons is disturbed. There are
few of the places of the Torrid Zone which want those ridges, as the inward
Africa, Mexico, and the like.

9. The effects of the Winds in the Torrid Zone are various and notable; for a
general wind blowing from the side Plagas of the East, or from the East
continually toward the West, refrigerateth the Maritim places which regard the
East, as Brazilia, the Oriental Coast of Africa; but not so to those toward
the West; as Guiney, Congo, Angola, and the Coasts of Peru. Some winds are
appropriated, as the South in Peru; which winds dispel vapors toward the
Plaga in which they blow. Some are fixed winds, of which we have largely
treated in the one and twentieth Chapter. Now these winds do very much disturb
the Celestial cause of the Seasons, for they are almost as equally constant,
and observe order, as the motions of the Heaven it self. They bring down the
Air, compel the vapors toward the tops of the Mountains, and by other Modes
alter the Seasons. Ten Anniversary rains are in many places of the Torrid Zone,
and take away the Celestial cause, seeing that they are as equally constant as
the motion of the Sun it self. For those err, who suppose that this our
Sublunary Orb observes all with inconstancy, and without order, and that the
Celestial only have a constant motion.

Seeing that the causes hitherto spoken of are so various, to be able to cause
the heat, and the properties of the Seasons; and in one place some are from
other causes; in another, others are of force, or concur in diverse Seasons of
the year, or mutually impede one another; hence we discover, why the cause and
condition of the Seasons of the Torrid Zone is so various.

Proposition XI. How the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter (Terrestrial) do
behave themselves, and in what Months of the year they commence in the diverse
places of the Torrid Zone.
Of the beginning of the Seasons in places in the Torrid Zone
We have said before, and especially in the second Proposition, that the Seasons
in many places of the Torrid Zone are contrary to the motion of the Sun, viz.
that it is Summer there when the Sun is most distant, and Winter when he is
nearest, yea vertical to the Vertex. Therefore we have distinguished the
Seasons into Celestial and Terrestrial. We have showed heretofore, and that in
the third and fourth Proposition, how any place being given in that Torrid
Zone, the Months of the year are to be found, in which the place ought to have
Summer, Spring, Autumn, and Winter, if we have regard to the access and recess
of the Sun; that is, we have taught to design the times of the Celestial
Seasons. But seeing that in many places of this Zone the forementioned Seasons
do not happen in those Months, but in others, and that in diverse places in a
different time; therefore the times of the Terrestrial seasons must be taken,
not from the Heaven, or a certain method, but from the experience made in those
places, and as much as possible, the cause of every one of them, why they
repugn the Celestial cause, must be explicated; viz. from those 10 causes,
which we have laid down in the first Proposition (...) this therefore ought
first to be known, that the Winter in the Torrid Zone does rage with cold and
frost, but rather with raines, and is to be defined by a lesser heat then that
in the time of the Summer. Farther in many places of the Torrid Zone, they
reckon not four but two seasons of the year viz. Summer and Winter, and these
are not distinguished by heat and cold, but chiefly by siccity and humidiy; for
in the Winter they have often greater heat than in their Summer; with a
shortness of respiration, because the rain and the Clouds press the Calid Air
downwards. But the Spring and Autumn are not to be found by so manifest signs,
or differences.

We shall begin our Narration from that part of Africa, which lies under the
Torrid Zone, and proceeding toward the East, with Brazilia, we shall finish
the whole Torrid Zone, seated in the West measured by us.

The Regions of the Occidental shore of Africa from the Tropic of Cancer to
Cape verd, (that is distant 14 degrees from the Equator toward the North) are
all abounding both with Corn, and variety of Fruit; there are also herds of
Cattle, and flocks of Sheep in great abundance: The Inhabitants are of a great
strength, the heat of the Air a little exceeds Mediocrity, so that the
Inhabitants go naked, except the Noble, and those that are rich, whose clothing
is a Linen Cloth. The cause of this fertility and temperate Air contrary to
the custom of the Torrid Zone, is, First, many Rivers, of which the chief are
Senega, and Gambea; before they discharge themselves into the neighboring Sea,
they water those Regions, and render the Air more humid and frigid. Secondly,
the vicinity of the Sea, which affords humid vapors, and somewhat cold
Winds. How the Seasons of the year have themselves in this place, and what
months of the year Summer and Winter happen, and are vigorous, I have not found
noted by Writers, which is to be imputed to their negligence, and sloth. Yet in
one Itinerary, I have read, that in one of the Islands which lie not far from
the Promontary of Cape verd (by name Salinae or the Hesperides) in one of them,
I say, called St. Vincents (the Latitude is 16 degrees) the watery months, that
is Winter, are August, September, November, December, January, even to
February. This time almost agrees with the Celestial cause, for in the months
of May, June and July; because the Sun is very near, or else vertical to that
place; therefore it makes the Celestial Summer, and here the Terrestrial
agrees with it, for then they have a greater heat, and dry Air without Rain.
In the months of February, March and April, is their Spring, be-because the Sun
is moved from a moderate distance to a lesser, therefore they are then without
rains, and have a moderate heat. The months of August, September and October,
are to be ascribed to Autumn, by reason of the rains, although it ought to
begin latter, because the Sun in August, has not yet returned from his least
distance to his mean. Lastly, the months November, December and January, are
Winter, because the Sun has then the greatest distance from their Vertex, and
then they find more and longer continuing rains, with some cold; but this is
not to be observed every year, though most years: But how the seasons are in
the Continent of Africa is not related, except that concerning the shore of
Sierra Leon, it is contrary, as we shall now speak.

2. Now succed the Regions of the Coast of Africa which look toward the South,
and extend themselves from the Promontory of Cape Verd, to the curvature or
bending part of Africa, that is from the West to East. These Regions are termed
by one name Guiny, although others attribute this term only to one part: Now
they lie in the Torrid Northern Zone 3.4. and more degrees from the Equator.
In these Regions there is a continual heat of the Air without any intervening
Cold, yet they attribute some months to the Summer, and some to the Winter. I
think the same must be understood of the former Western Coast; for in the
Regions of the Shore called Sierra Leon, which is removed above 9 degrees from
the Equator toward the North, as also in many Tracts of Guiny, they ascribe
the months March, April, May, June and July to Winter, especially the three
first, by reason that on these months there fall frequent and almost continual
rains, hot or warm, great Thunders and Lightnings, and so great Storms rage
without violent Winds, that none can easily conceive them, See Chap. 21.
who has not had experience of them. How they rage I have already spoken, also
in these months the Fields lie Barren, but when these Stormy months are
expired, then they dig up the dry Earth (which has sucked up the great Rains
in the said wet months) and mix stamped and bruised Coals (instead of manuring)
and so for the space of 10 days suffer the Earth to putrify, and then they sow
their Seed. There is here so great an heat of the Air, joined with humidity by
reason of the propinquity of the Sea, that the Fish which are taken, stink, if
kept undressed half a day. Therefore in these places, the Winter shall be in
April, May and June, when the Storms and Rains rage. The Spring in July,
August, and September; the Summer in October, November, and December; and the
Autumn in January, February, and March, where the Rains and Storms do begin.

Now all these times of the Seasons in those places are contrary to the
Celestial cause, or motion of the Sun, for in the months of May, June and July,
great heat ought to be there, because then the Sun is then vertical, or near
the Vertex, which the heat or warmness of the Rain also testifyeth:
contrariwise in the months of October, November, and December, it should be
Winter, because that the Sun being about the beginning and Tropic of
Capricorn, is most remote from the Vertex of those places. Here therefore the
time of the Terrestrial season do much differ from the Celestial seasons. The
cause therefore of these Rains, Storms, and Thunders, at that time in those
places, when the Sun is so near, is not easy to be explicated. But it seems to
be, that the Sun in the day time forces up many Vapors from the Sea, and
Sulphurous exhalations from the Land of Guiny, which vapors being condensed
by the cool of the Night, cause the Rains; especially when no continual wind
blows in these places, which may discuss the Vapors. But for the most part
here is a calm, some Storms excepted. And these months of Rain which they
attribute to Winter are not cold but hot, because no wind blows, and the Sun
is Vertical; yea the heat is Suffocative, which is the cause, of shortness of
respiration to the Inhabitants.

And although the Fields be Barren of Grain in these Watery months, yet the
Trees and Bushes are in their Verdure all the year, and bear Fruit.

The Day is here equal to the Night almost throughout the whole year, the Sun
in the East, rising at six in the Morning, and sets in the West at six in the
Evening: but the Easterly or Westerly Sun is seldom conspicuous there, because
for the most part he arises involved with Clouds for half an hour, and half an
hour before he sets, he is again inveloped with Clouds.

That also deserves consideration, why in the Months of July and August the
same Rains and Storms rage not there, seeing that the Sun is then as equally
nigh to those places as in the months of May and June. Moreover why in the
Islands of the Hesperides, which are not so far removed from Sierra, Leon, and
Guiny, the VVinter falls out in contrary months.

3. How the times of the seasons are in the Interior, or Mediterranean part of
Africa, which is included in the Arch of the Tropic of Cancer, the Regions of
the Occidental Shore, and Guiny, or the Land of the Negros, concerning which I
have found nothing as yet noted, but that all those places are almost Steril,
except those adjacent to the River Niger: for that River every year in the
months of June, July and August, overfloweth, and communicates much fertility
to those Lands; and moreover forms many Lakes. The other places confining on
Lybia are infested with violent heat, being for the most part Sandy. The Watery
Months do not seem to bear sway here after the same mode, as in Guiny.

4. Now follow the Regions of the Coast of the Tongue of Africa, which is
stretched from the North toward the South, and regards the West. The Regions
are Manicongo, Angola, and the like, from the second degree of Nothern
Latitude, even to the Tropic, South of Capricorn, beyond the Equator. Now the
Kingdom of Congo begins from the second degree of South Latitude. The Winter
in these places is like the constitution of the Vernal season in the Territory
of Rome in Italy; the heat temperate, so that they alter their Garments in no
time of the year. Neither are the tops of the adjacent Mountains infested with
cold. Here almost with our Spring, the Watery Winter begins and continues
April, May, June, July, August and good part of September. At that time the
Summer begins, which possesses the other Months, even to the 10 of March;
even in this Summer they have no rains, or at least very little, and seldom
have a continual serenity. But in the Watery Months the Sun is scarce to be
seen on any day, perpetual Clouds and rain so obstructing the Air, also
frequent Travados or Storms. It does not rain whole days, but for the most part
hours before, and two hours after noon, great drops fall, which are soon
received by the droughty Earth. Therefore although the Inhabitants divide the
year only into two parts, it may be distributed into four; (our common people
also do usually divide the year into Summer and Winter because the Spring is
comprised in the Summer, and the Autumn in the Winter.)

These times of the Terrestrial seasons in these places almost agree with the
Celestial course, for from the 25 of March, April, May, June, July, August, to
the 25 of September, the Sun departs from those places to the Tropic of
Cancer, where he is most remote from them, the 21 of June, and the rest of the
time he approaches again to them: so that on the 30 of September he becomes
vertical to them, and goes to a moderate distance toward the Tropic of
Capricorn, and returns from thence in the months of October, November,
December, January, and February; so that in March he again becomes vertical,
therefore in those Months they have a Summer by reason of the vicinity of the
Sun, whose effects are not here hindered by a Terestrial cause. And then again
in the Months from the 10th of March, to the 10th of September, they have
Winter, because then the Sun is more removed from them: but the times of the
Spring, Autumn, Summer, and Winter which we have assigned, do not well agree
with the Celestial course, and I doubt whether the Summer and VVinter may be
distinguished into the Spring and Autumn in those places.

Therefore here a more easy cause may be rendered, why in those Months from the
10 of March, to the 10 of September they should have a quotidian Rain, and some
kind of VVinter, viz. because the Sun departs from their vertex toward the
place of the greatest distance: but this cause is not only sufficient, because
it is not able of its self to produce such an effect, but another must be
added: The tops of the Mountains, which lie not far from these Maritime places
toward the east, are discerned in those watery Months to be continually
covered with Snow, The Wind is the North-west; Wind.
and this is caused by reason of the fixed wind which in these Months there
blows; therefore the Sun elevateth the Vapors very much from the Sea. And
this fixed Wind forces them toward the tops of the Mountains where they are
condensed, and then turn to Rain; and from the Rain which falls from the
Mountains springs the inundation of the Nile, and other Rivers of Africa.

Moreover we must know that in these watery Months the Rivers of Congo overflow
the adjacent Fields, which causes great Fertility in them, and also disgorgeth
great quantities of water into the Sea.

5. In the Maritime Region Lowango, adjacent to Congo, there are also observed
to be Rainy Months, and other Months of Summer that are serene; but that which
is to be admired is that they are not the same with those, in which we said the
Rain does wax vigorous in the Months of January, February, March, and April,
when yet it is Summer and a serene Air in January and February in Congo. Here
therefore the Terrestrial Season is repugnant to the Celestial, because that in
January and February the Sun is not most remote from those places, and
therefore they should not have Rain, but rather Siccity. Without doubt the
cause is either from another situation of the Mountains, another fixed Wind,
or the like.

6. The Island of St. Thomas, See the Description of St. Thomas.
and Anobon are very abundant in Sugar, Grain, Fruits, and Meats, and great
plenty of Oranges, etc.

7. How the Seasons are in the other Regions of the Occidental Coasts of Africa
from Lowango to the Tropic of Capricorn, I have not yet found to be observed
by any one.

8. Therefore that shore being left, and the Promontory of Good-hope being
sailed about, we return to the Tropic of Capricorn, where the Oriental Coast
of the Promontory or Tongue of Africa is discovered, in which lies Zofala,
Mozambique, Quiloa, even to the Equator, which are illustrated by the Oriental
Sun. In these places the Winter is in the Months of September, November,
December and January; in the rest Siccity and Summer, which time is contrary to
that, in which in Congo we have said that they have the Rain in Winter, and yet
these Regions lie from the Equator, but the ridge of Mountains which doubly
divide this Prominent Tongue of Africa into the Eastern and Western Land,
questionless are the cause of this diversity. The Land of these Regions are
only of a moderate Fertility, in many places Sandy, Barren, and scorched with
the chalure of the Sun; but the Rivers, the adjacent Sea, and general Easternly
Wind much allay the heat.

9. The other Regions of the Oriental Coasts of Africa lying from the Equator
toward the North, at the mouth of the Arabian Gulf, and hence to the Shore of
the said Gulf, even to the Tropic of Cancer; these Regions I say what seasons
they have, and in what times of the year, I have not yet found observed by any,
but that some write, that this tract is barren, sandy, oppressed with such a
violent heat, and destitute of Rivers.

10. As to the seasons in the Mediteranean part of Africa, which is the Region
of the Abyssines, which is cut almost in the middle by the Equator, so that it
has some Provinces in the Southern Torrid Zone, and very many in the Northern
Torrid Zone.

11. Now leaving Africa, we enter the Regions of Asia lying under the Torrid
Zone, where first we meet with the Regions of Arabia adjacent to the Red Sea,
from Mecca to Aden (12 degrees from the Equator toward the North) which
regard the West; The Merchants at Aden negoriate their affairs in the Night
season by reason of heat in the day.
on the East they have the Arabian Mountains. These Regions are exceedingly
infested with heat in March and April, and more in the following Months, whilst
the Sun approaches to their Vertex and about it, it remains May, June, July,
and August; the chalure is so great, that the Inhabitants, especially the
better sort, cause water to be poured on their Bodies all the day long, or else
lie in Vessels of Water to refresh them. I suppose the cause to be the defect
of watery Vapors, because on the Oriental part the Region is Rocky, and has
but few Rivers; now the Oriental wind, which is general, although it be not
there perceived, repelleth the Vapors rising from the Red, Sea: Likewise the
abundance of Sand which retains the heat received in the night, and
communicates it to the Air. Therefore this time of the Summer and Winter
agrees with the Celestial Course.

12. The same is the case of all Arabia, and its Eastern Coast.

13. In Camboja in India, lying under the Tropic of Cancer, as also in the
Regions of Malabar, or the Eastern Coast of the Indies which regard the West,
and extend themselves from the North toward the South to the eighth degree of
North Latitude; I say these Regions the Winter or rainy Seasons possess the
Months of June, July, August and September, but especially from the middle of
June to the middle of September. Neither in all these places does it rain in an
equal time, but more continually in the province of Goana and Cocina; and less
in Camboja where it only raineth three Months, in the other eight months it
seldom raineth in Camboja, but in Goa in the Months of April and May it
raineth, but less vehement, and beginning with Thunder and Storms; so that to
Autumn here, may be ascribed half the Month of March, also April, and May to
the 15th of June, then from the 15th of June, July and August to Winter,
likewise from the 15th of September to December the Spring; the other Months
from the 15th of December to the 15th of March to Summer, The Winter is not so
called from the cold (as with us) but from the Rains which then fall.
for in these Months is great drought, because that the Water of the former
Rains is extracted by the Sun from the Earth. Yet the Inhabitants do not number
four Seasons, but only two, Summer and Winter, or rather a dry, and a rainy
Season.

Besides these Raines, there are frequent Storms on the Coast, and also
Thunders in those rainy Months; so that the Sea is supposed to be then shut up,
and many Rivers then overflow; the Sea is open again in the Month of September,
and then Ships put forth to Sea from the Coast of Malabar into various parts of
the world. Neither are there any violent rains in these places in the Fields,
except some Storms, by reason that it cease for many hours of the day,
therefore it affords the Inhabitants a time of Planting, and Sowing, which
they do in these watery Months. The Air also is of a moderate heat at that time
because the Sun is obstructed with Clouds, so that the remote Inhabitants
expatiate from the Shore to the Hills and Fields for recreation, where the
inundation is not great, and incredible fertility is acquired to the Earth by
this Rain. But if these Raines fall not on the year, (as in Anno 1630.) which
seldom happens, then all hope of Sowing and consequently Harvest is taken away;
thence comes Scarcity of Corn, a hot Sultery Air, burning Feavours,
Pestilences, and Deaths of Thousands of People. In the said year 1630, A great
Famine in Camboja in 1630.
and the year following Man's Flesh was publicly sold in the Shambles in
Camboja: Sometimes the Shores do so rage, that the Houses (which are but
slightly built) fall by the inundation of the River.

They Sow in May, and the beginning of June, and Reap in November and December:
it is otherwise in Guiny.

This Summer, and this Winter is contrary to the Celestial Course or Motion of
the Sun, for in the Months of July and August the Sun is vertical to those
places, or very near the Vertex, therefore they must have heat and drought;
this is the great felicity of those places, for if these Rains fall not, and
the Clouds obscured not the Sun, that great heat of the Sun would render the
ground Sandy, and Steril, as Lybia, and Arabia, where these Rains are not, the
Sun being near the Vertex. Contrary wise in the Months of December, January and
February, they should have Winter, or lesser heat, because that then the Sun is
most remote from them; and then they have Summer: Yet in the night the Air is
cold enough: moreover a continual Wind from the 12th hour of the day to the
12th hour of the night blows from the Sea, which is very acceptable.

14. In the Coast of the East Indies which is called Choromandel, the seasons
also differ from the Heavens; for in the Months of March, April, May and June,
the Sun causes vehement heat, and there is no rain. Now the People which for
the most part are Saracens, divide the year into the hot, the wet, and the Cold
seasons; the hot or Summer, as I have said, is in the months of March, April,
May, and June, but the intolerable heat is from the middle of May, to the
middle of June, the Wind blowing from the North, unto which if you turn your
face, you shall discover so great a heat of the Air, as if you drew nigh an
Oven; for the Sun then in that Plaga, is in the Meridies: also the Wood and
Stones contract a great heat, yet the Waters in the Wells is so cold, that many
drinking thereof for extreme heat, dye.

The greatest heat of the day is between Nine in the Forenoon, and Three in the
Afternoon; in these intermedial hours they rest from traveling: the other
hours before Nine in the Morning, and Three in the Afternoon, the Air is at
least tolerably temperate, serene, and acceptable, the Heaven delightful, and
traveling pleasant.

The Wet season takes up four months, July, August, September, and October.

The Cold season, November, December, January, and February: in December, and
January the Cold is sensible enough, especially in the night.

Here are many things which deserve our enquiry, for in the months of March,
April, May and June, the Sun comes to those places of the Coast of
Choromandel, and becomes Vertical to them; therefore it is no wonder if they
have great heat; but why have they not the same heat in July and August, feeing
he is equally as near them in those months, and by reason of the former heat it
should be more hot? Moreover why do the seasons of the Coast of Choromandel
differ from the seasons of the Coast of Malabar, seeing that they both lie in
the same Climate, and have the Sun Vertical on the same days, and on the same
remote? And that which is more to be wondered at, there interceedeth between
these two Regions, in some places 70, in others only 20 miles interval; so that
you may come into a place of a serene and servid Air, where the Winter
predominateth, and that in the space of one day. Masseus thus speaks of these
places, In these Regions says he amongst other admirable things, that above
others exceeds the reach of all Philosophers, that in the same Plaga of the
Heavens, in the equal access and recess of the Sun in the same months of the
year, from the Sun rising beyond the Mountain of Gatis, (which by a direct
excursion to the Promontory of Cori intersects the whole Region of Malabar)
there is Summer and drought, and from the West on this side Gatis there are
Rains and Winter; that in so near a propinquity of places, in respect of the
course of the seasons, the same People almost seem Antipodes one to another.
But not only in these, but also in others we have showed this diversity to be
found, and shall show more anon. The cause is the situation of the Mountains,
which determinate the Land of Choromandel from Malabar, proceeding from the
North toward the South. To this must be added diverse Winds, for on the Coast
of Choromandel a general Eastern Wind is more discovered, (except in the Summer
months of May and June,) which drives the vapors toward the tops of the
Mountains, whence it raineth in the Land of Malabar. These Mountains tops are
discovered to be continually covered with Clouds in the Pluvial months, also
more vehement Showrs in those, where the rain is in Malabar: But when it
raineth in the Region of Choromandel, then is there a serenity in the tops of
the Mountains, as in the Land of Malabar (except the months July and August,)
for in these it raineth in both Lands.

15. In the Regions of the Gangick Sea, opposite to the Coast of Chroromandel,
and in the Northern Torrid Zone, as Sian, Peru, the Chersonesus of Malacca, the
Pluvial months, in which the Rivers overslow, are September, October and
November. But in the Land of Malacca it raineth every week of the year twice,
or thrice, except the months of January; February and March, in which there is
a continual drought. All these are contrary to the Celestial course, and their
causes must be sought from the Mountains, Winds, the propinquity of the Sea,
and the like: But because as yet we have no accurate observations concerning
these Regions, we will not search them here. The chief cause of the Fertility
of these Regions, is the overflowing of the Rivers. The vapors of the adjacent
Sea, the Rivers, and the Winds do much allay the heat, whence the Inhabitants
have great plenty of Fruits. In the Kingdom of Patana, and those bordering on
it, the Summer begins in February, and continues to the end of October; in
which time, there is a continual heat, which is allayd with a continual
Oriental Wind, the Air wholesome. In November, December and January, there are
continual Rains, which yet do not hinder a new increase every month at the
least. The same must be understoood of Camboja. And this Winter agrees with
the Celestial course.

16. Leaving Asia, the Pacifick Sea being Sailed over, we enter that part of
America which lies under the Torrid Zone, which is twofold, South and North:
the South again is twofold, Peru and Brazilia; although the parts of Peru be
vicine, yet they have contrary Seasons in one and the same time; for the Region
of Peru is divided into three parts, the Shore. or Maritim part, the
Mountainous and the Plain part which he in the same Climate. In the Mountainous
places; they have a Plavial Winter from the month of October, to the end of
March, when they should have Summer by the vicinity of the Sun. They have
Summer from the entrance of April to October, in which months no Rains do fall;
but in the Winter months there are continual Rains. Therefore the Terrestrial
seasons differ here from the Celestial. In Maritim Peru there is almost no
Winter in the whole year; but they account their Winter from the month of April
to October, (which agrees with the Celestial cause, because the Sun is then
removed from them to the Tropic of Cancer, and thence returns) by reason
that in those months it Raineth not, but almost every day the Clouds appear so
thick as if it would immediately Rain, but there falls only a certain kind of
Dew, and that especially in the months of June, July and August: Yet this mist
is not unwholsom, but being condenfed into Dew, and falling, it irrigateth the
Valleys. It does not Rain at this time in the Mountainous places, but is a
serene season. This Maritim Peru is distinguished into Valleys, and Sandy
places: the Valleys are abundantly fertile; the Sandy places which are between
every Valley are steril, also in the adjacent Islands it never raineth but a
Dew only falls.

In the Isle of Gorgon, which is removed three degrees from the Equator
toward the South, it raineth for Eight months almost continually, with so
great Thunder and Storms not to be paralleled. In May, June, July, and August,
it is Summer, and dry, contrary to the Celestial course. In some parts of this
Torrid Zone it is very cold, for in the Province of Pastoa, in the Valley
Airssina both in Summer and Winter the season is very cold, so that the fruit
increases not. In the Region of Cusco, which lies almost in the middle between
the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Equator, hard Frosts and Snows are also
found.

From whence it is collected, that Peru is parched with no violent heat, but
rather enjoys a temperate Air throughout the whole year; excepting its Sandy
places and Hills, but the Valleys are most fertile and pleasant, abounding with
Trees and Fruits. Their Water they receive in the Winter from the Dew which I
have said falls every day; but in the Summer from the Floods which descend
and rush from the Mountains, because in the Mountainous Region it is then
Winter, and raineth. And from these Torrents the Inhabitants conduct the Water
by certain convoyances into the Valleys; yet some Valleys are content only with
the Dew, and yet produce abundance of Fruit.

The cause of this diversity between the seasons of the Mountainous and the
plain Peru, and why it never raineth in the level Peru, is difficult to
declare; for these Mountainous parts are so near to the level Maritim Peru,
that any one in the morning descending from these pluvial and raging showers,
in the evening may arrive at the level Peruvia where there is no rain but a
serene Air. The cause seems to be twofold. First, those tops of the
Mountains. And Secondly, a South-West Wind which is proper and perpetual to
Peru. Therefore this Wind forces the Vapors toward the Mountains, where they
are as it were conderised, so that the Clouds may not destil their drops in the
level Peru; but in the Mountainous places they are attracted after the mode
which we have explained concerning Mountains.

Therefore Peru has this in common with Egypt, and some other places, that
the South Winds are not the cause of Rain and warmth, but rather a clearing the
Air; although it may seem to have place in all the places lying toward the
South from the Equator.

17. The South part of America, viz. Brazilia. is very pleasant, and excels
with an wholesome disposition of the Air; so that it gives place unto no Region
of the Earth. Concerning its seasons, the Inhabited front of it receives the
Subsolan Wind, which refreshes Men and Beasts, and freeth them from the
intolerable heat of the Vertical Sun; which if it approach the Sea, is
discovered in the morning; if it depats from thence, it is discerned more after
the Spring of the morning, See Piso in his Book De medicina Braziliensi
concerning the seasons.
neither does it languish about the evening. It is wont do do so in many parts
of India; but it is so intense by the assistance of the Sun, that it is
vigorous beyond midnight, and the Nocturnal Condensation of the Air cannot
easily dull or overcome that dilation and natural motion of the Air.

But the other part (which is separated from Peru by high ridges of Mountains,
and vast spaces) although it be infested with an unwholsom West Wind, and a
Mediterranean Gale, at midnight, yet it is every where encompassed with
Mountains near the Sea, and is so driven from the Matutine Gale that it can
hardly penetrate to the Shores.

As in these most delectable and constant seasons of the year, there are no
great mutations, so they happen in the day and night seasons more evidently;
because the days and nights are not more equal in space, than different in heat
and cold: for the Sun ascending higher, after it has opened the pores of the
Earth and Men; it hides it self more profoundly, and that by an equal
interval, whence the greater condensation of the Air, effects the more extreme
rorifluous part of the night. Hence a penetrating cold, from the third hour of
the night, even to the rising of the Sun, strikes the body, so that that this
is wont to be very noxious to those that are new comers into the Land: which he
that shunneth not, will hardly lead a good life in these, or other parts of the
Indies. The Brazilians therefore very cautiously keep a continual fire in their
habitations, and near their resting places: by the benefit of which they may be
able to endure cold, and drive away venomous Infects.

Moreover the direct ascent and descent of the Sun, causes the shortest
Crepusculas, and makes the nights so even to the days, that an hours
difference can hardly be found.

The cold is more in the Summer nights than in the Winter, which is to be
admired at; and it is more mildly discovered in the latter than in the former,
the Air being tranquillous. The beginning of the Wet season is in the month of
March, or April, and is finished in August; in which the Sun returning from
Cancer, in part dissolveth the matter of the Rain into winds, whence
immediately proceed storms and tempests; which by and by the Spring Season
calmly composeth. The Inhabitants of the Tropicks know no mutation about the
seasons of the year; the Sun twice coming toward, and departing back, as many
supposed; but only going away from the Equator to the Tropic of Cancer or
Capricorn.

There are only two times of the year, whereof one is dry and hot, called
Summer; the other hot and moist like to Summer with us in Europe, which
supplyeth the place of Winter. And this is found most true in all the Indies,
between both Tropicks. For although the beginning and end of the Winter and
Summer seasons, by reason of the particular incidences of the place, and also
for the greater or lesser vicinity of the Equator, do not happen in the same;
yet for the most part the year is accomplished in about six months, inclining
to Humidity, and six to Siccity: and on that account, as in the places of many
Cities of Asia and Africa of the same Latitude with us, there is thence a
great remission of the heat; our here is little perceived, although the Sun
passes the Zenith of the Brazilians in the months of October and February, and
strikes the Earth with reflex rays, at most acute Angles. Which diversity of
these Regions, promises the Inhabitants perpetual health, by reason of the
often calms, and the Air quelling all noxious heats.

Hence it is easy to dollect, that the seasons of the year do not so much
depend immediately on the Sun and his motion, as on the species of the Winds,
the diversity of aspects of the Stars, the quality and peculiar situation of
the Region

Moreover in these Mediterranean Regions toward the West the nights are more
cold, than in the Maritim, so much some times that the Frost seizes on the
very hairs of the Peoples. In the same months from the East about the Ocean is
Summer and Siccity; No Islands are opposite to Brazilia.
from the West beyond the ridges of the Mountains, and the Marshes of Brazilia,
is the Winter, Fogs and Rain.

Oftentimes the Heavens may be seen covered with vast Clouds, from the East
toward the West; but those again very thin, except in the days of the Rain,
the Sun both rising and setting may be beheld with fixed eyes; for there is a
wonderful serenity on every side, especially toward the evening; which never
afordeth any Vapors or Clouds to the succeeding Moon, but renders the night so
clear, that the old and new Moon may be seen in one and the same day; and
letters may be well read it the quarter Moon.

The Ether in respect of the diversity of the Planets, other inseriour causes
acceding, receives its distemperature; for the Heaven about evening is bright
with Lightning without Thunder in the most dry and serene season.

The drops of Rain are very great, and fall with great violence, which is wont
to be preceeded by a suffocative warmness.

The Dew here is more fruitful than that of Europe, being impregnated with much
Winter, and therefore is more penetrating and thin, especially in Summer; which
is manifest in all Metals, and in Iron especially, which it easily eats up
without the assistance of any Clouds,

The Meadows and open Fields do less wax green in the Summer, but more
especially in the Pluvial months, (although the Earth then seemed somewhat more
sad to the Inhabitants) and the places unfit for Tillage afford Pasture See
Piso.


All the Lands of Brazilia arise into moderate and pleasant Hills; there are no
Mountains of any great hight in the Coasts: but yet some are discovered afar
off in the Solitudes, among the barren hills, yet not every where, but with
some intervals of Miles the Valleys are interposed, every one irrigated with
some small Rivers, and for that reason are not only fertile in the pluvial
months, but also in those of the Summer. The Hills in the Summer months are
steril by reason of the heat of the Sun; so that they wither, and Grass does
not only die on them, but sometimes the Trees also. It very seldom raineth
throughout the whole day and night; and for some continual days very seldom
without intermission: the Pluvial months do a little differ. In the year 1640.
(as Mariners have observed) there were 7 Pluvial months, viz February, March;
April, May, June, July and August. But most, and almost continually from April,
May and June. In the year 1642. the most Pluvial months six, viz. March, April,
May, June, July and August. But the account of the other years was not much
different. Now these observations are to be taken only for one place, and not
for all the places in Brazilia.

Hence it is manifest that the Summer and Winter of Brazilia, answers to the
Celestial account, seeing that in the greatest distance of the Sun they have
Rain; and in the least and moderate toward the South, they have heat: Yet
there are not a few irregularities, the cause of which are to be sought from
the situation of the Winds and Earth.

The six rainy months are May, June, July, August, September, and October.
18. This is enough for the Southern America; in the Northern it is otherwise.
For in the Province of Nicaragua it raineth for six months; and the other six
months it is Summer, and dry weather; so that passengers may travel in the
night. This now is contrary to the Celestial course, for in the wet months; for
in May, June, and so on to November, the Sun is vertical, or near the Vertex
unto these places: so that then they should have Summer and Siccity and not
Rain. In November and December it is very distant, therefore they should there
have Rain.

Thus have we declared the Seasons of the chief places of the whole Torrid
Zone, from which being compared one with another we collect. 1. That in some
places, the cold is scarce sensible in some part of the year; and therefore the
Winter is rather to be defined by the Rains, than by cold in those places. 2.
In some places the cold is sufficiently sensible. 3. In the night time,
especially in the last quarter, the Air is discovered to be very cold, by
reason of the depression of the Sun beneath the Horizon. 4. That it is not the
least cause of the tolerable heat, and that those Regions are inhabited, viz.
that no days are there long, but almost equal to the night; for if the days
were as long there, the Sun remaining above the Horizon, as in the places of
the Temperate and Frigid Zones; then doubtless they would be uninhabited. 5.
That the Winds do much diminish the heat of the Sun. 6. That places which ly in
one and the same Climate, have the Summer and Winter in diverse times, although
they be very near to one another. 7. That those places which have Siccity and
Humidity contrary to the access and recess of the Sun, are so situated, that
on the East they have Ridges of Mountains, and that they regard the West, Peru
excepted. 8. That the Seasons observe no certain rule in the places of the
Torrid Zone. 9. That although most of the Inhabitants divide the year into two
Seasons, which is likewise observed by many Writers, to wit, a Pluvial and Dry
Season, yet it may aptly be divided into four, so that they may not only have a
Summer and a Winter, but also a Spring and an Autumn. For as in our parts the
Spring approaches near the nature of Summer, and the Autumn of Winter; so also
the dry places of the Torrid Zone may be divided. 10. And lastly in some places
there is a continual Harvest; in some only in two parts of the year, and in
others only in one part of the year.


Proposition XII. To show how the four Seasons of the year are made, etc. in
the places of the Temperate Zones.
Of the seasons of the year in places lying in the Temperate Zones.
1. In these places that cause, which we have placed in the first place amongst
the causes of the Seasons in the first Proposition of this Chapter; is so
potent in respect of the other causes, that that above almost makes up, and
moderateth them. To wit, in the Regions of the Northern Temperate Zone it is
Spring and Summer; the Sun going from Aries by Cancer to Libra; because then he
is more near them. Then the Sun going from Libra through Capricorn to Aries, it
is Autumn and Winter. But in the Southern Temperate Zone the matter is
contrary; neither can those other causes altogether disable the force of this
first, and induce a new course of the seasons, and be able to alter the times,
as in the Torrid Zone.

2. Yet those Seasons of diverse places vary, so that in one place there may be
more Heat or Cold, or Rain than in another, although the places lie in the same
Climate; but yet they cause not the Winter to be changed into Summer, or Summer
into Winter. A Rocky, Marshish, and Maritim Land, finds somewhat another
degree of heat or cold, than Valleys, or a Chalk and Maritim Land.

3. The places in the Tropicks for the most part in the Summer have an
excessive heat, others a Pluvial Season; so that they almost approach to the
nature of the places of the Torrid Zone. So in the part of the Kingdom of
Guzarat lying without the Tropic; at the same time the wet and dry months are
observed: which in the part lying beyond the Equator, the Summer is changed
into a Pluvial Season: yet then there is greater heat, than the dry part of the
year, where they have a moderate cold; and in truth, in the places of the
Temperate Zones we judge the Summer and Winter not from the drought and rains,
but from the heat and cold.

Now in the Coasts of Persia and Ormus, there is so great heat without Rains in
the Summer; by reason of the vicinity of the Sun, rhat both the Men and their
Wives ly in Cisterns full of Water. The like heat is in Arabia.

The Regions of Africa on the Mediterranean Sea are called the coast of Barbary.
Throughout all Barbary, the middle of October being past, Showers and Cold
begin to increase; and in December and January the cold is perceived more
intense, and that only in the morning: and withal so remiss, that the Fire is
not desired. February takes away the greatest part of the cold from the
Winter; but yet it is so inconstant, that sometimes 5 or 6 times in one day the
Air changes. In the month of March, the North and West Winds blow violently
and cause whole trees to be vested with blossoms. April gives form almost to
all Fruits; so that the entrance of May and the end of April is wont naturally
to produce Cherries. In the middle of May they gather Figs, and in the middle
of June in some places are ripe Grapes; Of the seasons of the year of Barbary.
the Figs or Autumn are gathered in August, and there is no greater plenty of
Figs and Pears than in September, There is not so great intemperies of the year
in those places; but that the three months of the Spring are always temperate.
The entrance of the Spring (that is the Terrestrial, not the Celestial) is as
they reckon on the 15th of February, and the end the 18th of May; in all which
time the Air is most grateful to them. If from the 25th of April to the 5 of
May they have no Rain, they esteem the same as ominous. They count their Summer
even to the 16th of August, at which time they have a very hot and serene Air.
Their Autumn, from the 17 of August to the 16 of November, and they have that
for two months; to wit August and September, yet not great. That which is
included between the 15 of August, and the 15 of September, was wont to be
termed by the Ancients the Furnace of the whole year; and that because it
produced Figs, Pears, and that kind of Fruit to maturity. From the 15 of
November they reckoned their Winter, which they extend to the 14 of February.
At the entrance of this they begin to till their Land, which is the plain; but
the mountainous in the month of October. The Africans have a certain persuasion
that the year has 40 very hot days, and on the other side so many cold, The
Opinion of the Arabians.
days; which they say begin from the 12 of December. They begin the Aequinoxes
on the 16 of March, and on the 16 of September. Their Solstices on the 16 of
June, and the 16 of December. The end of their Autumn, all their Winter, and a
good part of their Spring is full of violent Winds, accompanied with Hail,
Lightnings, and dreadful Thunders; neither is there wanting in many places of
Barbary an abundance of Snow. In Mount Atlas 7 degrees distant from the Tropic
of Cancer, they divide the year only into two parts; for from October even to
April, they have a continual Winter; and from April again to October they have
Summer. In this there is no day, in which the Mountains tops glitter with Snow.

The seasons of Numidia.
In Numidia, the parts of the year swiftly pass away, for in May they reap their
Corn, in October they gather their Dates; but from the middle of September to
January a violent Frost continues; October abstaining from Rains, all hopes of
Sowing is taken from the Husbandman: the same happens if that April produces
not Pluvial Water. Leo Astricanus remembers many Mountains of Snow in Africa,
not far from the Tropic of Cancer.

Of China.
The North part of China although no more remote from the Equator than Italy,
yet it has a cold more sharp; for great Rivers and Lakes are congealed up with
Frost, the cause of which is not yet sufficiently known, except we should refer
it to the Snowy Mountains of Tartaria, not far remote, to the avoiding of which
cold, they abound with the Skins of Foxes, and Scythilian Rats.

New England
New England, although it lie in 42 degrees of North Latitude, and therefore no
more removed from the Equator than Italy, yet in the month of June, when Sir
Francis Drake was there, the Air was so vehement cold, that he was compelled to
sail back to the South; for the Mountains were then covered with Snow. The
cause is the Frigid temperature of the Earth being Stony.

The seasons of Egypt.
In Egypt which is bounded with the Tropic of Cancer, the Spring and Temperate
Season of the year is observed about January and February. The Summer begins
with March and April; and continues June, July and August. The Autumn
possesses September and October. The Winter has November and December. About
the beginning of April they Reap their Corn, and presently thresh it. After the
20 of May not an Ear of Corn is to be seen in the Fields; no Fruits on the
trees. On the Ides of June, the inundation of the Nilus begins.

The seasons in the streights of Magellan.
In the Streights of Magellan, and the adjacent Regions; although they be no
more distant from the Equator than our parts are (under the 52 degree of South
Latitude) yet they have no very hot Summer. So that the Hollanders in the month
of January (when there should be an hot Summer) found a great glade of Ice in
the Creek of one of their Seas. In the Mountains of the adjacent Coasts Snow is
discovered all the Summer long; and it is observed, that in almost all the
Regions of the South Temperate Zone; they have a Cold far more intense in
Winter, and a violency of Rain, and a less heat in Summer, than the parts of
our Northern Temperate Zone. Whether this be the cause, that the Sun makes a
longer stay, and the slower progress in the Semicircle of the Northern Zodiac,
than in the Southern; is to be questioned.

In the Neighboring Province of Peru, which they call La Valla Imperial, in
the Province of Potosi; they find so great a Cold, that for four miles
circumference there grows nothing.

The season of Chili.
In the Kingdom of Chili, which extends it self from 30 degrees of South
Latitude, to 50 degrees; the Spring begins in the months of August (sooner
than the Celestial Account admits) and ends in the middle of November: And
from the middle of November Summer begins, even to the middle of February;
from whence Autumn leads on to the middle of May, which the Winter succedeth,
which is very violent, and dispoileth the Trees of their Blossoms, and
scatters a deep Snow; with a vehement Frost, which yet is discovered by the
Sun, except (which is very seldom) that the Sun appears not, but the Snow,
rarely falls in the Valleys; for although it falls in great abundance, and is
heaped up so high, that it ascends the tops of Mountains, and is heaped
together in the vacuity of the Mountains as in so many wells, and endure almost
the whole year; yet being there dissolved, they flow into the Rivers and
Torrents, which run through the Valleys with a great force even to the Sea; to
the great enrichment of the Grounds. But although here it Snow not, except
rarely in the Plains; yet it makes so excessive a Frost that the like is
scarcely felt in many parts of Europe; which happens partly from the Altitude
of the Pole; partly from the propinquity of the Mountains; from which descend
so subtle and penetrating Winds, that sometimes they are unsufferable; whence
it comes to pass that the Maritim parts are more temperate:

He that is Studious may collect other differences of Region under the same
Climate, or in the vicine Climates from Writers, for example; that in England
the Air is not so cold as in Holland, so that they pen not up their Herds in
the Winter. Between Siberia and Tartaria, in a place seated not far from the
Frigid Zone, in the end of our Temperate, are said to be pleasant Fields, and
rich Pastures, almost no cold, seeing that they scarce feel Winter; where by
the command of the Duke of Moscovia the City Tooru is built, which is at this
day so much increased, that it is able to repel the Assaults of the Tartars.

The Island of Japan.
In Japan the Winter is Cold, Snowy, Ruiny, when yet other Regions of Europe and
Asia, lying under the same Climate, have far lesser Winter; the cause is
because that Japan consists of many Islands, disjoined by a small Euripus, and
that it also lies in the middle of the Ocean.

America very hot in the Summer.
In Armenia and the adjoining places, there is great heat in Summer, because it
lies amongst Mountains, here and there mixed with Fields; hence the more rich
in some places in Summer remove to the tops of the Mountains; and remain there
for some months; but the meaner sort in the day time defend themselves in the
Mountains from the near, and about eventide do descend to the lower ground.

Proposition XIII. To declare how in places in the Frigid Zone, the four
Seasons of the year have themselves with the light.
Of the places in the Frigid Zone.
The cause of those Seasons, with the light proposed in the entrance of this
Chapter, thus stands in the Frigid Zone.

1. The Center of the Sun for some days or months, (as the place is either
nearer or remote from the Pole) does not arise above the Horizon, and for so
many days sets not.

2. In those days when he is above the Horizon, he only illustrateth those
places with his oblique rays, because he is not much elevated above the
Horizon; but moves round it, because those places are over much removed from
the way of the Sun.

3. The Sun is not deeply depressed beneath the Horizon; yea, in places near
the Polary Circle, or Artick Pole; although the Center of the Sun does not
arise, yet part of his Skirt arises and is beheld for some days above the
Horizon before the Center it self arises, by reason that the half Sun
possesses 15 minutes in the Heaven. For example, let us take those places
whose distance is from the Equator 67 degrees toward the Pole Artick; let the
Pole be elevated according to this Latitude, and in the Meridian Crena of the
Horizon, you shall see that the degrees of the Ecliptic do not arise from the
19th degree of Sagittarius, to the 11 of Capricorn; that is the Center of the
Sun being in that Arch does not arise for 24 days, viz. from the 10th of
December to the 4th of January; and yet part of the Skirt of the Sun for that
whole time shall be above the Horizon, to wit, on the 21 of December the Limbus
glittereth the Horizon; but on the 10 of December as also on the first of
January half the Sun shall be above the Horizon, and half beneath, because the
Center is then in the Horizon. But the whole Sun shall be elevated above the
Horizon, when the Center of the Sun shall hold the 14 degree of Capricorn; that
is about the 4 day of January: also the whole shall afterward appear, when his
Center shall possess the 16 degree of Sagittarius, that is about the 7 of
December.

But in places where the elevation of the Pole, is 70 or 75 degrees; there this
difference between the Oriental Limbus, and the Oriental Center is very little,
so that the Limbus or Skirt scarcely anticipateth the rise of the Center of the
Sun one day, or half a day.

From this smallest of depression; it follows also that they enjoy the light
of the Crepusculum many hours before the rising, and after the setting of the
Sun, and although the Sun arises not, yet in all, or many of the hours of the
day they have light in the Air.

There is also another cause, See Chap. 19.
which makes the Sun first to be seen before that he is elevated above the
Horizon.

For thence it comes to pass that not only the Sun is seen before he is
elevated above the Horizon, and before the Rays can directly come from him to
the Eye, but also that the light of the Twilight sooner illustrateth the Air,
than it would do without this refraction. We shall anon allege an example of
the appearancy of the Sun proceeding from refraction.

4. The Full Moon, and near the Full, remains above the Horizon for many
days, when the Sun is depressed beneath it, viz. for so many more days by how
much that place is more near the Pole. Yet it is not so highly elevated above
the Horizon, as to cause any warmness. But the Full Moon in those months, in
which the Sun remains above the Horizon in an whole revolution, the Full Moon
is never above the Horizon.

The Planets not always the same above Horizon.
5. The Fixed Stars are almost the same always above the Horizon, but not the
Planets. For Saturn remains 15 years above the Horizon of the place near the
Pole, and 15 beneath the same: Jupiter 6 years beneath, and 6 above the same
Horizon: Mars 1 year: Venus and Mercury about half a year. From this cause it
is likely that there is great diversity of the motions of the Air and seasons
in diverse years.

6. The Land in most places of the Frigid Zone, is Stony, Rocky, and as hard as
Flint; in few places Chalky, Sulphurous and Fat: In these places there is a
moderate fertility, in the other a sterility.

7. Those Regions are encompassed with the Sea, but for the Mediterranian we as
yet have no certain account.

8. Some of the Regions of the Frigid Zone have Mountains of a moderate hight,
but most want them, running on a plain for a long space.

9. The cold Winds there frequently blow from the Polary Plaga, seldom the East
Wind, and least of all the West. In the cold Artick Plaga, the North Winds
rage; in the Antartick the South.

10. Clouds and Rains frequently perplex these Regions.

From these causes it is not difficult to collect what the condition of the
seasons in these Regions are; for in the Winter time when the Sun rises not
for whole days, it cannot otherwise be, but that for the most part thick
Clouds, Frost, and Cold must render the Land uninhabitable. They are not
altogether deprived of light for that time; for the Moon being above the
Horizon for a long time gives light, and the twilight is daily afforded from
the Sun to the Vicine Horizon. But the Snow, the stick close about the Earth;
which cannot be discussed by the heat of the Sun; and therefore hinder the
aspect of remote things. There is no fertility, but all barren and
uncultivated; for that which some suppose, by how much any Region is nearer to
the Pole, by so much less it feels the intenseness of the cold, and the
Fields are found more fertile, seems not probable to me; when neither in Nova
Zembla (which is distant 16 degrees from the Pole) nor in Spitzbirga (which is
only 8 degrees distant) such a constitution of the Earth is found: but a
roughness and hardness, and almost in the middle of Summer, Snows or at least
Showers and very cold Winds. Neither is their opinion helped by one example,
observed by Mariners in a certain Region 9 degrees distant from the Pole, which
most men suppose to be Groenland. For in this green Grass is found, and an Air
more warm than in Nova Zembla, as is most certain. The only Animals peculiar to
these Northern Regions, Rhinoceros a kind of Venison.
is the Rhinoceros; and this in the space of a month becomes exceeding fat, by
feeding on this grass.

Nevertheless, seeing that as yet not many Regions are hitherto found of this
temperature in the Frigid Zone, it is not expedient for us from this single
example to make a general conjecture, especially seeing that the cause of this
peculiar constitution is manifest, for that Land is full of Marshes and Sedgey,
and the grass by which the Rhinoceros or Dear are tendered so fat, is not a kind
of Terrestrial Grass, but Sedge and Osiers; but other Herbs are not there
found, or any Trees. From whence we may gather, that that Land contains some
fat and Sulphurous Substance; which being mixed which the water produces such
an Oil, and fattening Sedge; but that the like Earth is to be found in other
parts of the Frigid Zone, has not as yet been observed, but rather the
contrary.

Therefore in the Winter in these places is little light, but an incredible and
great violence of Cold, Snow, Showers, and Polary Winds. And this Winter
begins in the Northern Frigid Zone, when the Sun first enters Capricorn;
although also the Autumn, the Sun going from the 1 degree of Libra to the 1 of
Capricorn, be little different from this violent Winter. The Spring indeed is
less infested with this violence of the Air; yet it is without Snows, Showers,
and cold Polary Winds. Yet the increase of heat in the day, or rather the
decrease of cold, is discovered at that time, viz. the Sun going from the 1
degree of Aries to the 1 of Cancer. And in this Vernal season, or in the latter
days of it, the Sun continues above the Horizon in entire revolutions; and
therefore then there is discovered a moderate heat, which yet is not of that
force as to melt and dissolve the Snow of all those places into Water, much
less is it able to melt the Ice; whence Mariners report, that here is to be
found Snow and Ice of a perpetual duration: Then the Summer shall be, from the
going of the Sun from the 1 degree of Cancer to the 1 of Libra; in the first
part of which, the Sun yet remains for whole days above the Horizon, and
augmenteth the heat by some accession; so that June, July, and August, are
months of a tolerable Air. In some places among the Mountains, the heat of the
Sun is intense; but the Showers and Clouds do much hinder this benignity of the
Sun, and especially the most sharp Northern Winds, unto which sometimes Snow is
adjoined; so that no fruits or Corn can here arrive to any maturity, except in
some places near the Artick Circle.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Shadows, which the bodies erected in the Earth, and
illuminated by the Sun do cast; and of the division of the Earth arising from
thence.
SEeing that the Shadows in diverse places of the Earth, which the illuminated
bodies of the Sun do cast, are carried into diverse places, and falling on the
Sense, have much variety; hence it came to pass, that men who were ignorant of
this cause, were struck with an admiration; and in respect of the Shadows of
the Earth, divided the Inhabitants of the Earth, as it were into three sorts,
(which division must be applied to the places of the Earth, or to its
Superficies:) So that they termed some Amphiscij, others Heteroscij, and the
rest Periscij. The explication of which terms, seeing that they contain but
small learning; we shall say somewhat also concerning Shadows, which although
they do not pertain to Geography; yet by reason of their near affinity, they
may be proposed in this Chapter.

Of Shadows.
The Shadows receive their denominations from the parts or quarters of the World
into which they are cast, as the Oriental Shadow, which tends into the East,
from the Sun placed in the West. Contrariwise, the Occidental Shadow, which
goes into the Western Plaga or quater. But here is chiefly to be considered
the Meridian Shadow, which is situated on the Plain of the Meridian; or which
is cast from bodies perpendicularly erected, or seated in the plain of the
Meridian; the Sun then being in the Meridian, and this is two fold, viz.
Northern and Southern.

The Inhabitants of that part of the Earth, are termed Heteroscij, where the
Meridian Shadows of bodies erected, are constantly carried all days of the year
to either Pole.

The Periscij, are those Inhabitants of the Earth, where the Shadows of erect
bodies in one and the same day, are carried about into all the Plagas of the
Horizon; or where the Meridian Shadows in one and the same day are cast to both
the quarters of the Meridian.

The Amphiscij are those Inhabitants of the Earth, where the Meridian shadows
of the erected bodies in some days of the year, are cast to the North, and on
othersom to the South.

Proposition I. The Shadows of bodies erected above the Horizontal plain, fall
upon the quarter opposite to it, in which the Sun existeth.
Of Shadows in reference to Optics and Dyalling.
Those that are versed in the Optics and Horology, are wont to say that a
Shadow, an Opac and Luminous body, are in one Plain; but the Term or bound of
the Shadow, the extremity of the Opac, and the Sun, are in one right line.

For because the Opac, the Shadow, and line concealed from the extremity of the
Opac, to the extremity of the Shadow, make a Triangle: now every Triangle is in
one plain, therefore those three lines shall be in one plain: the Sun is in the
extremity of the line conjoyning the extremity of the Opacity, and the Shadow.
Moreover an erect body is right to the Horizontal plain; wherefore the plain
drawn through it, ( viz. that of the forementioned Triangle) is also straight
to that Horizontal plain, and therefore seated in the Vertical plain; and
because a body erected is seated as it were a Vertex between the Sun and
Shadow, therefore the Sun and Shadow shall be in the opposite quarter.

There are three parts of this Shadow, which the Style erected, being
illuminated from the Sun, does cast, viz. a Dense Shadow, a Central, and a
Shadow which is almost a Dense Shadow, which a ray coming from the uppermost
edge of the Sun does terminate; a Central Shadow is that which is intercepted
between the ray of the Superior edge, and the Centrel ray: the penumbra is that
which is intercepted between the Central ray, and the ray of the lower.

Proposition II. The Inhabitants of the places of the Earth whichly in the
Tropic of Cancer and Capricorn are Heteroscij.
The people in the Tropicks are Heteroscij.
For when the Sun is in the first degree of Cancer; that very day the bodies
erected in any point of the Tropic of Cancer, do absorbe the Shadow of the Sun
possessing their Meridian, because that then the Sun perpendicularly from his
Vertex hangs over the Horizon; and therefore illuminateth all parts of it:
neither does any ray from the erect Opac hinder like this, which
perpendicularly falls on the plain of the Horizon; and therefore lies in the
very Opac.

But in other days of the year, because the Sun declineth from the Vertex of
the places of the Tropic toward the South; therefore the Shadow is cast in
the Meridies toward the North, never toward the South. On the contrary in the
places of the Tropic of Capricorn, every day it is cast toward the South,
(except on one day, in which there will be no Shadow;) never toward the North.

Proposition III. The Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone are Amphiscii.
The Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone, are called Amphiscii.
Let any place of the Torrid Zone be taken in the Globe, and let it be brought
to the Meridian, and let the Parallel of the Latitude, which shall cut the
Ecliptic in two points, be described by Chalk applied. When therefore the Sun
shall be in these points of the Ecliptic, he shall describe by his
circumvolution a Parallel, which shall directly hang over the Parallel
described; and therefore on those two days, in which he obtains those points
of the Ecliptic, in the assumed place, and in all situated in the described
Parallel, he shall be vertical in the Meridies, and illustrate all the places
of the Horizon. And therefore no shadow shall be cast on these two days; and
the Inhabitants shall be Amphiscii, without any shadow: but on the other days
of the year they shall not be so, but the Meridian shadow shall either be cast
to the North, or to the South; to the North, whilst the Sun moves in that part
of the Ecliptic, which lie in those two points before noted toward the South.
On the contrary, to the South, whilst the Sun moves in that part of the
Ecliptic, which is situated from those two points toward the North.

Proposition IV. The Inhabitants of the Temperate Zone, are Heteroscii.
The Inhabitants of the Temperate Zone, are called Heteroscii.
For because the Sun in all those days of the year, in the Meridies, is moved
from the places of the North Temperate Zone toward that quarter, to wit, the
South; and on the contrary, from the places of the South Temperate Zone,
toward the North; it follows from the first Proposition, that the Meridian
shadow of the places of the North Temperate Zone, bend to the same quarter all
the days of the year, ( viz. the North:), on the contrary, to the South, in the
places of the South Temperate Zone.

Proposition V. The Inhabitants of the Frigid Zones, are Periscii.
The Inhabitants of the Frigid Zone, are called Periscii.
For by reason, that on some days of the year the Sun sets not in these
places, but moves round about the Horizon; it is also necessary that the
shadow should be carried round into all quarters, and the Sun being in the
superior Semicircle of the Meridian, the shadow is cast toward the North; and
when the Sun is in the inferior Semicircle, the shadow is carried toward the
Southern quarter.

Proposition VI. A place of the Torrid Zone being given, to find the days of
the year, in which the Inhabitants of that place shall be without any shadow;
and in what days the shadows are carried to the North, and in what to the South.
Let the days of the year, in which the Sun becomes vertical to the place
given, be found; those shall be the days in which the Inhabitants of that place
shall be without a shadow. For this, use the Mode in the third Proposition.

Proposition VII. The day of the year being given, to find the places of the
Earth in the Globe, whose Inhabitants are Amphiscii that day.
Let the places be found, in which the Sun becomes vertical on the day of the
year given, (according to the 9th Proposition in the 24th Chapter,) these shall
be the places sought.

Proposition VIII. A place of the Frigid Zone being given, to find the days of
the year, in which the Inhabitants of it are Periscii.
Let the days of the year be found, in which the Sun sets not in the given
place, (according to the 10 Proposition of the 24th Chapter,) they are the days
sought.

Proposition IX. The day of the year being given, to find out the places of the
Frigid Zone, the Inhabitants of which are Periscii that day, so that this day
be the first day.
Let those places of the Frigid Zone be found, in which the Sun in the day
given does not first begin to set; they shall be the places sought for.

Proposition X. In places situated in the Equator, the Meridian shadow
falls half the year toward the North, the other half toward the South, and
in the days of the Equinoxes, the Inhabitants are Amphiscii.
For because the Sun in one half of the year recedeth from the Equator toward
the South, the other half, toward the North; the shadows are carried to the
quarter opposite to the quarter of the Sun, and thence it comes to pass, that
in one half year the Meridian shadows are carried to the North, and the other
half to the South.

Proposition XI. To place a Plain above the Horizontal Plain of our place, in
which the erected Styles perpendicular may be the Amphiscii for some days of
the year; on some days of the year the Meridian shadows may be carried to the
North, on others, to the South; that is, in which the Meridian shadows may be
so cast, as in some given place of the Torrid Zone.
Let the Latitude of the place given of the Torrid Zone be taken from the
Latitude of our place, if the Latitudes be cognominal; but if they be of a
diverse species, let both the Latitudes be added, and the remaining degrees
kept; then in the Horizontal Plain the Meridian line being found, and also the
line of the Equator, which is perpendicular to the Meridian line, let some
Plain be erected above the line of the Equator, that it may incline above the
Horizon so many degrees as were kept before. The Styles or Pins erected in this
Plain shall cast such shadows, as if they were erected in the places of the
Torrid Zone.

Proposition XII. In the places seated in the Equator, the shadow of the Style
perpendicularly erected in the whole days of the Aequinoxes, remains in one
right Line, whether before Noon ^t be continually cast into one quarter of the
West, or after Noon, into a quarter of the East; now in the other days of the
year the shadow is carried round into the Semicircle.
Of Places seated without the Equator.
In Places situated without the Equator in the Torrid Zone, whilst the Sun is
moved in part of the Ecliptic, which lies between the Vertex of any place,
and the vicine Tropic, the shadow wandreth through the lesser part of the
subject Superficies in a Semicircle. In the Places of the Temperate Zones,
whilst the Sun is moved in a more remote Circle from those or the Zodiac, the
shadows steal by the lesser Superficies in a Semicircle, and the greaten,
whilst the Sun runs through the nearer Semicircle of the Zodiac. In the
days of the Aequinoxes, the shadow of an erected Style is carried round in a
Semicircle in all the places of the Earth, except the Equator and the Pole.

These are all rendered perspicuous, partly from the sight of the Globe, and
partly from the declination of the Diagrams.

Proposition XIII. In the places of the Torrid Zone, whilst the Sun is in the
Arch of the Ecliptic, between the vicine Tropic and the Parallels of the
place, in those days the shadow of the erected Style twice returns back, and
goes over the Lines left behind, viz. once before Noon, and once after Noon.
The Sun also in these days will seem to inflect his course.
Of the shadow of the Sun in the places of the Torrid Zone.
Take any place of the Torrid Zone in the Globe, and let the Pole be elevated
according to his Latitude, and let the Parallel of the place be described,
which shall cut the Ecliptic in two points; I say, that whilst the Sun moves
in the intercepted Arch of the Ecliptic, between this Parallel and the vicine
Tropic, in those days the Sun will seem to be twice retrograde, and go over
the lines left behind. Let any of the Points of that Arch be taken, and let the
Parallel of the Sun be described, viz. which the Sun being in that point
describes by Diurnal circumvolution: For Example, take the first degree of
Cancer or Capricorn, and another of their Tropicks, for so there will be no
need of the description of a Parallel, until it come to the point in which the
Quadrant touches the Parallel; the Sun being in this Seat, or in this quarter,
will seem to bend his course toward the Vertex of the place, and the shadow
shall begin to be retrograde from the line of the Equator toward the Meridian
line. After the same manner, if that you apply the Quadrant to the Occidental
part of the Parallel, you shall see in that point in which the Quadrant
touches the Parallel, that the Sun goes to the quarters he has left, and
sets in that quarter in which some hours before he was.

Corollary. Therefore it is not against Nature, that the shadow should go back
on Sun-Dials; but then it is miraculous, if that it be done suddenly in a noted
space; also if it repeateth the lineary hours, viz. if that the Style be not
perpendicular, but parallel to the Mundane Axeltree: yea, although it be
perpendicular, yet do not the lines of the shadow it self show the hours, but
the lines of the shadows of the Axis of the World, part of which is concealed
in the mind on the Dial, if that it be wanting.

Proposition XIV. A place being given in the Torrid Zone, and one day of those
in which the Sun seems to bend his course, and the shadow of the Style
seems to go back; to find the quarter in which the Sun then shall be, and the
hour when it shall be.
Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given, and let the
place of the Sun be found at the given day, and let it be noted in the
Ecliptic, and let the Parallel be described with Chalk, which the Sun being in
that point describes. Let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and so turned
about until it touch the described Parallel: so the extremity of the Quadrant
in the Horizon, shall show the place sought for. Now that the hour may be
found, let that point of the Parallel be noted in which the contact is made;
let the Index be placed at the twelfth hour of the Cycle, and let the noted
point of the Parallel be turned to the Meridian. The Index will show how many
hours before, and how many hours after Noon the regress begins.

Proposition XV. The Longitude of the shadows decreaseth, the Altitude of the
Sun increasing; and on the contrary, the Altitude of the Sun decreasing, the
shadow increases.
They decrease from the East to the Meridies; and from the Meridies to the
setting, the Shadows again increase.
For the Sun is more near the vertex of the Style, by how much the more he is
elevated above the Horizon; therefore the ray of the Sun terminating the
shadow, becomes also more nigh the style, and on that account the shadow
becomes lesser. Moreover, the Sun has the greatest Altitude in the Meridies;
therefore the Longitude of the shadow then shall be lesser. But in the rising
and setting of the Sun there is no Altitude; therefore the Longitude of the
shadow shall be infinite.

Proposition XVI. The Longitude of the Style, and the shadow being given, to
find the Altitude of the Sun above the Horizon, and thence the hour of the day;
if that moreover the Latitude of the place, and day of the year be known.
The Longitude of the Style, the shadow, and the ray terminating the shadow,
makes a right Angled Triangle: therefore let the proportion be instituted
according to the 15th Proposition of the second Chapter. As the Longitude of
the shadow is to the Longitude of the style: so are the whole signs to the
Tangent of the Angle, which shows the Altitude of the Sun.

From this Altitude and Latitude of the place, See Proposit. 3. Chap. 29.
and day of the year, shall the hour of the day be found out.

Proposition XVII. The Semidiameter of the Sun and Earth being given, and the
distance of the Sun from the Earth, to find out the Longitude of the shadow,
which the whole Earth casts toward Heaven.
Of the Longitude of the Shadow.
The shadow of the Earth is Conical, as the Optics demonstrate, and is easily
showed by a Diagram: therefore the distance of the vertex of this Cone, which
causes the Eclipse of the Moon, from the Earth, is sought; that is found by
this Proposition: for as the distance of the Semidiameters of the Sun and Earth
are to the distance given, so is the Semidiameter of the Earth to the Longitude
of the shadow of the Earth, or to the Axis of the shady Cone.

Proposition XVIII. The distance of the Moon from the Earth, and the Longitude
of the Shadow of the Earth being given, to find how great a part of the Moon is
opscured; how great the Eclipse will be, if that the Moon remain in the
Ecliptic.
Of the Eclipse of the Moon.
Let the Rule of Three be instituted according to this proportion; As the
Longitude of the shadow is to the excess of this Longitude above the distance
of the Moon: so the Semidiameter of the Earth is to that shady Cone of the
Earth, in that part where the Moon entered it.

Furthermore; As the distance of the Moon is to the found out Semidianeter of
the shadow: so are the whole signs of the Canon to the Tangent of the Angle of
sight, which the half diameter of shadow subtendeth to our eye; which, if it be
doubled, the Angle of sight is accounted for the whole diameter of the shadow.
With this Angle, let the Angle of sight, or the apparent Semidiameter of the
Moon, which is in opposition of the Sun, or in time of Eclipse, be compared.

From this Comparation the quantity of the obcsurity will be made manifest,
which if you desire to have in Digits, institute a Rule of Proportion after
this manner: As the diameter of the Moon is to twelve Digits, so is the
apparent diameter of the shadow; or Angle of sight, to the Ecliptic Digits.

Proposition XIX. By how much the places of the Earth, every day are more
remote from the Equator, or from the Parallel of the Sun; by so much the more,
both the Meridian shadow, as well as the shadows of the rest of the hours, are
longer.
For because the Sun is more remote from the Vertex of those places, therefore
also the rays of the Sun terminating the shadow, are more remote from the
Style; and therefore the shadow is so much the longer extended.

Proposition XX. If that the Style be placed in any plain after such a Mode,
that it becomes part of the Axis of the World, or that it be Parallel to that
Axis, the shadow of that Style shall fall on a certain hour, on the very line
of that Plain, in which this Line is cut by the great Horary Circle, whether of
declination, or from the Meridian, in which the Sun is at that hour.
A moment, or small space of an hour.
For the shadow of the Axis of the World, or the style so placed, falls on the
plain of the Horary or Meridian Circle, in which the Sun is at that moment of
time; for neither can it fall beyond the Plain, seeing that the Sun, the Opac
body, and the Shadow are in one Plain, upon which the Style is placed.
Wherefore seeing this Style is upon this Plain, as also on the Plain of the
Meridian, which the Sun keeps for a moment; thence it follows, that this
shadow may fall on the common Section of this Plain, or the Plain of the
Meridian, or of the Horary Circle: For if any Line be in two or more Plains, it
shall be in the common Section of those Plains.

Proposition XXI. To describe the Aequinoctial Night-Dial.
Aequinoctial Night-Dial.
A Plain of Wood, Paper, Brass, or other Metal, must be erected above the
Horizon, so many degrees as the Equator is elevated above the Horizon; or so
many degrees as are in the Complement of the Latitude of the place.

Before it be erected, it is necessary to draw the Lines of the Scioterick;
therefore let what point you please be taken in that Plain, and let the
Periphery of the Circle be described from it, as from a Center. Let a line
Parallel to the Horizon be drawn through that Center; or let the Line be
Parallel to the common Section of the Equator and the Horizon, which shall be
the Line of the shadow of the hour of six in the Evening, and six in the
Morning. Let a Line perpendicular to this be drawn from the Center, which shall
be the shadow of the twelfth hour: then let both the Quadrants be divided into
three parts, and every one of those three, into two, so that the six Arches may
be in every one of them, whereof every one shall be of fifteen degrees; and let
them be drawn from the Center to the terms or bounds of the Arches of the right
Line, these shall be the Lines of the shadows for the beginnings of the
remaining hours, which fall between twelve and six, whose number and order must
be set down at the extremities of the Lines drawn; the same Arches of fifteen
degrees beneath the Horizontal line must be taken in the described Periphery
for the hours before six in the Morning, and six in the Evening; and the Lines
of the shadows must be drawn; the perpendicular Style must also be erected from
the Center.

Furthermore, In the Horizontal plain (if that the Plain of the Scioterick be
not yet erected) the Meridian line must be found, and the Line of the
Aequinoctial rising and setting; and so it must be placed on or above this
Plain of the Scioterick, that the Horizontal line of the Scioterick may be
parallel to this Line of the rising and setting: so the shadow of the Style
shall show the beginning of the hours at every day of the year.

But because the Sun only illustrateth this one Superficies of this Plain half
a year, and the other another half year, therefore in both the Superficies a
Scioterick must be made after the appointed Mode laid down before; that on one
side of it, in the time of Summer and Spring; in the other, in the time of
Autumn, the hours may be known by the benefit of the Shadows.

The Lines of the Circle, which show the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, or
the entrance of the Sun into the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and which do
represent the Parallels, which the Sun describes in the Heaven by his
circumvolution, may easily be drawn on this Aequinoctial Scioterick. For let a
certain Magnitude of the Style be taken, and let it be accurately divided into
Ten parts, and one of thsee Ten into ten other parts, that the whole Line may
be conceived to be cut into an hundred particles: then from a Table of
Declinations, let the Declinations of the Sun be excepted, the fifth, the
tenth, the fifteenth, the twentieth, the twenty fifth, the thirtieth degrees of
Aries; or the first, the fifteenth degrees of Taurus; the first, the fifteenth
degrees of Taurus; the first, the fifteenth degrees of Gemini; the first degree
of Cancer: and let the Tangents be taken from the Mathematical Canon.

Moreover, from the Center of the Horologe in the interval of the Tangent of
Complement of the fifth degree of Aries, let the Periphery of the Circle be
described; this will note the entrance of the Sun into the fifth degree of
Aries, and the twenty fifth of Virgo, and the Parallel of the Sun for that day,
viz. when the diurnal extremity of the shadow, by its circumvolution, shall
fall on this described Periphery, it shall be a sign, that the Sun is in the
fifth degree of Aries, or the twenty fifth of Virgo. After the same Mode, let
the Peripheries be described in the interval of the Complement of the tenth and
the twentieth degrees of Aries, the first and the fifteenth of Taurus, the
first and the fifteenth of Gemini, and the first degree of Cancer; those will
show the Parallels of the Sun in those points, and also in the points of the
20th degree of Virgo, the 10th and the first of Virgo; the 15th of Leo and the
first of Leo; and the 15th degree of Cancer.

After the same Mode on the other side of the Scioterick, let the Peripheries
be described for the Parallels of the Sun in the first degree of Libra, and the
25th of Pisces; in the 10th of Libra, and the 20th of Pisces; in the 15th of
Libra, and the 15th of Pisces; in the first of Scorpio, and the first of
Pisces; in the 15th of Scorpio, and the 15th of Aquarius; and in the first
degree of Sagittarius, and the first of Aquarius.

Unto every one of these Peripheries, the Characters of the Signs of the
Zodiac must be ascribed.

Proposition XXII. To describe an Horizontal Scioterick, or an Horizontal Plain.
An Horizontal Scioterick, or Horizontal Plain, described.
By the Globe. Let the Pole and Meridian be elevated for the Latitude of the
place, which Meridian is more conspicuous than the other lines in the
Superficies, both for color and magnitude; let it be brought under the Brazen
Meridian; let the Index be placed at the hour of twelve; let the Globe be
turned round, until the Index show the hour One or Eleven, or until 15 degrees
of the Equator do pass the Brazen Meridian. In this situation of the Globe,
let the degrees intercepted between the Brazen Meridian and the Meridian of the
Globe be numbered on the Wooden Horizon, and let this hour be noted for the hour
of One after noon, and Eleven before noon.

Then let the Globe be turned again, until the Index show the hour 11 or 10,
and let the degree intercepted between those two Meridians, the Brazen one and
that assumed, be noted for the 10th or 11th hour. After the same manner, let it
be done for the hours 9 and 3, for 8 and 4, for 7 and 5, for 6 and 6, (but we
shall not want this hour) for 5 and 7, for 4 and 8, for 3 and 9. These degrees
being thus noted for every ascribed hour, let the Meridian line be found on the
Horizontal Plain; and for any point of this line, let the periphery of the
Circle be described as from a Center, and let it be drawn perpendicularly from
the Center to the same, on either side. This shall be the line of the shadow at
the hour 6 before noon, and 6 after noon. The Meridian line is the line of the
shadow of the hour 12. In the described periphery, let the Arches before noted
be cut of, beginning from the Meridian line toward the line of the hour 6,
before and after noon. First, the Arch noted for 11 and 1, then for the hour 10
and 2, for 9 and 3, for 8 and 4, etc. The Arches thus cut off, let the lines be
drawn from the Center to those bounds; these shall be the lines of the shadows
in the beginning and end of the other hours.

But the Style must be so elevated from the Center of the Horologe, above the
Meridian line, that the Angle which it makes with it may be equal to the
Latitude of the place, or elevation of the Pole. But it is more commodious to
make some Triangle, whose Angle at the Basis is equal to the Latitude of the
place. If the declination be made on Paper, let the line be drawn from the
Center, which from the periphery may take an Arch equal to the Latitude of the
place; (the Numeration being from the Meridian line,) and let the Triangle be
cut out to be placed above the Meridian line; so the shadow will show the
hours. The making of this Scioterick, is easy without a Globe.

Proposition XXIII. To describe a Scioterick on a vertical Plain, which may
directly regard the East and West Aequinoctial.
A Scioterick, what.
The making of this is perfected after the same Mode, which we used in the
Horizontal, if that the Pole be not elevated according to the Latitude of the
place, but according to the Complement of it; and then the Style also be
elevated above the Meridian, according to this Complement: but this is better
learned by Instruction, than long Precepts.

Proposition XXIV. To make a Scioterick in our Horizontal, or other Plain,
which shall show the hours of other places, although remote from ours.
This may be done on our Scioterick, which was made to show the hours of our
place. First consider, whether the place given lie East or West from ours; if
Eastwards, the 12th hour must be reckoned there, before in our place; if
Westwards, mare later. Then let our place be brought to the Meridian, the Index
to the hour 12; and let the Globe be turned until the other place come to the
Meridian; the Index will show what hour is in this place, when it is 12 in
ours. From hence it is easy to collect the hours of that place, which may
agree with the 1, 2, 3, 4; also 11, 10, 9, 8, etc. of ours, which then must be
ascribed to them. But this may be done more elegantly without the Globe,
according to the Mode that the Horizontals are composed.

Proposition XXV. To elevate a Plain above the Horizon of our place, and in
that Plain to make a Scioterick, in which the shadows of the Hours may seem to
go backwards, as in the places of the Torrid Zone.
Because the Elevation of the Plain is left to our choice, therefore we shall
choose such an one as is commodious to our purpose: For Example, we shall so
place the Plain above our Horizon, or above the Aequinoctial line, East and
West, that the Axis of the World, or Pole, may be elevated ten degrees above
it. So the shadow shall begin to be retrograde, the Sun being entered into the
26th degree of Aries: and it shall so do, until the Sun comes to the 4th degree
of Virgo.

Therefore let the Plain be so constituted, and the Horologue so made, that it
may be in the place of the Latitude of 52, the Plain shall be elevated 42
degrees; so the Pole shall be elevated above that 10 degrees. See Proposit. 22.
In this Plain an Horizontal Scioterick may be made for the Elevation of the
Pole 10 degrees. Where, when the lines of the shadows are brought from the
Center of the Horologue, and extended far enough, let their parts about the
Center be blotted out, and the Center also, and let a perpendicular Style be
erected in any point of the Altitude of the Meridian line, such as shall
exhibit a Gnomonical Triangle; and the extremity of this Style, by its shadow
falling on the lines of the shadows, shall show the hours, and also the shadow
shall seem to be retrograde on those days.

Also by the assistance of the Terrestrial Globe, Meridional, Polary, and
Inclining Sciotericks of all sorts may be described. But because this matter
appertains to another Discipline, viz. to Dialling, therefore I think it
unnecessary to treat of all these here.

CHAP XXVIII. Of the Comparison of the Celestial Affections in diverse places of
the Earth.
See Scheme.
FRom the consideration of the agreement and difference of the Celestial
Appearances, in the diverse places of the Earth, proceeds the denomination of
the Inhabitants, (which some have mistaken for the division,) by which some are
said to be Antoeci, others Perioeci, and others Antipodes.

Of the denomination of the Inhabitants of the Earth.
Those are said to be Antoeci, or the Inhabitants of two places, which lie in
the same Semicircle of the same Meridian, but from a diverse quarter of the
Equator, to wit, one toward the North, and another toward the South; but yet
so, that they are equally distant from the Equator.

Perioeci, are the Inhabitants of two places, which lie in the same Parallel,
and in diverse Semicircles of the same Meridian. Sometimes the word is taken for
all the Inhabitants of any one Climate; but to avoid confusion, we shall
abstain from that use of it.

Antipodes, are the Inhabitants of two places, which diametrically are opposed
one to the other.

Note, That these three words are so taken for the most part, that they denote
the Inhabitants of both places, which are compared as we defined them: but yet
sometimes, when any certain place is adjoined to them, they only denote the
other place; as when we say, the Perioeci, or Antipodes of this or that place.

Proposition I. Those who live in the same Semicircle of the same Meridian,
they have also the same Meridies, or 12 hours; and also reckon together all the
other hours.
For the Meridies is defined by the existency or appulse of the Sun to the
Meridian, because therefore those places of the Earth, which inhabit in the
same Meridian of the Earth, have also the same Meridian of the Heaven; thence
it is manifest, that the Sun in the same Meridian to those that inhabit it,
makes the Meridies and the 12th hour to them all at one time. Moreover an hour
is defined to be that 24th part of that time, which intercedeth between two
vicine Noons, or appulses of the Sun to the same Semicircle of the Meridian.
Because therefore that it is the same time which intercedeth between the two
Meridies of the places of the same Meridian; therefore also the 24th part of
the same shall be equal, and the same in all; and on that account, they shall
together number all their hours from the Meridies.

Proposition II. They which dwell in the diverse Hemispheres of the Earth, which
the Equator makes or distinguishes; or those who live in the diverse parts or
quarters of the Equator; they, I say, have contrary Seasons of the year at the
same time, and the same Seasons in a different time of the year: so that in one
Hemisphere it is Winter, when as in the other it is Summer; and when the Spring
is in that, Autumn is in this.
Of the different Seasons which the Equator makes.
For the Summer begins in every place according to the Celestial course, viz.
the motion of the Sun, when he obtains a small distance from the Vertex of
the place: the Winter, when a great distance. Now because the Sun moves from
one Hemisphere to the other, thence it comes to pass, that when it draws
near the places of one Hemisphere, it more and more departs from the places
of the other; and so the Summer of one Hemisphere agrees in time, with the
Winter of another; and the Spring of one with the Autumn of another.

In the places of the Torrid Zone, the vicissitude of the Seasons has
something peculiar, See Chap. 26.
of which we have treated at large in the 26th Chapter.

Proposition III. Those who live in the Northern Hemisphere of the Earth, to
them, when they turn their faces toward the Equator, the East is on the left
hand, and the West on the right; the South before them, and the North behind
them. Those who inhabit the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth, they turning
their faces to the Equator, the Stars rise on their right hand, and set on
their left.
Of those who live under the Equator.
Those who live under the very Equator, if they turn their faces toward the
Northern Pole, they then have the East on their right hand, and the West on
their left; but if they turn their faces toward the Southern Pole, it is
contrariwise.

Those who live in the Northern Hemisphere, to them, their faces being turned
to the Equator, the Sun going in the Northern Semicircle of the Zodiac, will
seem to rise and set behind them; but perambulating the other Semicircle, he
will seem before them. The contrary happens in the Northern Hemisphere: and the
contrary will also be observed, if you turn your faces toward the Poles.

These are manifest from the consideration of his circumvolution, and may be
illustrated on the Globe; but Mariners, and others, unskilful of the Celestial
motions are wont to wonder at it, when they sail from our Hemisphere into the
Southern Hemisphere.

Proposition IV. The Celestial Affections of the Antoeci compared amongst
themselves, are thus.
1. They have the same Meridies, See Propos. 1.
the same Midnight, and reckon all their hours together, as is manifest from
the first Proposition of this Chapter. 2. They have contrary Seasons of the
year at the same time; for when it is Spring in one place, it is Autumn in
another; when that has Summer, this has Winter, Proposition 2.
as is manifest from the second Proposition of this Chapter. 3. The days of one
place are equal to the nights of the other; and the days of this, to the nights
of the former. 4. When the days of one place increase to the longest day, in
the mean while the days of the other decrease, even to the shortest: for they
have opposite equal days in their Calendar. For Example; the day of one place
at the twentieth of April, is equal to the twentieth of October in the other
place. 5. On the days of the Aequinoctial, the Sun rises and sets together
to them; but on other days sooner to the one than the other: also in those two
days the Sun has the same altitude above the Horizon of the Antoeci, at every
moment of time; but on other days a different Altitude. 6. To those that turn
their faces one toward another, or those who regard the Equator, to one the
Sun shall seem to rise on the right hand, and set on the left; and to the
other, to rise and set contrary. After the same Mode, all the Stars shall rise
to one on the right hand, and to the other on the left. 7. When the Sun rises
and sets behind to the one, he rises and sets before to the other;
contrariwise to this on the left hand, when to that on the right. 8. They have
the diverse Poles elevated by an equal Elevation. 9. The Stars appearing
perpetually to one place, or not setting, never arise to the other place, but
always remain depressed beneath the Horizon; contrariwise, those which never
set to this place, never rise to that. These are all manifest from the Globe.


Proposition V. Those which inhabit in the Equator, have no Antoeci; but the
Perioeci of those are the same with the Antipodes of these. The Poles of the
Earth have no Perioeci, for they are mutually one to the other Antoeci, and
Antipodes.
The truth of this Proposition is evident from the Definitions of the Antoeci,
Perioeci, and Antipodes, and therefore needs no probation.

Proposition VI. A place being given in the Globe, to exhibit the place of the
Antoeci, Perioeci, and Antipodes of the same.
Let the place be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and as many degrees as are
intercepted between this and the Equator, let so many be numbered from one part
of the Equator: the term of the Numeration shall be the place of the Antoeci.

Then let the Index be applied to the 12th hour of the Cycle, and let the point
of the Meridian be noted, which hangs over the place given, also that which
hangs over the place of the Antoeci; this being done, let the Globe be turned
round, until the Index shall show the other 12 hours: so the point of the
Globe, which is subjected to the noted point of the Meridian of the place
given, shall be the place of the Perioeci; and the point of the Globe,
subjected to the other noted point of the Meridian, shall be the place of the
Antipodes.

Proposition VII. Those who live in the same Parallel of the Earth, have every
day, and every night, equal: every one of the Stars also remains an equal
time above their Horizons; the same Stars never set, the same Stars never rise:
the Sun every day, and all the Stars also, rise and set to them in the same
quarter; and in the same hour also the Stars are equally elevavated above the
Horizon, or depressed beneath it. They have the same Pole equally elevated;
their faces being turned to the Equator or the same Pole, the Stars rise to
them from the same side, and set on the same side: they have the same seasons
of the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter together, and at the same time,
excepting the singular properties of some places.
These are manifest from the very consideration of the motions of the Stars,
and situation of the Places of the Earth. In the Globe, if that one certain
Parallel be taken, and the Pole be elevated near its Latitude or distance from
the Equator, the Wooden Horizon of all places shall be the Horizon of that
Parallel, viz. if that every place be brought to the Meridian; and then will be
manifest what this Proposition contains.

Proposition VIII. The Celestial Affections of the Perioeci, compared one with
another, are thus:
The Celestial Affections of the Perioeci compared together.
1. They have all those things common, which we have related in the preceding
Proposition, concerning the Inhabitants of one and the same Parallel. 2. They
reckon contrary hours of the day in reality, but yet the same in name, viz.
when in one place it is Noon, and the 12th Meridian hour, then in the other it
is Midnight, and the 12th hour of Midnight: and the Inhabitants of this, number
1, 2, 3 from Midnight, whilst they number 1, 2, 3 from Midnoon. 3. On the days
of the Aequinoxes the Sun sets to one place, whilst it rises to another,
and therefore the time of the day of one place, is the night of another; but on
other days of the year, viz. on the half year, in which the Sun runs through
the vicine Semicircle of those places of the Zodiac, that is, in the Spring
and Summer, it first rises to one place before he sets to another; and
therefore in some hours, or some parts of an hour, they have both the day and
the night conspicuous together, viz. whilst the Sun tends toward the setting
to one place, he begins to ascend toward the Meridian to the other, having
now emerged above the Horizon: But in the other half of the year, Autumn and
Winter, in which the Sun runs the more remote Semicircle of the Zodiac, he
first sets to one place before he rises to another, ( viz. the Perioeci;)
and therefore they have no part of the day, but some part of the night common,
and the Sun for some hours, or for some parts of the hours, depressed beneath
the Horizon; so that to one place it is the end of the night, to the other, the
beginning. 4. After the same Mode, those Stars which decline from the Equator,
toward the Pole elevated to the Perioeci, may be seen for some hours, or for
some parts of hours, at once, viz. before they are set to one place, they are
risen to another; and on the contrary, before they are risen to that, they are
not set to this; and in this, for so much the longer time, by how much the Star
is more remote from the Equator toward the Pole elevated. On the contrary,
they never see those Stars together, which decline from the Equator toward
the Pole, depressed to the Perioeci; but they first set to one place, before
they arise to another; and therefore for some time, or for some hours, or parts
of the hours of the day, they are conspicuous to neither of the Perioeci; and
for so much the longer time, by how much the Star is more near the Pole; and
those Stars, which remain continually to the Antoeci above the Horizon, are
perpetually obscured to the Perioeci. 5. What place of the Earth, one of the
Perioeci has in the setting Aequinoctial, or to the West; the same the other
of the Perioeci, being about to show, directs the digit to the Oriental
quarter, whereof one part is common to the Antoeci, the rest to the Perioeci.
Proposition IX. The Celestial Affections of the Antipodes, compared one with
another, are thus:
The Celestial Affections of the Antipodes.
1. In all the days of the year the Sun and the Stars rise to one place, whilst
they set to another; for they have the same Horizon, although a different face.
2. The day of one, is the night of another. 3. They have opposite equal days of
the year, as also nights; so that the longest day of the one place, is the
shortest of the other. 4. They have contrary seasons of the year at the same
time, and the same seasons in an opposite time; viz. some have Spring, whilst
the other has Autumn; the one Summer, whilst the other has Winter; and
contrariwise. 5. They have the different Poles elevated by an equal Elevation,
they are equally distant from the Equator; but that from the diverse quarters
of it: they are seated in the same Meridian, but that is in its different
Semicircles. 6. They reckon indeed the contrary hours of the day, but the same
in name, viz. it is Noon to one place, whilst it is Midnight to the other. 7.
What Stars continually appear to one place, or do remain above the Horizon,
they perpetually remain beneath the Horizon of the other place: Also what Stars
remain a long space above the Horizon of one place, they remain but a short
time above the Horizon of the other place. 8. The Sun and Stars seem to rise to
the Inhabitants of one place, on the right hand; to the Inhabitants of the
other, on the left; if that both shall turn their faces to the Equator.
Proposition X. The Perioeci of one place are the Antipodes of the Antoeci of
that place, and the Antoeci of the Antipodes of that place.
So the Antipodes of one place, are the Perioeci of the Antoeci of that place,
and the Antoeci of the Perioeci: These are plain from the Definitions, neither
do they need probation.

Proposition XI. A place in the Globe being given, to find those places which
have the same Hours and Meridies with the place given: also those places which
reckon contrary hours and Midnight, when it is Midday in the place given.
Sundry Questions wrought and performed by the Gl^be.
Let the place given be brought to the Brazen Meridian: so all the places which
are subject to the same Semicircle of the Meridian of this, or those places,
which number at once all the same hours: then let the Index be placed at the
12th hour of the Cycle, and let the Globe be turned round until the Index show
the other 12th hour: so the places which are subject to the same Semicircle of
the Brazen Meridian, are those reckoned hours, contrary to the hours of the
place given.

Proposition XII. A place being given in the Globe, to fiad those places, in
which all the days of the year are equal to the nights of the former place.
Let the place given be brought to the Meridian, and let the Parallel of its
Antoeci be found. All the places situated in this Parallel satisfy the demand.

But if that a place be required, whose days are equal to the nights of the
place given, and all the hours of the same; then the place of the Antoeci is
only that sought for.

But if all the hours be contrary, the place of the Antipodes only satisfies
the demand.

Proposition XIII. A place in the Globe, and the day of the year being given,
to find the hours in which the Inhabitants of that place, and its Antoeci both
together, may see the Sun, or in what hour the Sun is above the Horizon of both
places; also the hour in which he is sooner seen in one place, than in another.
Let the Longitude, or time of the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the
place given, See Propos. 4. Chap. 25.
at the day given, (according to the fourth Proposition of the 25th Chapter) be
found; the hours in which this time is deficient from 24 hours, are the hours
of the day in the place of the Antoeci. For these two places have the Sun
elevated together so many hours, as the day of the place given consists of
hours, or the day of the Antoeci, viz. of that day which has no more than 12
hours, as he is in the days of the Aequinoxes; but lesser than other days: Or,
that I may speak more plainly, if the day of the place given is less than 12
hours, then the Antoeci shall see the Sun on the same hours; but yet in more,
to wit, before and after that time. But if the day of the place given be more
than 12 hours, the number of the hours of the night must be taken: for so many
hours together the Antoeci shall see the Sun, and no more; and these hours are
to be reckoned about the Meridies, because they have their Meridies together.

Then half of the difference of the days, (or the difference between the day
and night of the same place) will show the hours in which the Sun arises
sooner above the Horizon of one place, and also sets later than to the other
place of the Antoeci.

Proposition XIV. A place being given in the Globe, and the day of the year, to
find the hours in which the Inhabitants of that place together see the Sun with
their Perioeci, and what hours they do not see it together.
Let the place of the stay of the Sun above the Horizon of the place given, be
found at the day given, and let the time of his stay beneath the Horizon, that
is, the quantity of the day and the night, be found; half the difference
between the quantity of the day and the night, will show the hours, or part of
the hours, in which the Sun first rises to one place, before he sets to
another; and sets later also to that place, than he arises to this.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Computation of time in the diverse places of the Earth.
Proposition I. The Hour of one place being given in the Globe, to find the
hour of another place given.
By the Globe, the hours of the places are found out.
LEt the place, whose hour is given, be brought to the Brazen Meridian, the
Index to that hour of the Horary Cycle, such as is given. Let the Globe be
turned round until the other given place come under the Meridian, the Index in
that situation of the Globe will show the hour demanded of this other place.

Proposition II. The hour of our place being given, (or of some other place in
the Globe) to exhibit on the Globe all those places in which at that hour the
Meridies is; also those in which it is Midnight; also those in which is what
hour we please. The Problem should be propounded concerning the Earth, if we
would act Scientifically; for it is an affection of the Earth. Understand the
same concerning many other following Problems.
Let the place given be brought to the Meridian, the Index to the given hour of
the horary Cycle. Let the Globe be turned round until the Index show the 12th
hour of the Meridies; so the places which are discovered to be subject to the
superior Semicircle of the Meridian (from the elevated Pole to the Pole
depressed,) are those which have the Meridies at the time given. But if the
Globe be turned round, that the Index may show the 12th inferior hour, the
places which are discovered to be subject to the same Semicircle of the
Meridian, are those in which the Midnight then shall be.

If we desire places in which is any hour, let the Globe be turned until the
Index show that hour, if the places subject to the Semicircle of the Meridian,
be those that are sought.

Proposition III. The Altitude of the Sun being given, the day of the year, and
the Latitude of the place, to find the hour at the time of that altitude.
Rules for the finding the hour of the day.
Let the Pole be elevated for the given Latitude of the place: from the given
day let the place of the Sun be found in the Ecliptic, and let that be noted
in the Ecliptic of the Globe, and brought to the Meridian. Then let the
Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and let the degrees of the given Altitude be
noted in it, and let the Index be placed at the 12th hour of the Horary Cycle.

Then let the Globe and the Quadrant be moved until the noted place of the Sun
agree with the noted point of the Quadrant. In that situation the Sun will
show the hour demanded.

Proposition IV. A Quarter being given, in which the Sun is beheld sometime of
the day given; and the Latitude of a place being given, to find the hour of the
day.
Mariners observe the quarter of the Sun on the Compass.
Let all be done as in the preceding Proposition: that the Quadrant may be
applied to the Vertex, let his end or extremity be brought to that quarter of
the Horizon which was observed, and let the Globe be turned round until that
point of the Sun come to the Quadrant. In this situation, the Index will show
the hour of the day.

Proposition V. The Sun shining, by the benefit of the Globe to know the hour
of the place given; or the Latitude thereof, which is given.
Let the Pole be elevated for the given Latitude of the place, and let the
Globe be placed at the four quarters of the World; then let a Needle be fixed
perpendicularly at the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic; or, which is better,
let the Spherical Gnomon be applied to the Ecliptic, so that the Apex of the
Gnomon fix on the place of the Sun, and so let it be brought to the Meridian,
and the Index to the 12th hour: let the Globe be turned, until the Needle make
no shadow on the Globe. In this situation the Index will show the demanded
hour.

Proposition VI. An hour of our Numeration being given, to find what hour it is
from the rising of the Sun, that is, the Babylonish, or Norimbergian hour.
In time past the Babylonians, and now the Inhabitants of Norimberg, and some
other People, reckon 24 hours from one rising of the Sun, to the rising of the
Sun the next day.

Let the Pole be elevated from the Latitude of the place given, and the place
of the Sun being found from the day given, let it be brought to the Meridian,
the Index to the 12th hour of the horary Cycle: let the Globe be turned until
the Index show the hour given. Then the Globe remaining immovable, let the
Index be reduced to 12, which being done, let the Globe be turned from the
setting to the rising, until the place of the Sun appear in the Oriental
Horizon: and in the horary Cycle, let the hours be reckoned from 12, toward the
East or rising, even to the Index: for these are the Babylonish or Norimberg
hours sought for.

Proposition VII. On the contrary: The hour being given from the Babylonish
rising, to find out the hour of our Numeration, which is from Midnight, or
Midnoon.
Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given, let the place of
the Sun be noted in the Ecliptic, and brought to the Oriental Horizon, the
Index to the 12th hour; let the Globe be turned toward the West, until the
Index show the hour given on the Cycle from the East. Which being done, let the
Index be reduced to the 12th hour, and then let the Globe again be moved, until
the place of the Sun be brought back to the Semicircle of the Meridian which is
next passed through, and let the hours be numbered from 12 to the Index toward
that quarter, unto which the motion of the Globe was made: so shall be found
the hour of our numbering from the Meridies, or Midnight.

Proposition VIII. An hour of our reckoning being given, to find what hour it
is from the preceding setting of the Sun, that is, the Italian hours.
Of Italian hours.
At this day, in many places of Italy, and in times past in Greece they numbered
24 hours from one setting of the Sun to the following, or next setting; to find
out which, we must thus do from the hours of our Numeration.

Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given; let the place of
the Sun in the Ecliptic be noted and brought to the Meridan; let the Index be
placed at the 12th hour at Noon of the Cycle: let the Globe be turned until the
Index show the hour given. Then the Globe being immovable, let the Index be
brought to the 12th hour; and this being done, let the Globe be turned toward
the East, until the place of the Sun be beheld in the Occidental Horizon. Then
let the hours be numbered from 12 to the Index, near the quarter of his motion;
for these shall be the Italian hours of Numeration.

Proposition IX. The hour from the setting of the Sun, or of Italick
Numeration, being given, to find what hour it is of our Numeration from the
Midnoon or Midnight.
Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given; let the place of
the Sun in the Ecliptic be noted, and brought to the Meridian; let the Index
be placed at the hour 12; let the Globe be turned to the setting, until the
Index show the given Italick hour. Then the Globe remaining immovable, let the
Index be brought to the 12th hour; this being done, let the place of the Sun be
turned back to that Semicircle of the Meridian which it did nearest pass
through, so the hours interrupted between 12 and the Index (numbering from 12
toward the rising) are the hours from the Meridies or Midnight, according to
our numeration or reckoning.

Proposition X. An hour of our Numeration being given on the day given, to find
what hour of the day that hour is, according to the ancient Judaick account,
and that of other Nations.
The Jews division of the day and night.
In Ancient times, the Jews and other Nations ( Astronomy being not yet
polished) divided every day, from the rising of the Sun to his setting, into 12
hours, and the night into as many, which hours are therefore termed Judaical
hours, Planetary hours (for another reason,) but more fitly unequal hours; for
seeing that neither the days or nigh^ are equal amongst themselves, or of equal
Longitude; but increase for half a year, See Chap. 25.
and decrease the other half (except in the places of the Equator,) thence it
comes to pass that those hours are sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser;
for they increase with the Longitude of the days, and decrease with the
decrease of the same. But in places near the Equator this increase is not
great, as we have showed in the 25th Chapter: but all the days of the whole
year are almost equal; and thence it comes to pass, that the People more
remote from the Equator, as those of Europe, never used these hours, but only
those People who are not far removed from, or that dwell under the Torrid Zone.

Therefore the Problem may be thus more clearly propounded, viz. an equal hour
being given in a given day, to find an unequal hour. An equal hour is termed
the 12th part of any day or night, or of the time in which the Sun does remain
above, or beneath the Horizon. An unequal hour is termed the 24th part of that
time, in which the Sun is moved from the Semicircle of the Meridian, until it
return again to the same Semicircle, which time is called an Astronomical day.

Now for the Solution of this Problem, we must thus act:

Let the Pole he elevated for the Latitude of the place given; let the place of
the Sun in the Ecliptic be noted, and brought to the East, the Index to the
12th hour of the Cycle: let the Globe be turned, until the noted place of the
Sun come to the West; the Index will show the hours for the Longitude of this
day, or the stay of the Sun above the Horizon, which must be observed. Then set
it be found, what is the hour given from the East or rising (or from the West
and setting, if that any hour be given after the setting of the Sun) according
to the 6 or 8th Propositions. See Proposition 6 and 8.
And let the proportion be compared after this Mode, that as the noted hours of
the Longitude of the whole day or night are unto 2 hours, so the hours found
from the rising, (or setting, if that an hour of the night be given) are to the
number of the Judaick hours.

Proposition XI. The Judaick hour being given, in the day given to find what
hour that is according to our Numeration or account; or to reduce a given
unequal hour to an equal hour.
Of the Judaick hour.
Let the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of the place given; the place of the
Sun in the Ecliptic from the day given being found, let it be brought to the
East, the Index to the 12th hour; and let the Globe be turned to the West, that
the Longitude of that day may appear in unequal hours on the horary Cycle,
which is noted. Then let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meridian, the
Index unto 12, and let the place of the Sun be turned round to the Oriental
Honrizon, the Index will show the hour of the rising.

Then let it so be brought to pass, that 12 be added to the number of the
Judaick hour^y so also let the found out Latitude of the whole be added to the
other number, which if that be added to the hour of the rising, we shall have
the hour from the Midnight, according to our numeration: if that the number of
these hours be more than 12, let 12 cast away, and the remainder will show the
hour from Noon.

Those Judaick hours which are related in the Sermon of CHRIST, cannot
accurately be reduced to the hours of our account, because the day of the year
is not added: so that the third hour of that day, may be our 8th, 9th or 10th;
so that the 11th hour of that Sermon, may be our 7th, 6th, or 5th, viz, as that
day may be taken either according to the Summer or Winter Solstice, or the
Aequinoctial.

Proposition XII. Those who go from some one part of the Earth, or sail toward
the Sun rising, and the whole Globe of the Earth being encompassed by them,
they return to the same place whence they set forth; they in the mean space, at
once have often had the Sun rising, setting, the Meridies, and the Midnight,
the very same with the Inhabitants of the place, from which they went from; and
therefore when they return, they number one day of a year more than in that
place. For Example, If in this place it be the first day of January, they
reckon the second of January; if they account it to be Saturday, they reckon
Sunday. And if they shall have sailed about the Earth, twice, thrice, or four
times, they shall still number so many more days.
Of the compassing of the Earth.
Those who by a determined course sail about the whole Earth toward the West,
they in the mean while for one space have the setting or rising Sun, the
Meridies and Midnight more rare; and therefore when they return, they number
one day less than in that place, to wit, the 31 of December; if in that place
it be the first of January, and Saturday or the last day of the Week, when in
this place it shall be Sunday, or the first day of a new Week: And if they have
sailed round the Earth twice, thrice, or soin times, they shall also reckon so
many days less.

This was a matter of wonder and admiration some Ages ago to M^^^^ and others;
but the frequency of this Experiment has lessehen the admination, and has
administered occasion to Mathemn^^^ to (...) the cause.

Neither is it difficult to explain the same, so that the motion of the Sun,
and the Meridian of the places of the Earth be well apprehended, and a certain
day of the year be proposed ^ for it dependeti^^ the Diurual cir^^^voluation^
of the Sun, not from his proper nation, as some have thought which we may begin
from any Circle, but for our more easy understanding it is very convenient to
begin from the Meridies, that the day may be the time from one Meridies to the
following Meridies, or Noon; or whilst the Sun returns from the Semicircle of
one Meridiany, to the same Semicircle.

Therefore, because that those who Sail toward the East, or Rising, come to
those places where the Sun first rises and makes his Meridian, than in the
place from whence they departed; thence it comes to pass, that the Sun being
in the Meridian of the place to which they have arrived, they begin to reckon a
new day. For Example: the second day of January, where in the place of their
departure hitherto they have numbered the first day of January, (if that they
set Sail on the same,) and the difference shall be one or two hours. This
anticipation daily increases until they come toward the East, so that it
shall make the hours of half a day, when they come to the opposite Semicircle
of the Meridian; for here they shall have the Meridies of a new day, when in
the place of their setting forth it shall be the Midnight of the preceding day.
And where they shall come to the Meridian 1^ degrees more remote, being in
that, they shall have the Meridies 13 hours sooner, than in the place of their
setting forth: and when again they shall come to a Meridian more remote 15
degrees, there they shall have the Minidies ^4 hours sooner, than in the place
of their setting forth. And so moreover, as they shall come to the Meridians or
places more remote 15 degrees, they shall have the Meridies 15, 16, 17 hours
sooner, and shall begin to account a new day sooner, than in their place of
their setting forth: so that when at length they shall have returned to the
place, they shall then number the Meridies of a new day sooner by 24 hours,
where in the place also the Meridies is, which yet may answer in number to the
Meridies which the Mariners had the former day.

But it is contrary with those who Sail toward the West, when they return to
the place from whence they set forth; for by how much the more they recede from
this place, by so much the more they shall have the Sun later in the Meridies,
because they are in a more remote Meridian, and therefore do later begin the
account of their new day, than in the place whence they set forth: So that this
Proposition takes away an whole day in the return.

Corollary 1. Corollaries.
If that two at the same time set sorth from any place of the Earth, the one
toward the East, the other toward the West, and they shall return both
together to the same place, the whole Earth being Sailed about: he that took
his Journey toward the East shall reckon two days more, than he which took it
toward the West. And if they have Sailed the Earth about twice, they shall
reckon a days more; if thrice, 6 days more, etc. but the days of these are
longer; of those, shorter.

Corollary 2. The same will happen, if that in any place of the Earth any two
meet one the other; and from hence first, and then often afterward, was this
apparently discovered: for when Ferdinando Magellanes by a direct course into
the West, had entered the Indies by the Streights, denominated from him, it was
found out by the Mariners, which there met with other Europeans, brought
toward the East by an ordinary Journey, that the Kaleudar, or the Numeration
of the days, differed an whole day. The same has been observed by all, which
have Sailed round the Earth, when they have come into the Indies.

Corillary 10. This also is the cause, that in two near places the account of a
different day (...) observed, viz. in the Philippine Isles, and in the City of
Marow on the Chaste of China, The day in Macoa, not the same as in the
Philippine Isles.
although they lie under the same Meridian, yet they reckon the days of the
Calendar sooner in Macoa, than in the Philippine Isles, and that by the
anticipation of one day, so that it is Sunday in Moacoa when but Saturday in
the Philippine Isles. The cause of this diversity is this, that the Rortu^^^
possessing the City of Macoa came thither from Europe toward the East by
asseccourse out of India; but the Spaniard, which possess the Philippine Isles,
came thither from Europe toward the West, by a set course from America.
Therefore it is in ferred from the preceding Corollary, because here in M^^a
and the Philippines, they almost meet, (...) ^ome into the same Meridian, that
they should ^^ce^d by one day the days of the other.

CHAP. XXX. Of the various Rising Setting, Altitude of the Sun, and other
Appearances in the diverse parts of the Earth.
Proposition 1. To place or hang a Terrestrial Globe, so that when the Sun
shines, those parts, of the Globe may be illuminated, which the Sun
enlighteneth in the Earth at any time, and that it also may appear, unto what
People the Sun rises, and to whom it sets; to whom it makes the Meridies,
and to whom it is altogether absconded; to what place it is vertical: also to
find the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, and the day of the year; also the
hour of the place.
The motion of the Sun showed by the Globe.
LET the place in which the Globe is placed be noted on the Globe, and brought
to the Meridian, and let a mark be made with a Chalk on that point of the
Meridian. Therefore if the Globe be to be hung by a Cord, the Cord must be tied
to the point of the Meridian. But if that it must be placed firmly in any
place, an Iron pi^ must be brought through the Center of the Globe, even to the
opposite point; and this Iron pin must be closely fixed to the Horizontal
plain, that it may remain immovable.

The Globe must be disposed according to the four quarters of the World, viz,
that the North, part of the Globe may regard the North part of the Earth or
Heaven; which, the Meridian line being found, is easy to do by the Mariners
Compass, or the Magnetic Needle. The Globe being thus placed, at every moment
of the day, when the Sun shines, on the Globe may be seen the part of the
Earth illuminated, and the part not illuminated. Those places which lie in the
middle Semicircle of the part illuminated, are those which will have the
Meridies at that moment of time. To those which are seated in the Oriental
Semicircle, dividing the illuminated part from the part not illuminated, the
Sun sets; but to those which are in the Occidental Semicircle, separating
the illuminated part from the part not illuminated the Sun rises.

To find out the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, let the Needle or Spherical
Gromon be moved hither and thither perpendicularly about the middle of the part
illuminated, until it makes no shadow, and let the point in the Globe be noted
(...) for this being brought to the Meridian, here will show the declination of
the Ecliptic point, in which the Sun is at the time of the Observation;
whence, according to the condition of the time, to wit, Spring, Summer, Autumn,
or Winter, the place of the Sun shall be known, and thence the day of the year.

Also the place in the Globe, unto which the Needle being affixed gave no
shadow, is that to which the Sun is vertical at that moment of time, and the
Parallel passing through this place will exhibit all the places, in which the
Sun will be vertical on that day.

Moreover, to find the hour of the place in which the Globe is so placed or
hung, let that place be brought to the Meridian to which the Sun is vertical,
the Index to the 12th hour of the horary Circle; and let the Globe be turned
round until our place, or that in which the Globe is seated, do come to the
Meridian? the Index will show the hour.

But because the Globe cannot be turned round, when it is affixed by the Iron
Style to the Horizontal plain, therefore it will be convenient that the
Quadrant be tied to the Pole, or part of the Circle of the Periphery 113 ^/^:
for here the Arch being brought to the place of the Needle, will show the
declination of the Sun from the Equator, whence the place of the Sun, and the
day of the year shall be found. The same Arch will show the degree in the
Equator, from whence if that the degrees be numbered to the Brazen Meridian,
and these degrees be changed into hours, or parts of hours, Fifteen Degrees
make an Hour.
you shall have the hour of the place. If so be that the Sun be between the
Occident and the Brazen Meridian, that is, of our place; but if that it be
between the East and our Meridian, the hour found out must be subtracted from
12, and the remaining number will show the hours from Midnight.

If that such a Brazen Arch be adjoined to the Pole of the Globe, as I have
described, 113 degrees, it may be bored through from the end even to 47
degrees; that is, from the departure of the Sun from the Equator, and a
turning Plate be inserted in it, which may bear the perpendicular Style: and so
there will neither be need of a Needle, or of a Spherical Gnomon, and the
operation will be less obnoxious to error.

Proposition II. The Terrestrial Globe being ^o placed, as in the former
Proposition is declared, it will also show, when the Moon shines, to what
People, at any moment of time in which it is above our Horizon, it is
conspicuous; to whom it arises, to whom it sets, and to whom it is vertical.
These are all manifest from the preceding Proposition. See Proposit. 1.


Proposition III. By how much the places of the Earth are remote from the
Parallel of the Sun on any day, by so much the Sun is elevated to a lesser
Altitude in the same hours above their Horizon.
Let the places in the same Meridian be taken in the Globe, for these do reckon
all the same hours, and that at once: then let a Parallel be described for any
assumed day, and it will be manifest, that any point of this Parallel is
farther distant from the more remote places, than from the places more near.

The Sun therefore being above, the points of this Parallel will be farther
distant from the Vertex of the remoter places, than from the Vertex of those
that are nearer; and therefore he shall be less elevated over the Horizon of
those places, than of these.

Proposition IV. By how much the places of the Earth are more remote from the
Equator, or more near the Pole, by so much the more the parts of the Horizon
are distant, in which the Sun rises on the day of the Solstice, and the day of
the Winter; as also those in which he sets. The same is true concerning the
Moon and all the Planets.
Take what places you please of a diverse distance from the Equator, and let
the Pole be elevated for the Latitude of every one of them, and let the points
be noted in the Horizon, in which the Tropicks of Capricorn and Cancer cut it.
A comparison being made, the truth of the Proposition will appear: this is also
showed the same way, by how much the places are more remote from the Equator,
by so much the more the Sun, in his Aequinoctial rising, is distant in the East
on every day of the year. The Astronomers term it, the rising Amplitude.

Proposition V. Stars placed between the Parallel of any place (lying without
the Equator) and the Pole, are less elevated above the Horizon of the places
between this Parallel, and the other Pole of those situated there, than above
the Horizon of the places situated between this Parallel and the nearer Pole.
Of the elevation of Stars, etc.
The Parallel of any Star may be designed on the Terrestrial Globe, or a point
only noted for a Star, and any place more remote from the Pole being assumed,
designeth the Parallel of the place. Then taking another place situated
toward the other Pole, the stay of the Star above the Horizon of both places
may be found, and the truth of the Proposition will be manifest.

Proposition VI. In places situate in and near the Equator, the Sun and Stars
directly ascend above the Horizon, even to the Meridian, and so descend again:
but in places situated above the Equator, they obliquely ascend and descend;
and so much the more obliquely, by how much the place is more remote from the
Equator.
Of the ascension and descension of the Sun and Stars.
Let any Parallel of the Sun be described on the Globe, such as some already are
delineated on the Globe, viz. the Equator, the Tropicks, and some Intermedial
ones: then let the Poles be placed in the very Horizon, that it may be the
Horizon of the places of the Equator, and it will be evident that the points
of the Parallels directly ascend from the Horizon to the Meridian. Then let the
Pole be elevated for the Latitude of any other places, and it will appear that
the Parallels are so much the more oblique to the Horizon, by how much the more
the Pole is elevated; that is, by the Wooden Horizon becomes the Horizon of
the places more remote from the Equator, or nearer to the Pole.

Proposition VII. By how much the place is more remote from the Equator, by so
much the more the Signs of the Zodiac, and the other Constellations, require
the greater time to arise, and set; and they pass through the Meridians of all
places at an equal time.
Let two places be taken on the Globe, unequally distant from the Equator, and
let the Pole be elevated, and observed separately for each of them, how much
time any Sign of the Zodiac requires to ascend above the Horizon; viz. the
entrance of the Sign being brought to the Oriental Horizon, let the Index be
placed at the 12th hour, and the Globe be turned round until the whole Sign be
rising: the Index will show the hours elapsed in the space whilst the Sign
arose; for by the comparison of the time, the truth of the Proposition will be
manifest.

Proposition VIII. The day of the year being given, to find, or show on the
Globe those places, in which the Sun arises in any given quarter.
To find the rising of the Sun in any quarter, by the Globe.
This Problem, and those that follow, should be propounded and resolved
concerning the Earth it self, if that we would act according to Art: for these
affections belong unto it; but they are propounded concerning the Globe,
because here it represents the Earth; although another method must be used in
the Earth, or another construction, which although it can only be comprehended
by the mind, is sufficient, that it may hinder in the practice by reason of the
obstacles.

This is the same with that Problem, The day and the quarter being given, in
which the rising of the Sun was observed, to find the Latitude of that place,
or its Parallel, in any point of which it is manifest that we are placed. See
Chap. 23. Proposit. 11.
The Solution of which we have delivered in the 23 Chapter. Proposition 11.

Proposition IX. The day and the hour, or part of the hour being given, to show
the place on the Globe to which the Sun is then vertical.
First let the place of the Sun, from the given day being found, be noted on
the Ecliptic of the Globe, and that being brought to the Meridian, let a mark
be made with a Chalk on the supereminent point; then let those places be found,
in whose Meridian the Sun was at the given moment of time, and let them be
brought to the Brazen Meridian. These being done, that place which is subject
to the noted point of the Meridian is the place which is demanded, viz. that to
which the Sun is vertical at the given moment of time.

Proposition X. Further note.
The day and the hour being given, to show all the places on the Globe, from
whose Vertex the Sun is distant the given degrees at that hour; but the given
degrees must not exceed a hundred and eighty: Or the day and the hour being
given, to show on the Globe those places, above whose Horizon the Sun has the
given Altitude, or the given depression beneath it; but the Altitude given must
not exceed 90 degrees, as likewise the depression.
Let the place be found on the Globe, to which the Sun is vertical at the hour
given, and let this be brought to the Meridian, and let the Quadrant be affixed
to the imminent point of the Meridian. Let the degree of distance from the
Vertex given be noted, and the Quadrant be turned round, the Globe remaining
immovable; all the places of the Earth through which the noted degree of the
Quadrant passes, are those from whom the Sun has the given distance, or above
whose Horizon the Sun has the given Altitude.

Proposition XI. At the given hour of the day, to show on the Globe all plains
unto which the Sun rises and sets, and to which he is fixed at the
Meridian; and all that are illuminated, and not illuminated.
Further, concerning the rising and setting of the Sun, found out by the Globe
at any day, or hour of the day.
Let the place be found in the Globe, to which the Sun at the time given is
vertical; and let the place be brought to the Meridian, and the Pole elevated
for the Latitude of that place: or let that place be placed in the vertex of
the Horizon. So all those places which are discovered under the Semicircle of
the Meridian above the Horizon, shall have the Meridies; but those places which
are beheld in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon, are those to which the
Sun then sets: but to those which lie in the Occidental Semicircle of the
Horizon, the Sun rises at the given time, and all the places which are above
the Horizon are illuminated by the Sun: on the contrary, all the places
situated beneath the same, then want the presence of the Sun.

Note, that the Problem must be understood of the rising and setting of the
body of the Center of the Sun: for the body of the Sun illustrateth part of the
Earth somewhat bigger than the Hemisphere, which, how big it is, shall be
discovered in the following Proposition. Therefore we may show the places to
which the Sun rises or sets, when we have Noon or Midnight: And
contrariwise, those in which he sets, when he arises to us, who then have
Midnight, or Midday.

Proposition XII. The Semidiameter of the Sun and Earth being given, and the
distance of the Sun from the Earth being known, to find out the part of the
Earth which the Sun illuminateth.
See Scheme.
Let the Semidiameter of the Earth be A B, A C; A the Center; A B C D E the
greatest circle of the Earth; S the Center of the Sun; S L, S O the
Semidiameter of the Sun; L B, O C the rays touching the Globe of the Sun and
Earth: for these distinguish the part illuminated from the part not
illuminated; therefore the Arch B D C represents the part of the superficies
of the Earth illuminated, and the Arch BLC the part not illuminated. Let the
Tangents LB, O C be extended until they concur in R, and B N parallels to A S:
therefore in the Triangle B N L, let N L be given; the excess S L above A B,
and B N of equal distance to A S; the Angle B N L is direct, because that B L
touches the Circle. Wherefore in the Triangle B L N, let the Angle N B L be
found according to this Proposition; that as B N is to N L, so are the whole
signs to the Tangent of the Angle N B L. Moreover the two Angles L N B, N B L
are together equal to one straight or 90 degrees, and B N L is equal to the
Angle A S L, or B A R.

Therefore the Arch of the Angle N B L is equal to the Arch B M, by which P B
is greater than 90 degrees, or than P M: so also the Arch P C.

If we take the Semidiameter of the Sun, according unto Ptolomy, of 52
Semidiameters of the Earth; but the distance A S, 1168 Semidiameters: these, I
say, being laid down, the Arch M B will be found 13 minutes, in which the Sun
illustrateth the Earth more than half M P Q.

Corollary. When therefore the Center of the Sun rises to some places, then
his limbus or edge rises to the People which inhabit in the parallel of the
Horizon, situated 13 minutes beneath the Horizon; also after the same Mode to
those to whom he sets. And when his Center sets, then his limbus yet
remains conspicuous, until the Center sets to the People, which are remote
13 minutes from our Horizon.

Proposition XIII. The height of a Mountain being given, to find how much
sooner the Sun seems to rise in the Vertex of the same, than at the foot or
root of the Mountain; and how much later it sets.
From the given Altitude, See Chap. 9. Proposit. 5.
by the fifth Proposition in the ninth Chapter, let the interval or Arch from
which the Vertex of the Mountain may be discovered, or in the bound of which, a
line so drawn from the Vertex of the Mountain, that it may be the Tangent of
the Earth, refracteth the same: for this line shows the first ray, which may
come from a direct passage from the Sun to the Vertex of the Mountain.
Moreover, the point of the Earth in which this is touched by the line, is the
place to which the Sun arises, when he begins to be seen on the Vertex of
the Mountain, and the Arch interrupted between that point and the foot of the
Mountain, is equal to that in which the Sun is depressed, as yet, beneath the
Horizon of the foot of the Mountain, when he is apparent in the Vertex.

Therefore the Problem is reduced hither; The depression of the Sun beneath the
Horizon being given, to find the time which is spent whilst the Sun moves from
the depression to the Horizon; whence also it will be manifest, that this time
is also diverse in the diverse days of the year. Therefore let the place of the
root of the Mountain be noted on the Globe, and let the Pole be clevated for
the Latitude of the same; let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex. The place
of the Sun being found in the Ecliptic from any day taken, let it be noted;
also the Point of the Ecliptic opposite to the place of the Sun. Then let this
opposite Point be brought to the Occidental Horizon, and let the Index be
placed at the hour 12. This being done, let the Degree of depression before
found be noted in the Quadrant, and the opposite Point be turned above the
Horizon, until it has an Altitude equal to the Arch of the depression (which
will be discovered from the application of the Quadrant) so the place of the
Sun beneath the Oriental Horizon, will have that Depression. And the Index in
the Horaty Circle will show the time intercopted between that depression of
him, and his emersion above the Horizon.

But because in this case we do almost work only by Minutes, therefore it is
better to calculate it, than to search after it on the Globe. Now you shall
find it If that the Altitude of the Mountain be placed 3 stadias, or of a
German mile, because the Arch of the depression is about three Degrees, The
Mountains of Caucasus, and Casius according to Aristotle, and Pliny, are
^llustrated with the Suns rays to the third part of the night.
and if the Latitude of the Foot of the Mountain be 38 Degrees, and the place
of the Sun about the middle of Leo, the time in which the Sun is beheld, is
sooner in the Vertex, than at the Foot of the Mountain by 13 Minutes. Hence it
is manifest, that that is not so probable which Aristotle relates of the
highest parts of Caucasus, and Pliny of the top of Mount Casius, that they
before the rising, and after the setting of the Sun, are illustrated with the
Sun Beams, even to the third part of the night. Now how great an Altitude is
required for this, shall be showed in the following Proposition.

Proposition. XIV. The time being given in which the Sun is sooner discerned on
the Vertex of the Mountain, than at the foot of the same, to find the Altitude
of the Mountain.
Let the Pole be Elevated on the Globe, for the Latitude of the Root of the
Mountain, and the Point being noted, which is opposed to the place of the Sun
in the Ecliptic, let the Arch of the depression of the Sun beneath the
Horizon, for the given time, be found. Then from this Arch, as from an
interval, from whence the Vertex of the Mountain is discovered, the Altitude of
the Mountain must be searched after by the Fourth Proposition of the Ninth
Chapter.

Proposition. XV. The places of the Moon being given in the Zodiac, together
with its Latitude, to find out, or show all those Places on the Globe, to which
the Moon is Vertical in the Circumrotation of that day.
Let the place of the Moon taken from the Ephemerides, be noted in the
Ecliptic, then let one end of the Quadrant be applied to the Pole of the
Ecliptic, the other to the Point noted in the Ecliptic, or to the place of
the Moon, and let the Degrees of the Latitude of the Moon be accounted on the
Quadrant, and let a mark be made at the term of the Numeration on the Globe;
then this being brought to the Meridian, and a Chalk applied, let a Parallel be
described, which the Moon that day does describe by her Circumvolution; and all
the places situated in this Parallel, are those demanded.

After the same Mode we act with the other Planers, if their Longitude and
Latitude be given.

Proposition XVI. The place of the Moon being given in the Zodiac, and its
Latitude, and the day of the year, to find the hour, in which she arises in
any place given, and in which she sets; also in which she makes midnight.
Let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the place of the Earth given; let
the place of the Sun found from the day of the year, be noted on the Ecliptic.
Then let a point also be noted on the Globe for the place of the Moon, as we
have showed in the preceding Proposition. See Proposition 15.
This being done, let the place of the Sun be brought to the Meridian, the
Index to the 12th hour of the Circle, and let the Globe be turned round until
the Moon arise, or be in the Meridian, or set. For the Index in the Circle will
show the hour of her rising or setting, or being in the Meridian, or setting.
After the same manner we must act with the other Planets.

Proposition XVII. To show on the Globe all those places, in which the Moon
arises at the given hour, and in which she is in the Meridian, and to which
she sets, if that the Longitude and Latitude of the Moon be known.
By the Globe are showed all the places in which the Moon arises, and sets
at any hour.
Let the place of the Sun, as also of the Moon, be noted on the Ecliptic, as
aforesaid, and the place of the Sun being brought to the Meridian, and the
Index to the 12th hour of the Circle, let the Globe be turned until the place
of the Moon come to the Meridian, and let the hours be observed on the Circle,
which are noted, or let a mark be made on the Circle: for they show how much
later the Moon comes to the Meridian, than the Sun. Moreover the place of the
Moon being constituted in the Meridian: let the eminent point be noted in this;
or let the Parallel of the Moon be described. This done, let the place of the
Sun be brought to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th hour. Let the Globe
be turned until the hour be found, in which the Moon touches the Meridian of
the place: Let the point also of the Meridian be noted, which hangs over the
place of the Moon. Moreover let the place whose hour is given, be brought to
the Meridian, the Index to the hour given: let the Globe be turned until the
Index show the 12th hour of noon, or midnight; so the places are those subject
to the Semicircle of the Meridian, in which the Sun makes the Meridies at the
hour given. Let the Index be reduced to 12, and let the Globe be turned again
until the Index come to the hour noted before in the Circle. In this situation
of the Globe, the place which is subject to the noted point of the Meridian, is
that to which the Sun is then Vertical.

Therefore let this place be constituted in the Globe in the Vertex of the
Horizon, all the places are those subject to the Superior Semicircle of the
Meridian, to which the Moon is then in the Meridian: but those places which are
discerned in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon, are those to which the
Moon then sets. Lastly in those places, which are discerned in the
Occidental Semicircle of the Horizon, the Moon rises at the given moment of
time. After the same Mode we act with Saturn, Jupiter, and the rest of the
Planets, if that their Longitude and Latitude be known,

Proposition XVIII. The day, or hour being given, in which the Ecliptic of the
Moon shall be, or has been, to exhibit on the Globe all those places which
have seen it, and in that species, to whom the Moon shall in the Meridian, to
whom it shall arise, and to whom it shall set Eclipsed.
This Problem little differs from the precedent, but yet it has a more easy
Solution.

From the day given, let the place of the Sun be found, except it be already
known, and let the Point opposite to it be noted on the Ecliptic of the Globe,
for this is the place of the Moon.

See Proposition 6. Chapter 28.
Let the place be found in the Globe to which the Sun is Vertical at the hour,
and let the Antipodes of this place be found according to the VI. Proposition
of the XXVIII. Chapter, for this shall be the place, unto which the Moon being
Eclipsed, shall be Vertical. Let this place be constituted in the Vertex of the
Horizon, the Pole being elevated or depressed for the Latitude of the place, so
all the places of the Globe which are above the Horizon, may have seen that
Eclipse: and those which lie under the Brazen Meridian, shall see it in the
Meridian: those which lie under the Oriental Semicircle, shall see it in the
West, or setting with the Eclipse; but those which lie in the Occidental
Semicircle of the Horizon, shall see it in the East, or Noon to arise Eclipsed.

But seeing that an Eclipse is not performed in one moment of an hour, but
dureth for some hours, therefore it is wont to be divided into the Beginning,
Middle, and End, and the Moments of the hours are wont to be noted, therefore
the consideration must be more especially concerning the middle time of the
Eclipse. Moreover, seeing that the Moon is less than the Earth, it will
illustrate a lesser part than the Hemisphere is; also it will be seen by the
Inhabitants of a lesser part, so that it will not be any more conspicuous to
those which lie in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon: but to those in the
Occidental Semicircle it has not yet appeared, but a certain Circle Parallel
to the Horizon is to be seen, which terminateth the part illustrated. Now how
much this part is distant from the Hemisphere, or how great a portion it is of
the Superficies of the Earth, shall be the enquiry of the following Proposition.

Proposition XIX. The Semidiameter of the Moon, and Earth being given, See
Scheme.
and the distance of them, to find out how long a portion of the Earth is
illustrated by the Moon at the Full.
See Proposition 11.
This Problem must be solved by the same Mode that we have used in the Eleventh
Proposition. For let the Center of the Earth be S, the great Circle
represents the Superficies, O F L H. The Center of the Moon A, the greatest
Circle C P B Q. Let the Tangents L B, O C, be drawn. For these are the ultimate
rays that can come from the Moon to the Earth, and therefore the Arch O H L,
will denote the part of the Superficies of the Earth. which is illustrated by
the Moon, and whose Inhabitants may see the Moon together, which by how much
lesser it is than the Hemisphere, we shall know if we find the Angle H S L, or
the Arch H L. Let B N be drawn from B, Parallel to A S, B A shall be equal to S
N, and N L, the excess of the Semidiameter of the Earth S L, above the
Semidiameter of the Moon A B, and B N is of an equal distance with A S: but the
the Angle N L B is direct, or of 90 Degrees. Therefore in the Triangle Straight
Angle N B L, we shall find the Angle N B L by this proportion. As N B is to N
L, so are the whole Signs to the Signs of the Angle L B N, whose Arch is that
in which H L differs from the Arch 90, or from the Quadrant of the Periphery
of the Earth, and so great an interval is the Periphery of the Earth distant
from the greater Circle, terminanating the part of the Earth illuminated by the
Moon. Let us suppose the Semidiameter of the Moon to contain four parts, of
such like the Semidiamiter of the Earth contains 15, or 4/15 of the
Semidiamiter of the Earth: now the greatest distance of the Moon from the Earth
in her Full; is 64 Semidiamiters of the Earth. Therefore N L shall be 11/15,
and the proportion shall be made thus: as 64 is to a 11/15, so is 10000000 to
114583, which is the Sign 39 Minutes. Therefore the Arch H L, is less than 90
Degrees. 39 Minutes, and therefore 89 Degrees. 21. Minutes.

Therefore in the place to which the Moon is Vertical constituted in the Vertex
of the Horizon, the People to whom the Moon then rises and sets, shall not
be those which are beheld in the very Horizon, but those in the Parallel of the
Horizon, distant from it 39 Minutes.

Proposition XX. The Declination of any Star being given, to exhibit all the
places on the Terrestrial Globe, unto which that Star is Vertical in his
Diurnal Circumvolution.
Of the Declination of Stars.
Let the Degrees of the given Declination of the Equator, be numbered on the
Brazen Meridian, and in the term of the Numeration make a sign with a Chalk, or
let a Parallel be noted on the Globe by a Chalk applied, and the Globe turned
round, all the places situated in this Parallel, are those, which pass through
the noted Point of the Meridian, the Vertex of which that Star in every Diurnal
Circumvolution shall possess for some moment of time.

Proposition XXI. The direct Ascension of any Star being given, and the hour of
the given day being given, to show all those places on the Terrestrial Globe,
on whose Meridian the Star is at the given hour.
Concerning the Ascension of any Star.
Let the Degrees given of the right Ascension of the Star be numbered in the
Equator, and let a mark be made with Chalk. Let also the place of the Sun
found from the given day, be brought to the Meridian; and let the Degrees of
the Equator in the Meridian be noted. Let the Arch of the Equator intercepted
between these two noted Points be observed, or which is the same, let it be
changed into hours, or scruples of hours: for they show the time which
intercedeth between the Appulse of the Sun, and that Star at any Meridian. This
done, let the places be found in whose Meridian the Sun is at the given hour,
or scruple of an hour, and the Index being placed at 12, let the Globe be
turned until the Index show the hour before noted, or until the noted Degrees
of the Equator have passed the Meridian. In this situation of the Globe all
those places which are discovered subject to the Meridian, are those sought
for, to wit, those in whose Meridian the Star is at the given time.

Proposition XXII. The right Declination, and Ascension of a Star being given,
and any time of the day being given, to exhibit on the Globe first, that place
to which the Star is then Vertical. Secondly, all those places above whose
Horizons the Star then shall be, and those beneath whose Horizons the same
shall then be: also those, in whose Meridian it shall be at the Meridies, and
in whose Meridian it shall be at midnight: also in all those places, in which
the Star shall then arise, and all those im which it shall then set.
From the direct Ascension, let the places be found in whose Meridian the Star
is at the time given, and those may remain subject to the Brazen Meridian. Then
let the Degrees of the given Declination from the Equator, toward the Pole be
numbered, and the Point of the Globe which is subject to the term of the
Numeration be noted. For this is the place, unto which the Star shall be
Vertical at the time: Let it be placed in the Vertex of the Horizon, the Pole
being Elevated for Latitude, so those places which are subject to the Superior
Semicircle of the Meridian shall have that Star at the given time in the
Meridian of the Meridies. But those places which are beheld in the Inseriour
Semicircle of the Meridian, shall have it in the Meridian of Midnight: and
those places which are beheld in the Oriental Semicircle of the Horizon, are
those to which the Star sets at once at that time: but to those which lie in
the Occidental Semicircle of the Horizon, the Star then arises together,

Proposition XXIII. To exhibit on the Terrestrial Globe all those places, in
which the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars, for so long time are obscured beneath
the Horizon, as they remain to us, or any other given place above the Horizon.
Let our place, or any other given place be brought to the Meridian, and let
the Parallel of the Antaeci be found; all the places situated in this
Parallel, are these sought for, as may be showed on the Globe, if that the Pole
be Elevated for the Latitude of the place given, and depressed for the Latitude
of the Parallel found.

Proposition XXIV To show the Cause why the days sooner augment and decrease
about the Aequinoxes, and more slowly about the Solstices, where for many days
there seems to be no increase or decrease, and that except the Equator, in
all the places of the Earth, and so much the more, by how much they are more
removed from the Equator.
Concerning the augmenting and decreasing of the days about the Aequinoxes and
Solstices.
For Example, Let us take 30 days before the Vernal Aequinox, (from the 20 of
February, to the 21 of March) and 30 days after the Solstice of Winter, or the
Solstice of Capricorn (from the 21 of December, to the 21 of January); here the
Cause must be shown, why the excess of the 21 of March, (or stay of the Sun
above the Horizon) above the Longitude of the 20 of February be much greater,
than the excess of the 21 of January, is above the 21 of December.

Let the place of the Sun for every one of those 4 days be noted on the
Ecliptic of the Globe, to wit, the first Degree of Pisces, of Aries,
Capricorn, and Aquarius, and let the Parallels of the Sun be described, whereof
two are extant in the Globe, viz. the Equator, and the Tropic of Capricorn.
Therefore it will be apparent, that the Equator, or Parallel of the Sun in the
1 of Aries is absent a far longer interval, from the Parallel of the Sun in the
1 of Pisces, than the Parallel of the Sun in the 1 of Aquarius, from the
Parallel in the 1 of Capricorn. Thence it comes to pass that not much a bigger
portion of the Parallel of the 1 of Aquarius is above the Horizon, than of the
Parallel of the 1 of Capricorn, or of the Tropic of Capricorn it self. Now
these parts show the stay of the Sun above the Horizon in those days, but the
portion of the Equator, or Parallel of the 1 of Aries, that is above the
Horizon, is much bigger than the portion of the Parallel of the 1 of Pisces.
Now because these Arches being above the Horizon, denote the stay of the Sun
above the Horizon, for this is the Longitude of the day, hence we collect the
increase or decrease of the Declination of the Sun from the Equator (or of the
Points of the Ecliptic) to be the Cause of this unequal increase of the days,
but in the places of the Equator it self, all days are equal, and therefore
here is no increase or decrease: although the Sun seem to stand about the days
of the Solstice, that is a little changing the Meridian Altitude.

Now it is manifest, that the greater inequality of this increase and decrease
of the days is to be found, where the places are more remote from the Equator,
if that the Pole be Elevated for the distance of the diverse places from the
Equator; and the Arches of the Parallels Elevated above the Horizon, be
considered in both scituations.

Proposition XXV. In the places of the Torrid Zone, or those situated in the
Equator, or in the midst of the Torrid Zone, the Sun much sooner departs
from the Vertex, than in places near the Tropic of Cancer, or Capricorn.
Of the departure of the Sun in places of the Torrid zone.
Let any Degree in the Brazen Meridian of the Globe be noted, for Example, the
Fifth Degree from the Equator, and another place in the Torrid Zone being
taken, for Example, one whose Latitude is 18 Degrees. Let this be brought to
the Meridian; make a sign with a Chalk in this, and let 5 Degrees from this
toward the Tropic be reckoned on the Brazen Meridian, and here again make a
sign with a Chalk. We must show that the Sun in fewer days is removed from the
Vertex of the places of the Equator, 5 Degrees in the Meridies, than from the
Vertex of another place so many Degrees.

Let the Globe be turned until some Point of the Ecliptic come under some
noted Point of the Meridian near to the Equator. And let the Degrees of the
Ecliptic between the first of Aries and Libra, and between that Point and the
Arches here to be noted. Then let the Globe be turned again, until some Point
of the Ecliptic pass through the Note made in the Meridian for the place, and
let this Point of the Ecliptic be noted: then let the Globe be turned again
until another Point of the Ecliptic pass through by that Point, removed five
Degrees which is noted, which must again be noted: and let the Arch between the
two last Points of the Ecliptic be reckoned, which will be found to be much
bigger, than that which was first noted; and thence the Sun shall stay in this
Arch more days than in the former, and therefore he more slowly recedeth from
the Vertex of the second place, than from the Vertex of the place taken in the
Equator.



THE THIRD BOOK OF General Geography, TO WIT, THE COMPARATIVE PART Of the
Affections from Comparing of Places.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Longitude of a place.
Definitions.

1. HE Circle of the Longitude of any place in the Earth, Definition.
is a Circle passing through that place, and both the Poles of the Earth. It is
also termed the Meridian Circle, because the Meridian of a place, and the
Circle of the Longitude of a place, are one and the same Circle. But they are
only rationally distinguished, because the Meridian has respect to the Motion
of the Stars; the Circle of the Longitude, to the extension of the Earth;
having no respect to the Celestial Motions. But the use of the term Meridian,
is more frequent and convenient, and therefore we shall also use the word. They
are conspicuous in Globes, and Maps, passing through every Ten Degrees of the
Equator.

2. The distance of a place from a certain Meridian is termed the Longitude of
a place, or else it is the Arch of the Equator, or Parallel intercepted
between the Meridian of that place, and a certain other Meridian: This Meridian
from which the Meridians of other places are reckoned, from West toward the
East, is called the first Meridian. The Longitude of the Earth it self is
termed its extension from West to East, conceived according to the Line of the
Equator. The first Meridian in the Maps, and Globes, is notable above the rest
for Magnitude, and Color, and it is apparent to the eyes.

3. The distance of one place from another, is a very short Line intercepted
between those two places in the Superficies of the Earth.

4. Any Point in the Globe and Maps, is truly said to represent and exhibit any
place of the Earth, if that it has that Situation and distance to the other
points of the Maps, such as the place of the Earth, which it ought to
represent, has to the other places of the Earth, which are represented by the
other Points of the Earth.

Proposition I. Nature has put no beginning or end to the dimension of the
Earth, or of the extension from the West, to the East, or according to the
Equator, but all and every one of the places may be taken for a beginning and
the first Meridian may be placed in them.
For the better understanding of this, the matter must be more fully searched
into, No beginning or end of the Dimension of the Earth, etc.
because that some, (I know not upon what account) suppose great mysterias to
l^e herein, that every Superficies, as well plane as crooked (as a Line ^y one,
and a Body by three) is measured and terminated by two Dimensions, or
extensions, as is evident from Principles of Geometry, and common use: of which
extension one is termed the Longitude of the extension or figure, and the other
the Latitude: and the one is conceived perpendicular to the other. Neither do
these extensions differ in their nature, but that which we take for Longitude,
may also be taken for Latitude, and so on the contrary: but yet for the most
part, if these two extensions be unequal, we take the longest for Longitude,
and the shortest for Latitude.

But in Ordinate Figures, as in the Aequilateral Triangle, a Quadrate, and the
like, the two extensions are equal; neither is there any difference between
Longitude and Latitude. For the Figure of the Superficies of the Earth is
Spherical, and Latitude does not truly differ from Longitude, which we so
conceive in it for the more distinct cognition. Now those two extensions in the
Spherical Superficies are commodiously so conceived (as in other crooked
Superficies,) if that first the Periphery of the Semicricle be taken in it,
drawn from one point to the opposite point, and this Line be made one extension
of the Superficies, then for the other extension you shall take another
Periphery, cutting the former Periphery in the middle at Right Angles (for so
Longitude and Latitude are taken in all Figures) and this must be conceived to
extend about the whole Superficies, until it return to it self, that so, a
crooked Superficies may be supposed to be extended into a plane. Because
therefore the first assumed Periphery, or extension, is only the Semicircle,
that shall be the Latitude of the Globe; the latter, or other extension shall
be the Longitude of the Globe, because it is longer than the former extension,
as returning into it self, and being the Periphery of the whole Circle. Others
render another cause of the Appellation; (...), that the lesser part of the
Earth was known to the Ancients, from Pole to Pole; the greater from the East
to the West.

Concerning the Latitude and Longitude of the Earth, and of places.
Moreover in the Superficies of the Globe, we may take any Semipeniphery for the
extension of Latitude, and his perpendicular for the extension of Longitude,
and therefore we may do the same also on the Superficies of the Earth: but
because it is better for memory, if that the Peripheries be assumed, whose
bounds, or self those Peripheries before the other Peripheries, which have
somewhat peculiar in the Superficies, therefore in the Superficies of the Earth
for the extension of Latitude, some one Periphery is deservedly taken, drawn
amongst the Poles of the Earth, and because no other Periphery is perpendicular
to this Periphery, which may pass together through its Medium, except the Line
of the Equator, therefore the Equator it self must be taken for the extension
of the Longitude of the Earth.

So I think it is clearly explained, for what reason the Latitude of the Earth
between the Poles is measured for Longitude by the assumed Line of the
Equator. This Latitude and Longitude of the Earth must not be confounded with
the Latitude and Longitude of places, or Points in the Earth, therefore they
are expressed by the same terms, because the Latitude of places, or Points, is
taken in the Periphery of the Latitude of the Earth it self, and is part of it:
but the Longitude of places or Points is taken in the Periphery of the
Longitude of the Earth, viz. in the Equator it self, and its Parallels.

Yet this is an improper acceptance of the terms, because Latitude and
Longitude properly (as has been said) only agrees to the Figures and
Superficies: but a Point has neither Latitude, nor Longitude; and therefore
this different acceptance of the words, Latitude and Longitude, ought to be
observed, because they are so frequently met with in the reading of
Geographers, viz. the use and acceptance otherwise when we say the Latitude
and Longitude of France, Spain, and the like. Because then the words are taken
in their proper signification: for it is the Figure of France, or Spain, and so
Longitude then signifies the outmost or longest extension, but Latitude the
shortest; which acceptance does agree with that, wherein we said before that
so much Latitude and so much Longitude must be assigned to the Superficies of
the Earth. But the signification is otherwise, when we say, the Latitude or
Longitude of this place, if by places we understand any Point, City, or Famous
Place, because then, Latitude denotes the distance of the place from the
Equator; and the Longitude its distance from a certain Meridian. And indeed in
my Judgment, for the avoiding of confusion, The Authors Judgment about the
words Latitude, and Longitude.
it were better to abstain from the use of these words, Longitude and Latitude,
and to use these in their stead, the distance from the Equator, and the
distance from the Meridian: but seeing that for so many Ages this has been
received, therefore it will be a hard matter to abolish it, wherefore in the
following Discourse I shall also use the said terms, Latitude and Longitude.

Moreover the Latitude of a place, as the Latitude of the whole Earth, has
some noted Points of the Earth for the beginning of the Numeration, viz. the
Poles and the Equator: but the Longitude of the Earth, because it is extended
about the whole Earth, has no certain beginning, or end, but the beginning and
end is every where, because the Periphery is like to an infinite Line,
Wherefore any Point of the Equator may be taken for the beginning of the
Longitude of the Earth, and the Meridian passing through that Point, for the
first Meridian, from whence the Meridians of all the Points of the Earth are
numbered, or the Longitude of them Calculated.

Now why we require these two distances in every Point of the Earth, viz. one
from the Equator, and the other from a certain Meridian, shall be showed in
the Third Proposition.

Proposition II. To place and determinate the first Meridian, and the beginning
of the Numeration for the Longitude of the places in the Globe of the Earth.
We have said in the preceding Proposition that every Point of the Equator
may be taken for the beginning of the extension of the Earth according to
Longitude, See Proposition 1.
and that from its Meridian the Longitudes of places must be reckoned, but
because we cannot take all at once, it is better to fix one beginning, or to
choose some certain Point, (but that is left to the choice of persons).
Therefore Geographers have taken a certain place in the Superficies of the
Earth, through which the first Meridian shall be drawn, and should show in the
Equator, where it cutteth it, this beginning of reckoning of the Longitude of
places. But all have not taken the same place for the first Meridian, but
diverse. Ptolomy has taken that near to the Fortunate Islands, which he
removes but only one degrees. from the first, and hence toward the Oriental
quarter through Africa, and Asia, he reckons the rest of the Meridians, The
Longitude of places where begun by Ptolomy.
and Longitude of places. For seeing it was less free to place a beginning, the
Ancients chose rather to have an account of the places of the Earth, which they
knew were inhabited, which portion does not return into it self, as the
Superficies of the Earth, and therefore in that portion or part a beginning of
Longitude and end may be assigned in another Point. Because therefore in the
time of Ptolomy the Fortunate Isles, where the ultimate ones in the Occidental
Quarter of all the Earth, or Lands then known: Therefore from that bound
Ptolomy begins to reckon the Longitude of the Earth, and having gone
forwards to the Oriental Regions, he makes the end of his Numeration of the
Meridians, in Sina, the ultimate Shore of Asia.

But in process of time many Regions of the Earth were found to be Inhabited
toward the Occid. and America was discovered, then some Geographers promoted
the beginning of Numeration of Longitude toward the Occid. For some made the
first Meridian at the Isle of St. Nicholas, adjacent to Cape Verd in Africa;
but Hondius chose the Isle of St. James in his Maps.

The Longitude of places where begun by Hondius, Mercator, and others.
Some chose the Meridian of one of the Islands of the Azores, which is called
Del Corvo for the first Meridian, because that in this Isle, and the adjoining
Sea, the Magnetic Needle is found to have no Declination from the Meridian
Line, and that it shows the Northern and Southern quarter. Mercator has
observed the beginning also in his Maps.

But seeing that there are other places in the Earth, where the Magnetic
Needle does the same, neither does it do it in all the Meridian of this place,
therefore other Geographers have not thought that Cause sufficient: and some
have placed the first Meridian in the Brazilian Shore: the more Modern,
especially the Hollanders having gone back to the Fortunate, or Canary Isles,
have chose in one of them called Teneriffe, The Longitude by the Hollanders
begun at Teneriffe.
a Mountain which is thought to be the highest in the whole World, called El
pico de Teneriffe, and from the Meridian of this Mountain, they judge the
Numeration of the Longitude of places ought to be begun, because they think fit
that a Famous and durable place for all Ages may be best chosen for this
purpose, concerning which in Ages to come, Posterity should not easily doubt,
and moreover that that assignation of Ptolomy, which has been observed for so
many Ages, should not be deserted on a trivial account. The Longitude by the
French begun at the Isle of Fer, in the Canaries.
The French at this day, from the Year 1634, observe that for the first
Meridian which passes through the Occidental part of the Isle of Fer, one of
the Canary Isles. Which beginning Lewis the XIII King of France, commanded his
Mariners and Geographers to observe.

Astronomers also take diverse places for the first Meridian. For those who
follow Tycho, are wont to place it at Vranoburge, situate in an Island in the
Danish Sea, and at this place to compute their Celestial motions, and thence to
other places. Others make other beginnings as they follow this or that Author
of the Ephemerides. The Longitude likewise begun in sundry places by
Astronomers.
For the Writers of Ephemerides, as also the computers of the Planetary Tables,
are wont to calculate the motions and appearances of the Planets, to the
Meridians of their own Country, as Origanus to Frankford, Maginus to Venice,
(because that Padua is an Academy of the Venetians). Ecstadius to Stetin,
Lansbergius to Goesa in Zeland, Reinholdus to Regium a Mountain of Borusia.

But to speak freely what I think, all this dissent of Authors proceeds from
no sufficient Cause, so that those who first removed the Ptolomaick-beginning
out of its place are blame worthy. But it is all one, whatsoever beginning of
this account is taken in the Earth, whether the place be noted, or the ultimate
to the Occident, or Orient, so that the situation and distance of the other
places be accurately known at it. Yet this variety of the beginning of the
Meridians expresses the reading of Geographical Writers with many confusions
and difficulties. Yet because the knowledge of the Declination of the
Loadstone, is of great utility, and that that Declination increases even to a
certain Meridian, and then again decreaseth, I think it not altogether
inconvenient for the observation of the Declination of the Load stone, and the
more easy comparison of the increase or decrease of it, if that that be taken
for the first Meridian, in which the Magnetic Needle makes little or no
Declination, so that such a Meridian might be given, viz. in all the places of
which, or the most at least, the Magnetic Needle would do it.

But seeing that the Hollanders at this time take the Mountain of Teneriffe,
for the beginning of their Longitude, and that they Sail at this day into all
parts of the World, therefore it is convenient to acknowledge the same
beginning with them for the better understanding of the Diaries that they are
wont to publish.

Now you must know that the Reading of Authors, where mention is made of the
Longitude of a Place, or of a certain numbered Meridian, that then you ought to
consider, what beginning of Longitude that Author determines, or through what
place he brings his first Meridian, ( as you are to observe that the Maps
which are used in the Second Part of this Book, being the Geographical
Description of the parts and places of the Four Parts of the World, the
Longitude I say of those places, are taken according to the French Account,
beginning at the Isle of of Fer, being one of the Canary Isles, they being
Composed by Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the King of France, and whose Method
is not convenient to be allowed), for to that the Longitude of other places
must be brought and inquired of.

Proposition III. The Latitude and Longitude of any place, or the distance of
any place from the Equator, or a certain Meridian being given, which is found
in the Maps, or Globes, to exhibit the situation and Point of that place on
the Maps, or Globes. Or thus, If that we be in any place of the World (either
at Land or Sea) which is unknown unto us, or whose situation we are ignorant
of, to the other parts of the Earth, so that if we can find the Latitude and
Longitude of this place, thence to find out the situation of this place in the
Earth, and its distance from other places.
This is that Problem for which a Method is sought so anxiously, and with so
great industry, by which the Longitude of a place at any time in which we are
in it may be found, and therefore although we should first treat of the
invention of this Longitude, yet I thought it fitter to premise the Problem it
self, for which that Longitude is sought for, and that for this reason, seeing
that we must treat largely of this Longitude, least you should be cloyed, not
knowing to what end so great a labor is undertaken, and so many various ways
tried.

The Longitude and Latitude of places, of great importance to Mariners to know.
For Mariners having Sailed far from the Shore, and being in the Ocean, because
they cannot accurately know the way of their Voyage made, by reason of the
diverse hindrances, and note it in their Maps, are often ignorant in what place
of the Earth they are, what situation this place has to those places whither
they go, or what places are to be gone to, if that they will avoid danger, and
therefore also they are ignorant unto what quarter they must direct their
course. Unto the knowledge of which there is no more ready a Method, than for
to certainly find the Longitude, and Latitude of the place, that is, its
distance from the Equator, and some certain Meridian of the Earth. And
Mathematicians have taught them, with no great difficulty by diverse ways to
find out the Latitude of a place in the day by the Sun, and in the night by the
Stars. Such Modes we have showed before, (for those who think to know it only
by the help of the Compass, sufficiently discovered their ignorance;) from
which Latitude being found, they know in what Parallel of the Earth they are,
which indeed is no small part of the demand. But seeing that the Points of the
Parallel are infinite, they do not yet know from the knowledge of this Latitude
in what Point of the Parallel they are: this they would attain, if that they
knew in what Meridian they were, or how many degrees this Meridian is distant
from some Meridian of other places. For this Meridian cutteth the Parallel
before found, that Point is the place wherein they are. For so it is observed
in all Mathematical Disciplines, that when it is demanded concerning the place
of any Point, that for the most part is no otherwise found than by the Section
of two Lines.

Therefore let the Latitude or Longitude of any place, or Point situated in
the Superficies of the Earth be known, the situation of the place or Point
will be found thus in the Globe.

Let the degrees. of Latitude from the Equator be numbered in the Brazen Meridian,
and at the term of the Numeration, let the Parallel of the place, or Circle of
Latitude, be described by a Chalk applied. Thus it is certain from the found
out Latitude, that we are in some Point of it, or that some Point of it is that
which is sought for. And this Point moreover is known from the found out
Longitude, for let the Meridian or place, from which that Longitude is reckoned
be brought under the Brazen Meridian (if that the Meridian pass through the
beginning of this Numeration, or if the first Meridian of the Globe be that
beginning, then it is not necessary to bring it to the Brazen Meridian) and let
the degrees. of the known Longitude, be numbered in the Equator for that Point,
which is in the Meridian, toward the West, or East, as the Longitude is given.
Let the term of the Numeration be brought to the Brazen Meridian (except some
Meridian pass through it) so this Meridian shall represent the Meridian in
which the Point sought, or place unknown is necessarily situated. And the
Parallel is before found, in which the same demanded Point has been shown to
be situated. Wherefore the sought place is that Point where the found out
Meridian, and the before found out Parallel mutually cut one another, viz. that
Point of the Parallel which is discovered under the Brazen Meridian: The
practice is easy after this Mode.

Let the degrees of the given Longitude be numbered in the Equator, from that
Point which is the beginning of the given Longitude: Let the term of the
Numeration be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and let the Degrees of the
Latitude given be reckoned from the Equator in the Meridian. The term of this
Numeration is the place sought, or the term of the Point, in which the place
unknown lies.

Mariners make use of Maps or Charts consisting of straight Lines.
It is thus showed on Maps, consisting of straight Lines, as all Mariners Maps
are: the degrees of Latitude are reckoned in the Lines descending, or side
Lines, and the Rule being applied, the Parallel of the place is drawn, in which
it is certain that the unknown place lies. Then in the transverse lines above
and beneath, the Longitude is reckoned, and the Rule being applied, the
Meridian Line is drawn, where this cutteth the former, that is the Point of the
place sought for. But more expeditiously thus: the Rule being applied to the
degrees of Longitude given in the tranverse lines, then one or other part is
taken from the interval of the Compass in the Lateral line, which lies between
the given degree of Latitude, and the upper or lower Point, and this interval
or space of the Compass being fitted to the Rule, presently you have the place
of the Point sought for in the Map. Therefore the situation of this is beheld
at once in all places; hence it is easy to gather unto what quarter the Ship
must Sail, and direct her Course, if that they intend to arrive at this or that
place.

Of Maps of Crooked Lines.
We act after the same Mode in Maps of Crooked lines, except only that we are
forced to draw Crooked lines in straight lines. This is the principal use of
the found out Latitude of the Mariners Art.

The second and greatest use, is the making of Globes and Maps, because after
the same Mode in which we have showed by Longitude, and Latitude known, all the
places are made in the Globes and Maps, as shall be showed in the following
Proposition. For it would be impossible to make a Terrestrial Globe, except the
Longitude of places had been found out and known. And thence it comes to pass,
that Globes, and Maps, may attribute many places to a false place, because
their true Latitude was not known.

The third use of the known Latitude of places is also notable, viz. that by
that we easily know the variety of times in diverse places, and in what hour, or
in what part of an hour every one of the Celestial Phoenomena's are beheld in
diverse Regions, of which I shall speak in the next Proposition.

The fourth use, is that from the difference of the Longitude of two places,
and Latitude, the distance of places is found. Now we come to the Method of
finding of it.

Proposition IV. The Sun, Stars, and all the Points conceived in the Heaven (as
the Points of the Equator, and Parallels) are every hour removed, or recede 15
degrees from the Meridian of any place, in one scruple of an hour 1/60 they are
removed 15 minutes, and so in 4 scruples of an hour they recede one degree,
viz. the distance being taken in the Parallel of any Star.
The Sun, Stars, and all the Points conceived in the Heavens, are every hour
removed 15 degrees from the Meridian of any place.
An hour is the 24th part of time, in which the Sun being carried from the
Meridian of any place, to the Occident through the lower Heaven, and the
Oriental Horizon, returns to the Meridian again, that is, he is circumvolved
through an whole Periphery. Now a Periphery is accounted by 360, and if you
divide 360 by 24, you shall find that 15 degrees do answer to one hour.
Therefore the Sun in one hour is removed 15 degrees. from the Meridian of any
place, all the Stars also are found at the same time to be wheeled round with
the Sun, through an whole Periphery to the Meridian. Wherefore they also depart
from the Meridian every hour 15 degrees. and in 4 scruples of an hour one degrees.

This may be showed or demonstrated on the Globe. For let any Point of the
Equator be noted, and that being brought to the Meridian, let the Index be
placed at the 12th hour of the Circle. Then let the Globe be turned until the
Index show the first hour, and you shall find that the noted Point of the
Equator, has departed 15 degrees. from the Meridian, or as we commonly say, the
Meridian has passed 15 degrees. of the Equator: if you then again turn the Globe
until the Index show the 2d, 3d, or 4th hour, you shall find in every noted
hour, that the Point has departed from the Meridian 15 degrees. After the same
Mode we shall find the same in any Parallel, which the Sun and Stars do
describe by a Diurnal Motion without the Equator.

Proposition V. The given hours being given at one and the same time, or at one
and the same Celestial appearance, as also the Horary minutes of our place, and
that of the other place; to find out how many degrees the Meridian of our place
is distant from the Meridian of the other place, that is to find the Longitude
of our place from that place.
The solution is easy from what has been said already, by reason that it has
been showed, that if one place anticipateth one hour of the account of the
other place, the Meridian of that is more Oriental than the Meridian of this,
by 15 degrees; if two hours by 30 degrees; if three hours by 45 degrees.

Let therefore the difference of the given hours, be changed into the degrees,
and Minutes of the Equator, viz. reckoning for every hour 15 degrees; for of
an hour, 3 degrees, 45 Minu^es; for one scruple of an hour 1 degree. The found
out degrees and Minutes, will show the distance of the Meridians, viz. if that
the hours of our place be more than the hours of the other place, our Meridian
shall be situated toward the East from the other; if fewer, toward the West.

Proposition VI. Again hours and scruples of hours of diverse places being given
at one and the same time; or at the time of one and the same Celestial
appearance, and one place, or one Meridian of one place being given in the
Maps, or Globes, to exhibit also the Meridian or Longitude of another place on
the Globe or Maps.
Let the difference of hours, and scruples of hours be changed into the Degrees
and Minutes of the Equator. Further concerning the Longitude of places.
Then consider, whether the hours of this place, whose Meridian is given on the
Globe, and the Maps be fewer or more than that of the other place, whose
Meridian is sought for. If fewer, this other Meridian shall be situated from
the given Meridian, toward the East; if more toward the West. Let it be
brought to the Brazen Meridian (except some other Meridian pass through it) and
let the Degrees and Minutes found from the difference of the hours be numbered
from the Point of the Equator, together being in the Meridian, and that
toward the West, or East, as we collect the situation of the other place (it
is more easily done by the Horary Index applied to 12, and the Globe being
turned round until the Index show the difference of the hours). Let the term of
the account be noted with Chalk, and brought under the Meridian: so this Brazen
Meridian shall be the Meridian sought, and the Point of the Equator shall show
its Longitude.

In Maps let the same Degrees and Minutes be numbered from the given Meridian in
tranverse lines above and below, and the Rule being applied, let the Line be
drawn (for in right lined Maps, as such as those of Mariners, is the chief of
this Problem) this Line shall be the sought for Meridian.

Proposition. VII. To find the Longitude of an unknown place, in which we are,
or to find the distance of the Meridian in which we are, from some known
Meridian, or whose situation is or may be expressed on the Maps, or Globes.
Of the finding out of the Longitude of an unknown place in which we are.
This is that Problem whose solution Seamen so much expect from the
Mathematicians, which would render the Art of Navigation almost perfect, and
subject to no Error, which has exercised for this two Ages the wits of so
many great persons, for the resolving of which, the English, French, Dutch,
have every one appointed a donative of 50000 Florens to him who shall exhibit a
resolution: the Dutch and German Mariners are wont sometimes to expound the:
Problem according to the Latin phrase: but sometimes they use another, as if
you should say, to seek the Oriental and Occidental quarter, which phrase is
very void of the matter; so that it is manifest what a power the Vulgar have
taken in introducing new phrases, though very improper. For by this phrase it
comes to pass that persons unskilful in Geography, and Navigation, are
ignorant what the Mariners mean, when they speak of finding out the East, and
West: for most think, that they seek what the words import, viz. the Eastern
and Western quarter, which yet is false and unworthy the demand. For they know
these quarters when they are in any place of the Sea, by the benefit of the
same Magnetic Needle, which shows the North and South. Because in the
Mariners Compass all the quarters are noted, and without the Compass the Plaga
of the North and South, being known, it is most easy to show the quarter of the
East, and West; for the face being turned toward the North, the East is on the
right hand, the West on the left: on the contrary, the face being turned
toward the South, the East is on the left hand, and the West on the right. But
this is not the demand, but the Longitude of the place is that required; that
is, how much in the Arch of the Equator the Meridian of this place is removed
toward the West, or East, from any certain Meridian. But why, may some say, do
Mariners assume so improper a phrase? The reason is, that the Vulgar do
conceive almost all things confusedly, and only Superficially, and from a small
similitude with other things impose Names and Phrases, as is manifest from the
appellation of America, which they Vulgarly term the West Indies, because that
after the discovery of India, (properly so called) that was also found. This
might be instanced by many more Examples, and so it is with this phrase, to
seek the East and West. But seeing that this Problem to find out the North and
South, is resolved by the Magnetic Needle, and also the Problem of finding out
the Longitude of a place is of very great Moment, and Mariners desire to have
as easy a Method to know the same, as that of the Latitude of a place, and
moreover that Longitude is reckoned from the West, to the East in the Equator;
Longitude reckoned from the West to the East in the Equator.
therefore by reason of this slight similitude, and account, they have taken up
this phrase, to find the East and West, when here no quarter is sought for, but
only the distance of the Meridians. This is convenient to explain, by reason
that many were brought into an Error, and false Conception of the same, or at
least were ignorant, what was signified by the phrase.

It is easy as is showed aforesaid, from the difference of hours, to show, or
find out the Longitude of one place from another. Therefore in Calendars, and
Ephemerides, (by the signal Benefit, and liberality of Astronomy) we have set
down for every day and hour, all the Phoenomena of any place, and the Motions
of the Planets, as the beginning, the middle, the end of an Eclipse; also the
Conjunction of the Moon with other Planets, her entrance into the Ecliptic.
Therefore being in the place of an unknown Longitude, if we enquire the hour in
which we behold the same Phoenomena in this place, we shall thence find the
difference of our hour, from the hour of that place unto which the Tables are
Calculated; and hence moreover the distance of the Meridian from the Meridian
in which we are, or whose hours the Table shows, and so we have the demanded
Longitude of the place. Neither does the difficulty consist in the finding of
the hour, and Horary scruples, for they are easily known from the quarter on
Altitude of the Sun or Stars, but the difficulty is in the defect of such
Celestial appearances, which may be so observed.

Now although there be also other Modes, by which without the knowledge of the
hours, and consideration of the Planetary motions, the Longitude of a place may
be inquired, yet they have no place here, by reason that they do not first show
the Longitude, but the place it self, and require other things which are
equally unknown in those cases with the Longitude, which Modes we shall explain
in the following discourse. But now we seek such Modes, in which that Longitude
of the place may be found, where the situation of the place is unknown. All
which Modes presuppose a knowledge and comparison of the time in which any
appearance of the Planetary motion is beheld in diverse places. But those
Motions are unfit for this business which are very slow, so that in many hours
none, or little difference is found in the place of those Planets. For Example,
Saturn makes his Progress in the Ecliptic, in the space of one hour.
Therefore although from the Ephemerides we may have the time, and the hour
which is in that place when that Saturn is in the Ecliptic, yet because that
he moves very slowly, thence it comes to pass, that if you observe, he
seems to stay many hours in the same place, and therefore that Moment of the
hour cannot be known in the place where we are, seeing that they stay in the
very minute, and therefore they cannot also compare the hour of our place, with
the hour of the place of the Tables.

The Motion of the Sun in the Ecliptic.
So the Sun goes forwards every hour in the Ecliptic about 2 first minutes,
(because in an whole day it goes forwards about one degree) which Motion is
over flow for this business, by reason that although observations may be very
accurately made at the beginning and end of the hour, yet the same place of the
Sun shall be found, and therefore the Error of two or three hours may easily
happen. For you must know, that the Modes ought to be such that in the very
search of the 15th part of an hour, an error may be avoided, that is, that that
Celestial Phoenomenon, which is made use of for the finding of the same, may
sensibly be varied within two scruples of an hour; for if at or between two
scruples of an hour, it remains altogether the same both as to sense and
diligent observation, we cannot be certain of that part of an hour, in which
that happens truly in the Heaven, and if we err two scruples of an hour in
the observation, then an error of half a degree will slip into the Longitude;
so that we will suppose that our Meridian in which we are, and note it in the
Maps, and Globes, which is not the true one, but removed from the true one in
the Equator half a degrees. Therefore they are such Phoenomenons of the Planets,
which within two scruples of an hour, or else at one scruple, or if possible,
at half a scruple may be varied. But of such there are none but these. 1. The
beginning of the Eclipse of the Moon, the middle, and the end. 2. The
Longitude, or place of the Moon in the Zodiac, 3. The distance of the Moon
from the fixed Stars, or her appulse toward them. 4. The ingress of the Moon
into the Ecliptic, or into the Points of her Circle, where this cutteth the
Ecliptic; And 5. The Conjunction, Distance, and Eclipses of the Jovial
Planets, viz. of those Four Planets which are found in this our Age, to make a
Circuit about Jupiter. Whence the Copernican Hypothesis has obtained a great
deal of Confirmation.

The first Mode by the Eclipse of the Moon.
Of the Eclipse of the Moon. First Mode.
This Mode is very* accurate if that their could happen but Eclipses every
night. At the time wherein we behold the beginning or end of the Lunary Eclipse
by the help of the Telescope, then I say, let the Altitude, or Plaga of any
fixed Star be observed, and also let the Elevation of the Pole be before found
out, or let it together be sought for from some Star in the Meridian. From the
Altitude of the Star, the hour with the scruples, is accurately enough found,
as we shall show from Astronomy, and more easily without the invention of
Altitude, if the Star be in the Meridian. Let this hour so found out with the
scruples, be compared with the hour and scruples in which the Ephemerides
exhibit the beginning of the Eclipse, or the middle, (which hours respect the
Meridian, unto which the Ephimerides are Calculated) for so the hour of two
places is found at the same time, or at the same Celestial appearance, viz. the
hour of our place, and of the Meridian of the Ephemerides: and the Meridian of
the Ephemerides is known. Therefore we shall find the Longitude of our place
from the Meridian of the Ephemerides, if we change the difference of the hours
of both places into the degrees and Minutes of the Equator, as we have said in
the V. Proposition. And because in Maps given, and in the Globe, the given
Meridian of the Ephemerides is known, or may be showed with little labor,
therefore we must reckon the degrees found out from it in the transverse lines
of the Maps, toward the West, or East, as the hour of our place, or of the
place unknown shall be more, or sewer than the hours of the Meridian of the
Ephemerides and the Meridian Line shall be brought through the term of the
Numeration. That is the Meridian of the place in which we then are, or in which
the observation of the Ecliptic was made.

The second Mode by the place of the Moon in the Zodiac.
Although the preceding Mode, by the Eclipse of the Moon performing the
business, The second Mode.
be most accurate, yet because those Eclipses are very rare, neither are all
conspicuous in all places, therefore this Mode does not resolve the business
sufficiently, neither can it help the Mariners in the wide Ocean, but it is
more convenient to the constituting and finding out the hours of the
Terrestrial places, where Mathematicians are, or may go, and the Longitudes of
almost all places* which we know are found out by this Mode. For from the noted
comparation of the time, in which the beginning, or middle of the Eclise was
discovered, it is easy to find out the Longitude of one place from another, as
I think is sufficiently explained. But the use of Mariners requires a
Phoenomenon or appearance, viz. which may happen every night at the least (if
not in the days) because it can happen in every night, so that they may be in
an unknown place, as deceived by Tempests. But the more frequent Phoenomenon is
the place of the Moon in the Zodiac, but a very troblesom observation is
required by reason of twofold Parallaxes, so that you can hardly avoid a small
error, if at least a great one of half, or an whole hour be shunned, whence a
false Meridian is found removed from a true many miles; viz. a hundred and
more. Yet you will be subject to the lesser error, if that you expect the
moment of the hour in which the Moon is in the Meridian: for then the place is
accurately enought found after this Mode. When you have observed that the Moon
is come into the Meridian of the place where you are, then you must presently
take the noted Altitude of some Star, and from this, It is presupposed that the
Elevation of the Pole is before found.
and the Elevation of the Pole, you may enquire the hour: but it is better to
do it by some Star then in the Meridian, as we shall hereafter show. Moreover
from the known hour is found what Point of the Ecliptic, or Zodiac, is then
in the Meridian, or that possesses the middle of Heaven (as Astronomers speak)
which also is easy as we shall show anon. So at the hour of our place, or of
the unknown place, we shall have the known place of the Moon in the Zodiac.
Then from the Tables of the Ephemerides let the hour be found, which is in the
Meridian of the Ephemerides, where the Sun is in the place of the Zodiac,
which is taught in the Introduction of the Ephemerides, neither is it
difficult. And so again we shall have the hours of two places at the same time,
viz. of the place in which we are, whose Longitude is unknown, and of the
place, unto whose Meridian the Ephemerides are Calculated, and whose situation
is in Maps and Globes. Wherefore from the difference of time the Longitude of
our place sought for shall be found, as is sufficiently demonstrated in the
preceding Mode.

The third Mode, by the distance of the Moon from some fixed Star.
The third Mode of the Moon.
By reason that we cannot observe the Moon in the Meridian many nights, viz.
when she is not much removed from the Sun, after and before the New Moon, and
therefore this appearance is not so frequent as the Mariners use requires,
Therefore some do consider another Phoenomenon in the motion of the Moon, which
is more frequent, and from thence the Mode in finding out the Longitude is
delivered, viz. the drawing near, and departing of the Moon from the fixed
Stars; for from thence the true place of the Moon may be observed at the given
moment of the observation. But the Calculation is so difficult by reason of the
Parallaxes, and the solution of the Oblique Spherical Triangles, and other
hazards, that it can neither serve Mariners, nor will I burden you with its
Precepts, but rather omit it. For it requires a Genius most expert in
Calculation.

The fourth Mode by the entrance of the Moon into the Ecliptic.
The fourth Mode of the Moon.
The path of the Moon cutteth the Ecliptic in two points, in which when it
comes by its own proper motion, she is then in the Ecliptic, but at other
times it is moved out of it by a great departure of 5 degrees. Therefore you
must observe exactly the time in the place of the unknown Longitude, in which
the Moon touches the Ecliptic. Moreover from the Ephemerides, let the hour be
taken at the Meridian of the Ephemerides, in which that entrance is made. Then
from the comparison of our time, or of the place unknown, with the time of the
Meridian of the Ephemerides, you have the difference of time, whence the
Longitude of the place, which is ours may be found from the Meridian of the
Ephemerides. But this Mode also by reason of the difficult practice is to be
esteemed useless. For the entrance of the Moon into the Ecliptic is difficult
to be observed, and the Calculation is very intricate, and subject to ^rror.

The fifth Mode by the Jovial Planets.
The fifth Mode by the Jovial Planets.
Many judge this Phoenomenon to be prefered before the Phoenomenons of the Moon
in this affair, because that these Jovial attendants are not subject to
Parallaxes; and moreover in every situation of Jupiter above the Horizon,
afford a commodious observation. There are four Planets, the invention of the
Great Galilaeus, which move about Jupiter, as about the Center of their Lord,
so small that they cannot be discerned by a free sight, but only by the help of
a Telescope. Their Motion ( viz. that proper to them, by which they move about
Jupiter, for they have a Diurnal Motion common with all the Stars, (a Motion
common in the Ecliptic with Jupiter, and the other Planets) is very swift. For
he that is next to Jupiter, absolveth his course in one day with 18 hours; the
second in 3 days, with 13 hours; the third in 7 days, and 2 hours; the fourth
and last in 16 days with 18 hours. The progress of their Motion must be
Calculated at every hour, and therefore it is not found in the common
Ephemerides; but you have their Ephemerides in other Books. Therefore if we
desire by the help of their Motions to find the Longitude of a place, we must
make use of a most perfect Astroscope, and in the night turning it to Jupiter
(if he be above the Horizon of that place) to observe the Conjunction of these
two Planets, or the Conjunction with Jupiter, or the like appearance, and at
that moment of time to find also the hour of the place from the Meridian
situation or Altitude of any Star. Then the Ephemerides of these Companions of
Jupiter must be consulted, and the hour, and scruples of hours thence taken, in
which such a Conjunction is in the Meridian, unto which those Ephemerides are
computed. And so again we shall have the hour of the two places at the time of
one and the same Phoenomenon. Whence from the difference of the hours, if it be
turned into degrees, we shall find the Longitude of our place from the Meridian
of the Ephemerides which is known.

The sixth Mode by an Automatical, or moving Dial, or Horologe.
By reason that all the Modes in which by the Celestial Phoenomena we have
showed to find the Longitude of places are in this respect defective, The sixth
Mode by a moving Dial.
that they do not appear every night (for it is known concerning the Moon, as
also with the attendants of Jupiter, that they rise and set with the Sun near
to Jupiter) and moreover that they have a great difficulty of observing in the
Ships, joined or accompanied with the flowing of waves; for this reason many
leaving the appearances of the Moon, and the attendance of Jupiter, fly to the
Automatical Horologe, and advise the Mechanical Artificers, so to endeavor to
prepare a Machine, or Horologe as may be subject to no error, so that it may
show 24 hours at the same time, in which the Sun may be circumvolved, and may
make one day, or 24 hours, and may neither Anticipate or postdate the time.

A moving Dial very useful for the finding the Longitudes of places.
If that such an Automaton could be made, it would be very apt and afford a most
facile invention of Longitude to Navigators. For before that they set Sail from
any place, the hour of that place must be observed accurately at some time
(which is no difficult matter) and the Automaton was to be disposed at that
hour, and so in every day it will show the hours of this place, if that it be
subject to no fault. When therefore that place being left, it came to another
whose Longitude or distance of the Meridian, from the Meridian of the place of
the departure, we desire to know, nothing remains to be done, but that we
should observe in this place the hour from Heaven (which in the day time is
done by the Sun, in the night by the Stars without much labor) of this place,
and also looking on the Automaton what hour then is in the place, or Meridian
whence we departed. So we shall have the hours of two places at the same moment
of time. And therefore that difference of hours, if that it be changed into
degrees and Minutes, as has been said already, it will show the Longitude of
this place, from the Meridian of our place whence we departed, and so the
degrees in the Maps or Globes being numbered from this Meridian whence we
departed, they will show ^he Meridian where we are.

But notwithstanding Artists have hitherto showed great industry in the making
of an Automaton of such perfection, yet none has been so happy to accomplish
the same. For both the condition of the matter whence they are made lacks such
a perfection, and the diversity of the Air takes away the perpetual equality
of the motion. For when the Air is cold, it moves more slowly than when the Air
is warm, so that the Automaton which the Hollanders placed in their Houses,
when they lived a whole Winter in Nova Zembla, ceased wholly from motion,
although that they added more weight to it than was usual. Now for the
correcting this defect in these Automatical Horologies, or Clocks, The
Automatical Horologe subject to Error.
they advise us every day to place the Horologe at the hour of that place in
which, or unto which they then are come, but although this be done, yet a great
error may creep into the invention of Longitude.

For if on the second day of our going forth, the Longitude of this place, or
Meridian may be found out from the hours of the Automaton, compared with the
hours of the place unto which we are come, and the hours of the Automaton do
not altogether exactly agree with the hours of the place whence we set Sail,
thence it will come to pass that a defective Longitude may be taken, and a
false Meridian noted in the Maps for the place of the Ship that day In the
following day, viz. on the third day, a false Longitude shall again be found,
and that being numbered from the false Meridian of the preceding day, shall
duplicate the error. On the fourth day again it shall be augmented, and the
defect shall be triplicated. On the fifth day it shall be four times worse, and
so on. For Example, if that an Horologe in the space of 24 hours prove
defective in the Celestial motion and revolution for the 15th part of an hour,
(which perfection our Artificers do seldom exceed) the Longitude found from it
shall be greater or lesser than an whole degree (for 1/13 of an hour, makes a
degree) and so a false Meridian of this day shall be noted in the Maps, which
is distant from the true a degree, or 15 Miles. And on the third day, by reason
that the Automaton erreth again the 15th part of an hour, here again will be
the defect of one degree of Longitude, and seeing that the noted Meridian of
the former day is also absent one degree from the Meridian, which is true, and
from thence the Numeration is made for the Meridian of the third day, here now
will be a Meridian removed two degrees, that is thirty Miles in the Equator:
on the fourth day three degrees, on the fifth day four degrees, that is sixty
Miles, so that at length the numerated Longitude, and the noted Meridian will
be far from the Meridian in which the Ship then is. And this is the Cause why
this Mode is not perfect, and is therefore neglected by Mariners.

Lemma.
Because that in all the preceding Modes of finding out of a Longitude, the
hour was to be sought for at the time of observation, therefore we shall
explain the same Mode from the Principles of Astronomy, by which it is done
(for concerning the Elevation of the Pole, which also is required, we have
spoken in the 23 Chapter). In the day time the Sun must be observed, See Chap.
^3
in the night the most remarkable Stars. At both time it is best to expect the
time in which the Sun or Stars are in the Meridian, and for the knowing the
hours and Horary scruples of the other remaining part of time, a most exact
Automaton must be used. For an Automaton will little err above the space of
half a day if it be exactly made, and so we shall have no need of the Elevation
of the Pole in this case, which yet we ought to know by reason of the Parallel.

Concerning the day therefore, the Sun being brought into the Meridian, we know
the 12 hour to be in the place, and therefore the Automaton must be placed at
this very moment of time to show the hours of the following time. But if the
Phoenomenon must be observed before the Meridies, let the Automaton be disposed
at the very time of the observation, and then let the appulse of the Sun at the
Meridian be observed, and then looking on the Automaton the hours may be known,
which are elapsed from the time of the observation to the Meridies, or 12th
hour, whence the hour of the observation shall be known.

But if when the Sun is without the Meridian, you desire to know the hour from
the Heaven, let the Altitude of the Sun be taken at the time of the
Phoenomenon, or appearance. Then on the Spherical Triangle, from three given
sides, which are the Complement of the Elevation of the Pole (or the distance
of the place from the Pole) the Complement of the Declination of the Sun to
that day, and the Complement of the observed Altitude of the Sun; from these
three sides, I say, of the Spherical Triangle, let any Angle be found out: in
this that must be found which is comprehended from the Complements of the
Declination and Elevation of the Pole, or that which is opposed to the
Complement of the Altitude of the Sun, which how it may be done, let those that
are studious search from the Doctrine of Trigonometry. How the hour may be
found by the Globe from the Altitude of the Sun at any time, See Chap. 29.
Proposition 3.
we have showed in the 29 Chap. and the 3d. Prop. which may satisfy most
Students in Geography, when they do not so much as demand an exact part of an
hour, but in Navigation it must be Calculated, except some, who resolve it by a
Catholic Planisphere, but I fear over much defect in Horary scruples. In the
night time the Stars must be applied, as has been said, and because, for the
most part, one or other of them may be had in the meridian; therefore there is
no necessity to exhibit another without the Meridian, but it is best to Elect
one in the Meridian, or to expect it at the time, in which some Star nigh to
the Meridian comes unto it. Then assume from the Astronomical Tables, the
direct Ascension of that Star. and also the direct Ascension of the Sun of that
Point of the Ecliptic, in which the Sun is on that day. And if the direct
Ascension of the Sun shall be lesser, let it be subtracted from the Ascension
of the Star; if greater, let his Complement be taken at 360 degrees, and let
this be added to the Ascension of the Star. Change the degrees thus taken into
hours, and scruples of hours: these shall those demanded at the time of the
observation.

Proposition VIII. To show other Modes of finding out of Longitude, Other ways
for the finding out of Longitude.
which exhibit not primarily and properly the Longitude, but the very place of
the Point (whose Longitude or Meridian is only demanded): yet it is commodious
to use for the Constituting or examining of the Longitude of Terrestrial places.
The first Mode. The distance and Latitude of two places being given, to find
the Longitude of one place from the other; but in Maps which Mariners use, and
in Globes to find the Point of an unknown place, if that another place be
given, (for there is always one place known or given).
The first Mode.
If that by a Trigonometrick Calculation, you will find out the accurate
Longitude, you must find the Angle on the Spherical Triangle, all whose sides
are given, viz, the distance being turned into degrees, the Complements of
Latitude, or distance of the places from the Pole: the computation must be made
from the two sides of the comprehended Angle, which are the Complements of
Latitudes, or which are the Arches intercepted between two places. The Method
must be taken from Spherical Trigonometry.

But in Mariners Maps, and the Globe, the unknown place of the Point is thus
found from the given.

Mariners Maps.
In Mariners Maps the given distance is taken by the interval of the Compass
from the opposite scale, and one foot being fixed on the given place, the other
is turned round until it touch, or cut the Parallel of the other Latitude,
which is that of the unknown place. The Point of the Contact, or Section is the
place demanded or unknown. But other Maps are unfit for this purpose, neither
do the Mariners Charts exhibit an accurate distance of places.

On the Globe, let the given distance be turned into degrees and Minutes, and
let them be taken by the interval of the Compass on the Equator. Then let the
degree of Latitude of the unknown place be noted, let one Foot of the Compass
be placed on the given place, and let the Globe be turned until one extremity
of the Foot touch the Point of the Globe subject to the noted Meridian sign:
that shall be the place demanded. Or let the Parallel of the unknown place be
described with Chalk, and then one Foot of the Compass being fixed on the given
place, let the other be turned round until it cut that Parallel, or touch it.
This Point of the Section is the place sought for, whose Longitude is then
reckoned in the Equator.

The second Mode. A Quarter being given, in which any place unknown (that is
whose situation is unknown) does lie from the noted place, or place given, and
the Latitude of both places being given, to find the Longitude of the unknown
place from the place known, and to exhibit the place on the Globe, and Mariners
Chart.
The second Mode.
By the given place, we understand here the Angle intercepted between the
Meridian of either place, and the Line drawn from the one place to the other,
which is more commodiously explained on the Globe, or by a Diagram. If
therefore by Calculation you would find out the Longitude of one place from the
other, the Spherical Triangle must be solved, in which there are two sides
given, ( to wit, the Complements of Latitude of both places) and the Angle
adjacent to the given side of either. But the Angle comprehended from the two
given sides is that demanded. For this will exhibit the sought for Longitude.

But in a Globe and Mariners Charts it is not needful to find out Longitude,
neither can it at the first be found out, but the place unknown is found from
the given places.

Not needful to find out Longitude in a Globe, and in Mariners Charts.
In the Globe: Let the place be brought to the Meridian, let the Pole be
Elevated for its Latitude, and let the Vertical Quadrant be applied to it: let
the Parallel be drawn with Chalk at the Latitude of the other place unknown.
Then let the extremity of the Quadrant be applied to the given Plaga of the
Horizon, viz. in which the other unknown place lies from the known. The Point
of the Parallel where the Quadrant cutteth or touches it, is the place sought
for, whose Longitude shall be reckoned in the Equator.

In Mariners Charts: Let the Parallel be drawn to the Latitude of the unknown
place, then from the given place let a Line be drawn for the given quarter, the
Point where this cutteth the Parallel is the place sought. But if the
Loxodromick Plaga be given, we should do otherwise, of which in the 39 Chapter.

The third Mode. A Quarter being given, and the distance of one unknown place
from the other, whose Latitude is given, to find out the Longitude of that
place from this: but on the Globe and Maps if this place be given, to exhibit
the situation of that.
The third Mode.
If you desire to find it by Calculation, two Angles are given in the Spherical
Triangle (the Complement of the Latitude of the place known, and the distance
of the unknown place being turned into degrees) and the Angle comprehended from
the Plaga given: from these three given, the opposite Angle to the distance
must be sought for. For this will exhibit the Longitude of the other place from
the known place.

But on the Globe, and Mariners Charts, the place is thus found: let the Pole
be Elevated for the Latitude of the place given: let the Quadrant be applied to
the Vertex, and let the other extremity be applied to the given Plaga of the
Horizon. Then the distance given being turned into degrees, let it be reckoned
on the Quadrant from the Vertex. The term of the Numeration shall be the place
sought for on the Globe. But if that the Longitude be only sought for without
the designation of the place, that is, if you are minded to resolve a Spherical
Triangle by the Globe, it will be done after this Mode. We will give Examples
in the 33 Chapter, See Chap. 33.
which is also to be observed in the following Chapters. There also we will
show by one Example how such Problems may be resolved by the Planisphere.
Concerning all these, also Tutors may instruct their Scholars from the Method
of the Logarithms, if that they be studious in these matters. But Mariners use
Calculation, or the Plain Sphere. A Globe not commodious in a Ship.
For the use of a Globe is not so commodious in a Ship.

In Mariners Charts, Let a Line be drawn from the given place for the given
quarter, and by the interval of the Compasses, let it be taken on the Scale,
the distance of the places being opposited, and one Foot being fixed on the
place given, let the other Foot be placed in the Line drawn for the Plaga or
quarter. This Point shall be the place sought for, but yet not exact, as we
shall show in the following Chapter.

The fourth Mode. The distance of a place unknown, being given from two places
known, to exhibit that and the known one in the Globe, and Maps; but to enquire
its Longitude by Calculation.
The fourth Mode.
In the Globe: Let one distance by the interval of the Compasses (turned into
degrees) be taken on the Equator, and one Foot being fixed in the place from
those given, whose distance was not taken; let an Arch be drawn on the
Superficies of the Globe, by the other Foot, which has the Chalk at its end.

After the same Mode, a distance being taken from any other place, let an Arch
be described from this, as from a Center on the Superficies: the Point in which
this Arch cutteth the former, is the place demanded.

In Mariners Charts, we must act after the same manner, but yet the distances
given must not be changed into degrees, but must be taken on the opposite
Scale. But if the place be somewhat more remote from the place given, an over
great error may be committed, by reason that the Charts do not perform this
accurately.

The invention of Longitude by Calculation, because it has much difficulty, as
the Diagram requires; therefore I shall leave it to be taught by some Tutor,
and not describe it in words.

The fifth Mode. Two places in the Earth being given, and the Quarters in which
some other unknown place is situated at them, to find out this third place in
the Earth, Maps, and Globe, and to enquire the Longitude of this place by
Calculation.
The fifth Mode.
In the Globe, Let one of the given places be brought to the Meridian, and let
the Pole be Elevated near its Latitude, let the Quadrant be applied to the
Vertex, and with the other end (in which to wit, at this noted place the third
unknown place is put to lie) and at the Margent of the Quadrant by a pointed
Chalk, let a small Periphery be drawn. Then let the other given place be
brought to the Meridian, and the Pole Elevated near to its Latitude, let the
Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and the other extremity to the given Plaga
of the Horizon, to wit, in which the third unknown place is placed to lie at
this, same known place the Point, in which the Margent of the Quadrant cutteth
the Periphery before drawn with Chalk, is the third place demanded.

On Maps It is thus done; Let a Line be drawn from one given place for the
given quarter of the three places; after the same Mode let the Line of the
quarter be drawn from the other given place. The Point in which these two Lines
mutually cut one another is the place demanded.

After the same Mode we should do on the Earth, if that we would Act
scientifically: neither in Sciences do we value hindrances, and impediments,
so that we may comprehend the Mode in our mind.

The Calculation in which our unknown Longitude of a place is found, from these
given, we leave to the Instruction of a Tutor if that he has apt and capable
Scholars.

But more than enough has been said concerning the invention of Longitude, the
ample use of which we have explained in the 2d Proposition.

Here should be added a Table of the Longitude and Latitude of the chief places
of the Earth, which the Author has Collected, and did here insert; but being
but short, and having Maps of the several Kingdoms of the World in the other
Part, or Volumn, to which the Latitudes and Longitudes are added, they are
thought convenient to be omitted here, and referring the Reader to the
particular Maps, by which you may easily find the Latitude and Longitude of any
place desired.

The fixed Stars as to their Declination and Ascension, of great use in
Geography, and Navigation.
Moreover seeing that there is great use of Declination and Ascension of the
fixed Stars, both in Geography and Navigation, I shall here add a Catalogue of
the Stars of the first Magnitude, with their Declination and direct Ascension
at the Year 1650. For it is known from Astronomy, that in progress of time, a
change is made in these by reason of the proper motion of the Stars above the
Poles of the Ecliptic. But in the use it is convenient to have such a Table of
all the Stars, because we have not always a convenience of using the same
Stars. But we only lay down these for Exercise, and for the trying the proposed
Problems in these. This business belongs to Astronomy, but the use is notable
both in other Sciences, and also in Geography.

Astronomy shows how a Declination, and direct Ascension may be found at
every Year.

A TABLE of the DECLINATION And right Ascension of the Stars for the Year 1650.
The Letter S, shows the Northern Declination, and the Letter A, the Southern.
The Names of the Stars. Declination. Right Ascension. Of the first Maginitude.
degrees. min. degrees. min. Oculus Tauri. 15 46 S 64 0 Regulus, or Cor Leonis. 13 39 S
147 27 Cauda Leonis. 16 32 S 172 59 Spica Virginis. 9 17 A 196 44 Cor Scorpii.
25 34 A 242 4 Lucida Aquarii. 31 24 A 339 28 Arcturus Bootis. 21 4 S 209 59
Lucida Lyrae. 38 30 S 206 17 Cauda Cygni. 44 3 S 307 23 Capella. 45 35 S 72 44
Pes Orionis Sinister. 8 38 A 74 29 Sirius, Canis Major. 16 13 A 97 26 Humerus
Dexter Orionis. 7 18 A 84 7 Canis Minor. 6 6 S 110 17

CHAP. XXXII. Of the mutual situation of places, and composition of the
Terrestrial Globe and Maps.
Proposition I. A place being given in the Earth, to find the situation of
other places at that place.
Of finding of the situation of places in the Earth, etc.
NOw the situation of one place to the other is termed that Plaga in which this
lies at, or an Angle of position, that is an Angle, which the Meridian of the
given place makes with a Line, or Periphery drawn from this place to the
other. For Example, if we be in Amsterdam, and desire to know in what
situation other places lie unto it, as Rome, Leyden, the Hague, or the like.

The first Mode.
The first Mode.
To those places that a prospect is granted from the place given, their
situation may exactly be observed to this place by Instruments. Let a
Geometrical Instrument be placed in an high Tower, or the place of the given
place, so that it may be Parallel to the Horizon, and the Meridian Line being
found, let one Rule of the Instrument be applied unto it; and the other having
a Perspective must be directed to the conspicuous place. The Arch of the
Periphery intercepted between the two Rules is the Angle of the position of the
place observed at this place; and from thence his quarter shall be known.

So the situation or position of all other vicine places shall be observed,
then let us go to these places, and from them by the same Mode we shall again
discover the situation of other places: and then we may so act over the whole
Superficies of the Earth, except that other ways were known, by which we might
come more easily to the demanded place.

The second Mode.
The second Mode.
If that the proposed places may be had on the Globe, let the place given be
brought to the Meridian, and let the Pole be Elevated for its Latitude; let the
Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and let it be applied to one, and the other
places, whose situation we desire to know at our place. The extremity of the
Quadrant in the Horizon, will show the Angle of position, and the quarter
sought for. And therefore we shall say, that Rome, Constantinople, lie from
Amsterdam toward this or that found out quarter. Which that we may conceive in
the World, we ought to know the Meridian Line, or quarter of the North and
South, also the East and West Aequinoctial, for from these being well conceived
of, the intermedial quarters may easily be conceived. Here must be collected
what has been said concerning quarters in the 20 Chapter. See Chap. 20.


The third Mode.
The third Mode.
From Maps of Straight lines, if that the places propounded be to be found in
them, it is easy to discover the situation of those places to this by the
eyes. For through the given place a right Meridian Line is conceived showing
the North, and South, and another Line transverse, or showing the Parallel of
the place, which discovers the Eastern and Western quarter. From these the
intermedial quarters in which every place is beheld, are easily discovered, or
else they are more accurately known by Lines drawn on the Quadrant of the
Periphery, if that there be need of a more accurate knowledge. But yet this
Method is not complete except in particular Maps.

In Maps of Crooked lines, the quarters or scituations of places are not so a
accurately sought as the other place.

The fourth Mode.
The fourth Mode.
The Latitude and Longitude of two places beging given, the situation of one to
the other is exactly found by a Trigonometrical Compute, both that which is
Vulgar, as that which is Logorithmetical, or by a Catholic Planisphere, or
also by the Globe. For let a Spherical Triangle be had, in which three things
are given, viz. the Complements of the Latitudes of both places, and the Angle
comprehended from these, which is known from the difference of Longitude. Now
let the opposite Angle, or adjacent to either of the two sides be sought, for
this will show the Angle of position of one place to the other, and the very
quarter. A Diagram, and the lively instructions of a Tutor, will make these
more clear; and hence appears the use of the Table of Longitude and Latitude
of places.

The fifth Mode.
From the given distance of a place from two places, or from the given distance
and Latitude, The fifth Mode.
his quarter or situation to the other place is found out by the solution of
the Spherical Triangles.

The sixth Mode.
The Latitude of two places being given, the distance of the quarter of one is
found to the other by a threefold Method, The sixth Mode.
as has been said. Other things given may be propounded by which we may find
out the quarter.

Proposition. II. A place being given on the Earth or Globe, to exhibit all
places which lie at the given place, in some one given quarter, or situation.
Of the knowing the places in the North-East quarter from Amsterdam.
For Example, we desire to know all the places which lie in the North-East
quarter from Amsterdam.

Let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the given place, and let the
place be brought to the Meridian; let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex,
and le^ the other extremity be applied to the given quarter of the Horizon. So
we shall behold the half part of the places sought for, viz. those, which are
adjacent in the Globe to the Margin of the Quadrant, the other half part is
beneath the Horizon at the point opposite to the Vertex.

But the construction is more easy for the Earth it self: to wit, Let the
Periphery of the great Circle be brought to the place given, which with the
Meridian of that place may make the given Angle of the Position. All the places
in the half Periphery are those sought for.

Proposition III. A place being given in the Earth, or on the Globe, to exhibit
all those places, at which the given place, has some one given situation or
quarter.
Of the knowing the places which lie North-West to Amsterdam.
For Example, we desire to know all the places, unto every one of which
Amsterdam lies in the North-West quarter.

But the Problem may with more delight be thus propounded; Any place, in the
Earth, or on the Globe, being given, as in Amsterdam, to show all those places,
from which whilst we desire to go to the given place Amsterdam, we must direct
our Course from every one of the places to one and the same given quarter.

The preceding Problem was locally plain, because the place of the demanded
points, was the Periphery of the Circle, which may be exhibited on a plain; and
is always situated in one plain. But the present Problem is solid, or rather
does belong to the Superficies. For the place of the demanded points in the
Superficies of the Globe is not any Periphery of the Circle (except when the
quarter given is Northernly or Southernly) but a certain peculiar crooked solid
line, that is, which may not be on a plain, but a Crooked, to wit, a Spherical
Superficies: yet neither is it a Loxodromical line (of which we shall speak in
a peculiar Chapter) but a Crooked line of its own kind terminated on both
sides. Now for the conceiving of this line, or the places themselves on the
Superficies of the Globe, let the given place be brought to the Meridian. Then
if the quarter given be Oriental, it is certain that the demanded places are
seated in the part of the Globe toward the West removed from the Meridian of
the given place (but it is otherwise if that the quarter given be Occidental)
and if the quarter given be one of those, which incline from the East, or West,
toward the North, the places demanded shall lie between the South, and the
primary Vertical of the given place. But it is otherwise if the quarter given
be one of those, which incline from the East, or West toward the South: if the
given quarter be of the Eastern or Western Aequinoctial, the place of the
demanded places shall be some one Crooked line, beginning from the given place,
and terminated in the vicine Pole, seated from the Oriental part of the
Meridian, if the given quarter be of the West, but from the Occidental, if that
the given quarter be of the East, and must be conceived at this line: so the
places must be sought or exhibited from which Amsterdam lies toward the
Western Aequinoctials. Because the quarter or Vertical Quadrant respecting the
Eastern, or Western Aequinoctial, falls in with the point of the Equator,
which is 90 degrees. absent from the Meridian of every place. Therefore first let
the point drawn from the given place, be conceived to be seated at the
Aequinoctial quarter, or point of the Equator in the Horizon, and therefore it
is certain that all the places sought, ought so to be seated from the Oriental
part of the Meridian of Amsterdam, so that their quarter, or primary Vertical
Quadrant, respecting the West, must cut the Quadrant of the Equator between
the points in the Occident, and the Meridian. Therefore from every one of the
points of this Quadrant, let the greatest Peripheries be conceived passing
through Amsterdam, and the Meridians drawn from these points as from the Poles,
in which the first conceived Peripheries every one cut their Meridians, are
those demanded: they make such a Crooked line as I have said, which puts it
self into the Pole, neither is it infinite. Hence the difference is manifest
between the Crooked line and the Loxodromick. For this does not arise in
journeys instituted toward the Eastern or Western Aequinoctial. All the kinds
of this of which we now do speak, are such that are contained and run within
the Pole, and the Quadrants of the 2 Merid. whose distance does not exceed 90
degrees.

But where any quarter is given intermedial between the Cardines, for Example,
places are sought from which Amsterdam lies toward the South-West, or in the
quarter removed 45 degrees. from the Meridian of every place toward the West from
the South. First therefore let another Meridian from the Oriental part of
Amsterdam be imagined (for in this it is manifest, that the places sought ought
to be) which with Amsterdam makes an Angle of 45 degrees. or between which and
that of Amsterdam, the intercepted Arch of the Equator is 45 degrees. This shall
be the term of the places sought for, neither beyond it can any place be found
in any Meridian which does satisfy. Let a perpendicular Periphery be supposed
to be drawn from Amsterdam into this Meridian. Moreover because the quarter
given seems to incline toward the South from the West, thence it is certain,
that the places demanded should be situated in the space of the Triangle whose
sides are now first drawn Perpendicular. Secondly, part of this Meridian is
intercepted between the drawn Periphery and the vicine Pole. Thirdly, part of
the Meridian of Amsterdam, is between Amsterdam, and the adjacent Pole.

In this space the Crooked line, all whose Points answer the demand, is seated,
which creeps forwards from Amsterdam with a crooked passage even to the Pole:
For the Description of it many Meridians are to be taken, from which the great
Periphery drawn to Amsterdam, may make with the Meridian from whence it is
drawn, and Angle of forty five degrees for our Example. So many Points of this
Crooked line to be described shall be found.

We have treated fully of this Crooked line in our Book of Crooked lines, here
we have only touched what is proper to Geography.

Proposition IV. The Latitude of one place being given, and the distance from
the other place, and the quarter in which this other place in seated from it,
to find the quarter of this other place in which the former place is seated at
this other place.
It will be better understood by an Example. Viz. Let the quarter be given in
which the City of Hamburgh is seated from Amsterdam: we seek the quarter in
which Amsterdam is seated from Hamburgh. The vulgar opinion is that the
contrary quarter is to be taken, which is false. And in this all Mariners
Charts, and all Right lined Maps do much err. The solution is easy by a
Trigonometrical Calculation, or by the Globe, or by the Plain Sphere.

Proposition V. To make a Terrestrial Globe.
Of the making a Terrestrial Globe.
So the vulgar speak very confusedly by this Problem: but the distinct
understanding of it is thus to be propounded in a Mathematical Style.

Any Piont being given in the Superficies of any Globe, which is put to
represent any place situated in the Superficies of the Earth (or in the given
half Periphery to find out any lines and Points in the Superficies of the same
Globe, which are so mutually seated to the given Point and to themselves, as
the places and Lines in the Superficies of the Earth, which ought to be
represented by them, are situated to the place first taken, and mutual to
themselves.

The first Mode.
The first Mode of making Terrestrial Globes.
The best, most easy and exactest method is that by which from the Longitude
and Latitude of places in the Superficies of the Globe it self, the places and
Points fought for, or representing the parts of the Superficies of the Earth
are consigned, which although Artificers do not use in making of Terrestrial
Globes which are sold in a great number, (because that this may be done another
way, where from the abundance of their Sale, the cost and charge is
sufficiently paid, which is not of facility and lester expense for the making
of one Globe, but most apt and prompt for the making of innumerable, of the
same Magnitude, and less expense, of which I shall speak in the third place;
yet the foundation of the constouction of it depends on this Description
conceived on the Globe: moreover where peculiar Terrestrial Globes are to be
made in Brass of a notable Magnitude, and the places of the Earth are to be
designed on its Superficies, as Brinces that favor the Mathematics are wont
to have them, A great Globe a pre^aring for Frederick Duke of Holstein.
as for example, Frederick Duke of Holstein has ordered such a Globe to be
made, whose Oavity is to be so great, that one may commodiously set in it, and
in the Superficies all the fixed Stars are to be painted in a golden color, or
little Stars made, are let in with a small instrument, and the Sun moveable,
and to be turned in the Zodiac, and with the addition of a small instrument
shall be wheeled round in 24 hours, so that the Spectator setting within its
Cavity may see the Stars in one and another situation, to arise, Ascend to the
Meridies, to set, even as we see the Stars to do in the Heaven. But the
external Superficies to come to our purpose, shall exhibit all the places of
the Earth, so that this Globe shall be both Celestial and Terrestrial. But when
I say such places are to be engraven, or painted on the Superficies of great
Globes, Artists cannot use their Mode by applying of Maps made of Paper,
neither would that be so convenient in so great and famous a Work. But now they
must be engraven in the Globe, and the places be illustrated with colors, as
also the Peripheries, the Rivers, and such like as are found in the Earth. Now
this is done thus, (using also at the same time a vulgar Globe, in which the
Courses of the Rivers, Seas, and the Earth are beheld.) Let a great Periphery
of the Globe be described through the given point, (or the assumed point at
your choice, if that be not given) in the Superficies, which Periphery we shall
constitute for the Meridian of this place; then let an Arch be taken in this
from that point, equal to the Latitude which that point is put to represent:
and let the term be noted, and let another Arch equal to the Complement of the
Latitude, or distance of the place from the Pole, be taken from the same point,
or from another point in the same Periphery, the term of this Arch shall be the
point which must represent the Arctick and Antarctick Pole of the Earth,
because it is so seated at the given point, as the Pole of the Earth which is
put to be represented from the point. Therefore we call this point the Pole of
the Globe, but the term of the Arch first noted shows the point in which the
Equator cutteth the Meridian of the given place.

And therefore from the Pole of the Globe, let a great Periphery be drawn by
the interval of the Compasses from that Pole to the Mentioned term, which shall
be the Line of the Equator, or the Equator of the Globe.

Then let a Pole be taken in the Meridian opposite to the former, and let an
Iron Axis be put through from one to the other through the Cavity and Center of
the Globe, and let a Brazen Meridian be affixed in its extant parts, prepared
by a diligent Artist, having every one of its quarters divided into degrees.
Now these points must be applied to the Axis where o, o, is, or where the
division of the quarters do end, so that the beginnings of the first degrees
may exactly hang over the Line of the Equator. Let the Equator be accurately
divided into degrees. Moreover if you will take the Meridian of the given
place, or of some other place for the first, it is all one, but it is better to
take that for the first, which the Tables of Longitude and Latitude which are
to be used in the designation of places, do acknowledge for the first, or from
whence they number the Longitude and Latitude of the other places. And
therefore if the place first given, is not that which the Tables acknowledge,
let the Longitude of the first given place be taken from the Table, and let so
many degrees be numbered from that point in the Equator, where the Meridian of
the first place cutteth it. The term of the Numeration shall be the point for
the first Meridian of the Tables. Now unto what quarter the Numeration must be
made is known, viz. toward the West: but what part of the Globe is to be taken
for the Occidental quarter, and what for the Oriental quarter from the Meridian
of the first place, you shall thus know? So place the Globe that the Semicircle
of the Meridian containg the first point may be uppermost, the other beneath,
and regard the Globe, now the Pole Arctick should be hear, the Antarctick
more remote; if that the place given near the Arctick Pole, but if near the
Antarctick, then the Antarctick must be placed nearer us, so that Hemisphere
which is in our right hand must be taken for the Occidental places, and the
other for the Oriental.

But in the Section of the first Meridian noted in the Equator, let those
numbers be ascribed to the degrees of the Equator beginning from that Section,
viz. 10, 20, 30, and so on. And then so must it be done in representing for any
other place, let the Longitude be taken from the Table of that place, and
reckoned in the Equator from the first Meridian. Let the term of the
Numeration be placed under the Meridian, and let the degrees of the Latitude of
that place which there we have extracted from the Table, be numbered in this
from the Equator. The point of the Globe which is then subject to the point of
the Meridian where the Numeration of the Latitude ends, will represent that
place of the Earth. And so we must do with all places, all Inlets, and
Fountains of Waters. Their appellations must be engraven. So the Problem is
satisfied, for all the places shall so be seated in the Globe, as in the Earth
it self.

Yet in the practice we must not so act at the first, because it is better to
assume Pole, for the first point, or that which may represent the Pole: and in
the making of the Globe, let the Axis be added, whose ends denote the Poles.
And the first Meridian of the Tables must immediately be noted on the Globe,
and then the other places, as I have said. But such great Globes are seldom
made from Tables, but for the most part imitateother lesser Globes, from whence
the Latitudes and Longitudes, and the tracts of Rivers, etc. are taken.

The second Mode.
The second Mode of the making of Globes.
This Mode is more apt to design some place, viz. one or two in the Globe from
others given, than to be used for the making of an entire Globe: for it uses
the distances of places. Let the greatest Periphery, or the Arch of the
greatest Periphery be drawn through the Globe, and in this from the given
point, let the Arch be taken, as much as the distance of the other place is
from the place first given, the term of the Arch shall be other place. Then if
you will design any third place, take by the interval of the Compass the
distance of that third place, from the other two even now designed, and from
these as from Centers, let the Arches be described by these intervals of the
Compass: The point, in which these Arches mutually cut one another, is the
point of the third place.

But as I have said that this Mode is not commodious for the entire designation
of the Globe; but when we will design any place in the Globe now made, which is
not yet in it, and desire to do it from the only noted distance of that place
from the two others which are found in the Globe, because it is easy, and we
have not time by reason of Calculation, to search the Longitude and Latitude of
this third unknown place. For thus we shall easily find the situation of this
point, or place in the Globe, and also the Longitude and Latitude; then the
Problem is this.

The distance of a place being given from two places that are found on the
Globe, to design the situation of that place on the Globe, whose distance is
given, of which in the following Chapter.

The third Mode, the Vulgar one of Artificers.
The third Mode of making of Globes.
The third Mode of exhibiting and representing the Superficies and places of the
Earth in the given Globe, is that which Artificers use in the making of all
Globes both Celestial and Terrestrial (except those great ones of which I have
now spoken) which have nothing of compendiousness, or commendation from the
facility, if that the places of the Earth be but only to be represented from
one Superficies of the Globe, but it is to be done on the Superficies of the
Globes of the same Magnitude; this practice has great Prerogative before the
other: for the Mode is thus; the Superficies of the Globe and the Earth is
conceived to be divided into twelve parts (or more if the Globe be to be made
of a larger form) through the Meridians drawn from Pole to Pole, so that in any
two Meridians, the 12th part of a Superficies is included from Pole to Pole.
Then on a Plain let the like Figure be included in such a part of the 12, in
two Arches, which then in the Globe make the half Periphery of the Meridians.
And in many Meridians drawn through every degree of the Equator, and divided
into portions, and segments of the Parallels affords a kind of lettice work:
the portion of the Equator is in the midst: all the Meridians end in the
Poles, then c. e Meridian being taken for the first, which the Tables of
Lon^itude acknowledge; let the degrees be noted from it in the Equator, the
numbers being ascribed, so that the degrees of Longitude of every place may ^e
accounted. Then in every one of these places representing the 12 parts of the
Superficies of the Globe, let the places be noted for the places of the Earth,
every one at his degrees of Longitude and Latitude, which are extracted from
the Table, and the name is ascribed to the Table, and the tracts of the Rivers
and Bays drawn, as also of the Lands: these being thus described on Paper, or
Wood, then make an incision, and engrave according to that exemplar in Plates
of Brass, which then is fit for the Printing Press. Which are afterward
applied and joined to the Superficies of the Globe, so that its ends may touch
the Axis or Poles of the Globe; yet in many the Papers do not touch the Poles,
but are so made only to touch the Artick, or Antarctick Circles: and peculiar
Papers are taken for the Polary Spaces. For so they are more easily applied,
especially in great ones so in the Superficies of this Globe all the places of
the Earth are exhibited, to which is then added a Brass Meridian and Horizon
with a Foot, Horary Circle, and an Index.

The things worthy of note in this Mode.
There are two things in this description which require a more full explication,
all the rest I suppose to be plain, and intelligible.

First, after what Mode these 12, or 24 parts are to be described, according to
the Example of which the engraving in Brass must be made.

Secondly, how plain Paper can be applied to the Superficies of the Globe.

The first is thus done ^ommodiously enough. For Example, let the 12 portion of
the Hemisphere from the Pole to the Equator, be applied to the Globe. First,
from the known Diameter of the Globe, let the quantity of the greatest
Periphery be found out according to the proportion of Archimedes, or the other
proportion of the Periphery to the Diameter. For Example, let the Diameter of
the Globe be two Foot, and let the Longitude of the Foot in the noted Paper be
divided into 10 digits, and the 10 digits, into 10 grains, that there may be
100 parts in a Foot. Let it be done so that as 7, is to 22, so 200 is to 628
4/7 parts, or 6 28/200 Foot for the Periphery; the fourth part of this, that is
the Quadrant of the Periphery shall be of 157 1/7 hundred, or 1 57/10071 Feet,
and the 12th part of 52 19/21 hundreds, or a Foot, and 2 hundreds and 19/21 of
an hundred. These being found, let a long Line of 52 19/21 hundreds be drawn on
the Paper, (from the ascribed Scale); from the middle of this Line let a long
perpendicular of 157 19/21 hundred be erected, which shall be the Quadrant (its
extremity shall be the Pole) and may be divided into degrees (you have the
Longitude of one degree if you divide 628 ^/7 by 360). Then let a Periphery be
described from the Pole through the beginning of every degree, or of every
tenth, (they shall be Parallels) in these Peripheries; from both parts of the
drawn perpendicular, let that part be cut off by the Compass, as much as is the
1/24 of the Periphery. Now how great it is in the opposite Scale is known from
the proportion of the Parallels, to the Equator, which we have delivered in
the end of the IV. Chapter. See Chap. 4.
So the points being signed in every Periphery and Arch you please, a Line must
be drawn through them, and part of the Paper perminated by these Lines, must be
cut off. For this being applied to the Globe will possess 1/12 of the
Hemisphere. Now the application is easily performed, viz. if that the portions
be small, for in these the distance between straight and Crooked, is little
discovered, especially of the Earth when the Paper has first been wetted; so
it is readily applied. But the places in that Paper before they are applied,
are consigned to their fit degrees of Longitude, and Latitude.

Proposition VI. To compose Geographical Maps.
We may thus propound the Problem in a Mathematical Style.

Of the composing Geographical Maps.
The situation of an infinite Plain, or one to be produced at pleasure being
given, to represent in that the places of the Superficies of the Earth,
according to the Rules of Perspective. Or thus more generally:

A Point being given on any Plain, which is put to represent any place of the
Superficies of the Earth, to find on the same Plain (infinite), diverse other
Points and Lines, which as commodiously may be, may represent to the life the
places and Lines of the Superficies of the Earth, or their situation to the
given place, or one to another. So I think the sense of the Proposition will be
better understood.

By reason that very few Students and favorers of Geography understand the
Rules of Perspective, neither can they attain to any distinct knowledge of the
Construction and nature of Geographical Maps, or judge of their commodity or
defects, except they know the Principles, according unto which they are made.
Therefore here a few things necessary in this Doctrine must be explained from
the Art of Perspective. The knowledge of Perspective necessary in Geography.
Now that Art, as most know, is conversant in representing all Objects, or
Bodies on some Table, or Platform, as the parts of a Picture are so conformed,
and seated one to the other, and so appear to our fight (the eye being fixed to
some certain place) as the parts of the body which it represents. This indeed
is the end of the Perspective. But the Mode by which they endeavor to obtain
it, is this.

The Mode for the obtaining the Art of Perspective.
Then they will represent a point, a Superficies, or any Body of what shape
soever in a Table, Board, or Paper, (whether they behold it, or conceive the
Idea in their fancy). 1. They Imagine it is discerner by the eye as in or from
one Point, and they do assign a certain situation or place to the eye whence
the sight may be made. 2. Then they conceive some one infinite plain (they term
it a Glass, because it is better for conception, if that the plain be
understood to be pellucid) to be interposed in some certain situation between
the eye and the Object. Then 3. They conceive rays or Lines to be drawn
through that plain to the Eye from every point of the Object.
They say that the points of this plain by which the rays are so conceived to
penetrate to the Eye, are the representation of the points of the Object it
self, or the Shadow of it, as they term it, and these points being conjoined by
Lines, they determine the Figure which thence arises, in the Table to be the
representation of the very Object of the Body, or Superficies in such a
situation of the Eye, and this Figure of a Plain or Table remaining in its
situation, does not otherwise appear to the Eye remaining in its situation,
then as if it beheld the very Object it self (which yet the Optics show not to
be altogether true in all respects, and it is easy to understand from the
various position of an interposed Plain.) But by reason no better Method of
representing Bodies is yet found, therefore we must be content with this. For
Example, let the Superficies of the Earth, and all its Peripheries and places
be represented on a Table. And therefore in the first we conceive the Eye to be
fixed or situated as a point without the Earth in the Air. Then between the
Eye and the Earth, a certain Table or Glass Plain to be extended, whose
situation although it may be taken at pleasure, yet in practice it is so
assumed, to a better and more ordinate Figure of an equal form, that it is
perpendicular to the Line, which is drawn from the Eye to the Center of the
Earth. Then we conceive Lines to be drawn, or Rays to be emitted through the
Table or Glass to the Eye from all points or places of the Superficies of the
Earth (as from all the points of the Equator, of the Tropicks, Polary Circles,
also of the Meridians; as likewise from all Cities, Sources of Waters, and the
like.) Every one of these Rays shall pierce the Table in certain points. These
points therefore are the shadows, or representations of the places of the
Superficies of the Earth, and if those points which are made by the Rays
emitted from some one Periphery (as from the Equator, from one of the
Tropicks, from a Polary Circle, or some other Meridian) be joined by a drawn
line, let it be either straight or Crooked, this shall be the representation or
shadow of this Periphery, so we shall have all the Circles, and all the places
of the Earth represented on a Table.

The whole superficies of the Earth being round, cannot be so well represented
on a Plain, as otherwise it is.
But because the Earth is round, therefore the whole Superficies of the Earth
with all its places, cannot commodiously be represented on one plain, because
they should make two places one and the same point on the plain, and those that
are situated beyond the Hemisphere, would be represented with a false face:
therefore half the Supersicies of the Earth must be represented on one Table,
and the other half on the other. And so the Eye may be taken within the Earth
it self, viz. when we take up one Hemisphere to be represented, the Eye is
conceived to be placed in the other Hemisphere, and the Table between that and
the Hemisphere to be represented. The same must be understood, if that only
part of the Superficies, as Europe, Asia, Spain, must be represented on the
Table, for then we may assume the place of the Eye in the very Center of the
Earth, if we please.

From these I think the Reader may sufficiently understand the nature and Mode
of this Perspective Art, by which the places of the Earth are represented on a
plain. The other two are more fully to be explained, from those which we have
spoken of in this Method. Because from thence depends the variety and
diversity of Geographical Tables.

We have said that a point must be taken for the representation for the place
of the Eye without the Object to be represented, as without the Hemisphere of
the Earth, or without the Superficies of Spain, or Europe. And therefore
because there is an infinite space about any Object, and on that account there
are infinite points, in which the Eye may be put contemplating the Superficies
of the Earth, (or Europe, or Asia,) if that a particular Table must be made,
and if the Rays be drawn to diverse points from the same points of the Object,
or Superficies, which may penetrate the same Table, the penetration of the Rays
is made in a very different place and situation, and therefore very unlike
Figures arise thence in the Table; thence it comes to pass that according to
the various situation of the Eye (which we attribute to it without the Earth,
or without that part which it ought to represent) there arises a various
representation of that Superficies on the Table.

For as there existeth another sort of Frontispiece of the walls of an house,
when the Eye may behold it from a situation directly opposite; another from an
oblique situation; another from an upper place; another from a long place, and
so changing according to the various situation of the Eye (which Tutors may
explain by Diagrams); so there arises a different position of the parts of the
Earth to be represented on the Table, if that the Eye be so constituted, or
conceived in the Air in such a situation, that it may hang over the Equator
of the Earth; and otherwise, if that it be supposed to exist in the pretended
Axis of the Earth, or in the Semi-Axis of the Hemisphere, and otherwise if it
be conceived to be eminent over any other place of the Earth. Thence it comes
to pass that both the Equator, and the Parallels, as well as the Meridians,
obtain various representations, because the Rays drawn from them, existing in
the Earth to the Eye perforate the Tables in diverse points, endued with a
various situation, which the Readers may easily understand, The Direction of a
Tutor very profitable.
if that they have the living information and direction of a Tutor.

The other, which I esteem fit for the Readers consideration in this Method for
his better understanding, is concerning the cause of the variety in the
Magnitude of Tables, and representations: for we can show the same Superficies
of the Earth, as also of all the Bodies of the World, as Temples, Houses, and
the like, on a great or small Table. The Cause is twofold, first, by how much
the Eye is placed more remote from the Earth, or any Object, by so much the
representation receives the lesser Magnitude, ziz. the situation of the Table
or Glass so remaining. 2. How much the Table, or Glass (in which the
representation should be made by the perforation of the Rays) is nearer moved
to the Eye, by so much the representation or projecture receives, the lesser
form; by how much the nearer to the Object, so much the greater.

But if the Eye may be removed in any kind from the Object, (the Table
remaining) so that it be removed in the same Line with the Center of the Earth,
or so that it remain in one Perpendicular Line, to the Superficies of the
Earth, therefore the Figure of the projecture is not changed, but only the
Magnitude, the similitude remains. So also if that the Table be any ways
moved to the Eye, or removed toward the Object, all the projectures do become
of a diverse Magnitude, yet they remain mutually alike, and represent all the
places in a like situation, so that the Table shall observe the Parallel
situated from the Eye in his access, and recess. But if the Table receives
another position, and also if the Eye be not only removed, but also recedeth
from that Perpendicular Line, then the like projectures shall not arise and the
places shall not have the like situation on the Earth, but besides a various
Magnitude, there shall also be a notable dissimilitude in the situation of the
places, one to the other.

But in the projectures of all Bodies, as also in the projecture of the
Superficies of the Earth, it is so wont to happen, that we attribute such a
situation to the Table or Glass, that it may touch the Body or Superficies in
that Point to which the Line drawn is Perpendicular to the Superficies of the
Body, or which is drawn from the Eye to the Center of the Earth: now to obtain
the lesser or greater projecture we remove the Point of the Eye more or less
from the Earth. But then we conceive the Earth to be very small.

This in general being explained concerning the projecture of the Earth, and
the Original of Geographical Maps, we shall show the Method of doing it: where
first we shall show whether these Tables should be made according to the Rules
of Perspective, and whether all may be made according to them, for the end of
these Tables or Maps is to the life, and exactly as may be to express the
situation of the places in the Superficies of the Earth. Therefore it is
demanded and that not unadvisedly, whether this may be done by another Method,
which observes not the Rules of Perspective; for whether it be done according
to the Rules of Perspective, or contrary to them, so that it exactly
represents the situation of the places, the Table shall be accounted to be
well done. To that I answer, that although certain Tables of some small
Province may be made, and are also made by another Method, to wit, by Angles of
position, or also by distances, as we shall show in the last place, yet in a
great part of the Superficies of the Earth it cannot be performed by a more
commodious Method, than by the Rules of Perspective, although the true
situation of the places may not be represented in the Tables made according to
these Rules.

Things to be known about the making of these Maps.
For we must know that in making of these Maps we must attend to a threefold
end. 1. That all the places must have such a situation and distance to the
chief Circles of the Earth, as the Equator, the Parallels, the Meridians, as
they have in the Earth it self, so that from those Tables the Parallels of
every place, the distance from the Equator, from the Pole, the Zone, the
Climate, etc. may be beheld, because that from thence many properties of the
Regions and Celestial appearances do depend. 2. That the Magnitudes of every
Region may have that proportion that they have in the Earth it self. 3. That
every place may have the same situation to the other mutually which they have
in the Earth it self.


Of these three requisites all Maps or Tables ought exactly to perform the
first, and for the most part exactly do, because they are made from the Table
of Latitude and Longitude of places; neither do the Rules of Perspective hinder
the same. But for the second, they cannot accurately perform the same if that
the Rules of Perspective be observed, because the crooked paths of the
Superficies being more remote from the Eye, makes the representation lesser in
the Glass than those parts subjected to the Eye: but yet that inequality is
small and becomes insensible, if that the Eye be conceived to be remote an
infinite interval from the Earth. But the third requisite can be performed by
no larger Tables, such are those of the whole Earth, also those of the 4 quar.
of the Earth and the greater Provinces although they may accomplish it in the
lesser Regions, and the vulgar suppose that it may be had in the larger Maps.
But we shall more fully explicate this in the description. Only this we shall
here advise in general, that in all Maps which we have, or which are sold by
Artificers, viz. those that are universal, that place must be taken for the
point, which shall be directly subject to the Eye in the projecture; that place
I say of the Earth which is seated in the middle of the Table, for here we must
conceive the Eye to hang over. This has place in many particular ones, yet not
in all.

Moreover you may make the following Rules to be more plain, if that you make
use of several Maps, Maps necessary to be used.
which will the more illustrate and explain our Rules by the Examples.

The first easy Mode, the Eye being placed in the Axis.
See Scheme. Of the Hemisphere of the Earth which places the Eye in some Point
of the Axis of the Earth.
In the first place, I exhibit this Method of painting the Hemisphere of the
Earth, which places the Eye in some Point of the Axis of the Earth. For
Example, we would represent the Arctick Hemisphere of the Earth, to wit, that
which lies between the Equator and the Arctick Pole, and the places contained
it, that is a, Geographical Map must be made of the Arctick Globe. Therefore we
shall conceive the Eye to be placed without this Hemisphere, that it may hang
over the middle Point of that Hemisphere, viz. the Pole Arctick, that the Eye
may be with the Pole Arctick, and the Center of the Earth in one straight line,
that is, that the Eye may be in the Axis of the Earth. And therefore it shall
be either in the Axis from the part of the Equator toward the Antartick Pole,
or in the Axis extended from the part of the Pole Arctick. But it matters not
in what part it be put. For the Table or Glass in which the representation
ought to be, let the place of the Equator be taken, or some Tangent of the
Earth in the Pole Arctick, if that the Eye be conceived to be placed from this
part. But to avoid confusion, and the better to express our selves, let us
suppose the Eye to be placed in the Antarctick Pole, the Plain of the Equator
to be the Table. We conceive the Earth to be of a small Magnitude.
Moreover we conceive Rays to be emitted from all the places and Peripheries
of the Arctick Hemisphere, (whether it possess the Antarctick, or other Point
of the Axis) which Rays therefore shall penetrate the place of the Equator.
The Points in which the perforation is made, shall exhibit every place of that
Hemisphere of the Earth, and the points made from the perforating Rays, the
Peripheries of the Tropic, if they be joined, do exhibit the Lines which
represent those Peripheries. By this Method it comes to pass that the Equator
becomes the term of this projecture: the Pole of the Earth may be represented
from the Center of this Circle, or of the Equator: the Meridians make right
Lines, all passing through the Pole, even to the Equator, the Parallels of the
Equator, or the Circles of Latitude, the Tropic of Cancer, the Arctick Pole,
and the like. Also by this projecture may be made these Circles, or
Peripheries, whose Center is the same with that of the Equator, viz. the
Point, which represents the Pole Arctick. But the places of the Earth are
represented every one in their Peripheries of Latitude, and the Meridian Line,
viz. where the Meridian Line of the place cutteth the Parallel of the place,
the Point of the Section is the representation of the place. But all the other
Peripheries and Semiperipheries, which may be conceived in that Hemisphere, do
not make in projecture straight lines, or Circular, but Eclipses: for Example,
if we will represent the Horizon and vertical Circles of any place; all these
in their projecture shall make Ecliptic Arches.

For the more easy imagination of projecture, by which Circles are represented
in a Table, a radious Cone must be conceived, whose Vertex must be the Eye, let
the Circle of the Earth to be represented be the basis, let the sides be the
rays drawn from the Periphery to the Eye: moreover this Cone to be cut by the
Table, and according to the various position, a various Line and Section to be
made, which is the projecture of the assumed Periphery on the Earth. So also
the Ecliptic it self, whose half only is represented with the Arctick
Hemisphere, makes a portion of the Ecliptic. But yet to speak properly, the
Ecliptic it self is not represented, because it cannot be conceived immutable
on the Earth, but only in a certain situation, or at a certain moment of the
day, and his intersection may be taken with the Equator in any point of the
Equator, yet in all Maps by reason of its Commodity, the intersection of the
first Meridian is assumed with the Equator.

So therefore we have distinctly explained the Original and Method of the first
sort of Tables or Maps, which have the Eye in the Axis: now I shall show how
such a Table is to be described in practice. How Tables of the first sort are
to be described by practice.
In any Plain or paper let the middle point P, be taken for the Pole, and from
that as from a Center, let the great or small Periphery be drawn (as we desire
to have our Maps great or small) which we shall have for the Equator. These
two may be taken at pleasure, but the other points and Peripheries shall be
found from them. Let the Equator be divided into 360 degrees. and straight lines
being drawn through the Center and the beginning of every degrees: these shall be
the Meridians, from which that which is drawn at the beginning of the first
degree from these 360, shall be taken for the first, so the rest of the lines
shall show the rest of the Meridians and Longitudes of the Earth from the first
Meridian. Now the Parallels of Latitude must be described. There are four
Quadrants, or quarters of the Equator, the first 0,90: the second 90,108: the
third 180,270: and the fourth 270,0. Let those be noted for the more easy
appellation with the letters A B, B C, CD, D A, and let one be taken from
these, for Example, B C, from every one of whose degrees as also from the 20
degrees. 30. min. and the 66 degrees. 30 min, let occult straight lines be drawn to the
point D, (the term of the Diameter B D) or let the Rule be only applied to D,
and brought round through every degree of the Quadrant B C: and let the 23 degrees.
30 min. and the 66 degrees. 30 min. in which these straight lines cut the
Semidiamiter P C, be noted, and from P as from a Center, and the Peripheries be
described through every point taken in P C. These Peripheries shall be the
Parallels of the Latitudes unto which in the first, and opposite Meridian, viz.
A P, and C P, the numbers may be ascribed from the Equator toward P, to wit,
1, 2, 3, 4, even to 90, so that the Latitude of every one may be conspicuous:
but at the Parallel 23 degrees. 30 min. the Tropic of Cancer shall be ascribed; at
the 66 degree 30 min. the Arctick Circle. In the Praxis neither all the
Meridians, nor all the Parallels must be colored, but only every tenth, the
rest must be represented with occult or obscure lines.

After all the Meridians and Parallels are described, it is easy to note from
the Table of Longitude and Latitude of places, the places of the Earth, viz. of
its Superficies; let the Longitude of any place be accounted from the first
assumed Meridian in the Equator, so we fall into the Meridian of the place;
then from the Latitude of the place we choofe a Parallel of the same Latitude,
and the point where the Meridian cutteth the Parallel is the point, which
represents the assumed place of the Earth, whose appellation is to be
ascribed unto it, and so we shall act with the inscription or projecture of any
place to be taken, until the Maps, or Tables be finished.

Rules to be observed if the Semicircle of the Ecliptic be to be noted.
If the Semicircle also of the Ecliptic be to be noted in it, that must be done
before the designation of the places. We have said that the Ecliptic makes
the Ecliptic line in projecture, therefore its points through which that
portion of the Eclipsis must be drawn, ought to be found. That is taken for the
first point, or for the intersection of the Ecliptic, and the Equator, in
which the first Meridian cutteth the Equator, which therefore is noted in the
sign of Aries. But the last point of this half Eclipsis, or the other
intersection of the Equator, and the Ecliptic, viz. the end of Virgo shall be
in 180, the opposite point of the Equator, the intermedial point is that in
which the Meridian 90, cutteth the Tropic of Cancer. So we have gotten three
points, through which the portion of the Eclipsis to be described passes,
(which is lesser than the half Eclipsis (which are the points of the 1 degrees. of
Aries, Cancer, and Libra: for finding the other points, as the 1 degrees. of Taurus
and 15; the 1 degrees. and the 15 degrees of Gemini; the 1 degrees. of Leo; the 1 degrees.
of Virgo, the Declinations of these points must be taken from the Table and the
right Ascension which are here ascribed.

Declination. Right Ascension.
degrees. min. degrees. min. The 15 of Aries and Virgo 5 56 13 48 166 for the 15 degrees.
of Virgo. The 1 of Taurus and Virgo 11 31 27 0 152 for the beginning of Virg.
The 15 of Taurus and Leo 16 24 42 0 187 for the 15 degrees. of Leo. The 1 of Gemini
and Leo 20 13 57 0 122 for the beginning of Leo The 15 of Gemini and Cancer 22
41 73 0 106 for the 15 degrees. of Cancer,

Then where the Meridian 13 degrees. or 4 degrees. cutteth the Parallel 5 degrees. or
rather 6 degrees. that point shall be the 15 degrees. of Aries; also where the Meridian
27 cutteth the Parallel 11, there shall be the 1 degrees. of Taurus, so where the
Meridian 42, the Parallel 16 degrees. where the 15 degrees. of Taurus, and where the
Meridian 106 cutteth the Parallel 22 degrees. 41 min. there shall be the 15 degrees. of
Cancer: where the Meridian 122 cutteth the Parallel 20, there shall be the
beginning of Leo: and so the other Meridians 137, 152, 166, cut the Parallels
16, 11, 5, for the 15 degrees. of Leo in the beginning of Virgo, and the 15 of
Virgo. These points being joined by a Crooked Line, we shall have the portion
of the Eclipsis for the Semicircles of the Boreal Ecliptic, whose points and
degrees are easily noted in every sign, if that you take Declinations for every
one out of the Tables, and Right Ascensions, by that Mode, by which we have
signed the degree, the 15 degrees. of Taurus, the 1 degrees. of Gemini and the like.

This being done, the Composition of this Geographical Map is finished, which
shall represent the half Superficies of the Earth, to wit, the part between the
Equator, and the Pole Arctick.

That this Mode is most easy and pleasant will be manifest from the
Description, and the Praxis will show it: now we shall speak of its use and
inconveniences: we have said before that three things are required in a Map, or
that they are made for a threefold end: The first of these, the Map, made by
this Method do accurately enough discover, Maps are made for a threefold end.
viz. the Latitude and Longitude of every place, because they are made from a
Table of Latitudes and Longitudes: also they show the distance of places from
the Course or way of the Sun, or Zones. The second requisite, to wit, the due
proportion of the Magnitude of every Region; Maps of this sort do not
altogether perform, for Regions, by how much they are more near the Equator,
by so much the more they receive the greater place in this projecture, than
they ought to have by their own proportion, But this difference is small, by
reason of the great distance of the Eye, Few Regions Inhabited about the Pole,
but many toward the Equator.
and this defect is compensated by that Commodity, that the places may the
better be noted, by reason few Regions are inhabited about the Pole, but many
toward the Equator. But the third end, viz. the situation of one place to
another, and the distance of places cannot be performed by these Tables,
because the Lines, which note such places in the Maps, have another situation,
and proportion, than in the Earth. But if you please to examine the situation
of one place, to the situation of other places, and the rising and stay of the
Sun above the Horizon of the same, the Horizon of that place may be drawn in an
Ecliptical form in this Method: Let 90 degrees on both sides be reckoned in the
Equator from the Meridian of the given place, one of the terms of the
Numeration shall one point of the Horizon to be drawn, viz. the Oriental point,
in which the Equator cutteth the Horizon. The other term again shall be the
point of the Horizon for the Aequinoctial setting. Moreover in the opposite
Quadrant of the Meridiah of the place, let so many Parallels be accounted from
the Pole toward the Equator, as the Parallel of the place is distant from the
Equator. The term of the Numeration shall show the third Point of the Horizon,
viz, the Northern Cardo, (we shall show how to find the Point of the South
Cardo, in that which we shall annex by and by; if a greater portion than that
of the Hemisphere, be to be represented on the Map, for it is not to be found
in the Hemisphere, only except the Horizon of the Pole, which is the very
Equator). So we shall have three or four chief Points, through which the
Horizon ought to pass. To find out the other Points, there is no more
commodious way than by the benefit of the Globe, viz. let the Pole be Elevated
for the Latitude of the place assumed; then in every Parallel let one Point be
chosen, through which the first Meridian passes, and let that be brought to
the Meridian, which done, let the degree under the Meridian be noted, and so
you must do in every Parallel. These being noted, let so many degrees be
reckoned on both sides from every Parallel from the Meridian of the place given
in the Map on the Equator, viz. for 10th, 20th, 30th, and so on; and where the
Meridians cut the convenient Parallels, they shall be the points demanded, to
wit, through which the Horizon is to be drawn, and the situation of the other
places may be examined in some measure at that.

By this Method the whole Superficies of the Earth may almost be represented on
one Table, if that either of the Poles, viz. the Antarctick be assumed for the
Eye, if a Table or Glass plain be taken of any Parallel near the Pole, for
instance, the plain of the Arctick Pole, and the Antarctick Circle on one
plain, neither does any thing else remain to be done, or added to the former
construction, but that the Meridian Lines should be protracted, and the
Parallels drawn from the other part of the Equator. Then let the whole
Ecliptic be drawn, and if you please, let the Horizon be completed. But
seeing that the parts and degrees situated beyond the Equator, toward the
Antarctick Pole, by this Mode would become far greater, than the parts about,
and in the Equator, which is contrary to the truth of the matter, therefore it
is better to make the projecture on two Hemispheres, that one may show the
Arctick Orb, the other the Antarctick.

Tables described according to this Method are very few: to general Maps of
Right Lines, two other Maps very small, described in this Method, are wont to
be added, whereof one exhibiteth the Regions about the Arctick Pole, the other
those about the Antarctick, which the Reader may look upon for the better
understanding of what has been said. But these are better learned from
practice than from precepts.

The second Mode, the Eye being placed in the plain of the Equator.
The second Mode. See Scheme.
The preceding Mode of describing of Geographical Maps does neither fitly show
the Magnitudes and situation of places, neither is commodious to describe the
Hemisphere intercepted between the two Poles; and to represent all the places
lying in the same Meridian: moreover it seems to be repugnant to our
conception, that the Pole of the Earth should fall into the Center, and
therefore those described Tables afford a more difficult imagination. Therefore
another Method has been found, which is somewhat more hard than the former,
but more aptly represents the places of the Earth, and removes the Pole from
the Equator.

For the conceiving of this Method, we must understand the Superficies of the
Earth to be cut into two Hemispheres from the whole Periphery of the Meridian,
and in two Tables we exhibit those Hemispheres, one in one, the other in the
gther. The Eye is placed in the Point of the Equator, which is removed 90
degrees from the first Meridian: the Table or Glass in which this
representation ought to be made, is assumed; the place of the first Meridian
and Hemisphere, (which lies beneath that Plain in respect of the Eye) is taken
to represent it on the Plain. In this form of projecture the Semicircle of the
Equator becomes a right Line, and that Meridian which is distant from the
first 90 degrees, unto which the eye is conceived eminent, will also become the
Right Line: all the other Meridians, and all the Parallels of the Equator,
become the Arches of the Circles, because their Cones are cut from the Plain of
the Tables by a subcontrary Section. The explication of which must be demanded
from the Conical Doctrine, and may better be showed than expressed. But the
Ecliptic becomes a portion of the Eclipsis for the Cause alleged in the
former Method.

The description Mathematically explained.
This Description is thus made: the point E, being taken for the Center in the
Table, a great or small Periphery of the Circle is described, A B C D, (as we
desire to have the Table great or small). This represents the first Meridian,
and its opposite, viz. the Diameter B D, being drawn, there arise two
Semiperipheries, whereof one B A D, is the first Meridian, the other B C D, is
the opposite, or of Longitude 180. This Diameter B D, represents the Meridian
90 degrees distant from the first, and his point D, is one Pole, viz. the
Arctick, but the point D, is the Pole Antarctick: the Diameter A C, to B D, is
the perpendicular Line of the Equator. Let these Quadrants A B, B C, C D, D A,
be divided every one into 90 degrees. Moreover we must do thus for the
representation of the Meridians, and Parallels, or for the finding out the
Arches of the Meridians, and Parallels. First, the Line of the Equator, A C,
must be divided into its degrees, to wit, 180, (because it only shows half
the Equator) or A E, E C into 90, after this Mode: from the point D, let the
Semiperipheries, right Lines, A B C be drawn to every degree, or which is as
well, let the Rule be applied to the point D, and to every degree of the
Semiperiphery A B C: these Lines shall cut the Line of the Equator into 180
parts, which shall represent the degrees, which are the degrees of Longitude,
and therefore the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and the like, must be ascribed, beginning
from the first Meridian D A B. Through every one of these points, 1, 2, 3, and
both the Poles B D, the Arches of the Circles must be described, which shall
represent the Meridians. But how the Periphery must be described through these
three given points, for Example, B, D, or B 2 D, and the like, is taught by
Geometry, viz. you must find the Centers for every Periphery to be described,
which Centers are placed in the very Line of the Equator, as is the Center E,
of the Meridian D A B. Those points are found according to Euclids Method,
Proposition 1. Lib. 3. if the Lines B 1, B 2, B 3, See Euclide lib. 3.
Proposition 1.
etc. be doubly cut by the perpendicular lines (this is most easy by the
application of the Rule): where these perpendicular lines fall into the
protracted Line E C of the Equator, if there be need, there are the Centers
for the describing of the Arches, B 1 D, B 2 D, etc. But the Centers of the
Arches B 91 D, B 92 D, B 93 D, etc. fall into E A; if that need be to protract
it. But the more easy invention in practice is, if that Right Lines be drawn
from B, through every degree of the Quadrants B A, B C, even to the protended
Line A C, which make these points, a, b, c, d, e, and the like. So that 1 A,
shall be the Diameter of the Meridian through which the 1 ought to pass, and
the 26 of that which passes through the 2, and so the 3 c, 4 d, etc. if
therefore 14, 26, 30, 4d, etc. be bissected, we have the Center of the Meridian
to be described,

But the operation will be less obnoxious to error, and more easy (especially
in great Maps) by a Canon of Tangents, for so we shall have no need to draw
Lines. For to divide E A, E C, E B, E D into degrees, we thus act: we divide E
B, in the opposite scale into 10000 parts. Then from the Canon we take Tangents
degree, 1 degrees. 1 degrees. 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, and the like; and we put every one of
these Tangents taken from the opposite scale in E A, E C, E B, E D, from E; so
two near points shall contain one degree, the ascription must be made as
before. Then at the Centers of every one of the Meridians to be found in E A, E
C, the number must be taken from 90 degrees (or the very number from the
Complement it self) let the Tangent of the residue be taken from the Canon, and
be placed from E, in E C, or E A. The term shall be the Center of the Meridian
to be described through the assumed degree. So we must do with all the
Meridians. Practice will show this to be easy, The foundation of this latter
operation for the finding out the Centers, is a Trigonometrical Theorem. The
difference of the Tangents of two Arches together filling up the Quadrant, is
double to the Tangent of the difference of the Arches. So therefore the
Meridians are represented.

To draw the Arches of the Parallels, the Meridians D B, must be divided after
the same manner into 180 degrees, as the Quadrants of the Equator E A, E C, if
that occult lines be drawn from C, to every degree of the Periphery D A B: but
there is no need of this, when those parts may be transferred from E A, into E
B, the points or degrees from E, toward B, must be numbered from the Equator
to the Pole, 1, 2, 3, 4, and the like. So from E, toward the other Pole D.

Then through every one of these points, and degrees of the Quadrants of the
like named number A B, C B, the Arches of the Circles must be described, viz.
through the first degrees, then from the beginning of the third, and the like.
And so from the other quarters of the Equator towords D. So we obtain the
Parallels of all degrees, and the Polary Tropicks, with their Meridians first
found out.

A twofold Method for the designing the Ecliptic.
To design the Ecliptic, there is a twofold Method, for we either put the
situation of the Ecliptic on, or above the Earth, that his intersection with
the Equator, or the beginning of Aries, may hang over the place E, and in this
situation the projecture of the Semicircles of the Ecliptic, from the 1 degrees.
of Cancer, to the 1 of Capricorn, on the Table is a Right Line: to wit, let the
23 degrees. 30 min. be numbered from A, toward B, and let the Diameter be drawn
through E, from the term of the Numeration. This shall represent the Semicircle
of the Ecliptic in that situation. Which line shall be divided after the same
Mode into degrees, as the Semiquator A C. For the point in the Quadrant B C,
where the Arctick Circle falls in, viz. 66 of a degree, is that from whence
if that straight lines be drawn to every degree of the Semiperiphery F A D G,
they shall cut E F into 90 degrees, and after the same Mode E G: to which the
numbers, and signs of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and so on, must be ascribed.

If the scrituation of the Ecliptic be put such that his intersection and that
of the Equator may hang over the place A in the first Meridian, then his
projecture shall become a portion of the Eclipsis; whose two points are A, C;
the third, that in which the Meridian 90 cutteth the Tropic of Cancer; the
other points shall be found by the same Mode, which we have explained in the
first Mode, viz. if that we have the Declinations and Right Ascensions of the
15 degree of Aries, the 1 of Taurus, the 15 of Taurus, and the like; where the
Parallels of every one of the degrees of the Declinations cut the Meridians
taken for every Right Ascension. Those points of the Sections are the 15 of
Aries, the 1 of Taurus, and so on through those. Therefore if a Crooked line be
drawn, we shall have the projecture of the Ecliptic, because it so remains
continued in two Hemispheres.

Moreover to the ascribing of every one of these places in their Tables,
Longitudes, and Latitudes must be excepted from the Tables of every place, and
where the Parallel of Latitude of any place cutteth the Meridian of the
Longitude of the same place, that point represents that place on the Table,
whose appellation is to be ascribed, and so all the places are to be designed.

After the same Method the whole Superficies of the Earth may be represented on
one Table, if that the plain of the first Meridian be not taken for the Glass,
but one Parallel to it, and that very near to the Eye; for so whole Parallels,
and whole Meridians, or every continued Meridian may be described in their
opposites. But thence there will arise a diverse appearance from the true
Superficies of the Earth, and therefore it is omitted by Artificers, who rather
exhibit two Hemispheres on one Map. But it is useful that practitioners should
exercise themselves in these. But then it will be more commodious to place the
Eye in the first Meridian, so that B D may be the first; the line of the
Equator shall not be A C, but another drawn from the point of the right line E
D, which shall be divided into so many degrees, as are in the Arch taken away
by the same Artifice.

The second praise is, that it aptly exhibiteth the Hemisphere intercepted
between the Poles.

The third is, that it almost shows the Latitudes and Longitudes of every
place, and distance from the Equator, and Pole, as they lie in the Earth.

The defects.
The defects are, that first it has unequal degrees of the Equator, viz. in
how much they are more near the first Meridian D A B, or the opposite B C D, by
so much they are the greater, and therefore the equal Regions of the Earth in
these Tables, are also made unequal, as in the preceding Mode (this defect may
be in part corrected, if the Eye be removed far from the Earth): viz. the
Regions about E are lesser, about A C greater than they ought by proportion to
be: after the same manner the Regions about the Pole B, D are made bigger than
they ought. Secondly, the situation of one place to another cannot be
commodiously examined, neither thence can we find the distances of places.

The third, fourth, and fifth Mode of Right lined Maps.
The 3d. 4th. 5th. Mode of Right lined Maps. See Scheme in Place.
There are sold by Artificers, Universal Geographical Maps of Right lines; viz.
in which both the Circles of Longitude (Meridians) and of Latitude, (Parallels)
are designed by Right lines, which is impossible according to the Rules of
Perspective; neither can there be any situation or position assigned to the
Eye or Glass, that both the kinds of Circles, viz. Latitude, and Longitude, may
become Right lines, but either of the Circles may be represented by Right
lines. In the first Method, which we have explained of the Meridian or
Longitude of Circles, Right lines are made according to Perspective, and the
Circles of Latitude become Circles, not Right lines: but in the fifth Method
following, the Circles of Latitude become Right lines, but the Meridian
Circles, crooked Ellipses. In other Methods which are instituted according to
the Rules of Perspective, The Rules of Perspective necessary to be understood.
both kinds become Crooked lines, except yet in one Method, according unto
which the Meridians become Right lines, but the Circles of Latitude become
Hyperboles, to wit, if the Eye be placed in the Center of the Earth, and
beholds the Hemisphere from either part of the first Meridian, but the Table,
or Glass, through which the aspect is made, becomes the plain Parallel to the
first Meridian. For so the Meridians shall become straight lines, and the
Circles of Latitude shall be Hyperboles. The division of the line of the
Equator, and of the Meridians according unto this Method into degrees is easy:
and those who are delighted with the variety of these things may try this Mode
with pleasure: but by reason of the description of Hyperboles, it is less fit
for practice: The Instructions of a Tutor good.
them use a Tutor. Therefore Maps of Right lines are not made according to
therefore we shall say no more concerning it; those who will attempt it, let
Perspective, but contrary to the same, as has been said. They are found to be
twofold, or of two sorts. Some account both the Rules of Latitude and Longitude
equal, such as were made in times past: but others, as those which are now
made, have the Rules of Longitude, or of the Equator equal (which is contrary
to Perspective) but not the degrees of Latitude, or of the Meridians. For they
augment the Magnitude of these toward the Poles more and more, so that to 80
degrees; the degree is twice double more than to the Equator, and then the
degrees more near the Pole, may receive almost an infinite Magnitude, which
cannot be expressed in any Map, which increase is contrary to Perspective,
which only grants a small augmentation.

Right lined Maps.
Right lined Maps of the first Mode are the most easy of all others. For Ab,
being taken for the Longitude, the Map is divided into 180, (for one
Hemisphere) equal parts, which shall be degrees; and the Meridians, viz. Right
perpendicular lines are drawn through every degree, and in these parts equal to
them are taken, which are taken in the line of the Equator, and right lines
Parallel to the Equator, are drawn through every part (which denote the degrees.
of Latitude) these shall be the Circles of Latitude. Any places shall be
signed, as in the former Mode, viz. where the Meridian of that place, and the
Circle of Latitude meet.

The second Mode of Right lined Maps.
Now the second Mode of Maps of right lines, in the division of the Equator
into equal degrees, differs not from the former, and therefore the assumed A
B, is divided into 180 equal parts (for either Hemisphere) as in the former,
and right perpendicular lines are drawn through every one of them which design
the Meridians or Circles or Circles of Longitude. But they observe another
Method to the designing the Circles of Latitude, or Parallels of the Equator.
For the Meridians are not divided into equal degrees, but into unequal, as
aforesaid, so that they increase toward the Poles. The Cause is, because other
Maps do not show the true position of one place to the other, or rather a
Nautical line, from one place to another, neither admit the finding out the
distance, but they determine these two may be obtained by Maps of this kind.
For because the Meridians are all drawn through the degrees of the lines of the
Equator equally distant one to another, thence it comes to pass that the
places or points situated in every Meridian, are so much the more removed
above the true distance from the first Meridian, by how much they come nearer
the Pole from the Equator: viz. the distance in Charts, from the first
Meridian, so much exceeds the lawful distance, as the Semidiameter, or whole
sinus, exceeds the Sine of the Complement of Latitude of any place, so one
degree or more to the Circle of this Latitude. And therefore the degrees in
these Circles ought to be exhibited lesser than in the Equator, and by so much
the more lesser, by how much those Circles are more near the Poles. But in Maps
of right lines, because the Meridians are drawn equally distant, they do not
become lesser, but equal in all Parallels. How much therefore the degrees in
every Circle of Latitude, are augmented above their due Magnitude, so much the
degrees of Latitude, every one ought to increase in these Maps, above the
Magnitude of one degree in the Equator. That is done thus in this Method in
designing the Magnitude in every degree: As the quantity of one degree in every
Parallel is to the quantity of one degree in the Equator, that is, as the
sinus of the Complement of any Parallel beginning that degree, is to the whole
Sine, so is the Magnitude of the part in the Equator, which designeth one
degree, to the Magnitude of the part which shall denote this degree in the
Meridian, from whose beginning that Parallel is drawn. But if you will act more
exactly, the sinus of the Complement of Latitude of any Parallel is not to be
taken, but the sinus of the Complement of Latitude, which begins the degree,
is to be added to the sinus of the Complement which terminateth that degree and
half of the aggregated Complement must be taken for the first term in the Rule
of proportion.

Example.
If a term be to be designed in the first Meridian for the first degree of
Latitude in the Equator, let the Magnitude of one degree of the Equator, be
of ten particles taken in the opposite Scale, according to the first
Proposition his Magnitude shall become equal to the degrees. of the Equator: See
Prop. 1.
because the Equator is the Parallel which begins this degrees. but according
to the II. Proposition, I take the Sine of the Complement 0 degrees of
Latitude, which Sinus is 100000 (for the Complement is 90) and I add to the
Sine of the Complement 1 degrees. viz. to the Sine 89 degrees. which is 99985, they
become ^99985, the half 99992. Therefore as 99992, is to 100000, so is 10 (the
Magnitude of a degree in the Equator, or an equal degree) to 10 10/100000 for
the first degree. But because the increase above 10 particles is so small, that
it cannot be noted in a Map; therefore this degree becomes of 10 particles,
viz. equal to a degree of the Equator. But in progress made toward the Poles,
the degrees more and more increase. For Example; let the Magnitude of 66
degrees be designed, viz. which is between the term of 59 degrees, and the
beginning of 61 degrees. According to the first Proposition, the time of the
Complement of the 59 degree is 51503. Therefore as 51503 is to 100000, so is 10
to 19, particles must be taken for the Scale, of which a degree in the Equator
contains 10.

See Proposition 2.
According to the second Proposition thus we must do. The Sine of the Complement
of the 50 degrees. is 51503. The Sine of the Complement of the 60 degree is 50000,
the half of the Aggregate is 50751. Therefore as 50751 is to 100000, so is 10
to 19 3/^. Which Magnitude is very little bigger than the former, neither is it
worth the pains. Moreover when the Magnitude of the second solitary degree is
found, it must be added to the Magnitude of the first degree: the Aggregate
shall be the increasing Latitude, as much as is to be taken in the Meridian
from the Equator, for the term of the second degree. Then the found out
Magnitude of the third solitary degree, must be added to the increasing
Latitude of two degrees before laid down. So we shall have the Magnitude to be
taken from the Equator in the Meridian for the term of the third degree. And
so you must do with the other degrees. Moreover that the labor may be more
easy for the Studious, I have here set down a Table for the taking of the terms
of every degree in the Meridian; I take such particles as one degree of the
Equator is put to have 100.

The TABLE.
The Table for the taking the terms of every degree in the Meridian.
grad. grad. grad. term. term. term. 1 100 29 3032 57 6970 2 200 30 3147 58
7157 3 300 31 3263 59 7349 4 400 32 3347 60 7546 5 500 33 3499 61 7749 6 601 34
3619 62 7960 7 702 35 3740 63 8175 8 802 36 3863 64 8399 9 903 37 3988 65 8631
10 1005 38 4114 66 8872 11 1107 39 4241 67 9023 12 1209 40 4371 68 9384 13 1311
41 4502 69 9691 14 1414 42 4636 70 9943 15 1517 43 4772 71 10243 16 1621 44
4909 72 10558 17 1725 45 5053 73 10900 18 1830 46 5193 74 11243 19 1936 47 5338
75 11617 20 2042 48 5486 76 12017 21 2150 49 5637 77 12445 22 2256 50 5791 78
12908 23 2364 51 5981 79 13409 24 2473 52 6109 80 13960 25 2583 53 6274 81
14565 26 2694 54 6441 82 15243 27 2806 55 6611 83 16009 28 2918 56 6790

The degrees of Latitude being so designed in the first Meridian, let Parallel
lines be drawn through every one of them with the Equator, which shall be the
Circles of Latitude. And let the Inscription of every one of the places be in
the point, where the Circle of Longitude and Latitude of the place do meet.

But the Regions about the Poles less aptly, and overmuch contrary to their
natural disposition are exhibited in Maps of this kind, therefore the parts
between the Poles, and the Polary. Circles are wont to be adjoined to the
universal Map, in two peculiar little Maps made according to the first Mode.

The use of these Maps.
The use of these Maps is such. 1. The Latitude and Longitude of places is
found, as in the preceding. 2. The place A, being given from whence you Sail,
and the place B, to which you Sail, the quarter is exhibited to which the Ship
is to Steer her Course. For if a Parallel be drawn through A, and the Right
line A B, the Angle which these two lines make shall show the quarter. Mariners
use another Mode. 3. They would find the distance between two given places, it
the interval of those two places be taken with a Compass, and transferred to
the divided Meridian, so that the feet of the Compass may be equally absent
from the Parallel, which is in the middle between these places. But these I
think to be less exact.

The sixth and seventh Mode.
See Ptolomy in his latter Chap. of his first Book of Geography. See Scheme.
Ptolomy in the latter part of his last Chapter of his first Book of Geography
proposes another Mode, and teaches by that to represent the part of the Earth
then known: In this Method the Equator, and Circles of Latitude become the
Arches of the Circles: the Meridians become Elliptical Arches. The Eye is
placed to hang over the Meridian, which is the midst between the extremities of
the Inhabited Earth: and in the middle place between the extreme degrees of
known Latitude. But by reason of the inconveniences of describing the
Ellipsis, and because it was devised by Ptolomy more to represent part of the
Earth, viz. that which is inhabited, therefore it is not used by Artificers. To
this that Mode is something like, which exhibiteth Circles of Latitude, by
Right lines: but the Meridians by the semissis of the Ellipsis, such as the
projecture is, if you conceive perpendicular lines to fall from every point of
either Hemisphere on the place of the first Meridian. But the Eye must be
supposed to be removed by an infinite space from the Earth, so that all the
Rays from the places of the Earth being drawn to it, may be accounted for
Parallels, and Perpendiculars to the plain of the first Meridian, as Dialists
say, that all the Rays emitted from some point of the Sun to the Earth do so
little bend, that they may be esteemed for Parallels, and do make the same
appearances in shadows. But it is not very difficult.

If therefore you intend to represent in this form the Hemisphere of the Earth,
take any point in the plain E, and from that as from a Center let the Periphery
A B C D be described, let the Quadrants be A B, B C, C D, D A; let every one be
divided into 90 degrees, beginning from A C, toward B and A, B A D, shall be
the first Meridian, B C D the opposite, in the right line B D, the middle
between these is the 90 from the first B A D. Let them be drawn to A C, which
shows the Semiperiphery of the Equator; Right lines Parallel through every
degree of the Quadrants, or quarters, they show the Parallels of the Equator
or the Circles of Latitude, and the Tropicks and Polary Circles shall also be
found out. The parts into which E B, E D is divided, through these that are
drawn, are the Meridian degrees B D, which are noted, 1, 2, 3, and so on. The
same are taken in the Quadrant E A, of the Equator, and the Quadrant E C, and
the number 1, 2, 3, are ascribed, even to 180, beginning from the first point,
or next to the Meridian B A D. So the parts A E C show the degrees, into which
the Semiperiphery of the Equator, is divided, through which the Poles B D, the
Semiellipsis must be drawn for the Meridians. Because through B D, is the
greater Axis of Ellipsis which are to be drawn, but the Semissis E B, or E D:
but the Axis of the lesser Semissis is various in diverse, viz. pair of E A,
intercepted between E, and the degree of Longitude, and therefore from those
given it is easy by an apt Instrument, to describe these Ellipses, which
Instrument is vulgar at this day, neither is it difficult to make it. Yet the
points of every one of the Ellipsis may be easily found, through which they
must be drawn with a free hand: but it is better to delineate them with an
Instrument.

The Circles of the Latitude, and the Meridians being so described, all the
places in this Map are to be ascribed at these points, in which the Meridian
and Circle of Latitude do meet, and so the Map shall be finished. The Ecliptic
shall be represented by a straight line, or by the Ecliptic line, by that
Method which we have explained in Maps of the second Mode, with little labor.

These Maps very useful.
Maps of this Method are able to perform, what the Tables of the preceding
Modes do, besides this they have this Commodity, that they apparently show the
decrease of the Circles of Latitude in Magnitude toward the Poles.

If the division H G, and H K, cannot be made through the strokes of the Lines,
by reason of the great distance of the Eye D, it will be easy by calculation to
find out the Parallels for every degree, viz. according to this proportion: As
the distance of the Eye taken from the Center of the Earth, with the Sinus of
the Complement of the Arch of the Equator to be represented, have themselves
to the Sinus of the same Arch, so is the distance of the Eye from the Table, to
part the Line H C, or H K, which shall only represent the Arch of the Equator.

For Example, let us put the Eye D, to be removed from the Center of the Earth
E, 200 Semidiameters of it: but the Table or Glass H K, 100 Semidiameters.
Therefore D E, shall be 200, and D H 100, of such as E B, or E A, E C is 1. We
shall find first the Longitude of G H K, which ought to represent the
Semiperiphery of the Equator A B C, in this distance of the Eye or Glass. And
it shall be thus:

As D E, is to E A, so is D H, to H S, or H K.

200 100 1 to the Semidiamiter of the Earth. From whence it is manifest H K, or
H G, ought to be of half the Longitude of the Semidiamiter of the Earth, which
in truth is over vast, when we can exhibit no such Line on any Plain. Therefore
for the Earth it self, we conceive a little Earth, or Globe Terrestrial, lesser
than usual, whose Semidiameter if that it be of 2 foot, H G, or H K, shall be
of 1 foot, viz. if that the Eye be put 200 foot remote from the Center of that
little Earth, but the Glass 100. But if you desire to know how much distance
the Eye ought to be removed from the very Earth, that the Semidiameter of the
Equator E A, or E C, may make the projecture H C, of given Magnitude; for
Example of 1 foot, (the Semidiamiter of the Equator, that is the Semissis of
the Axis of the Earth contains 19598300) that may be found by this proportion
(yet supposing the distance of the Glass from the Eye, viz. H D, 10000.)

As H G, to D H, so E A, to D E.

A Holland mile.
1 to 100000, so 19598300 to 1959830000000 foot, wherefore 18000 makes an
Holland mile, a vast distance. But in practice we take not the Earth its self,
but its type, or little Earth, from which it is not necessary to suppose the
Eye removed by so great an interval, but the projecture therefore is not varied.

The eighth Mode in which any given place in the Earth receives the Center, or
middle place of the Map.
If you please to have a Map, in which the situation of all places to our
place, or to any given place, as also the distance of them from our place, may
be beheld and found out, a Method is discovered, by which the Superficies of
the Earth is so represented, that any given place of it may possess the middle
place, or Center of the Map: and the other places may lie about it as a Center.
Such Maps those people affect, The Chinese and ancient Jews, supposed their
Country to be in the middle of the Earth.
who are delighted with a vain opinion, that their Country is situated in the
middle of the whole Earth, as the Chinese, and likewise the Jews in times past.

But to describe such a Map, let us take London to possess the Center of the
Map: we take his Latitude, or the Elevation of the 'Pole, to be the 51 degree,
the Eye is placed in the point opposite to the Vertex, or in the Nadir of the
place: the Table, or Glass is the Plain of the Horizon, or another Parallel to
it; if you please to represent a larger portion than the Hemisphere, which is
more commodious in this Method, to wit, that the Plain at least may pass
through the depressed Pole.

Therefore in the Plain, let the Center E, be taken for London, and the
described Periphery A B C D, which shows the Horizon, must be divided into
four quarters, and every one of these into 90 degrres: let the Diameter B D, be
the Meridian line: B the North Pole: D the South Diameter. And the line of the
rising and setting Aequinoctial, shows the primary vertical. A, the Occident,
C, the Oriental Cardo, or shows the place which is distant 90 degrees in the
primary vertical point. All the vertical points are represented in straight
lines, drawn through the Center E, to every degree of the Horizon. But to shun
confusion it is better to omit them, and to adjoyn a Circumductile Rule to the
Paxil affixed in E.

Then let B D be divided into 180 degrees, as in the former Mode, by drawing
Right Lines from A, to every degree of the Semiperiphery B C D. That point in E
B, which shows the 52 degrees. of the Arch B C, shall be the projecture of the
Arctick Pole: Let the point in E D, be noted with the letter P, which
represents the 52 degrees. of the Arch D C, (by accounting from C, to D) shall be
the projecture of the intersection of the Equator, and the Meridian of London.
Let the letter Q, be noted, and from that toward the letter P, let the numbers
of the degrees, 1, 2, 3, etc. be ascribed. Also from Q, toward D, and from B,
toward P, viz. 52, 53, 54, 55, etc.

Then the points being taken from P, of the equal degrees, viz. 99 and 99, also
88, and 88; let these be described about these parts as the Diameters of the
Peripheries of the Circles, which shall represent the Parallels or Circles of
Latitude, and the Tropicks, and Polary Circles with the Equator.

For the describing the Meridians.
To describe the Meridians, first, let a Periphery be described through the
points A P C: that shall show the Meridian, which is 90 degrees absent from
London. His Center shall be M, in B D, (protracted into the point N, which
shows the Antarctick Pole). Let P N, the Diameter, be drawn through M,
Parallel to A C, which is F H; protracted from both parts in K, L. Moreover let
the Circle P H N F, be divided into 360 degrees. and Right lines from the point P,
to every degrees. (or only by application of the Rule) which shall cut the line K F
H L. The Circles must be described through every point of the Section, and both
the Poles P, N, as through three given points which shall represent all the
Meridians: the Centers of the Arches to be described are seated in the same K
L, viz. those which are found by the former Section, but to be taken with this
condition that the most remote Center at L, be chosen for the nearest Meridian
from B D N, toward A, and for the second, the second from this.

The Circles of the Latitudes, and the Meridians being thus described, it is
easy to inscribe the places of the Earth on a Map, and the situation of them
all to London, will be conspicuous. Moreover to affix the Rule to the place of
London, the same parts should be brought in, into which E B, was divided, and
the number of degrees must be ascribed; so the Rule being brought round unto
every place, we shall presently know, both how great an interval they lie from
Amsterdam, and in what quater they lie in respect of it. Now how by the benefit
of the Globe such a Map should be made, we shall show in the Fourth Mode of
particular Maps.

The first Mode of Geographical particular Maps.
We have spoken of the making of general or universal Maps; now it is required
that we should teach the composition of particular or special Maps. Of
particular or special Maps, as of Asia; Africa, Europe, America.
The parts therefore of the Earth, which we would represent on the Map, are
either great or small. It great, as Asia, Africa, Europe, America; it will be
necessary to institute a Declination according to the Modes explained for
General Maps: but in diverse parts sundey ways are more commodious. Africa, and
America, because the Equator passes through them, are not commodiously.
exhibited by the first Mode, but most aptly by the second, the Eye being placed
in the Plain of the Equator above the middle Meridian, between the extremes
which shut up Africa, or America. Therefore in these Maps the Equator is a
right line, but the Parallels and the Meridians are the Arches of the Circles.
But to represent Asia, and Europe, the first and sixth Mode are more
commodious, but for the Polary Lands, or Frigid Zones, we have said that the
first Mode is most apt in the explication of the same.

First, therefore a straight line must be drawn upon the Plain for the Meridian
of the place, unto which we would have the Eye hang over, and that must be
divided into degrees, according to the Method explained in the preceding
Modes, and which shall be degrees of Latitude, the number of which must be
ascribed. Then from the Table must be extracted the Latitude of both Parallels,
viz. that which terminateth the Region from both sides which represents the
Poles. The degrees of the Latitude of these must be noted in the right line, or
the Meridian of the Eye, and through those points straight perpendicular lines
must be drawn, which enclose the Map toward the Northern and Southern quarter.
Then Parallels and Meridians must be drawn at every degree: and the places
inscribed until the Map be perfected.

The second Mode of describing particular Maps?
The second Mode of particular Maps.
Artificers are wont to use another Method in Regions not so large, but only
moderate or small. First, a tranverse line is drawn in the extremity of the
Table, for the Circle of Latitude; in which the ends of the Regions respecting
the Equator, are to be drawn; in that so many parts are taken equally, through
how many degrees. of Longitude that Region is extended from that part. Then from
the middle of this line, a perpendicular is drawn, which has so many parts as
there are degrees. of Longitude between the bounds of that Region toward the
Equator, and the Pole. But how great these parts should be, is known from the
proportion of the degrees. of the first Circle, which is greatest to the degrees. of
Parallel, which is represented from the lower transverse line. Through the term
of this perpendicular, another perpendicular, or Parallel to the inferior
line, is drawn, in which so many degrees. of Longitude must be taken as are in the
lower line, and equal to them of the lower line; if these Latitudes be not much
distant from the Equator, or mutual from themselves. But if the distance from
the Equator be great; or if the excess of the ultimate Latitude of the Region
be great above that which is more near the Equator, the parts to be taken in
the transverse line, shall not be equal to the parts of the inferior line, but
they ought to be lesser according to proportion, which the degrees of this more
remote Parallel has to the degrees of the inferior line, which proportion is
known from the Table we have placed in the Fourth Chapter. See Chap. IV.


After the parts are thus taken for the degrees. of Longitude in the superior and
inferior line, the right lines are to be drawn through the beginning and end
of the parts of the same number: which right lines shall represent the Meridian
lines. Then through every degrees. of its perpendicular, which we have ordered to
be erected from the middle point of the inferior line, lines Parallel to that
lower line must be drawn through the beginnings of every degree which shall
show the Parallels of Latitude. In the last place, places must be inscribed at
the points, in which the Parallels of every place, and the Meridian of Latitude
do meet. So a Geographical Map for a given Region shall be completed.

The third Mode of describing particular Maps.
The third Mode of particular Maps, as Provinces, etc.
In representing the Provinces of a small tract, we use another Method, which we
have explained before, viz. that the Maps may more accurately exhibit the
situation of one place to another, and the distance of places. The Method
consists in this, that we may find the Angles of the position of one place to
another by Mathematical Instruments, and then aptly transfer into the Chart.
For Example sake, let there be Five places of any Region to be disposed in the
Table according to its situation and distance; we shall call those Five places
A, B, C, D, E. First, we shall chose from these that A, from which the rest or
most of them may conveniently be beheld; and an Instrument being applied, we
shall observe the Angles of position at every place, viz. the Angles between
the Meridian line of the place in which we observe, and between the quarters of
the other places B, C, D, E. Moreover in the Chart in which we will represent
those places, we may take the letter A, and cut the Periphery described from
thence into degrees, (which is not necessary if we have a Semicircle divided,
or some other Geometrical Instrument fit for that purpose;) we shall assume one
Diameter for the Meridian line of the place A, viz. F A G: the other
perpendicular to this H A K, will show the Aequinoctial rising in the extremity
H, the setting K. F is the Northern Cardo, C, the Southern. Let the Angle of
the position of the place B, to A, be observed of 30 degrees. from the South,
toward the East, we shall number in the Quadrant G H, so many degrees, and
shall draw the line from A, through that degree. This shall represent the place
B, from the place A. After the same Mode the quarters of the other place D E,
must be noted on the Chart, if they be observed. Then another place is to be
chosen from B, C, D, E, whose distance from A, is known, or found out; for
Example, the place B, and in that the Instruments, being applied, the quarters
observed of the three other places C, D, E. This being done, we put in our
Table the Scale of miles, or Leagues, which we take either greater or lesser,
as we desire to have either a greater or lesser Map, and in the Line of the
quarter of the place B, we take from A, the noted distance, and there we mark
the place B, and through B we shall draw the Line Parallel to F G, which shall
represent the Meridian of the place B, and in the Periphery described about B,
as about A, we shall draw Lines from B, which will denote the quarters of the
places C, D, E, and where these Lines cut them which are drawn from A, the
points of the Intersection shall be the places of the C, D, E, and we must do
after the same Mode if that there shall be many places.

The fourth Mode which applies the Globe.
The fourth Mode by the help of the Terrestrial Globe.
We may by the help of the Terrestrial Globe, exhibit on a plain the situation
and distance of places remote from one to another, and of diverse Kingdoms; yea
the whole Superficies of the Earth: so that any place given may seem to occupy
the middle, as we have showed in the sixth Mode: so that this Mode may be
reckoned to the Modes for General Maps: but it is better not to extend the Mode
beyond the Hemisphere. For distance I determine to set down before your Eyes on
a Chart, the situation of all the places to London, and their distance from
this place. First in the Chart let the middle point be taken for London, let
the letter A, be noted, from that let the Periphery F H G K, be described. Let
F G, be the Meridian Line, or the Line of the North, and South: let H K, be the
Line of the East, and West. F, may show the North, G, the South, H, the East,
and K, the West. Let every one of the Quadrants be divided into 90 degrees.

Then in the Globe let London be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and let the
Pole be Elevated according to the Latitude of London, let the Quadrant be
affixed to the Vertex, and applied to every place, whose situation we would
represent to London on the Chart. For Example, the beginning, middle, and end
of France, so to the bounds of Italy, Spain, Hungary, Sweden, and the like; and
let the Angles be noted which the Quadrant makes with the Meridian in every
application, that is the Angles of the Position of those places to London:
moreover the degrees of the Quadrant between London and every place, that is
the distance of every one of them. This done, lay aside the Globe, and on the
Chart, let the Lines be drawn from A, for the quarters of every one of the
places, viz. which may make such Angles with the Meridian Line, as are noted
before, and that between the Cardinal noted points. (How we may supercede this
labor of drawing of Lines, we shall show anon) In these Lines of the quarters
the points must be found out for the places, by taking the distances from
London, which we may do by a double Method. For the places are either removed a
little interval, which we will note, or by a large interval, but so it is best
to make a small Map; or the places are removed a great interval, and so you
must form a Map of a greater bulk. In the two Cases it is sufficient to make a
Scale of degrees, by dividing some Line into equal parts, every one of which
may represent a degree. From this Scale we take the distances of every place
before noted, with the interval of the Compass, and bring them into the Line of
the quarter of every place. The term shall be noted with the appellation of the
place. A Scale of equal parts for Degrees not sufficient for larger Maps, with
remote Regions.
And so we shall note all the places in the Table about London.

But if you must make a Map of a larger form, and the remote Regions must be
noted, it is not sufficient to take a Scale of equal parts for degrees, but the
Line must be divided by another Mode, viz. according to the Rules of
Perspective; because in this Mode we place the Eye beneath the Horizon of
London, in the place of the Antipodes, and take the Horizon for the Glass. If
we are minded to represent an Hemisphere, or a part greater, lesser than the
Hemisphere, then we take a Plain Parallel to the Horizon, which may be distant
from it by so great an Arch, as is the part to be represented by the
Hemisphere. Therefore let the Periphery of the Circle be described in another
Chart, M, the Center, N O, one Diameter, P Q, another perpendicular. Let the
Quadrant P Q, be divided into 90 degrees, and let so many degrees be taken
beneath Q, as much as the part beyond the Hemisphere is to be represented, and
through the term R, let it be drawn to Q M, Parallet at M O, to wit, R S.

Moreover from O, let right Lines be drawn to every degree of the Quadrant N Q,
or N Q R, (if a greater portion than the Hemisphere be to be exhibited) which
divide the right Line M Q, or S R, into such parts, which in projecture shall
show the degrees. Then let a Line be taken, how much we will have to be the
distance of the most remote place from London in the Table, that is how much we
will have to be half the Table. That Line shall be divided as M Q, or S K, was
divided: and the parts shall be noted with numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. for
degrees. The distances taken from this Scale for every place from London, if
they be brought into the Lines of the Quarters, shall exhibit the points for
the places, and the Map shall be made which we desired.

In the practice we may supersede from the pains of the Lines to be drawn from
the Quarters, for it will be commodious to design a Scale of degrees in the
Rule, whose beginning if it be applied to London, and the Rule be brought round
to the degrees of the Periphery for the Quarters of every place, the point may
presently be noted for any place, accounting the distance on the Rule from the
beginning of the Scale. The practice will show this Method easy.

The fifth Mode, concerning Sea Maps, or Charts.
The fifth Mode treating of Sea Maps, or Charts.
Sea Maps, or Charts, are of right lines, and have all their Meridians
Parallel, otherwise than the second Mode has in the last member. They are
twofold, as we have said, that Universals are twofold in the fourth and fifth
Mode of universals, viz, of equal degrees of Latitude, or unequal degrees. The
construction is the same with that of the universals, the difference is only
that they represent part, and admit of diverse Nautick or Sea Compasses. Of
their use we shall speak in the Art of Navigation. Charts become of equal
degrees, if that part of the Earth a little varying in Latitude, be to be
represented: such are the Charts for the Navigation of the Mediterranean: they
are made of unequal degrees, if that the Latitude be great.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the distance of Places.
Proposition I. Two Points, or Places being given on the Globe, to draw a line
or Arch from one to the other, which may be part of the greatest Periphery of
the Globe, or to describe on the Superficies a Periphery of the greatest
Circle, which may pass through the two given Points.
Concerning the distances of places.
LEt us conceive two Right Lines drawn from one point to the other, and from
both to the Center of the Globe, or Earth, which three Lines shall make a
Triangle, and therefore they are on one Plain. This Plain protended may cut the
Superficies of the Globe: the Section shall be the Periphery of the greater
Circle, and the Arch intercepted between both places shall be that sought for.
Or let the interval of the Quadrant of the greatest Periphery be taken with the
Compasses, and one foot being fixed on one of the given places, let the Arch be
described on the Superficies of the Globe: then the other Arch, the foot being
fixed on the other given point, the Cannon Section of these two Arches, shall
be the Pole of the Periphery to be described, or in which if one foot of the
Compass be designed, and the Periphery described on the Superficies of the
Globe, we shall have the Arch demanded intercepted between the two given places.

Proposition II. The distance of two places on the Superficies of the Earth is
very short, or the shortest way from one place to the other is only one (except
the places of the Antipodes) viz. the Arch of the greatest Periphery, which is
intercepted between those two places.
The shortest distance of two places, is a Right Line drawn from one Point to
the other.
The shortest distance of these two points, is a Right Line drawn from one point
to the other, as is manifest from the definition of Archimedes, and it is easy
to deduct from other definitions. Also the shortest distance of two places
existing in the Superficies of the Earth is a Right line, which is conceived to
be drawn from one place to the other; but seeing that the Superficies of the
Earth is a crooked Unequal, thence it comes to pass, that the Right Line which
is truly the shortest distance of the two places, may fall between the Cavity
of this Superficies. But we consider only those ways from one place to another,
which are on the very Superficies of the Earth, and therefore Crooked Lines:
wherefore we add in the Proposition the shortest distance on the Superficies of
the Earth. Between these ways, or intercepted Lines, there is one which is
shortest of all, viz. the Arch of the greatest Periphery, intercepted between
any two points so drawn, as we have said in the preceding Proposition. That
therefore this Arch, or Crooked intercepted Line is shorter than all the other
Crooked Circular intercepted Lines (of which there are infinite) is manifest
from this Geometrical Theorem: if the Arches of two unequal Peripheries be
taken, whose subtended Line is equal, or the same, the Arch of the greater
Periphery shall be lesser than the Arch of the lesser Periphery of the Earth,
except that Arch which is supposed to be of the greatest Periphery. But that
this Arch is also lesser than the other Crooked not Circular solid Lines, (as
the Helices) such as may be infinitely supposed on the Superficies of the Earth
intercepted between two places is showed from others: for this Theorem does not
belong to Geography but to Geometry, which also shows only that one Arch of
the greatest Periphery may be drawn from one place to another, not many.

Proposition III. The distances of places are not changed.
Itinerary distances of places may be greater or lesser.
The Itinerary distance of places may sometimes be greater, and sometimes
lesser: but the true and shortest Geographical distance remains the same,
except you conceive the Superficies of the Earth to be rent or torn. But here
we understand places to be the points of the Earth which are immovable, and
therefore the Superficies intercepted between two places become higher, the
distance of the places shall also be made greater; if more depressed, lesser.

Proposition IV. No Maps of the Earth are distant a greater interval, than 2700
German miles, whereof 15 are said to be a degree.
Therefore because the Superficies of the Earth is Spherical, the shortest Arch
cannot fall between two points of it, Fifteen German makes a degree.
which is greater than 180 degrees. that is, than the Semiperiphery of the greatest
Circle. And 180 degrees. makes 2700 German miles; wherefore no places are distant
more than 2700 German miles. But the condition of an Itinerary distance is
otherwise.

Proposition V. The distance of the Antipodes is 2700 German miles, or 180
degrees.
The distance of the Antipodes.
The shortest distance amongst the Antipodes is not one, but infinite, and those
all equal, although to speak properly, they cannot be called the shortest
distances, but those than which none are shorter.

The Circular distances amongst the Antipodes are all greater Peripheries, no
lesser, of which between other places there are infinite, which are not opposed
to the Diameter.

A Periphery passing through two places, also passes through the Antipodes of
these places.

The distance of any places of the two which belong to the Antipodes taken
together, make 180 degrees. Therefore the distance of one place being known
from the other, the distance also of that place shall be known from the place
of the other of the Antipodes.

These Five Propositions are of so manifest a truth, that any one weighing of
them may easily discern, and understand them.

Proposition. VI. Any place being given on the Superficies of the Globe, to
exhibit all those place which may have one and the same distance from that
given place: but the given distance must not be greater than 2700 German miles.
Let the given place be brought to the Brazen Meridian; let the Pole be
Elevated according to to the Latitude of the place, let the Quadrant be affixed
to the Vertical point. Moreover let the given distance be turned into degrees,
which degrees must he numbered on the Quadrant from the Vertical point. Let the
term of the Numeration be noted with Chalk: then let the Quadrant be brought
round on the Superficies of the Globe: the noted point will show all the places
of the Earth, which have the given distance from the given place.

Or let the degrees. of the changed distance be taken on the Equator by the
interval of the Compass, and one Foot fixed on the given place, let the other
be brought round. The places through which it passes, are those demanded.

But if the degrees. arising from the changed distance are more than 90, that is
than a Quadrant, let their Complement be taken at 180: and let the place of the
Antipodes be brought to the Superior Semicircle of the Brazen Meridian, let
the Pole be Elevated for its Latitude, and the Quadrant affixed to the Vertical
point, and let the degrees. of the Complement be accounted on it, and let the term
of the Numeration be noted with Chalk. If then the Quadrant be turned about,
all the places demanded, which have the given distance from the given place,
shall have the noted point. But if you will do the business with the Compass,
use the Method of the Chorographical Maps.

Proposition VII. Of the Cause why the Itinerary distance is greater than the
true, or short and Geographical.
The reasons why the Itinerary distance is greater than the true, short, and
Geographical.
1. The unpassable Woods which lie between some places. 2. High Mountains, and
low Valleys. 3. Marshes and Water in general, if you mean Land Voyages. 4. In
Sea Voyages the procurrent Lands and Islands hinder the direct Voyage. 5.
Peculiar Fluxes of the Sea. And 6. The Winds.
But some may demand whether it be not possible that there may be places whose
Itinerary distance is lesser, than the most short Geographical? To this I
answer, although to Sense the Figure of the Earth be Spherical, yet I have
showed in the first Book, that this Figure is not altogether Geometrical, but
is rendered unequal by many places Elevated and depressed. Therefore if we
conceive a certain Superficies of the Earth, or the distance of the Superficies
from the Center, for Example, the vulgar Semidiamiter of 860 miles, in respect
of which places are to be taken Elevated, or depressed, this being supposed, I
say, there may be two places so situated, that the Itinerary distance may be
lesser than the shorter Geographical, which is removed 860 miles from the
Center, but the intermedial place must be more depressed.

Proposition VIII. To find out the distance of two places given on the Globe,
as also in Geographical Maps.
The finding out the distance of two places given on the Globe.
Let one of the given places be brought to the Brazen Meridian, let the Quadrant
be affixed to the Vertex, and let it be applied to the other given place: then
let the degrees intercepted between the Vertex and this place be numbered: let
these degrees be turned into miles, or another measure in which we would know
the distance of those places; this shall be that demanded.

Or let the interval of two places be taken with the Compasses, and this being
translated to the Equator, let it be considered how many degrees it possesses
in this, for these are the distances of the places, which we must convert into
miles, or some other measure.

But if that the distance be greater, than can be taken by the Quadrant, or
Compasses, ( viz. more than 90 degrees) the distance of one place from the
Antipodes of the other, shall be lesser than 90 degrees. Let this be enquired
after and taken from 180 degrees, the remaining degrees shall be the distance
required.

In Universal Maps, as also in Particular of great parts, the distance of
places cannot be exactly found: but in Particular Chorographical Maps, a Scale
of Leagues or miles is usually added, by the assistance of which the distance
of places contained in those Maps is known. For so if you take the interval of
two places, and transfer this into the Scale, you shall presently know the
distance of those places.

But if the Map be of any greater proportion, this Method is defective, for no
Map can be made by any Method, which exhibiteth the true distance of places:
but such an one may be made, which may show the distance of one place from all
the rest, as we have said in our Method of making Maps.

Proposition IX. The Latitude and Longitude of two places being given, to find
their distance.
The Latitude and Longitude of two places being given, to find their distance.
The solution of this Problem is easy by the Globe and Catholic Planisphere; it
is difficult by Calculation, and Trigonometrical Supputation.

It is performed on the Globe after this Mode: let any Meridian be taken, and
let the difference of the Longitude of places be numbered from it in the
Equator; let the term of the Numeration be brought under the Brazen Meridian,
and let the Latitude of the other place be reckoned on this; let the point of
the Globe, which is under the term of the Numeration be noted with Chalk: also
in the first Meridian, let the point of Latitude be noted for the other place.
Then let the interval be taken between the noted points with the Compasses, and
let it be transferred either into the Equator, or first Meridian: so we shall
know the distance of places in degrees, and parts of degrees: which degrees
must be turned into miles, or other measure which we would have; but if the
interval be greater than can be conveniently taken with Compasses, we must do
as in the VII Proposition. See Proposition 7.
But because the Planisphere is more apt for use, especially by Seamen, and
many love to solve Problems by it, and the use of this Problem is frequent, I
shall also propound this Method by the Planisphere.

There are two Cases of this Problem, for either the given Longitude of the
places is one and the same, or the difference of 180, to wit, if they lie in
the same Meridian, or the Longitude is diverse. If it be the same, there is no
need of another Method, but that difference of Latitude may be turned into
miles; viz. that every Latitude is the distance of places in degrees: but if
the Latitudes be of diverse species, to wit, one North, the other South, the
degrees of Latitudes shall be added: if the difference be of 180 degrees, viz.
if in diverse Semicircles of the same Circle of Longitude, we must do after the
same Mode, which is easy for any one to collect. But it is otherwise, if that
the Longitude of the places be unequal, that is, if the places shall be
situated in diverse Meridians, and without the Equator.

Cases which vary the solution of this Problem.
But it will be useful for the distinct understanding of the Problem to reckon
the Cases which vary the solution, and most of them have a most easy solution,
as will be manifest by Examples, which the Studious ought to examine.

1. If the Longitude of the places be the same, and they be the same
cognominated Latitude, in this Case the difference of Latitude is the very
distance in degrees, which may be changed into miles, or other measure. 2. If
the Longitude of places be the same, but the Latitudes be of a diverse name, one
Northern, the other Southern; in this Case, the Latitudes shall be added in one
sum, this shall show the distance in degrees. 3. If the difference of
Longitudes be of 180 degrees, and be of a like cognominated Latitude, the
Complements of the Latitudes shall be taken at 90 degrees, or the distance of
the places from the Poles, and they shall be added: the same will show the
distance in degrees. 4. If the difference of Longitudes be of 180 degrees, and
the Latitudes be of a diverse name, let the difference of Latitudes be taken,
and subtracted from 180 degrees, or the Semicircle. The remaining number shall
exhibit the distance in degrees. 5. It both places shall be in the Equator,
the difference of Longitude is the very distance. 6. If the Latitude of places
shall be one and the same, and not greater than 20 degrees, and the difference
of Longitude small, we must enter with that Latitude, the Table of Magnitude
laid down in the IV. Chapter, and we must except the quantity of one degree.
Then we shall take the difference of Longitude, and turn these degrees. into the
excepted Miles, or Measures. 7. But if the Longitude and Latitude be diverse, or
if the Latitude be the same, but yet greater than 20 degrees, and the
difference of Longitude be some what greater, which is usual in many Examples;
in this case we must not use the same compendiums, but the solution is more
difficult, and in this case the Problem is chiefly propounded. We have showed
the solution by the Globe; the Method by the Planisphere is this: let the Rule
of the Planisphere be brought to the Latitude of one place, or to the degree of
the Elevation of the Pole: then let the difference of Longitudes be numbered in
the Meridians, beginning from the other part, and wherein the point may be
observed, where this Meridian terminating the Numeration, cutteth the Parallel
of the other place of Latitude. Let the end of the Index be placed above this
point. This done, let the Rule be applied to the Line of the Equator. The
number of the Parallels intercepted between the Pole and the Index, is the
sought for distance in the degrees.
The solution of the Problem.
Thus the Problem is solved by the Planisphere. There is another Method found
out by Maurolicus, which by the strokes of the Lines on the Circle, teaches by
a pleasant operation to exhibit the distance, from which lineary description
also is deduced a Mode, in which the Problem is solved by Calculation. Let a
certain Periphery of the Circle be described in the Center E: one Semidiamiter
B E: let the Arch B A, be taken equal to the difference of the Longitudes of
the places (if the difference taken be greater than 180 degrees. the Complement of
this difference is at 360 degrees) and let the Semidiameter A E be drawn. Then
let the Arch A F, (toward B) be taken equal to the Latitude of the place A,
and from B, the Arch B C, equal to the Latitude of the place B: let G I, be let
down perpendicular from G, on B E, and F H, from F, on A E. Let I H, be drawn,
and above this the points I, and H, must be erected perpendicular, I L, equal
to I G, and H K equal to H F (on the same quarter if the Latitudes of the
places shall be Cognominal; but if they be of a diverse Name, then I L, shall be
drawn from one quarter to the right Line I H, and H K, from the other). This
done, the right Line L K, shall be stretched to the demanded distance, or the
Arch of it shall be subtended, which shall show the distance of degrees.
Therefore by the interval of the Compass K L, let the Arch B X, be taken: this
shall represent the distance in degrees.

This Mode of Maurolicus is taken from the solution of Spherical Triangles,
neither will this lineary Method exhibit an accurate distance, although the
practice be pleasant and easy: but only the Method by Numbers, or the
Trigonometry of Spherical Triangles, exhibiteth an accurate distance. For let
there be had a Spherical Triangle, in which two sides are given, viz. the
distances of the places from the Poles (the Complements of Latitude) and the
Angle contained whose measure is the difference of Longitude, the third side is
demanded. For the finding of which although there are many Methods, yet the
most general is this: First, if that the Latitudes of places be Cognominal, let
it be brought to pass, that as the Quadrant of the whole Sinus is to the right
Angle, contained under the Sinus of the distance of the places from the Pole,
so is it toward the Sinus of the difference of the Longitudes (if it be
greater than 180 degrees, let his Complement be taken at 360 degrees) to a
certain fourth number. Then let the difference of Latitudes be taken, and the
Sinus of this Complement. Moreover let the fourth number found out before be
compared with this Sinus: if it becomes equal, the distance of the places
shall be 90 degrees. If it be lesser let it be subtracted, and the residue
shall be the Sinus of the Arch, whose Complement is the distance of the places.
If the fourth be found greater than the said Sinus, let this be subtracted from
that, and the residue shall be the Sinus of the Arch, which being added to 90
degrees, will exhibit the distance sought in degrees, which must be converted
into an Itinerary distance.

2. If the Latitudes be of a diverse name, viz. one Northern, the other
Southern, let the place of the Antipodes be taken for either place of it, and
the distance of it may be found from the other place according to the said
Method. For the Latitude of this shall be the same with that of that place, but
of the same name with the other place: therefore in a Spherical Triangle there
shall be two given sides, and the Angle is the Complement of the difference of
the Longitude of the places at 180 degrees (or an excess above 180; if this
difference shall be greater than 180) therefore the distance between one place,
and the Antipodes of the other place being found, you have also the distance of
those places. For this is the Complement of the former to 180 degrees, as has
been said in the former Proposition.

In places near, and not much distant from the Equator ( viz. not beyond 18
degrees) we use a more easy, though not an Apodictical Method, which shall
exhibit a distance not much diverse from the true, viz. we take the Quadrant of
the difference of Longitude, and also of Latitude, we add the Quadrants, and
from the Aggregate extract the Quadrate Root, this will show the difference not
much different from the true.

Or thus, act in a more certain Method, which may also be applied to places
beyond the 20 degree of Latitude: from the Table of the Quantity of the
Parallels, except the proportion of the greater Parrallel of Latitude to the
Equator: and as the quantity of the Equator is to the quantity of the
Parallel, so is the difference of Longitude to the other, or to the difference
of Longitude taken in the Parallel of a greater Latitude. Let this quantity be
assumed for the difference of Latitude, and do as before.

Tables of Logarithms useful for the solution of this Problem.
The solution of this Problem is easy, if we apply Tables of Logarithms, and
resolve a Triangle, Oblique Angle, into two right Angles. So there will be need
of no Multiplication, or Division.

Proposition X. The Latitude of two places being given, and the Quarter in
which one is situated from the other, to find the distance.
This Problem is the same with the Trigonometrical abstract: two sides being
given in a Spherical Triangle, and an Angle, which is opposite to one given
side, to find a third side. For the two given sides are in this Geographical
Problem, the distances of these two places from the Pole, and the Angles
opposite to either side is the Angle of position, or the Angle of one quarter
of the place to the other, or the Complement of this Angle at 180 degrees.

The Solution of this Problem is thus performed by the Globe. Let the first
Meridian be taken for the Meridian of the place, whose quarter is not given at
the other: and in this Meridian let the point of Latitude be noted for this
place. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the other place, and
the Quadrant affixed to the Vertex, but let the other end be applied to the
quarter or degree of the Horizon, for the given quarter.

Then let the Globe be turned round, until the point noted in the first
Meridian come to the Quadrant. So the Arch of the Quadrant intercepted between
the Vertex and that point, is the demanded distance of the two places: you
shall also have the difference of Longitude in the Equator, viz. the Arch of
the Equator intercepted between the Brazen, and first Meridian.

Proposition XI. The Longitude of two places being given, the Latitude of one
place, and the quarter in which this other place lies at this, to find out the
distance.
Here we have again a Spherical Triangle, whose sides are the distances of the
places from the Pole, and the mutual distance of the places themselves, in
which one side is given, viz, the distance of one place from the Pole, and two
Angles are given, one, whose measure is the difference of Longitude, the other
is known from the given quarter of the other place. From these three given the
side is demanded, which is opposite to the Angle of the difference of
Longitude, the solution may easily be performed by the Globe, and by the
Planisphere; and very exactly by a Logarithmical Calculation, as also by the
common computation. We will only show the Method which the Globe affords,
although it be more easy by the Planisphere, but that which is done by the
Globe represents the Triangle.

The Method which the Globe affords herein.
Let the first Meridian be taken for the Meridian of the place whose Latitude is
not given: and let the degrees of the difference of the Longitude of the places
be accounted in the Equator. Let the term be noted with Chalk and brought to
the Brazen Meridian: so this shall represent the Meridian of the other place:
let the degrees of the given Latitude be reckoned on it, and the Globe
remaining fixed let the Pole be Elevated for that Latitude; Let the Quadrant be
affixed to the Vertex, and the other end to the given quarter of the Horizon.
In this situation of the Globe the point in which the Quadrant cutteth the
first Meridian, shall represent that other place, and the Arch of the Quadrant,
which is intercepted between the Vertex, and the point is the distance
demanded. Also by the same Method, the Latitude of this other place is had.

Proposition XII. The distance of two places situated in the same Meridian, or
of the same Longitude, being given in the quarters in which that third place
lies from those two, to find the distance of this third place from both of
them.
Here again we have a Spherical Triangle, whose three sides are the distance
between those three places. And one place is given, viz. the distance of two
places (which must be turned into degrees, except it be so given) and the two
adjacent Angles are given, the two other sides are sought.

Leaving the Methods which perform it by Calculation, and the Planisphere*
although they be more accurate, we shall only deliver that which solveth it by
the Globe, and places it more before the Eyes.

Let the degrees of two places distant be taken on the Brazen Meridian where
you please, and let the terms be noted: so that these may represent the places
whose distance is given. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of one
of these terms, let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and applied to the
given quarter, in which the other place is situated at the place which is
represented from that bound, and let the extension of the Quadrant be noted
with Chalk on the Globe. Then let the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the
other bound, and the Quadrant be affixed to that term, the other extremity to
the other given quarter. The point in which the Quadrant shall cut the Arch
marked with Chalk, shall represent the third place, whence it is easy to take
the distance from these two terms.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Visible, or Sensible Horizon.
A Sensible Horizon, is a Periphery on the Superficies of the Earth which
boundeth the prospect of the Eye moved round about, or which terminateth part
of the Superficies which the Eye moved about may see, or from whence the Rays
may come to the Eye. His Semidiameter is termed the greatest Arch of the Earth
intercepted between the Foot of the Spectator, and that Periphery, which
therefore is perpendicular over it.

Proposition I. The extension or Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon variously
existeth both according to the diverse Altitude of the Eye, as also from the
diversity of the taken Semidiameter of the Earth.
A sensible Horizon what.
Let the greatest Circle of the Earth be M P N Q. Let T be the Center, T P the
Semidiameter, P O the Altitude of the Eye: let O be the Eye. Let the Tangents O
N, O M be drawn from O: and let us conceive the Ray N O to be as it were
carried about on the Superficies of the Earth: and so to describe the
Periphery: this shall be the sensible Horizon: his Semidiameter P N, P M; for
the Rays N O, M O are the last, which from O can come to the Eye from the
Superficies of the Earth, which we here suppose to be perfectly round.

And it is manifest, if we take the lesser, or greater Altitude than P O, that
also the Arch P N shall be greater or lesser. After the same Mode if F P be
made to be of more, or fewer miles, P N shall also be of more or fewer miles.

The opinions of the Ancients concerning this Horizon.
These seem to be the Causes, that the Ancient Authors have followed diverse
opinions concerning this Horizon, or Extension of Sight. For Macrobius
assigns to it the Semidiameter P N of 180 stadia's, that is 22 miles.
Eratosthenes 350 stadia's, which makes 44 miles. Albertus Magnus 1000, which
makes 125 miles. Proclus 2000 stadia's, that is 250 miles. Many assign 500
stadia's, that is 62 mile. Yet I suppose the Causes of the diversity of these
assignations, not only to be those of which I have spoken, but the diverse
assumed distance of the stadia, as shall be manifest from the following
Proposition.

Proposition II. The stature of a Man being given from the Foot to the Eye, and
the Semidiameter of the Earth being given, to find out the Semidiameter of the
sensible Horizon.
Let P O be the stature of a Man: O the Eye. T P is the Semidiameter. O N is
the Rays touching the Superficies of the Earth, terminating the sensible
Horizon, or the Aspect: therefore P N is the Semidiameter; the Longitude of
this is demanded. Let P O be added, for Example, of Five Foot to T P the
Semediameter 19598300: so you shall have T O, and in the Triangle N T O besides
T O and T N, we know the Angle T N O to be right, or 90 degrees. Therefore N T
O is found according to this proportion.

As T O is to T N, so is the whole sinus to the sinus of the Angle N O T, whose
Complement at 90 degrees is the Angle N T O, or the Arch N P, which may be
turned into miles.

Corollary. We therefore may thence know that if this, or that quantity of the
Semidiameter T N, or T P be taken, and another Altitude of the Eye O, how great
a variation there thence is of the sensible Horizon.

Proposition III. The Altitude of the Eye being given on a Tower, or Mountain
to find the distance of the last point, unto which the Eye extends it self,
or which the Eye can see.
Let P O be the given Altitude of the Tower, in which the Eye being placed
beholds all round. Therefore in the Triangle right Angle N T O, the given
have themselves after the same Mode, as in the preceding Problem. Therefore
the Angle N T P and the Arch N P shall be found after the same Mode, which we
have used in the solution of the former.

Proposition. IV. The Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon being given, or the
greatest distance from which the Eye is supposed to see, to find out the
Altitude of the Eye.
Of the finding out the Altitude of the Eye.
This is the same with that Problem. The greatest distance being given from
which the Vertex of the Mountain is seen, to find the Altitude of the Mountain.

In the Triangle N T O, let the right Angle T N O be given, and the Angle N T O
is known from the Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon P N: moreover let the
Semidiameter of the Earth T N be given. Therefore T O shall be found according
to the proportion.

As the whole sinus is to the secant of the Angle N T O, so is T N to T O. From
which if you substract T P, the remaining number will show the sought for
Altitude of the Eye.

Proposition V. The Altitude of the Eye being given, and of some erected sean
Magnitude, as a Tower, the Mast of a Ship, or an high Mountain; to find the
distance of this from the Eye, that is the distance of the Ship.
To find the distance of a Ship, etc. by the Eye.
For Example, in the Diagram in the preceding Propositions, let P O be the
Altitude of the Eye in the Ship, Tower, or Mountain. Let F S be the Mast of
another Ship; and let P be the point, and F S the Ship so seated, that in P the
first top of the Mast S moy be seen. Therefore the point S shall be in the Line
O N, which is the Tangent drawn from the Eye O: for whatsoever is seated
beneath this O N X, that can send forth no direct Rays to the Eye O: but it
must so draw near, that the Vertex or point may fall into the right Line O X.

Therefore the distance F P is sought, viz. in which the first Ray from S may
come to the Eye.

In the Triangle N O T the Angle N T O is found from the given N T, T O and
from the right Angle T N O. And again in the Triangle right Angle N T S, N T, T
S is given, and the right Angle S N T: the Angle N T S, shall be found out: and
so the whole Angle O T S shall be had, whose measure is the Arch P S, the
distance demanded.

Proposition VI. On the contrary, if the Altitude of the Eye be given, and the
distance, from which first the top of the approaching Mast of the Ship or Tower
may be seen, to find out the Altitude of the Tower, or Mast of the Ship.
In the Diagram of the former Proposition in the Triangle N O T, from the given
N T, T O, the Arch N P is found, which being subtracted from the Known Arch P
F, (from the given distance turned into minutes) the Arch F N, or the Angle N T
S is left. And in the Triangle N T S, the right Angle N T is given, and N is
the right Angle; therefore the Hypotenusa T S shall be found, from which if T F
be taken, F S is left the demanded Altitude of the Tower, or Mast of the Ship,
or of any Mountain.

Proposition VII. The refraction of Rays in the Air, augmenteth the apparent
Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon.
Of refraction of Rays in the Air.
For there is a diverse refraction of the Air in diverse places; but the thicker
by how much it is nearer the Earth. Therefore although a Ray cannot come by a
direct way to the Eye O, from the point situated beyond N, for Example F, yet
his Ray may be so broken in the Air, that the refract may be N O, or the
Tangent of the Earth.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the three parts of the Nautick Art; and in special, of the
first part, viz. the making or building of Ships.
Proposition I. That is termed the Nautical Art or Science, which teaches how
a Ship may most safely with the assistance of the winds, be sailed from one
place to another through the Sea.
By the Winds Ships are carried from one place to another in the Seas.
BEcause in this discipline the places of the Earth are compared amongst
themselves, or mutually to themselves, and their respective situation is
examined, therefore deservedly it is referred to the respective part of
Geography.

Now I suppose that three parts may conveniently be constituted of this most
Noble Art so much useful to human Society. 1. The Art of building of Ships,
which also considers the motion of the Ship in the water, or else
presupposes it as known. 2. Concerning the lading of Ships. 3. The Direction,
Gubernation or Sailing of a Ship, which is termed the Art of the Master, or
Pilot, and in general the Art of Navigation by way of Excellency: unto which
also the definition of the Nautick Art is most of all agreeable.
And this part with greater right does appertain unto Geography than the two
former, which are more truly referred to the Staticks, and Mechanics: now the
Art of Sailing does wholly depend on Geography.

Proposition II. In the Fabrics of Ships these things following must be
observed.
Things to be noted in the Fabrics of hips.
1. That the matter or wood be taken, which may endure very long in the water,
of which Vitruvius and other Authors are to be consulted. Hither also belongs
how the Woods are to be prepared, and their density to be augmented, the
unuseful moisture to be consumed with Fire, Pitched, and defended from
corruption. This Doctrine must be taken from Philosophy. 2. That such a Figure
or Shape be given to a Ship that is most apt for a quick motion, and may be
moved by a small power. 3. In this Fabric, and in reference to the Figure,
this must be observed, that a Ship may with ease be defended against storms and
tempests; but of this I shall treat in the Second Part, where I shall speak of
the lading of Ships. The Magnitude of Ships.
4. The Magnitude of Ships must be considered, where there is a great comparison
between the Ancient and Moderns. Some suppose that the Ship of Alexandria, made
by Archimedes by the Command of Hiero King of Sicily, and presented to Ptolomy
King of Egypt, was of 12000 tuns. The Ship of Philopater is delivered by
Calixenus to have been in length 280 Cubits, in breadth 38, and in highth 48
Cubits. The greatest Ships at this day are those of the Spaniards, or
Portugals; they call them Caracasts. But of all Nations in Christendom, the
English may best brag of their gallant Ships for the service of War. 5. There
belongs to the building of Ships, the knowledge of every part, as the Keil,
the Rudder, Ribs, Head, Stern, Masts, Yards, Cables, and Anchors, etc. of which
not only the matter, figure, and coherency, but also the Weight and Magnitude
are to be explained. 6. To the Fabric of Ships belongs the skill how to
prevent a breach, leak, or other defects of Ships.
Thus much in brief of the First Part of the Nautick Art of building of Ships.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Lading of Ships, or the Second Part of the Nautick Art.
Proposition I. The burden to lade Ships withal is expressed by Lasts, and
Tuns.
Of the Lading of Ships.
THe Tun of a Ship is supposed to be 2000 pound weight, the Lasts twelve Tuns.

Proposition II. The body or matter which is higher than water, is not mergent
altogether in the water, but some part of it is above, but if it be of a
greater weight than water, it will sink to the bottom: if of the same weight,
it keeps the given place in the water.
Hitherto belongs the various knowledge of the weights of bodies, as of Lead,
Gold, Iron, Wheat, Sand, Oil, Wine, the gravity of all which must be compared
with water.

Corollary From hence it is manifest, that the weight of the matter to lade the
Ship with, taken with the burden of the Ship, ought to be lesser than the
burden or gravity of the water, whose moles is equal to the solidity or
capacity of the whole Ship.

Proposition III. By how much the Figure of the Ship comes to an Ordinate,
that is to a Cubick equality of Longitude, Latitude, and Thickness; by so much
the more it can sustain the greater burden in the water.
The demonstration must be sought from the Staticks.

Proposition IV. In the Lading of Ships respect must be had to two things,
first, that there is not imposed so great a burden, that its weight taken may
be equal with the weight of the Ship, or greater than the Moles of the water
which is equal to the solidity of the Ship, but that it be lesser, though not
much. But if the matter to lade the Ship be so light, the burden must be
augmented with Ballast. Secondly, the depth of the water must be considered,
through which the Ship is to sail.
Ballasts required in a Ship.
For although the gravity of the Water admits of this or that weight of the
Ship or Lading, when this is lesser than the equal gravity of the Ship is to
the moles of the Water; yet if the Water has lesser profundity than the part
of the Ship beneath the Superficies of the Water, the bottom will not grant a
motion to the Ship, but detain it. This is the reason that Spanish Ships carry
greater burden than Dutch, Spanish Ships carry greater burden than the Dutch.
because they have the Sea deeper on the Shore, and in the Harbors, as also
greater Ships come to Zeland, than to Holland.

Proposition V. If a Ship be so burdened, that its weight, or gravity, be
almost equal to the weight or gravity of the Sea water, equal to the capacity
of the Ship, yet it sinketh not in the Sea, but when it shall be brought into
any Rivers, it sinketh to the bottom.
The reason is because the Water of Rivers is lighter than the Water of the
Sea. Therefore if the weight of the laden Ship be almost equal to the gravity
of the Marine Water, therefore it shall be greater than the gravity of River
Water, and so the Ship shall be sunk in the River, or carried to the bottom.
Many Ships for this reason have perished, which have been over laden by
unskilful Mariners, or not unburdened in the Mouths of the Rivers. Now how much
this gravity should be, is known from the proportion of the Sea Water to River
Water.

Proposition VI. Any body swiming on the water has that weight that the watery
Moles has, equal to the demergent part of this body.
Corollary. The part of the Ship being given which is under Water, the weight
of the whole burdened Ship may be found. For the gravity of the Water is known,
or is easy to be found. For Example, one Cubick foot of Water is 70 li. and
therefore if the part of the Ship under Water be 2000 Cubick foot, therefore
the gravity of the Watery Moles which is equal to the part of the Ship under
Water, shall be 140000 li. So much also shall be the weight of the Ship laded.

Proposition VII. A Ship is most commonly accounted commodiously to carry that
quantity of burden whose gravity is equal to the gravity of half the Moles of
water, which the Ship can contain.
For Example, if the Ship can carry 500000 Tun of Water (whereof every one is
accounted at 2000 li. weight) that is if it contain the Water of 1000000000 li.
You may conveniently lade it with the burden of 250000 Tuns, 1000000000. In
this sense you must understand it, when they say that Ships are so many Tuns,
or carry so many Lasts.

The Spanish Carracts carry 1200 Lasts: the greatest Holland Indian Ship 800
Lasts.

Proposition VIII. By how much the Weight of the Ship laded is greater, by so
much the less it is tossed with storms, and tempests.
A laded Ship is not so subject to be tossed in Tempests as when not laden.
Ships of 2000 Tuns are not in danger of those Tempests, which are vexatious to
Ships of 300, or 500 Tuns. Much more might be said, but this may suffice for
Elements.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the third, and chief Part of the Nautick A^t, viz. the Art of
Guiding, or Navigating of a Ship, and its subdivision of the Four Parts.
Proposition I. That is termed the Art of Guiding or Navigating of a Ship,
which teaches unto what quarters a Ship is to be Guided in any situation of
it in the Sea, that it may come to the purposed place without danger.
I Make Four Parts of it.

Of the Guiding, or Steering of Ships.
1. Special Geography, that is the knowledge of a space intercepted between two
places, and the properties of the same. 2. The knowledge of the quarters in
every place. 3. The cognition of the Line by which the Ship is to be brought
from one place to the other; for there are between every two places infinite
intercepted Lines; this part is termed Histriodromice. 4. The knowledge of the
situation of every place, unto which by Sailing we arrive, or how these places
are situated unto that place, unto which the Ship is to be directed.
This is the chief part of the Art of Sailing.

Proposition II. The cognition of the intermedial space comprehends these
things.
Things observed from Special Geography and Nautical Maps.
1. The scituations of the places, the procurrences of Angles, the bending of
the Shores, the aspect of Promontories, Mountains, Bays, the depths of Waters,
the sight of Islands, and Coasts of Lands. All which are known from Special
Geography; and Nautical Maps, but most easily, and with greatest certainty from
observation, and frequent Navigation through any tract of Land; which is the
only Cause that some Mariners are more fit to guide a Ship to such place, and
others to another. 2. The knowledge of the General and Special Winds, and those
that are peculiar unto any place, which is exceeding necessary in Navigations
which are undertaken in the Torrid Zone, and adjacent places. For here a
general Wind, and in many places Anniversary Winds (which we have showed to be
called Moussons, Motions, in our XX. Chapter) do rule, which either promote or
hinder Navigation. For the Indian Sea is Sailed by these Anniversary Winds. Of
these and also of storms and tempests we have spoken in the XX. Chapter. See
Chap. 20.
3. The Condition of the Motion of the Seas in every tract, also the quarter of
it, into which quarter the Sea and Waves are born: for they carry the Ship with
them. The diversity of those Motions in many places we have showed in the XVII.
Chap. See Chap. 17.

First of all there is required a knowledge of the Ship, and reflux of the Sea,
and the time or hour of the increase and decrease at every day; the supputation
of which is termed the reckoning of the Tides, for except a Master know this,
the Ship is often much hazarded, when it is near Shores, or Sands, whereof most
in the greatest increase of the Water, do not hinder the passage of the Ship,
but most do in the decrease. So with a flux the Navigation is more facile to
the Shore, and to the inlets of Rivers, and the contrary is discovered in the
reflux. Of the supputation of this time we have spoken a little in the
Proposition of the XVII. Chapter.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the knowledge of places, viz. the North, South, East, and
West, and the intermedial quarters.
Proposition I. In every place to know the Plagas, viz. the North, South, East,
and West, and the intermedial quarters.
The quarters very neccessary in Navigation.
THe knowledge of this is the most necessary of all the Problems of the whole
Art of Navigation, seeing that a Ship must be guided unto some quarter, which
if unknown, there can be no direction, and the very defect of this knowledge
alone hindered the Navigation of the Ancients: and in this is the chief
difference between the Ancient and Modern Navigation. For the Ancients had not
a Method by which at any time in the large Ocean they might know where was the
North, where the South, and the other quarters. Therefore they could not, nor
durst they commit themselves to the vast Ocean; but only coasted the Shores, so
that they might know the quarters from other signs.

The Ancients had a double Method of finding out the quarters.
The Ancients had a double Method, (which serves also to the Modern Navigation)
of finding out the quarters (now this Problem is the same with that to find out
the Meridian Line, and the North and South quarters; for these being known, it
is easy to know the rest.) First by the Stars, viz. in the night, the Bear, or
the Helice, and Polary Star so called, in the extremity of the tail of the Vrsa
Minor (of great same amongst the Ancients) which showed the North quarter,
whence all the rest are found; for the face being turned to the North, the East
is at the right hand, and the West on the left, the Line of which quarters at
Right Angles cutteth the Line of the North and South. And these Cardinal
quarters being found, it is easy to find the intermedial quarters, unto which
purpose, that there may be no need of a description, they had a Circle made
with the quarters, whose Northern Line being placed above the Northern Line of
any place, the other quarters at one sight are discovered. But in the day they
sought out the quarter by the rising or setting of the Sun, as we have showed
in the XXVIII Chapter. See Chap. 28.


2. The other Method of the Ancients for the knowing of quarters, was the
knowledge of the situation or extension of the Shoars, and one Promontory to
the other. For seeing the quarter of this extension was known to them either
from the Maps, or from Observation, and Experience, they might in Navigation by
seeing them know the other quarters. (For one quarter being known; all the rest
are known) therefore the Ancients did not far depart from the Coasts, viz. that
they might know the quarter by the benefit of the known quarter of the
extension of Shoars. For they could not always use the Method of the Stars, and
the rising and setting of the Sun.

3. The third Method of the Ancients of the knowledge of the quarters was the
observed course of the Ship. For going from any place, and guiding the Ship to
the known quarter, they were able from the mutation of the course of the Ship
to know the quarters.

4. Hence it is manifest, that the chief cause of the dangerous and imperfect
Navigation of the Ancients, was the ignorance of a Method, by which every where
in the middle of the vast Ocean they might know the quarters, and so that
quarter unto which the Ship was to be steered. For, as I have said the Method
by the Stars, and the rising and setting Sun, cannot be applied on all days,
and on the hours of every day: for the mark from the situation of the Shoars
fails in the mid Seas in the night, neither is it safe enough in the day time.

The third Method from the observed course of the Ship has not place when the
Ship is tossed by boisterous winds and tempests, from one quarter to another.
And in this casually lies the chief difficulty. This I thought fit to admonish
concerning the Modes of the Ancients for the finding out the Meridian Line and
the North and South, by reason that the imperfection of these was the cause of
the dangerous and small Navigation of the Ancients, seeing that they were never
able to commit themselves to the vast Ocean, and therefore never knew those
Regions between which the Ocean is interposed (of which the chief is all
America, never yet fully known.)

But at this day the Method of knowing the quarters in all places, and of
finding out the Line of the North and South, is facile, by the benefit of the
admirable propriety which the Loadstone and all Iron touched by it has been
found to have. Viz. that all Magneticks not hindered by others in any place
direct their points almost to the same quarters. For there are two opposite
points in the Loadstone, whereof one always and in all places turns it self
to the North, or the adjacent quarter, the other to the South, and so also the
other points of the Magnes respect the other quarters viz. every point its
particular quarter: but all of them are not considered, but only those two
points, which as I have said do convert themselves to the North and South,
which are termed the Poles of the Magnes, one Northern, the other Southern. And
the same virtue (much to admiration) is communicated to the Needle, but by an
inverted and contrary operation of nature. For the end of the Lamine or Needle
which is touched at the North Pole of the Magnes, does not convert it self to
the North, but to the South, and that end which is rubbed at the South Pole of
the Loadstone, turns not to the South but to the North. These points of the
Needle are also termed the Poles. The virtue of the Loadstone.
Although therefore the Loadstone and the Iron touched by it have very many
notable properties, yet all may be referred to two species or heads: one is,
that virtue which does extract the Iron: the other, by which in every place it
directs the two points of its Superficies to the North and South. The former
faculty the Ancients were not ignorant of, but only this latter.

Seeing therefore the Magnes has this property, therefore by its help it is
easy to find in any part of the Earth, or Sea, where the North or South is;
whence all the other quarters are soon known. For if those points of the North
and South be noted in any Loadstone, or the North and South Pole, and we have
this Magnes in the Ship, where we are in the Sea, when we desire to know the
quarters, the Loadstone being hung by a Cord that it may easily move it self,
will so direct its Poles to the quarter of the North and South, that it will
show the quarters demanded. But the Magnetic Needle is more easy for use,
whose end is touched at the South Pole of the Magnes. For if that this Needle
be placed in the middle upon a sharp perpendicular pin, so that it can freely
turn round, the Needle resting will show by one of its ends the North quarter,
and by the other the South.

From what has been said, it is easy to make a Nautical Instrument.

Proposition II. To make a Mariners Compass.
Of the making the Mariners Compass.
Let the described Circle on any Paper be divided into 32 Quarters, or degrees,
and let one of these degrees. being taken for the North Quarter, be ascribed with
these appellations. Viz. with a peculiar Sign (the Flower de Luce) and the
found out points for the other Quarters, viz. South, East, West, North-East,
North-West (as we have propounded them in the Diagram in the XX Chapter.)
Mariners term this Chart the Rose.

Then let the Magnetic Needle be so affixed beneath the Chart, that the middle
of the Needle may be beneath its Center, and the North Pole of the Needle may
be subjected to the Line of the Paper unto which we ascribe the Northern
Quarter. Moreover the Paper being so made, with the Needle lying under; let it
be put upon the pointed pin, that it may have a free Circumrotation. So the
Index of the North, viz. the Lilly, in any place will show the North Quarter,
and the Indexes of the other Quarters after the same Mode will show the other
Quarters of the World. And this is the Fabric of that Instrument which the
Seamen term the Compass, by the help of which they commit themselves to the
vast Ocean, and seek the remotest parts of the World; steering the Ship unto
that Quarter which the Loadstone directs unto. The construction of this
Compass is for the places in which the Magnetical Needle respects the
Northern Quarter: for the other places see the VI. Proposition. See Prop. 6.


Proposition III. There are so many Quarters, as there are Points in the
Periphery of every Horizon, that is, they are infinite: now Seamen number 16 in
their small Navigations, 32 in those that are Moderate; and 64 in the great
Voyages through the vast Ocean.
Concerning this Proposition we have spoken in the XX. Chapter, from whence an
accurate explication of it may be drawn. The Portugals call these Quarters
Rumbs. The Dutch, de Course, also Even Streeck, although they attribute these
terms also to the Loxodromical part. But when they will denominate the
intermedial Quarters, they do that by the division of a space lying between two
Quarters.

Proposition IV. The Magnetical Needle (as the Poles of the Magnes it self) in
very few places does respect the very Quarter of the North and South, but in
most places declineth a little from that toward the East or West, and that in
an equal declination, and therefore altogether shows not the true Quarters.
That declination is called Chalyboclisis.
No Declination at one of the Isles of Azores.
Yet at one of the Isles of the Azores called El Corvo, there is no declination,
but the Needle shows the exact Northern point. The same is observed in some
places of the same Meridian, but not in all parts of it. In places situated
from this Island toward the East, (even to the Promontory of the procurrent of
Africa, called Cabo das Angulhas, not far from the Promontory of Good Hope) the
Needle declineth from the North toward the East in an equal declination, even
to the Islands of Tristan de Cunha, and the declination augmenteth a part more
remote by 70 degrees, so that it is there about 13 degrees, then again it
decreaseth to the places adjacent to the Promontory de Agulhas, where again
there is no declination. From that place toward the Indies the Declination of
the Needle begins from the North toward the West at Hamburgh, the
Chalyboclisis of 90 degrees. At Amsterdam at this time about five: for in time
past it was greater.

Now observations testify that this Declination does not remain the same, but
changes in course of time. For at London in Anno 1580 it was observed 11
degrees 15 minutes, but in Anno 1622, it was 6 degrees, 13 minutes; and in Anno
1634, it was 4 degrees, 6 minutes. And the observations were performed not only
by the new but old Needles also. At Paris in Anno 1640 the Declination was
observed 3 degrees, which in Anno 1610 was found 8 degrees. The same was also
observed in other places.

Proposition V. To find the Declination of the Magnetic Needle from the true
quarter of the North in any place.
The finding the Declinati^^ of the Magnetic Needle, etc.
Let the Meridian Line be found from the Heaven, as we have showed by diverse
ways in the XX. Chapter, and the Declination of the Magnetical Needle will
soonbe discovered. But the following Proposition will show the more easy method
for the use of Seamen.

Proposition VI. To explain the terms of Navigation, which are used in
designing of this Declination, and the correction of the Mariners Compass, and
the Modes which Sailors use to find out this Declination in the Sea,
The Modes which Sailors use to find out the Declination at Sea.
In the composition of the Compass the defect of the Declination is amended or
corrected. viz. the Declination of the Needle being known in the place, for
which the Instrument is prepared, that Needle must not be affixed to the Line
of the Chart, which has the Flower de Luce, and should be the Index of the
North, but under that Line, which is removed so many degrees from the Line of
the North as the Declination of the Loadstone has been found to have to wards
the Line of the East, or West. For so the Lilly, and the Line of the North,
will show the true North, although the Needle may Decline.

But for the use of Navigation, because in diverse places there is a different
Declination, the Needle ought to be fitted to the Chart, that that may be
carried round, the Needle remaining immovable, and the Line of that quarter may
be brought above the Needle, which the observed Declination shall show. For so
the same Instrument shall serve for all places.

Now for the finding out of the Declination of the Magnetic Needle from the
true Line of the North, and South, thus many Mariners do Act. They observe the
quarter of the Compass in which the Sun does rise; and the quarter of the West,
in which the Sun sets, for although that then they are in another place, yet
they are absent a small interval from the former in which the Declination is
not varied.

I^ these quarters of the Compass are equally distant from the quarter of the
Compass is the North, then it is a sign that the Needle in that place has no
Declination, and so there is no need of Correction, but the Needle ought to
remain under the Line of the North: but if the quarter of the Eastern Sun be
further distant than the quarter of the Western Sun from the quarter of the
North, then it is a sign that the Needle Declineth in that place from the true
Line of the North, toward the West: but lastly, if the quarter of the Eastern
Sun be farther distant than the Western Sun from the Northern quarter of the
Chart, it is a sign that the Needle declineth toward the East. The quantity of
the Declination is thus known: let the Arches intercepted between the Northern
quarter of the Compass, and the East and West quarters of the Sun, be noted let
the lesser Arch be deducted from the greater, the half of the residue is the
Declination sought, and so many degrees the North Line of the Chart must be
removed from the Magnetical Needle.

This Method has two inconveniences. 1. The Sun seems to arise when he is
as yet 34 minutes beneath the Horizon, from which difference of the apparent
and true rising, as also of the setting, an error redoundeth unto the quantity
of the Declination, which although it be little in the places near the
Equator, yet in places somewhat remote from the Equator, it may ascend unto
two degrees. 2. The Sun oftentimes arises covered with Clouds, which are
almost perpetual in the Torrid Zone.


Mariners use also sometimes another Method which is less subject to error,
viz. they observe the quarter of the Compass, in which the Sun is discovered
any time after his rising, and at that time they observe the Altitude of the
Sun. Then after noon they expect, or wait, until they find the Sun to come
unto the same Altitude; which being found, they observe the quarter of the
Compass in which the Sun was then beheld: from these quarters or Arches
intercepted between them and the quarter of the North, the Declination of the
Needle is found, after the same Method that we have spoken of.

Sometimes Mariners skilful in Trigonometry, or by the help of an universal
Planisphere use a third, or fourth Method. Viz. when that immediately by one
observation the Declination of the Needle must be enquired, to know the
quarters. For either they observe the quarter of the Compass in which the Sun
rises or sets; or they observe the quarter in which they found the Sun at
any observed Altitude. Then by a Trigonometrical Calculation, or a Catholic
Planisphere, they find in what quarter the Sun truly sticks at this time of
the rising, or Altitude. The difference of this or that quarter observed on the
Compass, is the very Declination of the Needle.

Proposition VII. To show those things, which withdraw the Magnetic Needle
from its natural situation in any place, and therefore are the Causes that it
shows not the quarters as it ought to do.
Things which withdraw the Magnetical Needle from its natural situation.
The chief are these. 1. The blunt extremity, or less sharpness of the pin on
which the Needle is fixed. 2. Some matter in the hole that receives the
Needle. 3. If the Paper or Rose lies beyond its Horizontal situation. 4. Some
admission of Air. 5. The vicinity of Iron: these hindrances of the true showing
must be avoided.


CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Histiodrome or Line of the course of a Ship.
The Line of the course of a Ship is the most difficult part of Geography.
THis is the most difficult part of all Geography, of which some Authors have
written so obscurely, and very many so falsely, that the Readers could gain
nothing from their writings but a confused imagination, and never understand
the matter it self. But we will endeavor as much as is possible to give a
clear and distinct explication, and there is required in the Reader an
attentive consideration.

Proposition I. If that any two places be situated in one Meridian, or if that
another place be situated from some place toward the quarter of the North, or
South, that same place shall be situated toward the same quarter of the
North, or South, from all those places or points, which are interposed between
those two places first assumed. One of the two places lying in the same
Meridian, from another, and from all intermedial points, is situated toward
the same quarter of the North, or South.
Of the situation of two places in one Meridian.
The truth of the Proposition is manifest if that it be rightly conceived. By
places intercepted between two points or places, are understood all points,
which are the intercepted Arch of the great Circle drawn through the two points
first assumed; or the points of that Arch which shows the shortest distance.
Let that place at which the situation of the other place is expended, be
termed the first; and that other whose situation is expended, be termed the
second. And for the more easy understanding, the first place is so to be
conceived, that it may be in the same in the middle of the whole Earth, or in
the middle of the circumjacent Regions, and by reason that it is situated in
the Brazen Meridian of the Globe, infinite Verticals are drawn through it by
the circumjacent places to the Horizon, and so the situation of all the rest
of the places is expended at it, or the distance from the Meridian of it, or of
its Angles which they make vertical with the Meridian.

The Cause of the Proposition is, because that the Angle which the Meridian of
the first place makes with the vertical of the first place drawn through that
second place, denotes the situation of the second to the first, or to the
quarter. Now if we conceive all the points interposed between the two places
assumed of one Meridian (for these are they of which the one toward the other
lies toward the quarter of the North, or South) it is manifest, that the
Meridian of every one of them is the same with the vertical, which is drawn
through every one from or through either place assumed, that is, that there is
no Angle between the Meridians and verticals. Wherefore the place assumed is
situated at every interposed point toward the quarter of the North and South.

Proposition II. If that any two places be assumed in the Equator, unto one of
which, or the first, the situation of the other or second be to be examined,
the second situated from the first in the chief quarter shall be the East, or
West, and the second shall be situated in the same Cardinal quarter, to all
the places interposed: or, one place of two lying in the same Equator from
another, and from all intermedial points, is situated to the same quarter of
the East or West.
For the more easy understanding of this, let any place in the Equator be
taken, and so placed that the Wooden Horizon may become the Horizon of it, that
is, that the Poles of the Earth may be in the Horizon it self. Then let the
second place in the Equator be taken, whose situation or quarter we consider
at the first place. It is manifest that it is the chief quarter of the East, or
West. For the Equator is Vertical to it, which is drawn from the first place
through the second perpendicular to the Horizon, and cutteth the Meridian Line
at right Angles. The same is also true concerning all the interjected points,
which if that they be brought to the Brass Meridian, the Wooden Horizon shall
be their Horizon, and the Equator shall be the Prime Vertical of them, which
cutteth the Meridian Line at right Angles, and passes through the second
place. Therefore this second place shall be situated to all those interjected
points in one and the same Cardinal quarter of the East, or West.

Proposition III. If that the second place with the first be not situated in
one and the same Meridian, and both of them be not in the Equator; the second
place shall not be situated to the first, and to all interposed points in one
and the same quarter, but in diverse quarters at diverse points.
The knowledge of the Original of Lines which a Ship makes, depends on this
Proposition.
From this Proposition depends the knowledge of the Original of Lines which
the Ship makes, therefore the Reader must endeavor well to understand it.

Let any two places be taken in the Globe, which neither of them are in the
Equator, nor in one Meridian (for in these two kinds of situation the quarter
of the second place is not varied at the intermedial places) for Example, Let
Amsterdam be taken for the first place from whence the Voyage is to be begun,
and Fernambuck in Brasilia for the second, or unto which the Voyage is
appointed. Let Amsterdam therefore be brought to the Brass Meridian; and let
the Pole be Elevated for the Latitude of the same, (for so the Wooden Horizon
represents the Horizon of the place), let the Quadrant be affixed to the
Vertex, and let it be applied to Fernambuck, it will show the quarter in the
Horizon in which Fernambuck lies from Amsterdam. And the Arch interjected
between these two places exhibiteth on the Globe the intermedial points. It
must therefore be showed, that the quarters in which Fernambuck lies from
every one of these points, are not the same, but all diverse, or that from every
one of those intermedial places Fernambuck does not lie toward one and the
same quarter.

For the understanding of this we must repeat from the preceding Doctrine that
the Angle, with the Meridian of this assumed place, makes with the Vertical
passing through the other place, shows the quarter of another place from some
one place assumed; or the Arch of the Horizon intercepted between the Meridian
and this Vertical, as the Angle shows the quarter of Fernambuck from
Amsterdam, which the Quadrant with the Brass Meridian makes (which is of
Amsterdam it self).

Therefore to prove the truth of this Proposition, let what points you please
be taken between Amsterdam and Fernambuck in the Arch subject to the Quadrant,
and let the Meridians passing through by them be conceived. It is best to take
those points, through which on the Globe the Meridians pass, (or the Circles of
Longitude) because therefore the Quadrant passes through every one of these
places, and Fernambuck it self, it will represent the Vertical of every place,
in which Fernambuck lies from them. Therefore the Angles which it makes with
the Meridians of each place, are the Angles of Position, and show the quarters
in which, or toward which Fernambuck lies from every intermedial place. Now
these Angles are unequal, and of a different Magnitude, therefore the quarters
also toward which Fernambuck lies from those places are diverse. Now that
these Angles are unequal is manifest from the very sight, or more evident if
that by any interval of the Compass you draw an Arch from each point, and
measure these Arches intercepted between each Meridian and the Vertical: or if
that we have ready by it self a Crooked portion, which may be fitted to the
Superficies of the Globe; or if that the places themselves be brought to the
Brazen Meridian, and the Pole be Elevated for their Latitude; let the Quadrant
be applied to the Vertex, and to Fernambuck, and in that situation let the
degrees of the Arch of the Horizon be reckoned.

Straight lined and Sea Maps are defective.
Corollary. Therefore the straight lined and Sea Maps are very defective, which
do so represent the places, that if that any two places be taken, at one of
which the situation or quarter of the other be examined, this other does seem
to be in one and the same quarter from the intermedial places, which yet is
false. The cause of the fault is, that they exhibit the Meridians Parallels,
which yet do meet in the Poles: but Seamen regard not this fault, so that they
do but relate the Course or quarter which they ought to have observed in
Sailing from one place to another.

Proposition. IV. If a Voyage be to be made, or that a Ship be to Sail from one
place to another ( which two places are not in one Meridian, or both of them in
the Equator) by a most short cut, or by this means, that it may never recede
from the interposed Arch of the Vertical, in such a Voyage the quarter is
changed every moment, or the quarter becomes another and another, into which
the Voyage is to be taken, or the Ship is to be Sailed.
This Proposition is manifest from the foregoing. See Prop. 3.
For let the Voyage be taken from Amsterdam to Fernambuck by the nearest way,
that is, through the Arch of the Quadrant affixed at Amsterdam, and passing
through by Fernambuck. Because therefore every where in the whole Voyage, or in
every point the Voyage is directed toward Fernambuck, and it is showed in the
precedent Proposition, that the quarters are diverse, toward which from those
middle points Fernambuck lies, therefore it is manifest, that the quarter
becomes another and another in every moment, and in each point, into which the
Ship is to Sail, or to be Sailed, that it may respect Fernambuck.

But if that the places be situated in one Meridian, or if that both be in the
Equator, the Case is otherwise. For in them the same quarter of the Voyage of
the North or South remains: in these the Cardinal quarter of the East or West.

Proposition V. A Voyage cannot be so undertaken, or a Ship so directed, that
it may tend in each moment to other, and other quarters, but for some time at
the least whilst it is moved, it tends to one and the same quarter in
appearance. Therefore whilst we are to Sail from one place to another, such a
way, or line of a way is most convenient, whose every two near points are
situated in one and the same quarter in show, although that this way be not
the shortest.
A Ship in a moment cannot move from one quarter to another.
A Ship cannot tend from one quarter to another in a moment of time, but whilst
that it is moved, for some time at the least it tends to it. Moreover it can
by no means be done, that the Seamen should know the quarters, unto which the
Ship should be Sailed, if that another quarter were so often to be assumed.

Therefore it is evident, that that passage between two places is most
commodious for Navigation, whose every two vicine points are situated in one
and the same quarter, so that the Ship may be continually directed unto one
quarter, and to come by such a direction to the place appointed. This being
supposed, let us enquire, what way is thence for the Motion of the Ship. Which
way indeed, if that the places be situated in one Meridian, shall be part of
the Meridian it self: if in the Equator, that way shall be a portion of the
Equator it self; if in one Parallel, it shall be a part of this Parallel; if
in any other Circle besides these, that way shall be another Line, not that
Circle, as we shall show in the following Propositions.

Proposition VI. If that a Voyage be appointed, or that a Ship be directed to
the North or South quarter, ( that is, if that the place from whence, and the
place unto which, be in one Meridian), the line of the Motion of the Ship it
self shall be a part of the Meridian.
It is proved from the first Proposition of this Chapter. See Prop. 1. of this
Chap.
For the place required at all the intermedial places, that is at the points of
the Arch of the Meridian is situated in one and the same quarter of the North
and South, as is ^ere said. And by the preceding Proposition such a way is
commodious for Navigation from place to place, whose every two vicine points
are situated in one and the same quarter. Wherefore seeing that the Arch of
the Meridian is such a way, that shall be the way or line of the Motion of the
Ship, viz. which the Ship by its Motion describes, whilst that it is
continually directed or steered to the North or South.

Proposition VII. If that a Voyage be appointed from any place situated in the
Equator toward the East, or West quarter, the line of the Motion is a portion
of the Equator it self.
We have showed in the Second Proposition, See Chap. 2.
that if two places be taken in the Equator, the first, from whence, the
second unto which the Voyage is appointed, that the second is situated in one
and the same East and West quarter from all the interposed points, that is,
from the points of the Arch of the Equator it self. Because therefore the Ship
is continually directed unto these quarters, the Arch of the Equator
interposed between these two places shall be the way of the Motion of the Ship.
And because that we supposed in the V. Proposition, that such a way between two
places is to be chosen, and is commodious for Navigation, viz. whose every two
vicine points are situated in one and the same quarter, such a portion of the
Equator shall be chosen for the way of the Ship.

Proposition VIII. If that a Voyage be undertaken from any place situated
without the Equator, toward the East or West quarter, so that the Ship
continually may be directed to either of these quarters, the circumference of
the Vertical Circle shall not be the line of the Motion of the Ship, but the
Parallel of the Equator, viz. of the Circle of the Latitude of the place, from
which the Voyage is appointed.
For because that a Ship, whilst it tends from one Meridian to another, is
supposed to have respect to the same quarter, it will not remain in the
Vertical, but presently into another point of the vicine Meridian, viz. which
is a point of the Parallel of the Equator, or of the Circle of the Latitude of
the place whence the departure was made. For every point of this Circle is
such, that the Tangent lines of this Circle being brought unto them may respect
the quarter of the East and West of each of these points. Furthermore the Keel
of the Ship, because that it is continually supposed to be directed toward
these quarters, always shall touch this Parallel in any point. Or by reason
that any two points of this Parallel are such, that one is situated from the
other toward one and the same quarter of the East, and West, and the Ship is
supposed continually to be directed unto this quarter, neither is there any
other Line on the Globe, whose points are so directed; therefore it follows,
that the way of the Motion of the Ship is this Parallel of the Latitude of the
place.

The way of a Ship is circular.
Corollary. From the Three preceding Propositions we collect, that if a Voyage
be undertaken from any place, or that the Ship be continually directed toward
any Cardinal point, that the way of the Ship is Circular.

Proposition IX. If that a Voyage be appointed from one place to another
situated in the same Parallel, or Circle of Latitude, this way of the Ship
shall be a portion of that Parallel, although this be not the shortest way.
For that line is chosen for the Navigation of the Ship, by which we arrive at
the place appointed, by directing the Ship continually unto one and the same
quarter. And any two of the points of the Parallel of the Circle are such.
Whererefore the portion of the Parallel shall be the way of the Motion of the
Ship.

A threefold situation of places.
Corollary. There is therefore a threefold situation of places, from one of
which to the other, when a Voyage is undertaken, the way of the Navigation is
the Periphery of the Circle. 1. If that both places be in one Meridian. 2. If
that both be in the Equator. And 3. If that both be in one Parallel or Circle
of Latitude.
In the two former kinds of situation the way or line of Navigation is the
same with the distance or shortest way: but in the third situation the line of
the Navigation is diverse from the shortest way. For this is the Arch of the
greatest Circle interjected between two places. In any other situation of
places the way of the Navigation cannot be the Periphery of the Circle, as we
shall show in the following Proposition.

Proposition X. If that a Voyage be undertaken from any place, toward any
quarter not Cardinal, so that the Ship may be continually directed to that
quarter, the Motion of the Ship is not Circular, but a crooked line, and
incompassing the Earth with infinite bendings and windings.
Let us conceive a Ship to Sail from some place, when she has arrived to the
vicine Meridian point, it is directed toward the point of the following, or
nearest Meridian, which is situated in the same quarter unto the first point,
in which this is first to the first place, and so moreover in the following
Meridians. Now these points of all the Meridians do not make the Periphery of
the Circle, but a solid crooked Helicoides. A distinct explication of this
matter is more easily showed on the Globe, than by many words.

A definition of the word Loxodromy.
Loxodromy, is a way or line of Motion which the Ship makes whilst it moves
from one place continually toward one quarter not Cardinal.

This is the Nominal definition: but the Essential definition of this line,
that is the knowledge of the Nature and Properties of it, is most difficult,
for neither is it an Helix as many think, neither does it depend on any
property of the Loadstone, who say that it has its existency thence, because
the Ship follows the conduct of the Loadstone, neither is it composed of the
minute particles of many Peripheries, as Nonnius says (which is manifest from
the very Parallel Circles, which are made from the same Motion of the Ship as
of Loxodromy) neither is the Explication of Snellius plain, who says that
Loxodromy is an Helicoidical line in the Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe,
which a right line touching about every where with the Meridians in total by
contact it comprehends those points equal Angles to those drawn out, for
Snellius does not explain now such a Tangent ought to be conceived, or how to
be drawn: and to speak properly, Loxdromy has not right lines Tangent, because
it is a solid line when that Tangents are drawn to plain lines to a curvature:
for in solid lines infinite Tangents may be brought to any points. Moreover
that definition may agree also to other draughts of lines when unto any point
of such a Menidian, such a Tangent, and Crooked line may be conceived to be
drawn from the vicine Meridian.

Also our definition may be thus proposed: Loxodromy is a crooked line
encompassing the Earth with many windings, every point of which lies from all
its other points in appearance in one and the same quarter; or in which if that
two points be taken, one point lies from another, and all the intermedial
points in one quarter; or from any point of which if that circular Arches be
drawn unto all the rest of the points, these Arches make equal Angles with the
Meridian, which passes through all these several points. This definition is
essential.

Proposition XI. If that a Voyage be undertaken from one place to another,
which is not situated with the former in the same Meridian, or Equator, nor
Parallel, and in the whole Voyage the Ship be directed unto that quarter, in
which the place designed is situated from the place of the departure, you
shall never by this Voyage come to the place designed, but continually the Ship
shall be removed more and more from it.
A notable property in Navigation.
This notable property of Navigation seemed Miraculous to Mariners when that it
was first observed, which happened in the time of Petrus Nonnius the Portuguez
Mathematician, who wrote two Books of this Subject; after him many
Mathematicians labored in the explication of this matter, or Crooked line: and
lastly, Mariners found it necessary for the Nautick use, and thence Tables were
made.

The cause thereeof.
But the Cause of this Phoenomenon is, that the Ship being continually directed
unto that quarter in which the second place from the first is situated, it
remains not in the Periphery intercepted between these places, but whilst
that it comes to one point, because here is a new Horizon, and another quarter
the extension of the assumed Course, and this is continually done in the
following points, thence existeth the Crooked Helicoidical line, in which
whilst that the Ship is moved in some places, it is more and more removed from
the determined place, and else where it approaches more near.

Proposition XII. 1. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place toward
another situated in the same Meridian, or toward the quarter of the North or
South, the Ship is continually to be directed to this quarter of the North or
South, or a Meridian is to be chosen for the way of the Ship, and it will
arrive at the other place.
Observations about Voyages.
2. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place to another, and both are in
the Equator, the Ship shall be guided into that quarter, in which the other
place lies from the first, that is to the quarter of the East or West, or the
line of the Equator is to be taken for the way of the Ship.

3. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place to another, and that they
are both situated in one Parallel of the Equator, the Ship is not to be
guided unto that quarter, in which this other place from the first lies, or
which is extended from the first to the other, for the Ship would never arrive
at the other place, but would go with infinite windings about the Earth toward
the Poles: but the Course must be made into the quarter of the East or West,
for whilst that the Ship tends unto that, it describes by its Motion the
Parallels of the Equator, and so arriveth at the other place.

4. When a Voyage is to be made from one place to another which are neither in
one Meridian, neither both in the Equator, nor in one Parallel of the
Equator, the Ship must not be guided unto that quarter, in which the other
place from the first lies, for it would never arrive to the other place, but
the Motion of the Ship would describe the Loxodrome, which would not pass
through another place: but the course must be directed unto that quarter, into
which whilst that the Ship moves, it describes the Loxodrome which passes
through another place into that quarter, whose Angle with the Meridian is equal
to the inclination of the Loxodrome, which passes through those two places.

All these follow from the preceding Propositions.

Proposition XIII. Infinite Loxodromes may proceed, or be conceived from any
place of the Earth as there are infinite Verticals, but yet there are only 28
reckoned about every place, viz. 7 in the Quadrant between the Meridian of the
place, and the Parallel of the place, so that they divide that right Angle into
8 equal parts, and the 2 vicine are distant an equal Angle. Yet the Parallel it
self is termed an eighth Loxodrome.
Of the number of Loxodromes.
But they are called by the same Names by which the Winds, or quarters are
named. On the Globe they are beheld to proceed and turn round about the Earth
from the Center of the Compasses, or also from other points of the Meridian.

But in Nautick use the intermedial Loxodromes are denominated by a distance
from the adjacent Loxodromes, for Example, in a third part, a fourth part more
North, more East.

Proposition XIV. A Loxodrome intercepted between two places is almost, or
according to the sense, equal to the Hypotenusa of a right lined plain
Triangle, whose one Cathetus is of an equal distance of Latitude of those two
places, the other Cathetus is of an equal difference of Longitude of the places
taken in the Parallel, which is in the middle between the Parallel of those two
places.
What Triangles are termed Loxodromes.
Such Triangles are termed Loxodromical. But places very near are to be taken
for an accurate Calculation, that a small portion may be interposed, viz.
places whose difference of Latitude is only of one scruple.

Proposition XV. The parts of the Loxodrome intercepted between Parallels
distant by an equal interval are equal.
Therefore many small Loxodromical Triangles, are conceived in each Loxodrome,
of which if that the Loxodrome of one be supputed, you have the quantity of the
Loxodrome from one place into another, whose Latitude is known.

Proposition XVI. The Latitude and difference of Longitude of two places being
given, to find out the Loxodrome, by which you may Sail from one place to
another. Or two places being given on the Globe, or in a Map, to find out the
quarter, unto which the Ship is to Sail, or to be brought from one place to the
other.
The chief Problem in the Art of Navigation, to which all the rest are referred.
This is the chief, or rather the only Problem of the whole Art of Navigation,
unto which all the rest are referred. If that there be no difference of
Latitude, the Loxodrome shall not be the way of the Ship, but the Parallel of
those places which yet is commonly termed the eighth Loxodrome, because after
the same Mode as the other Loxodromes, it is generated by the Motion of the
Ship which is directed to the Eastern or Western chief quarter. If that
therefore there be no difference of Latitude, they say that the eighth
Loxodrome ought to be taken, and the Ship must be steered to the chief Oriental
or Occidental quarter in the whose Navigation. For although it be not directed
to the appointed place, yet by this false direction the Ship shall be brought
to the place.

If that that there be no difference of Longitude, the way of the Ship shall
not be Loxodromical, but a part of the Meridian in which both the places lie,
and the quarter of the North or South, is taken for the direction of the Ship.

But if the places given be of a different Latitude and Longitude, and that you
are minded to work by the Globe, let the given Latitude be noted on the Brazen
Meridian, and if the Parallel of one Latitude have in it the Center of any
Compass, or from whence the Loxodromical lines were drawn, let this be brought
on the Globe to the Meridian under the noted degree of Latitude: then let the
Globe be turned round, until so many degrees of the Equator pass through the
Meridian, as there are degrees in the difference of Longitude; and then let it
be observed whether any point of the Loxodrome brought from the Center be under
the noted point of the Meridian. That is the Loxodrome sought, and it shows
unto what quarter the Ship is to be directed that it may arrive from the given
place unto the place given: if that there be no point of the Loxodrome under
the noted point of the Meridian, the Loxodrome intermedial between those two
near to that point must be taken.

But if that the Center of any Compass be to be found in neither Parallel of
the Latitude from which the Loxodromes were drawn, let some Loxodrome be
chosen, which may appear near to that demanded, and let it be brought to one
point of the noted Latitude, or of the Meridian, and let the Globe be turned as
before, until that the difference of Longitude pass through the Meridian. This
being done, if that any point of the assumed Loxodrome be under either noted
point of the Meridian, the taken Loxodrome shall be that which is demanded. If
that such a point be not found, another Loxodrome must be taken, and you must
do as before, until such an one be found; any point of which being found, let
it be removed under the other noted point of the Meridian, or at least no long
interval from it, and the Loxodrome shall be denominated from those nigh it,
amongst which it is to be conceived as the midst.

Of Sea Charts.
In Sea Charts it is performed after this Mode, as the quarter of one place is
found from another, which Method in Maps of equal degrees of Latitude, is
faulty, but in Maps of unequal degrees of Latitude it accurately enough
discovers the Loxodrome or quarter unto which the Ship is to be Sailed.

Also Mariners have another Method easy enough, in which by the solution of a
plain right angled Triangle the Loxodrome of Navigation is found: but to that
Method they use a Table, which they call a Table of increasing Latitude, of
which we have spoken in the the XXXII. See Chap. 32.
Chapter.

CHAP. XL. Of the chief Problem of the Art of Navigation, viz. of finding out a
place in the Maps unto which, the Voyage being performed, we arrive at a
certain time, or of finding out the Longitude and Latitude of this place.
Proposition I. The quarter cannot be known, unto which the Ship is to be
Sailed, that it may come unto the appointed place, except that the place be
known in which the Ship was at that time.
WE have said in the former Chapter that this is the chief Problem of the
Mariners Art concerning the finding out of the quarter, unto which the Ship is
to be directed, but that cannot be found, except that the place be known,
whence the Ship is to be directed. Therefore the solution of the Problem for
finding out the place is necessary.

Proposition II. To find the place in the Maps at which the Ship arriveth or
touches at any time.
The finding the place in Maps, at which the Ship at any time arriveth.
This is that work which the Dutch call Het besteck in de pas-kaert. They note
with a Pin every day on the Map the place unto which they suppose the Ship to
have touched, that by this means they may discover in what place they are, and
unto what quarter the Ship is to be Sailed. They use a threefold Method in this
affair, as they suppose this or that to be more rightly observed.

1. The Rhumbe being observed in which the Ship was directed from the place of
the first day, or from the place given on the Map, or the Rhumbe in which the
Ship was moved, and the quantity in the interim of the Voyage made, being
observed: these two things being known, the place of the Ship is found thus on
the Map: Let the Rule or Compass be taken, and one Shank of it be applied to
the place of the former day, or from whence the Ship departed, let the other
Shank be applied to the vicine line which represents the observed quarter or
course: let the point of the Shank be noted with Chalk, which is imminent over
the place of the departure. Then by the interval of the Compass let the miles
of the performed Voyage be taken from the opposite Scale, and let one foot of
the Compass be put upon the place of the departure, Pilots without a Rule, with
two pair of Compasses perform the Problem.
but let the Rule be moved on the line of the quarter until the other foot of
the Compass touch the noted point of the Rule. The place of the Map that is
subject to that point in that situation of the Rule, is that demanded, viz. in
which the Ship then is.

But if that you determine to find out more accurately the point on the Map by
Calculation, or the place of the Ship it self, the Problem shall be this: The
Latitude and Longitude of one place being given, and the quarter being given in
which they Sailed unto the other place, with the Voyage performed, to find out
the Latitude and Longitude of the other place. For these being found, you may
more accurately note the place of the Ship on the Map.

2. The quarter being observed, in one known place to another unknown, and the
Latitude of this other, or Elevation of this Pole being observed, to find the
situation of this other place on the Map.

Let one shank of the Rule be applied to the quarter observed near the place,
and let the other shank be placed on the place known (or whence the Voyage is
begun) and make there on the shank a mark with a Chalk. Then let the shank
applied to the quarter be moved, until the other noted point of the shank
applied to the quarter fall in on the Parallel of the observed Latitude. For
the point of the falling in, is the place sought, viz. the place of the Ship.
But if that there be no Parallel of Latitude observed on the Map, let the
degrees intercepted between this Latitude and the vicine Parallel be taken by
the interval of the Compass on the lateral line. And let the Rule in the line
of the quarter, and one Foot of the Compass be moved together in this Parallel,
until the other Foot of the Compass and the noted shank do meet, the point of
the meeting shows the place of the Ship. Seamen use two pair of Compasses.

If that you will determine more accurately by the Calculation of the place
demanded on the Map or Earth it self, the Problem is this: The Latitude and
Longitude of one place being given, and the quarter in which the Navigation is
appointed to another place, and the Latitude of this place given, to find his
Longitude: for the Latitude and Longitude given is the place it self.

3. The quantity of the Voyage performed from one known place to another
unknown being observed, and the Latitude of this other being observed, to find
this other on the Maps.

Let the quantity of the Voyage performed be taken by the interval of the
Compass from the opposite Scale. Then if a Parallel through the degree of
Latitude be observed on the Map, let one Foot of the Compass be placed on the
noted place, the other Foot on this Parallel. This point shall be the place
demanded. But if the Parallel pass not through the degree of Latitude, let one
shank of the Rule be applied to the vicine Parallel; on the other shank let the
degree of Latitude be noted, and let the Rule be moved until the other Foot of
the Compass touches the noted point of the Rule. The place of the Map subject
to the point in this situation shall be the sought for place of the Ship.

If that a more accurate invention is required by Calculation, the Problem
shall be this: The Latitude and Longitude of one place being given, and the
distance of the other on the line of Navigation, and the Latitude of this, to
find out the Latitude of this other. For this being known, when the Latitude is
observed, you have the situation of the place it self on the Maps, or Earth.

The 4th or 5th Method also of finding out of this place is also given, viz. in
which the Longitude of the other or sought for place is supposed to be
observed, but the Latitude is unknown. But because that very seldom the
Longitude can be observed on the Sea; therefore this Method is omitted as
unuseful. See Snellius, Stevens, and Metius.
He that desires more concerning this Method let him Read Snellius, Stevens,
Metius, and others, that have treated at large of it.

Proposition III. To conjecture unto what quarter the Ship is moved, and in
what Rhombe, although the signs be fallacious.
In the solution of the former Proposition for the finding out the place of a
Ship, those things as noted were taken and observed. 1. The quarter unto which
the Ship is moved, and the Rhombe, in which. 2. The way made. 3. The Latitude
of the place unto which it has arrived.
Now therefore we must show how these three may be observed on the Sea, that
they may be used for the finding out of the place. For if that these be not
rightly known, or observed, the true place shall neither be found or
discovered. First therefore let us see concerning the quarter of the course of
the Ship and the Rhombe.

The Pilots know the quarter from the Compass or Loadstone.
The Pilots know the quarter from the Compass, or Loadstone. For what quarter,
or Rhombe of the Compass agrees with the Line of the conceived Longitude of
the Ship, the same is put into the quarter of the Ship to be moved, and to
describe its Rhombe. For they seldom use the sign taken from the quarter of the
apparent rising and setting of the Sun which they compute.

These signs may be corrupted by diverse Causes, so that they may deceive in
showing the Rhombe or quarter. 1. If that the Declination of the Magnetic
Needle be uncertain in that place, and therefore the quarters of the Compass do
not show the true quarters. 2. If that the Sea in that place has a flux to a
certain place, for it will carry the Ship from the true Rhombe, although the
Ship be directed unto the same quarter, the fluxes, and refluxes are the
frequent cause of this error. And in many places of the Torrid Zone, a general
Motion is of force, and in many places a stated and fixed Motion from stated
winds. 3. Winds, especially storms remove the Ship from the Rhombe of their
Voyage, although they ply in the same quarter. 4. The fluxes of the Sea which
are carried toward other quarters, and carry the Ship with it. 5. The Rudder
or Helm cannot be moved by him that steereth unto any quarter as it ought to
be, the waves of the Sea obstructing of it.
All these hinder the Ship to be moved in the same Rhombe, whose quarters are
showed by the Compass. But how much it is drawn aside must be learned by
conjecture from the vehemence of the Flood, and of its quarter, and the like:
but the Method is very imperfect.

Proposition IV. To cast up the Voyage made upon the Rhombe, to measure it at
the given time from the given place.
The casting up the Voyage made upon the Rhombe, etc.
Pilots conjecture the same. 1. When they observe or know by experience what
course a Ship is wont to make with such a Wind. 2. If that they have Sailed in
the same Meridian or vicine Line with any Wind, and have observed the Latitude
of the place in the beginning of the Motion, and the Latitude of the place in
the following time. For the difference of Latitude turned into miles shows
the course made for so long a space of time, and such a Wind. Whence for the
time given and such a Wind continuing, the course made is collected. 3. With
more industry they measure the course performed by a Boat and string; one end
of which is fastened to the Boat, and the other with the Globe is in the Ship,
for the Ship remaining immovable, Sailing is permitted to the Boat until it be
removed 10 or 12 Orgyas of the string, and the time elapsed between is
observed. And from this for any time of the performed course of the Ship is
found out.


The signs of the performed Sailing of the Ship are corrupted, and rendered
uncertain by diverse ways; yea are uncertain of themselves, seeing they are mere
conjectures. 1. Oftentimes the Ship makes lesser or greater way than the
conjecture affords, viz. because in many places of the Sea the flux is unto a
certain quarter, or the Billows are rould unto a certain quarter. If therefore
the Ship be directed into the same quarter, the way made will be greater than
the conjecture makes it; but if into a contrary, it will be lesser. 2. Because
the Ship is carried by other Causes into other quarters, and so by windings
arriveth at another place. 3. The winds are variously changed. 4. By how much a
Ship has the greater Altitude, by so much its Motion seems more slow, though
it be not so.


Proposition V. To observe the Latitude of a place unto which a Ship is arrived.
The Seamen observe it by the Sun in the day time, and by the Stars in the
night, as we have showed in the XXIII. Chapter, they use Three Instruments, See
Chap. 23.
the Astrolabe, the Radius, and the Triangle.

Proposition VI. From whence it is manifest that the Methods used by Seamen to
find the places on the Maps unto which they have arrived, are fallacious,
because that they can neither be certain of the Rhombe or quarter of the way,
or of the quantity of the way made, or of the observed Latitude of the place*
yet the observation of the Latitude of the place unto which they are arrived,
because that it is not less subject to error, especially the Air and Sea being
tranquillous, may be exempted from this fallacy.
But from that alone the place it self is not found on the Map or Earth, but a
second is required, viz. either a distance from another place given, or a
Rhombe by which they Sail from the given place to that, or lasty, the Longitude
of that place from this. We have said that the observation of the way made, or
distance, is uncertain, as also that of the Rhombs. Therefore they return back
to find out the Longitude of the place. For the Latitude and Longitude of the
place being known, the place it self is found on the Maps, and determined on
the Globe of the Earth.

Whence it is evident that the Art of Navigation requires the solution of this
Problem to the making up of its perfection: viz. to find out the Longitude of
the place where we are at any time, and on any day. The prize is propounded,
let him win who can.

map of the world A MAPP or GENERAL CARTE of the WORLD Designed in two Plain
Hemisphers, By Monsieur Sanson Geographr to the French King and Rendered into
English and Illustrated with Figures by Richard Blome By the Kings Especial
Command. royal English blazon or coat of arms


To the High and Mighty Monarch Charles the Sec^^^ by the Grace of God, King of
England Scotland France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith etc. This Mapp in
all Humility is Dedicated, by your Majesty's obedient subject and sarvant.
Richard Blome.

A GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD, Taken from the WORKS Of the Famous
Monsieur SANSON, Late Geographer to the present French King.

To which are Added, About an hundred GEOGRAPHICAL and HYDROGRAPHICAL TABLES,
of the Kingdoms, Countries, and Isles in the World, with their Chief Cities and
Seaports; drawn from the MAPS of the said Monsieur Sanson, and according to
the Method of the said Description.

Illustrated with MAPS.

The Second Part.

By RICHARD BLOME.

Printed in the Year, 1680.

Geographical TABLES.
On, or above the Surface of the Terrestrial Globe, and Maps of the World,
ought to be understood and noted, Ten Points; of which Four are called Cardinal
Points, as the North, or the Pole Artick. the South, or the Pole Antartick. the
East. the West.
Four are called Collateral Points, as the East of the Summer, the East of the
Winter, the West of the Summer, the West of the Winter.
And two, as Above and Under us; as the Zenith, the Nadir.

Ten Circles, or Lines, of which Five are Parallels, the one to the other, as
the Aequinoctial, or -- the Equator. the two Tropicks, as the Tropic of
Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn.
The two Polar Circles, as the circle of the Pole Artick. the circle of the
Pole Antartick.

Five others are different the one from the others, as in the middle of the
Zodiac; as -- the Ecliptic. the Horizon, as the Horizon rational, the Horizon
sensible, or visible.
the Parallels, or -- the degrees of Latitude. the Meridians, or -- the degrees
of Longitude.

Two Colures, in which are 4 Points, which note our four Seasons of the year,
to wit, above the colures of the Aequinoxes, as the Spring, the Autumn.
the colures of the Solstices, as the Summer, the Winter.


Three sorts of Zones, in which are five, to wit one Torrid, or the Parching.
two Temperate, as the temperate Artick, or Northernly, the temperate
Antartick, or Southernly.
two Frozen; or Cold, as the frozen Artick, or Northernly, the frozen Antartick
or Southernly.

Three sorts of Shadows, which diversely receive the Inhabitants of the five
Zones; for they are in the Torrid Zone Amphisciens.
in the Temperate Zones Northernly, Northern Heterosciens,
Southernly, Southern Heterosciens.

in the Frozen Zones Northernly, Northern Perisciens,
Southernly, Southern Perisciens.



Three sorts of Positions, as the Inhabitants about the same Parallel, opposite
in Meridian, are Perioeciens. the Inhabitants about one Meridian, opposed in
their Parallels, are Antoeciens. the Inhabitants opposed both in Meridians, and
in Parallels, are Antipodes.
The Climates; of which the Ancients first made seven which they call by the
most famous Places, Seas, and Rivers, by which they passed; as dia (that is,
through) Meroes, dia Sienes, dia Alexandrias, dia Rhodou, dia Pontou, dia
Boristenon,

then m^e, in adding dia Ripheon, dia Danias.
the Moderns made 30, to wit between the Equator and the Polar circle 24, by
half hours, between the Polar circle, and the Pole -- 6, by Months.

The Parallels; which are following the Ancients 14, between the Equator and
Polar circle 48, by quarters of hours.
following the Moderns 60 between the Polar circle and the Pole 12, by fourteen
days.

The Winds; whereof the 4 Firsts, and whereof the names are Monosyllables,
shall be called Cardinal Winds, as North, South, East, West.

4 Seconds, and whereof the names are of two syllables, and composed of two of
the four Firsts, shall be called Collateral Winds, as North-east, North-west,
South-east, South-west.

8 Thirds; and have their names of three syllables, composed of one of the four
Firsts, and of one of the four Seconds, as North North-east, North North-west,
South South-east, South South-west, East North-east, East South-west, West
North-west, West South-west.
North, and a quarter by North-east, North, and a quarter by North-west,
North-east, and a quarter by North, North-west, and a quarter by North.
16 Fourths; taking their names from four Firsts, or four Seconds, in saying of
one fourth part by the other, and that without having regard to the eight Third
winds, etc. as it were South, and a quarter by South-east, South, and a quarter
by South-west, South-east, and a quarter by South, South-west, and a quarter by
South.
East, and a quarter by North-east, East, and a quarter by South-east,
North-east, and a quarter by East, South-east, and a quarter by East.
West, and a quarter by North-west, West, and a quarter by South west,
North-west, and a quarter by West, South-west, and a quarter by West.

The Measures; in which are to be considered, that the least part that can be
described upon the Terrestrial Globe, is a Point. many Points, described and
continued right the one to the other, make a Line. twelve Lines continued
together, are esteemed to make -- an Inch, or Thumbs breadth. twelve Inches,
make -- a Foot. two Foot and half make a common Pace, and two common Paces a
Geometrical Pace. one hundred twenty five Geometrical Paces, make -- a Stade,
or certain measure of ground. eight Stades, or one thousand Geometrical Paces,
is -- one thousand Roman Paces, or the Italian Mile. one thousand fifty six
Geometrical Paces make -- an English Mile. one thousand two hundred sixty seven
Paces make -- a Scottish Mile. two thousand four hundred, or 2500 Geometrical
Paces make a Spanish League. four thousand Geometrical Paces, make -- a Dutch
League, or Miles. five thousand Geometrical Paces, make -- a Swedish League, or
Miles. six thousand Geometrical Paces, make -- an Hungarian League, or Miles.
24 or 25 French Leagues, or 60000 Geometrical Paces make a degree of Latitude
on the Equator. three hundred and sixty degrees of Longitude on the Equator,
make the great circle of the Terrestrial Globe. the great circle of the Terr.
Globe, multiplied by his Diameter, make the Superficies of the Terrestrial
Globe.


Geographical and Hydrographical TABLES.
The Terrestrial Globe has all its Surface in LAND; which discovers it self
in Two Continents; whereof Ours, or the most Ancient and* Superior, contains
three great parts; to wit, Europe; where are the Kingdoms or parts of Turkey in
Asia, Arabia, Persia, India, China, Tartaria.
Asia; where are the Kingdoms or Countries of Italy, Turkey in Europe, France,
Germany, Low Countries, Poland, Scandinavia, Russia, or Moscovia.
Africa; where are the Kingdoms or Countries of Rarbary, Biledulgerid, Egypt,
Sara, or Desert of Saara, the Land of the Negroes, Guinee, Nubia, the Emperor
of the Abyssines. Zanguebar, Congo, Monomotapa, Caffreria. Spain,

The other, or New and Inferior, is called AMERICA. America Septentrionalis;
where are the Kingdoms of Canada, or New France, New Mexico, New Spain.
America Meridionalis; where are the Kingdoms of Peru, Brazil, Paragua.


Many Isles; of which the most famous are About our Continent, and part of
Europe; as those in the Mediterranean Sea, the Western Ocean, called the
British Isles.
part of Asia; as those of Japon, the Philippins, the Moluccoes, Sonde, Ceylan,
and the Maldives, etc.
part of Africa; as those of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, St. Thomas, Cape
Verd, the Canaries, etc.

Between the one and the other Continent; as the Azores. About the other
Continent, and toward America Septentrionalis; as those of Terra Neuves,
California, the Antilles.
toward America Meridionalis; the Magellanick Isles.
And in some Lands and Isles, the most part unknown, toward the one and the
other Pole; among the which are Groenland, Izland, etc. Terra Australis, Nova
Guiney, etc.


WATER; which is found in SEA; and which may be called Ocean, about our
Continent, Oriental, or Indian; where are the Seas of China, India, Arabia.
Southern, or Ethiopian; where are the Seas of Barbaria, or of Zangucbar,
Cafreria, Congo.
Western, or Atlantic; where are the Seas of Guinee, Cape Verd, the Canaries,
Spain, France, Great Britany.
Northern, or Frozen; where are the Seas of Denmark, Moscovy, Tartaria.

Sea, about the other Continents, North-Sea, or Seas of Canada, or New France,
Mexico, or New Spain. Brazil,
Magellanick-Sea, or Seas of Paraguay. Magellanick.
Pacifick-Sea, or Seas of Peru, New Mexico.

Gulphs, or Seas, between the Lands of our Continent, the Baltic Sea, the
Mediterranean Sea,
between the Lands of the other Continent, the Gulf of Mexico, the Gulf of
Hudson.

Lakes, or Seas, in the midst of our Continent, the Caspian Sea, in the midst
of the other Continent, the Lake, or Sea of Parime.
Streights; to wit, between the one and the other Contin. of Anian, between the
other Contin. and the J. M. of Magellan. between Europe and Africa -- of
Gibraltar.

RIVERS; of which the most famous, are In our Continent; as In Europe, the
Tage, the Loire, the Rhine, the Elbe, the Danube, the Boristene, the Don, or
Tanais, the Volga.
In Asia, the Tigre, and the Euphrates, the Indus, the Ganges, the Quiam, or
Jamsuquiam, the Oby.
In Africa, the Nile, the Niger.

In America, Septentrional; as -- the River Canada, or St. Lawrence.
Meridional; as the River Paria, or Orinoque, the River Amazones, the River of
Plates.




The Water in the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, is for the most part in
Seas; and which may be called Ocean, and about our Continent, to wit, the
Indian, or Eastern, where are the Sea of China, Indian Sea, Arabian Sea.
Ethiopian, or Southern, wherein are the Sea of Barbary, or of Zanguebar, Sea
of Caffreria, Sea of Congo.
Western, or Atlantic; where are the Sea of Guinee, Sea of Cape Verd, Sea of
the Canaries, or Gulf of Yeguas, Sea of Spain, Sea of France, Sea of Great
Britain.
Northern Frozen, or Scythick; where are the Sea of Denmark, or
Mourmanskoi-More, Sea of Moscovy, or Petzorke-More, Sea of Tartrria, or
Niaren-More.

Sea, and about the other Continent, to wit, the North, or Sea of Canada, or
New France, Sea of Mexico, or New Spain, Sea of Brazil, or North-Sea.
Magellanick, or Sea of Paraguay, Magellanick Sea, Sea of Chili.
South, or Pacifick; or Sea of Peru, or South Sea, Sea of California, or New
Mexico.


Between the one and the other Continent, and toward the Artick Pole, are the
Archipelague of St. Lazare, the Sea of Groenland,
Gulphs; among which there, where the Ocean washes them, and About our
Continent, are these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulf of Nanquin, Gulf of
Cochinchina, Gulf of Sian, or Cambogue, Gulf of Bengala, Gulf of Ormus, and
Balsora, Gulf of the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecca, Gulf of Aethiopia, or St.
Thomas, Sea of Guascagne, White-Sea, or Bella-more.
there, where the Mediterranean Sea enters, and within our Continent, are
these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulf of Lion, Gulf of Venice, Archipelague, or
White-Sea, Sea of Marmora, Black Sea, or Sea of Majeure, Levant Sea.
there, where the Baltic Sea enters, and within our Continent, are these
Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulf of Bolnia, Gulf of Findland, Gulf of Rhiga,
Gulf of Dantzick, Gulf of Lubeck.
there, where the Sea washes them, and About the other Continent, are the
Gulf of Hudson, Gulf of St. Lawrence, Gulf of Mexico, Gulf of Hondutas,
Gulf of Panama.

Streights; among which there, where the Ocean and the Sea washes, and About
the other Continent, are these Streights, Seas, etc. as the Straight of Anian,
Sea of Vermejo, Straight of Magellan, Channel of Bahama, Straight of Hudson,
Straight of Davis.
About our Continent, are the Straight of Nassau, or Vaygatz, Pas^ or Straight
of Cala^is, Straight of Bebelmande^, Straight of Mocandan, Straight of Manar,
Straight of Malacca, Straight of Sonde.

there, where the Baltic Sea is, and In our Continent, are the Straight of
Sound, Straight of Belt.
there, where the Mediterranean Sea is, and In our Continent, are the Straight
of Gibraltar, Fars, or Haven of Messi^a, Eur^pe, or tourn passage of
Negroponte, Straight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, Str. of Constantinople,
or Channel of the Black Sea, Straight of Cassa, or Vospero.

Lakes; and which may be called Seas; as In our Continent, the Sea of Bachu, or
Sala, Sea of Zabaque, or Tana.
In the other Continent, the Lake or Sea of Parime.
Lakes; as In Europe, the Lake of Earne, Lake of Werner, Lake of Ladoga, Lake
of Geneve, Lake of Constance, Lake of Balaton, Lake of Majeur.
In Asia, the Lake of Sodom, or the Dead-Sea, Lake of Astamar, or Vastan, Lake
of Burgian, Lake of Kithay, Lake of Chiamay, Lake of Cincui-Hay.
In Africa, the Lake of Zaire, and Zambere, Lake of Zafflan, Lake of Niger,
Lake of Bouchaira.
In America Septen^rional, the great Lake of Canada, Lake of Mechoacan, Lake of
Chapala, Lake of Mexico, Lake of Nicaragua.
Meridional, the Lake of Maracaybo, Lake of Titicaca, Lake of Eupana, or de los
Xarajes.






The most famous RIVERS In our Continent, and its Isles, are, to wit in EUROPE,
and in the Kingdoms, Countries or Regions of Spain; as the Douro, the Tagus,
the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, the Ebro, or Iberus.
Italy; as the Tiber, the Arno, the Po.
Turkey in Europe; as the Danube, or Donaw, the Drin, the Orfee, or Alfee, the
Vardar, the Marize.
France; as the Loire, the Garone, the Rhosne, the Seyne.
Low Countries; as the Escault, the Meuse.
Germany; as the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, the Oder.
Poland; as the Weisser, or Vistule, the Niemen, the Duna, or Dzwina, the
Niester, the Nieper, or Boristene.
Sweden; as -- the Torn. Moscovia; as the Wolga, the Dwine, the Don, or Tana.
England; as the Thames, the Severn, the Trent.
Scotland; as -- the Tay. Ireland; as -- the Shennon.
ASIA, and in the Kingdoms, Countries, or Religions of Turkey, in Asia, as the
Euphrates, the Pactolus, the Tygris, the Acheron, the Jordaine, the Orontes,
the Lali, the Chrysorhous.
Georgia; as -- the Araxes, and the Farza. Arabia; as -- the Caybar, and the
Astan. Persia; as the Tiritiri, the Gehun, the Bendimir, and the Tostar.
India; as the Indus, the Tapta, the Ganges, the Gemeni, the Mecon, and the
Pegu.
China; as -- the Quiam, or Jamsuquiam: Tartaria; as the Oby, the Gehan, the
Tartar, the Palisanga, the Jeniscey, the Albiamu, the Chesel, and the Jaick.

AFRICA, and in the Kingdoms, Countries, or Regions of Morocco; as -- the
Tensift, and the Sus. Fez; as the Ommiraby, Suba, the Mullulus, and the Cherser.
Barbary; as the Mulvia, the Maber, the Magrada, the Capes, the Rio Major, the
Chol, the Suffegmarus, the Masurius, the Tefflisus, and the Mina.
Egypt; as -- the Nile. Bilidulgerid; as the Suz, the Buzedota, the Darha, and
the Albus:
Zaara; as the -- Ghir, and the Equestris. the Negroes; as the Niger, which is
divided in the Senega, the Gambia, the Rio Grande, and the Cano.
Higher Aethiopia; as the Quilmanci, Nubia, the Zaire, and the Marabus.
Lower Aethiopia; as the Zambere, divided in the Curama, the Barame, the
Spiritu Sancto, the Rio dos Infantos.


In the other Continent, or in AMERICA Septentrionale and in the Kingdoms,
Countries, etc. of Canada, or New France; as those of Canada, or St. Lawrence,
Toppahanock, Penobscot, Pautu^xat; Nansamud, Chesapeac, or Pouharan, May, la
Trinite, Apamatuck, Pamanuc, and Patawomeck,
Florida; as those of Rio de Flores: Rio de Spirito Sancto, Rio de Neives, and
Rio grande.
Mexico; or New Spain; as those of Spiritu Sancto toward the East, Spiritu
Sancto toward the West, Panuco, Guaxacoalco. Baranja, Zacatula, Desaguadero of
Nicaragua.

AMERICA Meridionale, and in the Kingdoms, Countries, etc. of Terra Firma,
Guiana, and Peru; as those of Darien, Viapoco, St. Martha, Cayanna, Corritine,
Brebice, Orinoque, Apuruvaca. Essequebe, Madelaine, Desaguadero of Peru.
Brazil; as those of Orethane, or the Amazons, Maragnon, or Miari, Taboucorou,
Rio Janiero, Rio grande, or Potengi, Rio Real, Parayba.
Paraguay; as those of -- Paraguay, or de la Plata.



All the Kingdoms, Regions, Countries, Isles, etc. in the World, may be
comprehended under these two Heads, viz. Known Anciently, and in our Continent;
as EUROPE, with its Kingdoms, Estates, Isles, etc. may be considered in three
times three parts, and then The three most Southern parts, are the Kingdoms,
Estates; and Isles of Spain and Portugal, with its Isles of Majorca, Minorca,
etc. Italy, with its Estates and Isles of Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Isles of
Naples, etc. Turkey in Europe, with its Estates and Isles.
The 3 Innermost parts; and within the Continent, are the Kingdoms and Estates
of France, Germany, and Belgium, with its several Estates; as the Swisses, the
Grisont, etc. Poland, with its several Estates, toward the Danube; as
Transylvania, Moldavia, etc.
The three most Northern parts or Kingdoms, and Isles of Great Britain, and
Ireland. Scandinavia, or Denmark, Sweden, Norway.
Moscovy, with its Dutchies and Kingdoms.

ASIA, with its Kingdoms, Countries, Isles, etc. as they are found In firm
Land; as Turkey in Asia, with its Countries, Isles, etc. Georgla, Arabia,
Persia. India as it is divided into the China, Empire of the great Mogul;
Peninsula of India, within the Ganges; Peninsula of India, without the Ganges;
Tartaria, the Land of Jesso, the Land of Papous.
In Isles; as In the Ocean; a^ the Isles of Japon, Isles of Larrons, Isles of
Sonde, Philippine Isles, Isles of Ceylan, and the Maldives.
In the Mediterranean Sea; as in the Levant Sea, in the Archipelago.
About China, Persia, Arabia, etc.

AFRICA, with its Kingdoms, Isles, etc. as it is divided and found in Africa,
or Lybia Exterior, or outward; as Barbary, Bilidulgerid, Egypt.
Interior, or inwards; as Zaara, or Desert, the Countries of the Negroes;
Guinee.

Aethiopia, higher; as Nubia, Aethiopia, or the Empire of the Abyssines.
lower; as Congo, Monomotapa, Caffres.

And diverse Isles, which are found In the Mediterranean Sea; as the Isle of
Malta, etc. In the Western Ocean; as the Canary Isles, the Isles of Cape Verd,
the Isles of St. Thomas.
In the Eastern Ocean; as the Isle of Madaga car, the Isle of Zocotora, etc.



Lately, and in the other Continent; as AMERICA, with its Kingdoms, Regions,
Countries, Isles, etc. as they are divided, and found in America
Septentrionale; as Canadian, or the Artick Lands; as Groen and, Esloti^and,
Izland, etc.
Canada, or New France, with its Estates; Isles, etc. Florida.
Mexican, or Mexico, or New Spain, with its Audiences of Mexico, Guadalajara,
Guatemala, and St. Domingo,
The Caribbe Isles.

America Meridionale; as Peruvian, or Terra Firma with its Estates; Provinces,
and Isles. Guiana. Peru, with its Audiences of Quito, Lima, Dela Plata.
Chili, with its Jurisdictions.
Brasilian, or B^^zil, with its Capitane^, Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, with
its Parts or Provinces, the Magellanick Land, etc.



Unknown, or not fully discovered, and lies either under the Artick, or
Circles; as Antartick Circles; as Nova Guinea, Terra del Fuego, Maletur.
Psitracorum Regio, and the like feigned Names and Place^.



EUROPE, with its Kingdoms, Isles, etc. may be considered in three times three
parts; and then The three most Southern parts, are SPAIN, with its Kingdoms or
Principalities, viz. Castile, Madrid, Leon, Leon, Navarr, Pampelona, Bis^ay,
Bilboa, Asturie, Oviedo, Gallicia, St. Jago de Compo^^ Portugal, Lisbon,
Algarve, Pharo, Andaloufia, Sevill, Granada, Granada, Mu^cia, Murcia, A^^agon,
Caragosa, Valencia, Valencia, Catalonia, Barcelona, the Isles of Baleares,
Majorca.
ITALY, with Its several Estates and Principalities; the Chief of which are
Piedmont, Turin, Millain, Millain, Genoua, Genoua, Parma, Parma, Mantua, and
Modena, Mantua, Venice, Venice, Toscany, Florence, Estare of the Church, Rome,
Naples, Naples, Isle of Sicily, Messina, Isle of Sardiny, Calari, Isle of
Corsica, Bastia.
TURKEY (in EUROPE,) with its several Estates; the Chief of which are those of
Bosnie, Jaycza, Servie, Belgrad, Bulgarie, Sophia, Romania, Constantinople,
Macedonia. Salonichi, Thessalie, Armicho, Epire, Perveza, Achaia, Selines,
Pelopornesus, Petras, Dalmacie, Rhagusa, Sclavonia, Posega, Illyris, Zatha,
Croatia, Sisseg.

Together with several Isles, as they lie in the Aegean, or Grecian Seas, as
Negroponte, Cre^e, the Isles of Cyclades, etc. Ionian Seas, as Zant,
Zeffalonia, Corfu, etc. A^riatick Seas, as Zara, Lesina, Curzola, Lissa, etc.
The three Innermost parts, and within the Continent, are FRANCE, with its
twelve Governments, or General Estates; viz. Picardy, Amiens, Normandy, Roen,
or Roven, Isle of France, Paris, Champ^gne, Troys, Brelagne, Nantes, Orlenois,
etc. Orleans, Bourgogne, Dijon, Lyonnois, etc. Lion, Guyenne and Gascogne,
Bourdeaux, Languedoc, Toulouse, Provence, Marseille, Dauphin, Grenoble,
The several Estates, which lie between France, the Catholic Low Country,
Anvers, Lorrain, Metz, the French County, Besansons, Savoy, Cambery,
Germany, the Low Countries, or the United Provinces, Amsterdam, Rotterdam.
the Swisses, Basle, the Grisons, Coire.

GERMANY, with its several Estates and Principalities; the chief of which are
On this side the Rhine, Strasbourg, Beyond the Rhine, Cologne, Westphalia,
Munster, Franconia, Noremberg, Sovabe, Ansbourg, Bavaria, Munchen, Austria,
Vienna, Bohemia, Prague, Higher Saxony, Dresden, Brandenbourg, Berlin,
Pomerania, Stetin, Lower Saxony, Hamburgh.
POLAND, with its several Estates; the chief of which are Polonia, Cracow,
Prussie, Dantzick, Mazovie, Warzaw, Lithuania, Wilna, Volhynia, Kyovia,
Podolia, Kamieniec, Russia Nigra, Loewenberg.
And some Estates or Principalities, toward the Danube and Black-Sea, as
Hungaria, Buda, Transylvania, Hermenstat, Valaquie, Targovisko, Moldavia,
Soczowa, Little Tartaria, Nigropoli.

The three most Northern parts, Kingdoms and Isles, are SCANDINAVIA; where are
the Kingdoms and Estates of Danemark, Danemark, Capenhagven Norway, Trondhem.
Sweden, Gothland, Calmar, Sweden, Stockholm, Finland, Abo, Livonie, Riga.

MOSCOVIA, with its several Kingdoms, Duchess and Provinces; the chief of which
are Moscovy, Mosco, Wolomodire, Wolodomer, Dwine, St. Michael Archa^ Cazan
(Kingdom) Cazan, Astracan (Kingdom) Astracan.
The ISLES of GREAT BRITAIN; where are the Kingdoms of England, London,
Scotland, Edinburgh, Ireland, Dublin.



map of Europe To the high and Mighty, Prince James Duke of York and Albury
Marquess of Ormond Earl of Ross and of Arismanoch Ld High Admiral of England
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter sole Brother and Privi Councellor to
his most Sacrid Ma.ty K: Charlas the 2d this Mapp is humbly Dedicated by Rich:
Blome.

royal English blazon or coat of armsA MAPP of EUROPE
Designed by Mounsieur Sanson. Geographer to the French King; and Rendered into
English and Illustrated by Ric: Blome, By his Majets Espesiall Command London.
Printed for Rich Blome it.



EUROPE.
EVROPE is one of the three parts of our Continent, of which Asia makes the
most Eastern, Africa the most Southern, and Europe in regard of them is between
North and West.

Its Bounds.
It is for the most part bounded by the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea; that
which we call the Septentrional, or Frozen Ocean, on the North; and the
Occidental, or Atlantic Ocean, on the West: The Mediterranean Sea (which is
but an Arm of the Ocean) lies on its South, and separates it from Africa; but
from Asia, it is separated toward the East by diverse Seas, which fall into the
Mediterranean; by several Streights between these Seas, to wit, the
Archipelago, the Sea of Marmara, the Black Sea, and the Sea of Zabaque. Between
the Archipelago and the Marmara, is the Straight of Gallipoli, or the
Dardanelles of old Hellespontus: between the Marmara and the Black Sea, is the
Straight of Constantinople, or the Channel of the Black Sea; and between the
Black Sea and the Sea of Zabaque, is the Straight of Caffa, or Vospero. Then
the Rivers of Don, Wolga, and Oby, complete the division of Europe from Asia,
by drawing a line from the one to the other.

Situation.
The situation of Europe is between the 35 and 72 degrees of Latitude; and
between the 10 and 100 of Longitude, though it fill not all this space; and it
is almost all in the Temperate Zone, no part in the Torrid; but some under or
near the Frozen Zone.

But the Ocean, together with the diverse Seas which encompass and divide the
parts of Europe, have given so great an advantage to its People, that they are
long since become the most expert in the World in Navigation, all Arts and
Sciences, and in Arms and Military Discipline.

Its Division.
We will consider Europe in Nine (or three times three) principal parts: And of
these, the first three shall be Spain, Italy, and the Estates of Turkey in
Europe; and these possess the Southern part of Europe: the second three parts
shall be France, Germany and Poland, and these take up the middle part of
Europe; and the third shall be Scandinavia, where are the Estates of Denmark
and Sweden, Russia Alba, or Muscovia, and the Isles of Great Britain and
Ireland; and these are most Northward. As to the several small Isles, I shall
comprehend them under one and the other of these 3 parts, and that according to
their situation or vicinity unto them.

Besides these 9 parts, there will remain some Estates and Lands between
France, Germany, and Italy; likewise between Germany, Poland, Turkey and
Moscovia; and some in Turkey, which shall be described as occasion presents.

The Languages or Speeches.
But before we proceed to the Parts, let us consider that there are 3 principal
Tongues, and as many principal Religions in Europe, viz. the Latin, which
extends it self into Italy, France, and Spain, though in diverse Idioms: the
Teutonick into Germany, the British Isles, and Scandinavia: the Sclavenian into
Poland, Moscovy, in good part of Turkey, Bohemia, etc. though still in several
Idioms and Dialects. The other Tongues are much less general, as the Greek,
Albanian, Hungarian, and the Tartaresque in the Eastern parts; and lastly, the
Basque, Welsh, Irish and Laplandish, in the most Western and Northern parts.

Religions.
The Religions are the Protestant, which has spread it self where the Teutonick
Tongue is spoken; the Roman Catholic is almost every where with the Latin;
Schism, alone and every where amongst the People speaking Sclavonian and Greek;
the Mahumetan Religion is among the Natural Turks of Europe. But to proceed to
its Parts.

SPAIN.
SPAIN, with its fourteen Kingdoms or Principalities, whereof Two are in the
midst of the Country, to wit, LEON, Beyond the River Douro, or Dovere, Leon,
Avilez, Astorga, Placentia.
On this side the Douro, Salamanca, Cuidad Rodrigo.

CASTILE, The Old, Burgos, Valadolid, Numantia, Segovia, Calahorra, Soria,
Osma, Siguenca, Avila, Placentia, Coria.
The New, Toledo, Madrid, Alcantara, Alcala de Henores, Cuenca, Guadalasara,
Cuidad Real, Merida, Badajox.


Three are toward the North; as NAVARRE, which has the Merindades of
Pamplona, Viana, Estella, Tudela, Olite, Sanguesa.
BISCAY, where are Biscay, Bilboa, St. Andero.
Guipuscoa, St. Sebastiano, Andero, Victoria, Tolosetra.

ASTURIE, or Oviedo, Oviedo, Santillano:

Three are toward the West, viz. GALLICIA, St. Jago de Compostella, Bajona,
Coronn^, Mondo^nedo, Lugo, Tuy.
The Kingdom of PORTUGAL, Between the River Minho, and the Douro, Braga,
Miranda, Porto, Bragansa.
Between the Douro, and the Tajo, or Tagus, Lisbona, Santara, Sintra, Lamego,
Guarda, Coimbra.
Alen Tajo, or between the Tajo, and the Guadiana, Evora, Portalegre, Leirla,
Beja.

ALGARVE, Pharo, Tavila, Silves, Lagos.

Three are toward the South, to wit, ANDALOUSIA, and ESTREMADURA, Sevill,
Cordova, Marchena, Medina Sidonia, Xeres de la Frontera, Cadiz.
GRANADA, Granada, Malaga, Almeria.
MURCIA, Alicant, Carthagena, Murcia.

Three are toward the East, viz. ARRAGON, Caragosa, or Saragoz, Lerida,
Huesca, Mosons, Jacca, Borio, Calatajud, Daroca.
CATALOGNE, or CATALONIA, Rousillon, Perpignan, Elna.
Catalogue, Barcelona, Girona, Taragona, Tortosa, Lerida, and Solsona.

VALENCE, or VALENCIA, Valencia, Morvedre, Segobre, or Segorbia, Xativa.

Together with the Isles of Baleares, or MAJORCA, Majorca, Palomera.
MINORCA, -- Citadelli, and Mahon. YVISA, -- Yvisa, and Magno.


All the Estates of the CATHOLIC KING, may be comprised under The Estates of
the Crown of CASTILE, which are In SPAIN, the Kingdoms of Leon, -- Leon,
Castile, the Old, Burgos, Valadolid.
the New, Toledo, Madrid.

Biscay, -- Bilboa. Asturie, Oviedo. Gallicia, St Jago de Compostella.
Andalousia, Sivil. Granada, Granada. Murcia, Alicant. Navarte, -- Pamplona.
Toward FRANCE, The Catholic Low Country, Anvers, or Antwerp, Brussels,
Arras.
The French County, -- Dol^.
In ITALY, The Estate of Milan, Milan, Pavia.
On the River of Genes, -- Finale. On the Coast of Toscany, -- Orbetello.
In AFRICA, On the Coast of Barbary, Oran, Marsalquibir, le Penon de Velez.
The Canary Isles, -- Canary.
In ASIA, The Philippine Isles, -- Ma^ille. In AMERICA Septentrionale, or
Mexicane, The Isles Antilles, St. Domingo, in Hispaniola, Havana, in Cuba.
Florida, -- St. Augustino. Mexico, or New Spain, Mexico, los Angelos.
Canada, or New France, Guadalajara, Compostella.
Guatemala, St. Jago de Guatemala, Leon de Nicaragua.

Meridionale, or Peruviane, Terra Firma, Porto Bello, Panama.
New Kingdom of Granada, Cartagena, St. Marta, St. Fee de Bogata.
Peru, Popayan, St. Francisco de Quito, Lima, or Los Reyes, Cusco.
Ios Charcas, la Plata, Potessi.
Chili, St. Jago de Chili, Valdivia.
Rio de la Plata, Assumption, Cordovade Tucuman.


And toward Austriales, The Isles of Solomon, -- Isabella.
The Estates of the Crown of ARRAGON, which are In SPAIN, the Kingdoms or
Principalities of Arragon, Saragoz, or Caragoss Lerida, Huesca, Jorca.
Catalogne, or Catalonia, Barcelona, Perpignan; Taragona, Lerida.
Valencia, Valencia, Morvedre,
The Isles of Majorca, Minorca, Yvisa, Majorca, Citadelli, Yvisa.

In ITALY, the Kingdoms, etc. of Naples, Naples, Cosence, or Cozenza, Lecce,
Aquila.
Isle of Sicily, Messina. Palermo, Siracusa.
Isle of Sardiny, Cailari, Oristagni.
And diverse small Isles, Ischia, Capri, Lipari.


The Estates of the Crown of PORTUGAL, which are In SPAIN, the Kingdoms of
Portugal, Lisbona, Braga, Evora, Coimbra.
Algarve, -- Pharo.
In AFRICA, and thereabouts, On the Straight of Gibraltar, -- Ceute. On the
Coast of the Negroes, -- Arguin. of Guinee, St. George de la Mine. of the
Caffres, -- Cuama, or Sophala. of Zanguebar, Mosambique, Melinde.

And the Isles of Madera, -- Funghal. the Azores, Angra. Cape Verd, St. Jago.
St. Thomas, -- Cuidad, or Pavo^san^,

In ASIA, and thereabouts, On the Coast of Persia, -- Ormus. India, Diu, Goa,
Malacca.

And part of the Isles of Ceylan, Colombo. of the Moluccoes, Nostro Senioro del
Rosario.

In AMERICA, Brazil, St. Salvador, Olinda, Parayba.



The Estates of the Crown of CASTILE, are About EUROPE; as In SPAIN; to wit, In
the midst of the Country, the Kingdom of Leon, Leon, Astorga.
Kingdom of Castile, Burgos, Valadolid, Toledo, Madrid.

Toward the North, the Signiory of Biscay, Bilboa, Kingdom of Asturie, Oviedo,
Kingdom of Gallicia, St. Jago de Compostella,
Toward the South, the Kingdom of Andalousia, Sivilla, Cordova, Cadiz.
Kingdom of Granada, Granada, Malaga.

Toward France, the -- Kingdom of Murcia, Alicant. Kingdom of Navarre,
Pamplona.

FRANCE; to wit, The LOW COUNTRIES; where are the Duchy of Brabant, Louvain,
Brusselles.
Duchy of Limbourg, Limbourg. Duchy of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Thionville,
Duchy of Gueldres, Ruremonde, Gueldres.
County of Flanders, Gand, or Gaunt, Lisle.
County of Artois, Arras, St. Omer.
County of Haynaut, Mons. County of Namur, Namur. Marquisate of the Empire,
Anvers, or Antwerp: Seigniory of -- Malines,
The FRENCH County; where are the Balliages of Dole, Gray, Salins.

In ITALY; to wit, The Estate of the Duchy of MILAN; viz. Milanese, Milan.
Pavese, Pavia. Cremonese, Cremona. Alpesre, Come. Alexandrin, Alexandria de la
Paille.
On the River of GENES, the Estates of Finale, and Pontremoli.
On the Coast of TOSCANY, are the Estate of the Presidii, Orbetello, Porto
Hercole.
Protection of the Seignory of Piombino.


In AFRICA; as Terra Firma, on the Coast of Barbary, Marquisate of Oran, and
the Oran, Masulquivir, Penon de Valez.
In the Western Ocean, The CANARY Isles, The Great Canary, Canary.
In ASIA; as In the E. Ocean, The PHILIPPINE Isles, Luson, or Manilla, Manilla,
Toward the Land of AUSTRALES, The Isle of SOLOMON, or of New Guinee, Isabella.
In AMERICA; as SEPTENTRIONALE, or MEXICANE, where are the Audiences of St.
DOMINGO, Isles of Antilles, S. Domingo in Hispaniola Havana, in Cuba, St. Jean
de Puerto Rico.
Florida, St. Augustino.
MEXICO, or NEW SPAIN, Mexico, Mexico. Mechoacan, Valadolid. Panuco, St.
Estevan del Puerto. Tlascala, los Angeles. Guaxaca, Antequerra. Jucatan,
Merida. Tavasco, Neustra Seniore de la Victoria.
GUADALAJARA, or New GALLICIA, Guadalajara, Guadalajara. Xalifco, Compostella.
Chiametlan, St. Sebastian. Culiacan, St. Michael. Cinaloa, St. John To. los
Zacatecas, los Zacatecas. New Biscay, Indies.
GUATEMALA, Guatemala, St. Jago de Guatemala. Soconufco, Guevetlan. Chiapa,
Guidad Real. Verapax, Verapax. Honduras, Valadolid. Nicaragua, Leon de
Nicaragua. Costarica, Cartago.

MERIDIONALE, or PERUVIANE; where are the Audiences or Regions of PANAMA,
Veragua, La Conception. Panama, Porto Bello, Panama.

New Kingdom of GRANADA, Cartagena, Cartagena. St. Martha, St. Martha. New
Kingdom of Granada, St. Fe de Bogota. Rio de la Hacha, Nost. Sen. de los
Remedios. Venezuela, Venezuela, or Cori. New Castile; Cordova la Nueva.
PERU, Popayan, Popayan, Cali.
Quito, St. Francisco de Quito. los Quixos, Bacsa. Pacamores, St. John de las
Salinas. Lima, Lima, or los Reyes, Cusco,
los Charcas, la Plata, Potessi.
la Sierra, St. Cruz de la Sierra.
CHILI, Chili, St. Jago de Chili, la Imperiale,
PARAGUAY, Rio de la Plata, Tucoman, l'Assumption, St. Jago del l'Estero,
Cordova de Tuconan.





The Estates of the Crown of ARRAGON, are In SPAIN to wit, In the Firm Land; as
The Kingdom of ARRAGON; where are Ten Cities, to wit, Caragosa, Lerida, Huesca,
Jacca, Callatajud, Borio, Daroca, Teruel, Albazarin,
And more than a hundred Walled Towns; the chief of which, are Anza de
Sobrarbe, Benavarri de Ribagorsa, Monsons, Fraga, Camfrane, Viescas.

The Principality of CATALOGNE, or CATALONIA, with the County of ROUSILLON;
where are In Catalogne, eight Cities, Barcelona, Tartagona, Lerida, Girona,
Tortosa, Solsona, Urgel, Vich,
In Rousillon, two Cities, Perpignan, Elna.
And about an hundred and fifty Walled Towns; the chief of which in Catalogne,
are Puycerda, Balaguer, Cardona, Cervera, Manresa, Castillo d'Empurias, Roses,
And in Rousillon, -- Collioure.
The Kingdom of VALENCIA; where are Four Cities, Valencia, Segorbia, Xativa,
Orihuelha.
And about 60 Walled Towns; the chief of which are Elche, Biar, Denia, Gandia,
Alzira, Morvedre, Villa Real, St. Mattheo.


In the Sea, as The Kingdom, and the Isles of Majorca, -- Majorca, Minorca, --
Citadelli, Yuisa, -- Yuisva.

In ITALY; to wit, In the Firm Land, as The Kingdom of NAPLES; where are Terra
di Lavoro, Naples, or Napoli, Capona.
Principato citra, Amalfi, Salerno.
Principato ultra, Benevento, Conza.
Calabria citra, -- Conzenza. Calabria ultra, Reggio, Cotrone.
Basilicata, -- Cirenza: Terra di Otrante, Tarante, Lecce, Otrante, Brindici,
or B^indes.
Terra di Bari, Bari. Capitanate, Monte St Angelo, Manfredonia.
Comtado di, -- Molife. Abruzzo citra, or Abruzze citerieure, Lanciau, or
Lancrano, Sulmone, Civita di Chietti.
Abruzzo ultra, or Abruzze ulterieure, Civita di Penna, Aquila.

In the Sea, as The Isle and Kingdom of SICILY; where are in Val di Demona.
Messina, Taormina, Catane, Patta, Troina, Cefaledi,
Val di Noto, Siracuso, Noto, Motya, Termini.
Val di Mazara, Palermo, Monreal, Trapani, Marzalla, Mazara, Xacca, Girgenti,

The Isle and Kingdom of SARDAIGNE; where are in Capo Cagliari, Cagliary, or
Calari, Oriftagni, Villa di Glesia.
Capo Lugodori, Sassari, Algeri, Bosa.

And diverse Isles toward Naples, Ischia, Capri,
toward Sicily, -- Lipara, etc.




The Estates of the Crown of PORTUGAL, are In EUROPE, the PORTUGALS or Kingdom
of PORTUGAL comprehends three Regions, six Provinces, twenty Almoxarifatz;
(that is, Courts of Audience, or for the Receipt of the Kings Revenue) 18
Cities, more than 400 walled Towns, 200 Boroughs, 4000 Parishes. The Regions
are Between the Rivers MINHO and DOURO; where are the Provinces of Between the
Rivers MINHO and DOURO, which comprehend the Almoxarifatz of Porto, -- Porto.
Viana de Foz, Caminha, Viana de Foz de Lima, Barcelos.
Ponte de Lima, -- Ponte de Lima. Guimaranes, Braga, Guimaranes.
TRA-LOS MONTES, which comprehends the Almoxarifatz of Miranda, Miranda,
Bragansa.
Torro de Mencorvo, Torre de Mencorvo, Chiaves.
Villa Real, -- Villa Real, Pinhel, Castle Rodrigo, Pinhel.


Between the Rivers DOURO and TAJO; where are the Provinces of ESTREMADURA,
which contains the Almoxarifatz of Lisbona, -- Lisbona. Santarein, Santarein.
Tomar, Tomar. Alenquez, Alenquez, Sintra.
Leiria, -- Leiria. Setubal, Setubal, Cezimbra, Almada, Palmela, Alcazer do Sal.

BEIRA, which holds the Almoxarifatz of Coimbra, -- Coimbra. Guarda, Guarda.
Lamego, Lamego. Viseu, Viseu, Aveiro, -- Aveiro. Castle Branco, Castle Branco,
Salvatierra, Indanha.


ALENTAJO, or between the Rivers TAJO and GUADIANA; where are the Provinces of
ALEN-TAJO; which holds the Almoxarifatz of Evora, -- Evora. Beja, Beja,
Serpa, St Jago de C^cem, Mertola, Ourique.
Elvas, Elvas, Olivensa, Mouraon.
Portalegre, Portalegre, Crato.
Estremoz, -- Estremoz, and Avis.

ALGARVE; and the Almoxarifatz of Tavila, Pharo, Tavila.
Lagos, -- Silves, and Lagos.


Diverse Estates, Kingdoms, Isles, Cities, etc. in the other parts of the one
and the other Continent; among the which are In AFRICA; and On the Coasts of
The Kingdom of Fez, -- Centa. The Kingdom of Morocco, Mazagan. The Country of
Negroes, Arguin. Sierre Leone, Cachieu. Guinee, St. George de la Mina. The
Kingdom of Angola, St Pol de Loanda, Cambambe.
Caffreria, or Cafres, Cuama, or Sofala. Zanguebar, Mozambique, Malinde,
Monbaza.

The Isles of Madera, -- Funghal. Azores, Angra. Cape Verd, St. Jago. St.
Thomas, etc. Pavoasam.

In ASIA; and On the Coast of Arabia, -- Mascate. Persia, Ormus. Cambay, Diu,
Daman, Bazaim.
Decan, Chaul. Cuncan, Goa. Canara, Barcelor. Malabar, Cananor, Cranganor,
Cohin, Coulan.
Choromandel, Negapatan, Mal^apour, or St. Thomas:
Pegu, Sirian. Malacca, Malacca. China, Macao.
The Isles, or part of the Isles of Ceylan, Colombo. Manar, Manar. Moluccoes,
Nostro Seniora del Rozaria. Japon, Meliapon.

In AMERICA; and In BRAZIL, the fourteen Capitanies, or Governments of Para, --
Para. Maranhan, Maranhan. Ciara, Ciara, Rio Grande, Rio Grande, or Potengi.
Parayba, Paraba. Tamaraca, Tamaraca. Fennambuco, Olinda. Seregippa, Seregippa.
Bahia de Todos los Santos, St. Salvador. los Isleos, los Isleos. Porto Seguro,
Porto Seguro. Spiritu Santo, Spiritu Santo. Rio Janiero, St. Sebastian, St.
Vincent. Santos.



map of Spain blazon or coat of arms of the Hunloke baronetcyTo ye Rt
Worshipful Henry Hunloke of Wingerworth in Derbyshireshire Bart This Mapp is
humbly D.D. by R.B.

A General Mapp of the Kingdom of SPAIN By Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the
Eranch King


SPAIN.
THE Kingdom of SPAIN is almost quite encompassed with the Ocean and
Mediterranean Sea; and the Pyrenean Mountains separate it from France. These
Mountains are that Isthmus or neck of Land, that uniteth Spain to the
Continent, and serves as a desence and bound for this Kingdom and France; and
the Inhabitants that here reside, are a sort of rude and Barbarous people.

Spain taken conjoyntly with Portugal (which though a particular Kingdom, has
been always taken as a Member thereof) extends it self from the 35th degree of
Latitude unto almost the 44th; and from the 9th degree of Longitude to the 24th.

It is seated in the most Southernly part of the North Temperate Zone,
Situation.
the longest Summers-day making 15 hours. It is a Country not over fertile in
Corn or Cattle, which does occasion the People to order their Diet accordingly,
their chief food being Sallets and Fruits, the product of the Earth, so that
with a small piece of flesh, they will make two or three Dishes; and above all
their Oleums are esteemed as an excellent dish. But in recompense of the defect
of Corn and Cattle, the Country produces diverse rich Commodities; as Wines,
Oils, several Metals, Rice, Cork, Soda Barrellia, Shumack, Soap, Its
Commodities.
Anchoves, Honey, Wax, Woad, Coriander, Saffron, Anniseeds, Raisins, Almonds,
Oranges, Lemmons, Liquorice, Wool, Lamb-skins, raw Silk, etc.

Spain received its first People from Celtes, whence came the name of
Celti^eri; then the Phoenicians and Carthaginians possessed the most Southern
parts nearest to Africa, The several Inhabitants.
and endeavored to make themselves Masters of all the Country. The Romans
drove them out, and possessed it wholly, and in the declension of their Empire,
the Goths, Vandals, Sueves, Alains and Silinges fetled here, and parted it
amongst them. The Goths in the end remained sole Masters, till such times as
the Moors vanquished them, and forced them to retire to the Mountains of Leon,
the Asturias, and Gallicia. The People now inhabiting in Spain are of a swarthy
complexion, black hair'd, and of a good proportion; they are very stately in
all their Actions, of a Majestic gate, in their carriages are very grave and
serious; to their King are very obedient, true and loving; in Adversity,
patient; they are much addicted to Women; are great braggers, and exceeding
proud, though scarce Masters of a single Ryal. In matters of Religion, they are
Roman Catholics, in which they are very devout, not admitting the public
exercise of any other Religion throughout the Kingdom.

Spain is divided into fourteen Kingdoms or Principalities, which are set down
in the Geographical Table of the said Kingdom; and to these fourteen
Principalities, we may add the Isles of Baleares, seated in the Mediterranean
Sea, which comprehends Majorca, Minorca, and Yvisa: and all these Kingdoms
have formerly been reduced into three Estates, which they call, Castile,
Arragon, and Portugal. But to proceed to its several parts.

Kingdom of Leon.
LEON, called by some the Kingdom of Leon and Oviedo, has for its chief
places, 1. Leon, by some called Legio, as supposed that the eleventh Legion
quartered here, which was called Legio Germanica: 2. Avilez, seated on the
Sea-shoar: 3. Salamanca, of note for having the most famous Academy or all
Spain: 4. Astorga; and 5. Placentia.

Kingdom of Castile.
CASTILE, severed into the Old and the New, or first and last gained or
conquered from the Moors. The Old Castile is seated Northwards of the New, and
has for its chief places, 1. Burgos, famous, as contending with Toledo for the
primacy of all Spain: 2. Validolid, a neat and fair City and a University,
honored with the Birthplace of King Philip the Second, who erected a College
for the English Papistical Fugitives. 3. Numatia, famous for defending it self
against the Romans for fourteen years, and at last left Scipio nothing else,
but a pile of Ashes for his Triumph, and 4. Segovia, a place of note for
Clothing, here made. The New Castile boasts of Madrid for its chief place,
though but a Village, but is the greatest in all the World, and may compare
with many Cities in Europe; and its Territory, although neither pleasant nor
abundant, yet is made both, by the residence of the Kings of Spain. 2. Yoledo,
seated on the Tagus, and almost in the heart of all Spain; a fair City,
beautified with stately Edifices; its Walls are strong, whereon are placed
about fifty Towrs of Stone: It is honored with a University, famous for the
study of the Civil and Canon Laws. 3. Alcantara, of note for its Order of
Knights, so called. 4. Alcala de Henares, dignified with an University: And 5.
Cuenca, seated at the Springhead of the Xucar, nigh to which is the stately
Palace of the Escurial or St. Lawrence, built by King Philip the Second; a
place of such magnificence, that neither times past came near it, nor present,
does equal it. In this large and stately structure are Eleven several
Quadrangles, every one incloistred, all expressing a Peruvian Treasure to have
been spent in the building them, and is of such beauty and magnificence, that a
voyage to Spain were not lost to see it.

Kingdom of Navar.
NAVAR, for Antiquity may claim the second place of all the fourteen Kingdom:
It has for its Eastern bounds the Pyrenean Mountains. Its chief places are, 1.
Pamplona, a place more famous for her Fortification, than her Negotiation: 2.
Viana, once the Title of the Prince of Navar, near which Caesar Borgio was
slain by an Ambush; 3. Estella; 4. Tudela; 5. Olite; and 6. Sanguessa; all good
Cities. This Country was one of the first, that with success opposed the Moors.

Seigniory of Biscay.
BISCAY, by reason of its Mountainous and Woody situation, is the only
Country of all Spain, that remained unconquered by the Moors; and for its many
Iron-Mines, is called the Armory of Spain. The chief places are, 1. Bilboa, a
Town of great Trade, Riches, and much frequented by Merchants, seated two miles
distant from the Ocean, and abounds in Wines, Cattle, and the best Blades,
known by the name of Bilboa-Blades. 2. St. Sebastian, another noted Town for
Traffic: 3. Andero; all Seaport Towns; 4. Victoria; and is. Tolosetta; Cities
of some account.

Kingdom of Asturie.
ASTVRIE, or Oviedo, has for its chief place, Oviedo; which gave name to the
Territory, which conjoyns with that of Leon.

Kingdom of Gallicia.
GALLICIA, a Mountainous Country, like Asturie; has for its chief places, 1.
St. Jago de Compostella, or St. Jago, in honor of St. James, who here lies
interred; it is honored with the Sea of an Archbishopric, and an University;
and in one of the Churches are kept the Relics of St. James, which are much
reverenced: 2. Bajona, seated at the Mouth of the River Minius: 3. Coronna, not
far from the Promontory of Nerius: 4. Mondonnedo; 5. Luge; and 6. Tuy, seated
on the River Minho.

The Kingdom of PORTVGAL.
This Kingdom of Portugal, as united with that of Algarve, and divided from the
Dominions of Castile, contains the Kingdoms of Portugal and Algarve. It
enjoys a sweet and healthful Air; for most part is hilly, and not very
grateful to the Husbandman; but that defect is recompensed by their abundance
of Wine, Oil, Fruits, Honey, Fish, White Marble, Salt, Its Commodities.
Allom, etc. which are the product of the Country.

This Kingdom is about 320 Miles in length, and about 120 in breadth, Extent.
Number of Parishes.
in which compass are said to be about 1460 Parishes, and many Nunneries and
Religious Houses. Its Fruits are excellent, by reason of which here are
abundance of Confectioners: It is well watered with Rivers, having near 200
great and small, the chief of which is the Tagus.

The People are esteemed more honest, plain, Its People.
and of a simpler behavior than the rest of Spain, and more devout in matters
of Religion.

The chief Places in their Kingdom are 1. Lisbona, said to be built by Ulysses
in his ten years Travels, seated on the Tagus convenient for Navigation, and of
a great resort and trade; it is in compass about seven miles, in which may be
numbered about twenty thousand well built Houses, and has thirty and odd Parish
Churches; and on its Walls are about sixty Turrets and Towers, which renders a
pleasing show to the Beholders; toward the Continent, it is seated on five
small Hills, betwixt which is a Valley which runs down to the River Duero,
whose entrance is defended by a Castle: and this City being the Metropolis of
the Kingdom, is the residence of the Kings of Portugal, and the Sea of an
Archbishop. 2. Braga, once the chief of the Kingdom, now dignified with the Sea
of an Archbishop. 3. Miranda, seated on the Duero, an Episcopal See. 4.
Santaren, seated on the Tagus. 5. Sintra, upon the main Atlantic, at the end
of high Mountains; which for the pleasure of the Woods here adjacent, as also
for the refreshings which come from the Sea, is the usual retirement of the
Kings of Portugal in the heat of Summer. 6. Coimbra, seated on the River
Mondego, of a pleasant situation, being amongst Vineyards and Woods of Olives,
dignified with an Episcopal See, and a famous University. 7. Porto, seated at
the mouth of the Duero, now called Portuport, a Town of good Trade, and affords
an excellent strong Wine. 8. Bragansa; 9. Lamego; 10. Guarda; 11. Evora; 11.
Portalegre; and 13. Leiria.

South of Portugal is ALGARVE, which was united by the Marriage of Alphonso,
the Third of Portugal, who had it in Dowry with his wife Beatrix, Daughter to
Alphonso the Fourth of Castile, and Tenth of Leon. Its chief places are, 1.
Pharo, a Port-Town toward the Streights of Gibraltar and Silvis, anciently the
Seat of its Kings within Land. The utmost end (...) this Country, is called the
Cape of St. Vincent, because the Bones of St. Vincent, which the Christians
kept sacred, were by the Saracens (the then Masters of the Country) burnt and
scattered about the Earth.

This Kingdom of Portugal is much coveted by the King of Spain, who esteems it
the chiefest Pearl of his Cabinet, and as the chiefest Flower in his Garland;
and which to regain, he has often times waged War against them, but to no
purpose.

Kingdom of Andalousia.
ANDALOVSIA. the most rich and fruitful Country in all Spain, and well watered
with Rivers: It has on the East and South, Granada and the Sea, and adding the
Country of Estremadura, it reaches Northwards to the Castiles. The chief
Places are, Sevilla, or Sevil, the most beautiful of all this Continent: It is
in compass six Miles, and environed with stately Walls, and adorned with no
less magnificent Buildings, as Palaces, Churches, and Monasteries. It is
severed in two parts by the River Boetis, which are joined together by a
stately Bridge. From this place the Spaniards set forth their West India Fleet,
and do hither return to unlade; and the Trade of this City is of that greatness
that some have dared to say, that the Customs are worth to the King of Spain
the yearly Revenue of about half a Million of Gold; and indeed this City, and
Lisbon in Portugal, may be said to be the chief Cities for Trade in this
Continent; this for the West Indies, and Lisbon for the East. It is dignified
with a flourishing University, and the Sea of an Archbishop, whose Revenue is
said to be 100000 Crowns yearly, and is esteemed the next to him of Toledo. In
this City are said to be kept 30000 Genets for the service of the King of
Spain, which are ready upon all occasions. And here rests the body of
Christopher Columbus, famous for his Navigations and discoveries of the New
World. 2. Cordova, once the Royal Seat of the Moorish Kings; from hence comes
that excellent Cordovant-Leather, Not far from this City was fought that famous
Battle between Coesar and the Sons of Pompey, where Caesar gained the day, and
made an end of the Civil Wars. 3. Marchena, famous for its Genets. 4. Medina
Sidonia, whose Duke was General of the Invincible Armado, in Anno 1588. 5.
Xeres de la Fontera, a Seaport Town, from whence comes our Sherry Sack: and 6.
Cadiz, seated in an Isle below Sevil, a Colony of the Carthagenians.

Country of Estremadura.
ESTREMADVRA, Whis is part of Andalousia, has for its Chief places, 1. Merida,
built and made a Colony by Augustus; and 2. Guadalcanal, famous for its Mines
of Silver.

Kingdom of Granada.
GRANADA, bounded on the South with the Mediterranean Sea: Its Chief places are
Granada, a stately City, where is yet to be seen the Palace of the Moorish
Kings, indented with Mosaical work, and guilt; its Buildings are of Freestone,
fenced about with a strong Wall, on which are 130 Turrets. It is an Inland
Town, yet famous for being the residence of the Parliament, and Court of
Justice for all the Southern parts of Spain, as Valadolid is for the North. 2.
Malaga, a famous Seaport Town seated on the Mediterranean, abounding in
Raisins, and a rich Wine called Malaga Sack. 3. Almeria, seated on the
Sea-shoar.

This Country was the last that the Moors were expelled out of, which may be
attributed to its barrenness, and being so Mountainous.

Kingdom of Murcia.
MVRCIA, bounded on the East with the Mediterranean Sea, a fertile Country, and
well stored with Fruits: Its Chief places are, 1. Alicant, seated on the
Mediterranean, where it enjoys a commodious road for Shipping, is a place
well frequented, enjoys a good Trade, and affords for Merchandise great
quantities of excellent Wines, and several good Commodities. 2. Cartagena,
seated also on the Mediterranean Sea, built by Asdrubal of Carthage, at present
one of the most famous Havens in Spain: and 3. Murcia, which takes its name
from the Country, a City of good account.

Kingdom of Navarre.
ARRAGON, divided in the midst by the River Iberus; the Chief places are, 1.
Caragosa, or Saragoz, seated on the Iberus or Ebro, anciently called Caesar
Augustus, by whom it was first founded: It is a famous University, and once the
Seat of the Moorish Kings. 1. Lerida, seated on the River Cinga, which has its
Springhead in the Pyrenaean Hills; it is an University. 3. Huesca, also an
University. 4. Mosons, which gives entertainment to the King of Spain every
third year, at which time the People of Arragon, Valentia, and Catalonia, make
the King a Present of 600000 Crowns; and this is all the Taxes or Moneys they
pay to the King for three years. 5. Jacca; 6. Borio; 7. Galajud; and 8. Daroca.

Kingdom of Catalonia.
CATALONIA, near the Pyrenaean Mountains on the North; Its chief places are, 1.
Barcelona, seated on the Mediterranean shore, a place of good strength and
Antiquity, being built out of the ruins of Rubicata, an old Colony of the
Africans, and now dignified with the Seat of the Vicegerent. 2. Girona, seated
on the River Baetulus, the ancient Seat of the Arragon Princes.

Kingdom of Valence.
VALENCE, or VALENCIA, encompassed with Murcia, Castile, Arragon, and the Sea.
Its chief places are, 1. Valencia, situate near the mouth of the River
Guadalangar, and about two miles from the Sea, where there is an open, but ill
commodious road for Ships, called la Greno; yet, as being the chief City in the
Country, enjoys a good Trade. Here is an University in which St. Dominic, the
Institutor of the Dominican Order, studied: 2. Morvedre; 3. Segobre; and 4.
Zativa.

The BALEARE ISLES.
The Islands of the Baleares, or Kingdom of Majorca, comprehend that of Majorca
and Minorca, both seated in the Mediterranean Sea.

Island of Majorca.
MAJORCA, about sixty miles from Spain; It is about 300 miles in circuit, and
has for its chief places, Majorca, where there is a University; and Palomera,
which gave birth to Raymundus Lullius.

Isle of Minorca.
MINORCA, distant from Majorca nine miles, and is about half the extent of
Majorca. Its chief place is Citadelli, and its chief Port, Mahon, which is very
large and commodious. These Isles are indifferent fertile in Corn, Wine, and
Oil, which are three good Commodities.

Nigh to these Isles are two other small ones;

Isle of Yvisa.
YVISA, or Ebuisa, of about 150 miles in circuit, whose chief place is so
called, and its Port is Magno. The chief Commodity which it affords is Salt,
of which here is made a great quantity. And about ten miles from this Isle is
the other, called PORMENTERA, Isle of Pormentara.
which is about fifty miles in circuit. The People are excellent Swimmers, as
well the Women as the Men.

The Air of the whole Country of Spain is generally good and healthful, and the
Soil fertile enough, were it well cultivated; but the thinness of its
Inhabitants since their settling in America, is the chief cause thereof.

The whole Country is Catholic; It has 11 Archbishops, 56 Bishops, 20 or
25000 Parishes, and abundance of very rich Abbeys and Monasteries.

Chief Rivers in Spain.
In Spain are five great Rivers, viz. the Douro; the Tagus, or Tago; the
Guadiana; the Guadalquiver; and the Ebro, or Iborus. The Douro is esteemed for
force, the Tagus for its renown, the Guadalquiver for its riches, the Ebro for
its name, and the Guadiana, not having wherewith to answer the others (for
shame) hides it self under ground.

Chief Hills in Spain.
The chief Hills in Spain, are Seir Morena, being a chain of Hills, declining
from the midst of Spain toward the Streights of Gibraltar; and upon these
Hills it was, that Cervantes, the Wit of Spain, made the Scene of the many
Warlike exploits, achieved by the flower of Knight Errantry, Don Quixot de la
Manche. 2. Inbalda, or Idubalda, which extends it self from the Pyreniae
toward Portugal: And 3. Seira Nevada, which from East to West crosses Granada,
and are very high Hills.


ITALY ought to be considered in three or four principal Parts, which shall be
those of LOMBARDY, which may be divided into the Higher; where are the Estates
of PIEDMONT, which belongs to the Duchy of SAVOY, and comprehends the Duchy
of Aost, Aoste. Signieury of Verceil, Verceili. Principality of Piedmont,
Turine. County of Ast, Astr. Marquisate of Saluce, Saluzzo. County of Nice,
Nizza, or Nice.
MILLAIN, which comprehends the Duchy of Millan, Millan. Lake of Como, Como.
Lodesan, Lodi. Cremonese, Cremona. Pavese, Pavia. Tortonese, Tortona.
Alexandrin, Alexandria. Laumelline, Valenca. Novarese, Novara.
GENES, or GENOA, which is divided in The Eastern River, Getroa, Sarzana.
The Western River, Savona, Arbengue, Vintimiglia.

MONTFERRAT, To the Duke of Mantoua, Alba. To the Duke of Savoy, Trin.

Lower; where are the Estates of The REPUBLIC of VENICE, which possesses the
Provinces or Parts of Bergamase, Bergarne. Cremase, Crema. Bressan, Brescello.
Veronois, Verona. Vicentin or Vicentinois, Vizenzo. Padouan, Padoua. Pol^s^ne
de Rovigo, Rovigo. Coast of. Trevisane, Trevigi. Feltr^n, Feltri, Bell^nois,
Belluno. Cadorin, Cadore. Friouli, Cuidad de Austria, Aquileja, Palma la Nova.
Istri^, Cabo d'Itria. Dog^do, or Duchy of Venice,
MANTOA, -- Dukedom of Mantoua. Mantoua. PARMA, and PLACENZA, Dukedom of Parma,
Parma. Dukedom of Placenza, Placenza.
MODENA, and REGGE, Dukedom of Modena, Modena. Dukedom of Regge, Reglo, or
Regge.
TRENT, -- Bishopric and County of Trent.
In the one and the other Lombardy, are diverse small Estates, among the which
is Mirandola.
ITALY, particularly so called; where are The Estates of the CHURCH, Toward
the Gulf of Venice; as Dukedom of Ferrarese, Ferrara. Bolognois, Bologna.
Romandiola, Ravenna. Duchy of Urbin, Urbin. Coast of Ancone, Ancona.
Toward the Tyrrhenian Sea; as County of Citti di Castello. Perusin, Perugia.
Ombria, or the Duchy of Spoleto. Orvietin, Orvieto. Terre Sabine, Narvi. St.
Peter's Patrimony, Veij. Campagna di Roma, Rome, or Roma:

Among the Estates of the Church, are Duchy of Castro, Castro. Republic of
St. Marino.
The Estates of TOSCANY, To the Great DUKE of TOSCANY, Florence, Florence.
Sanase, or Siennois, Sien^. Pisan, Pisa, Livourne, or Ligorne.

To diverse Princes; as the Republic of Lucque. Principality of Alassa.
Signieury of Piombine. Isle of Elbe, Cosmopoli.


The Kingdom of NAPLES, sometime divided in TERRA di LAVARO. CALABRIA. But at
present into twelve Provinces; whereof are Six toward the Tyrrhenean Sea, to
wit, Terra di Lavora, Naples, Cajeta.
Principato citra, or Interior, Amalfi, Salerno.
Principato ultra, or Exterior, Benevento, Conza.
Calabria citra, Cosenza. Calabria ultra, Regium. Basilicate, Cirenza.
Six toward the Gulf of Venice, to wit, Terra di Otranto, Otranto,
Brundufium. Gallipoli, Brindici.
Tetra di Bari, Bari. Capitanate, or Pugi, Manfredonia, Mont St. Angelo.
County of Molise. Abruzzo citra, or Interior Lanciano, Sulmona, Civita di
Chietti.
Abruzzo ultra, or Exterior, Civita di Penna, Aquila.


PUGIA. ABRUZZO.
And to which, for the fourth part, may be added, The Isles and Kingdoms of
SICILE, or SICILY, Messina, Palermo, Siracusa, Montreale, and Catali^.
SARDAGNE, or SARDINIA, Cagliari, Bosa, and Sassari.
CORCE, or CORSICA, Bastia, Mariana, and Calvi.



Together with several small Isles, as those of Naples, Liguria, etc. some of
which are taken notice of in the Descriptional part.

The Estates of the DUKE of SAVOY, are On this side the ALPS, to wit, The
DUCHY of SAVOY; where there are the Provinces of Genevois, Annecy, la Roche,
Alby, Thonnon, Vieux.
Faussigni, Cluse, Bonneville, Bonne, Sallanche, Taninge,
Chablais, Thonon, Evian, St. Gingot.
Savoy, Chambery. les Eschelles, Montmelian, Ayguebelle, Conflans, Beaufort,
Ugine, Miolans, Aix, and Rumilly,
Tarentaise, Monftiers, St. Jaqu' Esme, le bourg St. Morice.
Morienne, St. Jaan de Morienne; la Cha^obre, Modane, La^^ebourg.
And Beugey, in part, Yenne, St. Genis d'Hoste.


The COUNTY of NICE; where are the Vicarats of Nice, or Nizza, Nice, or Nizza,
Ville Franche.
Poget, Poget. Barcellonnette, Barcellonnette, le Lauset.
Sospelle, Sospelle, Saorgiz.

And the Val St. Esteve, St. Esteve, St. Salvador.
Count of Boglio, or of Beuil.

Beyond the ALPS; to wit, PIEDMONT; under the name of which is understood, the
Duchy of Aoste, Aoste, Castillion, Bard.
Marquisate of Yvree, Yvree, Pont, St. Martin.
Signiory of Verceil, Verceilli, Crescer^tin, Borzane, Biele, Andorne,
Gartintra.
Marquisate of Suze, Suze, Avillar^e.
Principality of Piedmont, Turin, or Turino, Mondouj, Fossan, Chivas, Rivoli,
Javen, Carignan, Pancalier, Vigon, Cavours, Ville franque, Raconis, Savillan,
Coni, Tend, Ceve, Cortemille, Been, Quierase, Quiers. Moncalier, Cocconas.
Verue.
Count of Ast, Asti, Ville neuved' Ast. Saluce, or Saluzzo.
Marquisate of Saluce. Carmagnole, Barges, Revel, Droners, Cental, Rocqu'
Esparviere. Demont.
Quarter of Piedmont, or at present belonging to Fracne, Pignerol, Perouse,
Lucerne, Brigueras,

The DUCHY of MONFERAT, On the Coast of GENES, In part, where are Albe, Trin,
and Aqui.
The Marquisate of Oneglia, Marro.

In PIEDMONT, restored from the Church, the Printipality of Masseran. The
DUCHY of SAVOY preteneth to Geneve, Chypre, etc.

LOMBARDY, which may be divided into the Higher, and comprehends the Estates
of PIEDMONT, as it belongs to the Duke of Savoy; where are the Duchy of Aost,
Aoste, Ivree.
Seignieury of Verceili, -- Verceili. Principality of Piedmont, Turin, Fossan,
Mondevi, or Mondoui, Suze, Savillan, Coni, Quierase, Quiers.
County of Ast, -- Asti. Marquisate of Saluce, Saluce, or Saluzzo, Carmagnole.
County of Nice, Nizza, or Nice, Barcelonnette.

MILLAN, as it belongs to the Catholic King; where are the Duchy of Millan,
-- Millain. Val de Ugogne, Domo d'Osula. Lake of Como, Como. Novarese, Novare.
Vigevanase, Vigevan. Lodesan, Lodi. Pavese, Pavia. Laumelline, Valenca.
Alexandrin, Alexandria de la Paille. Tortonese, Tortona. Cremonese, -- Cremona.
GENES, or GENOA, a Signieury and Republic; which is divided into Eastern
River, Genoa, or Genes. Sarzana.
Western River, Vintimiglia, Arbengue, Savona.

The Duchy of MONFERRAT; as it belongs To the Duke of Mantoua, Alba, Aqui.
To the Duke of Savoy, Trin, Casan.

In Piedmont appertains To the French, -- Pignerol. To its peculiar Prince,
-- Masseran.
In the Estate of Millain, appertains To the Swisses, Lugan, Locarne,
Bellinzone.
To the Grisons, Churcoire, Chiavenna, Sondrio, Bormio.
In the Estate of Genes, or Genoa, appertains To his peculiar Prince, --
Monaco, or Mourgues. To the Duke of Savoy, -- Oneglia. To the Catholic King,
Finale, Pontremoli.

Between Piedmont, Monferrat, etc. To the Pope, or Church, -- Montaldo, etc.
Lower, and comprehends the Estates of The Signleury and Republic of VENICE;
where are Bergamese, -- Bergame. Cremase, Crema. Bressan, Bressia. Veronois, or
Veronese, Verona. Vicentin, or Vicentinois, Vicenza. Padouan, Padoua. Polesine
de Rovigo, -- Rovigo. Dogado, or Duchy, Venice, or Venetia, Chiogia, Caorla,
Torcello, Muran.
Coast of Trevisane, -- Trevigi. Feltrin, Feltri. Bellun^is Cuidad de Bellune.
Cadorin, -- Pie di Cadore. Friouli, Cuidad de Austria, Aquileja, Cuidad de
Friouli, Concordia, Palma la Nova.
Istria, Cabo d'Istria, Ci^ta Nuova, Parenzo, and Pola.

MANTOUA, to his Dukedom that of Mantoua, Mantoua, Viadana, Goito.
MODENE, and REGGE, etc. to their Dukedoms, Dukedom of Modene, -- Modene.
Dukedom of Regge, Regio, or Regge. Principality of Carpi, Carpi. Signieury of
Carfagnan, Castelnove de Carfagnan.
PARMA and PLACENZA, to their Dukedoms Dukedom of Parma, Parma. Dukedom of
Placenza, -- Placenza,
TRENTE, to his Bishopric; where are Trent, Bolzan.
In the Signieury of Venice, appertains To the Pope, or Church, -- Ceneda. To
the House of Austria, Gorice, Trieste, Pedena:

In the Estate of Mantoua, are to their Lords The Dukedoms of Guastalle,
Sabionete.
The Counties of Bozolo, or St. Martin, Castillon della Stivere.

Between the Estates of Mantoua and Modene, are The Duchy of -- Mirandola. The
County of -- Novelcare.
In the Estate of Modene, and to the Duke of Modene, are The Signieuries of
Correge, Sassuol.
In the Estates of Parma, to their particular Princes, are The Estates of
Palavicin, -- Bourg St. Domino. The Estate of Land^, -- Bourg val di Taro.




The Signieury or Republic of VENICE; called the ESTATE of FIRM LAND, which is
possessed in ITALY; to wit, Bergamose, Bergamo, Martinengo, Chuson.
Cremase, -- Crema. Bressan, Bressia, Salo, Azola, Orsi Nuovi.
Veronoise, Verona, Peschiera, Legnago.
Vicentin, or Vicentenoi^, Vicenza, Lonigo.
Padouan, Padoua, Este, Moutagnana, Castle Baldo, Monselice, Campo St. Petro,
Citadella, Pieve di Sacco.
Polesine de Rovigo, Rovigo, Adria.
Dogado, Venice, or Venetia. Chioggit, Caorla, Torcello, Grado, Murano, Marano,
Maestre.
Coast of Trevisane, Trevigi, Serravalle.
Feltrin, -- Feltri. Bellunoise, -- Cuidad de Bellune. Cadorin, -- Pieve di
Cadore. Friouli, Cuidad de Austria, Aquileja, ^alma la Nova, Cuidad de Friouli,
Concordia, and Chiusa.


ESTATE of or in the SEA; which is possessed On the Coas^^ of Istria, Capo
d'Istria, Citta Nuova, Parenzo, Pola, St. Juan de Duino.
Dalmatia, or Esclavonia, Nona, Zara, Novigrad, Tina, Sebenico, St. Nicolo,
Traw, Spalato, Salona, Almissa, Starigrad, Vesicchio, Cataro, Budua, Dolcigno.
Epire, Torre de Butrinto, Perga.

And the Isles In the Gulf of Venice, Chergo, -- Cherso. Ossero, Ossero.
Veggia, Veggia. Arba, Arba. Pago, Pago. Solta, Solta. Brazza, Neresi. Lesina,
Lesina. Torta, Torta. Issa. Meo. Curzo, -- Curzo.
Of the Levant, Corfu, Corfu, Cape St. Angusto.
Zephalonia, -- Zephalonia. Zante, Zante. Cerigo, Caps^li. Crete, or Candia;
now the Grand Seigniors; Candia, Retimo, Canea, Sittia, Suda, Spinalonga,
Belvidere, Verapolo, Castle Theodoro, Grabuso, Turluru.
Teno, -- Teno. Micone, Micone.


And between the Estates of the VENETIANS, are To the Pope, or Church, on the
Coast of Trevisane, -- Ceneda. To the House of Austria, in Friouli and Istria,
Gradisca, Trieste, Pedena.
To the Signieury of Ragusa, on the Coast of Dalmatia, -- Ragusa. To the Turk,
on the Coast of Albania, etc. Castal Nuova, la Valona.


The Estates of the CHURCH, or POPE, comprehends Twelve Provinces in ITALY,
of which Seven are between the TIRRHENE and the APENNIN; to wit, the Campaign
de Rome; where are Roma, or Rome, Ostia, Erascati, Tivoli, Palestrina, Veletri,
Segni, Anagni, Ferentino, Alatri, Velori, Terracina.
Patrimony of St. Peter, Veij, Citta Castellana, Sutri, Porto, Civita vechia,
Cor^eto, Monte Flascone.
Orvietin, Orviero, Aquapendente.
Terre Sabine, Narni, Terni.
Ombrie, or the Duchy of Spoleto, Spoleto, Fuligue, Nocera, Norcia, Rieti,
Amelia, Todi, Assisio.
Perusin, Perugia, Fratti.
County of -- Citta di Castello.
Five are between the APENNIN and the GULF of VENICE; to wit, the Region, or
Quarter of Ancone, Ancona, Jesi, Osmo, Recanati, St. Maria Lauretane, Fermo,
Ripa Tr^nsone, Ascoli, Macerat^, Tolentino, St. Sever^no, Camerino, and
Fabriano.
Duchy of Urbin, Urbin, Eugubbio, Cagli, Sinigagl^a, Fossomb^one, Fano,
Pesaro, St. Leo, Durance.
Romague, or Romandioa, Ravenna, Rimini, Sarsina, Cesena, Cervia, Bertinoro,
Forli, ^aenza, Imo^a.
Ferrarese, Perrara, Comach^o, Mesola,
Bologno^s, Bologna, Bolognese.



Also, In the Kingdom of Naples, The Duchy, and City of -- Beneven^o. In the
Estate of Venice, The City of -- Ceneda. Between Piedmont, Diverse places, among
which are Montaldo, St. Step^ano, etc.
Monserrat, and Genes, are Diverse places, among which are Montaldo, St.
Step^ano, etc.

In FRANCE, and Between Dauphin, Languedoc, and Provence, the County of
Avignon, and of Venaiscin* where are, Avignon, Carpent^as, Cavaillon, Vaison.
Venasque, Lisle, Vaureas, Pont de Sorgues, Chaun neuf du Pape, Malausa^e,
Brantes.
Rostored, freed, or quitted from the Jorisdiction, or Sup^emacy of the Church,
or Pope, diverse Estatea (...) among. which are the Kingdoms of Naples, --
Naples. Sicily, Messina. Sardaigne, Cagliari* Arragon, Syracuse. Jerusalem,
Jerusalem. Hungary, Bude. England, London. Ireland, -- Dublin,
Dukedoms of Par^a, C^s^ro, Bra^ciano.
County of -- Ronciglione. Principalities, or Selgnories of Radicosani,
Masseran.
Republic of -- St. Marino.

map of Italy A Mapp of ITALY Those chief Estates and Isles are ye Dukedom of
Toscania The Republique Venice the Estates of ye Church, The ki^^^^^ of Naples
The Illes of Sicile, Sardane Corsica etc. In which said parts ^re Included
several other Estates and provinces of less note.
PIE TE

blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Kingston upon HullYe Rt Honrbl Robert
Pierreponte Earl of Kingston upon Hull viscount-Newark Lord Pierreponte
Maunvey and He^^^^ This Mapp is Humbly D.D by R.B.



ITALY.
ITALY lies in the midst of the three most Southern parts of Europe; It is
formed like a Boot, and washed on all sides by the Sea, viz. by the Adriatic,
or Gulf of Venice, behind; by the Iyrrhenian before, and by the Ionian at the
foot: only the top of the Boot is contiguous to France and Germany, from which
it is parted by the Alps.

Extent of the Roman Empire.
The extent of the Roman Empire, before Constantine Ruled, and the division
thereof, was accounted to be about 3000 Miles in length, to wit, from the River
Euphrates Eastward, to the Irish Ocean Westward; and in breadth, from Mount
Atlas. Southward, to the Danube Northward, about 2000; which large extent was
the cause of its ruin and declension.

The Ancient Romans.
The Ancient Romans were a gallant People, of a sound Judgment, and a ready Wit,
well skilled in Arts and Sciences; very covetous of glory; of great Valor, as
by their subduing the chief part of the World, who, contrary to the custom of
Invaders, to sack and ruin Countries, they taught the People Manners,
Literature, etc. The Romans were the first that wore the Purple Robe, and the
beginners of Triumphs: they had excellent and stately Theaters, and it was hold
no disreputation to be an Actor.

Its fertility and Commodities.
This Country is so exceedingly furnished with whatsoever may be found useful
for Man, and the Soil so rich and fer tile in Grains, Fruits, Rice, etc. in
some places having threo Harvests in one year, that it is esteemed the Garden
of the World. The chief Commodities for Merchandise that this Country yields,
are Silks, both raw and wrought into several fabrics, as Sattins, Taffities,
Plushes, Velvets, Cloth of Gold and Silver, Damasks, Grograms, Rashes,
Fustians, Glasses, Alom, Armor, excellent Wines, Oils, Saffron, Anni seeds,
Argal, Brinistone, several Metals, Olives, Almonds, Galls, Kidsskins, Lute
strings, Quicksilver, Aloes, Gold, Thread, Anchoves, several Drugs, etc.

The People of Italy.
The Italians are very ingenious, respective, and grave; exceeding malicious, if
affronted; much addicted to Women, which are here allowed the liberty to make
use of their own. They are generally very jealous of their Wives, so that they
are denied the liberty of the Streets, or the common view or society of men.
The Women are generally handsome, witty, and of a seeming modest behavior; it
is observed of them, that they are Saints in the Church, Angels in the Streets,
Magpies at the Door, Sirens in the Windows, and Goats in the Gardens. Their
Language is very eloquent.

Its chief parts.
Italy may be considered in three principal Parts, viz. Lombardy; Italy,
particularly so called; and Naples: to which, for a fourth may be added the
neighboring Isles, in which said parts are diverse Estates and Dukedoms; all
which are at large set down in the Geographical Tables: and of these parts in
order.

LOMBARDY.
Parts of Lombardy.
Lombardy is divided into the Higher and Lower; in the Higher are the Estates
of Piedmont, which belongs to the Duke of Savoy; of Millan, which belongs to
the Catholic King; of the Commonwealth of Genes, or Genoa; and of Montferrat,
which belongs to the Duke of Mantoua; yet the Duke of Savoy has some part
thereof. And in the Lower Lombardy are the Estates of Venice, of Mantoua,
Parma, and Modena, which have their Dukes; and of Trent, which has its Bishop.
And in the one and the other Lombardy, are several small Estates, amongst which
is that of Mirandola.

The Estates of PIEDMONT, washed by the Mediterranean Sea, is exceeding fertile,
though inferior to other parts of Lombardy: It is divided betwixt the Dukes of
Savoy and Mantoua, the River Tener separating their possessions. It is very
populous, numbering about 160 walled Cities and Towns, of which the chief is
Turin, Chief places.
which is the Palace and Court of the Duke of Savoy; it is also dignified with
the Sea of an Archbishop and an University, where the famous Erasmus proceeded
Dr. of Divinity. 2. Aoste, or Avost, seated on the Northern limits of the
Country. 3. Verceili, a Town of great strength, bordering on Millan, to which
it did once belong. 4. Saluzzo, a Marquisate and Bishops See. 5. Nizza, or
Nice, a Seaport Town, and serves for Turin: and 6. Asti.

And since we have before omitted it, before we pass further let us repass the
Alps, and speak of the Territories of this Duke on this side, which is the
Country of Savoy, from whence he bears his Title.

Country of Savoy.
SAVOY, adjoining to Piedmont, is a Country very Mountainous and full of narrow
passages, and consequently not very fertile. Its chief City is Chambery, or
Cambreria, the residence of the Duke, when he is in these parts, seated in a
pleasant Valley, amongst Mountains, which are well stored with beautiful
Houses, belonging to the Gentry of these parts; and next Turante, which
commands the passage into Italy. Its other places of account, are Thonon,
Cluse, Beaufort, Vgine, Montiers, Yenne, Modane, etc.

The Duchy of MILLAN is rich in Natures gifts, being seated in the best part
of Lombardy, affording great plenty of Grains, Wines, Oils, and Silks, and is
said to have the best Rice in the World. It has for its chief places, Chief
places.
1. Millan, which notwithstanding its often spoils, is said to be the greatest
City of all Lombardy. It is seated in a wide Plain, wherein are no less
pleasant than profitable Meadows and Rivers; it is strongly fortified with a
Wall, and a spacious and almost impregnable Castle, besides its Fortifications;
it is beautified with many splendid Ornaments, the chief of which are its
University; its Hospital, liberally endowed, seated in an Isle almost two miles
in compass, and capable to give entertainment to about 4000 Sick persons. Its
Schools, Nunneries, and Churches, which amount in all to 238; most of which are
stately structures, and beautified with curious Paintings, Images of the
Saints, Sepulchers, and several Religious Antiquities. The whole City is about
seven miles in circuit, is exceeding populous, very rich, and of a great
Commerce, affording sundry good Commodities. 2. Pavia, seated on the River
Tacinus honored with a famous University, of note for the Battle, in which
Francis the first of France was taken Prisoner by the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, who for his ransom was forced to release all his Title and interest to
the Kingdom of Naples, and this Duchy of Millan. 3. Cremona, seated on the
banks of the Poe, first built in the beginning of the Punick War. It is a place
of good account, has a considerable Trade, beautified with well built Houses,
with the convenience of curious Gardens, and has large and well ordered
Streets. It is of most note for its high Tower and Cathedral Church, where are
to be seen many Relics of Saints, and curious Pictures. 4. Como, seated on a
Lake so called, which is about fifty miles in circuit, on which the Citizens
use to recreate themselves in Boats; It is a City of good Antiquity, and here
it was that both the Plinys were born. 5. Alexandria, which from a poor Village
(through the often ruins of Millan,) is now become a fair, strong, and
flourishing Town. 6. Lodi; 7. Tortona; 8. Valenca; and 9. Novara.

State of Genoua.
The State of GENES, or GENOVA, once very large, but at present possesses only
Liguria in the Continent, and the Isle of Corsica, of which we shall speak in
place more convenient. The People are much addicted to Traffic and Usury, and
here the Women are allowed the liberty of the Streets, as also to accompany or
discourse with Men, which is forbidden them in other parts. Its chief places
are, 1. Genoua, seated on the Sea-shoar, at the foot of high Mountains between
two Rivers, built by Janus, the first Inhabiter of Italy; it is (as also its
whole State) governed in form of a Republic. The City for its stately
Buildings, makes it to be termed by the Italians, Genoua la Superba, having
beautiful Palaces, with delightful Gardens; its Strada Nova being a spacious,
long, and strait Street, on each side imbellished with stately Palaces, which
for the most part are supported by vast Pillars of Marble, not to be paralleled
in the World; amongst which may be reckoned the Jesuits College, than which
nothing can be more polite. The Palace of the Prince d'Orta, with its famous
Bird-cage, deserves a particular mention; nor is its new Mould to be forgotten,
which has made the Port twice as capacious, and much safer than before. The
City is in circuit about eight miles, defended besides its Walls, by a strong
and fair Castle; it is exceeding populous and rich, its Inhabitants being
observed to be the greatest Usurers and Money-mongers in the World, which is a
great obstruction to its Trade. 2. Savona, of note for the interview between
Ferdinand of Spain, and Lewis the 12th of France, Anno 1507. 3. Sarzana; 4.
Arbengue; and 5. Vintimiglia.

Estate of Montferat.
The Estate or Country of MONTFERAT does in part belong to the Duke of Mantoua,
and the rest to the Duke of Savoy; a Mountainous Country, but of a fertile Soil.
It is encompassed with the Appenine Hills, Millain, and Piedmont: the River
Tenarus parts the possessions of the Duke of Mantoua from that of Savoy; its
chief places are, 1. Alba, where Pertinax the Roman Emperor was born; 2. St.
Vas, built by the first Duke of Mantoua; 3. Casal; and 4. Trin, fair Cities,
with some others.

In the Lower LOMBARDY we have placed the Estates of Venice, Mantoua, Modena,
Parma, Placenza, and Trent; of which in order.

Estates of Venice.
The Estates of the Duke of VENICE may be divided into several Parts or
Provinces, as they lie on firm Land and on the Sea, which are taken notice of
in the Geographical Tables of Italy; the chief of which I shall here only name,
as I have occasion to treat of the Cities; 1. Trevigi, seated in the Province
of March Trevisane, a City of some account, as commodious for an Inland Trade.
2. Bressia, seated in the Province of Bressan, esteemed the second City for
largeness and beauty in all Lombardy; it is more famous in her Archbishop, who
is Earl, Marquess, and Duke, than in any matter of trade. 3. Brescello, in the
Province of Bressan, famous for the death of Otho, the Roman Emperor. 4. Este,
in the Province of Padouan, from whence came the late Dukes of Ferrara: 5.
Crema, in the Province of Cremase, seated on the River Serio, and in a very
fertile Soil; a beautiful and rich City, adorned with stately Edifices; and
about two Furlongs from the City, toward the Castle, is a stately Temple,
called Sancta Maria del la Cruce, a structure of great beauty, and richly
adorned with Pictures, etc. a place much frequented for Devotion sake: this
City may be termed a strong Fortress against the Millanois, upon which it
borders. 6. Vicenzo, in the Province of Vicentin, seated at the bottom of a
Hill which commands the City, being well watered with Rivers, which uniting
themselves not far distant from the City, form a Navigable River, capable to
receive Vessels of a considerable burden, which passing by Padua falls into
the Sea by Venice. It is about four miles in circuit, beautified with stately
Palaces, Temples, and Public buildings; it is very populous, and inhabited by
Nobility and Gentry, who contrary to the custom of the Italians, delight to
Travel; here is a famous Theater, capable to receive five thousand People,
whose Stage is so represented by Prospective, that it seems a stately City,
being modelled by the famous Architect, Andreo Paladio: then its Piazza, a
spacious and beautiful place. 7. Verona, in the Province of Veronois, a fair,
large and beautiful City, seated on the Athesis, a place of great strength, as
well by Nature as Art, and boasts chiefly of its yet standing Amphitheater,
capable to receive about 80000 Persons. 8. Padua, in the Province of Padouan,
seated in the midst of a spacious Plain, about 20 miles distant from the Sea;
It is a place of good strength, being enclosed with double Walls and deep
Ditches, besides its Bulwarks and Fortifications; it was built by Antenor,
Brother, to Priam King of Troy, whose Tomb is here yet to be seen; to this City
do belong seven Gates, several Stone-Bridges, and five spacious Piazza's; it is
every where beautified with many splendid Edifices, as well private as public;
also its Churches are no less beautiful and rich, of which the Domo or
Cathedral is chief; its Hall of Justice is a spacious and stately structure,
near to which are the Schools for Learning: but this City is now most famous
for its University of Physicians. 9. Bergamo, in Bergamasse, adjoining to
Cremase: 10. Feltri, in Feltrin, toward the Bishopric of Trent; and 11.
Rovigo, in the Polesine of Rovigo, far engaged toward the Estates of the
Church. And these Provinces may properly be comprehended under one part, to
wit, March Trevisane. The chief Rivers in this Country are Addua, Athesis,
Breuta, and Olius.

Estates of Frioli.
The second part in this Estate of Venice, is FRIOLANI, encompassed with
Histria, the Alps, Trevigiana, and the Adriatic Sea. Its chief places are, 1.
Aquilegia, seated on the Natisco, a place not very well inhabited: 2. Cuidad de
Austria, built by Julius Caesar: 3. Palma la Nova, the best fortified place in
all Italy; and 4. Tergestum, or Treist, seated nigh the Seashoar. The chief
Rivers are Natisco, Risanus, and Lizonsus.

The third and last part of this Estate shall be ISTRIA, of an unhealthful Air.
Its chief places are, 1. Cabo d'Istria; 2. Polo; 3. Cita Nuova; and 4. Parenzo:
But to proceed to Venice, the principal City of this Republic.

City of Venice.
The City of VENICE is seated at the bottom of the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of
Venice, built on 72 Islands, being distant from the main Land five miles, and
defended from the fury of the Sea by a Bank of sixty miles in length, through
which, in seven places there are passages broken for small Vessels, save only
at Malamocco, and the Castle of Leo, which are strongly fortified; it is about
eight miles in circuit, having for the convenience of the Inhabitants about
4000 Bridges, amongst which that of Rialto is the chief, built over the Grand
Canal, which for length, breadth and height, may compare with any in the World;
and for the passage of People to and fro, here are said to be employed about 10
or 12000 Gondelos; all its Buildings are fair and beautiful; here are 200
particular places built of Marble, adorned with Columns, Statues, and Pictures
of great value, erected by the Senators, which for their Grandeur are fit to
lodge and entertain any Prince in Christendom, most of which are seated on the
Grand Canal. Also the Royal and proud Palace of the Duke deserves a particular
description, which for its largness, beauty and riches, as well in its fabric
without, as in its Pictures and Statues within, exceeds all others: then the
Tribunals or Courts of Justice, the Senate House, or great Hall. Its Arsenal or
Magazine of War being about two miles in circuit, encompassed with high Walls,
and the Sea having but one place or Gate for entrance, and only one Channel for
Ships to pass in and out at; and here is kept always in readiness about two
hundred Galleys, with all things fit for a Voyage or fight; also here are kept
a thousand Coats of Plate, garnished with Gold and covered with Velvet: but
above all, its Church of St. Mark, which for its exterior and interior
beauty, and richness of its Ornaments, have deservedly made this City famous;
and in this Church, according to report, lies the body of St. Mark, the Patron
of this City, which was brought hither from Alexandria. In this City are
seventeen rich Hospitals, 56 Tribunals, 67 Parish Churches, 26 Monasteries of
Nuns, 54 Convents of Friars, 18 Chapels, and six Free-Schools for the increase
of Learning. Its Piazza, or broad place of St. Mark, adorned with sumptuous
Fabrics, Statues, etc. is a place much frequented by the Gentry. This City is
the only place where Policy, Warfare, and Merchandise have embraced one
another: the Gentry are here held in such esteem, that it is held for the
greatest honor they can bestow upon the best deserver, to make him a Gentleman
of this City, and from them the Sonatours are chosen; and out of them the Duke,
who in a manner is only titular, not having the Regal power, his Salary which
is paid him out of the Common Treasury, is forty thousand Duccals yearly.

In this Estate are two Patriarchs, and 34 Bishops.

Dukedom of Mantoua.
The Dukedom of MANTOVA, seated Northwards of the Estates of Venice: Its chief
City is so called, a place of good strength, encompassed on the sides with
Water about a quarter of a mile broad, and on the other side with a Wall; it is
seated on a River, which emptieth it self into the Po. In this City Virgil,
that famous Poet, was born.

Dukedom of Modena.
The Dukedom of MODENA, formerly joined to that of Mantoua, has for its chief
City, Modena, famous for the Battle between Anthony and Augustus, where Hirtius
and Pansa, the two Consults, were slain, and Anthony lost the day. This place
is the residence of its Dukes, as Mantoua is of hers.

Dukedoms of Parma, and Placentia.
The Dukedom of PARMA and PLACENTIA, Northwards of Mantoua, has for its chief
place Parma, seated in a fruitful Plain five miles from the Appenuines. It is
about four miles in circuit, adorned with many rich and stately Structures, is
very populous, and well inhabited by Gentry, who are much addicted to Learning
and Arms: it has a fair and spacious Campagnia, which feeds abundance of
Sheep; and here the Duke has his Palace, which is a place of great delight and
state. This Country boasts of its Parmasan-Cheese, so much esteemed by some.
The chief place of Placenza is so called; it is seated on the Po, comodious for
Traffic, and famous for its Fairs in Exchanges here quarterly kept, which are
much resorted unto: it is about five miles in compass, a place of good strength
and beauty, being adorned with many fair and rich Structures and Churches.

Bishopric of Trent.
The Bishopric of TRENT, whose chief City bears its names; it is seated in a
Plain, and surrounded with Mountains of an excessive height, being always
covered with Snow, by reason of which it is more fit for Wines than Corn. The
City is not large, but indifferent strong; its Houses are fair and stately, its
Streets large, its Churches beautiful and richly adorned, and its Royal Palace
sumptuous and stately. This, City is famous for the general Council there held,
for the establishment of the Roman Catholic Religion.

ITALY, particularly so called.
The second part of Italy, according to our method, will contain the Estates of
the CHVRCH and TOSCANE, which may again be subdivided into others, which are
taken notice of in the Geographical Tables, of which in order.

Territory of Ferraresse.
The Territory of FERRARESSE, about 160 miles in length, and 50 in breadth, had
once Dukes of its own, but now belongs to the Pope; its chief place is Ferrara,
so called from the Iron-Mines about it; it is seated on the Po, which serves as
a Rampire to defend it on the one side, as does a strong Wall, well fortified
with a spacious Mote, on the other side; it is about five miles in compass,
beautifully built, and adorned with superb Edifices, and is accounted one of
the pleasantest Cities in Italy, having in the midst thereof a spacious Green,
into which does open about 20 Streets, most of which are about half a mile in
length, and so even and uniform, that from thence the utmost ends of each may
be easily discovered: It is well inhabited, rich, and dignified with an
University.

Province of Bolognois.
The Province of BOLOGNOIS, Eastwards of Modena, has for its chief place
Bologna, once the head of 12 Cities; it is seated on the River Aposa, and in a
large and fertile Territory for Corn, Wine, Fruits, and Olives; it is about five
miles in circuit, and begirt with a Wall. This City is adorned with many fair
and proud Buildings, in which they observe a uniformity, amongst which is the
Pope's Palace for his retirement, which for grandeur and statelyness is fit to
give entertainment to any Prince in Christendom. It is dignified with the chief
University of Italy, famous for the study of the Civil Law; it is proudly
built, having spacious Courts.

Province of Romandiola.
ROMANDIOLA, or ROMAGNE, Eastwards of Bolognese, has for its chief places, 1.
Ravenna, seated on the Adriatic, and once a place of good account, having one
of the fairest Havens in the World, which is now choked up. This City was the
seat of the Emperor Honorius, and his Successors, then of the Gothish Kings,
and lastly of its Patriarch; but now, as its Haven is choked up, so is the
Land covered with water, which makes it become useless. 2. Rimini, seated on
the mouth of the River Rubicon. 3. Cervia, seated on the Adriatic Sea, a place
where so great quantity of Salt is made, that the Popes part is valued yearly
at 60000 Crowns, and 4. Faenza.

Dukedom of urbin.
The Duchy or Dukedom of VRBIN, not long since fallen to the Holy Seat, it
lying in the midst of his Territories. Its chief places are, 1. Vrbin, seated
at the bottom of the Appennine, formed like a Miter: 2. Belfort, seated in the
Midland: 3. Fano, a Seaport Town to Vrbin, where the English do enjoy many
Immunities; and 4. Pisaro, a Maritim Town, enjoying a good Haven.

Province of Marca Ancona.
The Province of MARCA ANCONA, bounded with the Adriatic, Naples, the Appennine
and Romagne; it takes its name from Ancona, its chief City seated on the Hill
Cimmerius, which likes a Promontory shoots it self into the Sea, having the
best Haven in Italy, toward the Adriatic Sea, the entrance into which is shut
up by two Chains, the better to secure the Port. It is a City of good strength,
being encompassed with Walls and Bulwarks; its Houses are fair, and its
Inhabitants rich. 2. Loretto, famous for the Church of the Virgin Mary, which,
as it is said was brought from Palestine in the Air by Angels for the Sins of
the People, and is now a stately Structure, and richly adorned with the
Presents dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and is much resorted unto by Pilgrims.
3. Marcerata, the Seat of the Governors of this Province; and here is a
College of Lawyers for the hearing and determining of causes. 4. Adria, which
gave name to the adjoining Sea: 5. Ascoli the Fair: and 6. Fermo the Strong.

Province of Perusin.
The Province or part of PERVSIN is Westwards of Ombriae, its chief place is
Perugia, where Augustus besieged L. Antonius the Brother, and Fulvia the wife
of Anthony the Triumvir, which said place at the Siege became also obedient
unto him; and nigh to this City is Lago de Perugia, of about thirty miles in
circuit, near whose Banks, Hannibal slew Flaminius 15000 of his Romans: here is
also Lacus Vademonius, where Dolabella vanquished such of the Gauls as had
escaped the Sword of Camillus.

Duchy of Spoleto.
The Duchy of SPOLETO, anciently called Ombria, as situate under the Appennine
Hills; has for its chief places, 1. Spoleto, of great antiquity, where are yet
remaining stately Aqueducts, the Temple of Concord, etc. 2. Assisto, famous for
little, but being the Birthplace of St. Francis. 3. Fuligne; 4. Todi; 5.
Amelia; and 6. Rieti.

Land of Sabine.
The Land of SABINE, Southwards of Spoleto, has for its chief place Narvy,
which is of some Account.

Province of Orietin.
The Province of ORIETIN, Westwards of Spoleto, has for its chief places, 1.
Orvieto, seated on so high a Rock, that it amazes those that look into the
adjacent Valleys; and 2. Aquapendente.

St. Peter's Patrimony.
The part or Province called St. PETER'S Patrimony, contains also all Latium, or
Campagna di Roma, and part of Ituria; it is washed with the Tyrrhenian Sea; and
in this part are the Mountains called Gallicanum, in which Hannibal frighted
that noble Captain Fab. Maximus with a Stratagem, which was by having 2000
Oxen, which carried fire on their Ho^ns, by which means he passed over the
Mountains. Its chief places are, 1. Ostria, seated at the Mouth of the Tiber,
but its Haven is stopped up; it is honored with the Sea of a Bishop, whose
place is to consecrate the Popes. 2. Adrea, to which the Romans fled, after the
Gauls had taken Rome. 3. Veij, a City of good antiquity, wealth, and largeness.
4. Alba, once the Seat of the Silvian Kings, and of good fame and beauty, but
suffered much in the Wars by the hand of Tullus Hostilius. 5. Antium, a place
of great delight, to which the Roman Emperors used to retire for recreation.
6. Civita Vechia, a Maritim Town, abounding in great plenty of Alom. 7.
Viterbo; 8. Porto; 9. Corneto; 10. Veroli; 11. Palestrina; and 12. Trivoli, all
places of some account; but above all Rome, The City of Rome.
seated in the Territory of Campagna di Roma, once the Mistress of the World,
famous for her noble Warriers, who were so exact in their Martial Discipline,
for their Triumphs and Antiquities, and for being the place where the Spoils
and Trophies of all Europe, and a great part of Asia, were laid up; in brief,
it was a place sufficiently memorized by the ancient and renowned Historians.
This City, when in its pristine splendour, was said to be 50 miles in compass,
whose Walls were beautified with about 750 Towrs, and said to contain about
463000 fighting men, that is, free Citizens, such as were enrolled, besides
Servants, Women, and Children; but this City has several times felt the
jostlings of ill fortune, so that as to its present state it has not the
moiety of its pristine beauty and splendor, scarce containing 11 miles in
circuit, being almost Orbicular, in which space there is about one third part
wast ground; yet it is a place of great splendour, beautified with many Princely
Palaces, and sufficiently famous for being the Seat of the Pope, which makes it
to be exceeding populous, being thought to contain about 200000 Inhabitants,
besides an exceeding great confluence of Strangers which hither come, some for
devotion, and others to please their fancies with its Antiquities and
Curiosities; and of the Inhabitants, two thirds may be reckoned for Clergymen
and Curtesans, the later of which is esteemed to amount to about 40000, who pay
30000 Duccats yearly Tribute to the Pope, for which two Galleys are maintained
and furnished for the service in Civita Vechia. This City is seated on the
Banks of the Tiber, upon Campus Mar^^us; it is Built upon ten Hills, on which
are fair Structures, as on the top of the Vatican Hill, is seated the proud
Palace of the Popes, large enough to give entertainment to three Princes at one
time. It is beautified and enriched with excellent payntings and curiosities;
and here are the Gardens called Belvidere, famous for its rare Plants,
delightful Walks, curious Statues, etc. and on this Hill is the Church of St.
Peter, being the most splendid and famous in all Rome, being adorned with rich
Payntings, Tombs, etc. with diverse choice Curiosities, as the Spear that
pierced our Saviors side, and the head of St. Andrew. In this City are about
300 Churches, Monasteries for Nuns, Religious Houses, and Convents; here are
many Hospitals for the relief of the Distressed, likewise several gallant
Libraries, as the Vatican, the Jesuits College, etc. And here the Pope lives
in more grandeur than any Prince in Christendom, and the Cardinals have their
Palaces richly adorned, and dwell in good state.

TOSCANY.
Dukedom of Toscany,
The Dukedom of FLORENCE contains the greatest part of Toscany, to which does
belong those of Sanese and Pisan, and which I shall include under the Dukedom
of Florence. It is separated from Genoa by the River Magra, and the strong Town
of Sarazana, belonging to the Genouese. Its People, even the Duke himself, are
generally addicted to Traffic, by reason of which it is a Country very rich.

Florence.
Amongst the Cities in this Territory is Florence, seated in a no less fruitful
than pleasant Plain, near the confluence of the Rivers Arne and Chiane, about
six miles in compass; and by reason of being the residence of the Duke, is very
populous and rich, where he has a stately and magnificent Palace, richly
a^^rned; and to make it a perfect place of pleasure, its Courts are fair, and
its Gardens spacious and delightful, having therein excellent Fountains,
Groves, Labyrinths and Walks, besides a place where all sorts of wild Beasts
are kept. Besides this Palace, here are several fair and superb Edifices, being
a place so extraordinary beautiful, that Charles the Archduke used to say, It
was fit to be seen only on Holy days. Here are 44 Parish Churches, about 50
Nunneries, 14 Fryeries, 12 Priorates, and about 30 Hospitals. This City was
built by Sylla, that bloody Dictator, and was made a Colony by the Triumviri;
It was razed by the Lombards, re-edified by Charles the Great, bought its
Liberty of Rodolphus, and now continues subject to the Medices, Dukes of
Florence. This City enjoys a great Trade, by reason of the Privileges and kind
entertainment which they find; all sorts of Merchandise being here landed free
from all Imposts, Duties and Customs, an advantage not found in many places. 2.
Pisa, seated at the entrance of the River Arno into the Sea; It was once a very
large City, and had great Territories, Corsica, Sardinia, and Baleares, having
been under its subjection, being very rich and powerful both by Land and Sea;
but the many shocks of Ill-fortune have reduced it within one half of its
Ancient limits; yet its many good Buildings show its ancient splendour. 3.
Sienna, in Sanase, built by Brennus the Gaul, an Inland-City, seated in a
large, pleasant and fertile Territory, adorned with beautiful Buildings both
public and private. 4. Pistoya, a City, though small, yet rich and well built,
famous for its beginning that bloody faction of the Neri and Bianchi, as of the
Guelfes and Ghibillines: And 5. Ligorne, seated at the mouth of the Arno, a
fair and beautiful City, being accounted the strongest, and one of the
principal Towns of Trade in the Mediterranean Seas. This City, not many years
past, was purchased by the Florentines of the Genois, for 120000 Ducats;
before which it was a place of no great note, nor beauty, being a reception for
Thieves, Murderers, Pirates, and all sorts of Religions, or rather Irreligious
people; but now it is well inhabited and resorted unto by Merchants, abounding
in several rich Commodities.

Commonwealth of Lucque, etc.
The Commonwealth of LVCQVE, the Signiory of PIOMBINE, the Isle of ELBE, and the
Principality of MASSA, make up the rest of Toscany. This last is but small in
circuit, but yields abundance of white Marble, and is beautified with the
Cities of Massa and Carrara; the last oftener the residence of the Prince, the
former strengthened with a stately Castle; both beautified with excellent Marble
Statues.

LVCQVE comprehends the Territory and Town of Lucca, which is seated on the
River Serchius in a Plain, about three miles in circuit; a place of good
beauty, being replenished with many fair Edifices and stately Churches, amongst
which that of St. Martin is the chief; and the Walls are so adorned with Trees,
that at a distance it seems a City in a Wood. It is of note for being the
meeting place of Pompey, Caefar, and Crassus, all three famous Commanders,
where they consulted and joined into a Confederacy for the enlarging their
Possessions, and gaining more honor.

Isle of Elbe.
Next the Isle of ELBE, seated nigh the shore, and opposite to the Isle of
Corsica: Its chief places are, 1. Cosmopoli, and 2. Porto Longone. And opposite
to this Isle on the Toscane shore, is the small Signiory of PIOMBINE.

Kingdom of NAPLES.
Kingdom of Naples.
The third and last part of Italy in general, we have comprehended under the
Kingdom of NAPLES, which by some have been divided into 6 parts, viz. Terra di
Lavoro, Calabria Superior, and Inferior, Abruzzo, Pugia, or Capitanata, and
Terra di Otranto. It is enclosed on all parts with the Sea, except toward the
Lands of the Church; it is every where very fertile, and by some accounted the
richest in all Italy, abounding in excellent Wines, Silks, both raw, and
wrought into many Fabrics; in Oils, Saffron, Almonds, Anniseeds. Argal,
Brimstone, Mines of several Metals, etc. It is well watered with Rivers and
fresh Streams, affords plenty of Cattle, Fowls, and Grains, and is throughout
replenished with fair, pleasant, and beautiful Cities and Towns. Its parts are:

1. TERRA DI LAVORO, in which part is seated Naples, the Metropolitan City in
this Kingdom, and one of the fairest of Europe, calied by the Italians, Napoli
la Gentile, as being inhabited by so many Nobles and Gentlemen. It is seated on
the Mediterranean shore, amongst pleasant Hills and fruitful Fields, a City of
great antiquity, being said to be built by Hercules; it is about 7 miles in
compass, fortified with 4 strong Castles, a strong Wall, with Towrs, Ditches,
etc. so that it is in a manner impregnable; it is beautified with many superb
Structures and magnificent Churches, Monasteries, Colleges, Courts, and
Palaces of Princes and Nobles, adjoining to pleasant and delightful Gardens:
its Port and Haven is commodious and good, where are kept store of Galleys.
This place of late years has been famous for its strange Rebellion under
Massanello, a poor Fisherman; here is an Hospital, endowed with 60000 Crowns
yearly, for the maintenance of the sick, maimed and impotent People. The second
City is Cajeta, commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, a place of good strength.
3. Potzol, a fair and beautiful City, seated on the Sea-shoar, enjoying a
commodious Port. 4. Capua, seated on the Banks of the River, Vulternus; a place
of great antiquity, and once very beautiful. 5. Nola, where Hannibal received
an overthrow by Marcellus: and 6. Euma, once a fair and beautiful City, but now
nothing but a heap of Ruins, nigh to which is the Lake Avernus, much famous
amongst the Poets, whose unwholsom sulphurous stink so infecteth the Air, that
Birds flying over it lose their lives; and hereabouts (according to fiction,)
the Poets descend into Hell, and here Aeneas went down into Hell to talk with
his Father.

Part of Calabria Superior.
2. CALABRIA Superior, has for its chief places 1. Tarentum, built by the
Lacedaemonians, and is the Birthplace of Architas the Philosopher. 2. Cotrone,
whose Inhabitants were noted for their activity in the Olympic Games. 3.
Sybaris, built and peopled by the Grecians after the destruction of Troy. 4.
Amycle, formerly peopled by the Pythagoreans: and 5. Cosenza, a fair City,
being the chief of these parts.

Part of Calabria Inferior.
3. CALABRIA Inferior, whose chief parts are, 1. Peste, or Pessidonia, where
Roses grow thrice a year. 2. Regio Rhezo, or Rhegium, so called, because that
here it is thought that Sicily was by the Sea broken from Italy. 3. Salernum,
famous for the study of Physic: and 4. Nicotera, seated on the Sea-shoar.

Part of Abruzzo.
4. ABRVZZO has for its chief places, 1. Aquila, seated near the Appennine. 2.
Aquino, the Birthplace of that famous School Divine Thomas Aquinas. 3.
Sulmona, the Birthplace of Ovid the famous Poet. 4. Benevento, once called
Malevent^m: and 5. Molise, which some esteem to be the chief of the County.

Part of Pugia.
5. PVGIA, whose chief places are, 1. Manfredonia, dignified with the Seat of an
Archbishop. 2. Cannae, famous for the signal Victory gained by Hannibal against
the Roman Consuls and the Romans, of whom were slain about 42700, 3. Barletta,
a strong Fortress. 4. Venusia, the Birthplace of Horace. 5. Arpinum, the
Birthplace of Tully: and 6. Mont St. Angelo, a fair City, not far from
Manfredonia.

Part of Terra di Otranto.
6. TERRA DI OTRANTO has for its chief places, 1. Otranto, the taking of which
by Mahomet the Great, put all Italy into such a fright, that Rome was almost
left without Inhabitants, and was not fully inhabited until the expulsion of
the Turks the next year. 2. Brundusium, boasting in its Haven, which is
esteemed not inferior to any in Christendom. 3: Gallipoli, a place of some
Traffic, affording abundance of Oils and Cattle. 4. Leccie; 5. Tarantum; and
6. Brindici; all places of good account.

In this Kingdom are 20 Archbishops, 127 Bishops, 13 Princes, 24 Dukes, 25
Marquesses, and 90 Earls. But let us proceed to the Italian Isles, and first
with Sicily.

The ITALIAN ISLES.
SICILY.
Island of Sicily.
The Island of SICILY is the greatest neighboring Isle to Italy, from which it
is divided by a small Channel running between Messina and Regio, now called the
Phare of Messina, and higher in this passage were the Scylla and Charybdis of
the Ancients. This Isle was once called Trinacria, from its being Triangular,
and abating 3 Promontories at each corner into the Sea, to wit, Cape de Faro,
regarding Italy; Cape Passaro, regarding Morea; and Cap^ Boij, or Cape Coco,
facing the Promontory Mercurio, of Africa. This Isle is termed the Queen of the
Mediterranean Isles, not only for its greatness, being in compass about 700
miles; but for her other excellencies and admirable fertility, yielding all
things necessary for the use of man; it chiefly abounds in Wines, Oils, Sugars,
Honey, Wax, Salt, Saffron, Minerals, Alom, Agats, Coral, Emeralds, and Silk in
great plenty, both raw and wrought, and such abundance of all sorts of Grains,
that it was called the Granary of the Roman Empire, and is now found to furnish
Malta, the adjacent Isles, Spain, and some part of Italy with her super^^ities.
Here are many Baths of different natures, which are found good for several
Infirmities. The chief Hills in this Isle are Mount Hybla, famous for its Bees
and Honey, and Mount Aetna, for its sending forth flames of fire, which in the
year 1669 made such an eruption, that it destroyed diverse Towns; and for its
height, whose top is exalted ten miles above its Basis, and is a good Landmark
to Sailors. This Island was first inhabited by a race of huge Giants, much
spoken of by Homer, who called them the Lestrigones; and the Cyclopes of which
last was Polyphemus, so famoused for the entertainment of Ulysses and his
Fellows. This Isle is divided into 3 Provinces or Valleys.

Its Parts and chief Places.
1. VALLI DE NOTO, which is the South-east part, has for its chief places, 1.
Siracusa, once the Metropolis of the whole Isle, strongly fenced about with a
Wall, and other Fortifications, being a Garrison of Spaniards. Its Buildings
are fair, and show something of its Antiquity; it has two Havens, one toward
the South, and the other toward the North-sides of the City. 2. Leontium,
seated Northwards of Siracusa, with which it had diverse times struglings for
Priority: And 3. Enna, a Midland Town or City.

2. VALLI DE MAZORA contains all the West part of the Isle; its chief places
are, 1. Moreal, or Montreal, famous for its Archbishops See and Church. 2.
Girgenti, the Seat of the Tyrant Phalaris, who afflicted Perillus in the Brazen
Bull: and 3. Palermo, once a Colony of the Phoenicians, and now the: chief City
in the Isle, being the Seat of the Spanish Viceroy. It is beautified with
magnificent Palaces and Temples, curious Buildings, and fair Streets, famous
for being the Birthplace of so many brave Men, as was Siracusa.

3. VALLI DE DEMONA, possessing the North-east part of the Isle, and boasts
of its chief Town Messina, seated opposite to Rhegium in Naples, a place of
great strength, as well by Nature as Art, haying before it the Sea, where they
have a no less famous and commodious, than a strong Haven, and behind it are
high Hills. It is the Sea of an Archbishop, beautified with fair and stately
Edifices; and here the Viceroy has a magnificent Palace adjoining to the
Arsenal, where their Galleys, etc. are kept; and here Venus, Neptune, Castor,
and Pollux had their Temples, from whose ruins are now erected Christian
Churches. The Gentry and Citizens here live in great delight and pleasure; this
City is the chiefest place of Traffic in the Isle, being very well frequented
by Merchants and Strangers. Its other places are Malaso, seated on the North
Promontory; then Erix, where Venus was worshipped; next Catania, where there is
a College for the studying the Sciences, but chiefly for the Civil and Canon
Laws; and lastly Nicosia, a Midland Town.

SARDINIA.
Isle of Sardinia.
The Island of SARDINIA; or SARDAGNE, is seated not far from Sicily; it is in
length about 150 miles, and 90 in breadth; not so fertile as Sicily, yet it
abounds in Corn and Cattle, but is deficient in Oil, and other Commodities. It
is now subject to the Spaniard, and is divided into two parts, viz. Cape
Logodori, and Cape Cagliari; Its chief places are, 1. Cagliari, seated opposite
to Africa, having a commodious Haven, which makes it to be well frequented by
Merchants. The City is adorned with goodly Buildings, fair Temples, and
magnificent Turrets, being the Seat of the Spanish Viceroy, as also the Sea of
an Archbishop. 2. Bosa, likewise the Sea of an Archbishop. 3. Oristagni, and 4.
Sassary, both places of good account.

Its People are of a mean Stature, are very great Hunters, great Pains-takers,
no lovers of the Spaniards, not much addicted to Learning, and in matters of
Religion not over strict.

CORSICA.
Isle of Corsica.
The Isle of CORSICA, seated in the Ligurian Sea, opposite to Genoa, is about
100 miles in length, and 50 in breadth; the Soil, by reason of the Mountains,
is not very fertile in Grain, but abounds in excellent Wines; it yields
likewise Oils, Figs, Raisons, Honey, Wax, Alom, Box-wood, and Iron-Mines; its
Dogs and Horses are esteemed excellent. The chief places are, 1. Bastia, seated
on the North-east part, has a commodious Haven, and strong Garrison, dignified
with the residence of the Genouese Governor, under whose command the Island
is. 2. Mariana; 3. Galvi; 4. Porto-Vechio; 5. Adiazzo; and 6. Bonifacio. The
People are for the most part poor, headstrong, churlish, and not addicted to
Literature.

The Vulcanian Isles.
Besides this Island there are abundance of others, though of no great account,
and far lesser; as the VVLCANIAN Isles, lying on the Coast of Sicily, being 11
in number; the chief of which is Lipara, from whence the rest take their names,
being about 10 miles in circuit; then Stromboli and Vulcania send forth a
constant Smoke.

Isles of Naples.
The Isles of NAPLES are 18 in number, the chief of which are Ischia, Capreae,
the retirement of Tyberius; and Aenaria.

Ligurian Isles.
The chief of the LIGVRIAN Isles is Elba, famous for its two Potts Porto
Ferraro, and Porto Longone; Its chief places are, 1. Cosmopolis, built by Cosmo
di Medices; 2. Gallinaria; 3. Giglio and 4. Monte Christo, which is but a Rock.

Other Estates.
There are yet in Lombardy many little Estates, as of Mirandola, Guastella,
Sabionetta, etc. about Mantoua, of Pallaviano, and Landa, etc. amongst the
Estates of Parma and Placenza, of Manaco; on the Coast of Genoa, of Masseran in
Piedmont. The Count of Pitiglian, and the Marquess of Malispine in Toscany; all
which Princes, though holding from under the protection of others, have
Sovereign Rights.

Italy, with its Isles, extends it self from about the 36th degree of Latitude
unto the 46th, which are 250 Leagues from South to North, and from the 36th
degree of Longitude to near the 48th, which are as much or little more from
West to East; but its form scarce fills the third part of what is contained in
these degrees.

In Italy, I make little Account of other Rivers, than that of the Arno, Tiber,
and Po; the two first descend from the Appennine, the last from the Alps.

TURKEY in EUROPE; or that which the Grand Signior possesses in whole (or in
part) in EUROPE; may be comprehended under ESCLAVONIA, which is possessed by
the Turk, Hungarians, and Venetians, and may be divided into HUNGARIA, with its
chief Cities belonging to the Grand Signior; as Buda, Gyula, Canissa, Alba
Regalis, Quinque Ecclesiae.
Belonging to the Emperor, or Hungarians, Presbourg, Strigonium, Zegith,
Newhausel.


ESCLAVONIA, with its Parts and chief Places, as they belong to the Turks and
Venetians, Croatia, Turks, -- Wihitz. Venetians, Sisseg.
Esclavia, Turks, Posega. Venetians, -- Copranitz.
Dalmatia, Turkish, Narenza, Mostar.
Venetians, Ragusa, Spalato, Sebenico, Zara.


DACIA, (now belonging to the Turks) with its Provinces of Transylvania,
Waradin, Hermenstad.
Bosnia, Saraih, Bagnialuch, Jaycza.
Servia, -- Belgrad. Bulgaria, -- Sophia. Moldavia, Zuccania, Lazy.
Bessarabia, -- Khermen, Walachia, -- Targovisko.

GREECE, as it is possessed by (or under the subjection of) the Grand Signior;
which may be divided into the Provinces, or Parts of ROMANIA, or ROMELI, of
old, THRACE, Constantinople, Andrinopoli, Gallipoli, Caridia, Abdera, Pera, and
Galata.
MACEDONIA, with its parts of Jamboli, -- Heraclea. Camenolitaria, Pidna, Pella.
Migdonia, Salonichi, Stagira,

ALBANIA, Durazzo, Valona, Croja, and Sintari.
THESSALY, now by the Turks called JANNA, Anniro, Larissa.
EPIRE, now by the Turks called CANINA, Preveza, Larta.
ACHAIA, and ETOLIA, now called LIVADIA, Athens, now Sitines, Thebes, now
Stives, Lepanto.
PELOPONNESUS, now called the MOREA, Corinte, Misistra, Modon, Petras, and
Coron.

Together with diverse ISLES, (which for the most part are in the possession of
the Turks, except some few, which the Venetians yet keep;) which as they lie in
the AEGEAN SEA, are Negroponte, Negroponte, Caristo.
Stalimene, of Old, Lemnos, -- Lemnos. The Isles called the SPORADES, and
CYCLADES; which are the Isles of Milo, Tira, Tiresio, Nio, Stapalia, Morgo,
Nicfia, Levita, Zinara, Raclia, Siphano, Micone, Teno, Helena, Engia, Fermenia,
Zea, Andri, Coos, Delos,
Samothracia, -- Samos: Tasso, Tasso. Pelagmisi, Pelagmisi. Sciro, -- Sciro.
Creba, or Candia, Candia, Canea, Suda.

IONIAN SEA, are the Isles of Zante, -- Zante. Zefalonia, Zefalonia, Augustali.
Corfu, -- Corfu. Cerigo, Cerigo. Santa Maura, Santa Maura. Strivalis,
Strivalis. Val de Campara, -- Val de Campara.
ADRIATIC SEA, or GULF of VENICE, are the Isles of (if any are so called,)
Zara, Vegea, Lesina, Cherso, Curzolo, and Grissa.


The Empire of the GRAND SIGNIOR, or GREAT TURK, holds In EUROPE, and Toward
the higher ESCLAVONIA, Hungaria, in part, Buda, Gyula.
Esclavonia, in part, -- Pesega. Croatia, in part, -- Wihitz. Dalmatia, in
part, Narenca, Mostar.



Toward the lower ESCLAVONIA, Bosnia, Jaycza. Bagnialuch.
Servia, -- Belgrade. Bulgaria, Sophia.
On the BLACK SEA, Podolia, in part. Oezaco^, toward Moscovia, Azac, or Azoff.
In GREECE, which by the Turks is called ROMELI, the Parts or Provinces of
Romania, Constantinople, Adrinopoli, Gallipoli.
Macedonia, Salonichi, Heracle^.
Albania, Scutari, Durazzo, Vilona.
Thessaly, -- Armiro. Epiro, Preveza, Larta.
Achala, and Etolia, Athens, or Setines. Thebes, or Stives, Lepanto.
Peloponnesus, or the Morea, Corinte, Misistra, or Lacedemone, Petras.
And diverse Isles; the chief of which are Negroponte, Stalimene, Sancta Maure,
etc.


In ASIA, ANATOLIA, wherein are diverse Cities, among which are Smyrna, Ephesus,
Bursa, Chioutaige, Angoura, Cogni, Trebisonde, etc.
Diverse Isles, the chief among which are Rhodes, -- Rhodes. Cypre, or Cyprus,
Nicosin, Eamogousta.
Metelin, -- Metelin. Scio, Scio. Samos, Samos. Patmosa, or Patmos, Patmos.
SOURIA; which is divided in Sourie, or Syrie, Aleppo, Tripoli.
Phenicie, Said, or Sidon, Damascus.
Judea, or the Holy Land, Jerusalem, Naplouse, Gaza.

ASSYRIA, which is divided in Mesopotamia, or Diarbeck, Caramit, Asanchif.
Chaldea, Bagdad, Balsora.
Assyria, in part, Mosul, Chiahnezul.

TURCOMANIA, and Georgia, in part, Stranu, Cori.
Turcomania, Teflis, Derbent.

ARABIA, in part, to wit, in the Stony, -- Arach. Desert, -- Ana. Happy,
Zibid, Aden.


In AFRICA, The Kingdom of ALGIER; where are four Parts or Kingdoms, to wit,
Telensin, -- Telensin. Algier, Sargel, Tenes, Algier.
Bugia, Bugia, Steffa.
Constantina, Constantina, Bonna, and Tebessa.

The Kingdom of TUNIS, with its eight Government; to wit, Four Maritime,
Biserta, Gouleita, Sousa, Media, or Africa.
Four Inland, Tunis, Cairoan, Beg, and Urbs.

The Kingdom of TRIPOLI, with its parts of Tripoli, Tripoli, Lepeda.
Desert of Barca, Corena, Alberton.

EGYPT, with its three Parts; to wit, Errif, Alexandria, Roserta, Damierta.
Bechrio, or Demesor, -- Cairo, Said, -- Said, or Thebes.
Nigh unto EGYPT, Coast of Abex, in part, Suaquen, Arquico, or Ercocco.
Between Egypt and Arabia, Sues.

In EUROPE, restored from this Empire, The Signieury, and Republic of --
Raguse. The Vayvodes, or Princes of Tranfilvania, Hermanstat. Valaquia,
Tergovis. Moldavia, Saczou.
And the Cham of the -- Petit Tartaria, -- Caffa.

map of Turkey (...) SECVNDIS

blazon or coat of arms of the earls of WinchilseaTo ye Rt Honble Heneage Earl
of Winchelsea Vist Maidstone Baron Fitz Herbert of Eastwell Lord of the Royal
(...) of ^^e and Lord Lei^^^^^^ of Kent and (...) Mary is humble D.D by R.B.

A MAPP of THE ESTATES of the TURKISH EMPIRE in ASIA and EUROPE signed by Monsr
Sanson Geographer to the French King


Turkey in Europe.
THE Estate or Empire of the Sultan, or the Ottomans, whom we call the Grand
SIGNIOR, or Great TVRK, is part in Europe, part in Asia, and part in Africa;
the greatest part is in Asia, and the least in Europe; and yet this is not the
least considerable, since the Grand Signior makes here his residence, and has
from hence his best Forces. That which he holds in Europe extends it self from
the 35th degree of Latitude to the 45th, and sometimes near the 47th, which are
250 or 300 French Leagues; and from the 40th of Longitude unto, or beyond the
56th, which are likewise 300 Leagues.

Division of Turkey.
This part of the Estate of the Turks, which we call TVRKEY in EVROPE, may be
divided into two principal Regions, viz. Sclavonia, or Esclavonia, and Greece.
ESC LAVONIA, which shall be along the Danube from Germany unto the Black Sea,
and is bounded on one side with the Danube, and on the other with the Mountain
Marinai: and under the name of Esclavonia may be understood Hungaria,
especially so much as the Turk is Master of; the particular Esclavonia, with
the Provinces of Croacia, Esclavia and Dalmatia, of which parts the Grand
Signior holds but one part; then the Kingdom of Dacia. The other Region, which
I call GREECE, shall reach from the Mountain Marinai, a great way into the
Mediterranean Sea, and advancing toward the South, in which are several
Provinces, which we shall treat of.

HVNGARIA.
Kingdom of Hungaria described.
The Kingdom of HVNGARIA taken entirely, is bounded on the East with
Transylvania and Walachia, on the South with Sclavonia, on the West with
Austria, and on the North with Poland. It is part possessed by the Christians,
and in part by the Turks.

Its fertility.
This Kingdom is of an exceeding fertile Soil, yielding Corn thrice a year, and
feeding such abundance of Cattle, that it supplied Germany, Sclavonia, and
other adjacent parts, with about 100000 Oxen yearly; they have Deer, Pullain,
Phesants, Partridges, and all sorts of Fowl in such plenty, that they are free
for any one that will take them; and their Rivers are found to afford excellent
Fish, It also abounds in several good Commodities, as Hides, Its Commodities.
Butter, Cheese, Copper, Honey, Wax, Fish, etc.

Its Inhabitants.
The People are of a rude behavior, not addicting themselves to Literature, nor
Mechanical Trades. They use the Scythian Language; they are well proportionate,
strong, and very valiant. The Females are denied the Estates of their Parents,
neither have they any thing in Marriage; and until Men and Women are married,
they are not allowed the use of Beds to lie upon.

Its division.
This Kingdom now stands divided between the Grand Signior and the Hungarians.
The Turks have here four Beglerbies, to wit, of Buda, of Canisa, of Agrica, and
of Temiswar; the chief Cities which they possess, are Buda, seated on the
Danube, once the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and Royal Seat of the Kings of
Hungaria; it was taken by Solomon in 1536. Next Guyula, a strong Town on the
Confines of Transylvania, which was betrayed by the Governor to Solomon in
hopes of a great Reward, which proved insuccessful unto him to the loss of his
life: then Alba Regalis, which by the Germans is called Wisenburgh; also
Quinque Ecclesiae, taken in the same year with Alba Regalis: And these are the
strong places, and of good account with them. The chief places in the Emperors
or Hungarians possessions, are Presburg, seated on the edge of Austria, and
since the Turks became Masters of Buda, this has been the Metropolis of
Hungaria: next, Strigonium, or Gran, once taken by the Turks, but regained;
also Zegith, taken by Solomon the Magnificent in Anno 1566, who there ended his
days: then Newhausel, which has several times withstood the fury of the Turks.
The other Towns in the Hungarians possession, were (if not are) Komara, in the
Isle of Schut; then Bars, Novigrad, Vizzegrad, Papa, Sarwar, and Owar.

The chief Order of Knighthood in this Kingdom, is that of the Dragon,
instituted by Sigismund King of Hungaria, and Emperor.

ESCLAVONIA.
Bounds of Esclavonia.
ESCLAVONIA has for its Eastern bounds the River Drinus, and a line drawn
thence to the Sea; for its Southern bounds the Adriatic Sea; for its Western,
part of Italy; and for its Northern, Hungaria. The whole length of this Country
is about 480 miles, and its breadth about 120; it is situate under the 6th and
7th Climats, the longest day making 15 hours and a half. Its division.
This Country is divided into the Provinces of Croacia, Dalmatia, and the
particular Esclavonia, and are partly possessed by the Venetians, and partly by
the Turks.

Its fertility.
The Country is observed to be more fit for grazing and feeding of Cattle, than
for Tillage, for the Sheep and other Cattle bring forth their young twice a
year, and their Sheep are shorn four times a year; likewise their chief
Commodities are Horses, for Service; Cattle, which yields them abundance of
Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, and Wool, of which they make Cloth. Here are
also some Mines of Gold and Silver, which are in the Turks possession.

In Esclavonia, the chief places in the Turks possession are Posega, a place of
good account, and Barra: and in the Venetians possession is Copranitz, a fair,
strong, and good City.

Province of Croacia.
The Province of CROACIA is in a manner wholly possessed by the Venetians, the
Turks only possessing the strong Town of Withitz: the chief places possessed by
the Venetians, are 1. Sisseg, or Sissaken, famous for its resisting the Turks
in 1592, a fair and strong City. 2. Gardiskia, seated on the Savus. 3.
Novigrod, also seated on the Savus: and 4. Bruman.

Province of Dalmatia.
The Province of DALMATIA, whose Southern parts are washed with the Adriatic
Sea, is divided betwixt the Venetians, who hold the greatest part, and the
Turks; whose chief places are, 1. Marenza, seated on the Sea-shoar; 2. Mostar,
an Inland Town toward Bosnia; 3. Stagno, and 4. Sibioncello, both Maritim
Towns; and nigh unto which is the Isle of MELEDA, which also belongs to the
Grand Signior. The chief Towns in the possession of the Venetians, are 1.
Rhagusa, seated on the Adriatic Sea, a City of great Traffic and Riches,
being a Commonwealth of it self. 2. Spalato, a Maritim Town on the Adriatic,
and in a most pleasant Valley on the South side of great Mountains; and in the
Wall toward the Sea, is to be seen a great remainder of a Gallery in
Dioclesians Palace. This Town is kept by the Venetians as their only Emporium,
plied successively with two Galleys, which carry between this place and Venice
such Merchandise as are Transported into Turkey, or from thence brought in. 3.
Zara, a strong Fortress, feated on the Adriatic within the Gulf, which, by
reason of its commodions situation, is most apt to command the whole
Adriatic, and is strongly fortified and well Manned. In this City is a Temple
of St. John di Malvatia, which was built by a company of Seamen, who being in
a great and dangerous Tempest, made a Vow, that if they escaped they would
consecrate a Temple to the said St. John; and being saved, they Landed here,
and performed their Vows. 4. Sebenico, seated on the Sea-shoar, having large
Territories. 5. Nona; and 6. Traw.

DACIA.
Its Bounds.
The Kingdom of DACIA is bounded on the East with the Euxine Seas, on the West
with Hungaria, and on the North with the Carpathian Mountains. The Country
throughout is very fertile, affording for Merchandise, Oxen, Butter, Cheese,
Tallow, Hides, Honey, Wax, Commodities.
and excellent Warlike Horses, whose Manes are said to hang down to their feet;
their Fruits are good, and in great plenty, and the Earth is enriched with
Mines of several Metals. It is seated in the Northern Temperate Zone, between
the 7th and 10th Climates, which makes the longest day to be 17 hours.

Its People.
The People are well made and proportionate; they are headstrong, resolute in
their Opinions, and of no ready wit; they use the Sclavonian Language, they are
Christians, and follow the Greek Church.

The Kingdom at present is divided into several Provinces, as in the
Geographical Table of Turkey in Europe, is set down; all which are subject to
the Grand Signior.

Province of Transylvania.
The Province of TRANSYLVANIA has for its chief places, 1. Waranine, far
engaged toward the West, and it is a frontier Town to Hungaria, and of some
account and strength. 2. Hermensted. more toward Moldavia. 3. Weisenburg; 4.
Burges; 5. and Hanyad.

Province of Bosnia.
The Province of BOSNIA has for its chief place, 1. Saraih, the Metropolitan
City, seated in a fruitful Valley, which on the North and South sides are
immured with ridges of pleasant Hills, of an easy ascent. This City is said to
contain about 80 Mescheetoes, and about 20000 Houses, which for the most part
are but meanly built. 2. Bagnialuch, once the residence of the Bosnian Kings;
and 3. Jayeza, the usual Sepulcher of those Kings.

Province of Servia.
The Province of SERVIA, whose chief Cities are, 1. Belgrade, once the Bulwark
of Christendom, valiantly resisting the power of Amurath the 6th, and Mahomet
the Great; but yielded to Solomon. Anno 1520, when this whole Country became a
Turkish Province, 2. Stonebourgh, once the Seat of its Despot; and 3.
Samandria.

Province of Bulgaria.
The Province of BVLGARIA has for its chief places, 1. Sofia, the Seat of the
Beglerbeg of Greece, under whom are 21 Sangiacs, seated almost in the midst of
a long and fruitful Valley, beautified with many fair Hanes and Baths, the
chief of which has hot, Fountains. Its College is magnificent, and its
Mescheetoes are many and beautiful, especially that in the midst of the City,
which is the largest; and here the doors of the houses of the Christians and
Jews are not above 3 foot high, which is so made to keep out the Turkish
Horses, who would else in their Travels make them serve instead of Stables: so
great is the slavery that they live under. 2. Oesco; 3. Novi; 4. Durostoro; and
5. Destor; all which are seated on the Danube. 6. Proslavia, seated at the
mouth of one of the branches of the Danube at its fall into the Euxine Sea. 7.
Calutra; and 8. Varna, both seated on the Euxine or Black Sea.

Province of Moldavia.
The Province of MOLDAVIA, whose chief places are, 1. Zuccania, once the Seat of
the Vaivod. 2. Sotzowa; and 3. Lazy, both good Cities.

Country of Bessarabia.
To the Province of Moldavia does belong the small Country of BESSARABIA, which
lies between Podolia and Bulgaria, and is commodiously seated on the Black
Sea. Its chief places are Kherman, or Moncastro, the Seat of the Turkish
Sargiack, seated on the River Tyras, not far from its influx into the Sea; and
2. Kilia, also seated on the Euxine Sea.

Province of Walachia.
The Province of WALACHIA, being divided from Bulgaria by the Danube, and is
esteemed the richest Province in all Dacia. Its chief places are, 1.
Targovisco, the Seat of the Vajuods; 2. Domboviza; and 3. Brailonum.

GREECE.
The Parts of Greece.
The rest of Turkey in Europe may be comprehended under the name of GREECE,
which is divided into several parts, to wit, Romania, which answers to the
ancient Thrace; Macedonia, whose diverse parts have received diverse names, as
that of Jamboli, of Camenolitaria, of Migdonia, or particular Macedonia,
Albania, and Thessaly, which is now called Junna; Epirus, now Canina; Achaia
and Aetolla, now Livadia; and Peloponnesus, now the Morea.

Its Bounds.
GREECE, esteemed the Mother of Arts and Sciences, has for its Eastern bounds
the Egean Sea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and Thracian Bosphorus; and for its
Western, the Adriatic Sea and Italy. It is seated in the Northern Temperate
Zone under the 5th and 6th Climates, the longest day being 15 hours.

Its sertllity, and Commoties.
The Soil without doubt is very rich and fruitful, and would be very prositable
to the Husbandman if pains were taken in tilling it; but the Great Turk seizing
on their Estates, when and as often as he pleases, makes them careless to
cultivate it; yet here are found several good Commodities, which are
transported to other places, as Wines, Oils, Silk, both raw, and wrought into
severai Manufactures, as Velvets, Damasks, etc. also Gragrams, Brimstone,
Copper, Vitriol, Cottons, Sopes, Carpets, Cute, Currants, Cuminseed, Anniseeds,
etc.

The Ancient and present Greeks.
The Grecians, though a scattered People, since the Turks became Masters of
their Country, vet still retain their Name, Religion, Customs, and Language, as
indeed they do in all other places where they live. They were once a Nation so
excellent, that their Precepts and Examples do yet remain, as approved Canons
to direct the mind to Virtue; they were Lovers of freedom, every, way noble; in
matters of Government famous, in Arms glorious, in Arts admirable, and to whom
the rest of the World were held Barbarians; but since they became under the
Turkish yoke (for the generaliay) their Spirits are so low, that their
knowledge is turned into ignorance, their liberty into contented slavery, their
Virtues into Vices, and their industry in Arts and Sciences into idleness. They
are much addicted to drink and dancing, for which they had the name of Merry
Greeks; they are of a good proportion, and of a swarthy complexion; their Women
are well favored, brown, and excessively amorous; in matters of Habit they
differ little from those amongst whom they live. The Christian Faith was here
established by Timothy, to whom St. Paul wrote two Epistles. The Fathers which
this Church most adhereth unto, are Chrysostom, Basil, and the two Gregory's;
and the Church is governed by Patriarchs, one of Constantinople, another of
Alexandria, another of Jerusalem, and another of Antioch; freely exercising
their Religion, which differs much from the Church of Rome, as, I shall in
place elsewhere take notice o^, and have every where their Temples and
Monasteries. If a Patriarch die, another is elected by the Synod of Bishops.

Famous Men here bred.
This Country has bred several famous Men, as Alexander the Subverter of the
Persian Monarchy, Xenophon, Plutarch, Herodotus, and Thucydides, famous
Historiographers; Epaminondas, Pyrrhus, Miltiades, and Aristides, Captains;
Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and Theophrastus, Divine Philosophers; Demosthenes,
Aeschines, and Isocrates, eloquent Orators; with several others, too tedious
to name; but to proceed to the Provinces.

Province of Romania.
ROMANIA, particularly so called, a Country of it self, neither of a rich Soil,
nor pleasant Air, more inclining to cold than heat; yet by reason of the famous
Cities of Constantinople, Adrianople, and others here seated, renders it the
chief, and best inhabited of all Greece. Its chief places are Adrianople, so
called by the Emperor Hadrian, who repaired it; it was added to the Kingdom of
the Turks by Bajazet, Anno 1362, and continued the Seat of their Kings till
Mahomet the Great took Constantinople from Constantine Palaeologus, the last of
the Eastern Emperors, about 90 years after. Blunt in his Voyage to the Levant,
in his description of this City says, That it is seated on three low Hills, of
which that in the midst is the largest and fairest, on the top of which is a
stately and magnificent Mosque, and in the Churchyard are about 30 or 40 Cocks
under a stately Fountain, for People to wash before Divine Service; as also at
the bottom of this Building, on the North and South sides, are 20 Conduits with
Cocks, and on the East side are the Priests Lodgings and Gardens; and round the
Churchyard are Baths, Cloisters, and a College for the Priests, with other
useful Offices, all covered with Lead. In this City are several Besestines, or
Exchanges, some of good account, as likewise many fair Hanes. To this City are
four stately and lofty Bridges of Freestone, which make a pleasant show, and is
a fair, large, and well composed City. 2. Gallipoli, seated near the
Hellespont, but within the Sea of Marinora. This was the first City that the
Turks possessed in Europe, it being surprised by Solomon, Son to Orchanes, in
Anno 1358. Here the Beglerbegh of the Sea has his residence. A little below
Gallipoli is the streightest passage of the Hellespont, a place formerly famous
for Xerxes his Bridge, but especially for the two Castles of Sesto, on the
European side; and Abydo, opposite to it on the Asian shore, of note for the
Loves of Hero and Leander; which Castles are now called the Dardanelli, and
command the passage, and are the security or Bulwark of Constantinople on this,
as those on the Thracian Bosphorus are on the other. 3. Caridia, seated on the
Thracian Chersonese, opposite to the Isle of Lemnos, as also to Troas in Asia,
and therefore now called St. George's Arm. 4. Abdera, the Birthplace of
Democritus, who spent his time in Laughing. 5. Pera, a Town of the Genoueses,
opposite to Constantinople. 6. Galata, also opposite to Constantinople, from
which it is parted by a River, wherein is found a good Harbor for Shipping;
and here all the Western Christians, as English, French, Dutch, and Venetian
Merchants have their common residence, intermixed with Jews, Grecians,
Armenians, and some few Turks: And lastly, Constantinople, the now Metropolitan
City of all Greece, the Seat of the Grand Signior, and formerly of the
Emperors of the East; first built by Pausanias a Lacedemonian Captain, about
660 years before the Birth of Christ. It is a City very commodiously seated for
an Universal Empire, overlooking Europe and Asia, commanding the Euxine or
Black Sea, the Hellespont, and Sea of Marinara or Propontis; on the upper part
of which, and near the Thracian Bosphorus, it is seated, where it has a Haven
so deep and capacious, that the Turks for its excellency call it the Port of
the World, so that for strength, plenty, and commodity, no place can compare to
it. This City is in form Triangular; its Walls are composed of Stone and Brick,
equally intermixed, to which it has 24 Gates for entrance, whereof 5 regard
the Land, and 19 the Water, being about 16 miles in compass; and supposed, with
Pera and Galata adjoining to it, and Scutari on the Asian side, to contain
about 700000 living Souls, good part of which are Christians and Jews; and it
would be far more populous, were it not for the Plague, which like a Tertian
Ague here reigns every third year, and sometimes oftener. This City is adorned
with many magnificent Buildings, both public and private, as also with curious
Statues, and other such like Ornaments, which were brought out of Rome, and
other parts. There is no City in the World makes so stately a show, if beheld
from the Sea, or adjoining Mountains, as this does, whose lofty and beautiful
Cypress Trees are so intermixed with the Buildings, that it seems to
represent a City in a Wood, whose seven aspiring Heads (for on so many Hills it
is seated,) are most of them crowned with magnificent Mosques, all of white
Marble; in form round, and coupled above, being finished at the top with
gilded Spires, some having two, some four, and some six adjoining Turrets, of
a great height, and very slender: so that there is no City in the World has a
more promising Object, and being entered, so much deceives the expectation,
having many vacant places, several rows of Buildings, consisting only of Shops,
the Houses not fair, lofty, nor uniform; the Streets exceeding narrow and ill
contrived; yet here are many stately Houses, where the Great persons reside;
also many Canns for Merchants, and abundance of Mosques, amongst which that of
Sancta Sophia is the chief, once a Christian Temple. To every one of the
principal Mosques does belong public Bag^io's, Hospitals with Lodgings,
Santons, and Ecclesiastical Persons, which are endowed with competent Revenues:
the inferior Mosques for the most part are built square, many of them
Pent-houses, with oper Galleries, where on extraordinary times they pray. The
number of Mosques of all sorts, including Scutara, Para, Galata, and the
Buildings that border the Bosphorus, are said to be about 8000. This Temple of
St. Sophia is almost every Friday, (which is their Sabbath) visited by the
Grand Signior, by reason of its being so near his Seraglia, which is divided
from the rest of the City by a lofty Wall, containing in circuit about three
miles, wherein are stately Groves of Cypresses intermixed with delightful
Gardens, artificial Fountains, variety of Fruits, and curious Plains. The
Buildings are low, but rich and stately, with several fair Courts one within
another; and to the South Side does join the Grand Signiors Palace, in which
are also several large Courts, and stately Structures. On the left hand of one
of the Courts the Divano is kept, where the Bassa's of the Port administer
Justice; out of the second Court is a passage into a third, into which
Christians are not permitted entrance, but upon great favor: on the North-side
stands the Grand Signiors Cabinet, in form of a stately Summer House, having a
private passage from his Seraglio; and from this place he takes Barge to
delight himself on the Water. Not far from the Palace is a spacious place,
encompassed with Houses, called the Hippodrom by the Ancients, and by the
Turks, Almidan; where every Friday the Spachies of the Court play at Giocho di
Canni, that is, they are mounted on Horses, and ride after one another,
throwing Darts at each other, which they endeavor to avoid by their hasty
turning.

The Black Sea is distant from Constantinople about 15 miles; it is much
troubled with Ice in the Winter, neither is it so Salt as other Seas: and here
the Turks forbid Traffic to Foreigners, there being no passage into it but by
Rivers; neither this passage of the Bosphorus has been always, but forced by
violence of Streams that fell into the overcharged Euxine; where it rusheth
into the Bosphorus there are two Rocks, formerly called Cyancae and
Symplegades, so near, that at a distance they seem but one. Here upon the top
of a Rock, encompassed with the Sea, stands a Pillar of white Marble called
Pompeys Pillar; the Bosphorus is in length about 20 miles, but very narrow, the
broadest place not exceeding a mile.

The Dispositions, Manners, etc. of the Turks.
Before I pass to the other Province in Greece, a word or two as to the Manners,
Dispositions, Religions, etc. of the Turks. They are for the most part of a
good complexion, full-bodied, proportionable, and of good statures; they keep
the hair of their Heads shaved, only a lock on the hinder part; but their
Beards they wear at full length, which with them is a sign of Gravity and
freedom, they not allowing their Slaves to wear Beards; they are subtle, and of
a quick wit, are generally very courteous to Strangers, but bear an inveterate
hatred against Christians; they are exceeding jealous of their Wives, denying
them the liberty of the Streets, or going to their Mosques; their Salutations
are with an inclination of the head and body, laying their hands on their
bosoms; they use much Perfumes in their Garments, and all of them affect
clealiness so religiously, that besides customary Lotions, and daily
frequenting Baths, they never so much as make water, but they wash their hands
and privities, at which business they couch to the Earth, fearing their
Garments should be defiled with any of their Excrements, which is held a
pollution and hindrance to the acceptance of Prayer; and if they bath not
twice or thrice a week, they are esteemed Nasty: they use not much exercise,
loving a Sedentary life, but delight in riding; yet generally they have some
Trade, which they employ part of the day in, even the Grand Signior.

Their Food.
Their Food is gross, refusing all dainties for a piece of fat Mutton, which
they boil in Rice; and with Pease, Rice, and Mutton, they make Pottage; they
abstain from Blood, Hogs-flesh, and things strangled, neither care they for
Fish or Fowl, which are here numerous and so gentle, that they will suffer
themselves to be taken: they have neither Tables nor Stools, but sit upon the
Floor (which is covered with Tapestry, or the like) cross-legg'd; their Dishes
are made with feet, and their Spoons have long handles like Ladles. Their
common drink is Water, also Sherbet, Vsaph, but above all Coffee, which is held
in great esteem. As to their Sciences and Trades, they are not over ingenious,
nor knowing, contenting themselves with such as are necessary for them. By
their Law they are exhorted to marry for the propagation of their Religion,
every man being allowed four Wives, which must be of the Turkish Religion,
besides as many Concubines (which are Slaves, and of any Religion) as he is
able to keep; they buy their Wives of their Parents, recording the Contract;
and in their Nuptial Rites they observe many Ceremonies, some of which I shall
take notice of. The day before the Marriage is spent in Feasting, the Man his
Friends, and the Woman hers, who at night bath and anoint her, and so depart
till the next Morning, and then she is dressed in her best Apparel; all things
being ready, the Relations and Friends of the Bridegroom, who are all mounted
on Horseback, ride two by two to the Brides to conduct her to the Bridegrooms,
who is also ready mounted and richly habited, according to his quality, to
receive his never seen wife, who (after the Nuptial Ceremonies are performed)
is conducted to the Bride-chamber, where she is undrest and made ready for his
enjoyment; the rest of the day is spent in feasting and merriment. By the Law,
he is obliged to show equal respect to all his Wives, and to give them due
benevolence alike, and upon failure they may justly complain to the Cadi, who
will grant her a Divorce; but the Women are little better treated than Slaves,
giving their Husbands respect and reverence due to a Master, not sitting at
meat with him, nor meddling with Household affairs, nothing being required, but
to please their Husbands, to live peaceably together, and to nurse their
Children.

Their Religion.
Their Religion is contained in their Alcoran, made by Mahomet their Prophet; it
is written in Arabic Rhyme, and forbid by him to be written or read in any
other Language; which said Book is so reverenced by them, that it is not
touched with unwashed hands; they call it the Book of Glory, The Alcoran now
printed in English.
and Guide to Paradise; They believe in God, and hold Jesus Christ for a
greater Prophet than Moses, but Mahomet for the greatest; they deny the
Divinity of Christ, yet confess him to be the Son of the Virgin Mary; that he
was conceived by the smell of a Rose, which the Angel Gabriel brought her, and
that she bore him at her Breasts; that he was free from the Temptations of the
Devil and Original sin: he is called in the Alcoran, the Word and Breath of
God, said to raise up the dead, to give sight to the blind, to cure the lame,
to give speech to the dumb, to know the secrets of hearts, and that by his
Virtues his Disciples wrought Miracles, and that he shall return to Judgment
about 40 years before the end of the World to judge, save, and condemn
Christians, as Mahomet shall do them. By their Law they are obliged to pray
seven times a day; their Sabbath is on Friday, which they strictly observe, and
are very devout at their worship; and at the doors of the Mosques they put off
their Shoes, as a place too holy to defile with dirty Shoes; and the Women are
not permitted to come into their Mosques, but have apartments for themselves.
They observe two Solemn times in the year, which are both Lents, one is called
Ramdan, which continues a Month, and the other Byram, which lasts three
days. They admit of no Hell for any, but those who believe not Mahomet; but
allow of a Purgatory, which holds but till Doomsday, where in their Graves
(which they say is the place of Purgatory) they are inflicted with pain by a
bad Angel, whose fury is lessened by a good one, according to the life the
party led when living; and at the day of Doom, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet,
shall bring their several Followers to Judgment, and intercede for them; and
that Cain, the first Murderer, shall be the Leader of the Damned; and all
shall receive the reward due unto them, the Just into Paradise, and the Damned
into Hell, where they shall be tormented for ever; yet they hold a distinction
amongst the Damned, for those that have committed no great sins shall go into
Purgatory, from whence they shall shortly be delivered. Paradise, according to
Mahomets description, is a place of all delight, where they shall have stately
Palaces richly furnished, Christalline Rivers, Fields and Trees always in
their verdure, whose Fruits shall be delightful to the taste, and their shape
pleasing to the eye; under whose fragrant shades they shall spend their time
with amorous and handsome Virgins; not such as have lived in the World, but on
purpose created for them, whose lost Virginities shall daily be restored to
them, and that they shall ever continue young, the Men at the Age of 30, and
the Women at 15; and that Boys of Divine features shall administer to them, and
set before them all varieties of curious Meats.

Their Justice.
Their Justice is grounded on their Alcoran, in which they observe this Rule, To
do as they would be done unto. Their Judges for the most part are always
Ecclesiastical Persons, amongst which there are many Orders, of which the chief
is the Mufty, who decides great Cases, and to him lie Appeals, and his Decrees
the Grand Turk will not question: then the Cady, who has over him the
Monlacady, or Lord Chief Justice. All the Judges, except the Mufty, are limited
to set Precincts, and if they are found corrupt, are severely punished; the
execution of their Justice is very severe and cruel, and very speedy; and if
the business be matter of fact, upon the least complaint the Parties and
Witnesses are brought before the Judge, and according to evidence and Justice,
gives his Sentence, which in few hours is executed; and a False-witness, if
convicted, suffers the same punishment as the accused should have done, if
found guilty.

Their Forces.
The Great Turk is very powerful in his Forces; his Infantry are of two sorts,
the one raised out of Towns and Cities, and the other is the Janissaries, in
which he puts the greatest confidence. Their Cavalry are also of two sorts, one
the Spahyglans, from whom are chosen the Troops which guard the Grand Signiors
person, and the other the Spahy-Tymariots, which are such as hold Land free
from all Duties, in lieu of which they are obliged to furnish him with 2, 3, 4,
5, 10, or more or less Men and Horses at their own charge, as occasion
requires, according to the quantity of Land they hold; and besides these there
are other sorts of Horsemen, who are Volontiers; some serving for devotion to
gain Paradise by dying for Mahomets Cause, others serving for the gains of the
booty and spoils of the Countries, and others to merit a Timar; and all are
very expert in Military affairs. As for their Sea Forces they are but small, as
not much minding it, most of them being Galleys; yet are they often found
troublesome to Christians.

Their Funerals.
Concerning their Funerals, so soon as Life is departed several of their Priests
are sent for, who after they have performed certain Ceremonies, and desired God
to have mercy on their Soul, they wash the Corpse, and wrap it in Linen, but
not tie it neither at head nor feet, then lay it on a Bier, setting a Turbant
at the upper end, and so carry it to the Grave; which for the poorer sort are
usually made by Highway-sides and in Fields, having two stones of white Marble,
one at the head and the other at the feet, with an Inscription concerning the
deceased; but the better sort have Sepulchers in their Gardens. As they are
thus carried to their Graves, some of the Dervices go before with lighted
Tapers, then follow the Priests singing, and after them their Relations and
Friends: their Graves are boarded on the sides and bottom instead of a Coffin,
and being laid in, are covered with another board to hinder the Earth from
falling, but high enough that one may kneel; for they hold that two terrible
and black Angels, which they call Gudequir and Mongir, do immediately come to
the Grave and unite the Soul to the Body, demanding how he has lived; and if
he gives them satisfaction they depart, and two white Angels come and protect
him unto the day of Judgment, one sitting at his head, and the other at his
feet; but if he can give no good account of his life, then the terrible black
Angels grievously torment him until the day of Doom. A Purgatory is so
obnoxious unto them, that in their Maettins they beseech God to free them from
the examination of those terrible black Angels, as also from the punishment of
the Grave, and their evil Journey. But to proceed to the other Provinces in
Greece.

Province of Macedonia.
The Province of MACEDONIA is at present severed into three parts, viz. into the
Territory of Jamboli toward the North, whose chief places are Heraclea,
Bylazora, Joro, and Sydero-Caspae, famous for its rich Mines of Gold and
Silver. The second part is Camenolitaria, being its Southern parts, and on the
borders of Thessaly; its chief places are, 1. Pidna, seated on the influx of
the River Alaicmon, which Town was besieged and took by Cassander, in which
Siege he took Olympias the Mother, Roxane the Wife, and Hercules the Heir of
Alexander the Great; all which he put to death. 2. Pella, seated on the same
shore, the Birth place of the said Alexander. 3. Edissa, and 4. Scydra, both
Midland Cities. The third part is called Migdonia, or the particular Macedonia,
lying in the midst of the Province; its chief places are 1. Salonichi,
anciently called Thessalonica; to the People of which City St. Paul wrote two
of his Epistles; it is seated on the Egean Sea, is very populous, inhabited
with Christians, Turks, and Jews; but chiefly with the last, who are here more
numerous than in any other part of Turkey, and is a place of great Commerce,
and is the fairest and richest City in all Macedonia. 2. Stagira, the
Birthplace of Aristotle; 3. Pallene, sacred to the Muses; and 4. Neopolis, on
the confines of Romania.

Province of Albania.
The Province of ALBANIA lies on the Adriatic Sea, famous for being the
Country of that eminent and brave Soldier George Castriot, called by the Turks
Scanderbeg; its chief places are 1. Durazzo, a place of great strength. 2.
Valona, a good City seated on the Sea-shoar, opposite to Otranto in Naples. 3.
Croja, under whose Walls Amurath the Second, that damned wretch; finished his
wicked life 4. Scutari, or Scodra, famous for its resisting the Turks: and 5.
Belgrado; and 6. Albanopoli.

Province of Thessaly.]
The Province of THESSALY, now called JANNA, is a Country no less fertile than
pleasant; it lies South of Macedonia, and is famous first for the Hill
Olympus, which for its height, is by the Poets taken for Heaven; then for its
pleasant Vale of Tempe, called the Garden of the Muses: and thirdly, for the
Pharsalian Fields, where the Empire of the World was disputed in two great
Battles; the one betwixt Caesar and Pompey, and the other between Brutus and
Casstus on the one side, and Anthony and Augustus on the other. The chief
places in this Province are, 1. Armiro, now the Seat of a Turkish Sangiac. 2.
Larissa, seated on a fair River, which at a small distance falls into the Gulf
of Salonichi. 3. Tricca, and Pharsalis.

Province of Epire.
The Province of EPIRE, now called CANINA, is very Mountainous, has for its
chief places (possessed by the Turks) Praveza and Lart^, both Sea-Towns; and
the chief places in the Venetians possessions, are Torre de Butrinto and Perga,
both Sea-Towns and places of good account; opposite and nigh to which is the
Isle of Corfou. Mount Pindus.
In this Province is Mount Pindus, sacred to Apollo and the Muses; and here are
also the Acroceraunean Hills, so called for their being so subject to
Thunderclaps.

Province of Achaia.
The Province of ACHAIA, now called LIVADIA, washed on the East with the Aegean
Sea; it is divided into these parts, viz. Aetolia, Attica, Baeotia, Locris,
Megaris, Doris, and Phocis, in which parts are several good Cities and Towns;
amongst which are 1. Athens, now Sitines, more famous for its Antiquity than
any thing else, being now scarce any other than a Fishers Town; but formerly a
large, rich and stately City, the Nursery of Learning, and a place from whence
all Arts and Sciences spread themselves all over Aeurope. 2. Thebes, now
Stives, seated on the River Gephisus, famous for the Wars here made between
Polynices, and Eteocles, Sons to Prince Oedipus; it was sacked by the Macedons,
after which it was re-edified by Cassander, but of no account nor beauty to
what it was formerly. Next to this City are the Streights not above 25 foot
broad. 3. Lepanto, chief of Aetolia, seated in the bottom of a Gulf so called,
and where Augustus and Anthony sought for the Empire of the World; and where
more lately was that signal Battle between the confederate Christians and the
Turks. This City enjoys a good Trade, and affords several good Commodities,
as Silk, Oils, Cottons, Galls, Anniseeds, Wax, Honey, Currants, Wines, etc. 4.
Marathon, of note for the Victory of Miltiades, gained against the powerful
Army of Darius, which consisted of 100000 Foot, and 10000 Horse. 5. Megara,
where Euclid taught Geometry. 6. Platea, nigh to which was fought an exceeding
great Battle between the Grecians and the Persians. 7. Delphos, famous for the
Temple of Apollo, which was destroyed by the Phocians, who took from it 60 Tuns
of Gold. 8. Sparta, formerly of great Account; and 9. Micenae, famous for the
Temple of Juno, as also for the habitation of Agamemnor. Nigh to this City was
the Lake of Lerno, where Hercules slew the Lernian Seven-headed Hydra. In this
Province is the famous Temple of Aesculapius; where is also the Mount Helicon
and Parnassus, much famoused by the Poets; and here are also those pleasant
Arcadian Plains, and the places where the Olympian Games were solemnized, with
several other memorable places of Antiquity.

Peloponnesus, or the Morea.
PELOPONNESVS, now called MOREA, is a Peninsula bounded with the Sea, except
where it joyneth to Achaia by an Isthmus of about six miles in breadth; the
whole Peninsula is about 600 miles in compass, and contained once many
flourishing Provinces, as ARCADIA, ARGORIS, ACHAIA PROPRIA, ELIS, LACONIA, and
MESSENIA; but at present it is one sole Turkish Province. The People were
accounted the chief of all the Grecians, and gave Rules to the rest as
subordinate unto them. The chief places are, 1. Corinte, seated at the foot of
the Acrocorinthian Hills, hard by the Fountain Pyrene; a small Town, and of
little note to what it was, being out of the ruins of the ancient and famous
Corinth; which was a place of great strength and power. 2. Misistra, once of
good account: 3. Thalana, nigh unto which is Mount Tenarus, from whence
Hercules drew Cerbenus; as also the Lake Lerna, where the said Hercules slew
the Monster Hydra. 4. Selassia, where Antigonus vanquished Cl^omenus. 5.
Nemaea, where Hercules slew the Lions: 6. Olympia, very famous for the Statue
of Jupiter Olympicus, which was 60 Cubits high, and of a proportionate
thickness, being made of Gold and Ivory; and in honor to this Jupiter were the
Olympic Games instituted by Hercules, and performed on the Plains of this
City. 7. Megalopolis, the Birthplace of that eminent Historian Polybius. 8.
Mantinea, nigh unto which the Theban Army, which consisted of 30000 Foot and
3000 Horse routed the Army of the Athenians and Spartans, which consisted of
2000 Horse, and 25000 Foot, where that gallant Leader Epaminondas received his
deaths wound. 9. Lacedemon, 10. Argos, 11. Thebes, now ruinated; but the chief
places for Traffic now remaining, ar^ 12. Modon, 13. Petras, and 14. Coron,
all three Cities seated on the Sea-shoar, subject to the same Customs, and
found to afford diverse good Commodities, the product of Turkey.

The ISLES seated in the GRECIAN or AEGEAN, IONIAN and ADRIATIC Seas.
IN these Seas there are several Isles, many of which are of good note, and
well frequented by Merchants; most of which are in part, if not altogether in
the possession of the Grand Signior; yet the Venetians are not quite expunged.
But the Turk has divided all or most of them into eight Beglerbyats, and 60
and odd Sangiacats, that is, into general and particular Governments.

The AEGEAN or GRECIAN ISLES.
Isle of Negroponte.
The chief of the Aegean Isles are 1. NEGROPONTE, in the power of the Turks, in
circuit 365 miles; Its chief places are 1. Negroponte, seated in a Gulf so
called; 2. Caristo, and Dion, a Seaport Town.

Isle of Stalimene.
2. STALIMENE, of old LEMNOS, about 100 miles in circuit, well peopled by
Grecians, except three Towns which the Turks keep strongly fortified to keep
them in awe. Its chief Town is Lemnos, or Mirina, but of no great note. Here is
a Sovereign Mineral against infection, called Terra Sigillata; the Earth
thereof is made into small Pellets, and sealed with the Turks Stamp, and so
dispersed and sold to Merchants for an excellent Antidote.

Isles of Sporades and Cyclades.
3. The SPORADES and CYCLADES are a great body of several small Isles dispersed
about this Sea or Archipelago, and lie so thick, that they oft-times become
dangerous to Seamen, especially in Storms. The chief of these Isles are, 1.
Milo, so called for its abounding in Honey; it is about 60 miles in compass,
very fertile, and affords store of Grain and Oil, but no Wine: its chief place
is so called. 2. Tira, 3. Tiresio, 4. Nio, 5. Stapalia, about 50 miles in
circuit, whose chief place is so called. 6. Morgo, 7. Nicsia, about 75 miles in
compass. 8. Livila, 9. Zinara, 10. Raclia, 11. Siphano, 12. Micone, 13. Teno,
14. Helena, 15. Engia, in a Gulf so called; all small Isles. 16. Fermenia,
about 60 miles in circuit. 17. Zea, about 50 miles in compass. 18. Andri, about
80 miles in compass, not far from Negroponte, and is found to afford the same
Commodities; its chief place bears the same name. 19. Coos, more toward Asia
minor, whose chief Town is so called, and is inhabited by Turks, but the rest
by Grecians. In this Isle was born Apelles, that famous Painter; as also
Hippocrates, that revived Physic when it was lost; and here Aesculapius had
his Temples and Altars, where he was worshipped. 20. Delos, famous for the
Temple of Apollo, as also for a Custom here used, not to permit the birth of
Children, nor dying of People, being sent to Rhena, an Isle not far distant.
21. Namfio, 22. Policandro, 23. Pira, 24. Chiero, 25. Pergolo, 26. Serphino,
27. Pario, 28. Sirna, and 29. Sidrille; all small Isles of little note.

Isle of Candia.
4. CANDIA, or CRETA, (now in the Turks possession) an Isle seated in the Mouth
of the Aegean Sea, in compass about 590 miles, of a fertile Soil, and affords
to Merchants several good Commodities; but Corn is not over plentiful, which
defect is supplied from Peloponnesus. It is very populous, and has many good
Towns; the chief of which are 1. Candia, the Bulwark of Christendom, till
lately gained from the Venetians; in which Siege it was ruinated, being before
a good City. 2. Suda, a Maritim Town, enjoying a commodious Haven, which by the
Turks is well fortified and defended by two Castles. 3. Canea, and 4. Sittia.
In this Isle lived Strabo, that famous Cosmographer.

Isle of Samothracia.
5. SAMOTHRACIA, a small Isle, of note for being the Birthplace of Samo, one of
the Sybils; and Pythagoras, that Divine Philosopher.

Isle of Sciro, Schiati, etc.
6. In the Aegean Isles, or Archipelago, are these Isles, 1. SCIRO, Northwards
of Negroponte, from which it is not far distant. 2. SCHIATI; 3. PELAGMISI,
toward the Gulf of Salonichi. 4. TASSO, a small Isle, seated in the entrance
of the Gulf of Contessa in Macedonia: and 6. LENIBRO, also a small Isle, not
far from Lemnos.

The IONIAN ISLES.
Isle of Zante.
The principal of the IONIAN Isles, are 1. ZANTE, about 50 miles in circuit, and
about 7 Leagues from Peloponnesus, under the obedience of the Venetians; it is
wonderful fruitful in Oils and Wines, but especially in Currants. The chief
City bears the name of the Isle, a place not very large nor beautiful, but
fortified with a strong Castle, which commands not only the Town and Harbor,
but a good part round about it. The Isle is much troubled with Earthquakes, in
regard of which they build their Houses very low.

Isle of Zephalonia.
2. ZEPHALONIA, about 120 miles in compass, of a fertile Soil, and affords the
same Commodities as Zante; but the Currants are smaller, and not so good. Its
chief place bears the name of the Isle. 2. Augustali, 3. Guiscardo, and 4.
Nollo.

Isle of Corfu.
3. CORFV, about 50 miles in length, and 24 in breadth, seated 12 miles from
Epirus, and very convenient for the Venetians, who are the Masters of it, being
in the Center of their Maritim Territories. It is fruitful in Oil, Honey, Wax,
and some other Commodities; its chief City is so called, and is now reputed to
be one of the Bulwarks of Christendom, and the Key of the Venetian State, being
held impregnable, oft-times having resisted the fury of the Turks. It is seated
at the foot of a Mountain, on the Summit of which are built two strong Castles,
seated on high Rocks, which are as strongly fortified; the other place of note
are Castello, St. Angelo, and Pagiopoli.

Isle of Cerigo.
4. CERIGO, 60 miles in compass, about five miles from Cape Malo in the Morea.
It is defended by Rocks, which in themselves are inaccessible, out of which the
Inhabitants take abundance of Marble: it has many Havens, but none commodious
for Shipping. Its chief Town bears the same name, where was formerly a Temple
dedicated to Venus, out of which Helena the wife of Menelaus was ravished, and
stolen by Paris.

Isle of St. Maura.
5. SAINT MAVRA, where stood a Temple dedicated to Apollo, where Mad-brain'd and
unfortunate Lovers were cured of their phrenzies, by casting themselves
headlong into the Sea. Its chief place bears the name of the Isle, and is
inhabited by Jews that were driven out of Spain; and this of all the Ionian
Isles is under the Turks obedience.

Isles of Strivalis.
6. STRIVALIS, seated opposite to Messina, two small Isles of no great account,
inhabited by some few Greek Colonies, or Friars, who never go out of the Isles;
neither do they permit Women amongst them, but as they die, have a new supply;
they live by their labor, their diet is on Herbs, Roots, Oil, Olives, and the
like. Flesh they are denied, but may eat Fish sometimes.

Isle of Val de Campara.
7. VAL DE CAMPARA, about 56 miles in compass, Northwards of Zephalonia, famous
for the Birth place of Ulysses. This Isle affords those Commodities that are
found in Zant, and the Currants are the best and fairest, but in less
quantities.

The ADRIATIC ISLES.
The Adriatic Isles.
The Adriatic Sea is in length 700 miles, and about 140 in breadth; the
Venetians are Masters of them, to whom the Duke is espoused every Ascension day
by casting in of a Ring; a Ceremony performed with great state.

Isles of Zara, Vegea, etc.
The Islands seated in this Sea are not many, and those that be are neither
great nor famous; the chief of which are ZARA, a small Isle, but the chiefest
for Traffic, having diverse good Harbors. It is fruitful in Wines, Grains,
Cattle, and some Oils. 2. VEGEA, fertile in Wine and Pulse, about 10 Leagues in
compass. 3. LESINA, about 50 Leagues in compass, being the largest of all the
Adriatic Isles, very fertile throughout; its chief Town being so called, a
place though unwalled, yet of good strength, by reason of its strong Fortress.
4. CHERSO, well stored with Cattle. 5. CVRZOLO, a fair, fruitful, and populous
Isle, whose chief place is so called. 6. GRISSA, about 100 miles in circuit, an
Isle rich in Salt Pits. 7. ABSIRTIDES; 8. LISSA; 9. ARBE; and 10. BRAZZIA, with
some others of no great note.

The chief Rivers in Turkey in Europe are the Drin, the Alsea, the Penea, the
Wardar, the Mariza, and the Don, or Danube, which of all others is the
strongest and most considerable; the others being, for the most part, only
famous in Antiquity.

The Kingdom of FRANCE, with its Estates and Provinces, as they are divided
into twelve General Governments, or 3 times 4, according to their situation,
to wit, Four on this side the LOIRE, whose Provinces, Parts, and chief places
are PICARDY, Higher; as True Picardy, Amiens. St. Quintin.
Vermandois,
Lower; as Ponthieu, Abbeville, Calais.
Boulenois, Vexin, -- Roven, or Roa^.
NORMANDY, Higher; as Caux, Havre de Grace. Normandy, Lifieux.
Lower; as Auge, Caen, Alenson.
Bessin, Bayeux. Coutantin, Coutance;

The ISLE of FRANCE; where are Isle of France, -- Paris. Beauvaisis, Beauvais.
Valois, Senlis. Soissonnois, Soissons. Brie, Meaux.
CHAMPAIGNE; where are Remois, -- Reims. Champaigne, Troyes. Ch^^loons.
Bassigny, Langres. Senonois. Sen.

Four upon and about the LOIRE; whose Provinces, Parts, and chief places, are
BRETAIGNE, Higher, Rennes. St. Maloes.
Mean, Nantes, Vennes,
Lower, Morlaix, Breast.

ORLEANOIS, On this side the LOIRE, le Maine, -- le Main. Perch, Mortalgne.
Beauce, Chartes.
Upon the LOIRE, Nivernois, Nevers. Orleanois, Orleans. Blaisois, Blois.
Touraine, Tours. Anjou, Angiers.
Beyond the LOIRE, Poictou, Poictiers. Aunis, Rochell. Angoumeis, Angoulesme.
Berry, -- Burges.

BOURGOGNE, or BURGUNDY, Bourgogne, -- Bourgogne, Dijon. Autun, Beaune.
Countries adjacent, Challonnois, Challon. Auxerrois, Auxerre. Bresse, Bourg.

LIONNOIS, and AUVERGNE, Lionnois, Lionnois, -- Lions. Forez. Monbrizon.
Auvergne, Bourbonnois, Moulins. Anvergne, Clermont. la March, Gueret.

Four beyond the LOIRE, whose Provinces, Parts, and chief places are GUIENNE,
and GUASCOGNE, Guienne, Guienne, -- Pourdeaux, Saintonge, Sainter. Piregort,
Perigueux. Limofin, Limoges. Rovergue, Rodez. Quercy, Cahors. Agenois, Again.
Guascogne, Bazadois, -- Bazas, Albret, Nerac. Condomois, Condom. Armaignac,
Aux. Guascogne, Air. les Lands, Dax. Basque, Bayone. Lower Navarre, St.
Palais. Bearn, Pau. Lescar.
Bigorre, Tarbe. Comminges, St Bertrand,

LANGUEDOC, Higher, Toulousan, -- Thoulouse. Carcassez, Carcassone. Foix, Foix.
Albigeois, Alby.
Lower, Narbone, -- Narbone. Beziers, Beziers. Nismes, Monpelier, Nismes.

The Severnes, Givaudan, -- Mende. Velay, le Puy. Vivarais, Viviers.
DAUPHINE, Lower, Vienne, Valence.
Higher, Grenoble, Embrun.
Part of Piedmont, -- Pignerol.
PROVENCE, Aix, Arles, Marscille, Forcalquier, Tolon, or Thoson.

To which at present may be added LORRAINE; where are Barrois, Bar-le-Duc, St.
Michael.
Lorraine, Metz, Toul, Verdun, and Nancy.

And diverse small Estates and Principalities Between Dauphin and Provence, the
Country of -- Avignon. In the Country of Avignon, the Principality of Orange,
In Bresse, -- the Sovereignty of Dombes, Trevoux, Toward the Low Country, the
Principality of -- Sedan. the Principality of Arches, Charleville.





FRANCE, with its Four Governments (and Provinces therein contained) on this
side the Loire; which are Toward the Sea; as PICARDY, as it is divided in the
Lower; where are Bousenois, Calnis, Ardres, Boulognois.
Ponthieu, Monstrevil, Rue, Abbeville, St. Vallery.

Mean, True Picardy, Amient, Doulens, Corbie.
Santerre, Perone, Mondidier, Roye.

Higher, Vermandois, St. Quintin, Castelet, Hem.
Tierrasche, Guise, Fere, Capelle, Vervins, Marle.


NORMANDY, as it is divided into the Higher; where are Caux, Candebes, Dieppe,
Havre de Grace.
Vexin Normandy, Roven, or Roan, Gisors, Pont de l'Arche.
Normandy, or Champagne, Eureux, Lifieux, Laigle, Hanfleur.

Lower, Auge, Caen, Alenson, Seez, Falaise.
Bessin, Bayeux, St. Lo, Vire.
Coutantin, Coutance, Carenten, Cherbourg, Granville.
Auranchin, Auranches, Mortain, Pone Orson, St. Michael.



Inland; as The ISLE of FRANCE, with its parts In the Middle; where are Isle
of France, Paris, St. Denis.
Valois, Senlis, Crespy in Valois.

Toward NORMANDY, Vexin Francois, Pont Oyse, Maigny, Chaumont, in Vexin.
Francois, St. Germain, in Lay, Poissy, Mante, Meulan, Breux, Monfort l'Amaury.

Toward la BEAUCE, Gastinois, Dourdan, Narnours.
Hurepoix, Moret, Melun, Corbeil.

Toward CHAMPAGNE, Brie Francoise, Menux, Chasteau Thierry.
Toward PICARDY, Beauvaisis, Beauvais, Clermont in Beauvaisis.
Soissonnois, Soissons, Compeigne, Noyon.
Laonnois, Laon, Chauny:


CHAMPAGNE, with its parts Toward the LOW COUNTRY, as The Principality of
Chasteau Regnaud, Sedan, Charleville.
Retelois, etc. Retel, Rocroix, Donchery, Messieres, Mouson.

True CHAMPAGNE, Remois, Reims, Fisines.
Champagne, Troyes, Chaalons, Espernay.
Pertois, Vitry le Francois, St. Menehoult.

Toward LORRAINE, Valage, Bar upon Aube, St. Disier. Langres,
Bassigny, Chaumont in Bassigny, Joinville.

Toward the ISLE of FRANCE; Senonols, Sens, Joigny, St. Florentin, Tonnerre,
Monte reau fautyoune,
Brie Champagnoise, Provins, Sesanne, in Brie.





FRANCE, with its Four Governments (and Provinces therein contained) upon and
about the LOIRE; which are Below the LIRE, as BRETAIGNE; which may be divided
into the Higher, Rennes, Vitray, Dol, St. Maloes, Dinan.
Mean, Nantes, Vennes, Ploermes, St. Brien, Lamballe, Auray, Hannebout, Blavet,
or Port Louys.
Lower, Lantriguet, or Treguier, Leondoul, or St Pol de Leon, Morlaix, Breast,
Quimpercorentia, or Cornevaille, Quimperlay.

ORLEANOIS; under the name of which may be comprised the Provinces or
Countries; as they lie On this side the LOIRE; as le Maine, le Mains, Mayenne,
Laval, Domfront.
Perch, Nogent le Retrou, Mortaigne, Vernevil,
la Beauce, Chartes, Estampes, Chasteau Dun, Vendosme.
Gastenois, -- Montargis. Nivernois, Nerves, la Charity, Clamecy, Donzy.

Upon the LOIRE, as Orleanois, Orleans, Gien.
Blaisois, -- Blois. Touraine, Tours, Amboise, Loches, Chinon.
Ajou, Angiers, Saumur, la Fleche.

Beyond the LOIRE, as Poictou, Poictiers, Maillezais, Luson, Chastelleraud,
Niort, Lusignan, Monmorillou, Partenay, Touars, Loudun, Richelieu,
Aunis, -- Rochell. Angoumols, -- Angoulesme. Berry, Burges, Issoudun, Chasteau
Roux, Remorentin, Argenton, Sancerre.
the Sovereignty of -- Bois belle.


Above the LOIRE, as BOURGOGNE, or BURGUNDY, which may be divided in the Duchy
of BOURGOGNE; where are Bourgogne, Dijon, Autun, Beaune, Aussone.
Challonnois, -- Challon. Masconnois, Mascon, Tornus.
Auxois, -- Semur. the Country of Montagne, Chastillon upon the Seine.
Countries adjacent; as Charollois, Auxerrois, Bresse, Bugey, and Veromey,
Balliage, Charolles. Auxerre. Bourge. Belley. Gex.


LIONNOIS, and AUVERGNE; which may be divided in LIONNOIS; where are Lionnois,
-- Lions. the Sovereignty of Dombes, Trevoux. Forez, Monbrizon, Roenne, St.
Estienne of Furens.
Beaujolois, -- Ville Franche.
AUVERGNE, where are Bourbonnois, Bourbon the Archambaul, Molins.
Nivernois in part, -- St. Pierre le Moutier. Auvergne, Lower, Cleremont in
Auvergne, Riom, Monferrand, Thiers.
Higher, Vic le Comte, St. Elour, Orilhac, Brioude, Issoire.

la March, Higher, -- Gueret. Lower, Dorat, Belac.






FRANCE, with its Four Governments (and Provinces therein contained) beyond the
Loire; which are About the GARONNE, as GUIENNE, and GUASCOGNE,
GUIENNE; where are Saintonge, Saints, St. Jean of Angely, Brouage.
Guienne, Bourdeaux, Blaye.
Perigort, Perigueux, Bergerac, Sarlat.
Agenois, Again, Toneina.
Limosin, Limoges, Brive, Tulle.
Quercy, Cahors, Montalbon, Figeac.
Rovergue, Rhodez, Ville Franche of Rovergue, Vabres.

GUASCOGNE; where are Bazados, Bazas, St. Foy.
Lanes, -- Dax. Guascogne, Air, St. Saver.
Albret, -- Nerac. Condomois, -- Condom. Armaignac, Aux, Lectoure.
Coming, St. Bertrand, Lombes.
Conserans, -- St Licer. Bigorre, -- Tarbe. Bearn, Pau, Lescar, Oleron, Ortes.
Lower Navarre, -- St. Palais: Basque, -- Bayonne.

Between the GARONNE, and the RHOSNE, as LANGUEDOC, which is divided into
Higher LANGUEDOC; where are Toulousan, Toulousa, Montauban, la Vaur.
Albigeoi^, Alby, Castres.
Auraguais, Castelnau darry; St. Papoul.
Foix, Foix, Pamie^, Mirepoix, Rieux.

Lower LANGUEDOC; where are Quarter of Narbone, Narbone, Aleth, Limouth,
Carcassone, St. Pons de Tomiere^,
Quarter of Beziers, Beziers, Agde, Pesenns, Lodere.
Quarter of Nismes, Monpellier, Nismes, Beaucaire, Aiguesmortes,

SEVENNES; where are Gevaudan, Mende, Mervcich, or Mervejoss.
Velay, -- le Puy. Vivarais, Viviers, le Pond St. Esprit, Uzes.


Between the RHOSNE, and the ALPS, as DAUPHINE, with its Parts Toward the
RHOSNE, or ROANE, Viennois, -- Vienna. Valentinois, Higher, Valence, Romans,
St. Marcelin.
Lower, Crest, Montelimar.

Tricastin, -- St. Pol Trois chaux.
In the midst of the Country Grisivaudan, -- Grenoble. Diois, Die. Baronies, le
Buijz,
Toward the Alps, Embrunois, Embrun. Gapensois, Gap. Briansonnois, --
Brianson.

PROVENCE, with its Places Toward the Rhosne, or Roane, Arles, Tarascon.
Upon the Sea, Marseille, Toulon, St. Tropes, Frejuls, Antibe, Crace, Vence.
In the midst of the Country, Aix, Salon, Apt, Folcalquier, Riell Dragnignan.
Toward the Alps, Sisteron, Digne, Senez, Glandeve.




Estates, Counties, Bishoprics, Cities, etc. taken and purchased by (and in
the Protection, Guard, and Possession of) the King of FRANCE, viz. In the
Estates of the CATHO LICK KING, to wit, In SPAIN, as The County of Rousillon;
where are Perpignan, Elne, Collioure, Salces, etc.
The County of Cerdagne, -- Puy, Cerda, etc. The Principality of Catalogne, and
County of Barcelone; where are Barcelona, Girona, Vich, Solsona, Urgel,
Manressa, Cardona, Cadegues, etc.

In the LOW COUNTRY, as Part of the County of Flanders, Gravelines, Wasten.
Part of the County of Artois, Arras, Hesdin, Bappaumes.
Part of the County of Haynaut, Landrochy. Part of the Duchy of Luxenbourg.
Thionville, Damvillers.

In the FRENCH COUNTY, as Part of the Balliages of Gray, Vesoul, Lure, etc.
Part of the Balliages of Salins, Arbois, Poligny, Bletterans, St. Amor, Joux,
etc.


In diverse Lands and Principalities, the most part of which are esteemed in the
Empire of GERMANY, to wit, In the Estate of LORRAIN, as The Duchy of Barrois,
Barle Duc, Ligny, St. Michael, Pont a Moosson.
The Duchy of Lorrain, Nancy, Mirecourt, Newchasted on the Meuse, Dieuze,
Sirke, etc.
The Bishopric of Metz, Vic, Moyen-Vic, Marsal, St. Avold, Alberstrof,
Espernay.

About LORRAIN, as The Principality of -- Sedan. The Principality of Arches, or
Charleville, Clermont, Stenay, Jametz.
The County of -- Biche.
In and about the PALATINATE of the RHINE, as Part of the Palatinate of the
Rhine, Bacharach, Creutznach, Altzheim, Oppenheim, Neustat, Landau, Cermosheim,
etc.
Part of the Archbishopric of Mayence, Mayence, Bingen, etc.
Part of the Bishopric of Worms, Worms. Part of the Bishopric of Spire,
Spire, Udenheim, or Philipsbour^.
Part of the Estate of Bade, Baden, Durlach, Pfortzheim, etc.

In ALSACE, or ALSATIA, as Low Alsace, Haguenau, Saverne, etc.
Higher Alsace, Colmar, Schlestat, Brisach, Newbourg, etc.
County of Pfirt, or Ferrette, and Country of Sungou, Ferrette, Tannes, Befort,
Blome, Landseror, etc.

About ALSACE, as The County of -- Monbeliard, etc. The Bishopric of Basle,
Porentru, St. U^sand, Dalsperg, or Delmont, etc.
The County of Reinfield, Reinfield, Lanffenbourg, Waldshout.
In the Duchy of Wirtenberg, Hohen-Wiel, In Piedmont, -- Pignerol, etc.

In ITALY, In the Estates of the Duke of SAVOY, to wit, In the Principality of
Piedmont, Turin, Suze, Avigliane, Chivas, Santja, Ast, Quierascq, Coni, Caours,
etc.
In the Marquisate of Saluces, Carmagnole, Demont.

In the Estates of MONFERRAT, viz. In the Dukedom of Savoy, -- Trin, etc. In
the Dukedom of Mantoua, Casal, Aqui.

On the River of GENES, The Principality of -- Monaco, or Morgues.


map of France blazon or coat of arms of the Isham baronetsRt. Worshipful Sr.
Justinian (...) of Lamport in Northampto^shire Baronet. (...) Mapp is Humbly
DD. by R. Blome

GENERAL MAPP of the KINGDOM of FRANCE. Designed by Monsieur Sanson,
Geographer to the French King.


FRANCE.
FRANCE is esteemed the most fertile and powerful Kingdom in Europe, and the
best, next to England, that can subsist without the help of others. It is
seated about the 45th degrees of Latitude, Its Situation.
which is in the midst of the Temperate Zone. It is washed on the East with the
Rhine, together with an imaginary line drawn from Strasburgh to Calais; on the
South by the Mediterranean Seas, and opens a passage to the Northern Ocean; on
the West by the Aquitain Sea; and on the North by the British Ocean. Its Bounds.
It extends it self from the 42 degrees of Latitude unto the 51, and from the
15th of Longitude to the 29th, which makes its length and breadth to be above
200 French Leagues. It is contiguous to the Low Countries on the North, to
Germany and Italy on the East, and to Spain on the South.

Its Soil and Commodities.
It is of an extraordinary fertile Soil, affording three excellent and useful
Commodities in great plenty, viz. Corn, Wine, and Salt; also Oil, Almonds,
Paper, Canvass, Linen, both fine and course, Oade, Corral, Skins, Nuts,
Stuffs, and several Manufactures, Toies, and Curiosities. It is very plentiful
in all Provisions.

Its People.
It is exceeding populous and crowded with Towns and Cities, once numbering
100000 Parishes, which are now reduced to a less number. The People are well
proportionate, and indifferent handsome, especially the Men; they are of a ready
and Mercurial wit, of a courteous Behavior, of a hot Brain, and soon moved to
Broils; they are very active, and given to Exercises; in weighty Affairs, both
Civil and Martial, they are not over subtle, their first attempt being like
thunder, and their end like smoke. In matters of Religion they generally follow
the Church of Rome, in which they are not over strict.

It would be too tedious to observe all the different Orders and Governments in
this Kingdom; we will content our selves to say, that in the Assemblies of the
General Estates, where the Nobility, Clergy, and third Estate, have their
Seats, it is divided into twelve several Government, of which four are on this
side, or if you please, Northwards of the Loire; four upon and about the Loire,
and four beyond the South of the Loire.

The four on this side are Picardy, Normandy, the Isle of France, and
Champaigne; the four about the Loire are Bretaigne, Orleance, or Orlenois,
Bourgogne, or Burgundy, and Lionois; and the four beyond the Loire are Guienne
and Gascoigne, Languedoc, Dauphin, and Provence. In each Government are several
Parts or Countries, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Tables of the
Kingdom, of which in order.

Government of Picardy.
PICARDY is divided into the Higher and Lower, in both of which are diverse good
Towns; in the Lower are 1. Calais, called by Coesar, Portus Iccius, held by the
English near 200 years, and was then esteemed the Key of the Kingdom; it is
esteemed one of the best Ports in Picardy, seated opposite to Dover in England,
from which it is distant about eight Leagues, once a place of great Trade, as
being the Staple of English Wools; now only of note for its being the receipt
of Passengers from this Kingdom to England, to and fro. 2. Bulloigne, a strong
Frontier Town, toward the Sea. 3. Abbeville, also a strong Frontier Town. In
the higher Picardy are, 1. Amiens, a Frontier City toward Flanaers, well
fortified, and famous for the sudden loss, and as sudden and brave regaining it
by Henry the Fourth. 2. St. Quintin, a strong Frontier Town.

Dukedom of Normandy.
NORMANDY, well watered with Rivers, amongst which are the Seine, Anon, and
Orne. It is well garnished with Cities and Towns, many of which are
commodiously seated for Trade, by reason of their vicinity to the British
Ocean; the chief of which are, 1. Roan, its Metropolis, seated in the higher
Normandy, on the banks of the Seine, over which there is a famous Bridge of
Boats. Here is held one of the Parliaments of France, and it is a place of as
great Trade as any in France, being one of the three principal Towns, where
Exchanges are used. Here the English have a public Hall allowed them for the
sale of English Woolen cloth, to which place at certain days they are
constrained to expose them to sale. 2. Havre de Grace, or Now Haven, the
strongest place in all Normandy. 3. Dieppe, also a City of some Trade, being a
common Landing-place for the English in their passage into France. 4. Caen,
famous for its long resistance of Henry the Fifth of England. 5. Fabais, once a
strong / Town: here it was that Duke Robert passing through saw some Maids a
dancing, amongst which was one Arlet, a Skinners Daughter, who so nimbly footed
it, that his desires were to enjoy her, thinking she would be as active in the
Bed; whereupon he sent for her, and obtained his desires; in which she so
plensed him, that he begat on her William the Bastard King of England, in
spite to whom, and disgrace to his Mother, the English call Whores, Harlots.
6. Charenton, famous for the Preaching of that eminent Divine Peter du Moulin:
and 7. Constance.

Isle of France.
The Isle of FRANCE, made so by the circlings and confluences of the Seine and
other little Brooks: It lies in the heart of all France, where we shall find
not only its particular glory, but that of all the Kingdom, to wit, Paris, City
of Paris.
which for its Riches, Power and number of Inhabitants, may justly contend with
any in Europe. It is about 12 miles in circuit, if all the Suburbs are
reckoned, and in form rather round than oval; seated on the Seine, and in a
Soil so fertile, that not many Cities know so great plenty. It is of no great
strength, nor of much consequence in matter of Trade, only contenting
themselves with enough to serve the Inhabitants and Court; yet in matter of
Coin it gives rule to all Cities in France, and is another of the three Cities
where Exchanges are placed; a convenience for the Nobility, Gentry, and
Courtiers, as also for Strangers. The chief ornaments of it are the Palace of
the Louvre, so much famoused abroad; besides so many Palaces of the Nobility,
amongst the rest that of Luxembourgh, its Palace-Royal, its Church of Nostre
Dame, its University, formed by Charlemain in Anno 800, esteemed the first in
Europe, containing 55 Colleges, and particularly the College of the Sorbona;
also the Halls of Justice, or Courts of Parliament, being as our Courts of
Judicature, are all remarkable. Next to this City may be reckoned, 1. St.
Dennis, about three miles from Paris, famous for the Sepulchers of the French
Kings. 2. Pont-oyse; 3. Meaux; 4. Beauvais, and 5. Soissons. In this Province
is the beautiful House and Forest of Fontaine Bleau, built by Henry the Fourth,
esteemed not only one of the fairest Palaces in all France, but of Christendom;
here is also seated the Royal Mansion of St. Germains and Boys de Vincennes,
where the puissant Henry the Fifth finished his days. In this Province is the
Dukedom of Valois, whose chief places are Luzarch and Sen-lis: This Country
abounds in Vineyards, which yields the sharp Wine called Vin de Paris.

Province of Champaigne.
CHAMPAIGNE, so called from being a Champain Country; its chief places are, 1.
Rheims, famous for being the place where the Kings of France are usually
Crowned, and anointed with an Oil here kept, which they say came down from
Heaven, and never decreaseth; and here is a College for English Jesuits. 2.
Chaaloons, 3. Langres, 4. Sens, and 5. Troyes, all places of some account.

Province of Britany.
BRETAIGNE, or Britanny, whose chief Port-Towns are Breast, Blavet, and St.
Malos; and within Land the Cities of 1. Nantes, seated on the Loire. 2. Rennes,
where the Parliament for this Province is held. 3. Vennes, seated on the
South Sea. 4. Breine; and 5. Morlaix, of note for its great store of Paper so
called.

Under the Government of ORLEANS, or ORLEANOIS, we comprehend diverse Provinces
on this side, upon, and beyond the Loire, viz.

Province of Maine.
MAINE, whose chief places are, 1. Maine, seated on the River Magenue, which
discharges it self into the Loire: 2. Mayenne, 3. Laval, and 4. Domfront.

Province of Perch.
PERCH, on the borders of Normandy, has for its chief places Nogent le
Retrou, Mortaigne, and Vernevil; which by some are esteemed in Normandy.

Province of la Beauce.
LA BEAVCE has for its principal places, 1. Chartes, seated on the Loire, a
fair and pleasant City, dignified with an University for the study of the Civil
Laws. 2. Estampes, 3. Chasteau Dun, and 4. Vendosme.

Province of Gastenois.
GASTENOIS has for its principal place Montargis.

Province of Nivernois.
NIVERNOIS, or BVRBON, well watered by the Loire and Allier; its chief places
are, 1. Nerves, of some account for its pretty Glass-works, and is dignified
with an ancient Dukedom. 2. La Charity, 3. Clamecy, and 4. Donzy.

Province of Orleanois.
ORLEANOIS, whose chief City is Orleans, from whence the Government or Province
took its name; a City, if Paris excepted, may contend with any in France,
having once been the Seat of a King of its own. Its pleasant situation on the
Loire makes it extreme delightful, and although of no considerable Trade, yet
is a great Thorough-fair for such Commodities as pass to Lions, and other
places in the heart of the Kingdom.

Province of Blasois.
BLASOIS has for its chief place Blois, where, by the command of Henry the
Third, the Duke of Guise, the first stirrer up of the Civil Wars in France, as
also the great contriver and promoter of the grievous Massacre at Paris, was
slain in the Senate House.

Province of Touraine.
TOVRAINE has for its chief places, 1. Tours, where the Protestants first
began, and from one of whose Gates (called Hugo's-Gate) they were called
Hugonots. Nigh to this place it was that Charles Martel, Father of King Pepin,
discomfited an Army of about 400000 Saracens, and slew of them about 370000. 2.
Amboise, 3. Loches, and 4. Chinon.

Province of Anjou.
ANJOV, adjoining to Maine, a small Province, but exceeding fertile, and affords
the best Wines in France. Its chief places are 1. Angiers, dignified with an
University. 2. Saumur, a Town delightfully seated on the Loire, and dignified
with the only Protestant University in France: and 3. la Fleche.

Province of Poictou.
POICTOV, a large and populous Province, numbering about 1200 Parishes, and
dignified with three Bishoprics; its principal places are 1. Poictiers, seated
on the River Clavius, famous for the study of the Civil Laws, and in greatness
esteemed next to Paris; but of small account as to matter of Trade. 2.
Maillezais, 3. Luson, 4. Chastelleroud, 5. Niort, 6. Lusignan, and 7. Touars.
This Country is very fertile, especially in good Vineyards; and in these Fields
were sought that memorable Battle, between John of France and Edward the Black
Prince, who contrary to all expectation gained the day.

Province of Aunis.
AVNIS, South of Poictou, has for its chief City Rochel, commodiously seated
on the Aquitain Ocean, by reason of which it enjoys a great Trade; it is a
place of great strength, as may appear by the resistance the Protestants there
inhabiting, made against the powerful Army of the French King.

Province of Angoumois.
ANGOVMOIS, South of Guienne, has for its chief place Angoulesme.

Province of Berry.
BERRY, very fertile and has rich Pastures, on which are fed abundance of
Sheep, of whose Wool the Inhabitants make store of Cloth. Its, chief places are
1. Burges, dignified with a flourishing University; 2. Issoudun, 3: Chasteau
Roux, 4. Argentum, and 5. Sancerre.

Province of Duchy of Burgundy.
BOVRGOGNE, or BVRGVNDY, which is subdivided into several less parts, has for
its chief places 1. Dijon, built by the Emperor Aurelian, proud in her
Parliament, and for giving birth to St. Bernard. 2. Autun, once the chief City
in the Province, and dignified with an Episcopal See. 3. Beaune, famous for its
stately Hospital, equalizing many Princes Palaces; and these places are in
Bourgogne, particularly so called. 4. Challon, in Challonnois, belonging to the
House of Orange. 5. Mascon, in Masconnois, where the Devil made his visits and
disputes to a Minister, which story is sufficiently known, being at large
treated of in a Book entitled the Devil of Mascon. 6. Semur, in Auxois; and 7.
Chastillon on the Seine, in the Country of Montagne.

Several small Countries.
Adjacent to this Province of Burgundy are the Countries of Charollois,
Auxerrois, Bresse, Balliage, Beugey, and Veromey. The chief place of
CHAROLLOIS, is Chorolles; of AVXERROIS, Auxerre; of BRESSE, Bourge, a Town so
well built and so strongly fortified, that it is esteemed impregnable; of
BALLIAGE, which bordereth upon the Swisses and Savoy, Gex, which is not far
distant from Geneve; and of BVGEY and VEROMAY, bordering upon Dolphin and
Savoy; Belly, which is a place of some account.

Province of Lionnois.
LIONNOIS has for its chief places, 1. Lions, seated upon the conjunction of
the Roane with the Soane, by some esteemed the second City of France, a famous
ancient Mart Town, and the Sea of an Archbishop, who is Primate of all France.
2. Treveux, in the Sovereignty of Dombes; Mombrizon, in the County of Forez;
and 4. Ville Franche, in the Country of Beaujolois.

Province of Auvergne.
AVVERGNE has for its chief places, 1. Bourbon the Archambaul; 2. Molins,
seated on the Elaver, of note for their neat Cases of Knives and Scissers, both
in the part or Country of Bourbonnois. 3. St. Pierre le Montier, in Nivernois:
4. Cleremont, the Seat of Vercingetorix, who so bravely opposed Caesar; 5.
Riom, 6. Monferrand, 7. Vic le Comte, and 8. St. Flour, all in Auvergne,
particularly so called. 9. Gueret, and 10. Dorat, in the Part of La March.

Government of Guienne and Gascogne.
In the Government of Guyenne and Gascogne are several Provinces and Countries,
in which are seated many good Towns and Cities.

In GVYENNE are 1. the Province of Saintonge, whose chief place is Saints. 2.
Guienne, which has for its principal City Bourdeaux, seated on the Banks of
the Gerende, famous for being the Birthplace of King Richard the Second, at
present honored with an University and a Parliament. It is a place of a very
great Trade, and plentifully furnished with diverse good Commodities, especially
Wines and Paper. 3. Prigort, has for its chief place Perigueux, seated on the
Banks of Ila; 4. Agenois, whose chief place is Again; 5. Limosin has for its
chief places Limoges and Brive; 6. Quercy, in which are seated Cahors, a rich
and beautiful City, built on the ascent of a Hill; and Montalbon, situate on
the Garond, a place of good strength; and 7. Rovergue, whose chief places are
Rodez and Vabres.

Provinces in Gascogne.
In GASCOGNE are also diverse Provinces, which with its chief places are taken
notice of in the Geographical Table of the four Governments beyond the Loire,
beginning with Guienne and Gascogne.

Province of Languedoc.
LANGVEDOC may be divided into three quarters, in which are several parts. In
the higher Langnedoc are the Cities of Toulousa, in Toulousan, a fair large
City, though of no continuance, and is a place of a considerable Inland-trade.
2. Alby, in Albigeois; 3. Castellan darry, in Auraguais; and 4. Foix, in Foix.
In the lower Languedoc are 1. Narbone, the first Colony planted by the Romans
next to Carthage, out of Italy; 2. Aleth, 3. Limouth, all in Narbone; 4.
Beziers, 5. Agde, and 6. Pemenas, in the quarter of Beziers, 7. Montpellier,
esteemed the healthfullest place for a pure Air in all France; 8. Nismes, and
9. Beaucaire; all in the quarter of Nismes. In the other part called Sevennes
are, 1. Mende; in the quarter of Gevaudan; 2. Le Puy, in Velay; 3. Viviers, and
4. Vzes, in the part of Vivarais.

Province of Daulphine.
The Province of DAVLPHINE is watered with the Roane and other Rivers, and
honored with the title of the Princes of France. It may be divided into three
great parts, which are subdivided into others, viz. in the part or quarter
toward the Roane are the Parts and Cities of Vienne in Viennois, of some
esteem for its excellent Sword-blades here made; 2. Valence, a fine City
watered with the Roane; 3. Romans, 4. St. Marcellin, 5. Crest, and 6.
Montelimar; all in the higher and lower Valentinois; and St. Pol Trois Chaux,
in the part of Tricastin. In the quarter in the midst of the Province are 1.
Grenoble, in Grisivanden; 2. Die, in Diois; and 3. le Bujiz, in Baronies: And
in the quarter toward the Alps, 1. Embrun, in Embrunois, 2. Gap, in
Gapensois, and 3. Brianson, in Briansonnois.

Province of Provence.
PROVENCE, washed by the Mediterranean Sea, has for its chief places toward
the Roane, Arles, a Town well fortified by Henry the Fourth; and Tarascon. Upon
the Sea, 1. Marseille, once a Colony of the Phoenicians, commodiously seated on
the Mediterranean shore, enjoying an excellent Haven and Road for Shipping,
which renders it a place of a considerable Trade, and is well frequented by
Merchants. 2. Thollon, the best Seaport Town on the Mediterranean in all
France, having a capacious and safe Haven, and is well resorted unto by
Merchants. 3. St. Tropes; 4. Grace, and 5. Vence. In the midst of the Province
are 1. Aix, honored with a Parliament; 2. Salon, 3. Apt, and 4. Riez: And
toward the Alps are Sisteron, Digne, Senez, Glandeeve, etc.

To the Province of PROVENCE does belong the Country of Avignon, and the
Principality of Orange: In Avignon are many walled Towns and some Cities, the
chief of which is Avignon, a fair City seated on the Roane, famous for being
the ancient Seat of the Popes, till removed to Rome. This City is worthy of
observation, in that here is said to be 7 Parish Churches, 7 Monasteries, 7
Nunneries, 7 Inns, 7 Palaces, and 7 Gates to its Walls; as also for being made
a University.

Principality of Orange.
In ORANGE are several good Towns and Cities, the chief of which is Orange,
seated on the Meine, of note for the wonderful and excellent Antiquities that
are here to be seen; and this Country belongs to the Prince of Orange.

To the twelve Governments we ought to add LORRAINE, where are the Cities of
St. Michael, Metz, Toul, Verdun, and Nancy: also part of Artois; of Haynault
and Luxembourg, where are the Cities of Arras, Avesnes, Moutmedy, etc. Likewise
the Principalities of Sedan and Arches, whose chief place is Charleville; also
Rousillon, on the Coast of Spain, whose chief places are Perpignan, Elne,
Collioure, Salces, etc. Alsatia, on the side of Germany, and the Principality
of Bress, belonging to Mademoiselle d'Orleance; but being to treat of these
places in Germany, and elsewhere, I shall omit the description of them here.

Bishops, Parliaments, etc. in France.
All France has 15 Archbishops, 105 Bishops, 10 Parliaments; amongst which the
power of that of Paris extends as far as all the rest. Under these Parliaments
are 105 and odd Balliages, or Justices-Royal, immediate dependants on these
Parliaments, 24 Generalities, and about 250 Elections and Receipts of
Royal-Money: And in the general Governments of the Militia, about 2 or 300
Governments.

Chief Rivers.
This Kingdom is for the generality exceedingly furnished with Rivers, the
principal amongst which are the Loire, Roane, Garonne, and Seine.

ALLEMAGNIA, or GERMANY, which may be considered in three great Parts, whereof
The first about the RHINE, may be subdivided into three other parts, to wit, On
this side the RHINE; where are The French County, Besanson, Dole.
Lorraine, Metz, Nancy.
The Catholic Low Countries, Anvers, or Antwerp, Brusselles, Gand, or Gaunt,
Lille, Arras.

Upon the RHINE; where are Alsace, or Alsatia, Strasbourg, Fribourg, Brisac,
Haguenau.
Palatinate of the Rhine, Hildeberg, Worms, Spire,
The Electorates of Mayence, Treves, Cologne.
The Estates of Cleves and Juliers, Dusseldrop, Wesel, Juliers.
The Estates of the United Provinces, Amsterdam, Utrecht, the Hague.

Beyond the RHINE; where are Franconia, Wirzbourg, Nuremberg, Francfort.
Hessie, Cassel, Marpurg.
Westphalie, Munster, Embden, Soest.


The second about the DANUBE, may be also divided into three other parts, to
wit, Higher, or SOVABIA; which is divided into Suisse, or Switzerland, Basle,
Berne, Zurich, Geneve, Coire.
Sovabia, Ausbourg, Constance, Ulme, Lindau, Stutgard.

Mean, or BAVARIA; which is divided into Tirol, Inspruck, Feldkirck,
Duchy of Bavaria, Munick, Lanshout, Ratisbone, Saltisbourg, Passau.
Palatinate of Bavaria, -- Amberg.
Lower, or AUSTRICHE or AUSTRIA; where are The Archbishopric of Austria,
Vienne, Lintz, Crems.
The Hereditary Lands of Austria, Stirie, Creacz, Carinthie, St. Veit,
Carniola, Lau-bach, Cilley, Cilley, Vindis March, Metling.


The third about the EL^E, and ODER, may be divided into two parts, to wit, The
Highest comprehends the Estates of BOHEMIA; where are the Kingdom of Bohemia,
Prague, Cottenberg. Pilsen, Coningracz, Budweiss, Glatz.
Provinces incorperated to Bohemia, as Silicle, Breslau, Lignitz, Neisse, Gros
Glogau.
Lusacia, Baudisseu, Gorlitz, Soraw.
Moravia, Olmutz, Brynne.


The Lowest comprehends SAXONY in general, which may be divided inco into the
Higher Saxony; where are The Estates of Saxony, Wittenberg, Dreide, Lipsick,
Erford.
The Marquisate of Brandenbourg, Stendai, Brandenbourg, Berlin, Lansperg.
Pomerania, Stettin, Straelsond.

Lower Saxony; where are Two Archbishopricks, Magdebourg, Breme.
Three Bishoprics, Ferden, Hildesheim, Halberstat.
Several Dutchies; among which are those of Holsace, Kille, Gluckstad.
Meclebourg, Rostock, Suerin.
Lauvenbourg Lauvenbourg. Lunenbourg, Lunenbourg. Brunswick, Brunswick,
Wolsenbuttel.

Imperial Cities, Lubeek, Hambourg, Gos^a^.





GERMANY about the Rhine, may be considered On this side the RHINE, in three
Parts, to wit, FRANCHE COUNTY, or BURGUNDY; where are The Balliages of Amont,
-- Gray. Dole, Dole. Aval, Salins.
And some Manors of the Empire, as The Archbishopr. and City of Besanson. The
County of Monbeliard.

LORRAINE; where are the Dutchies, etc. of BARROIS, Royal, -- Bar-le-Duc.
Ducal, St. Michael.
LORRAINE, where are the Balliages of Francois, Nancy. Allemand, Vaudrevange.
Vauge, -- Mirecourt.
Bishoprics, and Imperial Cities, Metz, Toul, Verdun.

The CATHOLIC Low Country; where are The Dutchies of Brabant, Louvain,
Brusselles.
Limbourg, Limbourg, Mastci^h.
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Thionville.

The Counties or Earldoms of Flanders, Gand, or Gaunt, Brugge, Lille.
Artois, Arras, St. Omer.
Hay^^aut, Mons, Valenciennes.
Namur, -- Namur.
The Marquisate of the Empire, -- Anvers, or Autwerp. The Signiory of Malines,
-- Malines.
Also the Archbishopric, and Imperial City of -- Cambray. Bishopric, and
Imperial City of -- Liege.

Upon the RHINE, in five Parts, viz. ALSACE, or ALSATIA, On this side the
Rhine; where are The Sungou, -- Altkirck, The Higher Alsace, Ensisheim, Blome.
The Lower Alsace, Strasbourg, Haguenau.

Beyond the Rhine, where are The Brisgou, Fribourg, Brissac.
The Mormau, -- Offenbourg. The Marquisate of Bade, Durlach.


The PALATINATE of the Rhine, under the name of which may be understood The
Estates of the Palatinate, Heidelberg, Franken^al.
The Estates of the Princes of the House Palatinate, Zweibru^k, Simmere^.
The Bishoprics and Imperial Cities of Spires, Worms.

The ELECTORATES Ecclesiastics, or Archbishopricks of Mayence, Mayence,
Aschassenbourg.
Treves, Treves, Coblenz.
Cologne, Cologne, Bonne.

The Estates of the Succession of CLEVES and JULIERS, To the Marquess of
Brandenbourg, as The Duchy of Cleves, Wesel, The County of Marck, Hamme.
To the Palatinate of New bourg, as The Duchy of Juliers, Juliers, The Duchy
of Berg^or Mon^, Dusseldrop.

The Estates of the UNITED PROVINCES of the Low Countries; where are The Duchy
of Guelders, Nieumegue, Arnheim.
The Counties of Holland, Amsterdam, Dordrech^, the Hague.
Zeland, -- Mildebourg. Zutphen, Zutphen.
The Signiories of West Friezland, Lievarden. Groningue, Groningue. Utrecht,
Utrecht. Over-Ysel, Doventer.
And part of the Duchy of Brabant, -- Bosteduc.

Beyond the RHINE, in three Parts, to wit, FRANCONIA; where are The
Ecclesiastics, or The Bishoprics of Wirtzbourg, Bamberg.
The Order of Teut, -- Mergetheim.
The Laics, or The Marquisate of Cullembach, Onspach.
The Counties of Holac, Weickers^eim, Wertheim, Wertheim.

The Imperial Cities of Nuremberg, Francfort, Schweifurt,

HESSE, or HESSIA, as it is divided into Hesse, or Hessia, Langraviat of
Cassel, Marpurg.
County of Waldeck, Corbach. Abbey of -- Fulde.
Witteravia, -- diverse Counties, Nassau, Solins, Hanau, Isenbourg.

WESTPHALIA; where are The Ecclesiastics, or The Bishoprics of Munster,
Paderborne, Mind.
The D. of Westphalia, Arensberg.
The Counties, etc. of Embden, -- Aurick. Oldenbourg, Oldenbourg. Hoye,
Nienbourg, Lip, Lipstad, Ravensberg, Herwood, Benthem, -- Benthem,
The Imperial Cities, as Embden, Zoest.




The Countries, which consists of Seventeen Provinces, to wit, of Four
Duchies, to wit BRABANT; where are the Quarters of Louvain, Louvain, Tilemond,
Ascot.
Brusselles, Brusselles, Nivelles.
Anvers, Breda, Berg op Zom, Lire. Saint Ulit.
Bosleduc, Bosleduc, Grave.

LIMBO'URG; where are Limbourg, Limbourg, Vic de Mastric.
Adjacent Lands, Fauquemont, Dalem, Rolduc.

LUXEMBOURG, Luxembourg, Thionville, Arlon, Bastoigne, Monmedi, Dam Villers,
GUELDRES, where are four Quarters; but that of ZUTPHEN is among the Counties,
Betuve, Nieumegue, Bommel, Fort de Schenck.
Veluve, Arnhem, Harderwick.
Gueldres, Ruremonde, Gueldres, Venlo, Stefanswerdt,


Seven Counties, viz. FLANDERS; which is divided in Flanders Teutone, Gand, or
Gaunt, Bruges, Ipres, Gravelines, Dunkirke, Ostend, Newport, Scluce.
Flanders Wallone, Lille, Douay, Tournay, Orchies.
Flanders Imperlale, Alost, Hulst, Axel.

ARTOIS, Wallone, Arras, Hesdinfert, Bappaumes, St. Pol.
Flamingant, St. Omer, Air, Bethune.

HAYNAUT, Mons, Valenciennes, Maubeuge, Avesnes, Landrechies, Philippeville,
Marienbourg.
NAMUR, Namur, Charlemont.
HOLLAND; which is divided into North Holland, Alemar, Inchuse, Horn.
South Holland, Dort, Delft, Leyde, or Leyden, Harlem, Amsterdam, Goude,
Rotterdam, the Hague, the Brill.

ZELAND, Mildebourg, Flushing, Ziriczee.
ZUTPHEN, Zutphen, Doesbourg, Grolle.

One Marquisate of the Empire, which consists but of the City of -- Anvers,
or Antwerp. Five Signieuries, to wit, UTRECHT, -- Utrecht. OVERYSSEL; where are
the Quarters of Saland, Deventer, Campen, Swol.
Tuente, -- Oldenzee, Drente, -- Coevorden.
WEST FRISE, or WEST-FRISELAND, Leuvarden, Dockum, Franicker, Staveren.
GRONINGUE, -- Groningue: MALINES, -- Malines.
To which may be added the Archbishopric and Seignieury of CAMBRAY, --
Cambray. Bishopric and Signieury of LIEGE; where are Liege, Tongres,
Maestricht, Dinant, Huy.
County of LINGEN, -- Lingen.


The ESTATES, or UNITED PROVINCES of the LOW COUNTRIES, possessed in EUROPE,
The most Northern part of the LOW COUNTRIES, where are eight Provinces, or
Parts; to wit the Duchy of GUELDERS, Quarter of Betuve, Nieumegue, Bommel,
Fort de Schenck.
Quarter of Veluve, Arnhem, Harderwick.

Counties of HOLLAND, North Holland, Alcrnar, Horn, Inchuse.
South Holland, Dordrecht, Harlem, Delft, Leyde, or Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude,
Rotterdam, the Hague, the Brill, Gorckum, St. Guitremberg.

ZELAND, Mildebourg, Ziriczee, Flessing, Tolen.
ZUTPHEN, Zutphen, Doesbourg. Grolle.

Signleurles of UTRECHT, -- Utrecht. OVER-YSSEL, Devent^r, Campen, Swol,
Covorden.
WEST FRISE, Lieuvarden, Harlingen, Franicker, Dockum, Staveren.
GRONINGUE, -- Groningue.

And in the Neighboring Estates of the LOW COUNTRIES Part of the Duchy of
CLEVES, Wesel, Rees, Emmerick, Goch, Gennep,
Part of the Estate of COLOGNE, Rhinsberg, Orsoy.
And in the County of EMBDEN, -- Roeroort.
And in the most Southern part of the LOW COUNTRY, Part of the Duchy of
BRABANT, Bosleduc, Breda, Berg op Zom, Willemftad, Steenberg, Lillo.
Part of the Duchy of LIMBOURG, -- Maestricht. Part of the County of FLANDERS,
Escluse, Ardenbourg, Middelbourg, Isendi^k, Biervliet, Ter-Neuse. Philippine,
Patience, Lifkenshoeck.


In AFRICA, or AFRIQUE, AFRICA, or LYBIA, Upon the Coast, or near The Country
of the NEGRO'S, Arguin, Goeree,
GUINEE, St. George de la Mine, Fort of Nassau.

AETHIOPIA, The Isles of St. THOMAS, -- Cuidad de Pavoasan, LOANDA, St. Pol de
Loanda.

In ASIA, And in the East INDIES, On the Coasts of COROMANDEL, SIAM, Gueldres.
Malaca.

And in the East INDIAN ISLES, On the Coasts of Isle of CEYLAN, Isle of JAVA,
Colombo, Jacatra, or Batavia.

Part of the MOLUCQUES; to wit, in TERNATE, Talouque, Maylaye, Tacomma.
MOTIR, -- Nassau. MAQUIAM, Taffason, Naffaguia, or Maurice, Tabillola, or
Telebola.
BACHIAN, Labolia, Gamineduore.

About the MOLUCQUES; to wit, in GILOLO, -- Zabou. AMBOYNE, Coubella, Lovio,
Hittou, Ambeyne.
NERA, Isle of Banda, Nassau, Belgique, Revenge.
POLEWAY. Isle of Banda, Nassau, Belgique, Revenge.

Between CHINA and JAPON, HERMOSO, -- Zeland.

In AMERICA, or AMERIQUE MERIDIONALE; Part of BRAZILE; where are the Capitanies
of FERNAMBUCO, -- Olinde. TAMRACA, Tamaraca. PARAYBA, Parayba. RIO GRANDE,
Potengi. CIARA, Ciara. MARAGNAN, -- Maragnan.
And near the Coast of VENEZUELA, the Isle of Curacao.


GERMANY about the Danube, may be considered in three Parts, viz. Higher, or
SOVABIA, which is subdivided into two parts, to wit, SOVABE, or SOVABIA; where
are The Bishoprics of Ausbourg, Dilengen, Fuessen.
Constance, -- Mersbourg. Coire, -- Marsoila.
The Duchy of -- Wirtenberg, Stutgard, Tubingue.
The Marquisate of -- Burgau, -- Guntzbourg. Part of the Marquisate of -- Baden
Durlach, -- Baden. Thirteen Counties, among the which are Furstenberg, --
Me^kir^k. Hohenberg, -- Ehingen. Rhinfeld, Rhinfenden, Lauffenbourg.

Diverse Baronies, etc. The Barony of -- Waldbourg. Thirty five Cities of the
EMPIRE; among the which Beyond the Danube, are Ausbourg, Constance, Lindau,
Uberlingue, Memmingue, Kempten, Ravensbourg.
On this side the Danube, are Ulme, Norlingue, Drinckespuhel, Awlen, Halle,
Hailbron, Eslingue, Guemunde.


SWISSES, or SWITZERLAND; under the name of which is understood Thirteen
Cantons, where of The principal Cities are Basle, Berne, Zurich, Lucerne,
Soleurne, Fribourg, Schasshouse.
Twelve or Thirteen Allies; among the which are The Abbey and City of St. Gall.
The Bishopric of Sion. The Grisons, Coire. The Bishopric of -- Porentruy. The
Cities of Geneve, Mulhausen, Newchastel, Rotweil.

Twenty, or Twenty five Subjects; among the which are The County of --
Chiavenne. The Val Teline, Sondrio, Worms, or Bormio.
The Balliages and Cities of Lugan, Bellin^one, Bade, Frawenfeld.



Mean, or BAVARIA; which is divided into three parts, and where are The Estates
of the Dukedom of TIROL; which comprehends The County of Tirol; where are
Inspruck, Tirol, Cufsta^ne.
Toward the Lake of Constance, the Counties of Feldkirch, Bregaz.
The Protection of the Bishoprics of Trente, Brixen.

The Estates of the Duchy of BAVARIA; where are comprised The Duchy of
Bavaria, Higher, Munich, Landsperg,
Lower, Landshout, Straubing.

Between the Ecclesiastics, The Archbishopric of -- Saltzbourg. The
Bishoprics of Passau, Ratisbone, Frissingue.
The Provost of -- Berehtogade.
Between the Laics, The Palatinate of -- Newbourg. The County of -- Hag.
Cities of the Emperor Ratisbone, Ingolstat, Dona-wert.


The Estates of the Palatinate of BAVARIA; which are In the Country of the
Palatinate of Bavaria, -- Amberg. To the Princes of the House Palatine,
Sultzbach. In the Palatinate of Newbourg, Burglenfelt. To the Bishopric of
Aichster, Aichster. In the Langrave of Leuchtenberg, -- Pfrein^.

Lower, or AUSTRICHE, or AUSTRIA; which is divided into two parts, to wit,
Archbishopric of AUSTRIA, Higher, Lintz, Ens, or Ems, Wells, Freystat.
Mean, Crems, Horn, Stain.
Lower, Vienne, Newstat, Bade.

And the Hereditary Estates of AUSTRIA; to wit, The Duchy of Stitle, Higher,
-- Pruck: Lower, Graecz, Pettau.

The Duchy of Carnithie, Higher, Villach, Gurcz.
Mean, St. Veit. Lower, -- Lavemunde.
The Duchy of Carniole, Higher, or Seiche, Gorice, Gradisque, Czirknicz.
Lower, -- Laubach.
The County of Cilley, -- Cilley. The Windishmarch, or Marquisate of Vindes,
Metling. Rudolsswerd.




The SUISSES, or SWITZERLAND; and that which we understand under the name,
ought to be considered in three Parts, to wit, in Thirteen Cantons, which
(following their Antiquity) are URI, 1308 SUISSE, 1308 UNDERWALD, 1308 LUCERNE,
-- 1332 ZURIOH, -- 1351 ZUG, 1352 GLARIS, 1352 BERNE, -- 1353 FRIBOURG, 1481
SOLEURNE, 1481 BASLE, 1501 SCHASFHOUSE, 1501 APPENZEL, -- 1513
or following their Ranges, etc. Zurich, Protestant, Zurich, Winterthur, Stein,
Grisfensee, Eglifou.
Berne, Protestant, Berne, Lausanne, Yverdon, Nyon, Mouldon, Morges,
Peterlingen, Vevay, Lemzbourg, Burgdo^f, Aarbourg, Bruck, Thun.
Lucerne, Catholic, Lucerne, Sursce, Sempach:
Uri, Catholic, -- Altorf. Suisse, Catholic, Suitz, or Suisse, Underwald,
Catholic, Stantastad. Zug, Catholic, Zug. Glaris, Catholic and Protestant,
Glaris. Basle, Protestant, Basle. Fribourg, Catholic, Fribourg, Corbers,
Gryers.
Soleurne, Catholic, Soleurne. Schafshouse, Protestant, Schafshouse. Appenzel,
Catholic, -- Appenzel.
Their Allies; which are The Abbe and City of St. GAL, in Suisse, Will. St.
Gall.
The Bishopric of SION, or County of Valais, Sittin, or Sion, Martinath.
The GRISONS, divided into three Leagues or Confederacies; as Higher, or Grise,
Ilantz, Dissentis.
Of the House of God, Coir, or Chur; Furstenow, Puschia^e.
Of the ten Communalties, Tafas, Meyenfeld.

The Cities In Alsace, or Alsatia, -- Mulhausen, In Sovabia, -- Rotweil.
Toward the Franche County, Bienne, Neuchastel, Vallangin.
In Savoy, -- Geneve.
The Bishoprics of Basle in Suisse, Porentruy, Nuenftar, or Bonneville,
Delmont.
Constance, in Sovabia and Suisse, Mersbourg, Arbon, Bischofszel, Bollingen,
Keiserstul, Clingenow, Reichenau, Steekburne.
Coire, in the Grisons, -- Marsoilachau.

Their Subjects, viz. Subjects to the Cantons, as At Glaris, the County of --
Werdenberg. Ar Zurich, the County of Altsax, -- Foriteckchau. At Suisse and
Glaris, the Balliages of Gastal, Uznach*
At Berne and Fribourg, the Balliages of Murat, Orb, Granson, Schuartzembourg.
Of the three most ancient Cantons, the Balliages in Italy, of Bellinzone,
Valbrune, Polese, or Riviere.
To the same, and at Glaris, the City and County of Rapperchuil. To the seven
Ancient Cantons Part of Turgow, Dissenhofen, Psin.
The Franck Provinces, -- Meyenberg. The County of Sargans, Sargans,
Wallenstad, or Riva.
The City of -- Fraenfeld.
To the seven first in Range and Apenzel, the Balliages of Rhintal, Rhineck,
Alstetten.
To the eight Ancient Cantons, the Balliages in Suisse of Bade, Bremgarten,
Melingen.
To the twelve more Ancient Cantons, the Balliages in Italy of Lugan, Lucarue,
Mendris, Val Madie.

Subjects to the Allies, as To the Abbe of St. Gal, the County of Toggenburg,
Leichtensteg. To the Bishopric of Sion, toward Savoy, St. Morice, Montech,
Hochtal, or Val d'Aux.
The County of Chiavenne, Chiavenne, Pleurs, Ruynee.
The Valtelline, Morbegno, Sondrio, Tirano.
The County of -- Worms, or Bormio. And to the same the Protection of the
Signieury of Haldenstein.


GERMANY about the ELBE, and the ODER, contains in its Higher Part, The
Estates of BOHEMIA, which may be divided into the Kingdom of BOHEMIA; where are
Bohemia, particularly so called, Prague, Cuttenberg, Pilsen, Coningracz,
Budweiss, Leutmaritz, Caurzim.
The Quarter of Egra, or Heb, Elenbogen or Locker.
And the County of -- Glarz,
Provinces incorporated to the Kingdom of BOHEMIA; to wit, The Duchy of
Silesie, Breslaw, Ligni^^, Neyse, Gros Glogan, Brieg, Toppau, Crossen,
Jaggcrendorff.
The Marquisate of M -- oravia, Olmutz, Brynn, Znaym, Iglau, Radisch, Neustad.
The Marquisate of Lusace, Bautzen, Gorlitz, Sittau, Sorau, Guben, Cotous.


Lower Part SAXONY may be divided into the Higher SAXONY, where are found The
Estates of the Dukes of SAXONY, The Duchy of Saxony, Wittenberg. The
Marquisate of Misue, Dreiden, Misue, Torgaw, Lipsick, Mersbourg, Naumbourg.
The Duchy of -- Altembourg. Voitland, -- Zuickaw. Turinge Langraviat, Erford.
Dutchies, Jeve, Cobourg, Isenach.
Counties, Schwartzenbourg, Mansfeld, Smalculd, Gleichen.
Abbess, -- Quedelimberg, Abbey, -- Salsfeldt. Imperial Cities, Mulhausen.
Northausen.

Principality of Anhalt, Dessau, Bernebourg.

The Estate of the Marquisate of BRANDENBOURG, Alt-Marck, or Viel^e-Marck,
Stendal, Havelberg.
Mittel-Marck, or Moyenne-Marck, Brandebourg, Berlin, Francfort on the Oder.
New-Marck, Landsberg, Sterneberg,

The Duchy of POMERANIA, which has sometime been divided into the Dutchies of
Stettin, Stettin, Anclam.
Wolgast, -- Wolgast. Gutskow, -- Gripsuald. Barth, Straelsond, Barth,
Rugen, Isle and Duchy, Bergen. Ancien, -- Stargart. Cassubie, Colberg.
Vandalie, Stolpe. Pomerelia, -- Lowenbourg.

Lower SAXONY, where are found The Archbishopricks of Magdebourg, Magdebourg,
Halle in Saxony.
Breme, Breme, Stade.

The Bishoprics of Ferden, Hiddelsheira, Halberstat.
And to the Archbishopr, of Mayence, the Country of Eychfeld, Dudderstat.
Diverse Dutchies, the chief of which are Holstein, or Holsacia, Kyel, Segeberg,
Gluckstad
Lunebourg, Luneburg, Celle, Harbourg, Danneberg.
Brunswick, Brunswick, Wolfenbuttel.
Grunbenhagen, -- Limbeck. Gottingen, -- Gottingue. Lawenbourg, Lawenbourg,
Hadler.
Mecklenbourg, Wismar, Rostock, Scierin or Schwerin, Gustraw.

Imperial Cities; among which are Lubeck, Hambourg, Stoade.




The Estates of the Crown of BOHEMIA are The Kingdom of BOHEMIA, under which
ought to be understood BOHEMIA, as it is divided into Fifteen Provinces, where
are Forty and three Royal Cities, to wit, in the Provinces of Pregensko; where
is -- Prague: Caurzimsko; where are Caurzim, Coln, Bohmish-Broda.
Hradecsko, Kralow-Hradecz, G. Kinigingretz. Jaromirz, Bydchaff, Trantnow, G.
Konighoff. Krabedur.
Chrudimsko, Chrudim, Bamberg, G. Paumberg. Hohemauth, Policzka.
Craslawsko, Hora, G. Cuttemberg. Czaslaw.
Brechynsko, Budiejowize, G. Budweiss. Tabor, Pelhrzimow, Teyn suv Wultaw.
Wltawsko, -- Sedlezany. Podbredsko, -- Beraun. G. Bern. Prachensko, Piseck,
Suschitz, Wodnany, Prachatitz.
Pilsensko, Pilsen, Klataw, Strzibro, G. Meisf. Domazliez, G. Tauss. Rockissan.
Ziatecsko, Ziatecz, G. Satz. Most, Launy, G. Bruck. Cadan, Commota.
Rakownicsko, -- Rakonick. Slansko, Slaneywreh, G. Sehlan. Welwary.
Litomierziesko, Litomierz, Leitomeritz. Auski, Melnick.
Boleslawsko, Nymburg, Boleslaw. G. Jung Bunozel.

And the Quarters of Hebsko, -- Heb. G. Egra. Loketsko, -- Loket. G. Elnbogen.
Glatzko, -- Glatz.

The Provinces incorporated to the Kingdom of BOHEMIA, to wit, The Duchy of
SILESKA, as it is divided into Three Dutchies, Fifteen Principalities, and Four
Baronies; viz. Gros Glogaw, Duchy, Gros Glogaw, Sprottaw, Freystadt.
Crossen, Duchy, -- Crossen. Slagan, Duchy, -- Sagan. Jawer, Principality,
Jawer, Lemberg, Buntslaw, Hirschberg.
Lignitz, Princip. Lignitz, Goldberg.
Wohlaw, Princ. -- Wohlaw, Olsze, Principality, Olsze. Bernstadt, Principality,
Bernstadt. Breslaw Princ. Breslaw, Namslaw.
Schweidnitz, Principality, Schweidnitz. Brieg, Princ. Brieg, Olaw.
Monsterberg, Princ. -- Monsterberg. Neiss, or Grotkaw, Princ. Neiss, Grotkaw,
Zuckmantel.
Oppelen, Princ. Oppelen, Newstadt, Klein Glogaw.
Ratibor, Principality, -- Ratibor. Jegerndorff, Princ. Jegerndorff, or Carnow,
Lubschitz.
Troppaw, Princ. -- Troppaw. Teschen, Principality, Teschen. Among the Baronies
are Wartenberg, Pless.

The Marquisate of MORAVIA, as it may be divided into the Dutchies of Olmutz,
Brinn, Znaim,
Their Cities are Olmutz, Brinn, Znaim, Jglaw, Hardisch, Newstadt, Kremsit,
Krumlow, Meseritz, Niclasburg, Polna, Weiskirth.
The Marquisate of LUSACE, or LUSATIA, now engaged to the Duke of Saxony, is
divided into the Higher Lusatia, Baudissen, or Pautzen, Gorlitz. Sittaw,
Lawben, Camentz, Liebaw.
Lower ^usatia, Soraw, Guben, Cotbus.




The House of AUSTRICHE, or AUSTRIA, in diverse Branches and Titles, possessed
and lying within and near GERMANY, to wit, AUSTRICHE, or AUSTRIA; under the
name of which may be understood, The Archbishopric of Austriche, Vienna,
Crems, Lintz.
The Duchy of Stirie, Grecz, Pruck.
Carinthie, St. Veit, Lavemunde, Grucz, or Straspurg.
Carniole, -- Laubach.
The County of -- Cilley, -- Cilley. The Marquisate of Vinde, or Vindishmarch,
-- Metlin, And toward Italy, the County of Gorice, Gorice, Gradisque.
and part of Istrie, Triefte, Pedena.


The Kingdom of HUNGARY, or HONGRIE, in part; where are In the higher --
Hungary, Presbourg, or Poson, Sopron. or Oedenbourg, Raab, or Javarin, Comore,
Fileck, Cassau, Tokay, Varadin.
In the higher -- Esclavione, Zagrab, or Agram, Copronitza.
In the higher -- Croacie, -- Sisseg. And in the -- Morlaquie, Sen^, pr. Senia,
St. Veit am Flaum.

The Kingdom of BOHEMIA, and the Estates incorporated to Bohemi^ to wit, The
Kingdom of -- Bohemia, Prague, Cutrenberg, Pilsen, Co^^^gracz, Rudweis.
The Duchy of -- Silesie, Breslau, Lignitz, Neisse, Gros Glogau.
The Marquisates of Lusacia, Baudissen, Gorlltz, Sittau, Sorau.
Moravia, Olmutz, Brinne, Znaym.

The County of -- Glarz, -- Glarz. The Signieury of -- Egra, -- Egra, or Heb:
TIROL; under the name of which are The Counties of Tirol, Inspruck, Hall,
Cufstain.
Veldkirck, or -- Feldkirck. Bregentz, -- Bregentz.
The Protection of the Bishoprics of Trente, Brixen.

In SOVABIA, the Marquisate of Burgau, Burgau, Guntzbourg.
County of Hohenberg, Rotenbourg, Ehingen, Horb.
City of -- Yillengen, Lantgraviat of Nellenbourg, Stockach.
In SUISSE, or SWITZERLAND, the County of Rhinselden, Rhinselden, Lauffenbourg.
City of -- Waldshout. County of Hapspurg, or Habsbourg. Protection of the
Cities of Constance, Celle.

Within or near the Grisous, Castelz, Pludentz.
In ALSATIA, or ALSACE, the County of Pfirt, or Ferrette, Altkirck. Part of
Sungou, Tannes, Befort.
Langraviat of the higher Alsatia, Enfisheim, Keisersperg, Heiligen Creutz.
Part of Brisgou, Fribourg, in Brisgou, Brisac, Newenbourg.

The Palatinate of the RHINE in part, where are many Cities, among the which
Oppenheim, Franckendal.
BOURGOGNE in part, to wit, the County of Bourgogne; where are Dole, Gray,
Salins.
The Catholic LOW COUNTRY, for the most part; where are The Dutchies of And
the Charollois, in part, Charolles. Brabant, Leuvain, Brusselles.
Limbourg, -- Limbourg: Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Thionville.
Guelderland, in part, Ruremonde.
The Counties of Flanders, Gand, or Gaunt, Lille.
Artois, Arras, St. Omer.
Hainault, Mons, Valenciennes.
Namur, -- Namur.
The Marquisate of the Empire, where is -- Anvers, or Antwerp. The Signieury of
Malines, -- Malines.
And near the LOW COUNTRY, The Archbishopric and Signieury of Cambray,
Cambray. The County of Linghen, -- Lighen



map of German states blazon or coat of arms of the earls of BridgewaterTo ye
Rt Hon John Egerton Earl of Bridgewater Visc: Berckley Bart of Elsmere Ld:
Leiutenant Buckingham Shire and one of Ld: of his Matys most Hon. Privi
Council etc. This Mapp is Humbly Dedicated by R B

A GENERAL MAPP OF THE EMPIRE OF GERMANY. with its several Estates. Designed
by Monsieur Sanson. Geographer to the French King etc.


GERMANY AND BELGIUM; Or, THE Low Countries.
Its Bounds, Latitude and Longitude.
GERMANY is in the midst of those three parts which we have placed in the
middle of Europe, and extends it self from 45 unto 54 degrees of Latitude, and
from the 28th unto the 41 of Longitude. This position shows, that it lies in
the middle of the Temperate Zone.

This Germany may be considered in three great parts, of which each may be
subdivided into three others. We will call the great parts, Germany about the
Rhine, Germany about the Danube, and Germany about the Elbe and the Oder; all
which, with its lesser parts are taken notice of in the Geographical Tables of
Germany, according to which method we will proceed; and then the first will be
the Franche County, or BVRGVNDY, which is bounded with Bress, Switzerland,
Lorraine, and Champaine. Its ancient Inhabitants were the Hedui, who first
called Julius Caesar into France, and its People are at present esteemed
warlike, marching under the Colors of diverse Princes, and are known by the
name of Walloons. It is a Country so fertile, that it has been called the
Flower of France, within whose bounds some do esteem it. It has for its chief
places 1. Besanson, the Metropolis of Burgundy, seated on the banks of the
Doux, a City of good strength and beauty, and made an University by the
commands of Charles the Fifth, and Pope Julio the Third. 2. Dole, in the
Balliage of Dole, a Town of great strength, riches and beauty, famous for its
College of Jesuits: 3. Gray, in the Balliage of Amont; and 4. Salius, in the
Balliage of Aval, of some account for its rich Salt Fountain. Besides these
places in Burgundy are numbered 20 walled Towns, and about 160 Lordships.

Province of Lorrain.
LORRAINE, bordering on Burgundy, famous for having had for its Duke, Godfrey,
Surnamed Bulloigne, the Recoverer of the Holy Land from the Turks; its Dukes
now enjoy little else save the Title, the Country being seized by the French.
It is of a fertile Soil, affording plenty of Corn and Wine, and has store of
Salt. Its chief places are 1. Nancy, in the Balliage of Francois, once
dignified with the Seat of the Duke; 2. Vandrevange; 3. Mirecourt; 4.
Vancoleur, the Birthplace of Joan de Pucelle; 5. Pont-a-Mason, so named by
reason of its Bridge over the Mosa; 6. Metz, and 7. Toul.

Country of Barrois.
Between this Province and Champaine lies the Country of BARROIS, and belongs
to Lorrain, whence the eldest Sons of these Dukes were styled Princes of Barri.
Its chief places are Bar-le-Duc, and St. Michael.

The several parts of the Catholic Low Countries.
The Catholic LOW COUNTRIES may be contained under the Dukedoms of Brabant,
Limbourg, and Luxembourg; the Earldoms of Flanders, Artois, Haynaut, and Namur;
the Marquisate of the Empire; the Signiory of Malines, etc. The whole Country
is exceeding fertile, yet found not very advantageous to the Spaniards, who are
Masters of it.

Dukedom of Brabant.
BRABANT, for the most part of an ungrateful Soil, yet well inhabited and
stored with walled Towns and Villages; the chief amongst which are 1. Lovaine,
a fair and large City, being about four miles in circuit within its Walls, and
six without, wherein are many delightful Gardens and Meadows, and is of note
for its University, where there is a Seminary for English Jesuits. 2. Brussels,
a City for its fairness and elegancy of its Buildings (its extent being as
large as Lovaine) gives place to few in the Netherlands. It is at present the
residence of the Spanish Governor for the Low Countries; and 3. Breda, once
the Seat of the Prince of Orange, till taken by the Spaniards.

City of Antwerp.
To the Dukedom of Brabant does belong the Marquisate of the EMPIRE, whose chief
place is Anvers, or Antwerp, seated on the Schelde, out of which it has eight
Channels cut, the biggest of which are capable to receive about 100 great
Ships, which does much facilitate its Trade; it is a fair and large City, being
about seven or eight miles in circuit within its Walls, which are strong, high,
and broad enough for Coaches to pass, on which the Nobility and Gentry commonly
use to recreate themselves. In this City are abundance of Painters and Gravers,
whose work is well received abroad. To this Dukedom does also belong the
Signiory of Malines, whose chief place bears the same name: likewise the
Archbishopric and Imperial City of Cambria, of good account; and the
Bishopric and Imperial City of Liege, seated on the Meuse, a Town of good
beauty, being so filled with fair Abbeys and Monasteries, that it is called the
Paradise of the Priests.

Duchy of Limbourg.
LIMBOVRG has many good Towns, the chief of which are 1. Limbourg, seated on
the Banks of the Weser, and gives name to the Duchy. 2. Mastrich, a place of
great strength, being held almost impregnable, yet was gained lately by the
French; but through the assistance of the English, under the command of his
Grace, James Duke of Monmouth. 3. Dalen, fortified with a Castle, etc.

Dukedom of Luxembourg.
LVXEMBOVRG, Northwards of Lorrain, said to contain about 1000 Villages, and 23
walled Towns, the chief of which are 1. Luxembourg, seated on the Elze. 2.
Thionville, which, with the other places, suffered much in the time of the Wars
betwixt France and Spain.

Forest of Ardenna. The Spaw.
In this Province is the famous Forest of Ardenna, once about 500 miles in
compass, now scarce 90; and in it, or on its edges, is the no less famous
Waters of the Spaw, so much frequented by the Europeans in and about the Month
of July, being found exceeding good for several Diseases in the body Man.

FLANDERS:
Earldom of Flanders described.
FLANDERS should be the most famous of all these Countries, since it
communicates its name to them all; it is divided into Tutone, Wallone, and
Imperiale. The chief Cities and places in this Earldom are 1. Ghent, whose
Walls are seven miles in compass, and was once of great beauty; but now through
the Seditiousness of its Inhabitants it is much ruinated, a good part of it
being wast-ground; it is watered by the Rivers Scheld and Ley, which run
through the City and make 26 Islands, which are conjoined by 98 Bridges. This
place is particularly famous for being the Birthplace of John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster. 2. Bruges, seated on a large and deep Channel of the Sea, from
which it is distant about three Leagues; once a famous Mart Town, but now of
small account as to matters of Traffic, 3. Ipres, seated on a River so called,
a Town of great strength. 4. Graveling, or Gravelines, feated on the Sea-shoar,
a place of good strength; and 5. Lisle, of some account. The four principal
Ports in Flanders are, 1. Dunkirk, now in the possession of the French, a place
of good strength, especially of late, when the English were Masters of it; nigh
to which is the impregnable Fort of Mardike, also so made by the English. The
Inhabitants of this Town are found very troublesome on the Seas, to those that
are their Enemies. 2. Ostend, an exceeding strong place, as is manifest by its
holding out a Siege of three years, three months, three weeks, and odd days,
against the Archduke; nigh to which was fought that bloody Battle in 1660,
between the Archduke Albertus, and the States, where (by the valor of the
English) the Victory was gained: and 3. Sluice, seated at the Mouth of the
Channel of Bruges, where it enjoys a fair and commodious Haven, capable to
receive about 500 Sail of good Ships; now subject to the States of Holland.

Throughout all Flanders are a great many Religious-houses, and Nunneries,
which are filled with virtuous Gentlewomen (for the most part, Maidens) who
live a Religious life, and at spare times makes curious Works, which are
disposed of by the Lady Abbess.

Earldom of Artois.
The Earldom of ARTOIS, North of Flanders, is divided into Wallone and
Flamingat, and said to contain about 750 Villages, and 12 walled Towns; the
chief among which are 1. Arras, where the Tapestry Hangings, and Cloths of
Arras were first invented and made. 2. Hesdinfert, a very strong Frontier Town
toward Picardy; 3. Bappaumes, 4. St. Omer, and 5. Air.

Earldom of Haynault.
The Earldom of HAYNAVLT, West of Flanders, is said to number about 900
Villages, and 24 Towns; the chief amongst which are 1. Mons, an ancient and
strong Town; 2. Valenciennes, so seated on the Scheld that it cannot be
besieged, except with three Armies at one time. 3. Maubeugel; 4. Avesnes, about
which are dug excellent white Stones for building; 5. Landrechies, and 6.
Philippeville.

Earldom of Namur.
The Earldom of NAMVR, North of Brabant, has about 180 Villages, and 4 walled
Yowns, viz. Namur, Charlemont, Bovines, and Valencourt. This Country is very
fertile in Grains, has store of Mines of Jasper, all sorts of Marble, and
abundance of Iron.

Under the subdivision of the Provinces upon the Rhine, may be comprehended
Alsatia, the Palatinate of the Rhine, the Archbishopricks and Electorates on
the Rhine, the Estates of the Succession of Cleves and Julier, and the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, etc.

Province of Alsatia.
ALSATIA, Westwards of Lorrain, has for its chief places, 1. Strasbourg,
formerly Argentina, because here the Romans received the Tribute of the
Conquered Nations, seated in Lower Alsatia near the Rhine, from which here is a
Channel cut for the conveyance of Commodities. This City is about 7 miles in
circuit, is a good place of strength, and famous for its many Rareties; as its
admirable Clock, a description of which I shall here set down, which was given
me by an Ingenious person, who took this particular account thereof.

FOR the curiousness of the Work it self I cannot set it forth, neither can any
man take pleasure of the Workmanship, but such as see it. In the whole work
there are Nine things to be considered, which ascend up one above another, as
the description shows, whereof eight are in the Wall; the ninth, (and that
the most wonderful) stands on the ground, three foot or such a matter from
the Ground and Wall, and that is a great Globe of the Heavens perfectly
described, in which are three Motions; one of the whole Globe, which betokens
the whole Heavens, and moves about from the East to the West in four and
twenty hours: the second is of the Sun, which runs through the Signs there
described, (by that Artificial motion it has) once every year: the third is of
the Moon, which runs her course in 28 days. So that in this Globe you may
view (as if you had the Heavens in your hand) the Motions of the whole Heavens,
the motion of the Sun and Moon, every Minute of an hour, the rising and falling
of every Star (among which Stars are the Makers of this work Dassipodius and
Wolkinstenius) described, yea better than in the true Heavens, because here the
Sun darkneth them not by day, nor the Moon by night. The Instruments of these
Motions are hid in the Body of a Pelican, which is portraied under the Globe.
The Pole lifted up to the Elevation of Strasburgh, and noted by a fair Star
made in Brass: the Zenith is declared by an Angel placed in the midst of the
Meridian. The second thing to be observed (which is the first on the Wall) are
two great Circles one within another, the one eight foot, the other nine foot
broad, the uttermost moves from the North to the South once in a year, and
has two Angels, the one on the North-side, which points every day in the
Week, the other on the South Side, which points what day shall be one half
year after. The Inner circle moves from South to North once in a hundred
years, and has many things described about it; as the Year of the World, the
Year of our Lord, the circle of the Sun, the processions of the Aequinoctials,
with the change of the Solstitial points, which things fall out by the motion
which is called Trepidationis: the Leap-year, the Movable Feasts, and the
Dominical Letter, or Golden Number, as it turns every year. There is an
immovable, Index, which incloseth for every year all these things within it;
the lower part of which Index is joined to another round Circle, which is
immovable wherein the Province of Alsatia is fairly described, and the City of
Strasburgh. On both sides of these Circles on the Wall, the Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon are, which are to come for many years, even so many years as the Wall
might orderly contain. The third thing which is to be seen, a little above
this, is a weekly motion of the Planets as they name the day, as on Sunday the
Sun is drawn about in his Chariot; accordingly as the day is spent, and so
drawn into another place, so that before he be full in, you shall have Monday,
that is, the Moon clean forth, and the Horses of Mars's Chariot putting forth
their heads; and so it is for every day in the week: On this side there are
nothing but dumb Pictures to garnish the Wall. The fourth thing, which is next
above this, is a Dias for the Minutes of hours, so that you shall see every
Minute pass. Two beautiful Pictures of two Children are joined to either side
of this; he which is on the North-side has a Scepter in his hands, and when
the Clock strikes, he tells orderly every stroke. He on the South Side has
a fine Hourglass in his hand, which runs just with the Clock; and when the
Clock has stricken, he turns his Hourglass, which is run forth, and holds
it running. The first thing which is next above the Minute-Dial, is the Dial
for the hour, containing the half parts also: the uttermost circumference
contains the hours, but within it is made a curious and perfect Astrolabe,
whereby is showed the motion of every Planet, his aspect, and in what Sign,
what degree, and what hour every one is in every hour of the day; the
opposition likewise of the Sun and Moon, and the Head and Tail of the Dragon.
And because the Night darkneth not the Sun, nor the Day the Moon, or other
Planets, therefore their Courses are here exactly seen at all times. The sixth
thing, which is next unto this, is a Circle wherein the two Signs of the Moon,
rising and falling, at two several hollow places it is seen at what state she
is, and her Age is declared by an Index, which is wholly turned about once
every Month. The seventh thing, which is about this, are four little Bells,
whereon the Quarters of the hour are stricken; at the First quarter comes
forth a little Boy, and strikes the first Bell with an Apple, and so goes and
stays at the fourth Bell until the next Quarter; then comes a lusty Youth,
and he with a Dart strikes two Bells, and succeeds into the place of the
Child; at the Third comes forth a man in Arms, with a War-Mace in his hand,
and striking three Bells he succeeds into the place of the young Man; at the
Fourth quarter comes forth an Old man with a Staff, having a Crook at the end,
and he with much ado, because he is Old, strikes the four Bells, and stands
at the Fourth quarter until the next Quarter; forthwith to strike the Clock
comes Death: in the Room above this, for this is the eight thing, (and this
understand, that at every Quarter comes he forth, thinking to catch each of
those former Ages away with him;) but at a contrary side, in the same Room
where he is, comes Christ forth, and drives him in: but when the last Quarter
is heard, Christ gives him leave to go to the Bell which is in the midst, and
so strikes he with his Bone according to the number of the hours, and there he
stands at the Bell, as the Old man does at his quarter Bell, until the next
Quarter, and then go they in both together. The ninth and last thing in this
right Line, is the Town at the top of the Work, wherein is a noble pleasant
Chime, which goes at three, seven, and eleven of the Clock, every time a
diverse Tune to one of the Psalms; and at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, a
Thanksgiving unto Christ: and when this Chime has done (the Cock, which
stands on the top of the Town, on the North-side of the main Work,) having
stretched out his Neck, shaken his Comb, and clapped his Wings twice, Crowseth
then twice; and this verily he does so shrill and naturally, as it would make
any man to wonder; and if they list, which attend the Clock, they make him to
Crow more times. In this Town whereon this Cock stands, are conveyed all the
Instruments of those motions which are in the foresaid described things.



The other places of note in this Lower Alsatia, are 2. Altkirck, in the part
of Sungou; 3. Ensisheim, in higher Alsatia; 4. Frisbourg, in Brisgou; 6.
Offenbourg, in Mortnais; and 7. Bade, in the Marquisate.

Palatinate of the Rhine.
The PALATINATE of the RHINE, which is divided or severed into the Estates of
the Palatinate, the Estates of the Princes of the House Palatinate, and the
Bishoprics and Imperial Cities of Spires and Worms. The chief places are
Heidelberg, seated in a Plain, but environed on three sides with high
Mountains, and the other regards the Rhine, from which it is distant about a
mile; it is dignified with the Seat of the Palsgraves, as also with an
University. 2. Spires, seated in a Plain about half a mile from the Rhine, a
City of more Antiquity than Beauty and Trade, being of note for the Imperial
Chamber here continually kept. 3. Worms, a City also of good Antiquity for the
many Imperial Parliaments here formerly held; and 4. Frankendal, a new, fair,
strong and beautiful City, about which grow great plenty of Rhenish Wines.

Electorates of Mayence, Trives, and Cologne.
The Electorates and Archbishopricks on the Rhine, are those of MAYENCE, whose
chief places are Mayence and Aschaffenbourg; of TREVES, whose chief places are
Treves and Coblentz; and of COLOGNE, whose principal places are Cologne and
Bonne.

Cleaveland.
The Estates of the Succession of CLEAVELAND contain the Dutchies of Cleves, of
Julier, and of Berge. The Duchy of Cleves and County of Mark, is in the
Marquisate of Brandenburgh, Duchy of Cleves.
and has for its chief places Wesel and Hamme, in the County of Marks.

Duchy of Juliers.
The Duchy of JVLIERS has for its chief places Aken, where the Emperor, after
his Election, is invested with the Silver Crown of Germany; this place is of
great esteem for its holy Relics; and 2. Juliers.

The Duchy of BERGE, or MONTE, has for its chief places Dusseldrop,
Hattingen, and Arusberg.

The UNITED PROVINCES.
UNder the name of the United Provinces of the LOW COUNTRIES, or NETHERLANDS,
are contained the Duchy of Guelders, the Earldoms of Holland, Zeland, and
Zutphen, and the Lordships of Vtrecht, Overyssel, Groningue, and Malines.

Duchy of Guelderland.
The Duchy of GVELDERS, or GVELDERLAND, Westwards of Brabant, is divided into
the Quarters of Betuve, Veluve, and Guelders, particularly so called; wherein
are the Towns of 1. Nieumegue, once a Free City, seated on the branch of the
Rhine called Whael, and made one of the Imperial Seats in these parts by
Charles the Great; the other two being Thionvil and Aken. 2. Arnhem, the usual
residence of the Dukes of Guelders; 3. Ruremond, so called from the River Ruer
and Monde; 4. Harderwick, from a Village made a walled Town by Otho the third
Earl; 5. Guelders; 6. Venlo; and 7. Bommel.

Earldom of Holland.
The Earldom of HOLLAND has on the West and North the Seas, from which no part
is above three hours distance; in this Earldom are said to be about 400
Villages, and 23 Towns; the chief of which are Amsterdam, which of late, by the
addition of the new to the old, is a fair, strong, and beautiful City, being
the most rich and powerful of all the Netherlands; famous for its great Trade
to the utmost parts of the World, and as infamous for its toleration of all
Religions: It is seated on the Tay, which like a large, but calm Sea, flows
on the North-side; and the River Amster, taking its course from the South,
through three Lakes enters the City, passes through it, and falls into the
Tay. This City may be said to be the greatest Haven Town in the World, where
there are commonly to be seen about a 1000 Sail of Ships to ride; and by reason
of its vast Trade to Foreign parts, is found to have great plenty of all known
Commodities, as being general Traders to most places of Traffic. 2. Rotterdam,
famous for giving Birth to Erasmus; 3. Delft, inhabited most by Brewers and
their Relations; 4. Harlem, where Printing was first invented, and the first
Book that ever was Printed was Tully's Offices; 5: Leyden, dignified with a
famous University; the Town consists of 41 Islands, the passage from one to
the other being by Boats and Bridges, there being about 40 of Wood and 110 of
Stone. 6. Dort, where, in Anno 1618. was held a National Synod against the
Arminians; 7. Brille; 8. Alemar; 9. Incluse; and 10 the Hague, a Village, but
the largest in the World, equalizing many fair Cities, numbering about 2000
Houses, and is very populous; it is adorned with the Palaces of the States
General, who have here their Assemblies.

It will not be improper to speak of the power of these States by Sea, which is
so great, than in Holland, Zeland, and Friezland, they are able to put forth to
Sea about 2500 Sail of Ships for burden and war. Nor can it be forgot how
Margaret, A strange Birth of 365 Children.
Sister to Floris the Fourth, Earl of Holland, had at one Birth (being 42 years
of Age) 365 Children, which were all Christened in two Basins in the Church of
Lasdunen, by Guido Bishop of Vtrecht, who named the Males all John's, and the
Females Elizabeth's; and the Basins are yet to be seen in the said Church.

The Earldom of ZELAND, quasi, Sea and Land, Zeland.
consisting of seven Islands, the remainder of fifteen, which the Seas are said
to have swallowed up, in which were abundance of good Towns and Villages. The
seven Isles yet remaing are 1. Walcheren, whose principal Towns are
Middlebourg, once enjoying a good Trade, by the residence of the English
Merchant-Adventurers; and Flushing, the first Town that the States took from
the Spaniards; being now a place of good strength, and held to be the Key of
the Netherlands. The second Isle is South Beverland, whose chief Town is
Tergowse: The third Schoven, where are Sirexee and Brevers Haven: The fourth
Tolen, whose principal place is Tertolen^ the other three Islands are
North-Beverland, Duveland, and Wolferdike. This Country is destitute of
Fresh Water and Wood, but in recompense is very fertile in Grains.

Earldom of Zutphen.
The Earldom of ZVTPHEN, whose chief places are Zutphen, seated on the Yssel, a
place of great strength.

Barony of utrecht.
The Barony of VTRECHT, North of Holland, has 70 Villages, and 5 walled Towns;
the chief of which are 1. Vtrecht, a City commodiously feated for passage by
Boats to diverse other Towns, which, with the benefit of the common Ferries, one
may go in a day from hence to any of the 59 walled Towns, equally distant from
it; and to Dinner to any of the 26 Towns, and return at Night. 2. Rhenen, 3.
Amsford, 4. Wicket, and 5. Montfort.

Barony of Overyssel.
The Barony of OVERYSSEL, bounded on the East with Wesphalia; its chief places
are Deventer, and Swoll, in the quarter of Saland: Oldenzee, in the quarter of
Tuente; and Goevorden, in the quarter of Drente.

Westfriezlands
The Barony of WEST-FRIEZLAND is bounded on the West and North with the Sea, is
said to number 340 Villages and 10 Towns, the chief of which are 1. Louvarden,
where there is held the Common Council for the Province; 2. Harlingen, a
Maritim Town; 3. Franicker, of late made a University; and 4. Dockum.

Groningue.
The Barony of GRONINGVE is a Town in West-Friezland, having under its
Jurisdiction 145 Villages, of which the chief are Groningue, Old Haven, and
Keykerke.

Under the name of Germany beyond the Rbine, we comprehend Franconia, Hessia,
and Westphalia.

Province of Franconia.
The Province of FRANCONIA is divided into three parts, viz. into Ecclesiastics
or Bishoprics, Laics and Imperial Cities: the Bishoprics are those of
Writzberg, Bamberg, and Mergetheim, Cites of good account; the Laics are the
Marquisates of Cullembach and Onspach, and the Counties of Holas, whose chief
place is Weickersheim; and Wertheim, whose chief place bears the same name: and
the Imperial Cities are 1. Nuremberg, seated in a barren Soil; yet by reason of
the Industry of its Inhabitants is a place of good Riches, and well frequented
by Merchants for their Wares, known by the name of Nuremberg-Wares. 2.
Francfort, seated on the Moene, which severeth it into two parts, but joined
together by a fair Bridge. It is encompassed with a strong double Wall; it is a
Free City of the Empire, and famous for the two Fairs or Marts for Books here
annually held; the one in Lent, and the other in September: and 3. Schweinfurt.

Lantgravedom of Hassia.
The Lantgravedom of HASSIA, Eastwards of Saxony; its chief places are 1.
Cassel, a City seated in a fertile Soil, yet of no great beauty; 2. Marpurg, an
University, and the Seat of the Second House of the Lantgraves; and 3.
Dormestad, the Seat and Inheritance of the youngest House of the Lantgraves.

To this Province does belong the Country of WALDECK, whose Earls are subject
to the Lantgraves; its chief place is Gorbach. Likewise to this Province
belongs WETTERAVIA, whose chief places are Nassau, Solins, Han^u, and
Isenbourg.

Province of Westphalia.
The Province of WESTPHALIA is divided into three parts, to wit, Ecclesiastics,
Counties, and Imperial Cities. This Province was the ancient habitation of the
Saxons; the Soil is very fertile, wonderfully stored with Acorns, which makes
their Swines-flesh excellent, and so much esteemed. The chief places in the
Ecclesiastics are those of Paderborne, Mind, and Arensberg; also the
Bishoprics of Collen, Munster, and Triers. The Bishopric of COLLEN takes up
a great part of Westphalia, Bishopric of Collen, etc.
and has for its chief place Collen, a City well stored with Schools for the
education of Youth; and here (according to Report) were interred the Bodies of
the three Wisemen which came from the East to worship our Savior, vulgarly
called the three Kings of Collen. The Bishopric of MUNSTER has its chief
place so called, seated on the River Ems, where there is a Monastery so called,
built by Charles the Great; 2. Warendrop, and 3. Herwerden. The Bishopric of
TRIERS has for its chief places 1. Triers, an ancient City, seated on the
Moselle; 2. Bopport, seated on the said River, and 3. Engers.

The Counties belonging to Westphalia.
The Counties belonging to the Province of Westphalia, are 1. EMBDEN, whose
chief place is Aurick; 2. OLDENBOVRG, whose chief place is so called; 3. HOYE,
which has for its chief place Nienbourg; 4. LIP, whose chief place is
Lipstad; 5. RAVENSBERG, whose chief place is Herword; and 6. BENTHEM, whose
chief place bears the fame name.

And lastly, Imperial Cities.
the Imperial Cities are those of Embden, seated low, and therefore no good
VVinter City; but in the Summer is very pleasant: and Zoest, of some account.

We have already subdivided Germany about the Danube; it parts, as they are set
down in the Geographical Table of Germany about the Danube, are as follows.

Province of Sovabia, with its Parts.
The Province of SOVABIA is divided into several parts and Bishoprics, viz. the
Bishopric of AVSBOVRG, whose chief places are Dillengen and Fuessen. The
Bishopric of CONSTANCE, whose chief place is Mersbourg. The Bishopric of
COIRE, whose chief place is Marsoila. The Duchy of WIRTENBERG, whose chief
places are Stutgard, dignified with the Seat and residence of the Duke; and
Tubingue, of note for being a University, both Imperial Cities. The Marquisate
of BVRGAV, which has for its chief place Guntzbourg. Part of the Marquisate of
BADENDVRLACK has for its principal place Baden, seated on the Rhine, and
honored with the residence of the Marquess for the Winter Season, as Milberg
is for the Summer. The County of FVRSTENBERG has for its chief place Meskirch.
The County of HOHENBERG, whose chief place is Ehingen. The County of RHINFELD,
has for its chief places Rhinfelden and Lauffenbourg. The Barony of WALDBOVRG,
whose chief place bears the fame name. The Marquisate of ANSPACH, whose chief
place bears the fame name. The Bishopric of WEIRTSBERG, whose chief place
bears fame name. The Bishopric of MENTZ, whose chief place is so called,
seated on the Moene; this Bishop is the chief Elector of Germany. The
Bishopric of BAMBERG has for its chief places Bamberg, seated on the Moene;
and Fochiam, where (as it is said) Pontius Pilate was born.

Besides these Parts or Countries there are several IMPERIAL CITIES, Imperial
Cities.
as they lie on this side, and beyond the Rhine; as 1. Ausbourg, seated on the
Leith, in a fruitful Plain for Corn and Pastures, Northwards of the Alps, from
which it is not far distant; it is a Free City of the Empire, governed by a
Senate of Citizens, and is a place of beauty and good strength. 2. Constance,
3. Vberlingue, with twelve others, as are mentioned in the Geographical Table
of Germany, about the Danube.

Switzerland, and its parts.
The Province of SWITZERLAND, the SWISSES, or HELVETIA, South of Italy and
Savoy, is divided into 13 Cantons; and Confederates with them are 12 or 13
Allies, and 20 or 25 Subjects; all which, with the names of the several
Cantons, etc. are set down in the Geographical Table of Switzerland. The whole
Country is in length 240 miles, and about 180 in breadth; it is exceeding
populous, and the Men being good Soldiers and addicting themselves to the
Wars, serve under the Colors of any Prince that hireth them. This Country is
said to lie the highest of any in Europe, as sending forth four Rivers, which
run through its quarters, viz. the Rhine, Danube, the Po, and the Roanus. But
to proceed to its chief places in the Cantons, and then with those Confederate
with them; and 1. Basle, seated on the Rhine, which separates it into the
greater and lesser Basle, once an Imperial City, but now joined to the Cantons;
it is of note for its University, for the notable Council here held, and for
the Sepulchers of Erasmus, Hottoman, Clareanus, and Pontanus. 2. Zurich, seated
on the Lake Zurisca, which separates it into two parts, but joined together
with three fair Bridges, that in the midst serving for a Meeting Place for
Merchants. 3. Lucerne, seated on the banks of a great Lake so called; 4.
Steine; 5. Berne, 6. Soleurne, 7. Fribourg, and 8. Schafshouse.

Commonwealth of Geneva.
Amongst the Confederates with the Switzers, the chief are the Commonwealth of
GENEVA, whose Territories (though not above eight miles in circuit, and and the
City not above two miles in circuit) is said to contain about 16 or 17000
Souls; it is seated on the Lake Lemanus, through which the River Rhosne takes
its course, which divides the City in two parts; it is a fair City, well
fortified, and wholly in the possession of the Protestants, and since the
Reformation is become a flourishing University. The Government of this Estate
is by a Common Council, consisting of 200, the four chief amongst them are
called Syndiques. The Magistrates of this City allow of all Civil Recreations
on Sundays; to their Ministers they allow no Tithes, but give them yearly
Stipends.

The Grissons, Sangal, Vallais.
The GRISSONS has for its chief place Coire: also SANGAL; and the Territory of
VALLAIS, or Valesia, seated wholly amongst the Alps; a Country of no great
bigness, consisting in craggy Rocks and impassible Hills, yet intermixed with
delightful and rich Valleys. Its chief places are Sittin, or Sion, the only
walled Town in the Country, and is a place of great strength, as well by Nature
as Art, being seated on a high and steep Hill, 2. Martinach, of note for its
Antiquity; and 3. Augaunum, or St. Maurice, esteemed the Key of the Country,
especially in the Winter, the Ice stopping all other entrances; here being a
Bridge over the Rhine for that purpose, which is strongly built, and as well
fortified and guarded for fear of a Surprizal. Besides these several other
Places, Bishoprics and Cities, which are their Allies and Subjects, which I
have observed in the Geographical Table of Switzerland.

Province of Bavaria, with Its parts. Dukedom of Tirol.
The Province of BAVARIA is divided into the Dukedom of Tirol, the Duchy of
Bavaria, and the Palatinate of Bavaria.

The Estates of the Dukedom of TIROL is about 70 miles in length, and as much
in breadth; it has for its chief places 1. Inspruck, seated on the Oenus. 2.
Trent, a Bishopric, seated on the River Adesis, famous for the General Council
there held by Pope Paul the Third, against the Doctrines of Luther and Calvin,
which continued off and on for the space of 18 years. 3. Tirol, and 4.
Feldkirch. The Soil of this Country is very fertile, and in many places has
store of Silver-Mines, which are found profitable to the Archdukes.

Duchy of Bavaria.
The Duchy of BAVARIA has for its chief places, 1. Munick, seated on the Aser,
dignified with the residence of the Duke. 2. Saltzbourg, seated on the River
Saltzech, a City honored with a Bishopric; and here lies interred the Body
of Paracelsus. 3. Passau, famous for the often meeting here of the German
Princes. 4. Ratisbone, seated on the Danow, of note for the interview here made
between the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Maurice Duke of Saxony. 5.
Frisingue, seated on the ascent of a Hill, and not far from the River Mosacus;
and 6. Ingulstad, seated on the Danube, and dignified with an University.

Palatinate of Bavaria.
The Palatinate of BAVARIA has for its chief places 1. Amberg, seated amongst
Silver-Mines. 2. Newbourg, usually the portion of some of the younger
Palatines. 3. Castle, where the Palatinates of the Rhine, when they sojourn in
this Country, use to keep their Court. 4. Sultzbach, 5. Burglenfelt, 6.
Aichstet, and 7. Pfreimt.

Dukedom of Austria, with its parts.
The Arch-Dukedom of AUSTRIA is seated on both sides of the Danube, and has
united to it, as Horeditary possessions of that House, the Provinces or
Dukedoms of Stirie, Carinthie, Carniole; the County of Cilley, and the
Marquisate of Windischmarch.

The particular Dukedom or Province of AUSTRIA is separate from Hungaria on the
East by the Leite; Austria.
its chief places are 1. Vienna, seated on the Danube, at present the Seat of
the German Emperors, as being the Metropolitan, fairest, and most beautiful
City in all Germany, being adorned with many magnificent Temples and stately
Monasteries; but above all, with a most sumptuous and Princely Palace, where
the Emperor keeps his Court. It is esteemed the Bulwark of the Country against
the Turks, being of note for the repulse they gave the Turks in Anno 1526, when
besieged by about 200000, under the conduct of Solomon the Magnificent, and
were thence repulsed with the loss of about 80000 Men. 2. Ems, so called from
the River on which it is seated; 3. Wells; 4. Crems, seated on the Danube; 5.
Home, 6. Newstat, and 7. Bade.

Dukedom of Stirie.
The Dukedom of STIRIE is contiguous to Austria on the South; has for its chief
places Grecz, Pruck, and Pettau.

Dukedom of Carinthie, etc.
The Dukedom of CARINTHIE is South of the Alps, and has for its chief places
1. St. Veit, the Metropolitan City of this Country; 2. Lavemunde, and 3. Grucz.

The Dukedom of CARNIOLE, adjoining on Italy Westwards, has for its chief
places Laubuch, Gorice, Gradisque, and Czirknitz.

The Country of CILLEY, whose chief place bears the same name.

The Marquisate of WINDISCHMARCH, which has for its chief places, Metling, and
Radolfswred.

Germany about the Elbe and Oder, contains Bohemia, and the Higher and Lower
Saxony: To Bohemia are incorporated the Dukedom of Silesia, and the Marquisates
of Moravia and Lusatia.

BOHEMIA.
Kingdom of Bohemia.
THe Kingdom of BOHEMIA is encompassed with the Hercynian Forests, which for a
long time was a fence against the Romans; it has on the East, Moravia and
Silesia; on the South, Austria; on the West, Bavaria; and on the North,
Luisatia. The whole Kingdom contains 550 miles in circuit; in which are said to
be 780 Cities, walled Towns, and Castles, and about 32000 Villages. Its
Inhabitants are much addicted to Drunkenness and Gluttony; but the Nobility and
Gentry (for the most part) are of another temper. The Soil of the Kingdom is
extremely fertile, and enriched with Mines of all sorts of Metal, except Gold.
It is severed into 15 Provinces, and has for its chief places, 1. Prague, the
Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and seated in the midst, and on the River
Mulda. This City consists of four several Towns, and every one of them have
their peculiar Magistrates, Laws, and Customs; to wit, the Old Prague,
beautified with a famous Senate House, a large Market-house, and several fair
Structures: then the New Prague, separate from the Old by a deep and broad
Ditch; also the little Town, so called, which is divided from the Old Prague by
the Mulda, to which it is joined by a fair Bridge. In this City is the Hill
Rachine, on the sides of which are many beautiful Houses inhabited by the
Nobility; and on the summit thereof is a magnificent Palace, and is the
residence of the Bohemian Kings, and later Emperors: the fourth and last part
is the Town of the Jews, as by them inhabited, where they have five Synagogues,
and live according to their own Laws. 2. Coln, 3. Jaromirz, 4. Churdin, 5.
Hora, 6. Tabor, 7. Pisen, 8. Ziatecz, 9. Rakonick, 10. Melnisk, and 11.
Nimburg; all places of good account.

The Provinces Incorporate to Bohemia, are the Duchy of Silesia, the
Marquisates of Moravia and Lusasia.

Duchy of Silesia.
SILESIA is Eastwards of Bohemia, and is severed into two equal parts by the
River Oder, which has here its beginning; it is divided into three Dutchies,
fifteen Principalities, and four Baronies, whose names (with their chief
places) I have taken notice of in the Geographical Table of Bohemia. Its chief
places are 1. Breslaw, so called from a Duke of this Province, who built it: In
the year 1341 it was totally burnt, but since the rebuilding is become one of
the neatest Towns in this part. 2. Gros-glogaw, 3. Jawer, 4. Lignitz, 5.
Breslaw, 6. Breig, 7. Monsterbeg, 8. Neiss, 9. Oppelen, 10. Ratibor, 11.
Troppaw, and 12. Wartenberg.

Marquisate of Moravia.
The Marquisate of MORAVIA, West of Bohemia, is esteemed the most fertile Country
for Corn in Germany, abounding also in Myrrh and Frankinsince, not growing on
Trees, but out of the ground: It is severed into three parts, viz. Olmutz,
Brinn, and Znaim; and has for its chief places 1. Brinn, dignified with the
Seat of the Marquess. 2. Olmutz, seated on the Morava, from whence the Country
takes its name, and is dignified with an University. 3. Iglaw, 4. Znaim, 5.
Kremsir, 6. Krumlow, and 7. Polna; all places of good account.

Marquisate of Lusatia.
The Marquisate of LVSASIA, South of Bohemia, is divided into the Higher and
Lower Lusasia; a Country, though but little, yet able to Arm 20000 foot. It
has for its chief places, 1. Baudissen, 2. Gorlitz, 3. Sittaw, 4. Soraw, and
5. Guben.

The County of Glatzko, and the Signiory of Egra, belong likewise to the
Kingdom of Bohemia.

SAXONY.
Saxony, with its parts.
THE Lower part of Germany, about the Elbe and Oder, is taken up by Saxony,
which is divided into the Higher and Lower; in the higher are the Estates of
the Dukes of Saxony, the Estates of the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and the
Duchy of Pomerania. In the Lower Saxony are several Archbishopricks,
Bishoprics, Dutchies, and Imperial Cities; which I have taken notice of in the
Geographical Table of Germany about the Elbe and the Oder.

Higher Saxony, and its parts.
The Higher SAXONY for the most part belongs to the Duke and Elector of Saxony:
It is bounded on the East with Lusatia and Brandenburgh, on the South with
Bavaria and Bohemia, on the West with Hassia and Franconia, and on the North
with Lower Saxony and Brandenburgh. It is divided into the Duchy of Saxony,
the Marquisate of Misne, the Duchy of Voitland, Turinge, with its several
parts, and the Principality of Anhalt. The chief places in the Duchy of Saxony
are 1. Wittenberg, seated on a plain and Sandy barren ground, once dignified
with the Seats of the Dukes of Saxony, famous for the Sepulchers of Luther and
Melancthon; it is dignified with an University, and of this Town there is a
common Proverb, That a man shall meet nothing but Scholars, Whores, and Swine,
which last is their food: and 2. Worlets, seated on the Albis.

Province of Misne.
The Province of MISNE has for its chief places 1. Dresden, seated on the
Albis, the residence of the Duke, and Prince Elector of Saxony; it is a place
of great strength, having on its Walls and Bulwarks 150 Pieces of Ordnance,
being the Dukes Magazin for Arms and Men, where, upon a days warning, he can
make ready 30000 Horse and Foot. 2. Dipsick, seated in a fruitful Plain for
Corn, a fair Town, graced with large Streets, and beautified with many lofty
Buildings of Freestone, and is of some account for its University for the study
of Philosophy: and it is observed, that these Philosophers, amongst other
Secrets in nature, find Beer so good, that the Duke gains by the Custom
thereof, drunk by them and the Inhabitants, who follow their steps, about 20000
l. per annum sterling.

Duchy of Voitland.
The Duchy of VOITLAND is of no large extent, and of as little note; its chief
places are Altembourg and Zuickaw.

Province of Turinge.
The Province of TVRINGE, about 120 miles in length and breadth, is divided into
several parts, and has for its chief places 1. Erdford, a fair and large City;
2. Jeve, an University of Physicians; 3. Smalcald, famous for the Lutheran
League here made, in Anno 1530, by the German Princes, which in a short time
was propogated over all Christendom. 4. Cobourg, 5. Quedelimberg, 6. Salsfeldt,
7. Mulhausen, and 8. Northausen; which two last are Imperial Cities.

The Principality of ANHALT has for its chief places Dessau and Bernebourg.
Anhalt.


Marquisate of Brandenbourg.
The Marquisate of BRANDENBOVRG, East of Poland, is in compass about 520 miles,
is separated into the parts of Altmark, Mittle, Mittlemarck, March and
Newmarck; its chief places are 1. Havelberg, situate on the River Havel, the
Seat of a Bishop. 2. Brandenbourg, which communicates its name to the Country.
3. Berlin, seated on the River Spre, the ordinary residence of the Marquess. 3.
Francfort, seated on the Oder, to distinguish it from the other on the Meine,
and in a fertile Soil for Corn and Wine; it is dignified with an University and
a great Mart Town, but not comparable to the other Francfort, and 5. Landsberg.

Province of Pomerania.
The Province of POMERANIA, South of Brandenbourg, is divided into nine
Dutchies, whose names are set down in the Geographical Table. Its chief places
are 1. Stettin, the residence of the Prince, which from a poor Fisher Town is
now become the chief of the Country. 2. Walgast, once a famous Mart Town, where
the Russians, Vandals, Danes, and Saxons, had their particular Streets of abode
for Trade; but now it is lost, and from thence removed to Lubeck. 3. Gripsvald,
an University; 4. Straelsond, 5. Bergen, 6. Stargart, 7. Colberg, 8. Stolpe,
and 9. Lowenbourg. That part of the Country about Stettin belong to the Swede,
and that toward Colberg to the Marquisate of Brandenbourg.

Lower Saxony, with its parts.
The Lower SAXONY is divided into the Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, diverse
Dutchies, with some Imperial Cities, the names of all which are set down in the
Geographical Table of Saxony. In this Lower Saxony are diverse good Towns and
Cities, the chief of which are 1. Magdebourg, a City which gives name to its
Territory. 2. Breme, which also gives name to its Territory or Archbishopric,
is one of the Hans-Towns, so called from the freedom of Traffic here used; it
is commodiously seated on the Visurge, which runs through the City, and at
five miles distance falls into the Sea. 3. Ferden; 4. Hiddelshein, 5.
Halberstat; which three last are all Cities which give name to their
Territories or Bishoprics. The several Dutchies are HOLSTEIN, or HOLSATIA,
where are the Cities of Kyell, Segelberg, and Gluckstad.

Duchy of Lunebourg.
The Duchy of LVNEBOVRG has for its chief places 1. Lunebourg, said to be so
called from the Moon, which the ancient Inhabitants worshipped; it is an
Imperial and Free City, of good strength, being well fortified with thick
Mud-walls and deep Ditches, and its Buildings are fair; a place well known for
its salt ^^untain here found, over which is built a spacious House containing
52 Rooms, in every one of which are placed eight Chaldrons of Lead, in each of
which are boiled a Tun of Salt every day; the profit of which is divided into
three parts, one to the Duke, another to the City, and the other to the
Monastery and some adjoining Earldoms: And 2. Celle, the Seat of the Duke of
Lunebourg.

Duchy of Brunswick etc.
The Duchy of BRVNSWICK has for its chief places 1. Brunswick, seated in a
fertile Soil for Corn, a free Imperial City, strongly fenced about with Walls,
besides the River of Ancor, which encompasseth it; this place is famous for its
Mum, which the Inhabitants are so much addicted unto, that they commonly spend
the Forenoons about their Affairs, and the Afternoons in good Fellowship. 2.
Wolfenbutten, the Seat of the Dukes of Brunswick.

The Duchy of GRVBENHAGEN, whose chief place is Limbeck.

The Duchy of GOTTINGEN, whose chief place is Gottingue.

The Duchy of LAWENBOVRG, whose chief places are Lawenbonrg and Hadler.

The Duchy of MECKLENBOVRG, West of Pomerania, has for its chief places 1.
Wismar, so named from Wisamarus, a King of the Vandals, Father of Rhadaguse,
who, with Alarick the Goth, sacked Rome. 2. Rostock, an University; and 3.
Scierin.

Amongst the Imperial Free Cities, or Hans-Towns, which are about 72, most of
which are seated on the Sea-shoar, or navigable Rivers, enjoying large
Immunities, and able to put to Sea about 100 Sail of Ships; these following are
of most note, 1. Lubeck, seated on the Trane, which on the North-side divides
Germany from Denmark, and on a spacious Hill, on the top whereof is a beautiful
Church, from whence lead Streets to all the Gates of the City, besides which
there are nine other Churches; it is encompassed with a double Wall, one of
Brick, and the other of Earth, and in some parts deep Ditches, where Ships of
about 1000 Tuns are brought up to Winter from Tremuren, its Maritim-Port,
seated on the Baltic Sea, from which it is about a miles distance. The
Buildings of this City are of Brick, and very beautiful, to which they have
many pleasant Gardens; and the Inhabitants are to be commended for their
civility to Strangers, as also for their strictness in the execution of their
Justice. 2. Hambourg, seated on a large and Sandy plain, and on the banks of
the Albis, where it divides Germany from Denmark; it is a strong City,
encompassed with a deep Ditch, and on the East and Northsides with a double
Ditch and Wall, and has six Gates for entrance, the Haven being shut up with
Iron-Chains and strictly guarded: It is adorned with many fair buildings, as
the Senate House, the Exchange, etc. has nine Churches for Divine Worship, and
its private Houses are for the most part neatly built; it is very populous,
well Inhabited, and frequented by Merchants, especially by the English, who
have here a Factory for Woolen-Cloth. In this City there has been observed to
be 777 Brewers, 40 Bakers, one Lawyer, and one Physician; the reason of this
great disproportion (as one wittily observed) was, that a Cup of Nimis is the
best Vomiting potion, and their Controversies were sooner composed over a Pot
of Drink, than by order of Law. 3. Stoad, commodiously seated for Traffic on
the Elve, about five miles distance from Hambourg, once a place of a better
Trade than now it is. These Cities are called Free, from their great
Prerogatives in coining Money, and ruling by their own Laws; and Imperial, as
knowing no Lord or Protector, but the Emperor, to whom they pay two Thirds of
such Contributions as are assessed in the Assemblies.

Germany is a spacious Country, and very populous; the People are of a strong
Constitution and good Complexion, are very ingenious and stout, much given to
drink, but of a generous disposition: the Poorer sort great Pains-takers, and
the Nobles (which are many, for the Title of the Father descends to all their
Children) are either good Scholars or stout Soldiers, so that a Son of a Duke
is a Duke; a thing which the Italians hold so vain and foolish, that in
derision they say, That the Dukes and Earls of Germany, the Dons of Spain, the
Nobility of Hungaria, the Bishops of Italy, the Lairds of Scotland, the
Monsieurs of France, and the younger Brethren of England, make a poor Company.

There are so many inferior, (yet free) Princes in this Country, that in a
days Journey a Traveller may meet with many Laws, and as many sorts of Coin,
every Prince making use of his own Laws and Coins, whose Laws the Emperors are
sworn to keep; which made one say, that the Emperor is King of Kings, the King
of Spain King of Men, and the King of France King of Asses, as bearing his
heavy Taxes.

The fertility and Commoditles of Germany.
The Country is generally fertile and temperate, being situate under the
Temperate Zone. Here are many Mines of Silver and other Inferior Metals; it
has store of Corn and Wine, which they transport to foreign Countries, as
likewise Linen, Laces, Woollen, and diverse Manufactures, also Quicksilver,
Alom, Arms of all sorts, and other Iron-works; and its Ponds, Lakes, and Rivers
are well stored with Fish.

Its chief Rivers.
The chief Rivers of Germany are, the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, and the Oder;
for the Danube having but a small course in this Country, shall be elsewhere
spoken of.

The Commodities and Trade of Belgium.
That part which we call BELGIVM, or the Low Countries, is of a large extent,
seated in the North Temperate Zone, under the 8 and 9th Climates, the longest
day being 17 hours; the Air by reason of the industry of the Inhabitants in
draining the Marshes, and turning the standing-Waters into running-Streams, is
now very healthful, as being purged from those gross Vapors which did thence
arise: the Country lies exceeding low, and therefore subject to Inundations.
The Commodities that these Countries yield, are, Linnens, Yarn, Thread, Says,
Silks, Velvets, Tapestries, Pictures, Prints, Blades, Soap, Butter, Cheese,
Fish, Pots, Bottles, Ropes, Cables, Armor, several Manufactures, etc. besides
the Commodities of India, Persia, China, Turkey, and other parts, which are
here had in great plenty, by reason of the vast Trade they drive in all parts.

The Estates of the Crown of POLAND, are POLAND; under the name of which is
comprised, The Kingdom of POLAND, as it is divided into the Higher, or Little
POLAND, where are the Palatinates of Cracou, with its Castlewicks of Cracou,
Vounicz, Sandecz, Biecz.
Sandomirie, with its Castlewicks of Sandomitz, Vislicz, Radom, Zawichost,
Zaro^w, Malogocz, Czeschow,
Lublin, with its Castle -- Lublin.
Lower, or Great POLAND; where are the Palatinates of Posna, where are the
Castlewicks of Posna, Meseritz, Ragozno, Sremck, Brzesti, Crimn, Sandock.
Kalisch, with its Castlewicks of Kalisch, Kamin, Gnesna, Landa, Nackel,
Biechow.
Sirad, with its Castlewicks of Sirad, Wiel^n, Rozpirz.
Lencini, with its Castlewicks of Lencici, Bressini, Inowlocz.
Dobrzin, with its Castlewicks of Dobizin, Rippin, Stouck.
Ploczk, with its Castlewicks of Ploczk, Rasuntz, Sceps.
Rava, with its Castlewicks of Rava, Sochaczow, Gostiny, Cowal.


Diverse Dutchies, with their Castlewicks, to wit, RUSSIA NOIRE, which is
esteemed in the Higher Poland; where are the Palatinates of Leowenborg, or
Leopolis, with its Castlewicks of Leowenborg Halicz, Drzemist, Zamoscie.
Belz, with its Castlewicks of Beln, Chelm.

CUJAVIA, which is esteemed in the Lower Poland; where are the Palatinates of
Brzesti, with its Castlewicks of Brzesti, Krusnick, Cowal.
Uladislau, with its Castlewicks of Uladislau, Bidgost.

MAZOVIA, also esteemed in the Lower Poland, where are the Palatinates of
Czersk, with its Castlewicks of Warzaw, Liw, Czersk, Wissegrod, Zakrotzim,
Ciechanow, Wilna.

PRUSSIA, or PRUSSE; as it is divided in POLAQUIE, PRUSSIA ROYALE; where are
the Palatinates of Dantzick, with its Castlewicks of Dantzick, Elbing, with its
Castlewicks of Elbing, Marienburg, with its Castlewicks of Marienburg, Culm,
with its Castlewicks of Culm.
PRUSSIA DUCALE, with its Palatinate and Castlewick of Koningsberg, with its
Palatinate of Bielsk, with its Castlewick of -- Bielsk.

And diverse other Estates, Dutchies, etc. united, or subject to the Crown of
POLAND, viz. Duchy of LITHUANIA, under the name of which are comprised,
LITHUANIA; where are the Palatinates of Wilna, with its Castlewicks of Wilna,
Osmiana, Wilkomirs.
Braslaw, with its Castlewicks, Braslaw, Misdzial,
Troki, with its Castlewicks, Troki, Kowno, Grodno, Lida.
Minsk, with its Castlewicks of Minsk, Borissow, Robaczow, Rzeczica, Mary.
Minsk, with its Castlewicks of Mscislnw, Mohilow, Orssa.
Novogrodeck, with its Castlewicks of Novogrodeck, Slonim, Woskowiska.
Polosczk, with its Castlew, of Polosczk. Vitepsk, with its Castlew. of Vitepsk.
POLESIE, where is -- Bre^siici, with its Castlew. of Bressici. SAMOGITIE, with
its Palatinate and Castlewick of Rosienie. Duchy of VOLHYNIE, as it is divided
in the Higher VOLHYNIE, with its Palarinate of Lusuc, with its Castlewicks of
Lusuc, Wolodomiers, Krzemienec.
Lower VOLHYNIE, with its Palatinate of Kiovia, with its Castlewicks of Kiovia,
Owrucze, Zitomirz.

PODOLIE, with its Palate. of the Higher PODOLIE, as Kamieniec, with its
Castlew. of Kamieniec. Lower PODOLIE, as Braclaw, with its Castlewick of
Braclaw.
Part of MOSCOVIA, where are The Dutchies of Smolensko, with its Castlew. of
Smolensko. Novogrodeck, with its Cast. of Novogrodeck.



POLAND.
Poland, and its parts.
THE Estates of the Crown of Poland ought to be considered in two sorts, the one
called the Estates of POLAND, and the other of LITHVANIA; these two having
heretofore had their Kings and Dukes apart, and not having been united till
within about 270 years. The Estates of Poland shall be, Poland which we will
divide into the Higher and Lower, or Lesser and Greater; and into the Dutchies
of Russia Noire, Cajavia, Mazovia, and Prussia. The Estates of Lithuania may be
divided into Lithuania, Volhinia, Podolia, etc. all Dutchies; but Lithuania
much the greater; wherefore he who possesses them is entitled the Great Duke
of Lithuania.

Its extent.
All these Estates of Poland and Lithuania taken together, extend from about the
48th degree of Latitude unto the 57th, which are about 225 French Leagues; and
from the 38th of Longitude unto the 61, and have near as much Continent again
as France. They are bounded on the East for the most part by Moscovy, Bounds.
and part of the Petit Tartars; on the South the Mountains o^ Caprack and the
River Neister divide them from Hungaria, Transylvania and Moldavia; on the West
by Germany, and touched in part on the Baltic^ Sea; and on the North they are
bounded part by Livonia, and Moscovy.

Ancient Inhabitants.
The Ancient name of Poland was Sauromatia, from its Inhabitants the Sauromatae;
afterward by Lechius, the first Duke hereof, in Anno 550, it was called
Poland, which signifies a plain Country, as generally it is. It was made a
Kingdom by the Emperor Otho the Third, Anno 1000, Boleslaus being Duke, and
has ever had its Dukes and Kings elected by the States; who, by reason of
their vicinity to the Turks, generally choose a Warrior.

Fertility, Commodities, etc.
The Country is plain, well clothed with Firs and other Timber Trees; the Air is
so cold, that they have neither Wine nor Grapes, instead of which, having store
of Barley, they make use of the Old drink of England, viz. Ale The Country is
well furnished with Grains and Fruits, but they are but lean their chief
Commodities are rich Furs, Horses, Honey, Wax, Bow-staves, Buff-hides,
Ambergreese, Flax, Linen Cloth, Masts, Cordage, Boards, Wainscot, Timber,
Rozin, Tar, and Pith of both kinds, Match, Iron, Stock Fish, Salt dug out of
the Earth, Potashes, Rye in great plenty, for which it has made Dantzick
famous. It is well furnished with Flesh, Fowl, and Fish; and to wa^ds the
Carpatian Mountains of Hungaria are found Mines of Gold and Silver, as also
Iron and Brimstone.

Its People.
The People are ingenious, and much addicted to Languages, especially Latin;
there being scarce a man, though of a mean condition, but understand^ it:
according to their abilities, they are more inclined to prodigality than
penuriousness; as for the Gentry, they are free, but the Pesants are no better
than Slaves, being under subjection to their Lords. They are esteemed good
Soldiers, are proud, much given to costly Apparel and delicious Diet; they use
the Sclavonian Language: in matters of Religion they are said to embrace all,
so they have any thing of Christianity in them; some following the Reformed
Churches, some embracing the Doctrine of Calvin, others of Luther, and some of
Augustine, Bohemian and Helvetian Confessions, and blazon or coat of arms of
Sir Robert ClaytonTo the Rt Worship Full Sr Robert Clayton of the City of
London Knight and Alderman and Lord Mayr thee of Anno 1680 This Mapp is D D by R B

P of the ESTATES of the CROWN of POLAND, where are the KINGDOM of POLAND
withits Palatinates the DUCHESS of RUSSIA-NOIRE CUJAVIA MOZOVIA PRUSSIA ^IA
VOLHYNIA PODOLIA. etc Designed by Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King.
others are of the Church of Rome, which does occasion the Saying, That he that
has lost his Religion, let him seek it at Poland. Written Laws they have but
few, if any, Custom and Temporary Edicts being the Rule both for their
Government and Obedience.

The Revenue of the King.
The Revenue of the King is not great for so large a Country, and that which is,
he receives from them quarterly, the Kingdom being divided into four Parts,
every one of which keeps the King and Court a quarter; which Revenue is not
certain, but more or less according to his occasions, by War, Marriage of his
Daughters, or the like.

Poland, with its parts and chief places.
The Kingdom is divided throughout into Palatinates and Castlewicks. Poland,
taken particularly, is divided into the Higher and Lower; in the Higher are the
Palatinates of Cracou, Sandomirz, and Lublin. Places of most note in these
parts are 1. Cracou, or Cracovia, seated in a Plain, and on the Banks of the
Vistula, dignified with the residence of the King: It is in form round, the
Houses fair and lofty, and built of Freestone; in the midst of the City is a
large Quadrangle Market-house, where is seated the Cathedral Church, and the
Senate House for the Citizens, about which are several Shops for Merchants. The
City is encompassed with two strong Stone Walls, and a dry Ditch; on the
East Side of the City is the Kings Castle, being fair, well built, and
pleasantly seated on a Hill, as also the Kings and Queens Lodgings; on the West
is a Chapel where the Kings are interred, and on the North-side Lodgings for
Entertainment and Feasting; the South Side being without Buildings: but as to
matters of Trade, this City is of small account.

Also Sandomirz and Lublin, both chief Cities of their Palatinates, are in the
higher Polonia, or Poland.

Lower Poland.
In the Lower Poland are the Palatinates of Posna, Kalisch, Sirad, Lencin^,
Dobrzin, Ploczk, and Rava; whose chief Cities or places bear the same name, and
are the residence of their Palatines. Besides which there are several other
Towns of good note, which are taken notice of in the Geographical Table of the
Kingdom, and in chief Posna and Gnesna, dignified with the Sea of an
Archbishop, who during the Interregnum of the King, holds the Supreme
Authority in the Kingdom, and summoneth the Diets.

To Poland does also belong the Dutchies of Russia, Noire, Cujavia, Mazovia,
Prussia, and Polaquie.

Russia Noire.
RVSSIA NOIRE has for its chief places Loewenberg and Belz, both chief of
their Palatinates.

OVJAVIA has for its principal places Brzesti and Vladislau, Cujavia.
both chief of their Castelwicks.

Mazovia, with its places.
MAZOVIA has only one Palatinate, viz. Czersk, under which is comprised
several Cities and Castlewicks, the chief of which is Warzaw, one of the
fairest in the Kingdom, it oft-times being the residence of the Kings of
Poland, a place noted for its excellent Metheglin here made.

PRVSSIA is considered in two parts, Prussia.
which are called Royale and Ducale: Prussia Royale is immediately subject to
the Crown of Poland, and has its Palatinates in the Cities of 1. Dantzick,
seated on the Vistula, at its influx into the Baltic Sea, and at the foot of a
great Mountain, which hangs over it; it is the fairest, best, and of the
greatest Trade of any in Prussia. Through this City runs a River very
commodious to the Inhabitants, whereon are many Mills for the grinding of Corn,
which is here found in great plenty; as also a Water-Mill, for the conveyance
of water in Pipes to their Houses; and by reason of its great Trade for Corn
with England and other parts, they have a great many Granaries or Storehouses
for the same, which is hither brought them from Poland. 2. Elbin, though but
small, yet a fair City, and indifferently well frequented by the English
Merchants. 3. Marienburg, the Seat of the Masters of the Dutch Knights; 4.
Culne, and 5. Thorn, which though it has no Palatinate, is esteemed by many
next to Dantzick. Prussia Ducale belongs to the Marquess of Brandenbourg, who
holds it from the Crown of Poland.
It has only one Palatinate at Koningsberg, seated on an Inlet of the Baltic
Sea, and washed with the River Pegel; it is a fair City, a famous Mart, and a
good University, and before its Coast is gathered great quantity of
Ambergriece: This Ambergriece is the juice of a Stone growing like Coral on a
Rock in the North-Sea, continually covered with Water; and in the Months of
September and December, by the violence of the Sea, is rent from the Rocks and
cast into the Havens of the Neighboring Countries.

POLAQVIE is a small Province between the Estates of Poland and Lithuania,
Polaquie.
and seems to have belonged to Mozavia; Bielsk is the Seat of its Palatinate.
And hitherto we have treated of the Estates of Poland, almost all on the
Vistula, or the Rivers that fall into it, on which are seated the three fairest
Cities of these Quarters, viz. Cracow, toward its Spring; Warsaw, toward the
middle of its course; and Dantzick, toward its principal Mouth falling into
the Sea.

Estates of Lithuania.
The Estates of LITHVANIA are East of Poland, and about the River Neiper; they
are divided into the Palatinates of Wilna, Braslaw, Troki, Minsk, Novogrodeck,
Polosczk, and Vitepk. Its chief places are Wilna, an University, and the
Premier Palatinate; the other principal places bear the name of its Palatinate,
and are of some account.

Polisie. Samogitie.
The Quarter of POLESIE has for its chief place Bressisi. SAMOGIYIE has no
Palatinate, and has for its chief place Rosienie, whose Houses are built with
Mud and Straw walls.

The Duchy of VOLHYNIE is divided into the Higher and Lower, Volbynie.
and has the Palatinates of Lusuc and Kiovia; its chief places bear the names
of their Palatinates.

The Duchy of PODOLIE is also divided into the Higher and Lower, Podolie.
and has the Palatinates of Kamieniec and Braclaw, whose chief places bear the
same name.

The Turks and Swedes possessors of some parts of Peland.
The Turks are possessed of Oczacou in the Lower Podolia, and on the Black Sea;
likewise of Dassau in the Lower Volhynia, and on the Borstyhenes. The Swedes
have likewise, within these few years, taken all Livonia; the Duchy of
Curland, wherein is the City of Mittau remaining only of that Province under
the protection of the Crown of Poland; and moreover the Vayvode of Moldavia,
and sometimes likewise he of Valachia renders some Duties to Poland. In
Lithuania are diverse Dukedoms, as of Slusk, Neswies, Birga, etc. whose Princes
are powerful and have great Privileges. The Dukedoms of Smolensko and
Novogrodeck, which are of a great extent, and run all along the Coast of
Lithuania, toward Moscovia, belong at present to the Crown of Poland, although
part of Moscovy.

The principal Rivers in Poland are the Vistula, the Niemen, the Dovine, the
Neiper or Borysthenes, and the Neyster; most of which are very considerable for
largeness, fairness, and swiftness of Stream.

SCANDINAVIA, which with the Peninsula's and Isles about it, are the Estates of
DANEMARK, which comprehends the Kingdoms of DANEMARK; whereof the principal
parts are The Peninsula of JUTLAND, as it is divided into four Bishoprics and
two Dutchies; to wit, Ripen, Ripen, Rolding.
Arhusen, -- Arhusen. Alborg, Alborg, Scagen.
Wiborg, -- Wiborg. Sleswick, Sleswick, Flensborg, Hussen, Hadersleben,
Friderickstad, Sunderborg.
Holstein, or Holsace, Kiel, Segeberg, Krempe, Meldorpe, Gluckstad, Lubeck,
Hambourg, Borg in Femeren.

Diverse ISLES, the chief of which are Seland, or Zeland, Cop^nhagen, R^schilt,
Elsenno^r, War^org.
Fuinen, -- Otrensoe. Falster, Nicopen. Gotland, Visby. Osel, -- Arensborg.
The Coast of GOTHLAND; where are the Provinces of Halland, Halland, Helmstad,
La Holme.
Bleckinge, Christianople, Christianstad, Elleholm.
Sconen, or Scanja, Lunden, Elsenborg, Landscron, Malbogen.


NORWAY, which consists of Five Governments in SCANDINAVIA, viz. Bahus, --
Marstrand. Aggerhus, Opslo, Schou:
Bergenhus, Bergen, Staffanger.
Trontheinhus, -- Trontheinhus. Wardhus, -- Wardhus.
And diverse Lands and Isles, in the Northern Sea, and in AMERICA Artick, the
chief of which are Groneland, -- Bearford. Izland Isle, Scalhold, Holen,
Bellestead.
Far Isle, -- Far,


SWEDEN; which comdrehendeth the Regions of SUEONIE; whose parts are SUEONIE,
with its Provinces of Upland, Stockholme, Upsal.
Westermannie, Vesteras, Arbog, Koping.
Dalecarlie, -- Idra. Nericie, -- Orebrog. Sundermannie, Nikoping, Strengnes.

NORTHLAND, with its Parts of Gestricie, -- Gevalie, Helsinge, Hudwickswalde.
Medelpapie, Indal. Angermannie, Heronsand. Bothnie, -- Torn.

LAPPONIE, or Lapland, in part, to wit, LAPPONIE, most Southern, where are the
Marches of Vina-Lapmarck, -- Loisby. Pitha-Lapmarck, Sytovoma. Lula-Lapmarck,
Torpajaur. Torne-Lapmarck, Sequara. Kimi-Lapmarck, -- Somby.
GOTHLAND, or Gothie; whose parts are OSTRO-GOTHLAND, with its Provinces of
Ostro-Gothland, Wadstein, Schening, Linkoping, Norkoping, Sunderkoping.
Smalandie, Calmar, Jenekoping, Vexjo, Ekesio, Westerwick.
Ocland Isle, -- Borkholm.
WESTRO-GOTHLAND, with its Provinces of Westro-Gothland, Gotheburg, Scara,
Mariestad, Lidekoping.
Dalie, -- Daleborg. Vermeland, -- Carolstad.
FINLAND, -- Finland, Abo, Bienborg.
And Provinces united to FINLAND, as Cajanie, -- Ula. Savolaxie, Nyslot.
Tavastie, Tavasthus. Nyland, Botgo. Carelie, Wyborg. Ke^holm, -- Kesholm.

INGRIA, which cannot be divided into Provinces, -- Notteborg. LIVONIE, whereof
the part belonging to Sweden, may be divided into Esten, Hapsel, Revel, Nerva,
Derpt.
Letten, -- Riga.



The Kingdom of DANEMARK, as it is composed of three Parts, to wit, The
Peninsula of JUTLAND, or JUTIE, as it is divided in North JUTLAND; where are
the Bishoprics of Ripen, Ripen, Kolding, Weel, Ward, Rinkoping; Hostebro.
Arthusen, Arthusen, Kalla, Hersens, Randersen, Ebelto, Grimastad, Hobro.
Albourg, with its parts of Thyland, -- Albourg. Hanheret, Thystad. Morsee,
Nycopin. Venyssel, Selby, Scagen, Hirring.

Wibourg, Wybourg, Lemwick, Holcker.

South JUTLAND; where are the Dutchies of Sleswick, Sleswick, Hussen, Stenberg,
Hadersleben, Flensborg, Gottrop, Ekelenford, Appenrade, Frederickstad,
Holstein, or Holsatia, with its parts of Holsatia, Kiel, Rendesborg, Wilstet,
Nienmunster, Borg en Femeren.
Wagrie, Lubeck, Segeberg, Odesloe, Niestat, Oldenborg.
Stormarch, Hambourg, Krempe, Bredenberg, Gluckstad, Tychenberg,
Dilmarch, Meldrop, Heide, Lunden.



Diverse Isles, About the BELT, and between the Lands of DENMARK, as Zeland, or
Seland, Copenhagen, Roschilt, Elsenour, Warborg, Fredericksbourg, Ringstede,
Holbeck, Slages, Corsroer, Nestwede.
Fuinen, or Fionie, Osell, Niborg, Swinborg, Kartemunde, Woborg, Assens, Bowens.
Fimera, -- Petersborne. Alsen, Osterholme, Gammelgard, Norbarch.
Tusinge, -- Niburg. Huen, -- Vramburg. Arroe. -- Koping. Longland, --
Rudkoping. Laland, Maxcow, Rodby, Maribo.
Falster, Nikoping, Stubekoping.

In the BALTIC Sea, and between the Lands of SWEDEN; as Bornholme, Nex,
Rattenby, Sunneckier.
Gothland, -- Visby, or Wisby. Oesel, -- Arensborg.

The Coast of GOTHLAND, or GOTHIE, to wit, WESTRO-GOTHLAND; where is the
Province of Hallandis, Warborg, Lattolm, Helmstad, Falkenborg, Hallandia.
OSTRO-GOTHLAND; where are the Provinces of Scania, or Sconen, Lunden,
Helsinborg, Christiana, Malbogen, or Ellegeboges.
Bleckinge, or Blekingea, Trelborg, Usted, Malinogia, Colmar, Christianople.




SWEDEN.
The Estates of the Crown of SWEDEN, are composed of six different Regions, to
wit, SWEDEN, particularly so called, whose parts are SUEONIE; where are the
Provinces of Upland, Stockholm, Upsal, Enkoping, Sigtun, Oregrand.
Westmannie, Westeras, or Arosia, Arbog, Koping.
Dalecarlie, -- Idra. Nericie, -- Orebrog. Sudermannie, Nikoping, Strengnes,
Tleg, T^^silia, Tvosa.

NORLAND; where are the Provinces of Gestricie, -- Gevalia. Helfinge,
Hudwickswalde. Medelpadie, Indal. Angermannie, Hernosand. Pothnie, -- Torn.

LAPLAND; in part, to wit, LAPPONIE SUEDOISIE, or LAPLAND; where are the Parts
of Vina-Lapmarck, Loisby, Semifierli.
Pita-Lapmarck, Sytovoma, Lochtary, Arny^rfuy.
Lula-Lapmarck, Torpajaur, Sirckflucht, Jokomuka.
Torne-Lapmarck, Sequara, Tinquara, Pederjersi, Kittilaby, Sodenkyle.
Kimi-Lapmarck, Somby, Kimiby, Kolajerfui, Kithyerfui, Marnselkeby.

GOTHLAND, with its two parts, OSTRO-GOTHLAND, or Gothie Orientale, with its
Provinces of Ostro-Gothland, Wadstein, Schening, Linkoping, Norkoping,
Sunderkoping.
Smalandie, Cal^ar, Jenekoping, Vexjo, Ekesio, Westorwick.
Oclald, -- Borcholm.
WESTRO-GOTHLAND, or Gothie Occidentale, with its Provinces of Westro-Gothland,
Gotheburg, or Lodusia, Scara, Mariestad, Lidekoping, Falekoping, Skedui, Hio,
Bogesund, Br^tta, Lundos.
Dalie, -- Daleborg. Vermeland, -- Carolstad.

FINLAND, which may be divided in FINLAND, South Finland, Abo, Raseborg,
North Finland, Biernborg, Raumo, Nystadh, Nadhendal.

Aland Isles, -- Castelholm. Provinces united to FINLAND, as those of Cajanie,
Ula, Wassa, or Mustasar, Cajaneborg, Ulaborg.
Savolax, -- Nyslot, or New Castrum. Tavaste, -- Tavasthus. Nyland, Borgo,
Helsingfors.
Caresie, -- Wiburg. Kexh^lm, -- Kexholm, or Barelogorod.

INGRIA, which is not subdivided into Provinces, Notteburg, or Orescu,
Juanogorod. Caporia, Jamagorod.
LIVONIA, in part; as (The rest belongs to the Crown of POLAND.) ESTEN, or
ESTONIE; where are the parts of Esten, -- Febin. Vickeland, Pernajo, Habsel.
Harneland, -- Revel. Wireland, Wiesenburg, Tolsburg.
Alantack, Nerva, Nyslot.
Jervenland, -- Wittenstein. Kikeland, -- Derpt.
LETTEN, with its parts and places, as they lie Toward the West, Riga,
Segenwold, Wenden, Walmer.
Toward the South, Koekenhaus, Creutzburg, Dunburg.
Toward the East, -- Maryenburg.



SCANDINAVIA, Wherein are the ESTATES of DENMARK AND SWEDEN.
The extent, bounds, etc. of Scandinavia.
SCANDIA, or SCANDINAVIA, is only a Peninsula, which extends it self from the
56th degree of Latitude, unto or beyond the 71, which are near 400 Leagues from
North to South; and from the 26th degree of Longitude unto the 45th on the
Baltic Sea, and on the Ocean unto the 53; but this Mass of Land cannot have in
its greatest breath above 150 Leagues, finishing in two points toward South
and North.

Its situation, etc.
It is bounded on the North and West by the Northern Ocean, and on the South
and East by the Baltic Sea; a continual Chain of Mountains dividing it into
two almost equal parts, of which one is on the Baltic Sea, and the other on
the Ocean; this possessed by the King of Denmark, the other by the King of
Sweden.

DENMARK.
Its Commodities.
THe Estates of DENMARK contain two Kingdoms, to wit, DENMARK and NORWAY.
Denmark is between the Ocean and the Baltic Sea, composed of a Peninsula
contiguous to Germany, and of a Coast contiguous to Sweden; and of diverse Isles
which are between the Peninsula and Coast; some likewise in the middle of the
Baltic Sea, and near Livonia. It is situate partly in the Northern Temperate
Zone, and partly within the Artick Circle, extending from the 55th degree of
Longitude, or the middle Parallel of the 10th Clime, where it joyneth to
Germany as far as 71 degrees, where it is bounded by the Frozen Ocean, the
longest day in the most Southern parts being 17 hours; but in the most Northern
parts they have no Night for almost three Months: whereas on the other side,
when the Sun is in the other Tropic; and most remote from them, they have no
Day for the like time* This Country is very cold, and consequently not over
fertile, nor affording good Fruits. The Commodities that this Kingdom affords
are Fish, Hides, Tallow Furniture for Shipping, as Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Masts,
etc. also Firr, Boards Wainscot, several sorts of Armor, etc.

map of Denmark VIRTUTE NON VI

blazon or coat of armsTo ye Rt. Honble (...) Lord (...) and (...) of (...)
D^^^^^ and Earl of (...) and Ld of his Maitys most Honorable privy Council
etc 1678 of (...) and younger son of one of ye Danish Kings that came into
England with William the Conqueror This Mapp is Humbly dedicated by R B

^^PP OF THE KINGDOM OF DENNMARKE, WITH ITS SEVERAL DIOECESES OR PROVINCES,
DESIGNED BY MONSIEUR SANSON, GEO


Its Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants for the most part are of a good statute and complexion, very
healthful, ingenious, and of a ready wit, very punctual in performing their
Promises, proud and high conceited of their own worth, lovers of Learning, as
may appear by those Famous men it has bred, viz. Tycho Brahe, the great
Mathematician; John Cluverus, the renowned Philosopher and Physician; Godfrey
Gottricus, that stout Warrior, who not only settled the Government of this
Kingdom, but also shook the Realm of France; likewise Waldemare, Christiern the
Second and Fourth; Canutus and Sueno, which two last were the Conquerors of
England. They are great punishers of Offenders, especially Theft and Piracy;
their Women are of a comely grace, very fair, and as fruitful in Children;
discreet and sober.

The Peninsula called JVITLAND, once Cimbrica Chersonesus, Juitland.
from the Cimbrians its ancient Inhabitants: it is divided into North and South
Juitland.

North JVITLAND is severed into the Bishoprics of Ripen, Arthusen, Albourg,
and Wibourg.

Diocese of Ripen.
RIPEN contains 30 Prefectures or Herets, (as they term them) 7 Cities or
walled Towns, and 10 Castles. Its chief places are 1. Ripen, seated near the
German Ocean, the chief place of the Diocese, and dignified with an Episcopal
See: 2. Kolding, seated on a Creek of the Baltic Sea; 3. Weel, 4. Ward, etc.

Diocese of Arthusen.
ARTHVSEN contains 31 Prefecture, 7 Cities or walled Towns, and 5 Castles.
Its chief places are 1. Arthusen, seated on the Baltic Sea, having a
commodious and well frequented Port, and dignified with an Episcopal See. 2.
Kalla, a strong place, seated in a large Bay, reaching two Dutch miles to the
high Hill of Elemanberg; opposite to which lie the Isles of Hilgones, Tuen,
Samsoe, Hiarneo, and Hiolm, etc. 3. Horsens, 4. Randersen, 5. Ebelto, and 6.
Hobro.

Diocese of Albourg.
ALBOVRG, which is divided into four parts, viz. Thyland, whose chief Town is
Albourg, seated on the Bay of Limford, which, opening into the Baltic Sea,
extends it self through the main Land, almost to the German Ocean. 2.
Hanebert, on the North-west of Limford Bay, contains 4 Prefectures, and has
for its chief place Thystad. 3. Morsee, lying on the Ocean, contains 3
Prefectures, the Isle of Ageroe, the Town of Nicopin, and the Castle of
Lunstead: and 4. Vensyssel, according to Mercator, Vandalorum seeds, or the
Seat of the Vandals, contains 6 Prefectures, 3 Towns, and 1 Castle, viz. Selby,
Cagen, and Hirring.

Diocese of Wibourg.
WIBOVRG contains 16 Prefectures, the Isles of Egholm, Hansholm, Bodum, Idgen,
Cisland, and Ostholm; also it has 3 Castles, and as many Cities or walled
Towns; viz. 1. Wibourg, dignified with an Episcopal See, and the Courts of
Judicature for both the Juitlands. The point of Scagen, or Scean, ends this
Peninsula toward the North. 2. Lemwick, and 3. Holcker.

South JVITLAND is divided into the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein.

SLESWICK, a Country for the most part level, Sleswick.
enriched with fertile Fields both for Corn and Pasturage; it is very well
provided with good Bays on the Baltic, which are found commodious for
Merchants. The chief places in this Dukedom are, 1. Sleswick, seated on the
Slay, which falls into the Baltic, where it has a commodious and well
frequented Haven; it is a fair Town, the chief of the Dukedom, and honored
with an Episcopal See. 2. Hussen, seated on the German Ocean: 3. Sternberg, the
ordinary residence of the Governor for the King of Denmark; 4. Hadersleben,
seated on a navigable Inlet of the Baltic, and fortified with a strong and
fair Castle: 5. Flensborg, seated on the Baltic amongst high Mountains, having
a Port so commodious and deep, that Ships do lade and unlade close to their
Houses: and 6. Gottrop, where there is a strong Fort belonging to the Duke of
Sleswick, seated at the end of a large Bay of the Baltic, of note for the
Custom-house or Tole-booth there, erected for Cattle, sent out of these parts
into Germany.

Dukedom of Holstein.
HOLSTEIN, or HOLSATIA, a woody, low and Marshy Country; is severed into the
Parts of Holsatia especially so called, Wagrie, Stormarch, and Dilmarch.

HOLSTEIN, or HOLSATIA, has for its chief places 1. Kiel, seated on a
navigable Arm of the Baltic, where it has a large Haven, being a Town of a
good Trade. 2. Rendesborg, said to be the strongest Town in all the Province;
3. Wilsted, and 4. Nienmunster.

WAGRIE has for its chief places, 1. Lubeck, an Imperial and free City,
enjoying the privileges of a Hans-Town; it is pleasantly seated on the
confluence of the Billew, and on the North-banks of the Trane, severing it from
Germany, and empty themselves into the Baltic, being capable to receive Ships
of a great burden, which they lade and unlade at Tremuren, the Maritim Port,
at about a miles distance; it is built on all sides upon a rising Hill, on the
Summit whereof is placed a fair and beautiful Church called St. Mary's, being
the Cathedral, from whence, on an easy descent, there are Streets which lead
to all the Gates of the City, which afford a fair prospect to the Eye; besides
which, it is adorned with 9 other Churches, one of which being a decayed
Monastery, is converted to an Armory to keep their Ammunition for War. It is
about 6 miles in compass, encircling within its Walls diverse fair and uniform
Streets, beautified with good Brick-buildings, is very populous, and well
inhabited by Citizens and Merchants, who drive a considerable Trade on the
Baltic Seas. But this City, as also Hamburgh, is esteemed rather part of Lower
Saxony in Germany, where I have also treated of them. 2. Segeberg. 3. Odesloe,
4. Niestad, and 5. Oldenborg.

STORMARCH has for its chief places, 1. Hambourg, an ancient City built by the
Saxons, since made an Imperial City, enjoying the Privileges of a Hans-Town,
seated on the North-banks of the Albis, which divides it from Germany, of which
it is reckoned a part or member, and there treated of in the description of the
Lower Saxony, to which I refer the Reader. 2. Krempe, seated on a River of the
same name, which emptieth it self into the Store; a strong and well fortified
Town, being reckoned for one of the Keys of the Kingdom. 3. Bredenberg, a Town
of great strength, belonging to the Rantzoves: 4. Gluckstade, seated on a Bay
or Creek of the German Ocean, and therefore well fortified, to command the
passage up the Elbe: and 5. Tychenberg, seated on the Elbe, being so well
fortified, that it is now held the strongest Town in this Kingdom.

DILMARCH or DITMARCH, has for its chief places, 1. Meldrop, seated on the
Sea; a place of some account, and the chief of the Province. 2. Heide, and 3.
Lunden, a Haven Town, seated on the Eider, which rising in this Peninsula, here
emptieth it self into the Ocean.

The BALTIC ISLES.
THese Islands which are between Juitland and the Coast, and farther in the
Baltic Sea, are in number 35, and are so called, as being dispersed in these
Seas. The Baltic Sea begins at the narrow passage called the Sound, and
interlacing the Countries of Denmark, Poland, Germany, and Sweden, extends to
Livonia and Lithuania. The reason (according to the Opinion of many) why this
Sea, which is so large, does neither ebb nor flow, may be as well from its
Northern situation, whereby the Celestial influences have the less
predominancy, as also from the narrowness of the Straight, which receives the
Ocean. The chief of these Isles I have set down in the Geographical Table of
this Kingdom, of which a word or two, and first with Zeland.

ZELAND, anciently Codanonia, from the Codani its Inhabitants; Zeland.
the Isle is very fertile, the greatest and of most importance of any in the
Baltic, to the King of Denmark, as lying not above three miles from the main
Land of Scandia, which narrow Straight is called the Sound, through which all
Ships must pass that have any Trade into the Baltic, all paying to the said
King a certain Toll, according to the bigness or Bills of Lading, by which
arises a great Revenue unto him; and for the security of this passage there
are built two exceeding strong Castles, the one in this Isle, called
Cronenberg, and the other in Scandia, called Hilsemberg, of which more anon. In
this Isle are 7 strong Castles, and 13 Cities or walled Towns; the chief of
which are 1. Copenhagen, or Haffen, the chief of the Isle, seated near the Sea,
having a commodious Port; it is built orbicular, of a good strength, being
defended by a powerful Castle; its Houses are but meanly built, yet it has a
spacious Marketplace, and is dignified with the residence of the King for the
Winter season; whose Palace is built of Freestone quadrangular, but of no great
splendour, as also with the only University in the Kingdom. 2. Elsenour, seated
on the Sea side; of it self but a poor Village, were it not for the great
resort of Seamen in their passage through the Sound into the Baltic, this
being the place where they pay their Toll; and in this Village is the stately
and well fortified Castle of Cronenburg, built in the very Ocean, and bravely
resisting the fury of its Waves; now the ordinary residence of the King, being
a pleasant prospect into the Sea; on the South Side of this Castle is a large
and commodious Road for Shipping. 3. Roschilt, once a rich City, now only
famous for being the Sepulcher of the Danish Kings, where, in the Cathedral
Church, they have their Tombs; it is also dignified with the Sea of a Bishop.
4. Fredericksbourg, a Fortress built in a pleasant Plain, often visited by the
King in his retirement, where he has a delightful House seated in a Park. 5.
Warborg, 6. Ringstede, 7. Holbeck, 8. Slages, etc.

FVINEN, or FIONIE, seated betwixt Zeland and Juitland, Fuinen.
and almost joining to the Main-land; it is of a fextil Soil, and pleasant
situation, being in length about 12 Dutch miles, and 4 in breadth. Its chief
places are 1. Osel, or Ottonium, so called from Otho the Great, who founded
here an Episcopal See, seated in the midst of the Isle, from which the other
Towns are of an equal distance, which renders it very commodious for Traffic;
it is not large, having but two Churches, and its Buildings are neat and
ornamental enough. 2. Niborg, 3. Swinborg, 4. Kartemunde, 5. Woborg, and 6.
Ascens; all, or most of them seated on some convenient Creek or Haven.

FIMERA, a very fertile and well peopled Isle; Fimera.
and here it was that Tycho Brache, the famous Mathematician, built an
Artificial Tower, in which are (or were) many rare Mathematical, Instruments;
its chief place is Petersborne, of some importance to the King of Denmark.

ALSEN, a small Isle appertaining to the Dukedom of Sleswick; Alsen.
is very populous, contains 13 Parishes, and 4 Towns, viz. Osterholme,
Gammelgard, Norbarch, and Sunderburg; dignified with the residence of the Duke
of Sleswick.

TVSINGE, a very small Isle, Tusinge.
and of no great account by reason of its dangerous situation; its chief place
is Niburg.

ARROE, a small Isle belonging to the Duke of Sleswick; Arroe.
it contains three Towns, the chief of which is Koping, fortified with a Castle
so called.

LONGLAND, an indifferent long Isle, but not very broad; Longland.
its chief place is Rudkoping, of some account.

LALAND, not far distant from Zeland; abounds in Corn and Chesuuts, Laland.
fraighting therewith many Vessels yearly; it is very populous for the bigness,
contains 3 Towns, viz. Maxcow, Rodby, and Maribo; besides a great many Villages
and some Castles.

FALSTER, a small Isle, fertile in Corn, seated near to Laland; Falster.
its chief places are Nikoping, of a pleasant situation; and Stubekoping.

In the Baltic, and between the Lands of Sweden, are also several Isles the
chief amongst which are BORNHOLME, Bornholm.
seated not far from Gothland, an Isle very fertile, feeding abundance of
Cattle: It has many goo^ Towns and Villages, the chief of which are, Nex,
Rottonby, and Suomneckier.

GOTHLAND, Gothland.
an indifferent large Isle, in form round and narrow, no^ in the possession of
the Swedes: It yields white Marble, excellent for building; the City of Wisby,
seated in the midst of the Isle, was once so famous for Traffic, that it gave
Maritim Laws to the Baltic Sea.

That which the King of Denmark possesses, as particularly belonging to tha^
Crown, on the Coast of Scandinavia, is part of the ancient Gothland; the most
Southern of which that we are now treating of, is divided into Westro-Gothland
and Ostro-Gothland; which are again subdivided into the Provinc^ of Hallandia,
which takes up Westro-Gothland; and into the Provinces o^ Scania and Blecking,
which takes up Ostro Gothland; and first of Hallandia.

HALLANDIA, Hallandia.
now in the possession of the Swedes; this Country o^ Province for fertility of
Soil, sweetness of Air, store of Fish, plenty of Lea^ and Brass Mines, and
thickness of Towns and Villages, which are well inhabited, is not inferior to
any. Its chief places are 1. Warborg, seated on the Sea-shoar, and defended by
a strong Castle, built on the summit of a Hill, s^ that it has a great command
over the Country. 2. Laholm, 3. Helmst^^* 4. Falkenborg, and 5. Hallandia, or
Katterop.

SCANIA, Scanr^.
or SCONEN, has on the North Hallandia, and on all other parts, the Sea; also
now in the Swedes possession: It is about 70 miles long and 48 broad; the
pleasantest Country in all Denmark, most abundant i^ Fruits, and richest in
Merchandise, and on the Seaside are sometimes such great sholes of Herrings,
that they are found troublesome to Vessels. Its chie^ places are 2. Lunden, an
Inland City, dignified with the sole or Metropolita^ Archbishop of Denmark; the
chiefest beauty in this City is the Cathedra^ Church, a magnificent Structure,
beautified with excellent pieces of Art, the chief whereof are the Clock and
the Dial: the Clock being so composed b^ Artificial Engines, that whenever it
strikes, two Horsemen give one another as many blows as the Clock strikes
times: also upon the opening of (...) Door there is represented a Theater,
where the Virgin Mary is seated on (...) Throne with Christ in her Arms, to
whom the three Kings, with their sever^ Trains, come in order, and with
reverence present their Gifts to her, during which time two Trumpeters
continually sound. And next the Dial, where the year, month, week, day, and
hour of the day throughout the year, as also the motions of the Sun and Moon
through each degree of the Zodiac; the moveable and fixed Feasts, etc. are to
be distinctly seen, being neatly set for^^ in variety of delightful Colors. 2.
Helsinborg, fortified with an impregnabl^ Castle, and one of the Forts
defending the Sound: 3. Christiana, a place (...) great strength; and 4.
Malbogen, a Port-Town, opposite to Copenhagen.

BLECKLINGE, Blecklinge.
also belonging to the Swedes, has on the East an^ South the Baltic Sea: It
is a Mountainous and barren Country, and hat^ for its chief places 1.
Malinogia, the Birthplace of the famous Mathematicia^ Gaspar Bartholinus, who
was said to be the inventer and maker of the before said Clock and Dial. 2.
Colmar, an important Fortress against the Swedes until they gained the
Province.

The Soil of Denmark is naturally better for Pasture than Tillage, and feed
such multitude of Oxen, that at least 50000 are said to be yearly sent hence t^
Germany. Their other Commodities are Fish, Tallow, Furniture for Shipping
Armor, Ox-hides, Buck-skins, Wainscot, Fir-wood, Furrs, Pipe-staves Copper,
Wheat, Rye, etc.

map of Scandinavia A General Mapp of Scandinavia Where are ye Estates and
Kingdoms of Danmarke Norwaye and Sweden by Monsieur Sanson
blazon or coat of arms of the Eltham baronetsTo the Rt Worshippfull S.r Thomas
Fitch of Eltham and Mount Mascall in the parish of North Cray in Kent K.t This
Mapp D.D by R. B.



NORWAY.
Its situation, temperature, fertility, Commodities, etc.
THe Country of NORWAY is bounded on the North with Lippia, on the East with the
Dofrine Mountains, which divide it from Sweden, and on all other sides with the
Sea; on which, with a disproportionate breadth, it stretches its Coasts for
1300 miles in length. The Country is extremely cold, being partly under the
Frozen Zone, and partly so near it, that it all suffers under the inclemency of
bitter Colds. It is for the most part Mountainous, full of vast Woods, and of a
Soil so barren and ungrateful to the Husbandman, affording so little Corn, that
on many places the people live on dried Fish instead of Bread, (known to us by
the name of Stock Fish;) but the richer sort of people buy Corn of such
Merchants as come to Trade with them. The principal Commodities that this
Country affords, is great plenty of Firrs, Deal-boards, Timber, Tar, Masts,
and Furniture for Shipping, also Stock Fish, Train-oyle, rich Furrs, Copper,
Pipe-staves, etc. which the Inhabitants exchange for Corn, Cloths, Kersies,
Lead, Tinn, Stockings, etc.

The Country is exceedingly annoyed with certain small Beasts about the bigness
of a Mouse; by them called Lemmers, which at a certain time are so innumerable,
that like Locusts they devour all the verdure of the Earth, and at a certain
time die in heaps, which proves very noisome to the people, infecting the Air;
and the Sea is as bad troubled with Whales. The Inhabitants are said to be just
Dealers, punishers of Theft, and other Vices, and were accounted formerly great
Warriors.

Norway divided into five Governments, viz.
This Kingdom is divided into five Governments, which take their names from the
places where the Governors reside; in all which the Towns are exceeding thin,
and the Houses as poor. The five Parts are as follows.

BAHVS, belonging to the Swedes, is the most Southward; Bahus.
the chief places are Bahus, the residence of the Governor, to which are
subject the Towns of Congel, seated on the Sea, and of some Trade; and
Marstrand, seated in a Demi-Island, of note for the great quantity of Herrings
here caught.

AGGERHVS, mounting toward the North, Aggerhus.
whose chief place or Castle is so called, to which these Towns following are
subject, 1. Opslow, or Asloya, dignified with an Episcopal See, as also with
the Courts of Judicature. 2. Schou, of good account for its Copper and
Iron-Mines: and 3. Frederickstad.


BERGENHVS, or BERGEN, whose chief place is so called, Bergenhus.
dignified with an Episcopal See, and the residence of the Governor, once a
famous City of Trade, and one of the ancient Mart-Towns of Europe; yet still,
by reason of its situation at the bottom of a deep Arm of the Ocean, called
(by them) Carmefunt, where it has a commodious Port; is well frequented by
Merchants, who bring them Corn, Bread, Wine, Beer, Aqua^vitae, and the like
Commodities, to supply their wants; and in exchange take Stock Fish, Furs,
Deals, Firrs, Cordage, Pitch, Masts, etc.

TRONTHEINHVS, or TRONDENHVS, Trontheinhus.
whose chief place and Castle, where the Governor resideth is so called; it is
dignified with the Metropolitan Archbishopric of all Norway, once a fair City,
as being the Seat of their Kings, till the Danes became Masters of this
Country, who have reduced this City to a small Town.

WARDHVS, seated beyond Cape Nort, Wardhus.
which is the most Northern point of Europe. Its chief place and Castle, where
the Governor resideth, except during the absence of the Sun, which is for
about three Months in the year, is so called. This Town is serviceable to the
King, because it was the Luppians, their Neighbors, as also commands the
Natives; and profitable, because all the Ships going to Moscovy, must of
necessity touch here.

To the Norwegian King do belong diverse Lands and Isles in the Northern Sea,,
and in America Artick; the chief of which are Groenland, Izland, Far, etc.
which I shall treat of in the Description of America.

SWEDEN.
THe Estates of the Swede are all on the Baltic Sea, and take up all those
Regions which are on the West, East, and North of this Sea, and is Southwards
of Poland, Germany, and Denmark.

The Estates of the Swede are bounded on the West and North by the Estates of
Denmark, The Bounds of Sweden, with its parts.
on the East by those of Moscovy, and on the South by the Black Sea, Poland,
and Denmark; they comprehend six principal Regions, viz. Sweden, Lapland,
Gothland, Finland, Ingra, and Livonie.

SWEDEN, Sweden.
particularly so called, is divided into the parts of Sueonie and Norland, in
both which are several Provinces, which are taken notice of in the Geographical
Table of Sweden: It is bounded on the East with Sinus Bodicus, on the West the
Dofrine Hills, and on the South Gothland. The Country is very fruitful and
delicious, unless in some places, occasioned by the cragginess of the
Mountain, the great Marshes yet undrain'd, and the vast Woods yet standing.
The places of most note in this part are 1. Stockholm, seated in a watery
Marish, in part upon the Lake Meller, and in part on the East Sea, out of which
the great Trade for Shipping to this City does come, its Port being capacious
and safe; which is defended by two powerful Forts, as also the City by an
impregnable Castle, well furnished with Ammunition. This City being the
residence of the King, as the Metropolitan City, (whose Palace is more renowned
for its Antiquity than Magnificence) makes it to be a place of a considerable
Trade, and well frequented. 2. Vpsal, seated not far from the Bay of Bodner,
dignified with a See of an Archbishop, as also with an University, and
beautified with a Cathedral Church, no less large than fair, formerly the
Burial place of the Swedish Kings. 3. Nikoping, a Maritim Town, of good
strength. 4. Copordel, famous for its abundance of Brass. 5. Westeras, or
Arosia, of note for its rich Mines of Silver, which are exceeding profitable to
the King. 6. Hudwickswalde, seated on the Sea or Gulf of Botnie. 7. Orebrog,
8. Gevala, 9. Indal, 10. Hernosand, and 11. Torn.

LAPLAND is the most Northern part of Scandinavia; the People are barbarous,
Lapland.
rude, void of Arts or Letters, great Idolaters, Sarcerers, and Witches, for
which the place is famous, or rather infamous: of stature they are low, but
strong and active, expert in the Bow, with which they kill their wild Beasts in
hunting, eating the Flesh, and clothing themselves with the Skins, which they
tie about them to preserve them from the pinching Cold.

Lapland is divided into five parts, viz. Vina-Lapmarck, Pita-Lapmarck,
Luna-Lapmark, Torne-Lapmarck, and Kimi-Lapmarck; and these parts are but thinly
beset with Towns, contenting themselves with Sheds and Cabins, which they
remove from place to place as occasion serves. Its chief places I have set
down in the Geographical Table of Sweden.

GOTHLAND is divided into Ostro-Gothland and Westro-Gothland, that is, Gothland.
the Land of the Eastern and Western Goths; and these two parts are subdivided
into several Provinces, viz. Ostro-Gothland, Smalandie, and Oelald, in the
first part; and Westro-Gothland, Dalie, and Vermeland in the other part. This
is the richest and best Province of the North, and very fertile in Corn and
Cattle; in it is the famous Lake Wenir, or Werett, which receiving 24 Rivers,
disburthens it self at one Mouth, and with such noise and fury, that it bears
the name of the Devils-head. The places of most note in Ostro-Gothland are 1.
Wadstein, seated on a Lake; 2. Calmar, on the confines of Denmark, seated on
the Baltic Sea, a large City, enjoying a good Trade, having a commodious Port,
defended by a strong and beautiful Castle. 3. Linkoping, and 4. Vexio, both
Episcopal Sees. 5. Westerwick, commodiously seated on the Baltic Sea. In
Westro-Gothland are the places of 1. Gotheburg, or Lodusia, a Town of great
Trade by reason of its fair and commodious Haven. 2. Scara, an Episcopal Sea;
3. Daleburg, a fair Town, well fortified with a strong Castle; and 4.
Carolstad.

FINLAND has on the East Sinus Finicus, Finland.
on the South the Baltic Sea, on the West Sinus Bodicus, and on the North
Bodinus. The Inhabitants (according to Tacitus) are very barbarous and poor,
being destitute of Arms (except Bow and Arrows) Horse, and Houshold-goods,
contenting themselves with Herbs for their food, the Skins of Beasts for their
clothing, and the Ground for their Bed; yet it is said to be very populous in
Towns and Families; the chief amongst which are 1. Abo, seated at the bottom of
the Bay of Finland, which separates this Province from Livonia, dignified with
the Sea of a Bishop. 2. Bienborg, 3. Raumo, 4. Hadhendal, and 5. Castleholm, in
the Isle of Aland.

United Provinces to Finland.
Provinces united to Finland, are 1. CAJANIE, whose chief places are Vla, Wassa,
and Cajaneborg. 2. SAVOLAX, whose chief place is Nislot. 3. TAVASTE, which has
for its chief place Tavasthus. 4. NYLAND, whose chief places are Borgo, a place
of great strength, near to which (within the confines of Moscovy) are the two
strong Frontier Towns of Viburg and Rivallia, the keeping of which stands the
King of Sweden in 100000 Dollars yearly. 5. CARELIE has for its for its chief
place Wiburg: and 6. KEXHOLME, whose principal place bears the same name.

Other Lands adjacent to Finland, are Bodia and Scrickfinnia.

Lands adjacent to Findland.
BODIA, has on the South Finland, a Country not over fertile in Grain or
Fruits; but in recompense has great variety of wild Beasts, which affoes great
store of rich Furrs. It chiief places are Virtis, Vista, and Helsinga, honored
with the Title of a Dukedom.

SCRICKFINNIA has on the South Bodia, and thence stretches it self between
Lapland and the Frozen Ocean; a Country miserably cold; they have no use of
Money, but pay their Tribute to the King of Sweden in Skins and Furrs, of which
they have great plenty, which they take in hunting. Towns here are very thin,
if any, and those that are be on the Sea-shoar, and very poor, the Natives
contenting themselves with Cabbins and Sheds.

Province of Ingria.
INGRIA, a small Province bordering upon Livonia, at the bottom of the Gulf of
Finland, not many years taken from the Knez, or great Dukes of Mosco, by the
Kings of Sweden; who have likewise robbed Germany of the best part of
Pomerania, and Denmark of the Provinces of Schoven, Scania, Hallandia,
Blekingea, Bahus, Gothland, Oesilia, Heroedalia, and Jemptia.

LIVONIA, bounded on the East with Moscovy, and on the West with the Baltic
Sea; a Country extremely Mountainous and Fenny, but yet so fertile, that it
supplies with Corn the defects of other Countries. It is severed into the
parts, of ESTEN and LETTEN, and these again into several other lesser parts,
which are set down in the Geographical Table. Its chief places are Felin,
Pernajo, Revel, Wiesenburg, Nerva, Wittenstein, and Derpt, a Town of good
Trade. In the part of LETTEN, toward the West, are Riga, the Sea of an
Archbishopric, and is a place of a good Trade; Segenwold, Wenden, and Walmer.
Toward the South are the Towns of Koekenhaus and Creutzburg; and toward the
East the Town of Marienburg: All these Towns in the part of Letten are subject
to the Crown of Poland.

Lakes and Rivers.
In Scandinavia, or the Estates of Denmark and Sweden, are many Rivers, amongst
which, some are large, but not famous: The Lakes and Gulphs, which are in great
number, obscure the Rivers, and make the commerce only on the Coast. The Rivers
of Vma, Pitha, Luda, Torn, and Kimi, give their names to the Marshes of
Laponia, subject to the King of Sweden.

The principal Mountains in Scandinavia are the Dofrine Hills, which is a vast
and continual ridge of Mountains, Mountains.
which divide Sweden from Denmark.

The Spil of Sweden is so fruitful in many places, The Soil.
that it is a hard matter to see a Beggar, and the Air so pure and healthful,
that it is ordinary to see men of 130 or 140 years of Age. Commodities.
The Country abounds in Mines of Copper, Lead, Brass, and Iron; also has store
of Ox-hides, Goats and Buck-skins, Tallow, Tarrs, rich Furrs, Alom, Honey, Malt,
Barley, Wheat, Firrs, etc.

Its People.
The People are naturally strong, active, stout Soldiers, industrious,
laborious and ingenious, especially in Mechanical Aris, very courteous to
Strangers, etc. The Women are said to be discreet and modest. The Christian
Faith was first planted amongst them by Ansgarius, Archbishop of Breme, the
general Apostle of the North.

Revenue of the King.
The Revenue of the Crown of Swedeland must needs be great, there being three
ways allowed him for the receiving it, viz. the Tenths out of all increase of
Commodities, as well those of the growth as otherwise. Also by Customs upon all
Goods exported and imported; and also the Revenue of the Church, which was
seized on and incorporated to the Crown by Gustavus Ericus, our of which there
is ye an allowance to the Bishops and Clergy. And besides these ways, he has
power of imposing Taxes in time of War, according to the emergency of the
occasion.

In his Forces by Land or Sea he is very powerful, being able to put out to Sea
about 100 Sail of Ships, and into the Field about 30 or 40000 Foot and Horse.

As to the deciding of Controversies, etc. every Territory has its Viscount,
every Province its Lamen, and every Parish its Lanasnan or Consul; and there
lies an Appeal from the Consul to the Viscount, and from the Viscount to the
Lamen; from whom also Appeals lie to the Council, and from the Council of
Estate to the King, who alone decideth the same.

The Estates of the Great Duke of MOSCOVY or RUSSIA ALBA. To the West, and
toward SWEDEN and POLAND, Part of LAPLAND; where are the People of
Mouremanscoy Leporie, -- Kola. Terskoy Leporie, -- Jockena. Be^^^ces^oy
Lepori^, Kandalax, Om^^y, ^ie^z, So^^^,
(...) (...) Colmogorod, P^eg^, St. Nicola, Arc-Angel.

Toward the North, and between the Kingdoms of SWEDEN and NORWAY, and the
^iver DWINE; where are the Estates or Provinces of. Cargapol, -- Cargapol.
Wologda, Wologda. Biele^ero, -- Biele^ero. Pleskow, Pleskow, Opoliko.
Novogrodeck, Novogrodeck, Stara Russa, Ladoga.

Toward the South and the Kingdom of POLAND, and between the Rivers Don and
Boristene; where are the Estates of Moscovia, particularly so called, Mosco,
Mitrow, Salboda, Czirpach.
Wolodomme, Wolodimer, Muron.
T^er Twer, Tersack.
Reschowa, Reschowa, Woloczk.
Rezan, Rezan, Coloma, Cassira, Tula, Odojou, Coluga.
Worotin, -- Worotin. Biesski, Biela, Jaroslau, -- Jaroslau. Rostow, Rostow,
Uglitz, Calopigorod, Pereslaw.
Susdal, Susdal, Cast^om, Gali^^.


To the East, and toward TARTARIA, Toward the North, and between the Rivers
Dwine and Oby, where are the Estates of Ou^tiouga, -- Ustio^ga. Condora,
W^^^curia. Juhor^ki, -- Juhora. Petzora, Pusteoziero, Papinowgorod.
Be^^^ski, -- Per^^^w Weliki. Wiatka, Chlinow, Orlow, Slawa^a, Cotelnicz.

Toward the South, and about the Rivers Don and Volga; where are The Cities of
Nifi Novogorod, Vafiligorod, Sura.
The People, called the Czeremissi Logoway, Czeremissi Nagornoy, Morduates,
Machines, Nagaiski, Meschoraki.
The Fortresses of Perwolog Carawool, Cameni Caraw. Stapnio Car. Polooy Car.
Keezujur Car. Ichke^re Car. Uchoog Carawool.


In the ^uc TARTARIA, or Upon, and beyond the River Oby, are the Estates and
places of Obdora, Tara, Zergolta.
Calami, Calami, Japhanim, Tumen.
S^^evia, -- Tobolk. Tingoefi, Narinskoia. Ginstiuski, Besowia. Loppia, Loppi.
Samojedae, To^ma, Vogulichi, -- Tara. Locomoria, Zergolta, Pohem;
Pega Horda, Comgoskoja, Lopin.

Upon, and beyond the River Volga, are the Kingdoms of Casan, Casan, Belater.
Bulgaria, Bulgar, Samara, Marnloria.
Astracan, Astracan, Gi^ildecha, Tsier.

Estates, or Parts of Scibanski. Cosaski. Nagaja Horda.




MOSCOVIA, OR Russia Alba, OR BLANCH.
MOSCOVY, or RVSSIA ALBA, (so called to distinguish if from Russia Nigra, a
Province in Poland) answers to the whole Sarmatia of the Ancients, which they
divided into Sarmatia Europaeana and Sarmatia Asiatica; the most Eastern part
of Moscovy answering to this last, and the more W^^^^ to the former; and this
distinction has made some to esteem it partly in Asl^ and partly in Europe;
but it is by the generality esteemed all in Europe.

Its excent, ^ounds, etc.
The whole Estate of the great Duke of Moscovy is of a larger extent th^^ any
other in Europe, stretching it self 5 or 600 Leagues in length and bread^^*
reaching from the 48th degree of Latitude unto the 70th or 72; and from the
50th of Longitude unto the 100th, and sometimes to the 110th.

Moscovy has its Estates bounded on the East by Tartary, and beyond the Rivers
Volga and Oby; on the South, by the Caspian or Euxine Seas; on the North, by
the Septentrional or frozen Ocean; and on the West, by Norway, the Estates of
Sweden and Poland.

^ts Commodities.
The Commodities that this Empire yields are, rich Furrs of diverse sorts
Potashes, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Wax, Cables, Yarn, and other Cordage, Feathers',
Linen Cloth both course and fine, Train-oyle, Rozin, Pitch, Caviare, Tallow,
Iron, Salt, Seahorse Teeth, Astracan-hides, Tann'd-hides, Raw^hides,
dried-Fish, great increase of Grains, with many other good Commo^dities; here
are great store of Cattle, Elkes, Stags, Bears, Wolves, Venison, Tigres,
Linxes, Hares, etc. great plenty of Fowl and Fish, common with us in England;
and the Earth affords them plenty of Fruits, Roots, and Herbs,

The Air is exceeding sharp and piercing in the Winter, and subject to
ex^cessive great Frosts; but what with their warm clothing with Furrs and their
Stoves in their Houses, they endure it well enough: and as their Winte^ is thus
cold, their Summer is as hot and troublesome, the Sun being as it were above
their Horizon.

^ts Lakes, Forests, etc.
The Country has every where many Lakes, and those of as large an ex^tent as
any in Europe, as those of Lodaga, Ouega, Biela, Osera, Ilmen, an^ others
toward the North; those of Resanskoi-osera, of Iwanow-osera, an^ others
toward the South. Here are many Forests, among which the most re^nowned is
that of Epiphanow, very well clothed with Wood and stored wit^ map of Russia To
ye R.t Honrbl S.r Edu. Dering of Surrenden Dering in Kent Bart one of the Lords
Comissioner of his May Treasury This Mapp is most humbly Dedicated by Richard
Brom. blazon or coat of arms of the Dering baronets

(...) ^APP OF THE ESTATES OF THE GREAT DUKE OF RUSSIA BLANCH OR MOSCOVIA.
Designed by Mouncr. ^^^^^n. Geographer to the French King:
wild Beasts and Fowl. Mountains here are but few, except those of Roglowi,
between the Rivers Tana and Volga; and those of Camenopoij or Stolp, that is,
the Pillars of the World, which are between the Dwine and the Oby.

This Country (according to some) is called the Mother of Rivers, Rivers.
amongst which the Volga, the Don or Tana, and the Dovine or Dwine, are the
most famous; and especially the Volga, which is the greatest and noblest in all
Europe, both for its course and the force of its Water, running 7 or 800
Leagues, and receives abundance of other Rivers.

Moscovy ill inhabited.
Moscovy for the most part is ill Inhabited, and especially toward the North
and East; these quarters being cold, full of Forests, and some of their People
Idolaters: that which is toward Sweden and Poland is more frequented, more
civilized, and its Cities and Towns better built: that which lies toward the
South, and in all likelihood should be the best, is partly Mohammedan, and often
infected by the Petit Tartars. But a word or two of its People about Mosco,
which by reason of its being the residence of the Great Duke, are supposed to
be the most civilized and ingenious.

Its People.
The People are naturally ingenious enough, yet they addict themselves neither
to Arts or Sciences, but chiefly to Traffic and Husbandry, in which they are
very subtle; they are observed to be great Liars, perfidious, treacherous,
distrustful, crafty, revengeful, quarrelsom, proud, much addicted to Women and
strong Drink, but Tobacco is forbidden amongst them. Their Houses are but mean,
and as ill furnished, contenting themselves to lie on Matts or Straw, instead
of Beds; they are gross feeders, yet have wherewithal to feed deliciously.
Their habit (which they seldom or never change) is much the same with the
ancient Greeks, wearing long Robes of Cloth, Satin, Silk, Their Habit.
Cloth of Gold or Silver, which is beset with Pearls, according to the quality
of the person, by which, together with their attendance, they are known; and
under these Robes they wear close Goats and Drawers, begirting themselves with
Swashes; on their feet they wear Buskins, and on their heads, Caps (instead of
Hats) adorned with Pearl and precious Stones, which in their Salutations they
move not, only bow their bodies. They are for the most part fat and corpulent,
esteeming great Bellies, and long and great Beards, for a comeliness; the Women,
though indifferent handsome, yet make use of Paint. In the performance of their
Nuptial Rites they use many Ceremonies, which are largely treated of by Adam
Olearius, in his Book entitled the Ambassadors Travels into Moscovy and
Persin, whose description I shall make use of, wherein he says, That young Men
and Maids being debarred the Society of each other, Maidens not being allowed
the freedom of the Street, or society with Men; Their Ceremonies in Marriage.
it happens that no Marriages are made but by the consent of the Parents; and
the bargain being agreed on by them, the Wedding Day is appointed, the Night
before which the young Man makes his never yet seen Bride a Present, according
to their Qualities. He says further, that there are two Women appointed by
them, who are to take order for the making the Nuptial Bed, etc. which is made
upon about 40 sheaves of Rye, which are encompassed with a great many Barrels
of Wheat and other Grains. All things being made ready, the Bridegroom late in
the Evening goes to the Brides, accompanied with his Friends and Relations,
together with the Priest who is to marry them, riding before them; and being
received in, are brought to a Table where three Dishes of Meat are brought, but
none eats thereof; then after some Ceremonies, the Bride is brought in richly
clad in a sitting dress for that Solemnity by the said Women, who places her by
the Bridegroom; and to prevent their seeing one another, besides the Va^l over
the Brides face, they are parted by a piece of crimson Tassety, which is held
by two Youths: which done, the said Woman ties up her Hair in two knots, paints
her, puts a Crown neatly made and gilded on her head, and habits her like a
married Woman; the other Woman chosen by them paints the Bridegroom, and whilst
this is doing, the Women get up on Benches and sing several Songs; then after
several ridiculous Ceremonies they go to the Church, and before the Priest
gives them the Benediction, he carries them to the Offering, which consists of
fried Meats, Fish, and Pastry: the Benediction is given by holding Images over
their heads, and the Priest taking the Bridegroom by the right hand, and the
Bride by the left, and asks them three times, if they will love one another as
Man and Wife ought, and whether it be by their consent; to which both answer,
Yes: then all the People join hands and dance, whilst they and the Priest sing
the 128 Psalm, which ended, he puts a Garland of Rue about their heads, saying,
Increase and multiply; and then consummating the Marriage, says, Whom God has
joined together, let no man separate; which being pronounced, several
Wax-Candles are lighted, and the Priest is presented with a Glass of Claret,
and being pledged by the Married couple, he throws down the Glass, and he and
the Bride tread it under their feet, saying, May they thus fall at our feet,
and be trodden to pieces, who shall endeavor to sow discontent betwixt us.
Then after several other Ceremonies, the Bride is put in a Sledge and drawn to
the Bridegrooms house, where the Wedding is kept, and he following her on
Horseback, and as soon as they are come, the said Woman conducts the Bride to
her Chamber, undresses her, and lays her in Bed, during which time the
Bridegroom and his Friends are seated at a Table well furnished with Meat; the
Bride being laid in her Bed, the Woman fetches the Bridegroom from the Table,
who is accompanied with about eight young Men, beating in their hands lighted
Torches to conduct him to the Chamber, which being entered, they put them in the
said Barrels of Corn, and void the Room, being each of them presented with two
Martins Skins the Bride perceiving him coming, gets out of the Bed, putting a
Gown about her, and receives him very submissively; and this is the first time
he has the sight of her face: then they sit down at Table, and having eaten go
to Bed, all quitting the Room; and at the Door is placed one of the Old
Servants, who is to demand, if the business is done; and when he says, it is,
the Timbrels, Trumpets, etc. play, till such time as the Stoves are made ready,
where they has themselves, but apart, and the two next days are spent in
dancing, entertainments, and diversions; but for Citizens and Persons of a
meaner Degree, less Ceremonies are used, and with lesser-state and cost. The
Wedding being past, the Bride betakes her self to a retired condition, being
not much permitted the liberty of the Streets, nor do their Husbands,
especially the Richer sort, care they should be brought to Houswifry, so that
they bestow their time in Idleness, and playing with their Maids; and as some
say, they are not well contented unless their Husbands gives them b^ating,
being like Spaniels, the more they are beaten the better they love.
Divorcements are frequent amongst them, for when they have a desire to part,
they accuse her of Adultery, or want of Devotion, by suborning of false
Witnesses, by which they are contented, without answering for themselves.

Their Religion is the same with the Greek Church, of which they are a Member,
Their Religion.
but full of Superstition, as considering the Virgin Mary, the Evangelists,
Apostles, with abundance of other Saints, not only as simple Intercessors, but
also Co-operators and Causes of their Salvation, giving to their Saints and
Images the same honor as is due only to God. They differ from the Romish and
Reformed Churches in several points, as 1. Forbidding extreme Unction,
Confirmation, and fourth Marriages. 2. Denying the Holy Ghost to proceed from
the Father and the Son. 3. Denying Purgatory, but allow praying for the Dead.
4. They hold it unlawful to fast on Saturdays. 5. They reject graven or carved
Images, but allow of the painted. 6. They observe four Lents every year. 7.
Communicating in both kinds, but mixing warm Water with the Wine, and using
leavened Bread, which they distribute both together with a Spoon. 8. They admit
Children of seven years of Age to come to the Sucrament. 9. They admit of none
to Orders, but such as are married, and forbidding the same to those that are
in actual Orders. And 10. Believing that Holy men (before the Resurrection)
enjoy not the presence of God; and for these and the like Tenants, there is a
great feud and hatred between them and the Papists.

The Moscovites suffer all Nations to live amongst them in quietness, and give
toleration to all Religions, except the Jews and Papists, whom they will not
permit amongst them.

They are great observers of Festival-days, of which they have abundance, all
which are not observed, except by the Priests; but their great Festival-days
are strictly observed, as also Sundays, on which they go thrice a day to their
Devotions: Their Service consists in reading of Chapters and Psalms, saying,
or rather singing of certain Prayers, St. Athanasius's Creed, Ceremonies
observed by them.
together with a Homily out of St. Chrysostom; they are such great Adorers of
the Cross, that they will undertake no business, neither eat or drink before
they have made the sign of the Cross; also they are as great worshippers of
painted Images, there being scarce a Family without them; and also have them
placed about the walls of their Churches, directing their Prayers to them; and
these Images are adorned with Pearls and Precious Stones; and if it happen that
any person is Excommunicated, both He and his Images are not allowed the
liberty of the Churches, which are esteemed Sacred places by them, and are
built round, and vaulted like a Dove-house in imitation of Heaven. Their
Devotion is performed standing or kneeling, having no Seats in their Churches;
and in their Communions they hold Transubstantiation. They are strict observers
of Fasts, of which they have a great many, Their Fasts.
besides every Wednesday and Friday, on which they will not eat any kind of
Flesh, nor that which comes from it.

Their Funerals.
In their Funerals they also observe several Ceremonies. As soon as the sick
person is deceased, they send for all his Relations and Friends near at hand,
who stand by him lamenting his loss in a howling tone, demanding why he would
die? whether he wanted any thing? whether his Wife was constant to him? or the
like ridiculous Questions. Also they send to the Priest a Present of
Aqua-vitae, Hydromel and Beer, that he may pray for the Soul of the deceased.
Their Lamentations being ended, they wash the Body of the deceased, put a clean
Shift and Shroud about him, as also a pair of new Buskins on his feet, and so
lay him in the Coffin and carry him to Church, the Priest going first, who
carries the Image of his Saint; and being come to the Grave the Coffin is
uncovered, and whilst the Priest says certain Prayers, the said Image is held
over the Corpse, and the Wife, Relation and Friends kiss him, and take their
last farewell in grievous Lamentations; then the Priest puts betwixt his fingers
a piece of Paper, which is a Pass directed to St. Peter, signed by the
Patriarch or the Metropolitan of the place, wherein is declared what he is, how
he lived in obedience to the Church, etc. as also a penny in his Mouth; after
which the Coffin is covered and the Corpse interred with his face to the East:
then the People doing their devotions to the Images, return to the House of the
deceased, where they dine and comfort up the Widow. Their usual time of
Mourning is forty days, in which time they make three Feasts for the Friends of
the deceased.

They hold Baptism of great importance, Baptism.
insomuch that they Baptize their Children so soon as born; and if it happen
that through weakness the Child cannot be brought to the Church, then it is
baptized at home; and in this they observe several Ceremonies. And the Child
being baptized, the Priest assigns it a particular Saint, the Image of which he
delivers to the Godfather, charging him to instruct the Child to have a
devotion to his Saint.

Ecclesiastical Government.
Their Ecclesiastical Government consists of a Patriarch, which is the Head of
the Church, and as it were Pope, who has under him several Metropolitans,
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Proto-Popes, and Priests.

The Grand Duke of Moscovy is absolute Lord both of the Lives and Estates of
his Subjects, whom he treats little better than Slaves, his chiefest aim being
for what he can get, more than the good and welfare of his People, being, not
subject to Laws, but makes what seems good unto him, which, though never so
tyrannical, are strictly obeyed; yet he will seem to take advice of his Knez
and Bojares, who are as his Privy Council. His Revenues and Riches cannot but
be great from the several ways from which he raises it, as by Illegal Taxes,
Customs, his Lands, and what he takes from his Subjects at pleasure. He is
apparelled like a King and a Bishop, wearing with the Royal Robes a Miter and a
Crosiers-Staff, and observes a great deal of state and grandeur.

The Estates of MOSCOVY comprehend 3 Kingdoms, about 30 Dutchies or Provinces,
and about 20 People or Nations, who live by hoords or Communalties, all which I
have taken notice of in the Geographical Table of Moscovy. The Country is not
so populous as spacious, nor very well frequented by Strangers, so that I
cannot give so good account thereof, as otherwise I would, of which in order.

Province of Dwina.
DWINA, a Province of a large extent, but very barren, has for its chief
places Dwina, seated on the River so called, which falls into the Northern
Ocean; and on the Mouth of the said River, on the Sea-shoar is seated the City
of St. Michael (commonly called Archangel) a place of note for its great
Trade, and much resorted unto by the English.

PLESKOW, Pleskow.
a large Province, whose chief place is so called, being large and fain, and
the only walled City in the Empire; a place of great strength, very populous,
and dignified with an Episcopal See.

NOVOGRODECK, Novogrodeck.
very Northernly seated, a Province also of a large extent, whose chief place
is so called, seated on the River Naf, dignified with and Episcopal See, a City
which for fairness and largness, might once compare with any in Russia, being
formerly one of the Mart-Towns of Europe, which is now removed to St. Nicholas,
a Port-Town, more convenient for the Moscovian Trade.

CARGAPOL, WOLOGDA, and BIELEZERO, whose chief places bear their names, are
Provinces of this Dukedom.

Province of Moscovia.
MOSCOVIA is one of the largest Provinces in all Russia, and seated in the
midst of this large Estate, so called from Mosco its Metropolitan City, seated
on a River so called, dignified with the Imperial Seat, as also with the Sea of
the Patriarch. This City, before its firing by the Tartars, was 9 or 10 miles
in circuit, but now not above half the compass; it is very populous, and has
for Divine worship 16 Churches, of which about half are made of Wood and Dirt,
as are most of the Houses. The Palace of the Great Duke is seated in the heart
of the City, a large Structure, well fortified with 17 Turrets and 3 great
Bulwarks, which are always guarded with about 25000 Soldiers, which, with two
Castles seated in the outward parts of this City, is its only defense, being
without a Wall or Ditch.

WOLODOMIRE is a Duchy very fertile in Corn, Wolodimire.
its chief City being so called, once dignified with the residence of the Great
Duke till removed to Mosco, from which it is distant 36 Leagues, now dignified
with an Episcopal See.

TWER is a fair, Twer.
fertile and populous Province, washed by the Volga; its chief place is so
called, dignified with the Sea of a Bishop, which for beauty and largness may
compare with Mosco, from which it is distant about 140 miles.

RESCHOWA, Reschowa.
a Duchy, Bielski.
which takes its name from its chief City; as does the Duchy of BIELSKI, from
Biela.

REZAN is a Duchy so fertile that its fellow cannot be found in all these parts
yielding Corn to admiration; Rezan.
its, chief City also hears the same name, which is seated on the River Occa,
dignified with an Episcopal See.

WOROTIN, Worotin.
a Province also, so called from its chief City, seated on the said River Occa,
and defended by a strong Castle.

PERMSKI, Permski.
a Province of a large extent; its chief City is so called, seated on the River
Vischora.

WIATKA, Wiatka.
a barren and woody Country, and much pestered with the Incursions of the Crim
Tartars; its chief place being so called.

PETZORA is a Province fenced on all sides by losty Mountains and Rocks;
Petzora.
its chief place takes the name of the Province, seated on a River so called
near its fall into the Sea, and on these Mountains are found excellent Hawks
and Sables, which bring some profit to the Inhabitants.

Other Provinces.
INHORSKI, CONDORA, OVSTIOVGA, SVSDAL, ROSTHOW, and JAROSLAV, are Provinces of
this Dukedom.

Toward the South, Cason.
and about the Don and the Volga, are several Cities, People, and Fortresses,
as are mentioned in the Geographical Table; as are several Provinces or Estates
upon and beyond the River Oby.

Besides these Provinces, the Grand Duke holds at present toward Asia, the
Kingdoms of Casan, Bulgaria, and Astracan.

CASAN is a Kingdom in Tartaria Deserta, Bulgaria.
whose chief place is so called, seated on the Volga; now dignified with the Sea of a Bishop, is in the Kingdom of BVLGARIA, whose chief place is so called.

ASTRACAN lies on the Volga, Astracan.
whose chief place is so called, enjoys a good Trade, especially by the
Armenians, by reason of its commodious situation, on the branches of the
Volga, about 20 Italian miles from the Caspian Sea.

The ISLES of GREAT BRITAIN, with the Territorles thereto belonging, are those
of GREAT BRITAIN, where are at this day two Kingdoms and one Principallty, to
wit, The Kingdom of ENGLAND, which according to the SAXON HEPTARCHY, has had
Seven Kingdoms, viz. Kingdom of KENT, Canterbury, Rochester.
Kingdom of SOUTH SAXONS, Southwards, Chichester, Winchelsey.
Kingdom of EAST ANGLES, Norwich, Ipswich, Cambridge, Ely
Kingdom of EAST SAXONS, Colchester, London.
Kingdom of WEST SAXONS, Exeter, Bristol, Rath, Salisbury, Southampton,
Dorchester.
Kingdom of NORTHUMDERS, York, Lancaster, Durham, Carlifle, Barwick,
Kingdom of MERCIA, Leicester, Lincoin, Nortingham, Darby, Oxford, Gloucester,
Worcester, Leichfield, Chester, Hereford.

The Principallty of WALES, as it was divided into SOUTH WALES, Brecknock,
Cardigan, Cardiff, Monmouth.
NORTH WALES, Flint, Denbigh, Carnarvan, Mongomary.

The Kingdom of SCOTLAND, which has once had the Kingdoms of the SCOTS, beyond
the Tay, Cromartly, Eigin, Aberdone, Perch, Dunkeldon.
PICTS, on this side the Tay, Dunslafag, Dunkirton, St. Andrews, Dunblain,
Sterling, Edinburgh, Glasco.


IRELAND, or The Kingdom of IRELAND, with its Provinces, which were formerly so
many Kingdoms, viz. ULSTER, Donegal, Dungannon, Armagh, Tredagh.
MUNSTER, Cassile, Lymerick, Kinsale, Cork, Waterford.
CONNAUGHT, Slego, Galloway, Refecomen, Letrim.
LEINSTER, Molingar, Trymm, Dublin, Kildare, Kilkenny,


And a great many small ISLES, to wit, those About SCOTLAND, The Oreades, --
Kirkwall. The Isles of Sherland, Burgh. The Western Isles, Colmkill.
About ENGLAND, The Sorlings, -- St. Mary. The Isle of Man, Rusbin. The Isle of
Wight, Newport. The Isle of Jarfey, St. H^llary. The Isle of Garnsey, St.
Peter's.

In AFRICA, in the Kingdom of -- Fex, -- Tangler. Besides the several Factories
belonging to the Royal Company, from Sally in South-Barbary to Cape Ronns
Esperan^^, as at ^am^^, Rio, Nuno, Rio Grande, Siera, Liona, Serbro, Cestos,
A^hin, Anta, Comenda, Cape, Corso, Acara, Cormentine, A^dra, Renin, Cailabar,
etc. In the East Indies, in ASIA, the several Factories belonging to the
East India Company; a Surat, Bambay, Curwar, Baricale, C^lie^t, Fort St.
George, Pentapoll, Musullpat^n, Bellisar, Ougely. In the West Indies, or North
AMERICA, On the Continent, New England, -- Boston. New York, New York. New
Jersey. Maryland. Virginia, James Town. Carolina, -- Charlos Town.
The ISLES of Newfound-Land. the Bahama Isles. Bermudes, -- St. Georges.
Jamaica, Port Royal. Barbados, St. Michaels. St. Christophers, Basse Terre.
Nieves, -- Bath-bay. Monferat. Autega. Angullia. St. Vincent. St. Dominies.
Harbada.



The Kingdom of ENGLAND may be divided into ENGLAND, particularly so eali'd, in
which. If Monmouthshire were included, there would be 40 Shires* and which,
according to the SAXONS Haptarchy, are thus divided, and that as they regard
the 4 Quarters, and then The Nine toward the East and South, and which made
the Kingdoms of KENT, where is only Kent, Gin^erb^ry, Rochester, Dover,
Sandwich.
SOUTH SAXONS, which contained the Regm, are the Counties of Surrey, So^thwe^k,
Kingsto^^.
Sussex, Chichester, Winchelsey, Jews.

EAST ANGLES, which contained the Iceni, are the Counties of Norfolk, Norwich,
Y^rmouth.
Suffo^k, ^^swich, St. Edmonds-Bury.
Cambridgshire, Cambridge, Ely.

EAST SAXONS, which contained the Trinobantes, are the Counties of Essex,
Colchester, Norwich.
Middlesex, London, Westminster.
Hartfordshire, Hartford, St. Albons.


The Seven regarding the West, and which have made the Kingdom of the WEST
SAXONS, are the Dammonii, of Counties of Cornwall, Launston, Padstow.
Devonshire, Exeter, Plymouth, Dartmouth.

Belge, of Counties of Somerse^shire, Bristol, Bath, Wells, Bridgwater.
Wiltshire, Salisbury, Mal^bury.
Hamshire, Southampton, Winchester.

Durotriges, or Counties of Dorsetshire, Dorchester, Weymouth.
Berkshire, Windsor, ^edding.


The Six toward the North, and which have made the Kingdom of the NORTHUMBERS,
are the Counties of Yorkshire, York, Hull, Richmond.
Lancashire, Lancaster, Lirpool.
Durham, -- Durham. Cumberland, Carlisle, Peri^h.
Westmerland, Kendale, Apleby.
Northumberland, Barwick, Newcastle.

The Seventeen in the middle of the Country, and which have made the Kingdom of
MERCIA, are the Iceny, or County of Huntingtonshire, Huntington, St. Ives.
Canleju^anl, or Counties of Buckinghamshire, Buckingham. Bedfordshire, --
Bedford.
Coritanl, or Counties of Rutlandshire, -- Upingham. Northamptonshire,
Northampton, Peterborough.
Lelcas^ershire, Lelcester, Harborow.
Lincolnshire, Lincoln, Boston.
Nortinghamshire, Nortingham. Derbyshire, Derby, Chesterfield.

Dobimi, or Counties of Oxfordshire, Oxford, Henley.
Gloces^ershire, -- Gloucester.
Cornavii, or Counties of Worcestershire, -- Worcester. Warwickshire, Warwick,
Coventry.
Staffordshire, Stafford, Litchfield.
Cheshire, Chester, Nantwich.
Shropshire, Shrewsbury, Bridgnorch.
Herefordshire, -- Hereford.


The Principality of WALES, where are 12 or 13 Counties, and all toward the
West of England, and whereof Six toward the North, and which have made the
Kingdom of NORTH WALES, as the Counties of Flintshire, Flint, St. Asaph.
Denbighshire, -- Denbigh. Carnarvanshire, -- Carnarvan. Isle of Anglesey,
Bawmorri^. Merso^et^shire, -- Harl^ch. Montgomeryshire, Monrgomery.
Seven toward the South, and which have made the Kingdom of SOUTH WALES, as
the Counties of Radnorshire, -- Radnor. Bracknockshire, -- Brecknock.
Cardiganshire, -- Cardigan. Pembrockshire, -- Pembroke. Carmardenshire --
Carmarden. Glamorganshire, Cardiff, Landaff.
Monmouthshire, -- Monmouth.

In diverse Isles, In the Great Ocean, to the West of Cornwall, as the SORLINGS,
-- St. Mary. In the Irish Ocean, to the South of Scotland, as the Isle of MAN,
-- Russia. In the Narrow passage near Hantshire, as the Isle of WIGHT, --
Newport. near France, as the Isles of JARSEY, -- St. Hillary. GARNSBY, -- St.
Peter's.




The Kingdom of KENT, (wherein is only the County of Kent) may be divided Into
The Lath of SUTTON, which again is subdivided into the Hundreds of Black Heath,
Grenwich, Deptford, Wolledge, Eltham.
Little and Lesues, Eryth, Plampsted.
Bromley and Beckenham, Bromley, Beckenham.
Rokesley, St. Mary Cray, Orpinton.
Axtan, Dartford, Wimbleton, Greenhith.
Godsheath, Sevenoke, Otford.
Westram, Westram, Brafted.
Somerden, -- Speldherst.
The Lath of AYLFORD; where are the Hundreds of Watlington, Pepenbury. Capell.
Little Barnefeld, -- Brenehely. Twyford, -- Yalding., Lowy of Tunbridge, --
Tunbridge. Little Field, -- Royden. Wrotham, Wrotham, Stansted.
Larkfeld, Malling, Aylesford.
Maidstone, Maidstone, E. Farly.
Eyhorne, Lenham, Stockberry.
Gittingham and Chetham, Rochester, Chetham.
Shamell, -- Cobham, Tottingtrough, -- Gravesend. Hoo, St. Mary's, St. James.

The Lath of SCRAY; in which are the Hundreds of Milton, Milton, Queenborow,
Sittingborn.,
Tenham, Tenham, Dodington.
Feversham, -- Feversham. Bocton, under Bleane, Bocton, Under Bleane,
Felborough, -- God Marshal. Wye, -- Wye. Kirch^lt, Barony, -- Kenington.
Chart, -- Ashford. Catehill, Pluckley, Egerton.
Blackborne, Apledore, Orlaston.
Barkley, -- Byddenden. Cranbrook, Cranbrook, Stapleherst.
Marden, Goodherst, Marden.
Fincocks, -- Bedgbury. Great Barnfeld, -- Flimwell. Selbrightenden, --
Sandhersl. Rolvenden, -- Rolvenden. Tenderden, -- Tenderden.
The Lath of SHEPWAY; wherein are the Hundreds of Oxney, -- Stone. Aloesbridge,
-- Brookland. Langport, -- Lyde. St. Martin, -- Snargate. Ham, -- Ham.
New-Church, New-Church, Bonington.
Worth, Romney, Hyth.
Streate, -- Alington. Byrcholt Franchis, -- Braborne. Stowting, -- Stowting.
Heane, -- Saltwood. Lovingbergh, -- Eltham. Falkston, -- Folkston.
The Lath of St. AUGUSTINE; in which are the Hundreds of Bewsbrough, Dover, E.
Langden.
Corniloo, Sandown, Deal.
East^y, Sandwich, Barfrayston.
Wingham, -- Ruynes. Kinghamford, -- Barnhamdown. Bredg and Petham, Canterbury,
Patricksporne.
Downhamford, -- Wickham. Westgate, St. Stephens, Harbledown.
Whitstable, VVhitstable, Seasalter.
Bleangate, Reculver, Hearne.
Breston, -- Elmeston. Kingsloe, which is the Isle of Thanet, St. John's, St.
Nicholas, Mynster.



The Kingdom of the SOUTH SAXONS, which contained the Regni; and now the
Counties of SURREY, which is divided into the Hundreds of Brixton, Southwark,
Rotheriff, Lamboth, Batersey, Putney, Wandesworth, Clapham.
Kingston, Kingston, Richmond, Mottlack.
Croydon, Croydon, Cashalton, Cheame, Carshalton.
Tanridge, Bletchingligh, Burstow.
Reygate, Reygate, Horley.
Copthorne and Effingham, Ewell, Bansted, Ebesham.
Darklug, Darking, Newdigate, Charlewood.
Emley, Cobham, Waybridge, Walton.
Chertsey, Chertsey. Egham, Frimley.
Woking, Guilford, Ockham, Woking.
Farnham, Farnham, Puttenham, Peperharo.
Godalming, Godalming, Witley.
Blackheath and Wotton, Albury, Cranley, Dunsfold.

SUSSEX, which is divided into the Rapes of Chicester, Chich^ster, Mydhurst,
Rogar, Binderton, Eastbourne, Chydham, Thorney, Emley, West Wittering. Selsey.
Arundell, Petworth, Arundell, Storington, Hamp^on, Fering. Burpham, Barham,
Billingshurst, Rudgwick.
Bramber, Horsham, Shoram, Stening. Tarring, Shipley, Etchingfold, Rusper.
Jews, Jews, Cuxfield, Brighthemsto^, Myching, Oford, Stamner, Porstad,
Wivelsfeld, Balcombe, Crawley.
Pevensey, East Grinsted, Buckhurst, East-Bourn, Mayfield, Flerching, Haylsham,
Bishopston, East Deane, Pemsey.
Hastings, Winche^sey, Rye, Hastings, Battle, Wartling, Warbleton, Euwood,
Burwash, Flimwell, Nordiam.



The Kingdom of the EAST ANGLES, which contained the Iceni, or Counties of
NORFOLK as it is divided into the Hundreds of East Flegg, Yarmouth. West Flegg,
Winterton. Happinge, Hicklinge. Tunstead, North Walsham, Worstead.
North Orpinham, Cromere, Sheringham.
Holt, Holt, Clay.
Greenhaw, Walsingham, Wells.
Gallowe, Burnham-Market. Smithdon, Snetsham, Tichwell.
Febridge, Linn, Caftlerising.
Brothercross, Fawkenham, Basham.
Laundiche, Lexham. Haynford, Repenham. South Orpingham, Caston, Alesham.
Taverham, Spikesworth. Blofelde, Burlingham, Tunst^ll.
Clavering and Loddon, Wheataker. Humliarde, Norwich, Higham.
Hensted, Castor. Forehoce, Windham, Hingham.
Mitford, East Derenham. Wayland, Watton. South Greenhowe, Swaffam. Clacklowse,
Downham, Southrey.
Febridge in Mershland, Clenchwarton, Owtwell.
Grimshoo, Hockhold. Shoreham, Buckenham, Thetford.
Giltcross, Herlinge. Dis, Diffe. Depwade, Moulton. Erisham, Harleston.
SUFFOLK, where are the Hundreds of Mutford, Kesland. Blithing, Sowould,
Dunwich, Halesworth.
Lothingland, Leystoft. Wagford, Beckles, Bungey.
Hoxon, Wingfeld. Plumesgate, Saxmundham, Alderburgh, Orford.
Looes, Framlingham. Treadling, Debenham. Hartesmere, Aye, Mendelsham,
Buddesdale.
Blackborne, Ikesworth, Ewston. Brandon,
Lackford, Mildnall, New Market.
Risbridge, Haverill, Clare.
Thingoe, Bury. Thedwestrie, Wulpett. Baber, Neyland, Lavenham, Sudbury.
Cosford, Bilston, Hadley.
Stow, Stow. Bosmere, Ipswich, Needham.
Carleford, Rummere. Wilforde, Woodbridge. Colnes, Felixton. Sampford,
Harksted, and Stretford.
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE, with its Hundreds of Chilford, Lynton. VVitlessord, Sawsted.
Triplowe, Hawkeston. Arningford, Royston. VVetherlee, Barington. Stow, Caxton,
and Gamlingay. Papworth, Cunnyngton, and Papworth. North Stow, Longstanton.
Chesterton, Chesterton. Flendish, Cambridge. Radesley, VVillingham. Cheveley,
Ditton. Stane, Botshman. VVichford, Reche, and Mersh. Staplehow, Sotham. Ely,
Ely, and Littleport. Wisbech, Wisbech.

The Kingdom of the EAST SAXONS, which contained the Trinobantes, or Counties
of ESSEX, in which are the Hundreds of Becontrey, -- Barkin. Havering Liberty,
-- Rumford. Chaford, -- Brentwood. Bar^ ^tole, Horden, Billerekey.
Rochford, Rayleigh, Foulness.
Dengye, Maldon, St. Peter's Chapel.
Chelmesford, Chelmesford, Ingerstone.
Onger, -- High Onger. Waltham, Waltham Abbey, Epping-street.
Harlow, -- Hatfield. Dunmow, Dunmow, Thaxted.
Clavering, -- Clavering. Utlisford, Walden, Audley-End.
Freshwell, -- Hempsted. Hingkford, Baryntre, Halsted, Hemingham Castle.
Witham, Easterford, Witham.
Thurstable, Totham, Tolesbury.
Lexden, Colchester, Cogshall.
Winstred, Verley, Marsey.
Tenderidge, Harwich, Manytre, Horsey-Isle.

MIDDLESEX, which is divided into the Hundreds of Osleston, London,
Westminster. Chelsey, Kensington, Fulham, Hamersmith, Cheswick, Acton,
Hamsted, Highgate, Finchley, Newington, Hackne, Issington.
Edmonton, Tottenham, Edmonton, Hadley, South Myns.
Goare, Hendon, Edgware, Harrow-hill.
Bithorne, Brentford, Ukbridge, Hillington, Hounslow, Ryslipe, Hayes,
Harlington.
Istleworth, Istleworth, Twittenham, Hounslow, Heston.
Spetthorne, Stanes, Stanwell, Bedfont, Sunbury, Hampton Court.

HARTFORDSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Hartford, Hartford, Hodsdon.
Caisho, St. Albans, VVatford, Rickmansworth, Barnet, Totteridge.
Dacorum, Hamsted, Berkamsted, Trange.
Hitching, Hitching, Kempton.
Broadwater, Baldock, Hatfield, Stevenedge, VValkorn.
Odsey, Royston, VVallington.
Edwinstree, Barkway, Huntingford, Hadham.
Braghing, VVare, Puckeridge, Bishops S^ratford; Sabsworth.



Part of the Kingdom of the WEST SAXONS, which contained the DAMON II, or
Counties of, CORNWALL, with its Hundreds of Penwith, -- Pensans, St. Ives,
Market Jew Kerrier, -- Penryn, Helston. Powder, -- Truro, Grampond, Foy. Pider,
-- St. Colombe, Padstow. Trigg, -- Bodman. West, -- Westloe, Liskerd, Listhyel.
East, -- Launston, Saltash, St. Germain. Lesnewth, -- Boscastle, Camelford.
Stratton, -- Stratton.
DEVONSHIRE, which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of
Roborough, -- Plymouth. Tavestock, -- Tavestock. Lyston, -- Lyston, Okehampton.
Black Torrington, Houlsworthy, Hatherlay. Hartland, -- Horton. Shebbeare, --
Bediford. Fremington, -- Torrington. Banton, -- Ilfarcomb, Barnstable,
Combmerton, Sherwell, -- Sherwel. South Moulton, -- Moulton. Witheridge, --
Chimligh. Bampton, -- Bampton. Tiverton, -- Tiverton. Halberton, -- Halberton.
Hayrudge, -- Columbton, Bradmuch. Hemyocke, -- Hemyocke. Axmilter, -- Axmilter,
Huniton. Cullington, -- Culliton. St. Mary Otery, -- Otre. East Budleigh, --
Sidmouth. Clifton, -- Broadclift. West Budley, -- Cadbury. Crediton, --
Crediton. North Tanton, -- Bow, Burrington. Winckley, -- VVinckley. Wonford, --
Exeter, Chegford. Exminster, -- Chidlay. Tinbridge, -- Morton, Ashburnton.
Heytor, -- Newton Bushel. Colridge, -- Dartmouth, Tornes. Stanborough, --
Kingsbridge, Dodbrook. Armington, -- Modberry. Plympton, -- Plympton,

DUROTRIGES, or County of DORCESTERSHIRE, with its several Hundreds in each
division, Bridport division, Whitechurch, -- Lime, VVitchurch. Beamister, --
Beamister. Redhoave, -- Molverne. Eggarton, -- Frampton. Goderthorne, --
Birdport.
Dorcester division, George, -- Dorchester. Tollerford, -- Evershot. Puddleton,
-- Piddlechinton. Colliford, -- Waymouth, Cheselton. Ugscombe, -- Abbotsbury.
Sherburn division Sherborn, -- Sherborn. Redlane, -- Sturmister. Newton, --
Tudboroe. Brownsel, -- Lydlinch. Yeatmister, -- Yeatminster. Tortomb, -- Cerne
Abbey. Buckland, -- Buckland. Whiteway, -- Middleton.
Shaston division Badbury, -- Winbornmister. Cogdeane, -- Poole. Hanly, --
Hanly. Cranborne, -- Cranborne. Knowlton, -- Knowlton. Upwimborne, --
Shafterbury.
Blanford division Pimperne, -- Blandford. Rushmore, -- Wareham, Lulworth.
Barrow, -- Whitlovington. Coombeditch, -- Bloxworth. Beer, -- Beer. Winfrith,
-- Morton. Rowbarrow, -- Coyfe. Hasler, -- Aren.

ATTREBATI, or County of BERKSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Faringdon, --
Faringdon. Shirvenham, -- Shirvenham. Lamborne, -- Langborne. Kentbury, --
Hungerford. Faircross, -- Newbury. Compton, -- East Ilsey. Wanting, -- Wantage.
Ganfeld, -- Pusay. Oak, -- Marcham. Hormer, -- Abbington. Morton, --
Wallingford. Theate, -- Inglefeld. Reading, -- Reading. Charlton, -- Barkham.
Sonning, -- Okingham. Wargrove, -- Wargrove. Bernersh, -- Remneham. Bray, --
Maidenhead. Ripplemore, -- Windsor. Cookeham, -- Binfeld.

Part of the Kingdom of the WESTSAXONS, which contained the BELGE, or Counties
of SOMERSETSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Chewe, -- Bristol. Portbury, --
Clevedon. Hartclif, and Bedminster, Burton. Winterstoke, -- Axbridge. Chewton,
-- Pensford. Keynsham, -- Canesham. Bathfrom, -- Bath. Wellow, -- Phillips
Norton. From, -- Frowmselwood. Kilmersdon, -- Stokeland. Bruton, -- Bruton.
Wells, and Welford, -- Wells. Bempston, -- Marck. Brent, -- Wrinton.
North-Petherton, -- Bridgwater, and Huntspil. Whitleigh, -- Weston. Glaston, --
Glastonbury. Whitstone, -- Shepton-Mallet. Norton Feris, -- Whicaunton.
Horethorne, -- Hersington. Cattesayshe, -- South Barrow, and Queens Camel.
Somerton, -- Somerton, and North Curry. Pitney, -- Langport. Martock, --
Martock, and Ilchester. Stone, -- Evyll. Barwick, -- Barwick. Coker, --
Hardington. Houndsborough, -- West Chenock. Tintenhull, -- South Petherdon.
Crewkerne, -- Crewkerne. South Petherton, -- South Petherton. Kingsbury, --
Chard. Abdick, -- Beacham, and Ilmister. Taunton, -- Taunton. North Curry, --
Wivescombe. Anderfield, -- Brumfield. Cannington, -- Stokeland Marsh. Willyton,
and Fremanour, Watchet, and Dulverton. Carhampton, -- Dunster, and Mynehead.
Milverton, -- Wellington, and Milverton. Bulston, -- Curryvivel.
WILYSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Malmesbury, -- Malmesbury. Highworth,
-- Highworth, and Crekelade. Ramsbury, -- Auburne. Kingsbridge, -- Watton
Basset, and Auburne. Selkley, -- Marlborough. Calne, -- Calne. Potterne, and
Cannings, Alington. Damerham, North, -- Christ Malford. Chippenham, --
Castlecombe, and Chipnam. Bradford, -- Bradford. Melkesham, -- Trubridge.
Whorwelsdown, -- North Bradley. Westbury, -- Westbury. Swanborne, -- East
Lavington, and the Devizes. Kingswarton, -- Barbich. Elstube, and Everly, --
Everly. Amesbury, -- Amesbury. Alderbury, -- Winterslow. Frustfield, --
Stonley. Downton, -- Downton. Underditch, -- Salisbury. Branch, and Dole,
Wishford. Harsbury, -- Harsbury. Warmister, -- Warmister Dametham, -- Munkston
Deverel. Mere, -- Mere, and Hindon. Dauworth, -- Swallowcliff. Chalk, --
Norrinton. Cawden, and Cadworth, Wilton.
HANTSHIRE; which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of
Christchurch, -- Christchurch. Ringwood, -- Ringwood. Fordingbridge, --
Fordingbridge. New Forest, -- Lymington. Redbridge, -- Rumsey. Kingsunborne, --
Rumsey, and Stokebridge. Budlesgate, -- Crawley. Bartonstacy, -- Bartonstacy.
Hornor, -- Tufton. Thornegate, -- Bossington. Andover, -- Andover. Pastrow, --
Husborntar. Evinger, -- Ashmansworth, and Whitechurch. Kingscleere, --
Kingscleere. Holshort, -- Silchester. Chuteley, -- Wisherborne. Basingstoke, --
Basingstoke. Overton, -- Overton. Micheldever, -- Micheldever. Buntesborow, --
Swarwatton. Barmanspit, -- Bradley. Odiham, -- Odiham. Crundal, -- Fernborow.
Alton, -- Alton. Selborne, -- Hawkley. Sutton, -- Alresford. Fawley, --
Winchester. Eastermean, -- Froxfield. Meanstoke, -- Menestock. Waltham, --
Southampton, and Bushwaltham. Mansbridge, -- Hound. Titchfield, -- Farnham.
Portsdown, -- Portsmouth. Finchdean, -- Petersfield. Bosmere, -- Southwood.


The Kingdom of the NORTHUMBERS, which contained the Brigantes, or Counties of
YORKSHIRE, with its several Hundreds, as they may be considered in the West
Riding, Stancliffe, Settle, Skipton.
Claro, Rippon, Borough-bridge, Ripley, Knaresburgh.
Ansly, -- Busshopthrop. Barkston, Sherborne, Selby, and Tadeaster.
Skirack, Ledes, Otley.
Morley and Agbrigg, Halyfax, Bradforth, Wakefield.
Osgodcross, Pontefract, Snathe.
Strasforth, Doncaster, Rotheram, Sheaffeld, Bautre, and Tickhill.
Staincross, -- Barnesley.
North Riding, Gillingwest, -- Richmoud. Haugwest, -- Midlam. Hangeast, Masham,
Bedall.
Gillingeast, -- Langton great. Hallikeld, -- Tanfield. Bulmar, -- York.
Burford, -- Thruske. Allerton, -- Alverton. Langbargh and Whitbystrand, Yarum,
Stokesley, Gisburgh, Whitbye.
Pickering, Scarbrough, Pickering,
Rydale, Malton, Hovingham, Helmeley, Kirby-moreside.

East Riding, Buckcross, -- Setterington. Dickering, Bridlington, Kilham,
Flamborough-head.
Holderness, Headen, Sprunhead.
Hunsley, Hull, Beverley.
Bainton, -- Bainton. Harthill, -- Pocklington. Wilton, -- Wilton. Holme, --
Wighton. Ouse and Darwent, -- Stilling fleet. Howdensher, -- Howden.

LANCASHIRE, where are the Hundreds of Loynsedale, Lancaster, and Hornby,
Ulverton, and Dalton, Hawkshead, Sunderland-point.
Amoundernes, Garstrange, Kirkham, Preston.
Blackborne, Blackborne, and Hastingde, Colne, Bruntley, and Cletherow.
Layland, -- Wigan, and Eccleston. Salford, Manchester, and Rochdale, Bolton,
and Bury.
West Darby, Ormiskirke, Lerpoole, Warrington.

The Bishopric of DURHAM (as yet not divided into Hundreds,) whose chief
places are Durham, Hartpoole, Bishops-Aukland, Darlington, Stayndrop,
Bernard-Castle, Derwenfote-haven, Sunderland, Stockton.
CUMBERLAND, (as yet not severed into Hundreds) has for its principal places,
Carlisle, Penreth, Brampton, Wigton, Wetheral, Ireby, Abbey, Holme, Keswick,
Kirkswald, Cockermouth, Irton, Werkington, Bottle, Egremond, Whitehaven,
Ravenglass, and Bleunerhasset.
WESTMORELAND, (also as yet not divided into Hundreds) whose chief places are
Apleby, Burgh, Kirby-Stephens, Orton, Kirby-Landall, Burton, Kendal, and
Ambleside.
NORTHUMBERLAND, (as yet also not severed into Hundreds) has for its noted
places Newcastle, Tinmouth-haven, and Castl^, Hexham, Morpe^h, Alnewick,
Barwick, Woller, Holy Island, Cocket Island,


Part of the Kingdom of the MERCIA, which contained the ICENI, or County of
HUNTINGTONSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Norman-cross, -- Yaxley, and Ramsey.
Huntington, -- Huntington, and St. Ives. Leightenstone, -- Kimbolton. Tosland,
-- St. Neats, and Godmanchester.
CATEJULARI, or Counties of BUCKINGHAMSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Stoke,
-- Colbroke, and Eaton. Burnham, -- Beconfield, High-Wickham, and Amersham.
Desburrow, -- Marlow. Alesbury, -- Alesbury, and Wendover, Ashenden, --
Ashenden. Buckingham, -- Buckingham. Cotslow, -- Winslow, and Ivingo. Newport,
-- Newport, Stony-Stratford, and Oulney.
BEDFORDSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Stodden, -- Ryseley. Wylly, --
Bedford. Barford, -- Berford. Biggleswad, -- Biggleswade, and Potton.
Wixamtree, -- Cardington. Redbornstock, -- Ampthill. Flitt, -- Luton. Clifton,
-- Shefford. Manshead, Woborne, Tuddington, Leighton, and Dunstable.

CORITANI, or Counties of RUTLANDSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Allstoe, --
Burley. East -- Casterton. Martinsley, -- Baroughdon, Wrangedyke, -- Upingham.
Oukhamsook, -- Oakham.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds
of Massaburgh, -- Peterborough. Willibrooke, -- Nassington. Corby, --
Rockingham. Polbrook, -- Oundle. Navisford, -- Thrapston. Huxloe, -- Kettering.
Orlingsbury, -- Walgrave. Rothwell, -- Rothwel. Guilsborow, -- Lilborn.
Fausley, -- Daventrey. Newbottlegrove, -- Newbottle. Shephoe, -- Northampton:
Hampfordshoe, -- Wellingboroe. Highamferyes, -- Higham-Ferrers. Cleley, --
Graston. Towcester, -- Towcester. Wimersley, -- Wotton. Norton, -- Blakesly.
Warden, -- Edgcote. Sutton, -- Brackley.
LEICESTERSHIRE, with its Hundreds of West Goscote, -- Ashby de la Zouth,
Montsorel, and Loughborow. East Goscote, -- Leicester. Framland, -- Melton
Moubray, and Waltham on the Would. Gartery, -- Hallaton, Harburgh, and
Billesden. Guthlixton, -- Lutterworth, and Bennones.
LINCOLNSHIRE, as it is divided into the parts of Lindsey, with its Hundreds of
Sparkinhoe, -- Bosworth, and Hickley. Manbie, -- Burton, and Kirton. Yarbrough,
-- Barton, Glamfordbridge, and Limberg. Brodley, -- Grinisby, and Thongcaster.
Ludbrough, -- Cawthorp. Walchcroft, -- Binbrook. Aslacoe, -- Bishops-Norton.
Corringham, -- Gainesburgh. Well, -- Brampton. Lawris, -- Lincoln. Wraggoe, --
Rande. Gartre, -- Horncastle, and Market-Stanton: Louthask* -- Saltsflet,
Louthe, and Market-Rosen* Calceworth, -- Alford. Candleshoe, -- Waynfleet, and
Burgh. Hill, -- Harrington. Bullingbrook, -- Bullingbrook, and Spilsby,
Horncastle, -- Horncastle.
Kesteven, where are the Hundreds of Lango, -- Blackney. Bothby, -- North
Hickham. Loveden, -- Beckingham. Flaxwel, -- Sleford. Ashwardhurn, -- Howel.
Wivebridge, -- Ancaster. Grantham, -- Grantham, and Belvoir Castle* Aveland, --
Folkingham, and Bourn. Beltisloe, -- Corbye. Ness, -- Market-Deping, and
Stamford
Holland, with its Hundreds Ellowe, -- Spalding, Holbeck, and Crowland. Rirton,
-- Dunington, and Kirton. Skirkeck, -- Boston.

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Northclay, -- Redford. Bassetlaw,
-- Worksop, and Blyth. Southclay, -- Darlington. Thurgarton, -- Nortingham, and
Southwel* Newwark, -- Newwark. Bingham, -- Bingham. Rusaclyfe, -- Codlingstock.
Broxtow, -- Maunsfeld.
DARBYSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Highpeake, -- Tideswal, Bakewel, and Chaple
in the Frith Scardale, -- Chesterfeld, Alfreton, and Belsover. Worksworth, --
Wirkesworth, and Ashborne. Appletree, -- Sherley. Morleston, -- Darby.
Reppington, -- Newtonsony.



Part of the Kingdom of MERCIA, which contained the DOBIMI, or Counties of
OXFORDSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Banbury, -- Banbury. Bloxam, --
Milcombe, and Hooknorton. Chadlington, -- Chippingnorton. Wotton, -- Oxford,
Woodstock, and Deddington. Ploughley, -- Burcester. Bullington, -- Cuddesden.
Bampton, -- Burford, Witney, and Bampton. Dorchester, -- Dorchester. Tame, --
Tame. Lewkenor, -- Emington. Pirton, -- Watlington. Ewelme, -- Warboro.
Binfield, -- Henley.
GLUCESTERSHIRE; which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of
Kystgate, -- Winchcombe, and Camden. Tewksbury, -- Tewksbury. Botloe, --
Newnham, and Newent. Westminster, -- Apperley. St. Briavels, -- Dean Magna.
Westbury, -- Westbury. Blideslow, -- Blakney, or Blakley. Cleve, -- Cleve.
Tibolston, -- Beckford. Chettenham, -- Chettenham. Kingsbarton, -- Sherenton.
Dudstone, Gloucester. Rapisgate, -- Elston. Bradly, -- Lech. Slaughter, -- Stow
on the Would. Britlesbarrow, -- Lechlade. Crotherne, -- Cirencester. Biesley,
-- Stroud, and Panswick. Whitstone, -- Leonard, and Stanley. Longtree, --
Minchinhampton, and Tetbury. Grombaldash, Chipping-sods bury, Marsfeld, and
Horton. Wotton, -- Dursley, and Wotton Underedge. Gloucester, -- Sutton.
Barkley, -- Barkley. Thornbury, -- Thornbury, and Fairfield. Swinshed and
Langley, Littleton. Henbury, -- Compton Grenuyld. Barton, -- Bristol.
Pocklechurch, -- Pucklechurch:

CORNAVII, or Counties of WORCESTERSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Halfeshire,
Sturbridge, and Kiderminster. Droitwich, and Bromesgrove.
Dodingtre, -- Bewdly, and Tenbury. Worcester, -- Worcester. Upton, -- Upton.
Pershor, -- Pershore. Oswalderstow, -- Throgmorton. Blakenhurst, -- Evesholme.
WARWICKSHIRE; with its Hundreds of Hemlingford, Solihul, Bermicham,
Polesworth, Tamworth, Colchil, Suttoncofeld, Atherton, and Nun-Eaton. Coventry,
-- Coventry. Knightlow, -- Rugby, and Southam. Kyneton, -- Warwick, Kyneton,
and Shipton. Barlichway, Bitford, Stretford on the Avon, Aulcester, and Henley
in Arden.
STAFFORDSHIRE; with its Hundreds of Totmonsloe, Leeke, Chedle, Uttoxater, and
Pagits Bromley. Dyrehil, -- Stafford, Newcastle, Eccleshal, and Stow.
Cudleston, -- Brewood, Ridley, and Penk rich. Seisdon, -- Wolverhampton.
Offelow, -- Lichfield, Burton on Trent, Walsal, and Tamworth.
CHESHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Wyrehal, -- Legrange. Edesbury, --
Frodesham, and Tarvin. Broxton, -- Chester, and Malpas. Nantwich, -- Nantwich.
Northwich, Northwitch, Middlewich, Sambach, and Congleton. Macclesfield, --
Macklesfield, and Stopford. Bucklow, -- Knottesford, and Altringham.
SHROPSHIRE; which may be considered as it is divided into the Hundreds of
Narth-Bradford, Whitechurch, Draton, Prees, and Wem. Pimhill, -- Elsmere.
Oswestre, -- Oswestre. Ford, -- Strettons. Chirbury, -- Chirbury. Purslow, --
Bishops-Castle, and Shipton. Clunn, -- Bettus. Munslow, -- Didlesbury. Overs,
-- Ludlow. Stottesdon, -- Bridgnorth, and Clebury. Shrewsbury, -- Shrewsbury.
Wenlock, -- Wenlock. Condover, -- Stapleton. Bradford, -- Newport, and
Wellington. Brimstry, -- Bonyngal.
HEREFORDSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Wigmore, -- Kyneton. Hunlington,
-- Huntington. Ewiaslacy, -- Hardwick. Webstre, -- Madley. Wormelow, -- Great
Birch. Greytree, -- Ross. Radlow, -- Lidbury. Grimsworth, -- Hereford. Broxash.
-- Bramyeard. Wolsey. -- Lemster. Stretford. -- Pembridge, and Webley.





WALES, which may be considered as it is divided into NORTH WALES; where are
the Counties of FLINT SHIRE, as yet not divided into Hundreds; it has for its
chief places St. Asaph, Flint, Cajervis.
DENBIGHSHIRE, as yet also not divided in to Hundreds, has for its chief
places Denbigh, Llanrost, Ruthin, Wrexham.
CAERNARVANSHIRE, also as yet not severed into Hundreds, whose chief places are
Carnarvan, Bangor, Aberconwey, Newin, Pulhely, and Krekyth, Bardesey Island.
ISLE of ANGLESEY, with its Hundreds of Tallibollion, Holyhead. Llyfon,
Llandrogarn. Tyndaythwy, Bewmatis Twrkelyn, Llandourodok. Meney, Newburgh,
Maltracth, Aberfraw.
MERIONETHSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Ardydwy, Harlech. Talibout,
Dolgelhe. Ystymanale, Abe^dowy^. Mowthy, Maynloyd. Penlyn, Bala. Ydeirmon,
Corwen.
MONTGOMERYSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of Mechavy, Llanvilling.
Ystrondmarchel, Montgomery, Welshpoole*
Kery, Kery. Kidriorn, Newtown. Kare Eynion, Llandaguan. Kyfy Log. Machenlet.
Yriostly, Llanidios.

SOUTH WALES; in which are the Counties of RADNORSHIRE; where are the Hundreds
of Rayadergowy, Rayadergowy. Knighton, Knighton. Kevenlice, Llanbadern. Radnor,
New Radnor, Prestaine.
Painscastle, Llanhedder. Collowini, Dyssart.
BRECKNOCKSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Bealt, Bealt. Talgarth, Hay. Merthye,
Merterkynok. Dyvynnock, Divynock. Penkelly, Brecknock. Crickhole, Crecowell.
CARDIGANSHIRE, with its Hundreds of Tredvoir, Cardigan, Cardigan Island.
Moythen, Llanbeder. Pennarth, Tregaron. Llanylar, Llanrusted. Llanbadarn,
Aberysthwyth.
PEMBROOKSHIRE, which is divided into the Hundreds of Kemes, Newport.
Kilgarvan, Kilgarvan. Dewysland, St. David's, Ramsey Island, the Bishop and his
Clerks.
Dungledy, Lauhaden, Wiston.
Rowse, Haverford, west, Rosemarket, Scaline Island, Stockholme Isle.
Nerberth, Tenby and Narberth. Castle Martin, Pembroke, Caldey Island.

CAERMARDENSHIRE; where are the Hundreds of Derllys, Kancharne. Elluet,
Caermarden, and Newcastle. Kidwellye, Kidwyly, Llannelthye.
Perue, Llanymdofry, Llangadok.
Cayo, Llandilouawre. Cathinok, Abergerlech.
GLAMORGANSHIRE; in which are the Hundreds of West Gowre, Swansey and Penrise,
Mumbles point, Pennarth point; Oxwich point, Wormshead point.
Llangevelach, Llansamled. Neath, Aberavon, and Neeth. Newcastle, Bridgend.
Ogmore, Ogmore Castle, Nash point.
Cowbridge, Cowbridge. Denispowis, Porkerry Castle, Barry Island, Sylye Isle.
Cardiff, Cardiff, Landaff.
Caerfily, Caerphilly. Lantrissent, Lantrissent.
MONMOUTHSHIRE, (now an English County,) where are the Hundreds of Bergaveny,
Abergavenney. Skenfrith, Mounmoth. Ragland, Ragland. Caldicot, Chepston,
Goldeclyffe,
Uske, Uske, Carlion.
Wealooge, Newport.



ENGLAND.
Small Isles belonging to Great Britain.
THE Kingdom of England, with that of Scotland, forms an Island, which bears the
name of Great Britain; unto which belongs a vast number of lesser Isles,
which may be considered under four heads or forts, viz. the Orcades, the
Hebrides, the Sorlings, and the Isles of Scilly, with those of the Sporades.
All which said Isles, with that of Ireland, are scit^ate between the 9th and
the 23th degrees of Longitude, and the 50th and 59th of Latitude.

England is divided from Scotland by the River Tweed and Solway, a line being
drawn from the one to the other; and on all other sides it is begirt with the
Sea.

Its extent and division.
The extent and form of these Isles, with their situation to each other, does
appear in the Map, to which I refer the Reader.

But it is probable that some may judge the Maps false, for that the true
Geographical distances of places are lesser than the Itinerary. But these
Reasons are sufficient to satisfy any to the contrary, 1. The unpassable
Woods, which (...) between places; 2. the high Mountains and low Valleys; 3.
the Marshes or Boggs; 4. the Rivers or Ponds; and 5. the Parks, or other
enclosures, which cause the Traveller to leave his direct line and go about.

It may be divided into two (though unequal) parts, to wit, England and Wales,
separated each from other by the Severn and a line drawn to the Wye but the
more certain division was by a huge Ditch (which beginning at the Influx of the
Wye into the Severn, reached to Chester, where the Dee dis^ burdens its self
into the Sea) 80 miles in length, made by Offa King of the Mercians, and called
Claudh Offa.

This Kingdom of England is severed into 52 Shires or Counties, of which 12
make the Principality of Wales; and these Counties are subdivided into
Hundreds, Wapentakes, or Wards; and those again into Parishes, which comprehend
Boroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Endships, or Trthings.

Its division according to the Circuits of the Judges.
England is also divided into six parts, for the Circuits of the 12 Itinerary
Judges, two of which twice every year are allotted for each Circuit, i^ the
chief Town or Towns of each County in the said Circuit, to sit and hear Causes,
and to administer Justice for the ease of the Subject; and according to this
division, one Circuit does contain the Counties of Wilts, Somerset, Devon,
Cornwall, Dorset, and Hantshire. Another, those of Berks, Oxford, Gloucester,
Monmouth, Hereford, Worcester, Salop, and Stafford. Another, those of Kent,
Surry, Sussex, and Hartford. Another, those of Bedford, Bucks, Cambridge,
Huntington, Norfolk, and Suffolk. Another, those of Northampton, Rutland,
Lincoln, Derby, Nottingham, Leicester, and Warwick. And another, those of York,
Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Lancaster. The two
remaining Counties, viz. Middlesex and Cheshire being exempted, the one for its
vicinity to London, and the other as having its peculiar Judges for the
administration of Justice.

Its division according to the Spiritual Jurisdiction.
For Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, this Kingdom is divided into two
Archbishopricks, viz. Canterbury and York, under which are 25 Bishops of which
22 belong to that of Canterbury, who is Primate and Metropolitan of all
England, and but 3 to that of York. Now what these Bishoprics are this
following Table will declare unto you.

map of Britain royal English blazon or coat of armsA GENERALE MAPP OF THE
ISLES OF GREAT BRITAIN, DESIGNED BY MONSIEUR SANSON, GEOGRAPHER TO THE FRENCH
KING. and RENDERED INTO ENGLISH and ILLUSTRATED BY RIC BLOME. BY HIS MAIESTIS
ESPECIAL COMMAND. London Printed for Ric Blome
The most August, Charles the 2d by the grace of God ^ing of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, defendor of the Faith; etc (...) this Mapp with all
humility is Concecrated by your Majestes Obedient subject and Servant Ric: Blome



A Catalogue of the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics of England and Wales;
together with what Counties are under their Jurisdictions, and what Parishes
and Impropriations are in each Diocese.
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, Counties under each of their Jurisdictions.
Parishes in each Diocese, Impropriations in each Diocese, Canterbury has
Canterbury, and part of Kent, 257 140 York has Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire,
581 336 London has Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartfordshire, 623 189 Durham
has Durham and Northumberland, 135 87 Worcester has Worcestershire, and part
of Warwickshire, 241 76 Winchester has Hantshire, Surrey, Isles of Wight,
Garnsey and Jersey, 362 131 Bath and Wells has Somersetshire, 388 160 Oxford
has Oxfordshire, 195 88 Bangor has Carnarvanshire, Anglesey, Merionethshire,
and part of Denbighshire, 107 36 Rochester has part of Kent, 98 36 Ely has
Cambridgshire, 141 75 Chichester has Sussex, and part of Hartfordshire, 250
112 Salisbury has Wiltshire and Berkshire, 248 109 Lincoln has Lincolnshire,
Leicestershire, Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, Buckinghamshire, and part of
Hartfordshire, 1255 577 St. Asaph has part of Flintshire, and part of
Denbighshire, 121 19 St. David's has Pembrookshire and Carmarthenshire, 308 120
Peterborough has Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire, 293 91 Landaff has
Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, Brecknockshire, and part of Radnorshire, 177 98
Carlisle has part of Cumberland, and part of Westmerland, 92 18 Exeter has
Devonshire, Exeter City, and Cornwall, 604 239 Chester has Cheshire,
Richmondshire, Lancashire, part of Cumberland, Westmoreland, Flintshire, and
part of Denbighshire, 256 101 Bristol has Dorsetshire, and the City of
Bristol, 236 64 Norwich has Norfolk and Suffolk, 1121 385 Gloucester has
Glocestershire, 267 125 Hereford has Herefordshire, part of Shropshire,
Worcestershire in part, and part of Radnorshire, 313 166 Coventry and Lichfield
has Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Warwickshire, and part of Shorpshire 557 250
Besides peculiar to the Diocese of Canterbury, 57 14

To these may be added the Bishopric of Sodor in the Isle of Man, under the
Archbishopric of York, but has no place or Vote in Parliament.

ENGLAND is a Kingdom blessed with a sweet and temperate Air, and for the
generality of a fertile Soil, Its fertility and commodities.
and very grateful to the Husbandman, abounding in all things necessary for the
use of Man, both for Food and Raiment, as Corn, Cattle, Fowl, Fish, Fruit,
Roots, etc. In the bowels of the got else-Earth are store of excellent Mines of
Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper, Black-Lead, not where in Europe, Coal, and some of
Silver. It also produces Hops, Linen Cloth, Tallow, Hides, Leather,
Calves-skins, Lamb-skins, Sheepskins, Cony-skins, and some Furrs; also Wax,
Stockings, Hats, Saffron, Honey, Madder, Butter, Cheese, Herrings, Pilchers, and
Barrel-Cod; but above all, Wool, of which is made great abundance of excellent
Cloth, Serges, Bays, Kerseys, Worsteds, and the like Manufactures, which find
great vent in Foreign parts; and for Building it affords all Materials.

The Weights.
The Weights current in this Kingdom are of two sorts, viz. Troy and Averdupois.
Of Troy 24 grains make a penny-weight, 20 penny-weight an ounce, and 12 ounces
a pound, from which pound wet Measures are derived, a pint making a pound: and
by this weight, Gold, Silver, Silk, Pearl, Precious Stones, Bread, etc. are
weighed. By the Averdupois is weighed Butter, Cheese, Flesh, Tin, Iron, Fruits,
and generally all garbled and ponderous Commodities; and this weight is reduced
into several denominations, as Tuns, Hundreds, Quarters, Pounds, Ounces, and
Drams; where note, that 16 drams make an ounce, 16 ounces a pound, 28 pound a
quarter, 4 quarters a hundred, and 20 hundred a Tun.

The Measures.
The Measures are three, viz. dry, liquid, and long; the Dry are those in which
all sorts of dry Commodities are measured, and consists also of several
denominations, as a pint, quart, gallon or half-peck, peck and bushel, which
contains 64 pints, or 32 quarts, which is 8 gallons: also 8 Bushels make a
Quarter, 9 Bushels a Fat of Coals, which is a quarter of a Chaldron, 5 Quarters
a Wey, 10 Quarters a Last, and 20 Lasts a Comb.

Liquid Measures are those in which liquid substances are measured, of which a
Gill is the least, next a quarter, half-pint, pint, quart, pottle, and gallon,
which is 4 quarts, 8 Gallons make a Firkin of Ale, and 9 a Firkin of Beer; 2
Firkins a Kilderkin, 2 Kilderkins a Barrel, which is 36 gallons; 42 Gallons a
Tierce, 63 Gallons a Hogshead; 2 Hogsheads a Butt or Pipe, and 2 Buts a Tun.
But note that the Wine Measures are of less content than the Ale, for 4 Gallons
Ale-measure make 5 Wine-measure.

Long Measures are those by which Cloth, Stone, Glass, Land, etc. is measured,
of which an Inch, which is esteemed the length of 3 Barley corns (though divided
into less denominations, as half a quarter of an Inch) is the least; and 12
Inches make a Foot, 3 Foot a Yard, which is divided into 16 parts or Nails; 3
Foot 9 Inches is an Ell, 6 Foot a Fathom, 5 yards, or 16 foot is a Rod, Perch,
or Pole, 40 Rods a Furlong, 8 Furlongs an English Mile, which is 320 Poles, or
1760 Yards, or 1056 Paces, at 5 foot to the Pace.

Of Weights, Measures, etc. used in particular Commodities, viz.
The weight and measure of particular commodities.
A Fodder of Lead is 19 Hundred, a Load is 36 Formels or 175 Stone, and a Stone
is 5 pound. A Faggot of Steel is 120 pound, and a Barrel of Gad-Steel is 180
pound. A Stone of Glass is 5 pound, and 24 Stone is a Seam. A Last of Herrings
is 12 Barrels, every Barrel 12 hundred, and every Hundred 120 Herrings. A Last
of Powder is 24 Firkins, every Firking weighing 100 pound neat, and the empty
Firkin 12 pound. A Load of Timber, is 50 foot of square Timber. A Stack of Wood
is 3 foot in height, and 12 in length. A Faggot of Wood ought to be 3 foot in
length, and 14 inches about, besides the Band. Billets ought to be 3 foot and 4
inches in length, and the single Billet must be 7 inches about; the Cast-Billet
10 inches, and the two Cast-Billets 14 inches about. Billets of a Cast must be
nicked within 4 inches of the end, and Billets of 2 Casts within 6 inches of
the middle. A full Sack of Coals is 3 Bushels. Ten Hides make a Dicker, and 20
Dickers a Last of Leather. A Roll of Parchment is 5 dozen. Twenty Quires of
Paper is a Ream, and 10 Reams a Bail. A Lath must be 5 foot long, 2 inches
broad, and half an inch thick. A Plain-Tile must be 10 inches in length, 6 in
breadth, and half an inch thick. Roof-Tiles must be 13 inches in length, with a
good and equal proportion of breadth and thickness. Pan, or Paving-Tiles, must
be 10 inches square, and 1 inch thick. A Brick must be 9 inches long, 4 broad,
and 2 inches thick. Nails are sold by the 1000, and 120 to the hundred. A Truss
of Hay is to weigh 56 pound, and 36 Trusses make a Load. A Truss of Straw
should weigh 36 pound, and 36 Trusses make a Load.
Courts of Judicature.
As concerning the Courts of Justice of this Kingdom, they may be considered
under three sorts, to wit, Ecclesiastical, Temporal, and one mixed of both; and
under these three sorts are comprehended all the Courts of Judicature. For
Ecclesiastical Affairs, are the Synod or Convocation of the Clergy, and the
Provincial Synod, which is kept in both Provinces of Canterbury and York, viz.
the Courts of Arches, the Courts of Audience, the Courts of Faculties, the
Prerogative Court, and the Court of Peculiars. The Courts for Temporal Affairs
are of two kinds, viz. for Law and Equity: for Law, those of the Kings Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer, Assizes, Court of Admiralty, Duchy Court, etc. And
for Equity, those of the Chancery, Exchequer, Requests, etc. And besides these
Courts, there are several other Inferior Courts held in particular Liberties
for the Inhabitants thereof. And all these Courts have their peculiar Judges
and other sub-Officers.

As concerning Precedence, Precedence.
all Nobles of each degree take place according to their Seniority of Creation,
and not of years, unless descended of the Blood Royal, and then they take place
of all others of that degree. Yet there are some that by their great Offices or
Places at Court, or setting at the Helm of State, have precedence; as the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Lord President of his Majesty's Council, Lord Privy
Seal, Lord high Chamberlain, the Earl Marshal, the Lord Chamberlain, the Master
of the Horse, etc.

Precedence may be thus observed; the King, who is the fountain of Honor; the
Prince of England, who is eldest Son to the King, and is born Duke of Cornwall,
and about the age of 17 years is usually created Prince of Wales: Princes of
the Blood Royal, who are the Sons, Brothers, Uncles, and Nephews of the King.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper; the
Archbishop of York, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord President of the Privy
Council, Lord Privy Seal, Dukes, Marquesses; Dukes eldest Sons, Earls,
Marquesses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Viscounts, Earls eldest Sons,
Marquesses younger Sons, Bishops, Barons, Viscounts eldest Sons, Earls younger
Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Privy Counselors that are not Noblemen, Judges,
Viscounts younger Sons, Barons younger Sons, Knights of the Garter (if not
otherwise dignified, as is rarely found,) Knights Bannerets, Baronets, Knights
of the Bath, Knights Batchelors, Colonels, Sergeants at Law, Masters of
Chancery, and Doctors and Esquires; and those may be comprehended under five
several heads, 1. Esquires unto the Kings Body; 2. the descendants by the
Male-line from a Peer of the Realm; 3. the eldest Sons of Knights of the
Garter, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, and Knights Batchelors; 4. the two
Esquires attending on the Knights of the Bath at their Knighting; and 5.
Officiary Esquires, as Justices of the Peace, Barresters at Law, Lieutenant
Colonels, Majors, and Captains; and lastly, Gentlemen.

At a Marshal Court held at White Hall the 18th of March, An. Dom. 1615. it was
declared and concluded on, that there are two degrees that establish and settle
the Title of an Esquire by birth; the one, the younger Sons of Peers of the
Realm, which do invest into the Heirs-males descended from them the Name and
Title of Esquires; the other, the lineal Heir-male of a Knights House: and
these may justly assume and challenge the Title of Esquire by birth; so that in
all reason, the younger Sons of Peers are more worthy than Knights: so the
settling of a Title proceeding from them, is more worthy and eminent than that
derived from Knights.

The Dominions of England.
The Dominions of the King of England are very large, for besides that of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, there are diverse small Isles situate nigh unto
them, and do belong to one or the other; as the Isles of ORKNEY, or ORCADES, in
number 32, seated against the North-cape of Scotland. The Isles of SHETLAND,
also under the Scottish Dominions; the HEBRIDES, in number 44, seated Westwards
of Scotland; the SORLINGS, seated in the Westrn-cape of Cornwall; the SPORADES,
being several Isles dispersed about the British Seas, amongst which these
following are the chief: MAN, situate between England, Scotland, and Ireland;
JERSEY and GARNSEY on the French Coast; WIGHT, part of Hantshire; PORTLAND,
part of Dorsetshire; STEEPHOLMS and FLATHOM, in Somerfetshire; AIBBRE, in
Cheshire; DENNY, in Monmouthshire; CODLEY, in Pembrokeshire; ANGLESEY, which is
one of the Welsh Counties; SHEPPEY, in Kent; NORTHEY, OSEY, and HORSEY, in
Essex; FERN, COCKET, and HOLY Isle, in Northumberland; with several other
small Isles not worth the naming, as indeed many of these are. Then in Africa,
as TANGIER, GVINEY, etc. In the East Indies several places, though belonging to
the East India Company of London; and in America large Dominions, as NEW
ENGLAND, NEW YORK, MARYLAND, VIRGINIA, CAROLINA, all which are on the
Continent; also diverse Isles, some of which are very considerable, as JAMAICA,
BARBADOS, BERMVDOS, ANTEGO, NEW FOVNDLAND, etc. all which shall be treated of
as they come in order; but first of the English Counties.

County of Barkshire described.
BARKSHIRE, well clothed with Wood and watered with Rivers, is blessed with a
sweet Air, has a rich Soil fit both for Corn and Pasturage, (especially in the
Vale of Whitehorse;) and generally the whole County, for profit and pleasure,
yields to few Shires in England. The principal Commodity that this Shire
produces is Cloth, which finds great vent: and amongst the Rivers that water
the County, the Isis, the Oak, and the Kenet (which affords excellent Trouts)
are the chief.

It is severed into 20 Hundreds, in which are 140 Parishes, and has 12 Market
Towns.

Reading, Reading.
pleasantly seated near the Thames, and on the Kenet, which is navigable for
Barges to London, which adds much to its Trade, which is considerable,
especially for Cloth and Malt; it is a large Town, containing three Parish
Churches, is beautified with well built Houses, has fair Streets, is well
inhabited and has a very considerable Market for Grains, Malt, Hops, and most
Country commodities, on Saturdays. It Is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major,
12 Aldermen, and as many Burgesses with sub-Officers, enjoys several
Immunities, and sends Burgesses to Parliament. 'Twas formerly beautified with
a fair and rich Monastery, and a strong Castle built by King Henry the First,
where (in the Collegiate Church of the Abbey) himself and Queen, with Maud their
Daughter, were interred; both which now lie in their ruins.

New Windsor, Windsor.
pleasantly seated near the banks of the Thames, and adjoining to a Park and
Forest well stored with Game; it is a fair, large, well frequented and inhabited
Town Corporate, governed by a Major and other sub-Officers, sends Burgesses
to Parliament, and has a very good Market for Provisions on Saturdays. This
Town is of great note for its stately Castle and Royal Palace of his Majesty,
seated on a great eminency, wherein is a Chapel for Devotion, a College for
Learning, and an Almshouse for decayed Gentlemen, called the poor Knights of
Windsor; and famous is this Castle, not only for giving birth to so many of our
Kings and Princes, but for being the place where the ceremony of the Knights of
the Garter is solemnized on St. Georges day.

Nigh unto New Windsor is Old Windsor, a Town of greater antiquity, though not
of so much splendour.

Newbury, Newbury.
well seated on the Kennet, and in a Champain Plain, a large, well inhabited
and frequented Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen and Burgesses;
beautified with a spacious Marketplace and well built Market-house,
sufficiently served with Corn, Flesh, Fish, and Fowl, on Thursdays. This Town
had its rise out of the ancient Spinae, now a small Village near adjoining, and
called Speenhamland, and is of note for its Jack of Newbury, who got so great
an estate by Clothing, which this Town at present is very considerable for.

Wallingford, Wallingford.
a Town of great antiquity, and in times past very strong and large, containing
four Parish Churches within its Walls, which took up a mile in circuit. It Is at
present a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen and sub-Officers,
enjoys large Immunities, and sends, Burgesses to Parliament. It Is
commodiously seated on the banks of the Thames, over which it has a fair
Stone Bridge: its Market-house or Guild Hall, with a Free School lately
erected, is a fine pile of building, where the Major and Justices keep their
Courts. It enjoys a good Trade for Malt and Corn, which is transported in
Barges to London; and its Markets, which are on Tuesdays, and Fridays, which is
the chief, is very considerable for Grain and Provisions.

Abington, the Shire-Town, seated on the banks of the Thames, Abington.
over which it has a Bridge; a Town of good antiquity and note in former time
for its rich Abbey. It Is at present well inhabited, frequented and traded unto,
especially for its Malt; is governed by a Major, enjoys several Privileges,
sends a Burgess to Parliament, and has two Markets weekly on Mondays and
Fridays, which are well served with Corn, Malt, and Provisions.

This County is adorned with many fair and stately Buildings, has been
strengthened with 6 Castles, and graced with three of his Majesty's Houses. In
this Shire is the Vale of White-horse, one of the fruitfullest Vales in England.

County of Bedford described.
BEDFORD, a County for the generality of a fertile Soil both for Tillage and
Pasturage; the North and North-east parts being of a deep Clay, the South a
Chiltern, and the midst a Sandy-ridge of Hills well clothed with Wood. It Is a
Country well inhabited and full of Gentry, which is occasioned through its
vicinity to the Counties of Lincoln and Huntington, which in some places are
troubled with unhealthful Fogs. The chief Rivers that water it, are the Owse
and the Iwell.

This County is severed into 9 Hundreds, in which are numbered 116 Towns,
besides 59 Endships; and of these Towns 10 have the convenience of Markets.

Bedford, the Shire-Town, pleasantly seated in a rich Soil and on the Owse,
Bedford.
which divides it in the midst, but joined together by a fair Stone Bridge,
which for the prevention of passage has two Gate-houses; it was formerly
strengthened with a Castle, but in its place is now a Bowling-green, much
resorted unto by the Gentry. The Town is large, numbering 5 Parish Churches, is
well inhabited, and its Markets (which are on Tuesdays and Saturdays) are well
resorted unto; that on Tuesdays being considerable for living Cattle, and that
on Saturdays as great for Corn and Provisions. For Civil Magistrates, it is
governed by a Major, 2 Bailiffs, 2 Chamberlains, a Recorder, and other
sub-Officers; enjoys several Immunities, and sends Burgesses to Parliament.

Dunstable, Dunstablt.
seated on a Hill in a dry Chalky-ground; yet by reason of a large Pond of
standing-water in every one of the 4 Streets of the Town, the Inhabitants find
no want. It Is a place of great antiquity, and was of note in the time of the
Romans, as appears by the Coins in the adjacent fields, often dug up, which
the Inhabitants call Madning-money; and is at present of some note for the
great abundance of Larks here caught. It took the name of Dunstable from one
Dun, a notorious Robber, that used to pester these parts. The Town is fair,
well inhabited, full of Inns, as seated on the high Road, and its Market, which
is on Wednesdays, is very considerable for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions.

Bigleswade, Bigleswade.
seated on the Ivell, which falls into the Owse, over which it has a fair
Stone Bridge, and on the Road from London to York, which has occasioned it to
be well provided with Inns for the reception of Passengers, and its Market on
Tuesdays is at present very considerable for Grain, Cattle, Milch-kine, and
Provisions.

At Sand and Chesterfield, near adjoining, now a Warren, stood the famous City
of Salena of the Romans; which, by the ruins of its Walls (in many places yet
to be seen) makes it to have been of a large extent.

Buckingham, shire described.
BVCKINGHAM, a Country for the generality of a fertile Soil; it is divided into
two parts; that toward the South and East (which rises up into Hills, which
are sufficiently clothed with Wood) is called the Chilterne; the other, lying
Northwards, (bein plain) is called the Vale, and is the most fruitful for
Tillage and Pasturage, seeding great abundance of Sheep and Cattle* It is well
watered with the Owse, and the Thames. The ancient Inhabitants were the
Catejulanii, who yielded themselves to Caesar, and upon the Saxons subduing the
Romans, it became part of the Kingdom of the Mercians.

This County is severed into 8 Hundreds, in which are 185 Parish Towns, of
which 13 have the convenience of Markets.

Buckingham, Buckingham.
well seated on the Owse, which almost encircles it, over which it has 3 fair
Stone-bridges, and in a low fruitful ground. 'Twas once a Town of good
strength, and of some note for its stately Prebend-house, and its Chapel of
St. John Baptist, founded by Tho. Becket; now made use of for a Free School. It
is at present a fair and well inhabited Town Corporate, governed by a Bailiff,
12 principal Burgesses, a Steward, etc. is dignified with the title of an
Earldom, has the election of Parliament men, and its Market on Saturdays is
well served with all manner of Flesh, Corn, and other Provisions.

Stony-Stratford, Stony-Stratford.
seated on the Owse, a Town of great antiquity, being the Romans Lactoradum,
and built upon the ancient Causway called Watlingstreet, and is at present of a
good largness, containing 2 Parish Churches, is well accommodated with Inns,
and has a considerable Market for Corn, Flesh, and some Fish, on Fridays.

Ailesbury, seated on a branch of the Tame, and in a fertile Vale, so called,
which feeds store of Sheep. It is a fair and well inhabited Borough-Town,
electing Parliament men, is honored with the Title of an Earldom, is the usual
place where the Assizes for the County are held, having in the midst of the
Town a fair shire-hall, and its Market on Saturdays is very well served with
Corn, Cattle, and Provisions.

High Wickham.
High Wickham, well seated in a rich Soil, a Major Town, which for largeness
and fair buildings, is not inferior to any in the County, of note for its
black Bone-Lace here made, and its Markets on Fridays is very great for Corn,
Flesh, Fish, and all Provisions.

Cambridgshire described.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE, a County of a different Soil, the Southern part being Champain
and indifferent fertile, bearing excellent Corn and Barley, of which the
Inhabitants make abundance of Malt: and here is gathered good store of
Saffron, the dearest commodity that England produces. And the Northern part
(called the Isle of Ely, as made so by the Owse and its branches) is Fennish,
and not so pleasant and wholesome to live in as the Southern; but is recompensed
with rich Pastures, which feed abundance of Cattle, which are very profitable
to the Inhabitants, and affords also great plenty of Fish and Fowl.

This County is severed into 17 Hundreds, of which 14 are in the Southern part,
and 3 in the Northern, called the Isle of Ely; in which said Hundreds are 163
Parishes, and forth accommodation of its Inhabitants is traded unto by 8
Market Towns.

Cambridge, seated in an Air somewhat unhealthful, Cambridge.
occasioned through the Fenny-grounds near adjoining, and on the River Came or
Grant, (navigable for Barges) which separates it into two (but unequal) parts,
which are joined together by a Bridge. It Is a place of great antiquity, being
said to derive its name from Cantabar, a Spaniard, who about 375 years before
the Incarnation of Christ had there settled the Muses Seat; but more certain it
is, that Sigilbert the first Christian King of the East Saxons established here
several Schools; and of no less fame for its University or Seminary of true
Learning, which is its chiefest ornament, being adorned with 16 Colleges and
Halls, many of which are superb Buildings; and by reason of these Seminaries it
is a place of a large extent, numbering 14 Parish Churches, is beautified with
well built Houses, its Streets are paved and well ordered, is well inhabited,
enjoys a good Trade, and its Market on Saturdays is sufficiently furnished
with Provisions, which are had at easy rates. It is a Town Corporate, endowed
with ample Immunities, and sends 4 Burgesses to Parliament, viz. two for the
University, and two for the Town.

Nigh unto Cambridge Southwards, are Gogmagog-Hills, which are of a great
eminency, and yet retain the remembrance of the Danish Station; and of these
Hills the Country people tell fine stories.

Ely, seated in a fenny and waterish place, and on the banks of the Owse, Ely.
which renders it very unhealthful; it is a City of more antiquity than
beauty, being but meanly built, nor overmuch frequented or inhabited, and would
be far less, were it not for being the Sea of a Bishop, whose Palace is so
ruinous, that it is uninhabitable; but its Cathedral or Minister is a lofty
structure, and beautified with a stately Lenthorn of curious Architecture. It
is a City that enjoys ample Immunities, for in the Isle of Ely the Bishop
has all the rights of a Count Palatine, and bears chief sway therein,
appointing a Judge for the hearing of Causes within the said Isle; he also
holds Assizes, Jail-delivery, and Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and has his
chief Bailiff and other Officers; and although the City is but meanly
inhabited, yet its Market on Saturdays is well served with Provisions.

New Market, New Market.
seated part in this County and part in Suffolk, and in a large and pleasant
Heath, so called; a place of some largness, containing two Parish Churches, and
is well inhabited and much resorred unto by the Gentry, by reason of its
commodious situation for Horse-races and Hunting, being both Recreations that
his Majesty takes so great delight in, that he has there his Palace for his
reception; which adds no small advantage to the Town, often honoring it with
his Royal presence. Its Market is on Tuesdays, which is not very considerable
by reason of its vicinity to Bury and Cambridge.

Caxton, seated in the Clay, and on the North-road; a small Town, Caxton.
and has a little Market on Tuesdays.

Royston, seated on the high Road to Huntington in a bottom amongst Hills,
Royston.
and part in this County and part in Hartfordshire; It is a large, well
inhabited Town, and has a considerable Market on Wednesdays for Provisions,
especially for Malt, here, and in parts adjacent, made in great quantities.

Cheshire, described.
CHESHIRE, a County Palatine, of a rich and fertile Soil both for Tillage and
Pasturage, feeding abundance of Cattle, and affording plenty of Corn, Fish,
(especially Salmon) Fowl, Butter, Cheese, and Salt, which is their staple
commodity, and here had in great plenty: and out of the Rocks and Quarries,
broad Slates and fair Stones for building are dug; as are Millstones out of
Moucop-Hill. It is well furnished with Timber and Fuel from its Woods and
Forests of Delamer and Maxfield; is plentifully watered with Rivers, Meers, and
Pools, has several Heaths and Mosses. The ancient People were the Cornavii of
Ptolomy, and afterward became part of the Kingdom of the Mercians.

In this County are seated 86 Parish Churches, besides 38 Chapels of Ease, and
has Traffic with 13 Market Towns.

Chester, Chester.
or West-Chester, a City of great antiquity, said to be raised from the Fort of
Ostorius, Lieutenant of Britain, for Claudius the Emperor, and of a pleasant
situation on the Dee, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge, sustained by
eight Arches, at each end of which is a Gate: but the Channel is now so choked
up with Sand, that it is scarce navigable for small Vessels, so that all Ships
now come to a place called New-Key, about 6 miles distant. Its form is
Quadrangular, and takes up about two miles in circuit within its Wall, on
which are 7 Watch-Towers, and which gives entrance by 4 Gates and 3 Posterns,
and of these Gates the East-Cate is esteemed one of the stateliest Gates in
England. For its further defense it has a large Castle, seated on a Rocky
Hill, where the Shire Hall is (which something resembles that of Westminster)
where all matters concerning the County Palatine are tried by their peculiar
Officers. The City is large, numbering to Parish Churches beside its Minster or
Cathedral, a large structure, adjoining to which is the Bishops Palace; it is
beautified with diverse fair Buildings, both public and private, is graced with
large and well ordered Streets, is well frequented and inhabited by Gentry and
Assizes are kept, as also for being the usual place of taking Shippipng for
Ireland, with which it has a great intercourse, and has a considerable Trade.
It is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Aldermen, a Recorder and
Sub-Officers, enjoys ample Immunities, and sends Burgesses to Parliament,
which no other Town: in the County does. It is well served with Provisions, for
besides its Shambles, it has two considerable Markers weekly, on Wednesdays
and Saturdays.

Not far from this City is the Forest of Delamer, where Aedested the Mercian
Lady built a small City, long since reduced to ruins; which place is now called
The Chamber in the Forest.

Nantwich, Nantwich.
seated on the Wever, the largest and best built Town next to Chester, in the
Country, and is graced with a goodly spacious Church. It is a place well
inhabited and frequented, chiefly occasioned for its Salt Pits or Salt-wich,
for the making of white Salt, here had in great plenty; and its Market, which
is on Saturdays, is sufficiently provided with all Provisions and necessaries,
especially Corn and Cattle.

Malpas, Malpas.
situate on a great eminency, and on the River Dee, a fair Town* containing 3
Streets, which are paved and well ordered; it has an Hospital and Grammar
School, and its Market on Mondays is of good account.

Middlewich, Middlewich.
seated between Nantwich and Northwich, a large Town, containing several
Streets and Lanes, its chief place being called the Kings-Mexon. The Town is of
note for its Salt Pits, and making of Salt, and has a good Market for
Provisions on Saturdays.

Maxfield, Maxfield.
or Macclesfield, seated near a Forest so called; a very fair and large Town,
graced with a goodly Church, which has a high Spire Steeple, adjoining to
which is a College. The Inhabitants drive a great Trade in making of Buttons,
and its Market, which is on Mondays, is well served with Corn, Provisions, etc.

Cornwall described.
CORNWALL, encompassed on all parts, except on the East (by Devonshire) with the
Sea, which thrusts forth its several Arms, and receives those many Rivers,
which plentifully water the County; as the Foy, Newton, Dranes, Lo, ^^nla,
Seaton, Loo, Liner, Tavy, and Tamer. It is of a sharp; but healthful Air,
generally very Hilly, consisting ordinarily of Rocks and Shelves; but crusted
over with a shallow Earth, and more inolined to sterility than sertility; but
the parts toward the Sea, and the enclosures about the Towns* through the
industry of the Husbandman are more sertil, bearing good crops, and feeding
store of Cattle.

It affords great store of game both for the Hawk and Hound; and its Seas and
Rivers, plenty of several sorts of Fish and Fowl, as well those common to other
Counties, as appropriate to themselves. In the bowels of the Earth are Quarries
of sundry sorts of useful Stones and Slates for building; also Copper; precious
Stones, called Cornish Diamonds; but chiefly Tin, which is here found in great
plenty to the great inrichment of the Inhabitants, who, as to their Names and
Language hold great affinity with the Welsh.

The ancient Inhabitants were known to the Romans by the name of the
Danmonti's, and became afterward part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons.

This County is severed into 9 Hundreds, in which are numbered 161 Parish
Churches, and has intercourse of Traffic with 23 Market Towns.

Launston; seated on an eminency, and on a branch of the Tamer, Launston.
a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major and his Brethren, and amongst
other Immunities electeth Parliament men; it is a place well inhabited, enjoys
a good Trade, and the more as being the place where the Assizes are held; and
it is Market, which is on Saturdays, is well served with Provisions. Ad^oyning
to this Town is an ancient Castle, seated on a great eminency, and encompassed
at the top with a treble Wall, where there was a College of Canons and Secular
Priests. The lower part now compriseth a decayed Chapel, a large Hall, and a
place made use of for the Common Goal.

Liskerd, a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 8 Magistrates, Liskerd.
a Recorder, and other sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, has an eminent
Free School, and is a large; well inhabited and frequented Town, whose Market
on Saturdays is well served with Corn and all sorts of Provisions, and the
Inhabitants drive a considerable trade for Tarn every Market Day.

Bodman, seated in a bottom between two high Hills, Bodman.
which render it not very healthful, especially to new Comers; it is large, an
indifferent well built and inhabited Town Corporate, governed by a Major,
sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a great Market on Saturdays for Corn
and Provisions.

Listhyel, or Listwithiel, seated on the Foy, not far from its fall into
Foyhaven, Listhyel.
which formerly brought up Vessels to the Town; but its Channel being choked
up (by reason of the Tin-Mines) is a great obstruction to its Trade. It is a
Town Corporate, governed by a Major and his Brethren, electeth Parliament men,
has its part in the coynage of the Tin; (but the Goal for the whole Stannery,
and the keeping of the Courts is only here kept) and has a small Market on
Fridays.

Foy, so called from its Haven, or Arm of the Sea on which it is seated, Foy.
being strongly fortified at the entrance of the Haven with Block-houses, and
in times past was a place very considerable for Shipping and Traffic; its
Market, which is on Saturdays, is very served with Corn and Provisions.

West-Looe, seated on a navigable Creek, over which it has a fair Bridge,
West-Loot.
which leads to East-Looe, more commodiously seated, where there is an
indifferent good Market on Saturdays. They are both Towns Corporate, and send
Burgesses to Parliament. The chief benefit arising to the Inhabitants of these
Towns, is their Fishing.

Saltash, seated on the descent of a steep Hill, a pretty large Town Corporate.
Saltash.
consisting of 3 Streets, is governed by a Major, and 9 Aldermen, enjoys
large Immunities, and sends Burgesses to Parliament. Its Market is on
Saturdays, which of late is much decayed to what it was; (...) ^odito^
yet its Inhabitants gain well by their Malt and good Beer.

Not far from this Town is Trematon Castle, once a place of great note, in
which is kept the Trematon Court, wherein all Causes within ^he said Fee are
tried; as also the Prison.

Padstow, Padstow.
a Seaport Town, of some Trade by reason of its commodious situation with
Ireland, and were its Haven secure, it would be of greater account. It is a
Borough Town, electing Parliament men* and has a good Market for Corn and
Provisions on Saturdays.

Falmouth, Falmouth.
at present a very large and well inhabited Town Corporate, governed by Major
and sub Officers, enjoys a good Trade, is well resorted unto by Shipping,
where there is a Key intended shortly to be built, and has a very considerable
Market for Corn and Provisions on Thursdays. The Haven whereon this Town is
seated, and bears its name, is very commodious for Ships, and so capacious
that 100 Sail of Ships may safely ride at Anchor. And this Haven, with those of
Milford and Plymouth, are the chiefest in the Kingdom. On the West side and at
the very entrance of this Haven is Pendennis Castle, seated on a Hill so
called; and on the other side, (but of a lower situation) is St. Moze or
Maudit, both which are a great security to the Coast and Haven.

Truro, Truro.
seated on a branch of Falmouth haven, at present the head Town in the County,
being a fair, large, well inhabited and traded Borough Town, privileged with a
Majoralty, sends Burgesses to Parliament, has the coynage of the Tin, is a
place where the Western Sessions are held, and its Markets on Wednesdays and
Saturdays are well served with Provision, etc.

Penrin, Penrin.
seated also on a Creek of Falmouth-haven, a very considerable To^en Corporate,
electing Parliament men, and has weekly 3 Markets, viz. on Wednesdays, Fridays
and Saturdays for Corn, and on Saturdays for Provision.

Helston, Helston.
seated on the Low, between which and the Sea there is a great breach or bar
of Sand. It is a well inhabited and frequented Town Corporate, governed by a
Major and Aldermen, electeth Parliament men, and its Market on Saturdays is
well served with Provisions, and the two Markets before Christmas are so great,
that they may be reckoned as Fairs.

Near this Town is Godolphin-Hill, well known for its rich Tin Mines. Penzance,
Penzance.
seated on Monts-bay, and in an Inlet thereof; a very good traded Town, and
has a considerable Market for all Provisions, especially Fish, on Thursdays.

St.Iv^^, St.Ivos.
or St. Ithes, seated on an open Bay so called, chiefly frequented by
Fishermen, for the taking of Pilchards and other Fish, which are here
plentifully caught. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, a Justice, and
12 Aldermen, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has 2 Markets weekly, viz.
on Wednesdays and Saturdays.

It is observed that Men live here to a very great Age, and are stronger,
hardy, and addicted to wrestling, pitching the Bar, and other boisterous
sports, more than any other English men.

By Helford is a great Rock lying upon the ground, the top whereof is hollow
and filled with water, which ebbs and flows as the Sea does. There is a very
great Rock in this Shire called Mainamber, which rests upon other smaller
Rocks, which with the push of a finger may be moved; but cannot be moved out of
its place by all the Art men can use.

Country of Cumberland described.
CVMBERLAND, a County far engaged Northwards, is very Mountainous, and much
inclined to sterility, yet not without many fertile Valleys, both for Tillage
and Pasturnge. It has an Air very sharp, and would be more, were it not for
the high Hills that break off the Northern and Western Storms. In the howels of
the Earth are rich Mines of Copper in great plenty; also those of Iron, Lead,
Black-lead, ^oal, and some of Silver: and the Sea, and large Lakes and Meers,
plentifully furnish the Inhabitants with Fish and Fowl. And besides these
Commodities this County produces several Manufactures, amongst which,
heretofore Fustians and now Linen Cloth and course Broadcloths in great
plenty. The Mountains of most note are Black-koum, Hardknot, Wrey-nose,
Skiddow, and Crossfell, etc. It is well watered with Rivers, and has many
Lakes and Meers.

This Shire of all others in England shows the most Roman Antiquities, for
being in the utmost limits of their possessions it was always secured by their
Garrisons, and defended by that admirable. Wall called the Picts Wall, which
ran from Sea to Sea about 100 miles, and was 8 foot broad and 12 foot high, and
having at every 1000 paces a Watchtower erected, in which Soldiers were kept;
and on this Wall grows the Vulnerary Plant. And being thus in the confines of
Scotland, it was exceedingly strengthened with Castles, having about 25 public
ones, besides the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, which were generally built
Castle-wise.

It is severed into 5 Wa^ds, in which are 58 Parish Churches, besides diverse
Chapels of Ease, and has 15 Market Towns.

Carlisle, a City of great antiquity, Carlisle.
and no less pleasantly than commodiously seated at the influx or meeting of
several Rivers, viz. the Eden, Cauda, and Petterill, which on all parts, except
the South, encompass it; and for its further defense, it is fortified with a
strong and large Castle and Citadel, and fenced about with a strong Wall,
first built by Egfrid King of Northumberland, which was defaced by the Danes,
and again rebuilt by King Rufus. Its Houses are fair and well built, is
beautified with a Cathedral Church of curious workmanship, it enjoys several
Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 12
Aldermen, 2 Bailiffs, and other sub-Officers. It is a place well inhabited, and
traded unto chiefly for Fustians; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is
very considerable for Corn, Wool, Provisions, and several Country Commodities.

Cockermouth, seated between the Derwent and the Coker, Cockermouth.
which almost encompass it, over which are two fair Stone-Bridges, and between
two Hills, upon one of which stands the Church, a fair building, and upon the
other a spacious and stately Castle. It is a well inhabited Borough Town,
graced with fair Buildings, enjoys a good Trade, especially for course
Broad-cloth^ here made, has the election of Parliament men, and its Market,
which is on Mondays, is esteemed the best in the County for Corn, next to
Perith. Here is a Custom at their Fairs, holden at Whitsontide and Martlemass
for the hiring of Servants, to which end all such that want Servants, or
Services, do hither come; the like is observed at Perith, and most of the
Market Towns in the County.

Whithaven, seated on a Creek of the Sea, Whithaven.
indifferent commodious for Shipping, which makes it to be well inhabited and
frequented by Tradesmen, especially by Fishermen, and those that are related to
Sea-Affairs, who drive a good Trade to Ireland, Scotland, Chester, Bristol, and
other parts, having a Custom-house and several Vessels belonging to the Town,
whose chief Trade is for Salt and Coals, here plentifully dug up. Its Market
is kept Thursdays.

Kavenglass, a well built Maritim Town, couched betwixt the Rivers Irt,
Ravenglass.
Esk, and Mite, with which the Sea does encompass 3 parts of it, and is a good
road for Shipping, which makes it to be a place of some Trade, and has a
Market on Saturdays.

Keswick, seated in a Valley, Keswick.
hemmed in with Hills and the Mountains called Derwent Fells, wherein are good
Copper-Mines; and not far from the Town is dug up Black-Lead, or Wadd, in great
plenty. The Town was formerly of greater account than now it is, when the
Mineral-men had here their, Smelting-houses, being at present not very
considerable. It has a Market on Saturdays, chiefly for Meal, Flesh, Butter,
and Cheese.

Perith, seated on a Hill called Perith Fell, Perith.
and near the Rivers Eimont and Lowther; a large, well built and inhabited
Town, esteemed the second in the County, although neither a Borough nor Town
Corporate; it is adorned with a fair Church and a large Marketplace, which
every Tuesday is very much resorted unto, being considerable for Corn, living
Cattle, diverse Commodities and all sorts of Provisions in great plenty.

Derbyshire described.
DERBYSHIRE, a Midland County, but inclined toward the North, which makes it
to be of a sharp Air, especially upon the Peak Mountains. The Soil is generally
fertile, chiefly the South and East parts, which for the most part are enclosed
and improved, yielding good Corn and Grass, and has also store of Coal and
Iron-stone. The North and West parts are very hilly and stony, and not so
fertile, except in Lead-Oar, in which it much abounds, yet not without some rich
Valleys; and on the Hills are bred good (though not large) Sheep in great
abundance. For Fuel, it is not beholding to Wood, having such great plenty of
Coal, that it supplies the defects of diverse neighboring Counties.

It is well watered with Rivers, viz. the Trent, Derwent, Dove, and Wye, which
are the chief, and are passed over by about 21 Stone-bridges, some of which are
of considerable note; as Burton over the Trent, sustained by 35 large
Stone-Arches; Swarkeston-bridge over the fame River, reputed near a mile long,
but much of it is rather a Causway than a Bridge; Monks-bridge over the Dove,
and St. Marys-bridge, at Derby, over the Derwent, which River severeth the
County into East and West, and it is observed that on the East Side Coal is
generally dug, and on the West, Lead.

The Inhabitants were the Coritani of the Romans, and was afterward part of
the Kingdom of the Mercians.

It is severed into 6 Hundreds, and contains 106 Parish Churches, besides
several Chapels of Ease, and is traded unto by 9 Market Towns.

Derby, Derby.
well seated on the Derwent, over which it has a goodly Stone Bridge; a Town
of good Antiquity, and is at present a very large, populous, well frequented
and rich Borough Town, numbering 5 Parish Churches, of which All Saints, which
is the chief, is a curious structure, and beautified within with several
Monuments. It is a Borough Town, electing Parliament men, is honored with the
Title of an Earldom, enjoys ample Immunities, is governed by a Major, 9
Aldermen, 14 Brethren, 14 Common Council, a Recorder, Town Clerk, etc. is well
traded unto, especially for Barley, which they make into Malt, which finds
good vent, and its Market, which is on Fridays, is very considerable for
Cattle, Corn, and all sorts of Provisions, besides a small Market on Wednesdays
and Saturdays. Here is lately built a fair Hall of Freestone a^ the Counties
charge, where the Assizes are constantly kept.

Chesterfield, Chesterfield.
pleasantly seated between two small Rivers, and in a good Soil, a Borough Town
of great antiquity, is dignified with an Earldom, enjoys large Immunities, is
governed by a Major, 6 Aldermen, a Recorder, 6 Brethren, 1^ Counselors, etc.
and has weekly two Markets on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are very
considerable for Corn, Lead, and most Country Commodities.

Wicksworth, seated in a Valley, a pretty large and populous Town, beautified
with a fair Church, Wicksworth.
has a Free School and Almshouses, and its Market on Tuesdays is well served
with Provisions and Apples, especially for Lead, where the Merchants have their
meetings for the Sale thereof.

Bakewill, Bakewill.
seated amongst Hills and on the banks of the Wye, an indifferent large Town,
and has a good Market on Mondays for Lead and Provisions.

In the Peak Forest is a Well that obb^ and flows 4 times in one hour, keeping
its exact Tides.

At Buxton, out of a Rock, in 24 foot compass, 9 Springs arise, of which 8 are
warm and one cold; and the Waters are found very good to bath in, and for the
Stomach.

And in this County is Eldenhole, being a Cave worthy of note.

Devonshire described.
DEVONSHIRE, of a sharp and healthful Air, very hilly and generally of an
ungrateful Soil, without great pains and charges in manuring it; yet is it not
without many fertile Valleys, and its sterility is recompensed by the rich Mines
of Tin and Lead, as also by the great plenty of Herrings, Pilchers, and other
Fish, taken on its Sen-Coast, from which the Inhabitants reap good profit;
which, with its Clothings, Saerges and Bone-lace, are the chief Commodities of
the County.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Dannionii, and was afterward part of the
Kingdom of the West Saxons.

It is very well watered with fresh Streams, as the Ex, Tamar, Tave, Tawe,
Pline, Dart, Turridge, Tinge, Plime, Culme, and Ottery, which are found very
advantageous to the Inhabitants.

It is divided into 33 Hundreds, in which are 394 Parishes, and for the
accommodation of its Inhabitants, has about 30 Market Towns.

Exeter, a fair, sweet and well compacted City, of great Antiquity, Exeter.
and no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the top of an easy Ascent,
and on the Ex (whence it took its name) over which it has a fair Stone Bridge.
It Is a place of a good largeness, containing within its Wall and Ditches, about
a mile and half in circuit, in which and in its Suburbs (which are large) are
numbered 15 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral or Minster, founded by King
Aethelstan, a fair and beautiful structure. It enjoys a considerable Trade,
being much inhabited and resorted unto by Merchants and Tradesmen, having
several Ships and Vessels belonging unto them, and is in a flourishing
condition, enjoying ample Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is
honored with the Title of an Earldom, is governed by a Major, 24 Aldermen or
Brethren; a Recorder and other sub-Officers, and has two very considerable
Markets weekly, viz. on Wednesdays and Fridays for Provisions, and Searges in
great abundance.

Plymouth, seated on the Plime, and near the Tamer, Plymouth.
at both their Influxes into the Sea, which from a poor Fishing-Village is
become a very fair, large, well inhabited and frequented Town, resembling
rather a City than a Town, although it has but two Parish Churches; it is a
place of great importance by reason of its commodious Haven and excellent Port,
which does occasion it to be so well resorted unto by most Ships both outward
and inward bound, and is of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, being
defended by a strong Fort, a Citadel, and other Fortifications. It is a
Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen, and Common Council,
has the election of Parliament men, enjoys a great Trade for most
Commodities, and its Markets on Mondays and Thursdays are extraordinary well
served with all sorts of Provisions, as also have living Cattle.

Dertmouth, seated on the Dent, near its fall into the Sea, Dertmouth.
where it has a commodious Haven; a large, well inhabited, frequented and
traded Port-Town, containing 3 Parish Churches, and its Market on Fridays is
very well served with Provisions. It Is an ancient Town Corporate, is governed
by a Major and his Brethren, and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to
Parliament.

Totnes, seated on the Dert, and on the descent of a Hill; Totnes.
a Town of great antiquity, and of greater account than now it is, yet does it
retain several of its Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is
governed by a Major and his Brethren. The Town is large and has a very great
Market on Saturdays for all live Cattle, Corn, Malt, and Provisions both Flesh
and Fish.

Ashburton, seated in a rich Soil under the Moor; a large Borough Town,
Ashburton.
composed of several Streets, is beautified with a fair Church, electeth
Parliament men, and has a very good Market for Corn, Cattle, Sheep, and
Provisions on Saturdays.

Okehampton, seated betwixt the River Okement and a branch thereof; Okehampton.
a Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, is governed by a Major,
Burgesses, Recorder, and sub-Officers, and has a very good Market for Corn,
Provisions and Yarn, on Saturdays.

Bediford, Bediford.
commodiously seated for the reception of Vessels on the Towridge, over which
it has a large Stone Bridge of Arched-work; consisting of 24 Peers. It Is a
large, well inhabited and traded Town, and its Market on Tuesdays is well
served with Corn and Provisions.

Barnstable, Barnstable.
commodiously seated on the Tawe, over which it has a large Stone Bridge: It Is
a fine Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, is a place of some Trade,
and has a considerable Market on Fridays for Cattle, Corn, and Provisions.

South-Moulton, South-Moulton.
seated on the Moul, which falls into the Tawe, a pretty good Town, and has
a considerable Market on Saturdays for Corn and Provisions.

Tiverton, Tiverton.
seated on the Ex, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge, where the Leman
falls in. It is a large Town Corporate, electing Parliament men, is governed
by a Major, 12 Burgesses, and other sub-Officers; is a place of good account
for its Clothing here made, and has a Market on Tuesdays, which is very well
served with Provisions, etc.

Crediton, Crediton.
seated betwixt two Hills, and in a rich Soil, once the Sea of a Bishop, till
removed to Exeter. It is a place of a pretty largeness, being composed of two
Towns, the one called East Town and the other West, is beautified with a very
fair Church built Cathedral-wise, to which belongs a Free School, which has
12 Governors; it is well inhabited, enjoys a good Trade for its Searges here
made, and its Markets on Saturdays, for Corn and Provisions, is esteemed one of
the best in the County.

Dorsetshire described.
DORSETSHIRE, of a healthful Air and fruitful Soil; the Northern part (which is
severed from the South almost by a continual ridge of high Hills) is somewhat
flat, abounding with rich Pastures, and is well watered with fresh Streams,
which has induced many of the Gentry to settle here, although the Winter
season is very dirty and troublesome to the Traveller; which inconvenience the
South part is freed from, as consisting of Hills and Downs, which are
overspread with flocks of Sheep; yet it is not without diverse Valleys, in which
(for the most part) the Towns and Gentlemens-Houses are seated.

It is well watered with Rivers, the chief of which are the From and the
Stower, which, with the Sea, do plentifully furnish the Inhabitants with Fish
and Fowl.

The chief Commodities that this County produces are Cattle, Sheep, Corn,
Wool, of which the Clothiers make Kerfies; Wood, Hemp, Tobacco-clay,
Free-stones, etc. And for the better support of their Traffic, they have
several good Haven-Towns, as Lime, Weymouth, Pool, etc.

Its Inhabitants, known to the Romans, were the Durotriges; and when the Saxons
became Masters of the Island, it became part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons.

It is divided into 5 Divisions, and those into 29 Hundreds, in which are
seated 248 Parish Churches, and for accommodation of its Inhabitants, has
Traffic with 18 or 19 Market Towns.

Dorchester, Dorchester.
a Town of great antiquity, and well known to the Romans, where they had their
station; it is pleasantly seated on the South Side of the From, and on the
Roman Causway called Foss-way, at present the chief in the County (though not
so large as in former time, as appears by the circuit of its then Walls, first
thrown down by the Danes) being neatly compacted with well built Houses, has 3
fair Streets and as many Parish Churches, has an eminent Free School and an
Almshouse. It Is a Town Corporate, governed by 2 Bailiffs, 8 Aldermen, a
Recorder, and other sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, and gives title to
the Right Honorable Pierrepont, Marquess of Dorchester, etc. Its Inhabitants
gain well by Clothing and other Merchandise, and its Market on Saturdays is
very considerable for Corn, Flesh, Cattle, Sheep, and Country Commodities,
usually sold in great Markets.

Weymouth, seated on the Wey at its influx into the Sea, opposite to which,
Weymouth.
on the other side of the River, stands Melcombe, or Melcomb-Regis, but
joined together by a fair Timber-bridge; which Towns are now incorporated into
one body, and governed by a Major, Aldermen, and other sub Officers; yet each
of them still send 2 Burgesses to Parliament. Weymouth at present has but one
chief Street, which for a good space lies open to the Sea, and on the bank
thereof rises a Hill of such steepness, that the Inhabitants are forced to
climb up to their Chapel by 60 steps of Stone, from whence there is a fair
prospect of the Town and Haven, which lies under it. Melcombe, as seated on a
flat, much surpasses Weymouth for convenience of situation, affording room
for Buildings, has a good Marketplace, good Streets and Yards or their
Merchandise, which has invited most of the Merchants to reside here; and these
Towns thus united gain well by Traffic into Newfoundland, France, and
elsewhere; and their Markets, which are on Tuesdays and Fridays, are well
provided with all necessaries and provisions.

Not far from Weymouth is the Isle of Portland, or rather a Peninsula, Portland
Isle.
so made by the Beech, which runs from Abbotsbury. It is a place of great
strength, as well by nature as art, being encompassed with inaccessible Rocks,
except at the place of Landing, where there is a strong Castle called Portland
Castle; and almost opposite to it on the Land-side toward Weymouth is another
called Sandfoot Castle, which two command all the Ships that pass into the
Road. The whole Isle, when got to the top of these craggy Rocks, shows it
self in a flat, and is in compass about 7 miles. The ground is very good for
Corn, and indifferent for Pasturage; it affords excellent Quarries of
Freestone for building, but is exceeding destitute of Wood and other Fuel. On
the South Side stands the only Church in the Isle, which is washed by the
Sea-waves. And here Portland-race shows it self.

Lime, or Lime-Regis, of great antiquity, seated on the banks of the Sea, Lime.
a well known Haven, Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major and other
sub-Officers, enjoys diverse Immunities, and electeth Parliament men. The Town
is large and built on both sides of the River Lime, but joined together by a
Bridge. It enjoys a good trade, and its Markets are well frequented.

Cerne-Abbas, once famous for its rich and fair Abbey near adjoining;
Cerne-Abbas.
it is seated in a dry bottom, watered with a fine Rivulet, and in a Champain
Country, affording great delight for the Hawk and Hound. The Town is but mean,
yet has it an eminent Market for Corn, Sheep, Cattle, etc. on Wednesdays.

Sherborne, of good antiquity and same, Sherborne.
being formerly the Sea of a Bishop; it is well seated and watered, and for
largeness, fair Buildings, frequency of Inhabitants, and quick Markets, which
are on Thursdays and Saturdays, for Corn, Flesh, Sheep, Cattle, and most
Country Commodities, gives place to few or none in these parts.

Shaftsbury, or Shafton, seated on a great eminency, Shaftsbury.
and very destitute of Water, which for ordinary uses is brought on Horses
backs from the foot of the Hill. It once contained (when in its glory) 10
Parish Churches, which at present are reduced to 3, and is a fair, large, well
built, inhabited and frequented Thoroughfare, Borough and Major Town, governed
by a Major, 12 Aldermen, etc. electeth Parliament men, is honored with the
title of an Earldom, and has a very considerable Market on Saturdays for Corn,
Flesh, Cattle, and most Commodities.

Blandford, a fair, large and well compacted Town, seated on the Stower,
Blandford.
over which it has a Bridge which leads to St. Mary Blanford. It is well
inhabited, enjoys a good Trade, and the rather as being neighboured by so
many Gentry, and its Market on Saturdays is well provided with all things
necessary, but chiefly with Corn, Sheep and Cattle.

Pool, enclosed on all parts with the Sea, except on the North, Pool.
where it admits entrance only by one Gate. A Town by reason of its commodious
Haven, from a small Village is become a very large Town Corporate, governed by
a Major and other sub-Officers, electeth Parliament men, and has two Markets
weekly on Mondays and Thursdays, which are indifferent well served. In the
Haven (contrary to all Ports in England) the Sea ebbs and flows four times in
24 hours.

Worham, Worham.
esteemed the ancientest Borough Town in the County, seated between the From
and the Biddle, at their falling into Luckford Lake, where it had a good
Harbor for Ships, and was a very considerable large place, containing several
Churches, which are now reduced to 3; and its Haven being choked up, does much
eclipse its Trade. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major, etc. sends
Burgesses to Parliament, and has an indifferent good Market on Saturdays.

Lulworth-Castle, Lulworth Castle.
the Seat of Hum Weld Esquire, esteemed one of the best Houses in the County,
as well for beauty and largeness, as for a pleasant situation and prospect
into the Sea.

The Isle of Purbeck, Purbeck Isle.
or rather the Peninsula, so called, has veins of Marble running under the
Earth. It is about 10 miles in length and 5 in breadth; in which tract are
seated diverse Towns, amongst which is Corfe-Castle, seated on a River, and in a
barren Soil, between two Hills, upon one of which stands the Castle. It is an
ancient Borough Town, governed by a Major and Barons, enjoys ample
Immunities, electeth Parliament men, and has a small Market on Thursdays.

County of Durham described.
DVRHAM, a Bishopric and County Palatine, of a sharp and piercing Air, but
through the plentifulness of Sea-Coal the Cold is not so offensive unto the
Inhabitants. It is of a different Soil, the Eastern part being Champain, the
Southern most fertile and well inhabited, and the Western, hilly, barren, and
thin of Woods and Towns, but is recompensed by the store of Coals, Lead, and
Iron-Mines.

The ancient Inhabitants known to Ptolomy were the Brigantes, and in the time
of the Saxons became part of the Kingdom of the Northumbers.

This County was formerly called St. Cuthberts Patrimony, from one St.
Cuthbert, who was Canonie^d a Saint, and was born in this County.

It is divided into 4 Wards, viz. those of Chester, Darweton, Easington, and
Stockton, in which are numbered 118 Parishes, and is traded unto by fix Market
Towns.

Durham, Durham.
a City of good Antiquity, dignified with the Sea of a Bishop, and sends
Burgesses to Parliament. It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on
an easy Ascent, and almost encompassed by the River Wear, over which it has
two large and spacious Stone-bridges, which give entrance into it, which, with
its Wall and spacious Castle, make it to be a place of good strength. This City
is fair and neatly compacted, containing 6 Parish Churches, besides its Abbey or
Cathedral, dedicated to St. Cuthbert, a large structure with a lofty Tower in
the midst, and two Spires at the West End, adjoining to which are the Houses
for the Dean and Prebends. It is beautified with fair Buildings, has well
ordered Streets, a spacious Marketplace, which is well resorted unto every
Saturday, is much inhabited and frequented by the Gentry of these parts,
enjoys a good Trade, and its Shopkeepers are well furnished with Commodities.

Hartley-pool, Hartley-pool.
commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, (which encompasseth it, except toward
the West) and surrounded with Rocks and Hills. It Is an ancient Town Corporate,
governed by a Major and sub-Officers, is indifferent large, but poor, and its
Market at present disused; and were it not for its Harbor, which is good, it
would be less frequented,

Bishops-Aukland, Bishops-Aukland.
well seated on the side of a Hill, and between the River Wear and the Rivulet
Gaunless; of chief note for its Castle, which is the Bishops Palace for the
Summer season, now beautifully repaired. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is
indifferently well provided with Corn and Provisions.

Darlington, Darlington.
seated in a flat and on the Skerne, which falls into the Tees; a Town of a
good largeness, consisting of several Streets, has a spacious Marketplace,
and its Market on Mondays is very considerable, and well furnished with Corn,
Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions.

At Oxenhall, near Darlington, are 3 deep Pits, called by the Inhabitants
Hell-Kettles, which are said to be made by an Earthquake.

Stocton, Stocton.
seated on the Tees near its fall into the Sea; a place of great trade for
vending and exporting of Corn and Butter to London, and other parts. It is a
Town Corporate, governed by a Major and sub-Officers, is well inhabited, and by
reason of its commodious Port it enjoys a good Trade.

County of Essex described.
ESSEX, a County of a large extent, and very populous; is well watered with
Rivers, besides the Sea, which sends forth several of her branches, as the
Stower, Blackwater, (where those excellent Oysters, called Walfleet, are
caught) Crouch, Ley, etc. The Soil may be esteemed fertile, though in some
places it is sandy and barren; it is well clothed with Wood, has variety of
Parks, great plenty of Fish and Fowl; nor is there any want of other
Provisions: And for its Commodities affords Cloths, Stuffs, Hops, Butter,
Cheese, Gunpowder, Oysters and Saffron.

It is severed into Hundreds, in which are seated 415 Parish Churches, and for
the convenience of its Inhabitants has 21 Market Towns.

Colchester, Colchester.
a place of great antiquity, said to be built by Collus the British Prince An.
Dom. 124. and in former times of no less fame than largeness, numbering 15
Parish Churches, many of which are now reduced to ruin, with abundance of its
Houses. It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the Colne, which
after about six miles course loses it self in the Sea. It is governed by 2
Bailiffs, 12 Aldermen, who are clothed in Scarlet, a Recorder, with other
sub-Officers; it enjoys several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament,
has a Market on Saturdays, which is well served with Provisions, and its
Inhabitants (many of which are Dutch, and have their Church for divine Worship)
drive a good trade for Says, Bares, and other Draperies here made. It is also
of some note for the great quantities of excellent Oysters here taken. This
place gave birth to Lucius, Helena, and Constantine the first Christian King,
Empress, and Emperor in the World.

Harwich, Harwich.
a Haven, Seaport, and Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, is of
great great strength as well by nature as art. The Town is not large, but is
well inhabited and frequented by those that have relation to Sea-Affairs; and
the rather, by reason of its safe and commodious Haven, harbor for Ships and
Vessels to Anchor in, it being oft-times the station of the Navy Royal, which
(and for being the ready passage to Holland, where the Packet-boats are kept
for that purpose) does occasion it to enjoy a good Trade; yet its Market on
Tuesdays is not very considerable.

About 4 miles Northwards from Harwich is Horsey Isle; and about 2 miles
further is the Ness, a Promontory well known to Seamen.

Maldon, Maldon.
a Town of great antiquity and repute in the time of the Romans, (as Cambden
notes) and was the Seat of Cunobelin, King of the Trinobantes. It is well
seated on an Arm of the Sea, about 6 or 7 miles from the Main, before which lie
small Isles called Northey and Osey; the Town is large, having one Street about
a mile in length, is well inhabited, enjoys a good trade, occasioned by
reason of the commodiousness of its Haven; amongst its Immunities electeth
Parliament men, is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 6 Aldermen, 18 Brethren, a Recorder,
High-Steward, etc. and has a very considerable Market on Saturdays for Flesh,
Fish, Fowl, and other Provisions.

Walden. Walden.
or Saffron-Walden, seated on an Ascent amongst pleasant Fields of Saffron; a
large, fair, well inhabited and frequented Town Corporate, enjoying several
Immunities, is governed by a Treasurer, 2 Chamberlains, and the Commonalty, and
has a very considerable Market on Saturdays, for Corn and all forts of
Provisions.

Near unto this Town is that stately House Audley-end, Audley-end.
built by the Right Honorable Tho. Howard, Earl of Suffolk, then Lord High
Treasurer of England, which said House now belongs to his Majesty.

Chelmesford, Chelmesford.
seated in the Road and between two Rivers, over which are Bridges for
convenience of passage. It is a fair, large and well frequented Town, where the
Assizes are usually kept, and has a very great Market for Corn, Provisions,
etc. on Fridays.

Raleigh, Raleigh.
a place of great antiquity, though not of largeness, and its Market which is
on Saturdays is but small.

Not far from this Town are the Isles of Wallop and Fowlness, that is, the
Promontory of Fowls, which has a Church in it. Also Canvey Isle, of a rich
Soil, and feeds good store of Sheep.

Brentwood. Brentwood.
seated on a Hill, and on the high Road; a place of good Antiquity, is well
inhabited, and its Market on Thursdays is well served with Provisions.

Rumford. Rumford.
a large thoroughfare, well frequented and inhabited Town, seated in the
Liberty of Haverill, which enjoys large Immunities, being an ancient retiring
place of the Kings. This Town of Rumford is of note for its great Market on
Tuesdays for living Cattle; but for Corn and Provisions, which it is
plentifully served with, it has a Market on Wednesdays.

Waltham, Waltham.
or Waltham-Abby, seated on the River Leg, where it forms several Eights, or
small Isles, and in a large Forest so called, well stored with Deer and other
Game. It is a Town of some note, and has a Market on Tuesdays.

Gloucestershire described.
GLOVCESTERSHIRE, a County of a healthful Air and fertile Soil both for Corn and
Pasturage, yielding plenty of Corn, and feeding abundance of Cattle and great
flocks of Sheep (especially about Coteswold) whose Wool is much esteemed for
its fineness.

The part lying Eastwards, called Coteswold, rises up with Hills, and is for
grazing; the middle part (which is watered with the Severne) lies low, and
makes a most fertile Plain; and the Western part, beyond the Severne, is
overspread with Wood and called Dean Forest, which affords excellent Timber
Trees for the building of Ships, and great store of Coal and Iron-Mines, where
there are diverse Furnaces and Forges for working the same. This Forest is of a
large extent, being about 20 miles in length and 10 in breadth; within which
tract of ground are numbered 3 Hundreds, 23 Parish Churches, 1 Castle, 1 Abbey, 3
Market Towns, and 1 Major Town; and the Common thereof (besides the Purlieus
and Abby-woods) is said to contain 32000 Acres of Ground.

The chief Commodities that this County produces, are Corn, Wool, Cloth, Iron,
Steel, Wool and Timber; also Fruits here had in such great plenty, that the
Highways and Lanes are beset with Apple, Pear, and Plumb-trees, which grow
naturally without ingrafting.

It is well watered with Rivers, amongst which are the Isis, Strowd, Churne,
Avon, Wye, and Severne, which for broadness of Channel, swiftness of Stream,
and plenty of Salmon and other excellent Fish, comes little short of any River
in England.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Dobuni, and in the time of the Saxons it
became part of the Kingdom of the Mercians.

This County is divided into 30 Hundreds, in which are numbered 280 Parish
Churches, and is traded unto by 25 Market Towns.

Bristol, Bristol.
seated between the Avon and the Froom, which after a small course fall into
the Severne; the Avon dividing it into two parts, as the Thames does London and
Southwark, and are so joined by a fair Stone Bridge, on which are also stately
Houses. The greatest part of this City is in this County, and the least in
Somersetshire, but it will owe subjection to neither, being an entire County
incorporate of it self, enjoying large Immunities, sends Burgesses to
Parliament, is governed by its peculiar Magistrates, as a Major, Court of
Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, and other sub-Officers, and is dignified with the Sea of
a Bishop and the title of an Earldom, now invested in the person of the Right
Honorable George Digby, Earl of Bristol, etc. It is a City of a sweet and
delightful situation, and of far more beauty than antiquity, being adorned
with many fair and well built Edifices; and its Streets so neatly ordered, by
reason of the Avon that runs through it, together with the common Sinks and
Sewers under ground, that no filth is to be seen to annoy its Inhabitants. It
is a City of a large extent, numbering 18 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral,
a fair structure. It is begirt with a Wall, and further defended with
Fortifications; its Port is good, and commodious for Ships of a considerable
burden, which does occasion it to be a place of a very considerable Trade, and
to be well inhabited, and frequented by Merchants and Tradesmen, insomuch that
next after London it may justly claim priority of all others in England; and
for the accommodation of its Inhabitants, besides its Shambles, its Markets on
Wednesdays and Saturdays are plentifully served with all sorts of Provisions.
It is of note for its Bristol-Stones, taken out of St. Vincents-Rock near
adjoining.

Gloucester, Gloucester.
a City of good antiquity, and pleasantly seated on an easy Ascent, and on the
banks of the Severne, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge. It Is a City not
very large, yet has it for Divine worship 12 Parish Churches, besides its Abbey
or Cathedral, dedicated to St. Peter, a fair and beautiful building, consisting
of a continued Window-work, and has large Cloisters and an excellent
Whispering-place. It is also beautified with a handsome College, and many neat
Buildings, being a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoying a good Trade;
and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well furnished with all
Provisions, and very great for Corn and Cattle. This City is the Sea of a
Bishop, to which belongs a Dean and 6 Prebends; it is a County within it self,
enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by
a Major, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, with other sub-Officers.

Circester, Circester.
seated on the Churn, over which it has a Bridge, and in the Woulds very
commodious for Mills. 'Twas a City once large, and of great account in the time
of the Romans; at present it is a good Borough Town, enjoying large
Privileges, and sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has weekly two
considerable Markets, on Mondays chiefly for Corn, and on Fridays for Wool,
Yarn, and Provisions.

Tewksbury, commodiously seated on and between 3 Rivers, Tewksbury.
the Severne, Avon, and Swilyat, over which are as many Bridges; a fair, large,
well inhabited and frequented Borough and Town Corporate, electing Parliament
men; of good account for making of Woollen-cloth, and for the best Mustard in
England, and has a very good Market on Saturdays for Corn, Cattle, and
Provisions.

Stroud, seated on a River so called, over which it has a Bridge, Stroud.
and on the banks of the said River are placed abundance of Fulling-Mills. It
is a well built Town, which is of chief note for making and dying of Cloths,
and especially for good Scarlets; and has a good Market on Fridays for
Provisions and Yarn.

Tedbury, an indifferent good Town, beautified with a fair Market-house;
Tedbury.
and its Market on Wednesdays, for Corn, Cattle, Cheese, Malt, Tarn, Wool,
Provisions, and other Country Commodities, is esteemed one of the best in these
parts.

Barkley, a place of good antiquity, honored with a Barony, Barkley.
and gives title to the Right Honorable Lord Berkley, etc. It is seated on a
branch of the Severne, and has an indifferent Market on Tuesdays.

Dursley, seated on or near a branch of the Severne; a good Town, Dursley.
much inhabited by Clothiers, and has a small Market on Thursdays.

Chipping-Sodbury, seated in a bottom of the Downs, and in the Road;
Chipping-Sodbury.
an indifferent good Borough Town, which has a very great Market for Cheese on
Thursdays, and is also well served with Corn and Provisions.

Hantshire described.
HANTSHIRE, of a fertile Soil for Corn, has rich Pastures, which feed store of
Cattle, is well clothed with Wood, affords plenty of Iron, which is here
wrought from the Mines; also excellent Honey, and of their Wool they make
abundance of Cloths and Kersies.

Its Southern parts are washed with the Sea, and by reason of its of its
several good Ports and Havens it is well resorted and traded unto, affording
most Transmarine Commodities,

The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Segoutians in the North
part, and the Belgae and the Regni in the South.

In this County is New-Forest, about 30 miles in compass, and a place which
affords great variety of Game; within this tract of ground was formerly 36
Parish Churches, which with the Houses thereto belonging were pulled down by
command of William the Conqueror, that it might be a place for wild Beasts to
harbor in.

It is severed into 40 Hundreds, wherein are seated 253 Parish Churches, and is
traded unto by 18 Market Towns, besides those in the Isle of Wight, being part
of this County, which I shall anon treat of.

Winchester, Winchester.
a City of great antiquity, and famous in the time of the Romans, Saxons, and
Normans, it being the Sepulcher of diverse of their Kings and Queens, and was of
note in the time of the Romans for making the rich Embroideries for their
Emperors. It is a place pleasantly seated in a Valley betwixt Hills, and on
the banks of a delightful River, which after about 10 miles course falls into
an Arm of the Sea, on which Southampton is seated. It is a fair City of about a
mile and a half in circuit within its Walls, which gives entrance unto its
Suburbs by 4 Gates; for Divine worship it has five Parish Churches besides its
Cathedral, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, a large and beautiful structure. It
is garnished with good Buildings, amongst which are the Bishops Palate, the
Prebends houses, and the Town Hall, where the Assizes and Sessions for the
County are kept. It is a place well inhabited and frequented, and its Markets,
which are on Wednesdays and Saturdays, are well provided with all sorts of
Provisions, especially that on Saturdays. It enjoys several Immunities, and
sends Burgesses to Parliament. Without the City, in the Suburbs, is a fair
College bearing the name of the City, having a Warden, Masters, and an Usher,
and is undowed with a liberal Mantenance.

Near unto this City, pleasantly seated on a fair River, is St. Crosses
Hospital for the relief of 12 Poor men called Brothers, having a Master,
Steward, and sub-Officers; and according to the Institution of the House, Bread
and Drink is given to all Travelers that will require the same.

Southampton, Southampton.
commodiously seated on an Arm of the Sea, capable to receive Ships of a
considerable burden to its Keys, which are fair, and very convenient for the
lading and unlading of Goods, by reason of which it is a place well inhabited
by Merchants and Shopkeepers, who drive a good Trade. It is a large Town,
numbering 5 Parish Churches besides its Hospital, called Gods-house. It is
garnished with well built Houses, and is fenced about with a double Ditch and
Walls, which gives entrance by 7 Gates. It is a Town and County of it self,
governed by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, enjoys large Immunities,
sends Burgesses to Parliament, is dignified with the title of an Earldom, and
its Markets on Tuesdays and Thursdays are not very great, except for Provisions.

Portsmouth, Portsmouth.
at present one of the best Garrisons and Seaport Towns in England, by reason
of its commodious situation, which makes it to be exceedingly resorted unto by
Shipping, and is one of the usual stations for the Navy Royal, where his
Majesty has his Storehouses and Docks for the building and equipping his
Ships, which adds no small benefit to the Town, which is large, well built,
very populous, enjoys a good Trade, is well provided with all necessaries,
and its Markets on Thursdays and Saturdays are very considerable for
Provisions. This Town is seated in the Isle of Porsey, so made by the Sea and
its two Arms, which are joined by a River. It is a Town Corporate, sends
Burgesses to Parliament; and being a place of such concernment, is exceedingly
fortified with two Castles and other Fortifications. Here they make Salt of the
Salt Water.

Basingstoke, seated on the Road, Basingstoke.
a great thorough-fare Town for the Western partt. It is a Town Corporate,
governed by a Major, 7 Aldermen, as many Burgesses, a high Steward, a Recorder,
etc. and the Market on Wednesdays is very good for Corn, especially Barley.

Silchester, a place of great antiquity, and of a large extent, Silchester.
said to be the ancient City Vindonum, built by Constantius Son of Constantine
the Great, and before it was destroyed by the Danes, was of a large extent.
Here the warlike Arthur was Crowned.

The Isle of WIGHT, part of Hantshire, Isle of wight.
of which it may part; for from Hurst Castle, which is seated on a Languet of
Land which runs forth into the Sea; it is not above a mile to the Western
part of this Isle, and from Portsmouth not above six. And its Southern part
lies opposite to France, from which it is distant about 35 Leagues.

The form of this Isle is long, being about 20 miles in length, and where
broadest 12, and has about 60 miles of Seacoast.

It is blessed with a healthful Air, and is of a fertile Soil both for Corn and
Pasture, and has plenty of Conies, Hares, Partridges, Sea-fowl, and other
Game; and for excellent Fish may compare with any Country whatsoever; nor is it
wanting in any thing either for pleasure or profit, except Wood, and that they
are supplied with from Hantshire.

It is a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art; for besides its
Castles, Block-houses, Forts, and Militia; it is fenced about with a ridge of
craggy Rocks and Cliffs, with dangerous Banks; amongst which those of most note
to Seamen are the Needles, Shigles, Brambles, the Mixon, etc. It is very
populous, and garnished with 36 Parish Churches, and has for its chief places,

Newport, a large, populous and well frequented Major Town, Newport.
which has the election of Parliament men, is dignified with the title of an
Earldom, and at present the only Market Town in the Isle, which is here kept on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, both very considerable for Provisions, Corn, Cattle,
and other Commodities. It is seated within 4 miles of the Sea, and on a
navigable Creek for small Vessels to the Key, which does much facilitate its
Trade.

Yarmouth, a fair Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, Yarmouth.
and had formerly a Market; is beautified with well built Houses, which for the
most part are of Freestone and covered with Slate. Its situation is in the
Western part of the Isle on the Sea-shoar, with which and its Arms it is now
encompassed, and has 3 strong Fortifications raised with a Drawbridge, and
the West end is defended by a powerful Castle on the Key.

The Cows, seated at the entering in of the Creek that goes to Newport; a place
very eminent for the harboring of Ships. About this Isle are several other
small ones, or rather Rocks, as those called the Black-Rock, the Mixon, the
Don, Moss, Challorne, Goss, Warden, Atherfield, and Chalk-Rocks; and on the
North part, between it and Portsmouth, as dangerous Sands, as the Brambles, the
Horse, and Nomans Lands.

Hartfordshire described.
HARTFORDSHIRE, blessed with a wholesome Air, and for the generality is of an
indifferent fertile Soil for Grain, affording good store of Wheat and Barley, of
which they make Malt, especially in the Vale of Ringtail or Ringdale, and has
plenty of Meadows and Pastures, which feed store of Cattle; but of its own
nature it is apt to bear Wood and Copses. It is well stored with Parks, and
has many pleasant and ancient Seats of Gentry, commonly called Beryes, that
is, Mannor-Houses, Court-Houses or Halls.

It is well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which are the Lea, Stower,
Stratford, Redburne, Flamsted, Colne, etc.

The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Trinobantes and the
Cattieuchlamans, and became afterward part of the East Saxons.

It is severed into 8 Hundreds, in which are seated 120 Parish Churches,
besides 15 Chapels of Ease, and is traded unto by 18 Market Towns, most of
which are of good account.

Hartford, Hartford.
seated on the Lea, said to be formerly navigable, once a place of a larger
extent, and of more beauty, strength and esteem than now it is; yet is it the
Shire Town, where the County Goal is kept, and as a Borough Town electeth
Parliament men. It is governed by a Major, 9 Burgesses, 16 Assistants, a
high-Steward, who is always a Nobleman, a Steward of the Court of Records and
other sub-Officers, and has a Market on Saturdays, which is well frequented
and served with Commodities.

St. Albans, St. Albans.
seated on the Colne, a Town of great antiquity, being raised from the ruins of
that famous City Verulam, so splendid in the time of the Romans, as may appear
by the Pillars, Pavements, Arched-Vaults, Idols, and Coins often dug up; at
which time it enjoyed ample Privileges and Immunities, many of which it yet
keeps, being dignified with the Title of an Earldom, and as a Borough Town
electeth Parliament men. For its chief Magistrates has a Major, 10 Aldermen, a
Steward and Chamberlain. It is a fair, large, well inhabited and frequented
thorough-fare Town, divided into four Wards; for Divine worship has 3 Parish
Churches, in one of which was (if not is) a Font of solid Brass brought out of
Scotland, which was there made use of for the baptizing the Scottish Kings
Children, and has a Market on Saturdays, which is well served with
Commodities, etc.

Barnet, Barnet.
or high Barnet, a large, dry and pleasant Town, highly seated, and on the
Road, a place of some account for its Medicinal-waters, as also for its
Swine-Market on Mondays, which makes it to be well frequented, and to be well
accommodated with Inns. here was fought a bloody Battle between the Competitors
of the Houses of York and Lancaster on Easter Day, in which Edward the Fourth
became Victor.

Watford, Watford.
seated on the Colne; a large and well inhabited Town, whose Market on Tuesdays
is well frequented, affording all necessaries, especially Corn in great plenty.

Not far from Watford is Langley Abbey, where was born Nicholas, Surnamed
Break-Spear, who was afterward Bishop of Rome, and called Pope Hadrian the
4th. He taught the Norwegians the Christian Faith: he was of so proud a Spirit,
that he had his Stirup held by Frederick the Roman Emperor.

Berkhamsted has a fair Free School, Berkhamsted.
and a pretty good Market on Mondays, chiefly for Malt. And here it was that
the English Nobles met in Council for the shaking off the Normans Yoke.

Hatfield, Hatfield.
a place of great delight and recreation, by reason of its Parks and other
places of pleasure, once dignified with a Royal-house of the Kings, which now
belongs to the Earl of Salisbury; it has a Market on Thursdays.

Ware, Ware.
a large, well frequented and inhabited thorough-fare Town, seated on the Lea,
has a Market on Tuesdays, which is well provided with Commodities; a place
well known to many for its great Bed.

Stratford, Stratford.
or Bishops-Stratford, seated on the side of a Hill; a very large, fair, and
well inhabited and frequented Market Town, full of Inns for the giving
entertainment to Strangers, and its Market on Thursdays is very well resorted
unto, and provided with Provisions and most Country Commodities. Here are the
ruins of a Castle, raised on an artificial Mount, within which is a deep and
dark Dungeon called the Convicts Prison, by which it may be supposed that some
great Privileges did belong unto it.

Baldock; Baldock.
a considerable large Town, seated between the Hills in a Chalky Soil fit for
Corn, of chief note for its many Maulsters; yet its Market on Thursdays is but
small.

Royston, a famous Market Town, Royston.
which is kept on Wednesdays for Corn and Malt here made, being seated in a
fat Soil, and between Hills in a bottom. The Town is large, well inhabited and
full of Inns, part being in this County and part in Cambridgeshire.

Herefordshire described.
HEREFORDSHIRE, a County every where exceeding fertile, having great plenty of
Grains and rich Pastures, which feed store of Cattle, especially Sheep, whose
Wool is much esteemed for its finess; and for Wheat, Wool and Water it yields
to no County in England. It is well clothed with Wood, and watered with Rivers,
the chief amongst which are the Wye, Munow, Wades, Doive, Lugg, Froom, etc.

All Fruits here grow in great plenty, and of their Apples they make such
abundance of Sider, that besides what they use themselves (it being their
general drink) of late years it is become a considerable Commodity, especially
that which is called Red-streak.

Its ancient Inhabitants were the Silures, a stout and warlike People, who
sorely perplexed the Romans for 9 years space, through the valor and noble
exploits of their Commander Charactacus, and became afterward part of the
Kingdom of the Mercians.

It is divided into 11 Hundreds, in which are numbered 176 Parish Churches, and
has Traffic with 8 Market Towns.

Hereford, Hereford.
a City of great antiquity, and raised out of the ancient Arconium, now called
Kenchester, about 3 miles distant; a place of good account in the time of the
Romans, and so continued until it was shaken to pieces by a violent Earthquake.
It is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated amongst delightful Meadows
and rich Cornfieldsd, and almost encompassed with Rivers, to wit the Wye and
two others, over which are two Bridges. It is of a large place, beautified with
good Buildings both public and private, amongst which are the Bishops Palace,
the College, the Cathedral, the Prebends houses, and Hospital, and numbreth 6
Parish Churches, (two of which in the late Troubles were demolished) besides
its Cathedral, to which belongs a Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, 6 Canons, 27
Prebends, with a Chanter, Treasurer, 12 Vicars Choral, besides Deacons,
Queristers, and other Attendants. This City enjoys large Immunities, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 6 Aldermen, a Common Council,
Recorder, and other sub-Officers, and is very well served with Commodities,
having weekly 3 Markets on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, which are of
considerable account; that on Fridays for Cattle, Sheep, and Hogs, and the
other for Grain and all sorts of Provisions, besides Gloves here made and sold
in great quantities.

Near to this City is Gilden Vale, so called from the fertility of the Soil and
pleasant situation.

Ross, Ross.
seated in a fertile Soil on the banks of the Wye; a fair Borough Town, which
has a very great Market on Thursdays for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, being
much resorted unto by the Inhabitants of Gloucestershire and Monmouthshire.

Lidbury, Lidbury.
near adjoining to Malvern Hills; a fine well built Town, seated in a rich
Clayey-ground, much inhabited by Clothiers, who drive a good Trade, and its
Market on Tuesdays is well served with, Corn, Cattle, and Provisions.

Lemster, a large, ancient and pleasant Town, Lemster.
seated in a rich Soil and on the Lugg, which runs through it, over which
are several Bridges. It is governed by a Bailiff, a Recorder, Justices of the
Peace, and 24 of the Chamber or Common Council; it sends Burgesses to
Parliament, and has a very good Market on Fridays for Corn, Cattle, Sheep,
Provisions, Hops and Wool, for which this Town is of note, it being called
Lemster-Ore.

Kyneton, also seated on the Arrow; a pretty large and well built Town, Kyneton.
whose Inhabitants drive a good Trade for narrow Cloths. Its Market on
Wednesdays for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, and several Country Commodities, is
esteemed the best in the County.

County of Huntington described.
HVNTINGTONSHIRE, a County for the generality of a fertile Soil both for Corn
and Tillage, garnished with delightful Hills, and toward the East; where it
joyneth on the Fens; it has rich Pasturage, which feed store of Cattle. It is
well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which is the Ouse, which divides
it self into several streams.

It is severed into 4 Hundreds, in which are seated 79 Parish Churches, and is
traded unto by 5 Market Towns.

Huntington, Huntington.
pleasantly seated on a rising Ascent, and on the North-banks of the Owse, over
which it has a fair Stone Bridge, which leads to Godmanchester on the other
side of the Owse; a very large County and ancient Borough Town, seated in a
rich Soil, and well inhabited by Yeomen and Farmers. It is a Town of great
antiquity, was once very populous, numbering no less than 15 Parish Churches,
which are now reduced to 4, and enjoyed great Immunities, and had a Mint for
Coynage. At present it is dignified with the title of an Earldom, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, (of which the
Major is one) and Burgesses; is well inhabited and frequented, and the rather
as being a thorough-fate Town from London, Cambridge, and other Southern parts
of England, into the North and into Scotland; and also for being the place
where the Assizes are kept for the County; and its Market on Saturdays is very
well served with Provisions.

St. Ives, St. Ives.
so called from one Ivo a Persian Bishop, who it is said about the year 600
traveled through England preaching the Gospel, and here ended his days, and
his Body was from hence removed to Ramsey Abbey; a fair, large and ancient
Town, seated on the Owse, over which it has a very good Stone Bridge, has a
Market on Mondays, which is well served with Provisions, and is of chief note
for living Cattle.

St. Neots (so called from Neotus, St. Neots.
a Monk of Glastenbury;) a large and well built Town, beautified with a neat
Church, is commodiously seated on the Owse, over which it has a fair
Stone Bridge, which leads to Bedfordshire. Its Market is on Thursdays, which
is well served with Provisions, and through the commodiousness of the Owse the
Neighboring Towns are from hence furnished with Coals.

Ramsey, Ramsey.
seated in the Fenny part amongst rich grounds both for Tillage and Pasturage,
and near the Meers of Ramsey and Whitlesey, which with the Rivers that
plentifully water it, afford excellent Fish and wild Fowl in great plenty. It
is a good Country Town, which was held in great esteem for its rich Abbey so
called, and its Market on Wednesdays is well frequented.

County of Kent described.
KENT, a County of a large extent, and although very hilly, for the generality
is of a rich and fertile Soil both for Corn and Pasture, and is well stored with
Cattle, Fish, Fowl, and Fruits.

The Air is temperate and good, except in the Weald and Marshes, which are
Aguish. It is well watered with Rivers, many of which are Navigable; as the
Thames, which washes its Northern parts; the Medway, which in a manner divides
the Shire in the midst, and is the station for his Majesty's Navy Royal (which
said River loses it self under ground, and rises again near Cox-heath)
besides 10 others of considerable account, which opening with several Creeks
and Havens, are found commodious for Ships to ride in, of which four bear the
name of Cinque Ports, viz. Dover, Sandwich, Rumney, and Hith; and on the banks
of these Rivers, which are crossed by diverse Bridges, are seated several good
Towns.

This County boasts it self for being the first Kingdom of the Heptarchy; of
having a particular King to it self; that it was never subdued, but yielded
upon Articles to the Normans, and to keep their ancient Customs; That their
Kings and Commons, amongst all the Saxons, were the first Christians.

This County is enriched with two Cities and Episcopal Sees, is strengthened
with several Castles, is graced with 4 of the Kings Palaces, beautified with
many splendid Buildings; well replenished with Gentry, sufficiently stored with
safe Roads and secure Harbors for Ships; plentifully garnished with good
Towns, is a place of a considerable Trade, affording Corn and other Grains,
Cloth and several Draperies, Fullers-Earth, Madder, Flax, Iron, Wood, Fruits,
both Apples and Cherries, in great plenty; and by reason of its vicinity to
France is well known and frequented by Strangers.

As to its division, it has 14 Bailywicks, 17 Franchises and Liberties, which
have Courts of Record to hold pl^a of all Actions real, personal, and mixed, and
14 Corporations; For the names of all which see the Volume of Britannia, page
122. lately published by me.

It is severed into 5 Laths and 64 Hundreds, in which said Hundreds are numbered
400 and odd Parishes, and has intercourse of Traffic with 28 Market Towns.

Lath of Sutton with its chief places.
The Lath of Sutton, or SVTTON at Hone, is severed into 8 Hundreds, has two
divisions of Justices of the Peace, and for its chief places has,

Sevenoke, Sevenoke.
a Town of good resort, so called from its Founder Will. Sevenoke, Lord Major
of London, Anno 1418. who erected a Free School and an Hospital; has a Market
on Saturdays, which is well served with Corn and Previsions.

Dartford, Dartford.
seated on the Darent, not far from its influx into the Thames, and on the high
Road from London to Canterbury; it is a good large Town, full of Inns and Houses
of Entertainment, and has a Market on Saturdays, which is well stored with
Corn and Provisions, and is much frequented by Corn-Chandlers and Meal-men.

Greenwich, Greenwich.
a large, well built and very pleasant Town, seated on the Bank of the Thames,
being much inhabited and frequented by Gentry, and enobled with a once stately
Palace of the Kings, out of the Ruins of which is now erecting a curious Pile
of Buildings; and adjoining to this Palace is a small, but pleasant Park, which
affords a delectable prospect. And here it was that Queen Elizabeth, with
diverse other Princes, were born.

Adjoining to Greenwich is Black Heath, a place of note in former times for
Military Affairs; and it is supposed, that here might be dug excellent
SeaCoals, but is not encouraged for fear of hindering the Newcastle-Trade.

Eltham, seated on the South Side of Shooters-Hill amongst Woods; Eltham.
a well built Town, neatly situated, well inhabited by Gentry, and was once
honored with a Palace of his Majesty, said to be built by Anthony Beck,
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who gave it to Queen Eliantor, wife to King Edward the
First.

Aylesford Lath described.
The Lath of AYLESFORD is of a large extent, reaching from North to South, is
serveed into 15 Hundreds, is divided into 3 divisions of the Justices of the
Peace, and has for its chief places

Rochester, an ancient City, and once larger than now it is, Rochester.
being at present but small, having but one principal Street, which is of a
good length, and for the most part inhabited by Tradesmen and Innkeepers, and
graced with well built Houses; besides its Cathedral, built by Ethelbert King
of Kent, dedicated to St. Andrew, a fair structure, to which belongs a
Deanary and 6 Prehendaries. It is a City no less pleasantly than commodiously
seated on the banks of the Medway, over which it has a stately Stone Bridge,
sustained by diverse Arches, which leads unto Stroud, a good, fair and well
inhabited thorough-fare Town from London to Canterbury, (as is Rochester). This
City enjoys several Immunities, is dignified with the Title of an Earldom;
governed by a Major, Court of Aldermen, with other sub-Officers, has the
election of Parliament men, is well resorted unto, and its Market on Friday is
well served with Provisions.

Adjoining to this City is Chetham, also seated on the banks of the Medway; a
long thorough-fare Town, which is chiefly inhabited by Seamen, and those that
have alliance thereunto, and the more as being the station of the Navy-Royal,
and where there is a stately Dock for the building and equipping of his
Majesty's Ships.

Graves-end.
Graves-end, seated on the banks of the Thames; a place of great resort, as
being the common Landing-place for Strangers and Seamen in their passages to
London; as likewise the accustomary place for the taking of Shipping, and the
ready Road to France, which does occasion it to be well furnished with Inns,
Taverns, and Houses of entertainment, and its Market on Wednesdays and
Saturdays to be well provided with Victuals; yet all things here want for no
price. And here is seated one of the Block-houses, the other being opposite
unto it in the County of Essex; which said Blockhouses are for the securing the
passage of the Thames up to London.

Maidstone, Maidstone.
seated on the Medway, (over which it has a fair Bridge) which, with the branch
it sends forth, severeth the Town. It is a large, fair, sweet, populous, and
well built and frequented Borough Town, which electeth Parliament men, enjoys
several Privileges, and as the Shire-Town here is one of the Prisons for the
County, and where they keep their Sessions and Assizes. Its Market is on
Thursdays, which is very considerable and well provided with Corn and all sorts
of Provisions.

Tunbridge, Tunbridge.
seated on a branch of the Medway, over which it has a Bridge, and is said to
take its name from its many Bridges. It is a well frequented Market Town, which
is on Fridays for Corn and Provisions, and is of chief note for its healthful
and Medicinal Waters near adjoining, which are much visited by the Gentry in
the Summer season.

Lath of Scray described.
The Lath of Scray takes up the mid-part of the County, is divided into 16
Hundreds, has two divisions of Justices of the Peace, and has for its chief
places,

Feversham, Feversham.
not far from the Isle of Shippey, so made by the Medway, which with the Sea
encircleth it; out of which said River there comes a Creek up to the Town, by
reason of which it is well frequented by Hoyes and such like small Vessels,
which here drive a good Trade, it being the principal Port-Town for all this
part of Kent. The Town is large, well built, and inhabited by Tradesmen,
Innkeepers and Victualers; and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are
well served with Provisions.

Near this Town are very deep Pits, which are narrow at the mouth and broad
below, with Chalk Pillars as it were to support them, and have partitions or
rooms within them.

Queenborough, Queenborough.
seated in the Isle of Shippey (which is about 21 miles in circuit, and of an
exceeding fertile Soil, feeding great flocks of Sheep, from whence it is said to
take its name;) a Borough Town of great antiquity, but is very small and mean.
For the defense of the passage up the River of Thames here was a very strong
Castle, now reduced to ruin; but of late his present Majesty has caused a
powerful Fort to be raised at Shyreness, the better to secure the passage up
the Medway to Gellingham and Chetham, where the Navy Royal rides. In the Isle
of Shippey there are no Moles, and if any be carried thither, they are said to
die.

Ashford, Ashford.
not far from the Stower, has a well frequented Market on Saturdays; and in
this Town is kept a Court of Record upon every Tuesday three weeks for Actions,
wherein the debt or damages do not exceed 20 Marks.

Lath of Shepway.
The Lath of SHEPWAY is severed into 13 Hundreds, has one division of Justices
of the Peace, and for its chief places has,

Hyth, Hyth.
once a place of good note and largeness, as being one of the Cinque Ports, but
now not much frequented, by reason of the Seas forsaking it, and its Haven
being choked up; yet does it still retain its privileges as other Cinque-port
Towns, and has a Market on Saturdays, which is indifferently well furnished
with Provisions; and here are yet two Hospitals, which are both under the
government of the Major and Jurats of the Town.

Rumney, another of the Cinque-Port Towns, seated in a Marsh so called, Rumney.
of about 14 miles in length and 8 in breadth; now more famous for the
fertility of the Marsh in grasing of Cattle than for the goodness of the place,
by reason of the Seas leaving it; and for its unwholsom Air, the Town being not
large nor the Buildings good, yet is it the chiefest Market Town in the Marsh,
which every Thursday is indifferently well served with Provisions; yet does it
still enjoy the privileges of other Cinque-port Towns.

Lath of St. Augustine.
The Lath of St. AUGUSTINE is washed on the North and East with the Sen; it is
severed into 12 Hundreds, has one division of Justices of the Peace, and for
its chief places has,

Canterbury, a City of great antiquity, Canterbury.
being said to be built 900 years before the birth of Christ, and in former
time was held in great fame and much resorted unto, and the more for being the
Burial-place of St. Thomas Becket there slain, a person so greatly reverenced
by the Romanists. This City is encompassed with a Mote and Wall, on which are
(or were) several Cittadels or Watch-Towers, without which are its Suburbs, in
which and within the City are numbered 14 Parish Churches besides its Cathedral,
a large and superb structure, not inferior to St. Paul's at London, when in its
pristine grandeur and splendor, having two lofty Towers, which much add to the
prospect of the City, and within its bounds or limits are several fair Edifices
belonging to the Dean and Prebends, as also a Free School called the Kings
School. It is a City graced with diverse good Buildings and a fair Market-house,
over which are Rooms made use of by the Major and Aldermen for the public
concerns of the City. It is dignified with an Episcopal See, who is Primate of
all England; is governed by a Major and Court of Aldermen, and has a Recorder
and other sub-Officers. It enjoys several Immunities, electeth Parliament
men, is well inhabited and traded unto for its Stuffs made by Walloons there
inhabiting, and is well provided with Provisions; for besides its Shambles it
has weekly two Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which it the most
considerable.

Dover, commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, Dover.
which together with its strength, as well by Nature as Art (being loftily
situated between high Cliffs, commanding both Sea and Country adjacent, and
defended by a strong Castle and other Fortifications;) as also the
commodiousness of its Haven, for being one of the Cinque-port Towns; and for
its short and ready passage into France (being about 21 miles) makes it a place
of considerable note. It also enjoys a good Trade, and its Markets on
Wednesdays and Saturdays are well frequented and furnished with Provisions. It
is a Town Corporate, governed by a Major and other Officers, enjoys ample
Immunities, and was of a larger extent than now it is, having formerly 7 Parish
Churches, which are reduced to 2. Its Castle (built by Julius Coesar) is
esteemed a place of great importance to the Nation, and is strongly guarded. At
the west part of the Peer is a Fort called Archliff-Fort; and in the Cliff
under the Castle is a Fort called Motes Bulwark: and at the other side of the
Castle-hill is a Tower or Light-house, made use of for direction of Ships,
called Breden-stone, and by some, the Devils drop of Mortar.

Along the Shore, going toward Sandwich, are St. Margarets-bay, Kingsdown,
Walmer Castle, Deal Castle, and Sandown Castle.

Sandwich, another of the Cinque-port Towns, being incorporated, Sandwich.
and amongst its Immunities electeth Burgesses. It is a place of good strength
both by Nature and Art, but by reason of the ill-commodiousness of the Harbor
is not well frequented; yet has it weekly 2 Markets on Wednesdays and
Saturdays.

Isle of Thanet.
The Isle of THANET does here present it self, which is about 9 miles long, and
about the same breadth where broadest. It is very populous and plentifully
stored with Provisions, especially Corn, and has in it several Towns, whose
names appear in the Map.

County of Lancaster described.
The County Palatine of LANCASTER, for the generality of an unfertil Soil as to
the Moorish part; yet not without a sufficiency of Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl,
Coals, Flax, etc. The Eastern part is very Mountainous, and full of stony,
barren and craggy Hills, being the habitation of Foxes, Conies, and some
Otters; but where the ground is plain and Champain it is very grateful to the
Husbandman, except some moist and unwholsom places, which they call Mosses,
which are not unlike Irish-bogs, from which the Inhabitants are supplied with
Turf for Fuel; and throughout the County there is great store of goodly Cattle,
which are there sold at easy races.

The Air of this County is sharp and serene, but very healthful to the
Inhabitants.

It is very well watered with Rivers, amongst which are the Mersey, Irwel,
Roch, Irke, Dugless, Tarrow, Ribel, Derwent, Codar, Lune, Brochwyre, Keere,
Kent, Dudden, etc. with the Sea, which waters its Western parts, together
with the Meers; it abounds in Fish and Fowl.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Brigantes; and when the Saxons became Masters
of the Isle, it was part of the Kingdom of the Northumbers.

Although there are but 61 Parishes in the County, yet it is very populous, the
Parishes being large, containing within them several Chapels of Ease, which
may be reckoned as Parishes in other Counties. And amongst these Parishes there
are 27 Market Towns, many of which are large, well frequented and traded unto.

Lancaster, Lancaster.
a place of good antiquity, pleasantly seated on the River Lune, over which it
has a fair Stone Bridge sustained by 5 Arches. It is at present indifferent
large, containing (though but one Parish Church, which is large and fair,) yet
several well ordered Streets, and graced with good Buildings; the chief amongst
which are its Church, Bridge, Market-house or Town Hall, where the Major and
his Brethren keep their Courts, and Castle, seated on the top of the Hill, now
made use of as a Prison for the County, and where the Assizes are kept: And
although the Shire Town, yet it is not much frequented nor inhabited by
Tradesmen, but chiefly by Husbandmen, as lying in a good Soil; but its Market,
which is on Saturdays, is well served with Corn, Cattle, and Provisions,
especially Fish, and chiefly with Salmon. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a
Major, 2 Bailiffs, 6 Brethren, 24 Burgesses, 2 Chamberlains, a Recorder, etc.
and amongst its Immunities electeth Parliament men.

Manchester, Manchester.
seated betwixt the Irke and Irwel, and upon a stony Hill; a Town of great
antiquity, being the Fort and station of the Romans, and at present is large,
beautified with fair Buildings, (the chief amongst which are its College,
Marketplace, and Collegiate-Church, which is very ornamental) is well
inhabited, much resorted unto, and enjoys a considerable trade for most
Commodities, but chiefly for its Linen and Woollen-Cloths; also for its
Cottons, known by the name of Manchester Cottons, which are held in great
esteem; and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable for the abovesaid
Commodities, as also for Provisions.

Opposite to Manchester, on the other side of the River, is Salford, a pretty
large Town, with a Chapel of Ease.

Warington, Warington.
seated on the Mersey, over which it has a curious Stone Bridge, which leads
to Cheshire. It is a fine large Town, much resorted unto by Welshmen; is of
note for its Lampries, and has a considerable Market for Linen Cloth, Corn,
Cattle, Fish and Provisions, on Wednesdays.

Lerpool, Lerpool.
or Leverpool, commodiously seated on the East Side of the goodly River Mercy,
where it affords a bold and safe harbor for Ships, which has much advanced
its Trade, being inhabited by diverse wealthy Merchants and Tradesmen, whose
Traffic (especially into the West Indies) makes it famous; its situation
affording in greater plenty and at reasonabler rates than most parts of
England, such exported Commodities proper for the West Indies, as likewise a
quicker return for such imported Commodities, by reason of the Sugar-Bakers and
great Manufactures of Cotton in the adjacent parts; this Town having
intercourse of Traffic with Ireland, and diverse considerable Counties in
England. The chief Commodities that this Town affords, are Corn, Butter,
Cheese, Beef, Pit-Coal, White Salt from Cheshire, Silver and Gold Watches,
Lead, Saddles, Shoes, Beeswax, all sorts of Nails and Iron Tools; and for
Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and all sorts of Provisions, its Market on Saturdays, is
sufficiently well provided with. It is an ancient Borough and Corporation,
sending two Representatives to Parliament; it is governed by a Major, Bailiffs,
Aldermen, Recorder, Town Clerk, and Common Council, consisting of 40 Burgesses.
It is of late, at the great charge and industry of the Family of the Moors of
Bank-ball, beautified with many goodly Buildings, to the great enlargement of
the Town, there being Streets that entirely beat their name.

Wigan, seated on the Douglass; a large and well built Town Corporate, Wigan.
is governed by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, has the election of
Parliament men, enjoys a good Trade, has two Markets weekly on Mondays and
Fridays for Meal and Provisions, is much inhabited by Brasiers, Pewterers,
Dyers, Weavers of Rugs, Coverlids, and Ticking, for Bedding, and is of note for
its Fuel called Cannel, being the choicest Coal in England.

Preston, a large, fair, well built and inhabited, Preston.
and frequented Borough Town, where the Court of Chancery and Offices of
Justice for the County are held: It has the election of Parliament men, and is
governed by a Major, Baileffs, Burgesses, Recorder, and other sub-Officers. It
is seated on the Rible, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge, and for the
accommodation of its Inhabitants has weekly 3 Markets, viz. on Wednesdays,
Fridays, and Saturdays, which is the chief, and very considerable for Corn,
living Cattle, Provisions, and several other Commodities in great plenty.

Cartmel, seated near the Sea, and amongst the Hills called Cartmel-Fells.
Cartmel.
It is beautified with a very fair Church built Cathedral-wise in form of a
Cross, and has a very good Market on Mondays for Corn, Sheep and Fish.

Dalton, seated in a Champain Country in the lower Farness. Dalton.
Here is an ancient Castle, now belonging to his Grace Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, wherein is kept the Records and Prisoners for Debt for the Liberty
of Farness. It has a Market on Saturdays, which is very well served with Corn,
Cattle, Fish and Fowl.

County of Leicester described.
LEICESTERSHIRE, a Champain Country, and but thinly clothed with Wood, which
defect is supplied by the great plenty of Pit-Coal, dug up in the Northern
parts, which is called the Would, and although barren breeds store of Cattle.
Its South-west and North-east parts are of a good Soil for Tillage and
Pasturage; and its South-east part is exceeding fertile, having rich Pastures,
and produces all sorts of Grain, especially Pease and Beans.

It is well watered with Rivers, as the Stour or Sour, Trent, Wreke, Weeland,
Sense, Eye, etc.

It is severed into 6 Hundreds; for Divine worship has about 200 Parish
Churches, and is traded unto by 12 Market Towns.

Leicester, delightfully seated in a healthful Air, rich Soil, Leicester.
and on the Banks of the Stour, over which it has two Bridges. It is a place
of more antiquity than beauty, being said to be built by King Leir, and called
Caer-Lerion, wherein Authors say he placed a High Priest to serve in the Temple
of Janus, which he caused to be built, and wherein he was buried. This Town was
also had in great request in the time of the Romans; also Ethelred, King of the
Mercians, erected here an Episcopal See, which he soon translated elsewhere to
its great impoverishment; but the noble Lady Edelfled not only repaired it, but
also encompassed it with a strong Wall, and much added to its Riches, so that
it soon became a place of a great Trade; which glory and riches it lost by the
Spoils it sustained by Rob. Bossu, the Crouch-back Earl of this Shire. As to
its present state, it is a Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major,
Aldermen, and sub-Officers, is dignified with the title of an Earldom, is well
inhabited, has indifferent good Buildings, sends two Representatives to
Parliament; contains 3 Parish Churches, and its Market on Saturdays is well
served with Corn, Provisions, and Country commodities.

From this Town Crouch-back Richard set forth with great strength and pomp to
Redmore, near Bosworth, where, on the 22 of August 1485, in a bloody Battle
there fought (for the deciding the differences betwixt the Houses of York and
Lancaster) he was slain, yielding both himself and the victory to Henry of
Richmond, who was proclaimed King in the field; and the next day the body of
the said Richard was disgracefully brought back torn, and naked, and as meanly
buried in the Gray-Friars of Leicester in a Stone-chest, which now is made use
of in an Inn for a Drinking-trough for Horses.

Loughborough, Loughborough.
delightfully seated on the banks of the Sour, over which it has a Bridge,
amongst fertile Meadows and near Charwood Forest: It is a handsome Town,
beautified with fair Buildings and a large Church, and has a very considerable
Market for Corn, Cattle, Sheep, and Provisions, on Thursdays.

Melton-Mowbray, Melton-Mowbray.
well seated in a fertile Soil and on the banks of the Eye, which almost
encircleth it, over which are two fair Stone-bridges. It is an indifferent
large and well built Town, and has a very considerable Market on Tuesdays for
Corn, Cattle, Hogs, Sheep, Provisions, etc.

Lutterworth, Lutterworth.
seated on the Swift, and in a good Soil; an indifferent Country Town,
beautified with a large and fair Church, which has a lofty spired Steeple; and
its Market on Thursdays is well served with Corn and Country commodities. Near
this Town is a Spring so cold, that in a short time it turns Straws and small
Sticks into Stone.

LINCOLNSHIRE, County of Lincoln described.
a County of a large extent, and does divide its form, bounds and division into
Hundreds.

The Soil is of a different temperature, the Western and Northern parts being
very pleasant and grateful to the Husbandman both for Corn and rich Pastures,
which feed great store of Cattle; and the Eastern and Southern parts are fenny,
barren, and unfit for Corn; but in recompense has great plenty of Fish and
Fowl. The Air upon the South and East parts is thick and foggy, occasioned
through the Fenny grounds; but the other parts good and healthful. It is well
watered with Rivers, as the Humber, Trent, Idell, Dane, Wash, Witham, Welland,
etc. which lose themselves in the Sea.

The chief Commodities that this County produces, are Corn, Cattle, Fish,
Fowl, Flax, Wool, Alablaster, etc.

This County is severed into 3 principal Divisions or Parts, viz Lindsey,
Holland, and Kesteven, which are divided into 30 Hundreds, in which are numbered
631 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 31 Market Towns.

Lincoln, Lincoln.
a City of great antiquity, and has been far more magnificent and spacious
than now it is, whose ruinous places does witness the same, being said to have
had 50 Churches, which now are reduced to 15, besides its Cathedral or Minster,
said to be one of the finest, loftiest, and stateliest structures in England.
This City in the time of the Britains was of great strength and fame,
containing 1070 Mansions, and 900 Burgesses, with 12 Lage-men, having Sac and
Soc; and in the time of the Normans it was esteemed one of the best peopled
Cities in the Isle, and enjoyed a great Trade both by Sea and Land, insomuch
that King Edward the Third ordained here his Staple for the Mart of Wools,
Leather, and Lead. But its pristine glory has been much eclipsed by the several
shocks of ill Fortune it has met with; nevertheless it is a place well
inhabited and frequented, enjoys a good Trade, and its Markets on Fridays is
well served with Provisions, and its Shops furnished with Commodities. It is
pleasantly seated on the side of a Hill, and on the River Witham, which
divides it self into several streams and waters in the lower part of the City,
over which are diverse Bridges for the accommodation of the Inhabitants in their
passage to and sro. It is dignified with an Episcopai See, where the Bishop
has his Palace, and whose Diocese is the greatest of any in England, numbering
within its Jurisdiction 1255 Parishes, of which 577 are Impropriations. The
civil Government of this City is committed to the care of a Major, 2 Sheriffs,
12 Aldermen, who are clothed in Scarlet, besides a Recorder, Town Clerk, 4
Chamberlains, a Sword Bearer, 4 Sergeants at Mace, etc. It enjoys ample
Immunities, sends two Representatives to Parliament, and is a County within
it self, whose Liberties extends about 20 miles in compass, and is called the
County and City of Lincoln.

The Isle of Axholme, made so by the Rivers Trent, Dun, Idel, Isle of Axholms.
and others. It is a large tract of ground, in which are seated several Towns:
the flat and lower part of the Isle toward the Rivers is Moorish, and yields
a sweet Shrub, called by the Inhabitants Gall. In this part have been great and
tall Fir-trees dug up. And the middle part (which is a rising ground) is
fertile, and produces great store of Flax.

Barton, seated on the Humber, Barton.
where there is a considerable Ferry into Yorkshire, which does much advantage
the Town, which is large and straggling, yet has but an indifferent Market on
Saturdays.

Grimsby Magna, seated near the Humber, or rather the Sea, Grimsby Magna.
and in a flat and Marshy rich ground. This Town was formerly very large,
having two Parish Churches, enjoyed a good Trade; but its Harbor (which was
then commodious) being choked up, has much eclipsed its trade and grandeur,
having now but one Church, which for largeness gives place to few Cathedrals.
Here was formerly a Castle, an Abbey, a Nunnery, 2 Priories, and 2 Chantries,
which time has reduced to ruins, and in their places are erected Houses. It is
a Town Corporate, enjoys several Immunities, has the benefit of a Port Town,
and keeps Courts for trial of Causes. and Felons, sends Burgesses to
Parliament, is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, 2 Justices of the
Peace, 2 Town Clerks, 2 Chamberlains, and other sub-Officers, and has a good
Market for Provisions on Wednesdays.

Thong-Caster, or Caster, a well compacted Town, Thong-Caster.
which has a very considerable Market on Saturdays, chiefly for Swine, Sheep
and Cattle. This Town is of note for its ancient Castle so called, said to be
built by Hengist the Saxon, who had a grant from Vortiger for so much ground as
an Ox-hide would compass, which he cut into small Thongs, so that it
encompassed a tract of ground, on which he built the Castle, and there seated
and defended himself.

Lowth, a large, well built and inhabited Town Corporate, Lowth.
governed by a Warden and 7 Assistants, and has weekly two Markets, on
Saturdays and and Wednesdays, which is the chief, and is very considerable for
Cattle, Horses, Swine, Corn, and all sorts of Provisions.

Stamford, Stamford.
seated on the Weland, which being now made navigable is no small advantage to
the Town and Country adjacent, its Inhabitants driving a considerable Trade,
especially for Malt and Freestone. It is a Town of good antiquity, from
whence the Roman High Street leaded to the North, and in the Reign of King
Edward the Third here was a College for the Professors of the Arts and
Sciences, who thence removed to Brazen-Nose College in Oxford. It is a large,
well inhabited and frequented Town containing several Streets, has 6 Parish
Churches, is beautified with fair Buildings, is begirt with a Wall, and has
weekly 2 Markets, on Mondays, which is but small; and on Fridays, which is well
furnished with Corn, Cattle, and all sorts of Provision in great plenty.

Grantham, Grantham.
seated on the Witham; a Borough Town, of good account and well inhabited; is
governed by an Alderman and 12 Justices of the Peace, and has the election of
Parliament men. The Town is beautified with a fair Church, which has an
exceeding lofty Spire-Steeple; and its Market on Saturdays is very
considerable, and well served with Corn, Malt, Sheep, and all sorts of
Provisions.

Boston, Boston.
a fair, large Borough and Town-Corporate, of good antiquity, enjoys several
Immunities, electeth Parliament men, and is governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen,
Burgesses, a Recorder, etc. It is commodiously seated on both sides the Witham,
over which it has a fair Woodden-bridge, and being near its influx into the
Sea, is a place of considerable account, is well frequented and inhabited,
enjoys a good Trade, and its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are very
great, especially for Provisions both Flesh, Fish, and Fowl. Its Marketplace
is fair and spacious, as also its Church, whose Lanthorn or Tower serves as a
Landmark to Sailers.

Kirton, Kirton.
seated on a Sandy-ground, and so called from its Church; a fair structure
built of Freestone Cathedral-wise in form of a Cross with a broad Steeple in
the middle. This whole Township is very large being divided into 4 Hamlets or
Vintins, viz. Kirton-Willington, Kirton-Meers, Kirton-Skeldike, and
Kirton-Holme; and had formerly a Market, which is now disused.

Crowland, Crowland.
or Croyland, a Town of good account amongst the Fenny-people; but much greater
in times past for its famous Abbey, founded by Aethelbald King of the Mercians
in Anno 716. It is seated very low and dirty, and so shut up that there is no
access to it but by the North and East-sides, and that by narrow Cawswaies not
admitting of Carts, insomuch that the Inhabitants have a Proverb, That all the
Carts that come to Crowland are shod with Silver. And the situation is much
like to Venice in Italy, the Streets being severed from each other by Dikes or
Watercourse, on the banks of which are set Willow-trees. The chief Riches
here gained is by Fish and Fowl, which are taken in great plenty; and here is a
small Market.

Spalding, Spalding.
a pretty fair Town, seated very waterish and by a navigable River, which does
occasion it to have a very good Trade, having several Vessels and Barges
belonging to them; and here is every Tuesday a very good Market for Corn,
Cattle, and Provision.

Dunington, Dunington.
seated in a flat, like Spalding; an indifferent Town, but has a very
considerable Market on Saturdays for Provisions, and Hemp in great abundance.

MIDDLESEX, County of Middlesex, described.
a County of a small extent, but every where garnished with Towns and fair
buildings, which are the habitations of the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens of
London. It is blessed with a sweet and wholesome Air, and for fertility of Soil
both for Tillage and Pasturage, may compare with any shire in England,
especially for its bigness.

It is severed into 6 Hundreds, in which are seated 73 Parish Churches,
(besides those of London, and its several Chapels of Ease) and is traded unto
by 4 Market Towns, besides the Markets in London.

As to the description of the Towns in this County, I shall treat of those of
most note, and conclude with London, the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and
first with Vxbridge.

Vxbridge, uxbridge.
seated on the high Road from London to Oxford; a large, well inhabited and
frequented Town, well accommodated with Inns, is governed by two Bailiffs, 2
Constables, and 4 Headboroughs, and has a Market on Thursdays, which is well
served with Corn and Provisions.

Hampton, Hampton.
seated on the banks of the Thames, of chief note for its Palace of the King
called Hampton Court (delightfully seated by two Parks) first built by Cardinal
Woolsey, and afterward much enlarged by King Henry the Eighth, containing now
within it several large Inner-Courts, which are enclosed with fair Buildings,
in one of which is a stately Fountain.

Istleworth, Istleworth.
or Thistleworth, a fair large and pleasant Town, seated on the banks of the
Thames, well inhabited by Gentry and the Citizens of London; as are Twittenham,
Teddington, Chiswick, Hamersmith, Fulham, and Chelsey, Towns all seated on the
banks of the Thames.

Nigh unto Thistleworth is Sion-house, a large Structure, Sion-House.
now belonging to the Countess of Northumberland, but in times past was a
Monastery, erected by King Henry the Fifth to the honor of our Savior, the
Virgin Mary, and Bridget of Sion, for Religious Virgins, where he appointed so
many Nuns; Priests, and Lay-Brethren, as in number did equal our Savior his
Apostles and Disciples; and on the other side of the Thames opposite unto it he
erected another for Carthusian Monks, named Jesus of Bethlehem.

Brentford.
Brentford, containing the Old and the New, both seated on the Western Road,
which does occasion it to be so well accommodated with Inns. In New Brentford
is kept the Market, which every Tuesday is very well served with Corn and
Provisions, which are much bought up by the Londoners.

Kensington.
Kensington, a thorough-fare Town, well inhabited by Gentry and Persons of
Honor; as are Hampsted, Highgate, Hornsey, Tottenham-Highcross, Muswel-Hill,
Edmonton, etc. Towns near adjacent to London.

London.
London, the epitomy and glory of the Kingdom, was the Seat of the British
Empire, as now the Royal-Chamber of our Kings; a City of great antiquity, said
to be built by Brute the Trojan; but all agree it was re-edified by King Lud in
Anno Mundi 5131, who called it Luddestown. It is seated in a healthful Air, and
no less pleasantly than commodiously on the banks of the Thames, which severeth
it into two (but unequal) parts, which are joined together by a stately
Stone Bridge, so covered with Houses that it seems rather a Street than a
Bridge.

This City is begirt with a Wall, first built by Constantine the Great, at the
suit of his Mother Helena, and has for entrance 7 principal Gates; but now as
contemning bondage it has enlarged it self on all sides with spacious Suburbs,
insomuch that she has joined her self to the City of Westminster, which name
is now swallowed up, all passing under the general name of London.

The City of Westminster, according to Mr. Norden in his description of
Middlesex, was in time past called Thorney, or Dorney, and was an Isle
encompassed with the Thames; which divided it self, and one branch passed
between Chairin-Cross and Kingstreet through St. James's, including Tut-hill;
which said Isle was so called, as being overgrown with Briars and Thorns; but
in the time of King Lucius it is said to be cleansed, and the foundation of the
great Temple of St. Peter's was laid, which was raised out of the ruins of a
former, delicated to Apollo, where the Trinobantes, or Troinovantes, did
sacrifice Bulls, Bullocks, Stags, and such like Beasts, to Diana Tauropolia,
whom the Gentiles called the Queen of Heaven.

This City or part of London is the noblest (though not the longest) being
taken up by the King, the Nobility, Gentry, and such as have their dependancy
on the Court or Law, being sufficiently graced with fair and beautiful
Edifices; as 1. The Palaces of his Majesty Whitehall and St. James's, to which
is joined a small, but delightful Park, wherein is a Pall Mall, said to be the
best in Christendom, 2. The Courts of Judicature and Houses of Parliament, now
all known by the general name of Westminster Hall, and was anciently the Palace
of the Kings of England. 3. Its Collegiate-Church of Westminster, which was
formerly the Temple of St. Peter, and now renowned for its Chapel built by King
Henry the Seventh, being beautified with the Tombs of the Kings and Queens, and
many of the Nobility of England; nor is it less famous for the Inauguration of
our Kings and Queens. 4. The Palace of her Majesty, Somerset House; and, 5. The
Houses of the Nobility. And thus much for the City of Westminster.

The Eastern part, or Suburbs of London beyond the Tower, is taken up by those
that have relation to the Sea; and the whole City thus taken is now of a great
extent, being in length from Black-wall in the East to Tuttle-fields in the
West, about six miles; in breadth 1, 2, and in some places 3 miles, and is said
to make in circuit about 14 or 15 miles, in which extent are numbered about 500
Streets and Lanes, and contains (according to computation) about 75000 Houses;
and by the great number of Houses the Inhabitants may be guest at, which
without doubt are very numerous; and if we consider its great Trade and
Commerce with other Nations, its Riches, Jurisdiction, bounds, and
populousness; its good Government, the ingenuity of its Inhabitants in Letters,
Arts, and Manufactures, etc. it may deservedly be numbered with any City of the
highest rank in the World.

The Buildings of note belonging to this City, are its Inns of Court and
Chancery. Guildhall, a stately Structure, where the Courts of Judicature are
held, and where the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council meet, for the
negotiating the Affairs of the City, The Royal Exchange, built quadrangular,
now said to be the best in the known World. The Tower, a place or large extent,
well furnished with a Magazin or Arsenal of warlike Munition both for Sea and
Land-service, and does contain (according to observation) a Kings Palace, a
Prison, an Armory, a Mint, a Wardrobe, and an Artillery, each having their
peculiar Officers; and for Buildings resembles a Town, having a Parochial
Church, exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop. Gresham College,
given to the City by Sir Tho. Gresham, with the allowance of liberal Salaries
to professors of several Arts and Sciences, to read Lectures for the
advancement of Learning amongst the Citizens. The College of Heralds, called
the Heralds Office, where the Records for the Arms, Descents, and Pedigrees of
the Nobility and Gentry are kept. Doctors Commons, which is taken up by the
Civilians. The College of Physicians. The Halls of the several Incorporated
Companies. The Houses of Correction, amongst which that of most note is
Bridewell, a large Building. The Hospitals, viz. St. Bartholomews,
Christ-Church, and the Charter House (or Suttons Hospital) being the noblest
Hospital in the Kingdom, in which are well maintained 80 Old men, and 40 Boys.
The Sessions House, for the trial of Malefactors; and lastly, its Churches and
Free Schools.

This City within the Walls and Freedom is divided into 26 Wards, and the
Government thereof committed to the care of so many Aldermen, each having the
overseeing of his several Ward; and besides these Aldermen there are 2
Shoriffs, which are yearly chosen, as also a Lord Major, who is the principal
Magistrate.

To the making a complete City there are several principal parts or helps
required for the supportation thereof, and without which it cannot well stand;
to wit, Husbandry and Artificers, for the providing Food and Raiment for its
Inhabitants; Arms and Ammunition, for its defense; the Priesthood, for Divine
worship; Judges, Counselors, etc. for the administration of Justice; and
Traffic, for the bringing in of Riches: In all which this City in a liberal
measure is blessed with.

County of Monmouth.
MONMOVTHSHIRE. This County (formerly part of Wales) is blessed with a healthful
Air, and although very hilly and woody, yet is exceeding fertile, (especially
the Eastern parts, which are not so hilly as the Western) the Hills feeding
abundance of Cattle and Sheep, and the Valleys bearing great crops of Corn and
Grass; and the rather for its being watered with so many fresh Streams; the
chief of which are the Vske, Wye, Munow, Ebunith, Scoway, and the Rumney, which
fall into the Severn Sea.

It is divided into Hundreds, in which Tract are seated 127 Parish Churches,
and is traded unto by 7 Market Towns.

Monmouth, Monmouth.
no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the banks of the Wye and Munow,
which does almost encircle it, over each of which is a Bridge. In the midst of
the Town, near the Marketplace, stands a (once stately, but now ruinous)
Castle. It is a fair, large, well built, and inhabited and frequented Town,
enjoying large Immunities, and sends a Burgess to Parliament. It is governed
by a Major, 2 Bailiffs, 15 Common Counselors, a Town Clerk, and other
sub-Officers; and has a considerable Market for Corn and Provisions on
Saturdays.

Chepstow, Chepstow.
seated on the side of a Hill which is washed with the Wye, near its fall into
the Severn; a Town formerly very famous, and of great resort, being said to be
raised out of the ruins of Venta Silurum, the chief City of the Silures. It is
a large, well built, inhabited and frequented Town, and has a Market on
Saturdays, which is very good for Corn and Provisions, and very considerable
for Swine.

Carlion, or Caerleon, an ancient and flourishing City of the Romans, Carlion.
which is evidenced by the ruins of its stately Buildings; as Palaces, Temples,
and Theaters, enclosed within fair Walls, the Water-pipes, Vaults, Hot-houses,
and Roman Coins often dug up. And here the Noble Arthur kept his Court; and
here was a famous College for 200 Students in Astronomy, and other the liberal
Arts and Sciences. This Town (which is indifferent large) is commodiously
seated on the banks of the Vske, over which it has a large wooden Bridge; yet
its Houses for the generality are built of Stone, and its Market (which is but
indifferent) is on Thursdays.

Vske, seated on a River so called; a large Town, uske.
beautified with well built Stone-houses, and has a very good Market on
Mondays and Fridays.

Abergavenny, seated at the meeting of the Vske and the Keveny, Abergavenny.
once a place of great strength: It is a large Town, has well built Houses,
enjoys a good Trade for Flanels and Straw-Hats, here made in great plenty;
and its Market, which is on Tuesdays, is very considerable for Cattle,
Provisions, etc.

County of Norfolk.
The County of NORFOLK is of a different Soil, but may be comprised under two
heads, to wit, Champain and Wood-land; yet notwithstanding about the Towns it
is of a Claiey, Chalkey, and fat Earth, and not without Wood. That which is
comprised under the head of Champain is along the Seacoasts, and from Thetford
to Burnham, and so Westwards, and affords great plenty of Corn; and on the
Heaths great flocks of Sheep are fed. The Wood-land part is chiefly for
grasing; yet not without Corn ground.

The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans were the Iceni, and afterward
became part of the Kingdom of the Angles.

The Commodities that this Country plentifully affords, are Worsteds,
Stockings. Norwich Stuffs, and Herrings.

The chief Rivers that water this County are the Owse, Waveny, Yare, and the
Thryne. It is generally well inhabited with Gentry, is very populous and full
of Towns and Villages, numbering 660 Parish Churches, which are the most of any
County in England; and is traded unto by 27 Market Towns.

Norwich, a City of great antiquity, Norwich.
and formerly of as great splendour when the Seat of the East Angles; since
which it has undergone several calamities by Fire, Sword, and Pestilence; and
notwithstanding all its shocks of Ill fortune, it is at present a fair, large,
and populous City, and enjoys a great Trade, especially for their Stockings,
Stuffs, and Manufactures here made. It is commodiously seated on the banks of
the Yare, which severeth it; but is joined together by several Briges, and in a
pleasant Valley. It is about a mile and half in length, and almost of the like
breadth, and is encompassed with a Wall (except on the side seated on the
River,) and has 12 Gates for entrance, and for Divine worship 32 Parish
Churches, bisides Chapels. Its chief buildings are the Cathedral, the Bishops
Palace, the Palace of the Duke of Norfolk, the Market-house, the Cross, and the
House of Correction, made of Freestone. Here is an Hospital where 100 poor Men
and Women are maintained. This City may not improperly be called an Orchard in
a City, or a City in an Orchard, by reason of the pleasant intermixture of the
Houses with Trees. It was first governed by 4 Bailiffs; but in the Reign of
Henry the Fourth it was incorporated into a Majoralty, and made a County, whose
limits extend to Eaton-Bridge. It enjoys several Immunities, sends Burgesses to
Parliament, and is the Sea of a Bishop. Its Markets on Wednesdays, Fridays, and
Saturdays, are very great, and well stored with Corn, living Cattle, Leathen,
Yarn, Worsteds, and all sorts of Provisions.

Lynn, Lynn.
or Lynn Regis, seated almost at the influx of the Owse into the Washes; a
fair, large, and well built Borough Town, numbering 3 Parish Churches, of good
antiquity, enjoying ample Immunities, which were granted them for their good
service against the outlawed Barons in the Isle of Ely. It is governed by a
Major, 12 Aldermon, has a Recorder, Sword Bearer, and other sub-Officers,
sends its Representatives to Parliament; for its defense, is encompassed
about with a Wall and a deep Trench; is well watered, having 2 Rivulets which
run through the Streets, which are passed over by 15 Bridges. It is well
inhabited by Merchants and Tradesmen, having a commodious Haven; and its
Markets on Tuesdays and Saturdays are well served with Commodities and
Provisions.

Yarmouth, Yarmouth.
seated on the Yare, at its influx into the Sea. It is a place of great
strength, as well by Nature as Art, being esteemed the Key of this Goast. The
Town is large, yet has but one Church, but that is so large that it serves
for two Ministers. Its Buildings are good; it is a place of a great resort, is
well inhabited and traded unto, and the more as being the ready passage to
Holland for the Packet-Boat, and other Vessels. About this Coast, great
abundance of Herrings are caught in September, and as great quantities of
Mackerels in the Summer season. It is a Town Corporate, having for its chief
Magistrates 2 Bailiffs; it enjoys several Immunities, and sends Burgesses to
Parliament. Its Market is on Saturdays, which is very great for Corn, Fish, and
Provisions.

Windham, Windham.
seated in a dirty bottom, has an indifferent good Market for Corn and
Provisions on Fridays; but chiefly for Stockings, Wooden-Spoons, Yapps, and
Spindles, which are here made and sold by the Inhabitants in great abundance.

Swasham, Swasham.
seated on a Hill; a large and well built Town, full of Inns, end well
inhabited by Shopkeepers, who drive a good trade. Its Market, which is on
Saturdays, is very well served with Corn and Provisions, being esteemed one of
the best Market Towns in the County.

North Walsham, North Walsham.
seated in a level, not far from the Sea; a fine Market Town, which on
Thursdays is well provided with Corn, Flesh, and other Commodities.

County of Northampton described.
NORTHAMPTON, an Inland County, of a fat and rich Soil both for Tillage and
Pasturage, every way recompencing the Husbandmans pains and industry, both for
its excellent Grain, and for feeding and breeding of store of Sheep, Horses,
and Cattle, insomuch that here is observed to be less wast ground than in any
County in the Kingdom.

It is blessed with a healthful Air; it is very populous and full of Gentry,
insomuch that in many places 20 or 30 Sleeples present themselves to view at
one time.

It is well watered with Rivers and fresh Streams; as the Welland, the Ne^ or
Aufona, the Owse, Charwel, etc.

This County is severed into 20 Hundreds, in which are numbered 326 Parish
Churches, and is traded unto by 11 Market Towns.

Northampton, Northampton.
delightfully seated on the banks of the Nine, which washes its South and West
parts, over which it has two Bridges. It is a Town of good antiquity, and once
very large, but this, as all other places in the Kingdom, selt the sore hand of
the Dane, with other Calamities, and lately in was laid in its Ashes by a
merciless Fire; but is again almost rebuilt, and will be of better luster than
before. Its extent is large, numbering 4 Parish Churches within its Walls, which
were of great strength before their demolishment. On the Western side of the
Town, on an Eminency, is mounted a large Castle, but so ruinous that it seems
ready to fall. It is a Town Corporate, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is
governed by a Major, 2 Barliffs, 12 Magistrates, a Recorder, Town Clerk, with
other sub-Officers. It enjoys a very considerable Trade, is very well
inhabited, being the place where the Assizes are kept, and the general place
for the Justices of the Pence to meet for the County; and its Market, which is
on Saturdays, is very great for Cattle, Corn, Provisions, Leather, Shoes, and
several Country Commodities.

Peterburgh, seated on the River Aufona, or Nen, Peterburgh.
(which is navigable for Barges, over which it has a Bridge which leads to
Huntingtonshire,) and in a Marshy ground. It is a City of great antiquity, and
was of good account in the time of the Saxons; for it is said that Wolpher,
King of the Mercians, for the expiating his crime in the cruel murdering his
Sons Wolphald and Rufin for embracing the Christian Religion (to which he was
some years after converted himself) in Anno 633. finished a most stately
Monastery, and dedicated it to St. Peter, from which the City took its name,
being before called Madeshamstede. It is at present a City of no great extent,
having but one Parish Church besides its Cathedral, raised out of the
Monastery; a stately structure, where lies the Bodies of two unfortunate
Queens, Katherin of Spain, and Mary of Scots. This City enjoys several
Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is honored with the Title of an
Earldom and the Seat of a Bishop, as also of a Dean, who keeps his Court for
the hearing of Causes. Its Streets of late are indifferent well ordered, its
Houses well built, and has a spacious Marketplace, well resorted unto on
Saturdays.

Not far from this City, Westwards, was seated the ancient City Durobrivae,
called by the English Saxons, Normanchester.

Oundle, pleasantly seated on the banks of the Nen, Oundle.
over which it has two good Bridges; a well built uniform Town, beautified
with a fair Church, and a Free School; has a very great Market for Cattle,
Corn, Flesh and Fowl on Saturdays.

Higham-Ferrers, situated on an Ascept, and on the banks of the Nen; Higham
Ferrers.
an ancient Borough and Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 7 Aldermen, 13
Capital Burgesses, a Steward, etc. is graced with a fair College, has a Free
School for the education of Youth, and an Almshouse for the relief of poor
People; and has a Market on Saturdays, which is well resorted unto.

Wellingborow, seated also on the Nen; a large and well inhabited Town,
Wellingborow.
of some note for its Springs of Medicinal-water, not far distant from the
Town. It is beautified with a fair Church, and a Free School; is a large and
well inhabited Town, and has a Market on Wednesdays, which is well served with
Corn and Provisions.

Daventry, seated on the side of Borow-hill; a good Town, Daventry.
govermed by a Bulliff, Aldermen, a Steward, and 12 Freemen, and has a Market
on Wednesdays, which is well provided with Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Corn, and
Provisions.

Not far from this Town is Wedom, which was a Station of the Romans, and where
there was a Monastery founded by the holy Virgin St. Werberg, Daughter of King
Wolpher, who had here his Royal Seat.

Brackley, seated on a bank of the Owse, Brackley.
and on the edge of the County toward Buckinghamshire; an ancient and large
Town Corporate, containing two Parish Churches, had formerly a College, now
made use of for a Free School; is governed by a Major and Aldermen, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, and has a small Market on Wednesdays; which in former
time was considerable, being the staple Town in the County for Wool.

County of Northumberland.
NORTHVMBERLAND, a County of a sharp and piercing Air, and much troubled with
pinching Frosts, boisterous Winds, and deep Snows, which would be more
troublesome to its Inhabitants, were it not for the great abundance of Sea-Coal
here had in great plenty.

It is a County, for the most part, of an ungrateful Soil, being very rough,
hilly, and very hard to be manured; but the parts toward the Sea, by the
industry of the Husbandman in manuring it with the Sea-weed, are indifferent
fertile.

It is well watered with Rivers, which (with the Sea) afford to the Inhabitants
great plenty of Fish and Fowl.

In this County are numbered 46 Parish Churches, many of which are very large,
having their Chapels of Ease, and is severed into 6 Wards; and for the
accommodation of the Inhabitants is traded unto by 6 Market Towns.

The Inhabitants that possessed this County before the Romans, were the Ottadini,
and being brought to the Jurisdiction of the English Saxons by Osca Brother to
Hengist, and by his Son Jebusa, had first official Governors under the fealty
to the Kings of Kent: After that, when the Kingdom of the Berenicii was
erected, that which reached from the Scottish Frith to the Tees (being the best
part) was subject to the Kings of Northumberland, who having finished their
period, that which lay beyond the Tweed passed for Scotland; then was it
yielded up to Egbert King of the West Saxons, who laid it to his own Territory:
and soon after the expulsion of the Danes it was governed by Earls.

This County shows abundance of Antiquities, not only along the Picts Wall,
which runs by its Southern part, but elsewhere; amongst which these
following are worthy of note: Readsquire, a steep Mountain, was ofttimes the
place of Conference for the East Marshes. The Hermitage, not far from
Wakeworth, by the Water; a Chapel cut out of a Rock, without Beams, Rafters, or
any piece of Timber, and the Altar was also hewed out of the same Rock; and
this was the place of devotion for a Hermit, who lived in a Cell within the
Rock. Risingham, seated on the River Rhead, a place of great Antiquity, which
('it is said) God-Magon for sometime defended against a certain Sultan, or
Heathenish Prince. Through the Picts Wall runs the Tyne, which waters two
Dales, each having their Hills so boggy, with standing Water on the top, that
no Horseman is able to ride through them; and yet in many places are great
heaps of Stones (called Laws) supposed to be cast up in memory of some persons
there slain.

The chief places are,

Newcastle, Newcastle.
situate on an Eminence, and on the North banks of the Tyne, over which it
has a fair Bridge. This Town before the Conquest was called Monk-chester, as
being in the possession of Monks, which name was changed to Newcastle by
Robert, Son to William the Conqueror, from a Castle there built by him. It is
a Town and County of it self, being incorporated and governed by a Major, 12
Aldermen, a Recorder, and other sub-Officers; and amongst its Immunities sends
its Representatives to Parliament; it is a place of good largeness, numbering 4
Parish Churches, besides one in Gates-head; it is beautified with good
Buildings, and by reason of its deep and secure Haven is much inhabited and
frequented by Merchants and Tradesmen, having several Vessels belonging to the
Town, but is of chief note for its Coal trade. It is a place of great strength,
for besides its Castle, now something ruinous, it is begirt with a strong Wall,
on which are many Turrets, and has for entrance 7 Gates. Here are weekly two
Markets, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are both very considerable for all
sorts of Provisions.

Morpeth, Morpeth.
situate on the Wensbeck; a very fine incorporated Town, governed by 2
Bailiffs, and sends Burgesses to Parliament. It is strengthened with a Castle,
and has a Market on Wednesdays, which is esteemed the best in the County for
Corn, Cattle, and Provisions.

Barwick, Barwick.
commodiously seated betwixt England and Scotland, but on the North or Scottish
side of the Tweed, over which it has a stately Bridge, sustained by 14 or 15
Arches, being a Town and County of it self. It is a Place of great strength, as
well by Nature as Art, being almost encompassed with the Sea and the Tweed, and
strongly fenced about with Walls, a Castle, and other Fortifications, as being
a place of such great importance to England. It is a Town Corporate, governed
by a Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, and has the election of Parliament men.
It is large and populous, its Houses well built, enjoys a good Trade,
especially for Salmon and Corn, and its Market on Saturdays is very
considerable.

Along the Coast of this County are the Isles of Cocks, Fern, and Holy Isle,
which are small Isles of a barren and ungrateful Soil, and but thinly inhabited.

NOTTINGHAM, a County blessed with a wholesome Air; County of Nottingham.
its Soil is different, the South-east part, which is watered with the Trent
and other fresh Streams, is most fertile and apt for Corn and Grass, and is
called the Clay part; and the Western part, wherein is the Forest of Shirwood,
a large tract of ground, which is well clothed with Wood, and provided with
Game; and this part, from the temperature of the Earth, is called the Sandy
part.

This County produces a Stone softer than Alablaster, but being burnt makes a
Plaster harder than that of Paris, with which they floor their upper Rooms.

The form of this Shire is oval, doubling in length twice its breadth. It is
severed into 8 Hundreds or Wapontacks, in which are numbered 168 Parish
Churches, and has intercourse of traffic with 9 Market Towns.

Nottingham, commodiously feated on an Eminence and on the banks of the Lean,
Nottingham.
which at a small distance loses it self in the Trent, over each of which
Rivers there is a fair Stone Bridge, besides two others over two Ponds, called
the Cheney Bridges. It is a large Town, numbering 3 Parish Churches, is
replenished with well built Houses, its Streets are fair, and graced with a
spacious Marketplace; on the West side of the Town is the Castle, which
(before its defacement in the late Wars) was a place of great strength and
importance. It is a Town of good antiquity, and amongst its places of remark
here are many strange Vaults hewed out of the Rocks, especially under the
Castle, which are descended by diverse steps, and have their several Rooms and
Stairs artificially made; also in the Hill are Houses, with Rooms, Chimneys,
winding Stairs, and Windows, wrought out of the solid Rock. This Town enjoys
several Immunities, electeth Burgesses for Parliament, is governed by a Major,
6 Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, a Town Clerk, and other sub-Officers; it enjoys a
good Trade, is well inhabited and frequented, and has weekly 3 Markets, viz.
on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, which is very considerable for Cattle,
Corn, and Provisions.

Newark, situate on the high Road to York, and on the Trent, Newark.
over which it has a Bridge. It is a good large Town Corporate, governed by an
Alderman and 12 Assistants, is well inhabited, enjoys a good Trade, and has
a considerable Marker for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions on Wednesdays.

Mansfield, situate in the Forest of Sherwood; a well inhabited, Mansfield.
well built, and large Town, enjoying a good Trade for Malt, and has a very
considerable Market for Corn, Cattle, Malt, Swine, and Provisions on Thursdays.

Redford, situate on the River Idel; an ancient Town Corporate, Redford.
which electeth Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 6 Aldermen,
and a Steward, and has a great Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays.

The County of OXFORD is blessed with a delectable Air, County of Oxford
described.
which does occasion it to be much inhabited by Gentry; and the rather, as
being of a fertile Soil for Corn and Fruits, well stored with Cattle, and
interlaced with pleasant Hills, wherein (and in the Downs) are found variety of
Game. It is well watered with Rivers, as the Owse, or Isis, the Tame, Cherwel,
Windrush, and Ebenlode.

It is divided into 14 Hundreds, in which tract is seated 280 Parish Churches,
and is traded unto by 12 Market Towns, and graced with a beautiful and stately
City.

Oxford, the Seat of the Muses, exceeding all Universities in the World, Oxford.
except her Sister Cambridge. It is a place of great antiquity, said to be
consecrated unto Learning in the time of the Old Britains; and was much
cherished and countenanced by King Elfred, who sent thither his Son Ethelward
on purpose to invite the young Nobles to study the Arts and Sciences. It is a
City commodiously seated both for pleasure and profit between the Isis and the
Charwel, which encompasseth three parts of the City, over which for the
convenience of passage it has several Bridges. The City is large, numbering 14
Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, a large Structure, and is at present a
fair and stately City, adorned with well built Houses, and beautified with
diverse curious Structures, as the Kings Palace, now the Manor House, the 16
Colleges, 8 Halls, the Schools, wherein is a stately Library, and The ater
newly erected. It enjoys ample Immunities, keeps Courts for all Actions
without limitation of some; has the election of 4 Burgesses, 2 for the
University, and 2 for the City. It is a place very populous, and well resorted
unto, has weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which is the chief,
and very considerable for Provisions and all sorts of Grain, especially Barley;
and also enjoys a great trade for Malt.

Burford, Burford.
situate on an Ascent near the Downs, and on the River Windrush, which
springs out of the Cotswold; a large and fair Town Corporate, governed by two
Bailiffs, and other sub-Officers, and has a well frequented Market for Corn,
Cattle, and Provisions on Saturdays; and is of chief note for Saddles here made.

Woodstock, Woodstock.
a well compacted Borough Town, governed by a Major, 4 Aldermen, etc. enjoys
several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has an indifferent good
Market on Tuesdays. It is delightfully seated, and of some note for its large
Park, wherein was Woodstock-Bower, built by King Henry the first, and where he
kept his Mistress, the beautiful Rosamond Clifford, which was here poisoned by
his enraged Queen Elianor.

Banbury, Banbury.
seated on the Cherwel, and in a Flat; a pretty large, wealthy and beautiful
Town Corporate, governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, etc. sends Burgesses to
Parliament; has a very considerable Market for Cattle, Sheep, and Provisions
on Thursdays, and is of some note for its Cakes and Cheese.

Tame, Tame.
pleasantly seated on the River so called, which (with its branches) does
almost encompass it, and over which it has a Bridge which leads into
Buckinghamshire. It is a large Town, having one spacious Street, in the midst
of which is the Marketplace; and its Market, which is on Tuesdays, is well
resorted unto by Grasiers and Butchers, from London and other parts, it being
very considerable for Cattle.

Henley, Henley.
or Henley upon Thames, as being thereon seated, over which it has a fair
Bridge; a large Town Corporate, governed by a Warden for its chief Magistrate,
enjoys a considerable trade for Maulting, and much inhabited by Bargmen and
Watermen, who are employed for the carrying of Malt, Wood, etc. to London; and
in return, bring such commodities as they and the Neighborhood have occasion
of. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is very considerable for Corn, especially
Barley, there being oft-times about 300 Cartloads sold in one day.

RVTLAND, County of Rutland described.
the smallest County in the Kingdom, making in circumference not above 40
miles; and although for quantity the least, yet for quality may be compared
with the best, being of a very fertile Soil both for tillage and pasturage,
especially about the Vale of Catmose. It is well clothed with Wood, watered
with fresh Streams, is blessed with a sweet Air, and has more Parks (considering
its extent) than any County in England.

This County is severed into five Hundreds, in which are 48 Parishes, and has
two Market Towns; viz.

Oakham, Oakham.
situate in the rich and pleasant Valley of Catmose; and although not large,
yet is the Shire Town, where the Assizes and Sessions are held; its Buildings
are indifferent good, especially its Church, Free School, and Hospital; here is
an old decayed Castle, which is now made use of for the Assizes. It has a
Market on Saturdays, which is indifferently well served with Provisions.

Vpingham, highly seated; a neat compacted and well built Town, Upingham.
has the accommodation of a Free School, and an Hospital; and its Market,
which is on Wednesdays, is well resorted unto, and served with living Cattle,
Corn, and Provisions.

SHROPSHIRE, being a frontier County to Wales, County of Salop described.
is well replenished with Towns and Castles, the better to overawe the
Welshmen in the bordering Marches: and diverse Noblemen in this tract were
called Barons of the March, and enjoyed in their Territories certain
Privileges, and held Courts for the administering of Justice.

This County is of a fertile Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage, abounding in
Wheat and Barley, is well clothed with Wood, feeds good store of Cattle, and
in the bowels of the Earth are Mines of Iron and Pit-Coal. It is well watered
with Rivers, as the Tern, Clun, Rea, Teame, Roden, and Severn, being the chief;
which in a crooked passage severeth the Shire in the midst. It is very Hilly
and Mountainous, especially toward the Southern and Western parts.

In this County are 170 Parish Churches, and has for its Towns of chief note.

Shrewsbury, raised out of the ancient Vriconium, Shrewsbury.
the Seat of the Princes of Powis, until forced thence by the Saxons. It is
pleasantly seated on an easy Ascent, and on the banks of the Severn, which
almost encompasses it. It is a place which for largeness, numbering 5 Parish
Churches besides a Chapel, neatness of Buildings, both public and private,
largeness and variety of Streets, and populousness, may be set down in the rank
of Cities. It is a Town of good strength, as well by Nature as Art, being
fenced about with a strong Wall, defended by a Castle, Bulwarks, and other
Fortifications. It is a place of a great resort, and well inhabited both by
English and Welsh, and enjoys this place being the common Mart between
England and Middle Wales. The Town enjoys large Immunities, keeps Courts,
sends its Representatives to Parliament, has a large Free School, is
governed by a Major, 24 Aldermen, 48 Common Council-men, a Recorder, Town
Clerk, with other sub-Officers; and has weekly 3 Markets, on Wednesdays for
Provisions, on Thursdays for Cottons, etc. here sold in great abundance, and
thence sent to London; and on Saturdays for Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions
in great plenty.

Oswestre, so called from Oswald King of the Northumbers, Oswestre.
who was here slain in a Battle, and cruelly torn in pieces by Penda the Pagan
Mercian Prince. It is a Town Corporated, governed by two Bailists and
Burgesses; and before the Mart for Welsh Cottons was hence removed to
Shrewsbury, was of greater account than now it is; yet is it of some trade for
Flannels, and its Market, which is on Mondays, is well resorted unto, and
furnished with Cattle and Provisions.

Wenlock Magna, seated in the road from Worcester to Shrewsbury; Wenlock Magna.
a Town Corporate, governed by Bailiffs and Burgesses, has the election of
Parliament men, is of some note for its Lime and Tobacco-pipes, here made in
great plenty; and has a very good Market on Mondays for Corn and Provisions.

Bridgnorth, a large Town Corporate, governed by 2 Bailiffs and Burgesses,
Bridgnorth.
and has the election of Parliament men. It is seated on the Severn, over
which is a fair Stone Bridge, is well inhabited, contains 2 Parish Churches,
and has a good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions.

Ludlow, seated on the Temd, a Town more fair than ancient, Ludlow.
being beautified with diverse good Buildings, amongst which is the Palace of
the President of the Marches. It is a large Town Corporate, governed by
Bailiffs and Burgesses, has the election of Parliament men, and has a very
great Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions on Mondays. The Town is strong,
being defended by a Wall and Castle, is very populous and well inhabited, and
is of chief note, for being the place where the Courts for the Marches of Wales
are kept, for the easment of the Welsh and Neighboring Inhabitants; and here
Prince Arthur kept his Court.

County of Somerset described.
SOMERSET, a large and wealthy County, and of a rich and fertile Soil both for
Tillage and Pasturage; yet not without Stony-hills. It is exceeding populous,
and well frequented, occasioned through its commodious Havens and Seaport
Towns, and is every where well watered with Rivers; as the Severn, Avon,
Parret, From, Brue, Ivel, etc. which with the Sea plentifully serves the
Inhabitants with excellent Fish. As to the bounds, extent, and division of the
Shire into Hundreds, see the Table.

This County has been the Theater of diverse bloody Battles; for instance, at
Pen, near Cadbury, Edmond, surnamed Iron-sides, gave the Danes a notable foyl
in his pursuit of Canutus the then Usurper of the English Crown. Not far from
Bridgwater, Ealstan Bishop of Sherbourn, gave a great overthrow to the Danish
Camp. At Cadbury King Arthur obtained a great and memorable Victory against the
English Saxons: And near this place Keniwalsh, a West Saxon, obtained the like
Victory against the Britains, to their ever after dread of the English Saxons.
And not far from Banes-down King Elfred gave the Danes such an overthrow, that
constrained them to a submission, and caused Godrus their King to be baptized,
and was his Godfather.

In this County are numbered 385 Parish Churches, and has intercourse of
Traffic with 30 Market Towns.

Bristol, a City part in this County, and the greatest part being in
Gloucestershire, it is there treated of, and therefore omitted here.

Bath, Bath.
seated on the Avon, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge, and in a low and
small Plain, which is encircled with Hills, out of which issue forth several
Springs, which pay their Tribute to this City. It is a City of great Antiquity,
as does appear by the many Roman Inscriptions and Images commonly found in the
Walls which encompass it; and where the Abbey stands was a Temple consecrated
to Minerva, the Goddess of Fountains and Baths, It is a fair and neat City,
replenished with well built Houses, for Divine worship has at present but one
Parish Church besides its Abbey or Cathedral, a superb Building. It is governed
by a Major, Aldermen, Common Council, with other sub-Officers, enjoys several
Immunities, sends its Representatives to Parliament, and has two Markets
weekly, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are well served with Corn and
Provisions; it enjoys a good trade for its Clothing here made, and is a place
well inhabited and resorted unto, and the rather for its Medicinal Baths, for
the curing of several diseases in the body of Man. Of these Baths there are
four, and the Water, as to heat, is of a different temperature: The Cross-Bath,
which is of a temperate heat, is enclosed with a Wall, and about the sides are
placed 12 Seats of Stone: The second is of a much hotter temperature, and
therefore called the Hot-Bath: Adjoining to these Baths is a Spittle-house, for
the relief of poor diseased people. The third and fourth (as joined together)
are the greatest and best, being seated near the Abbey, and called the King and
Queens Baths, they are enclosed with Walls, and have 32 Seats made of
Arched-work, and so ordered that Men and Women sit apart.

Wells, Wells.
seated at the foot of a Hill, so called from the Springs and Wells there
springing up; a small City, but well inhabited, and of a good account, being
dignified with an Episcopal See, under whose Jurisdiction is that of Bath. It
is garnished with fair and stately Buildings, both public and private, as its
Cathedral, dedicated to St. Andrew, a beautiful Pile of building; the
Bishops-Palace, adjoining to the Cathedral, built Castle-wise; then the
Prebendaries Houses, and the Market-house, sustained by Pillars. It is governed
by a Major, 7 Masters, 16 Burgesses, a Recorder, Town Clerk, etc. enjoys
several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has weekly 2 Markets,
viz. on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are well served with Provisions.

Pensford, seated on the River Chue, near its falling into the Avon; Pensford.
a Town of good account, and much inhabited by Hatters and Bakers. It has a
Market on Tuesdays, which is well served with Corn and Provisions.

Glassenbury, seated near the Tor; Glassenbury.
a good Town and has a Market on Tuesdays, which is well served with Corn,
Fowl, Fish, and other Provisions. This place is of note for its once famous and
stately Abbey of Glassenbury, where (as it is reported) the Body of Joseph of
Arimathea, whom Philip the Apostle of the Gauls sent into Britain to preach the
Gospel of Christ, lies interred; and here King Inas built a fair and stately
Church, and in the Churchyard was the Sepulcher of King Arthur.

Near adjoining, on a high and steep Hill is placed a Tower, now called
Glassenbury-Tor, which commands a great prospect round about, and serves as
a Landmark to Seamen; and on the top thereof the last Abbot was hanged by
command of King Henry the Eighth.

Bruton, seated on the River Brew; a well built and inhabited Town, Bruton.
of a good trade for Clothing, Searges, and Maulting, and has a very great
Market for Provisions, etc. on Saturdays. The Town is graced with a very
beautiful Church, has a Free School, founded by King Edward the Sixth, and a
most goodly Almshouse, that has rather the resemblance of a College than an
Hospital.

Evil, or Yeovell, a Borough Town, governed by a Port-Reve; Evil.
and keeps Courts for the trial of Actions. It is seated on a River so
called, and has a very considerable Market on Fridays for Corn, Cheese, Hemp,
Flax, and Provisions in great plenty, taking its rise from the decay of
Ilchester, near adjoining.

Ilchester, a Town of great antiquity, Ilchester.
and in former times of as great strength; for at the coming of the Normans it
was so populous that it had in it 107 Burgesses, and numbered 16 Parish
Churches; but at present it* has but two Churches. It is a Town Corporate,
governed by a Bailiff and 12 Burgesses, has the election of Parliament men, is
the place where the County Goal is kept, and has a pretty good Market on
Wednesdays.

Taunton, pleasantly seated on the Tone, Taunton.
which is navigable for Barges within three miles of the Town, where it has a
fine Bridge. It is a very fine, neat, and well built Town, graced with spacious
Streets, contains 2 Parish Churches; is well inhabited both by Gentry and
Tradesmen, especially Clothiers, who drive a considerable Trade for Searges and
Clothing, being esteemed the best Town in the County; and its Markets, on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, are very great, and well provided with Corn, Flesh,
Fish, and Fowl. It was formerly a Major Town, but at present a Bailiwick.

Bridgwater, seated on a navigable River, Bridgwater.
over which it has a fine Stone Bridge. It is a large, well frequented and
inhabited Borough Town, has the election of Parliament men; is governed by a
Major, and other sub-Officers; was formerly a place of good account, having a
Castle and an Abbey. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is well served with Corn
and Provisions, and in the Summer season with Cattle.

Mynehead, seated on the Sea-shoar; a Borough Town, Mynehead.
electing Parliament men, has a very good harbor for Ships of a considerable
burden to ride in, and is a place of some Trade, especially into Ireland; yet
its Market is but small.

County of Stafford.
The County of STAFFORD, seated much about the midst of England; of a healthful
Air, and different Soil, the Southern parts being generally barren, as sandy,
gravelly, or heathy, except on the banks of the Rivers; yet by the Husbandmans
pains in manuring it, it bears good Corn; and the Northern parts are hilly,
and full of great Heaths and Moors, and is made use of for seeding of Cattle:
And although an Inland County, yet by reason of the many Rivers and Brooks it
is plentifully furnished with excellent Fish. To speak of the Country in
general, there are more Heaths, Moors, and wast Ground, than in any County in
England, as to its bigness, insomuch that you may go the whole length of the
County and see little but Heaths and Moors; but these are not without profit,
as breeding store of Sheep, Conies, and Deer, as well as pleasure for the
Gentleman, both for the Hawk, Gun, and Hound; and for Parks and Warrens few
Counties does exceed it. The Commodities that this Shire affords to others,
are Cattle, Sheep, Horses, Butter, Cheese, Wool, Bacon, Iron, Iron-ware,
chiefly Nails, Alablaster, etc.

The number of Parishes are 130, and has 18 Market Towns, many of which are of
considerable account.

Litchfield, Litchfield.
a City and County of it self, seated in a pleasant Champain Country, divided
from the Cathedral and Close, but joined together by two Bridges and Cawseys.
It is a City of great antiquity, formerly called Licidfeld, that is, the Field
of dead Bodies, which name it had from the great number of Christians there
slain in the Dioclesian Persecution: and here Oswin, King of the Northumbers,
having vanquished the Pagan Mercians, erected a Church, and made it the
Episcopal See of Duina the Bishop, which afterward was made an Archiepiscopal
Pale by Pope Hadrian, in the Reign of King Offa, which dignity expired with his
life. This City is well built, is indifferent large, containing 3 Parish
Churches besides its Cathedral, a beautiful and curious Structure; adjoining to
which is the Bishops Palace, and the Prebends-houses: the Streets are paid and
well ordered, and is a place much frequented by Gentry. It is governed by 2
Bailiffs, a Sheriff, (which are elected out of 24 Burgesses) a Recorder, Town
Clerk, with sub-Officers; and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to
Parliament. Its Markets are on Tuesdays and Fridays, which are plentifully
served with Corn and Provisions.

Stafford, Stafford.
well seated on the River Sow amongst rich Meadows; a fair Town, indifferent
large, containing 2 Parish Churches, has a Free School, and a fine square
Marketplace, in which the Shire-Hall is kept for the Assig^^ and Sessions of
the County; the Streets are paved and well ordered, and its Houses well built;
it is governed by a Major and Burgesses, has a Recorder, Town Clerk, and 2
Sergeants at Mace. The Town enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to
Parliament, is well inhabited and frequented, and its Markets, which is on
Saturdays, is well served with Corn, Flesh, and other Provisions.

New Castle under Line, New Castle.
seated on a little Rivulet; a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major,
Bailiffs, and Burgesses, has a Court of Record, to hold plea in all Personal
Actions under 40 l. and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament.
It has a great Market on Mondays for Cattle, some Horses and Sheep, with
plenty of Provisions; and after Low-Monday, a Market (or rather a Fair) every
Fortnight for some time.

Vttoxater, uttoxater.
pleasantly seated near the Banks of the Dove amongst excellent Pasturage. The
Town is not very well built, but pretty large, has a well built Marketplace;
and its Market, which is on Wednesdays, is said to be one of the greatest in
these parts of England for Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Butter, Cheese, Corn, and all
Provisions.

Tamworth, Tamworth.
seated on the Banks of the Tame, which divides the Town, one part being in
this County and the other in Warwickshire. The Town at present is of good
account (though not of that splendour as in former times) being incorporated,
governed by Bailiffs, a high Steward, under-Steward, Recorder, and other
sub-Officers, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a Market on Saturdays,
which is indifferent good for Corn and Provisions, and in the Spring time for
Cattle and Sheep.

Walsall, Walsall.
seated on the top of a Hill; a well built Town Corporate, governed by a Major,
and other sub-Officers, has a Court of Record, enjoys a good Trade for
diverse Manufactures made of Iron, as Nails, Bridle-bits, Stirrups, Spurs, and
also Bellows, here made in great plenty; yet its Market, which is on Tuesdays,
is not very great.

Wolverhampton, pleasantly seated on a Hill, Wolverhampton.
beautified with reasonable well built Houses, and its Streets handsomely paved;
is much frequented by Gentry, has a neat Collegiate Church, and its Market,
which is on Wednesdays, is very considerable for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions,
being esteemed the second Market Town in the County.

County of Suffolk described.
SVFFOLK, a County of a various Soil, and consequently has sundry growths and
Manufactures; the Eastern parts all along the Coasts, and for 5 or 6 miles
Inland are generally very bleak, but healthy, sandy, full of small Hills and
Springs, and employed in Tillage for Rye, Peace, Brank, Hemp, and for
Sheep-walks. The more Inland part, commonly called High-Suffolk, or the
Wood-lands, is pretty level, close and dirty, and is made use of chiefly for
Dayries, driving a great trade for their Butter and Cheese; and the parts about
Bury are Champain, and affords great store of grain of all sorts.

It is a County of a large extent, is well stored with Parks, watered with
fresh Streams, and blessed with a most healthful and sweet Air, which makes it to
be so well inhabited by Gentry, and is traded unto by 27 Market Towns, and
numbreth 575 Parish Churches.

Ipswich, seated by the Banks of the Orwell, Ipswich.
near the place where its fresh Water and salt meet, which (with the Tide)
gives it the convenience of a Key. It Is a place of great antiquity, and was
once fenced about with a Wall or Rampire, which was thrown down by the Danes.
It is at present a place of a large extent, numbering 12 Parish Churches besides
St. Georges Chapel; and for its abundance of Streets, which are clean and
neatly ordered, its populousness and good trade that its Inhabitants drive both
by Sea and Land, it may be ranged in the number of Cities. It is a Town
Corporate, well Privileged, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by
2 Bailiffs chosen out of 12 Port-men, and 24 Common Council, also a Recorder,
Town Clerk, and other sub-Officers. It is well served with Provisions, for
besides its Shambles here are weekly 3 Markets, viz. on VVednesdays and
Fridays, for Fish and Butter, and on Saturdays for Provisions of all sorts in
great plenty. And this Town gave birth to Cardinal Wolsey, who here began a
magnificent College, which still bears his name.

Bury, or St. Edmonds-Bury, so called from King Edmond the Martyr, Bury.
here interred, who was shot to death at Hoxon by the Danes, for not renouncing
the Christian Faith. This Town is very pleasantly seated, and in an Air so
healthful, that makes it to be much inhabited and frequented by Gentry. It is a
Town Corporate, governed by an Alderman for its chief Magistrate, besides a
Recorder, and other sub-Officers, and sends its Representatives to Parliament.
It is of a large extent, yet consists but of two Parish Churches, has well
built Houses; its Market-hill, Fair-sted, and Corn-Cross, are spacious and
handsome, but its Streets are ill paved, chiefly occasioned by the heavy
Carriages which come to its Markets on VVednesdays, which are much resorted
unto, being the chief Market. Town in the County for Grain, and is also well
furnished with fresh Fish, Pigeons, wild Fowl, and most sorts of Provisions.
This Town was famous for its Abbey, which for fairness and Prerogatives exceeded
all others in England. Here is kept the Quarter Sessions for the liberty of St.
Edmond; and in the Abby-yard stands the Shire-house, where the Assizes are
ordinarily held for the County.

New Market, composed of a well built Street; Newmarket.
a great thorough-fare Town, full of Inns; it consists of two Parish Churches,
the one in this County and the other in Cambridgeshire; but its Marketplace
and Street is wholly in Suffolk. Its Market is on Tuesdays, which is well
frequented and served with Fish, wild Fowl, and other Provisions; and by reason
of the situation of the Town near the spacious Heath, which bears its name, so
commodious for Horse-races, and in a part of the Country so fit for
Field-sports, it is much resorted unto by his Majesty, where he has his
Palace, and the Nobility and Gentry.

Mildenhall, Mildenhall.
seated on a branch of the Owse; a large Market Town, graced with a fair
Church, with a tall Steeple, and very populous, having distant Streets called
Rows (as Beck-row, How-row, etc.) to the Fenward belonging to it, as big as
some little Towns. It has a well frequented Market (especially for Fish and
wild Fowl) on Fridays.

Sudbury, Sudbury.
seated on the Stower, over which it has a fair Bridge leading into Essex; an
ancient, good large Town, containing 3 Parish Churches, and by reason of its
trade of Clothing is well frequented. It is a Borough Town, electing Parliament
men, and is governed by a Major, 7 Aldermen, 24 Burgesses, and other
sub-Officers. Its Market, which is on Saturdays, is well resorted unto.

Hadleigh, Hadleigh.
a large Town Corporate, governed by a Major, Aldermen, Council, etc. has the
accommodation of two Markets weekly, viz. on Mondays, very considerable for all
Provisions, especially Meat; and a smaller on Saturdays. It is graced with a
sumptuous Church, was a place of great Trade in former times for Clothings; but
at present has lost much of its trade for Turky-ware, as also for Bays and
Says.

Stow-Market, Stow-Market.
seated in the center of the County, and between the branches of the Gypp or
Orwell; a large and beautiful Town, graced with a spacious Church, on whose
Steeple is a lofty Pinnacle, not easy to be paralleled. It has a Market on
Thursdays, which is well served with Provisions and Retail-wares; and the grand
Trade of the Town is now in Tammeys, and other Norwich-Stuffs, being the only
Town in the County considerable for that employment.

Woodbridge, Woodbridge.
a large Town, watered with several fresh Springs, having a pleasant prospect
down the Channel, chiefly at High Water, being about 6 miles from the Main; a
Town of good Traffic by Sea and Land; it is well enough built, excepting the
lowness of the oldest Houses, and part of the Streets are well paved; it has a
fair Church, in which are several Monuments. Its Market, which is on
Wednesdays, is of considerable resort, and well traded unto for its
Commodities, viz. Pouldavis, Sackcloth, Plank, Butter, Cheese, but chiefly for
its Hemp. As to its Sea-trade, they have several Vessels both great and small,
which are employed by them, and have here 4 or 5 Docks for the building of
Ships.

Aldborough, Aldborough.
a Coast Town, pleasantly seated in a Dale; a large, long, and plain built
Town, composed of two or three Streets of low Houses, all in a row. At a small
distance from this Town is Slaughden, where they have a commodious Key, with
Warehouses, or Fish-houses, the only employment of the Town being for Fish,
having great conveniences for drying their North-Sea Fish; in which
Fishing-trade, with a little in the Coal-trade, they employ several Vessels,
but not so many as formerly. It is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs,
10 Capital Burgesses, with 24 Inferior, enjoys ancient Privileges, and
sends its Representatives to Parliament. For their defense Sea-wards, they have
about 20 great Guns planted. Its Market is on Saturdays, which is but small.

Dunwich, Dunwich.
an ancient Town Corporate, sending Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by
two Bailiffs, and other sub-Officers, and has a small Market on Saturdays. It
is a Town of great antiquity, being in the year 640 made an Episcopal See by
Felix the Burgundian, in the reign of William the Conqueror; it contained 236
Burgesses, had a Mint, and its Inhabitants were rich; but through the removal
of its Episcopal See, and the encroachment of the Sea, which has swallowed up
a great part of it, and decay of its Shipping and Trade; it is rather the
Remains of a Town than one.

Bungay, Bungay.
sufficiently watered by the Waveney, which severeth it from Norfolk. It is a
good large Town, containing two Parish Churches, one of which is fair; and
between both, in the midst of the Town, is to be seen the Ruins of a famous
Nunnery. Its Market is on Thursdays, which is great, and well resorted unto,
especially by those of Norfolk.

Beckley, seated also on the Waveney; a very large Town, Beckley.
having a considerable, much frequented, and well served Market on Saturdays,
and has a Passage-trade by Water to Yarmouth; the Town is but plain built,
having several Thatched Houses, but graced with a fair Church, and a bulky tall
Steeple, on a Hill.

County of Surrey described.
SVRREY, a County of a different Soil, not over fertile, (especially in the
midst,) yet the parts near the Thames, which is plain and Champain, is grateful
to the Husbandman; and the parts called Holmesdale, by reason of the aspiring
Hills, Rivers, Parks, Meadows, Groves, and Fields, is a place of great delight.
The Air is very healthful. It is garnished with the Seats of several Gentlemen,
and is better stored with Game than Grain.

Here are seated 140 Parish Churches, and has the accommodation of 9 Market
Towns.

Southwark, or the Borough of Southwark, Southwark.
on the South Side of the Thames opposite to the City of London, to which it is
joined by a stately Stone Bridge, and is a member thereof, being annexed by
King Edward the Sixth; but does still enjoy several of its ancient Privileges,
as electing Burgesses, holding of Courts within themselves, etc. It is a place,
which for largeness of good Buildings, and quantities of Inhabitants, may be
ranged with Cities; enjoying a good Trade, and is well resorted unto.

Croydon, seated low, near the Springhead of the River Wandle, Croydon.
and in a manner begirt with aspiring Hills, which for the most part are well
clothed with Wood, of which great store of Charcoal is made, for which this
place is of note. It is a large Town, dignified with the Seat of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, is beautified with a large and fair Church, has an Hospital for
the relief of Poor people, and a Free School for the Education of Youth. The
Town is large, its Houses well built, and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is
considerable, and well served with Corn and Provisions.

From this Town to Farnham runs the Downs, called Banstead-Downs, which
affords great diversion for Hawking, Hunting, and Horse-Races.

Kingston, a large and ancient Town Corporate, Kingston.
enjoying large Immunities, and is of chief note for being the place where
(upon a Stage in the open Marketplace) stood the Chair of Majesty, where
Aethelstan, Ethelred, and Edwin, were Crowned Kings, and received their
Imperial Scepters, from whence it is said the Town took its name, being before
called Moreford. It is pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Thames, over which
it has a fair Bridge which leads to Kingstonwick in Middlesex, about a mile
from Hampton Court, the Palace of his Majesty. Its Houses are well built, and
has several Inns and Taverns; it is the usual place for the Assizes, and its
Market on Saturdays is very considerable for Corn and Provisions.

Reygate, seated in the Vale of Homes dale, Reygate.
of note for its bloody Battles here sought against the Danes, in which they
were vanquished; and also for its ancient, but ruinated Castle, where (in the
midst of a large Court) there is a Vault of a great depth and length, at the
end of which is a spacious Room, where (according to report) the Barons met in
Council, in their War against King John. Here is Fullers-Earth dug up in great
plenty. It is a large Borough Town, which sends Burgesses to Parliament, and
has a very considerable Market on Tuesdays, being well served with Corn and
Provisions.

Not far from this Town are Blechingley and Gatton, two ancient Borough Towns,
which electeth Parliament men, once places of good account, especially Gatton.

Guilford, no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the River Wey,
Guilford.
which is navigable for Barges, very commodious to the Inhabitants for the
conveyance of their Goods by water to London. It is an ancient Borough Town,
governed by a Major, and other sub-Officers, has the election of Parliament
men, and was a place of a larger extent when the English-Saxon Kings had their
Palace here, than now it is; yet is it a fair, neat, well built, and large
Town, containing three Parish Churches, one of which is a fair Structure. It is
a place well inhabited and frequented, where the Assizes are often kept; and as
seated on a High-road, is well furnished with Inns and Taverns for the
reception of Travelers; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is of good
Account, and well served with Corn and Provisions.

Farnham, Farnham.
said to be so called from the great store of Fern here growing. It is a good
Town, seated on the River Wey, of note for being the place where King Elfred
(with a small Power) subdued the Danes with a great slaughter; and for its
spacious Castle, highly seated. It has a great Market on Saturdays for all
Provisions, but chiefly Oats and Barley.

County of Sussex described.
SUSSEX, a large County, in form long and narrow, which, with its extent,
bounds, division into Rapes, situation, etc. may appear by the Table. The Air,
though clouded with Mists and thick Vapors, which arise from the Sea, yet is
it good and healthful. It is well watered with Rivers, which fall into the Sea,
which washes its Southern parts; and although its Seacoast is of so large an
extent, yet it is but thin of Harbors, and those not very good, being
dangerous for entrance by reason of its Rocks and Shelves.

The Soil is fertile: the Seacoast called the Downs is hilly, but very
pleasant, and feeds good store of Cattle. The North-part is overshadowed with
Woods and Groves, where (in times past) was that famous Wood Andradswald, being
about 120 miles in length, and 20 in breadth; and in these parts are many
Iron-Mines.

The Commodities that this County affords, are Iron unwrought, and wrought
into Guns, etc. Corn, Cattle, Sheep, Wool, and Wood.

This County is severed into 6 Rapes, all which traverse the Shire, and have
each of them their particular River, Forest, and Castle; and in these Rapes are
65 Hundreds, in which are numbered 312 Parish Churches; and is traded unto by 16
Market Towns.

In Chichester Rape are 7 Hundreds, and its chief places are,

Chichester.
Chichester, seated on the Banks of the Levant, which at a small distance
falls into the Sea. It is an indifferent large City, containing 5 or 6 Parish
Churches besides its Cathedral; it is graced with good Buildings and spacious
Streets, especially the 4 which lead from the 4 Gates of its Wall, and cross
one another at the Marketplace, which is a fair Stone-Building, sustained with
Stone-Pillars. It is dignified with an Episcopal See, and Seat of a Bishop. It
is a City endowed with many Privileges, electeth Parliament men, is governed
by a Major, Aldermen, Recorder, with sub-Officers; is a place of pretty good
Trade, and its Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, are well provided with
Corn, Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions, both Flesh, Fish, and Fowl.

Nigh unto this City is Selsey-Isle, or rather a Peninsula, as being almost
encompassed with the Sea and its Arms and Branches, at present of chief note
for its Cockles and Lobsters, here taken in great plenty; but in former time
was of note for its City so called, now devoured by the Sea, where there was an
Episcopal See, which afterward was removed to Chichester.

Arundel, Arundel.
pleasantly seated near a Forest so called, and on the Banks of the Arum, over
which it has a Bridge. It is an ancient Borough Town, governed by a Major, and
sub-Officers, and amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament; it was
once of note for its ancient and strong Castle, which flourished in the time of
the Saxon Empire. The Town is indifferent large, and its Houses well built, and
has a Market.

Horsham, Horsham.
seated near St. Leonards Forest, said to be so called from Horsa, Brother to
Hengist, who were the first Leaders of the English Saxons into this Isle. It is
a large Borough Town, governed by Bailiffs, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is
the place where the County Goal is kept, as also the Assizes; and has a very
great Market on Saturdays for Corn and all sorts of Provisions, especially
Fowl, which is bought up by London Haglers.

New Shorham, seated on an Arm of the Sea, Shorham.
which renders it to be a place of some Trade, and would be more, had it but a
good harbor for Ships. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a Constable and
Burgesses, electeth Parliament men, but has not the benefit of a Market.

Jews, situate on the banks of the Arun; a Town of good antiquity, Jews.
where King Athelstan appointed the Mintage of his Money. It is a Town
Corporate, governed by 2 Constables, enjoys several Immunities, electeth
Parliament men, and has a very good Market for Corn and Provisions on
Saturdays. This Town for fairness of Buildings and Streets, populousness of
Inhabitants, both of Gentry and Tradesmen, and largeness, numbering 6 Parish
Churches, and having large Suburbs, may be esteemed one of the best Towns in
the County.

At the entrance of the River Arun into the Sea, is New Haven, of late made a
pretty secure Harbor for Ships, which hither put in in Foul weather, which
these Seas are subject unto.

East-Grinsted, seated on an Eminence; Grinsted.
a small Borough Town on the confines of the County toward Surrey, is graced
with a fair Church, has the election of Parliament men, is governed by a
Bailiff and Burgesses, is the place where the Assizes are often held, and has
a good Market on Thursdays.

Winchelsey, of good antiquity, Winchelsey.
and once of far greater account than now it is, and that occasioned by the
Seas unkindness in forsaking it; yet does it still enjoy its Privileges, as
keeping of Courts, in being a Member of one of the Cinque Ports, in sending
Burgesses to Parliament, and by being governed by a Major, (who is Lord of
Yarmouth for the Fishing-Trade) and Jurats. The Town is seated on a Rock or
sandy Cliff, and on an Inlet of the Sea, where it makes 4 Cataracts, and were
its Haven not choked up it would be a place of Trade. It was formerly a large
Town, numbering 18 Parish Churches, which are all reduced to ruin except one,
and its Buildings also wasted and ruinous for want of Inhabitants, so that its
Market is now disused.

Rye, one of the Cinque-Port Towns, Rye.
which began to flourish upon the decay of Winchelsey, being walled about
(where the Cliffs defend it not) in the Reign of King Edward the Third. It is
at present a fair and well built Town, with paved Streets; is well inhabited
and frequented, chiefly by Fishermen, being of note for its excellent Herrings
here taken, and for being the ready Port-Town to Normandy. It is governed by a
Major and Jurats, has a commodious Haven, and has weekly 2. Markets, viz. on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well served with Corn and Provisions.

Hastings, of good antiquity, being Incorporated, Hastings.
governed by a Major and Jurats, is one of the Cinque Ports, enjoys large
Immunities, and is of note for being the place where William the Conqueror set
up his Fortress at his Landing at Balver-hith, not far distant, where he caused
his Fleet to be burnt. It is a large Town, containing 2 Parish Churches,
chiefly composed of as many Streets, in each of which there being a Church, and
its Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are well resorted unto, and served with
Corn and Provisions, especially Fish, which is here had in great plenty. As to
the situation of this Town, it is couched between a high Cliff Sea-wards, and
as high a Hill Land-wards.

County of Warwick described.
The County of WARWICK, seated (as it were) in the midst or heart of the
Kingdom, and participates with her in the best, both for richness of Soil,
pureness of Air, and pleasure to its Inhabitants.

It may be divided into two parts, the one called Feldon, and the other
Woodland, and these are in a manner separated by the River Avon, which in a
crooked passage runs through the County. That called Feldon is more
Champain, affording rich Meadows, feeding store of Cattle, and is exceeding
grateful to the Husbandman in their Crops of Corn: That called Woodland, of old
Arden, took its name from the great plenty of Wood, which is now much wasted by
the Iron-works, and this part is more ungrateful to the Husbandman.

It is severed into 5 Hundreds (in which are numbered 158 Parish Churches) and
is traded unto by 17 Market Towns.

Coventry, Coventry.
well seated for an Inland City, being esteemed the chief place of Trade in
these parts; a place very well inhabited and frequented, and the more for the
great quantities of Clothes here made and vended. It is a fair, neat, and large
City, containing 3 Parish Churches, of which that of St. Michael and the Holy
Trinity, are loftily built, and is beautified with good Buildings and well
ordered Streets, and its Cross (now lately repaired) is composed of curious
work, and delightful to behold. Here it was that Godiva, wife to Leofrick, Earl
of the Mercians, for the purchasing the Citizens freedom, and to be eased from
those heavy Taxes which he imposed upon them for some Offense, about Noonday
rode naked through the chief Streets of the City. It is a place which enjoys
several Immunities, being a County incorporate of it self, having within its
Liberties several Towns; is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, and other
sub-Officers; keeps Courts for the hearing of Causes and trial of Felons,
having a Goal for Offenders, and sends Burgesses to Parliament. It is a place
well served with Commodities, and its Market on Fridays, is very great for
Corn, Cattle, Provisions, etc.

Warwick, Warwick.
a Town of great antiquity, said to be built by Gurgunstus almost 400 years
before the birth of Christ; and in the time of the Romans it was in a very
flourishing condition, large and populous, where they kept a Garrison, which
was a Band of Dalmatian Horsemen. It is at present a Town of good account,
seated on a steep Rock, and washed on the River Avon, over which it has a
strong and well built Stone Bridge. It is indifferent large, containing 2
Parish Churches (besides several demolished;) its Houses are well built, its
Streets well-ordered and large, has a stately Market-house, enjoys a good
Trade, chiefly for Malt, and is the place where the Assizes and general
Sessions for the County are kept. It is governed by a Major, 12 Brethren, 24
Burgesses, a Recorder, with sub-Officers. Amongst its Immunities electeth
Parliament men; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very great for Corn
and Provisions.

Near unto this Town is Guy-Cliff, most pleasantly seated amongst Groves and
fresh Streams, where Guy of Warwick is said to have built a Chapel; and after
he had left off his exploits, here led an Hermetical life, and was here
interred.

Stratford, Stratford.
seated on the Avon, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge, sustained by 14
Arches. It is a good large Town, having for Divine worship two Churches, is
well inhabited, enjoys a considerable Trade for Malt here made, and has a
Market on Thursdays, which is very well served with Corn and Provisions.

Bromicham, Bromicham.
seated very dry on the side of a Hill; it is a large and well built Town, very
populous, much resorted unto, and enjoys a very great trade for Iron and
Steel Wares and Tools here made; also for Saddles and Bridles, which find good
vent at London, Ireland, and other parts; and its Market is on Thursdays, which
is very considerable for living Cattle, Corn, Malt, and Provisions, besides
the Manufactures of the Town.

At Newenham-Regis is a Spring, whose Water (if drunk with Salt) loosneth; and
if with Sugar, binds the Body; and is said to be very Sovereign against
Ulcers, Imposthumes, and the Gout.

County of Westmoreland described.
The County of WESTMORELAND, so called, as lying amongst Moors, and high Hills
or Fells, generally of a barren Soil, and very Mountainous, but not without
many fruitful Valleys both for Tillage and Pasturage; and is well watered with
fresh Streams.

Here are several Meers and Lakes, as Winder-Meer, which is the greatest
standing water in England; Rydale-water, Ester-water, Gresmere-water,
Kent-Meer, Vlles-water, Brother-water, Hawse-water, and others.

This County is divided or severed into two Baronies, viz. Kendale Barony,
which is divided into the Wards of Kendale and Lonsdale; and the other Barony,
called the Barony of Westmoreland, is divided into Eastward and Westward; and
of these in order.

Kirby-Lonsdale, Kirby-Lonsdale.
or the Church-Town in Lonsdale, seated on the Lon, over which it has a large
Stone Bridge, and in a rich Vale. It is a large and well built Town, beautified
with a fair Church; a well inhabited and frequented Town both to Church and
Market, esteemed the greatest in the County next, to Kendale; and its Market on
Thursdays is well served with Provisions, and traded unto for Cloth.

Kendale, Kendale.
or Kirby-Kendale; a very fair, large, well built, inhabited and frequented
Borough, and Market Town, which for good Buildings, largeness, neatness, and
good Manufactures is the chief in the County. It is a place of a considerable
Trade, the people much addicting themselves to Traffic, not only in their old
Manufacture of Cotton and course Woollen Cloth; but of late in Druggets,
Serges, Hats, Worsted-Stockings, etc. to the much enriching the Town and
adjacent parts. It is most pleasantly seated in a Valley, so called, amongst
Hills, and on the River Can or Kent, over which it has two fair Stone-bridges,
besides one of Wood, which leads to the Castle, now ruino^^. The Town is
built in form of a Cross, and is beautified with a fair and large Church,
sustained by five rows of Pillars, with several Apartments; near unto which is
a Free School, well endowed; and to this Church belongs 12 Chapels of Ease.
As to the Government of this Town, it is committed to the care of a Major, 12
Aldermen, 20 Common Council-men, a Recorder, Town Clerk, and two Attorneys, who
attend their Sessions and Courts of Record. Here are belonging to this Town 7
Companies, viz. Mercers, Shear-men, Cordwainers, Tanners, Glovers, Tailors, and
Pewterers, each having their Hall or place of meeting; and for the
accommodation of its Inhabitants has a very great Market for Corn, living,
Cattle, and Provisions, on Saturdays.

Apleby, Apleby.
of note for its situation and antiquity, being for the most part encircled
with the River Eden; but so slenderly peopled with idle Inhabitants, and the
Buildings so mean, although of late much amended, that were it not for the
Assizes and Sessions here held, it would be little better than a Village. It is
a very ancient Town Corporate, governed by a Major, and 12 Aldermen, with
sub-Officers, enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is
discharged from paying Toll in all places, except London and York. Here is an
Hospital or Almshouse erected, and liberally endowed by the Lady Clifford for
the relief of 13 decayed Widows, who are called the Mother and her 12 Sisters.
The Market is here kept on Saturdays, which is well served with Corn and
Provisions.

Kirby-Stevens, Kirby-Stephens.
beautified with a fair Church, seated near the Hills toward Yorkshire. It is
a good and well known Town, which of late is much improved by the trade of
making Stockings, and has a good Market on Fridays.

At Stainmore, a great Hill, is a Cross said to be erected upon a Peace
concluded between William the Conqueror and Malcolme King of the Scots, and
that by the said Place each Kingdom should know their limits; and on this
Stone-Cross which is called Ree-Cross, that is, the Cross of Kings, was
engraven the Arms of the Kings, on the South Side those of England, Ree-Cross.
and on the North those of Scotland.

County of Wilts.
WILT-SHIRE, an Inland County, no less fertile than delightful. Its Northern
parts has delectable Hills, well clothed with Woods and watered with fresh
Streams, amongst which is the Isis, which soon becomes the chief of the
Kingdom. Its Southern parts are more even, and exceeding fertile in Corn and
Grass, feeding great flocks of Sheep; and are also well watered with the Avon,
Willy, and Alder; and the midst of the County is plain and level, bearing the
name of Salisbury-Plain, which is a large tract of ground which feeds good
flocks of Sheep.

In the midst of this County is a Dike called Wansdike, which runs many
miles in length, and is a place of some wonder, being said to be made for the
dividing the Kingdom of the Mercians from that of the West Saxons; this being
the place where they fought for the enlargement of their Dominions. And here it
was that Ina the West Saxon joined Battle with Geolred the Mercian, whence both
of them quitted the Field with equal loss.

This County is divided into 29 Hundreds, in which are seated 304 Parish
Churches, and has for the accommodation of the Inhabitants 20 Market Towns.

Salisbury.
Salisbury. a City of great antiquity, being the Seat of the Romans. It is
commonly called New-Sarum, as raised out of the Old, which was seated on a
great Eminence, being designed for Strength and War; yet honored with an
Episcopal See, and a fair Cathedral. This City of New Sarum is pleasantly
seated on a River, whose Streams commodiously water its Streets, which are
large and spacious. It is beautified with fair Buildings, and its Minster or
Cathedral is a stately Structure, having as many Doors for entrance as Months
in the year, as many Windows as Weeks, and as many Pillars (great and small) as
Days in the year; and its Spire proudly shows it self from a great distance;
near unto which is the Bishops Palace: then its Town Hall, seated in a spacious
Marketplace, is a fair Building. This City (amongst its Immunities) sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoys a
good Trade, and its Markets, which are on Tuesdays and Saturdays, are very
considerable for Corn and Provisions, and for living Cattle on Tuesdays.

This City is encompassed with open Fields and Plains, where (at about 6 miles
distance) is that wonderful piece of work called Stone-Henge, composed of great
and unwrought Stones, some being 28 foot high, and 7 broad, and so laid thwart
one another that it is wonderful to behold. And these Stones are said to be
thus raised by the Britains, as a Monumental Sepulcher of the Virtue and
Manhood of Ambrosius Aurelianus, who took upon him the Imperial Purple-Robe of
Britain in the declension of the Roman Empire, succored his languishing
Country, and by the aid of that warlike Arthur repressed the furious rage of
the Enemy, vanquishing powerful Armies, and in the end, in the last Battle
sought on this Plain, lost his life.

Wilton.
Wilton, well watered with the Willey and another River; a Town in former time
of such great note that it was the chief in the County, and was dignified with
an Episcopal See, had a Monastery and enjoyed great Immunities; but at present
it is become a small, mean Borough Town, electing Parliament men, is the place
where she Knights of the Shire are chosen, where the Sheriff keeps his Monthly
County-Courts; yet has but a small Market on Fridays.

Divizes.
Devizes, seated near Blackmere-Forest; a Town of greater note and strength in
former times than at present, being defended by a powerful Castle; yet is it a
large Town, being well inhabited and traded unto for diverse Commodities,
especially for Malt; It has the election of Parliament men, and its Market,
which is on Thursdays, is very considerable for Horses, Cattle of all sorts,
Corn, Provisions, and diverse other Country-commodities.

Chipnam.
Chipnam, seated on the Avon, a Borough Town, electing Parliament men, and has
a noted Market for Corn and Provisions on Saturdays.

Marlborough.
Marlborough, seated on the Kenet near Savernake-Forest and Aldburn-Chase, and
in a Chalky Soil, a Town of great note in former times, where there was a
Parliament held, and a Law made for the suppressing of all Tumults called the
Statute of Marlborough. And here was once a strong Castle belonging to John
Surnamed Sans Terre, who was after King of England. It is at present a good,
large, and well built Borough Town, electing Parliament men, is governed by a
Major and Burgesses, and has a very considerable Market for Corn, Malt,
Provisions, Butter, and especially Cheese on Saturdays.

Not far from this place are diverse Stones, some of a vast bigness pitched up
an end.

Swindon.
Swindon, seated near a rich Vale, and on the Summit of a Hill, a Town of no
largeness, but its Houses are generally well built of Stone, and has a
considerable Market for fat Cattle on Mondays.

Malmesbury.
Malmesbury, pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Avon, which almost
encircleth it, over which it has 6 Bridges. It is a Town of great antiquity,
where Maidulph an Irish-Scot, a man of great Holiness and Learning, under a
Hill in a solitary Grove built a Cell or little Monastery, and lived an
Hermetical life, and where his Successor Adelma built a, fair Monastery, It as
it, present a good Borough Town, governed by a Major and Aldermen, enjoys
several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a good Market for
Corn and Provisions on Saturdays.

County of Worcester.
The County of WORCESTER is of a fertile, Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage,
bearing good Crops of Corn, and feeding store of Cattle. It is inter, laced
with aspiring Hills, well clothed with Wood, as the Malvern, Bredon, Woodbery,
Aberleg, etc. and through its Valleys run those many Rivers, which so
plentifully water the County, as the Severn, Avon, Salwarp, etc.

This Shire has such great abundance of Fruits, that even the Hedgerows and
Highways are beset therewith, whose Fruits are free to all Passengers; and
here Sider and Perry is had in as great plenty, as Beer at London. Here are
many Salt Pits or Wiches, which afford a most excellent high prized Salt for
the Gentries Table, which for fineness, whiteness, and hardness, imitateth
Loaf-Sugar.

This County is severed into 5 Hundreds in which are seated 152 Parishes, and
is traded unto by 11 Market Towns.

Worcester, Worcester.
no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the Severn, over which it has
a fair Stone Bridge, with a Tower upon it. It is a City of great antiquity,
said to be built by the Romans, the better to secure themselves from the
Britains, who were Masters of all beyond the Severn, and was held in good
repute in the time of the Danes and Saxons; and although it has received so
many shocks of ill fortune by Fire and Sword, yet is it a place of good
largeness, numbering 9 Parish Churches, besides St. Michaels and its Cathedral,
a stately Structure, in whose Quire are several graceful Tombs. This City
enjoys ample Immunities, electeth Parliament men, is dignified with the Sea
of a Bishop, is governed by a Major, Sheriff, 6 Aldermen, 24 principal
Citizens, with 48 less, called Common-Council-men, 2 Chamberlains, a Recorder,
Town Clerk, with sub-Officers; is graced with good Buildings and well ordered
Streets, is well inhabited, enjoys a good Trade, especially for Clothings,
here made in great quantities, and its Markets on Wednesdays, Fridays, and
Saturdays, are very considerable, especially that on Saturdays for living
Cattle, Corn, Flesh, Fish, and all Provisions, which are here had at easy
rates.

Evesholme, Evesholme.
seated on a Hill, arising from the River Avon, which almost encompasseth it,
where it has a Stone Bridge. This Town was of note for its Abbey, founded by
Edwin, by the helping-hand of King Kenred, Son of Wolpher King of the Mercians.
It is at present a large and well built Major-Town, esteemed the best in the
County, next to Worcester, containing two or three Parishes, sends Burgesses to
Parliament, is well inhabited and frequented, enjoys a good Trade,
principally for Stockings; and its Market, which is on Mondays, is very
considerable for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, and Stockings. This Town gives name
to a Vale near adjoining, which for fertility of Soil may deservedly be called
the Granary of these parts.

Droitwich, Droitwich.
seated on the River Salwarp; a pretty good Bailiwick-Town, but its Market
(which is on Fridays) is but small. This Town is of great note for its
Salt Pits or Wiches, having three Fountains that afford great plenty of Water
for the making of Salt, which is excellent white and good, for which here is
drove a good Trade.

Sturbridge, Sturbridge.
seated on a Flat, and on the Stower, over which it has a Bridge; it is a good
and well built Town, has the accommodation of a good Free School, with a
Library, and its Market on Fridays is well furnished with Corn, Provisions, and
Swine.

Kidderminster, Kidderminster.
feated under a Hill, and on the Severn, where the Stower loses it self,
dividing the Town in twain; an ancient Bailiwick-Town, beautified with a fair
Church, has well built Houses, is well inhabited, and much traded unto for its
Stuffs called Kidderminster-Stuffs, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is
considerable for Corn, Gottle, Provisions, and several Country-commodities.

Bewdley, Bewdley.
a Bailiwick-Town, which sends Burgesses to Parliament, pleasantly seated on
the Severn, and near the Forest of Wire, which in former time was a place of
great delight, and much resorted unto. It is a neat and well built Town,
enjoys a good Trade for Malt, Leather, and Caps, called Bewdley-Caps, here
made, and has a Market on Saturdays, chiefly considerable for Barley.

YORKSHIRE, County of York described.
the largest County in England, being above 300 miles in compass; and although
thus spacious, for the generality is indifferent fertile, yielding good plenty
of Cattle, Corn, Fowl, and Fish; for if one part is stony, sandy, and barren,
other parts make amends: and although there are great store of Heaths and
Moors, which are barren ground, yet are they profitable to the Inhabitants for
the feeding of Cattle.

In this County the Romans had several Stations; and here were abundance of
Abbeys, Monasteries, and Religious Houses, many of which were of great note,
eminency, and wealth.

The chief Manufactures of this Shire, are Stockings, Alum, Jett, Lime, Knives,
Pins, etc. but above all Cloth in great plenty.

It is fevered into three distinct parts, and called the North Riding, the
East Riding, and the West Riding; which said Ridings or Parts are subdivided
into 26 Wapontacks, or Hundreds, viz. the North into Eleven, the East into Six,
and the West into Nine; and in all these Wapontacks are numbered 563 Parish
Churches, besides abundance of Chapels of Ease, by reason of the largeness of
the Parishes, many of the Chapels being as large as Parishes in other parts of
England.

The North Riding of Yorkshire may not improperly be divided into
Richmondshire; Cleaveland, a fertile part; North-Allerton, and Blackmore, very
Mountainous, Craggy, and Moorish. The chief places in this Riding are,

York, City of York.
which next to London claims the Priority of all others in the Kingdom; a
place of great antiquity and fame, having its rise from the Romans, who had it
in such great esteem, that Severus their Emperor had here his Palace, and here
ended his days, and had those Funeral Rites solemnized on his Corpse according
to their custom. And here Fl. Valerius Constantius, surnamed Chlorus, bid adue
to the World, and in his room his Son Constantine was here proclaimed Emperor.
Nor did this City thus flourish only in the time of the Romans, but was of
great repute in all succeeding Ages, and has in all the revolutions and
changes under the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, preserved its ancient luster, and
is at present a fair, large, and beautiful City, adorned with many splendid
Buildings, both public and private, is very populous, much resorted unto, and
well inhabited by Gentry and wealthy Tradesmen, and numbreth about 30 Parish
Churches and Chapels, besides its Cathedral or Minster, a most stately
Structure dedicated to St. Peter. Amongst its public Buildings of note these
may be taken notice of; The Bishops-Palace; its Chapter House, a curious piece
of Architecture; the Princes-House, called the Manor; and the Courts of
Judicature, held for the Neighboring Marches, according to that of Ludlow. It
is a City and County within it self, enjoys large Immunities, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Lord Major, 12 Aldermen clad in
Scarlet, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Common Council, 8 Chamberlains, a Recorder, Town Clerk,
Sword Bearer, and Common Sergeant, with other sub-Officers. It is a place of
great strength, being well fortified, and enclosed with a strong Wall, on which
are many Turrets or Watchhouses, and has for entrance 4 Gates and 5 Posterns.
Its situation is no less pleasantly than commodiously seated on the Owse,
which severeth it in two parts, but joined together by a fair Stone Bridge; and
to conclude, its Markets on Thursdays and Staturdays are very considerable, and
well served with Flesh, Fish, Fowl, etc. as are its Shambles on the Weekdays
with Provisions.

Malton, or New-Malton, seated on the Derwent, Malton.
over which it has a good Stone Bridge. It is composed of two Towns, the New
and the Old Malton, and both containing 3 Parish Churches; it is a place well
inhabited, and accommodated with good Inns, has weekly two Markets, on
Tuesdays and Saturdays, which is one of the best in the County for Horses,
living Cattle, Provisions, and most Country-commodities, especially Vtensils
for Husbandry; and as a Borough Town (which is but meanly built) electeth
Parliament men.

Pickering, or the Honor of Pickering, a pretty good Town, Pickering.
belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster, has a famous Old Castle (now ruinous)
in which they keep their Courts for the hearing of Causes under 40 s. in the
said Honor, which includes several Villages, which (as it were) encompass it,
so that the adjacent Country is called Pickering-Lith, the Forest of Pickering,
and the Liberty of Pickering. Its Market, which is on Mondays, is well served
with Corn and Provisions.

Scarborough, a place of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, Scarborough.
being seated on a steep Rock, with such craggy Cliffs, that it is almost
inaccessible, and bears so into the Sea; that it is washed on all parts,
except on the West, where it yields access by a strait passage, Cliff, or
Gullet, where it has a strong Wall. On the top of this Rock is a very fair,
green, and large Plain, containing about 60 Acres of ground, and has a little
Well of Fresh Water springing out of the Rock; and for its further defense has
a strong Castle, now made use of by his Majesty for a Garrison. This Town is
not very large, but well built and inhabited, enjoys a good Trade, having a
commodious Key, with several Vessels belonging to it, which are employed by
them; and during the Herring-season for the Fishing Trade, they being
plentifully taken on this Coast. This place is of note for its famous Spaw,
much resorted unto, as well by Foreigners as the English. It is a Town
Corporate, electing Parliament men, is governed by two Bailiffs, and a Common
Council; and has two Markets weekly, on Thursdays, which is of good account,
and on Saturdays, which is but small.

Not far from this Town is Robinhoods-Bay, so called from Robinhood, that noted
Robber in the Reign of King Richard the First; and here is found Jett, or
black-Amber,

Whitby, well seated on the River Esk, at its influx into the Sea, Whitby.
over which it has a Bridge. It is a well built Town, enjoys a considerable
Trade, (especially for Alum and Butter, called Whitby-Butter) there belonging
to it about 100 Sail of Vessels, having a Custom, and would be more
considerable were its Peer finished; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is
very great, and well served with Flesh, Fish, Fowl, etc.

On this Coast is seated Skeningrave; a small Town, Skeningrave.
but well frequented by Fishermen: And near unto Hunt-Cliff, not far from the
Shore, at a Low Water, appear Rocks, about which the Seal-sish come in great
Sholes, and lie sleeping and Sunning themselves in fair and warm weather; and
(according to observation) whilst these Fish do thus sleep, there is one of
them which watches as a Sentinel, and when any danger approaches, they are
awaked by its slinging it felf into the Sea, and making a noise, and so escape.

North-Allerton, seated near the Swale, a large Borough Town, North-Allerton.
which electeth Parliament men, and has a great Market on Wednesdays, for
Horses, Cattle, Corn, and Provisions, and is a Town of a good Trade.

The other part of this Riding bears the name of Richmondshire, Richmondshire.
so called from a Castle there seated. It lies very high, and is Mountainous
and Rocky; has good Mines of Lead, Copper, and Pit-Coal; is interlaced with
fertile Valleys. It contains within its Jurisdiction 5 Wapontacks, and has
for its chief places,

Richmond, Richmond.
seated on the Northern Banks of the Swale, over which it has a Stone Bridge.
It is a large Town Corporate, contains 2 Parish Churches, is begirt with a
Wall, which has 3 Gates for entrance, which leads into so many Suburbs; is
fortified with a strong Castle, highly seated on a Rock; is graced with
well built Houses, many of which are of Freestone, and its Streets are paved
and well ordered. Its Marketplace, which is well resorted unto, and
plentifully furnished with Cattle and Provisions, on Saturdays, is very
spacious. It is well inhabited by Gentry and Tradesmen, and enjoys a very
good Trade for Stockings and Woollen Knit-Caps for Seamen. It is governed by a
Major and Aldermen, with sub-Officers, enjoys large Immunities, and has a
Court of Record for all Actions, without limitation of some for the said
liberty.

The East parts of this Riding, lying on or near the Sea-shoar and the Banks of
the Derwent, are of a good Soil and fertile; but the midst, called the Would, is
very hilly and barren. Its chief places are,

Hull, Hull.
or Kingston upon Hull, commodiously seated on the Mouth of the River Hull, at
its influx into the Humber; a Town of no great antiquity, taking its rise from
King Edward the First, where he made a Haven and a Free-Burgh, and granted to
its Inhabitants (who were Free Burgesses) ample Immunities. It is at present a
very large Borough and Town Corporate (though containing but 2 Parish Churches)
graced with fair Buildings, and well ordered Streets, which are sufficiently
furnished with Shopkeepers, one of which resembles Thames Street, near the
Bridge in London, where Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Sails, and other necessaries for
Ships are sold, and to which the Ships and Vessels come to lade and unlade
their Goods, having a Custom-House and Key; and the commodiousness of the Town
for Shipping, makes it to be a place well inhabited, and much resorted unto by
Merchants; this Town being inferior for Trade to none in England, next to
London and Bristol. It is a place of exceeding great strength, being able to
bid defiance both to a Navy and a Land-Army, and that by reason of its strong
Block-houses, Castles, VValls, Forts, Trenches; and the Inhabitants and
Soldiers within it, being a considerable Garrison of his Majesty's. It is
governed by a Major, 12 Aldermen, a Common Council, and other sub-Officers;
amongst its Privileges, gives Vote in Parliament by its Representatives. It is
very well served with Provisions, as well in its Shambles as in its Market,
which is on Saturday.

In these Seas are taken abundance of Herrings, to the great profit of the
Inhabitants.

Bridlington, Barlington.
or Barlington, a Seaport Town, seated on a Creek near Flamborough-head (a
place well known to Seamen) and has a sase Road for Ships to ride in, and a
very commodious Key for Ships to lade and unlade at, by reason of which it
enjoys a good Trade; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is well served
with Provisions, etc.

Beverley, Beverley.
seated on the River Hull, which gives passage into the Humber for Boats and
Barges, for the conveyance of their Goods to and fro. It is a large and
well built Borough and Town Corporate, containing two Parish Churches besides
its Minster; it enjoys large Immunities, electeth Parliament men, is governed
by a Major, 12 Aldermen, with sub-Officers; is a place well inhabited by Gentry
and Tradesmen; and its Markets, which are on Thursdays and Saturdays, are well
served with Provisions.

Howden, Howden.
seated near the Rivers Owse and Derwent; a good large Town, which gives name
to a small Territory called Howdenshir, and has a very great Market for
Cattle, Corn, and Provisions, on Saturdays.

The West Riding is the largest of the three, is every where well watered with
Rivers, and replenished with good Towns; the chief amongst which are,

Halifax, seated in a barren Soil, and on a steep descent of an Hill; Halifax.
a place of note, as well for being the Birthplace of Johannes de Sacro Bosco,
the Inventer of the Sphere, as for its strict Law in the sudden beheading of
such as are taken in the act of Theft. As for the largeness of the Parish, it
contains 11 Chapels of Ease, of which two are Parish Chapels; is very well
inhabited, and drives a great Trade for Cloth and other Manufactures. It is a
very good Town, graced with Stone-built Houses, and well-ordered and paved
Streets, and has a considerable Market for Corn and Provisions on Thursdays.

Sheafield, seated on the Don or Dune; Sheafield.
a place of chief note for the great quantity of Smiths there inhabiting (by
reason of the many Iron-Mines in these parts) who drive a good Trade for all
sorts of Edge-Tools, and other things of Iron, especially Knives, which bear
the name of Sheafield-Blades. The Town is large, its Houses built of Stone, and
has a great Market on Tuesdays for several Commodities, especially Corn, which
is much bought up for the supply of some parts of Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire,
and the West of Yorkshire.

Rotheram, seated on the Don, over which it has a fine Stone Bridge; Rotheram.
a well built Town, with Stone-houses, and has a very great Market for Cattle
and Provisions on Mondays.

Tickhill, yet retains something of its ancient Castle and Fortifications,
Tickhill.
demolished in the late Wars. It has a distinct Liberty, called the Honor of
Tickhill, being part of the Duchy of Lancaster, and has a Market on Saturdays.

Doncaster, seated on the Done, and on the great Road to London; Doncaster.
an ancient Town, of good Antiquity, once defended by a Castle, now reduced to
ruins; and in Anno 759 this Town suffered much, great part (with its Citadel)
being consumed with Fire; but was rebuilt with a fair Church, erected in the
place where the Citadel stood. It is a large, well built and inhabited Town
Corporate, governed by a Major and Aldermen, enjoys a good Trade, especially
for Stockings, Knit-Waistcoats, Petticoats, and Gloves, and has a very good
Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, on Saturdays.

Selby, honored in giving birth to King Henry the First, seated on the Owse,
Selby.
which gives passage for small Vessels to York, which does occasion it to be a
Town of some Trade, and has a good Market for Provisions and Merchandise on
Mondays.

Ponfract, very delightfully seated in a dry tract of ground; Pontfract.
a neat Town Corporate, beautified with good Buildings, was once strengthened
with a strong and stately Castle, which was demolished in the late Wars. It is
governed by a Major and Aldermen, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a
very great Market for Corn, Cattle, Provisions, and diverse Country-commodities,
on Saturdays.

Wakefield, seated in a large Lordship so called, having its Steward. Wakefield.
It is a large Town, of good antiquity, beautified with well built
Stone-houses; it is a place well known for its Clothing here made, and has a
great Market on Thursdays and Fridays for Cloth, Corn, Provisions, and diverse
Country-commodities.

Leeds, seated on the Are; an ancient Town, Leeds.
where the Kings had formerly their Royal Palace; and here Oswy, King of the
Northumbers, put to flight Penda the Mercian. It is a large and well built Town
Corporate, governed by a Major and Aldermen, with sub-Officers, electeth
Parliament men, is very well inhabited, especially by wealthy Clothiers, who
drive a great Trade for their Cloth; and has two considerable Markets, on
Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are well traded unto for Corn, Provisions,
Woollen-Cloth, and diverse good Commodities.

Knaresbrough, Knaresbrough.
delightfully seated on the Nid, and on a ragged rough Rock, on which is seated
a Castle. It is a well built Town Corporate, electing Parliament men, and has
a good Market for Corn and Provisions on Wednesdays.

Nigh unto this place, in a Moorish boggy-ground, arises a Spring of
Vitrioline taste and odor; and not far off is also a Sulphur-Well, which is
good for several Diseases; here is also a droping petrefying-Well, which turns,
Wood, Moss, etc. into Stone.

Rippon, Rippon.
feated between the Yore and a Branch thereof, over which are two Bridges. It
is a place of good antiquity, and of much same for its Religious Houses, but
especially for its stately Monastery, built by Wilfrid Archbishop of York. It
is at present a large and well built Town Corporate, governed by a Major and
Aldermen, has the election of Parliament men; the Town is well inhabited by
Gentry, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is very great for Cattle, Corn,
Provisions, and chiefly for Wool, which is much bought up by the Cloathiers of
Leeds. This Town is beautified with a very fine Cathedral Church with a lofty
Spire-Steeple; and in this Church was St. Winfrids Needle, a place famous in
our Forefathers days, being a narrow Hole in the close Vaulted-room under
ground; in which place (as it is reported, but not Recorded for Truth) Women's
Honesty was used to be tried; for, according to the story, those that were
Chaste could easily pass through, but the kindhearted Souls were (by an unknown
means) held fast, and could not pass through.

WALES.
THE Island of great Britain, in ancient time, was severed into three Parts;
the first, fairest, and greatest, contained all within the French Seas, the
Rivers of Severn, Dee, and Humber, and was called Lhoyger, which name in Welsh
it still retains; and in English, England. The second took up all the Land
Northwards, from the Humber to the Orkney Isles, and was called Mare
Caledonium, or Deucaledonium, and now Scotland: And the third lying between the
Irish Seas, the Rivers of Severn and Dee, was anciently called Cambria, and now
Wales; to which the Britains being outed of their Country, were forced to
retire, and there fortified themselves.

The Bounds.
This Country of Wales is bounded on all sides by the Sea, except toward
England, from which it is severed by the River Dee, and a Line drawn to the
River Wye; but anciently it was extended to the River Severn Eastward, for Offa
King of the Mercians forced them to quit the Plain Countries beyond that River
(which now is called the Marches of Wales,) and to betake themselves to the
Mountains, which he caused to be separated from England by a great Ditch,
called Offa's Dike; in Welsh, Claudh Offa; in many places yet to be seen; which
Dike begins at the influx of the Wye into the Severn, and reaches unto
Chester, which is about 84 miles; where the Dee disburthens it self into the
Sea. And over this Dike (by a Law made by Harald) no Welshman was permitted to
pass with a Weapon, upon pain of losing his Right hand.

Very Mountainous and Barren.
The whole Country is Mountainous and Barren, yet affords several good
Commodities, and is not without many fertile Valleys, which bear good Corn, and
breed great abundance of small Cattle, with which they furnish England, as also
with Butter, Cheese, Woollen-Cloths, called Welsh-Frizes, Cottons, Bays,
Herrings, both White and Red, Calve-skins, Hides, Honey, Wax, etc. and the
Country is well stored with Quarries of Freestone for building, and
Millstones; as also has Mines of Lead, Lead-Oar, Coals, and some of Silver and
Tin. And these Commodities are generally brought to Shrewsbury, Oswestre,
Bristol, Worcester, and other adjacent parts, and thence dispersed into England.

Its Ancient division.
About the year of Christ 870, Rodericus Magnus, King of Wales, divided this
Country into three Regions, Territories, or Talaiths, which were so many
Kingdoms, to wit, Gwineth, Venedotia, or North Wales; and this part he gave to
Anarawd, his eldest Son; Deheubarth, or South Wales, which he gave to Cadelh,
his second Son; and Powis, or Powis-Land, which he gave to Mervin, his third
Son: and in each of these three Kingdoms he appointed a Royal Palace, as at
Aberffraw, in the Isle of Anglesey, for North Wales; at Dynefar, or
Dynevowr-Castle, not far from Carmarthen, for South Wales; and at Matravan, in
Montgomery-shire, for Powis-Land.

Present division.
But at present, according to Act of Parliament, made in the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth, it is severed into two Parts, to wit, North Wales and South Wales,
both which have as it were devoured all Powis-Land; and in each of these parts
there are 6 Counties; in the North, those of Anglesey, Caernarvon, Denbigh,
Flint, Merioneth, and Montgomery; and in the South, those of Brecknock,
Cardigan, Carmarden, Glamorgan, Pembroke, and Radnor.

Again, Wales (like unto England) is divided into four Circuits for the
Administration of Justice; and then the first shall contain the Counties of
Denbigh, Flint, and Montgomery; the second, those of Brecknock, Glamorgan, and
Radnor; the third, those of Cardigan, Carmarden, and Pembroke; and the fourth,
those of Anglesey, Caernarvon, and Merioneth.

But to proceed to the description of these Counties, and first of North Wales.

NORTH WALES.
Isle of Anglesey.
THe Island of ANGLESEY is severed from Caernarvon-shire by a narrow Straight of
the River Menai, and on all other parts it is washed with the Irish Seas. It
was the ancient Seat of the Druids, and brought with no small difficulty under
the Roman Scepter by Julius Agricola. It is so fertile, and abounding in all
things, as Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, that the Welsh term it the Mother of
Wales, supplying its defects; although for fight it seems dry, stony, and
hilly. It produces a sort of Stones called Molares, very fit and good for
Millstones, and Grind-stones.

In this Isle were formerly seated 360 Towns and Villages, but at present but
74, and has intercourse of Traffic with two Marks Towns, and has several
good Ports and Harbors, as also diverse Ferries, for the conveyance of
Passengers to and fro. Its chief places are,

Beau-Morish.
Beau-Morish, seated on a Moorish-ground, but commands a fair prospect into
the Sea, where it has a very good Harbor for Ships. It was built by King
Edward the First, the better to secure his Conquest, who fortified it with a
powerful Castle, now in good repair. It is a pretty good handsome Town
Corporate, governed by a Major, Recorder, 2 Bailiffs, who are Justices of the
Peace, and 21 Common Council, called Burgesses. It is the chief Shire-Town,
where the Assizes and Sessions are held, sends a Burgess to Parliament, is
indifferently well inhabited and frequented, as being the usual place for the
reception of Passengers from London to Ireland, before their taking Shipping at
Holyhead. It has weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are
indifferent good.

Newburgh, Newburgh.
seated near Brant River, where it forms a Bay, and falls into Menai River;
a small Borough Town, governed by a Major, 2 Bailiffs, and a Recorder, and has
a Market on Tuesdays.

County of Caernarvon described.
The County of CAERNARVON, before Wales was divided into Shires, bore the name
of Snowden-Forest from the principal Hill therein seated, which is of a very
great height and extent, and affords excellent sweet Mutton; on the top of
this Hill floateth a Mere, and makes a River, and falls into the Sea at
Trathe-Mawer. It is a County of a sharp Air, very Mountainous; yet not
unfertil, and feeds good Herds of Cattle.

In this County are seated 68 Parish Churches, and has six Market Towns:

Caernarvon, Caernarvon.
commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, where it has an excellent prospect into
the Isle of Anglesey. It was a place of good account, where the Princes of
Wales had their Exchequer and Chancery for North Wales; and is a place of great
strength as well by Nature as Art, being encompassed on all parts (except
toward the East) with the Sea and two Rivers, and had a strong Castle, where,
in a Tower thereof called Eagle-Tower, Edward the Second, the first Prince of
Wales was born. It is a place of no great extent, having but one Parish Church;
its Houses and Streets are well built and ordered, is well inhabited, enjoys
several Immunities, sends a Burgess to Parliament, is governed by the Constable
of the Castle, who is ever Major, and has for his assistance an Alderman, 2
Bailiffs, a Town Clerk, with Sub-Officers; and its Market on Saturdays, is very
good for Corn and Provisions.

Bangor, lowly seated on the Sea-shoar; a Town in Ancient time so large, Bangor.
that it was called Bangor the Great, and was defended by a powerful Castle,
which long since was laid level to the ground. It is at present but a small
City, or rather a Town, yet dignified with the Sea of a Bishop; its Cathedral
is large and well built, its Houses indifferent good, is pretty well inhabited,
is governed by the Bishops-Steward, who keeps Court-Leets and Courts-Baron
for the Bishop; and has an indifferent good Market on Wednesdays.

Nigh unto Bangor is Penmaen-maur, that is, the Great Stony-head, Penmaen-maur.
being an exceeding high and steep Rock, which at High-Sea so hangs over,
that it affords a very narrow and dangerous passage; but having passed this,
and Penmaen-byehan, that is, the Lesser Stony-head, the Country opens it self
in a broad Plain as far as the River Conwey.

Aberconwey, seated at the Mouth of the Conwey, Aberconwey.
raised out of the Ruins of the ancient Canonium of Antonine, being strongly
fenced both with Walls and a Castle. It is a pretty good Town, governed by an
Alderman and 2 Bailiffs, which for largeness and good Buildings, does rather
deserve the name of a City than a Town, especially were it thicker inhabited,
and better resorted unto; yet its Market, which is on Fridays, is well served
with Provisions and several Country-commodities.

Pulhely, seated on the Sea-shoar, and between two Rivers; Pulhely.
a pretty large and indifferent well built Bailiwick Town, which has a good
Market on Wednesdays for Corn and Provisions, and enjoys a good Trade by Sea.

County of Denbigh described.
DENBIGH-SHIRE, a Country very Hilly, several of which are of so great a
height, that they retain Snow, and the tops thereof in the Summer season are
the Country-mans Morning-Almanack, to denote a fair day by the rising of
certain Vapors.

It is of a different Soil; the Western part being Heathy, is much inclined to
sterility, and but thinly inhabited, except the part which lies toward the
Sea; the Eastern (beyond the Valley) is much more barren; and the middle, where
it lies flat, is a pleasant and fertile Vale, and well inhabited with Gentry.

Here are seated 57 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by four Market Towns.

Denbigh, seated on the hanging of a Rocky-Hill, Denbigh.
and on a branch of the Cluyd; once a place of good strength, when fortified
with a strong Wall, and an impregnable Castle. The Town is indifferent large,
well built, inhabited by Glovers and Tanners, enjoys a good Trade, by some
esteemed the best Town in North Wales; is governed by 2 Aldermen, 2 Bailiffs,
and 25 Capital Burgesses, with sub-Officers; electeth a Parliament man, and
has a good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, on Wednesdays.

Ruthin, seated on the Cluyd, which washes a rich Vale, Ruthin.
of note for its once large and fair Castle. It is a large, well inhabited and
frequented Town Corporate, governed by 2 Aldermen and Burgesses, has a large
Hospital, and a Free School, governed by a Warden; and has a very considerable
Market for Corn and Provisions on Mondays, which is esteemed the best in the
Vale.

Wrexham, seated in a good Soil, affords plenty of Lead, Wrexham.
and on a small River which falls into the Dee. It is an indifferent large,
well built and inhabited Town, graced with a fair Church, whose Steeple is not
inferior to any in England; and has two Markets weekly, viz. on Mondays,
which is but small, and on Thursdays, which is very great for Corn, Cattle, and
Provisions.

In this County is Llansainan, seated on the River Aled; Llansalnan.
a small Town, but of note for its Cave made in the side of a Rock or
Stony-hill, wherein are 24 Seats, some bigger and some lesser, known by the
name of Arthur's Round-Table; a place much frequented by Shepherds and
Heardsmen.

Flintshire described.
The County of FLINT is not over Mountainous; and those that are being
interlaced with fertile Valleys, affords plenty of Corn and Pasturage; it has
great abundance of Honey, but is very defective of Wood and Fruits. It is
indifferently well watered, has several safe Harbors for Ships to Ride and
Anchor in; and this part of the County has plenty of Mines of Pit-Coal, and
the adjacent Mountains have store of Lead-Oar.

This Shire is famous for St. Winfrids-Well, St. Winfrids-Well.
not far from Cajervis, in English, Holy-Well; a place of great note, and much
resorted unto, as well by those to Bath in, as being esteemed very good for
several Diseases; as by Pilgrims, out of their devotion in memory of that
Christian Virgin Winfrid, who was there ravished by a young Lord or Prince of
the Country, and to stop her Acclamations, cruelly slew her and cut off her
Head; out of which place (according to Report) did immediately gush forth a
Spring, which is of so rapid a Stream, that at a small distance it is able to
drive a Mill. Over the Head of this Spring or Well there now stands a Chapel
built of Freestone, of curious workmanship; and in the Chancel, on the
Glass-window is lively pourtraied the History of St. Winfrid; of her life, and
how her Head was cut off, and set on again by St. Reuno. In the Well there
grows Moss, of a most sweet and pleasant smell, which is said to be St.
Winfrids-hair.

Here are seated 28 Parishes, and has two Market Towns.

Flint, Flint.
well seated on the Dee^, of chief note for its now old and ruinous Castle; and
although the Shire-Town is but small, and has no Market; but as a
Borough-Town, electeth Parliament man.

St. Asaph, seated on the Elwy, St. Asaph.
where it receives the Cluyd, over each of which there is a Bridge; a place of
more fame for its antiquity, than largeness or beauty, being an ancient
Episcopal See, founded by Kentigerne, a Scot, Bishop of Glasco, in Anno 560, of
which about 300 that were unlearned, employed their times in Husbandry within
the limits of the said Monastery, and the rest to a Holy life. By this it may
be judged their Bounds were exceeding large; and upon his return into Scotland,
he ordained Asaph (a godly man) to be his Successor, from whom the Town or City
took its name, which at present is not large, not its Buildings very good,
chiefly glorying in its Cathedral. It has a small Market on Saturdays.

County of Merioneth described.
The County of MERIONETH is exceeding Mountainous and Rocky, very unpleasant,
and for the generality much inclined to sterility, bearing but thin Crops of
Corn; yet is found to feed good flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle, from
which the Inhabitants draw their chief Maintenance. It is observed, that these
Mountains are of so great an height, that in many places two men may stand and
discourse together, each upon a several Mountain, but must travel some miles
before they can come to meet. It is well watered with Rivers, and is well
provided with red Deer, Fowl, and Fish; and as this County is thus Mountainous
and barren, so is it as thinly inhabited, numbering but 37 Parishes, and those
but ordinary, and has but three Market Towns.

Harlech, Harlech.
seated on a Rock on the Sea-shoar; a small Borough Town, which is but thinly
inhabited, nor its Houses over well built, although the chief of the County. It
is governed by a Major for its chief Magistrate, sends a Burgess to Parliament,
and has a mean Market. This Town was once of a greater account for its strong
and beautiful Castle, highly seated, commanding both Sea and Country adjoining;
but was reduced to Ruins in the late unhappy Wars by the Parliamentteers, this
being a Garrison of the Kings.

Bala, Bala.
seated near Pimble-Meer, which is of a large extent, through which the Dee is
said to run, but not to mingle with its water, which is proved for that the
Salmons, plentifully taken in the Dee, are not found in this Mere; and likewise
the Fish called Gwyniaid, much like unto Whitings, which is in as great plenty
taken in this Mere, are never found in the Dee. This Town is Incorporated,
enjoys some Immunities, is governed by Bailiffs, has an indifferent Market
on Saturdays; but the Town is mean and small.

County of Montgomery described.
MONTGOMERY-SHIRE, very Hilly and Mountainous, but interlaced with fertile
Valleys both for Tillage and Pasturage, and was in ancient time of note for its
good breed of Horses.

Here are seated 47 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 6 Market Towns.

Montgomery, the Shire-Town, so called from Roger de Montgomery, Montgomery.
Earl of Shrewsbury, the first builder thereof. It is well seated amongst rich
grounds, and on an easy Ascent of a Hill; a place once fortified with a
powerful Castle, and fenced about with a Wall, which was dismantled in the late
Wars. It is an indifferent large Town Corporate, governed by Bailiffs, sends a
Burgess to Parliament, and its Market, which is on Thursdays, is well resorted
unto, and has a good Shambles.

Welch-Pool, seated on the Severn, and in a rich Vale; Welch-Pool.
the greatest and best built Town Corporate in the County, governed by
Bailiffs, is well inhabited, enjoys a very good Trade for English Commodities
from Bristol, and its Market on Mondays is very considerable for Cattle,
Provisions, and Flannels. Its Castle, called Powis-Castle (which within the
compass of its Wall contains two Castles,) is of late a large and stately
Pile of Building.

Llanvilling, situate in a Flat amongst the Hills, Llanvilling.
and between the Cain and the Ebir; it is a good Town, and has a considerable
Market for Cattle, Corn, Wool, and Provisions, on Thursdays.

Within three miles of this Town is Matravan-Castle, sometimes the Royal Seat
of the Princes of Powis-Land.

SOVTH-WALES.
County of Pembroke described.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE, called in Welsh, Brechinean, is said to take its name from one
Brechanius a Prince, who had a great Offspring of 24 Daughters, and all
Saints. It is a County for the generality very Mountainous, some of which are
exceeding high, especially Monuchdenny-Hill, not far from Brecknock, which
exalts it self above the Clouds; and although thus Hilly, yet is not without
many large and fertile Plains and Valleys, both for Corn and feeding of Cattle;
and the more by reason of the Rivers, Vske and Wye, which receive those many
Streams that so plentifully water the County, and afford to the Inhabitants
great abundance of Fish, especially Salmon and Trouts, in the Wye.

Here are seated 61 Parish Churches, and 4 Market Towns.

Brecknock, seated at the meeting of the Rivers Hodney and Vske, Brecknock.
over which it has a fair Stone Bridge. It is a place of good antiquity, and
at present a very large Bailiwick Town, containing 3 Parish Churches, one of
which is a Collegiate Church; its Houses are well built, was once strengthened
with a stately Castle, as also with a strong Wall, which gave entrance by 3
Gates. It is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 15 Aldermen, 2 Chamberlains, a Town Clerk,
etc. amongst its Immunities sends a Burgess to Parliament; is a place well
inhabited, and the rather as being the Shire-Town where the Assizes are held.
It enjoys a good Trade for Clothing, and has weekly two Markets, on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well served with Cattle, Corn, and
Provisions.

About two miles from this Town is a large Mere or Pool some miles in compass,
called Brecknock-Meer, where in former times stood a fair City, which was
swallowed up by an Earthquake.

Hay, seated between the Wye and the Dulas; Hay.
a Town of good note in the time of the Romans, being then sortified with a
Castle and a Wall. It is at present a good Town, and has a very great Market
for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, on Mondays.

Bealt, pleasantly seated amongst the Woods, and on the Banks of the Wye, Bealt.
over which it has a very large Wooden-Bridge, which leads into Radnorshire;
at present a pretty small Town, enjoying a considerable Trade for Stockings,
and has weekly two very good Markets, on Mondays for Cattle, and on Saturdays
for Corn and Provisions.

County of Cardigan.
CARDIGAN, a County of a different Soil, and ill clothed with Wood; the
Southern and Western parts being plain and very fertile (yet not without some
Hills,) and its Eastern and Northern parts are Mountainous, and not so fertile,
amongst which is the Plinillimon-Hill, a Mountain of a very great extent and
height.

Here are numbered 64 Parish Churches, and has 4 Market Towns.

Cardigan, Cardigan.
formerly strengthened with a Wall, and a fair and spacious Castle, built on the
side of the Tywye upon a Rock, long since brought to ruin. It is a Town no less
pleasantly than commodiously seated on the said River Tywye, over which it has
a fair Stone Bridge, sustained by several Arches, and is of no great distance
from its influx into the Sea; and being the Shire-Town where the Assizes are
held, and the County-Gaol kept; is well inhabited and frequented, being a large
Town, though containing but one Church, which is a fair Structure, and is
graced with a well built Shire-Hall, with several good Buildings; and as a Town
Corporate, is governed by a Major, Aldermen, Common Council, with sub-Officers;
enjoys several Immunities, electeth a Parliament man, and has an indifferent
good Market on Saturdays.

Llanbeder, Llanbeder.
seated on the Tywye, over which is a Bridge which leads into
Caermarden-shire; an indifferent good Town, governed by a Port-Reive and
Steward, and has a Market on Tuesdays, which is well resorted unto for Grain
and Provisions, and from the latter end of April to the beginning of July, is
very great for Sheep, Heifers, Cows and Calves.

Aberysthwy, Aberysthwy.
seated on a Rising-ground, and on the Banks of the Ridall, near its influx
into the Sea; a Town once strengthened with a Wall and Castle, now ruinated. It
is a long and ill-built Town, governed by a Major, with sub-Officers, has a
very great Market for Corn, Wool, Cheese, and Provisions, on Mondays, and is a
place much resorted unto by reason of its Fishing-trade, and would be more were
its Inhabitants industrious.

Near unto this Town is Lhan-Badernvaur; a well built Town, graced with a fair
Church, which was formerly an Episcopal See, and is now the Parish Church of
Aberysthwy.

County of Caermarden.
CAERMARDEN-SHIRE is generally of a fertile Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage,
as not being so Mountainous as its Neighboring Counties, and is well watered
with Rivers, as the Tovye, Taoy, Lough, or Taff, which (with others) discharge
themselves into the Sea, plentifully serving the Inhabitants with Fish and
Fowl; and in many places are dug Pit-Coal.

Here are seated 87 Parish Churches, and is traded unto by 8 Market Towns.

Caermarden, Caermarden.
pleasantly seated on the Towy, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge, and is
navigable for small Vessels, having a good Key for the lading and unlading of
their Merchandises. It is a place well inhabited and traded unto, and as a Town
Corporate is governed by a Major, 2 Sheriffs, elected out of 16 Burgesses or
Aldermen, all clad in Scarlet, with other sub-Officers. Amongst its Immunities
electeth a Parliament man, keeps Courts for the trial of Causes, is the place
where the Assizes are held, and has weekly two Markets, on Wednesdays and
Saturdays, which are very great for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions, both Flesh,
Fish, and Fowl, in great plenty. This Town glories in giving birth to Merlyn,
that famous British Prophet, or South-sayer.

Llancharn, Llangharn.
or Llangharne, seated on the Towye, near its influx into the Sea; a well built
Town, of some Trade, having several Vessels belonging to it, and its Market,
which is on Fridays, is very good for Corn and Provisions.

Near unto this Town is a Which, or Salt-work, where good quantity of Salt made.

Llanelly, seated on a Creek of the Sea; a pretty good Town, Llanelly.
which is well traded unto for Sea-Coal, and has a Market on Thursdays, of
good account for all sorts of Cattle, Corn, and Provisions.

Llandilovawre, seated on the Towy, over which it has a fair Bridge;
Llandilovawre
a pretty good Town, having two Markets weekly, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, for
Cattle, Corn, and Provisions; and the Parish to which this Town belongs is
about 13 miles in length, and 7 or 8 in breadth.

Llanymdofry, seated amongst Rivers; Llanymdofry.
a pretty fair Bailiwick and Town Corporate, and has two very great Markets
weekly, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, for Provisions, and the greatest in the
County for Cattle and Sheep.

County of Glamorgan described.
The County of GLAMORGAN is of a temperate and healthful Air, and of a different
Soil and Situation, the Northern parts being extremely Mountainous, full of
thick Woods, very barren, and thinly inhabited; yet are found to feed good
Herds of Cattle, and to send forth several fresh Streams, the chief amongst
which are the Tavye, Taff, Ogmore, Rumney, Elay, Nid or Neath, etc. and the
Southern part, which is washed by the Severn Sea, and receives the said
Rivers, is more upon a level, is very fertile both for Corn and feeding of great
quantities of Sheep and Cattle, is well inhabited, and thick beset with Towns
and Houses of the Gentry.

This County numbreth 118 Parish Churches, and has the accommodation of 8
Market Towns.

Cardiff, the fairest Town in all South Wales, well seated on the River Tave,
Cardiff.
or Taff, over which it has a fair Bridge, to which Vessels of small burden
do come to lade or unlade their goods; and in a rich and fertile Soil both for
Tillage and Pasturage. It is a large and well built Town, with good ordered and
clean Streets, containing within its Walls two Parishes, but has but one
Church; without the Eastgate is a large Suburb called Crockerton, without the
North-Gate stands the White-Friers, and without the West-Gate a small Suburb
adjoining to the Blackfriars, and in this part is seated the Castle, which is
a strong, spacious, and stately Building. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a
Constable, 12 Aldermen, as many Capital Burgeffes, a Steward, Town Clerk, with
sub-Officers, enjoys several Immunities, electeth a Parliament man, is the
place where the Assizes are kept; is well frequented and traded unto, its
Inhabitants having a great intercourse of Traffic with Bristol, and its
Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays are very good, especially that on
Saturdays, which is the best in the County, and very considerable for Gattle,
Corn, Swine, Sheep, and all sorts of Provisions in great plenty, and at easy
rates.

Llandaff, a City seated on the Taff, but of a small extent, Llandaff.
scarce comparable to an indifferent Town, having not so much as a Market kept,
which is occasioned by its vicinity to Cardiff. Its Cathedral is a spacious and
superb Structure, and near adjoining are the Ruins of an Old Castle, which was
the ancient Palace of the Bishops.

Neath, seated on a River so called, over which it has a Bridge, Neath.
to which small Vessels come for the lading of Coals here had in great plenty
to the profit of its Inhabitants. It is a Town of great antiquity, and of a
good extent, yet is it indifferent large, is governed by a Port-Reve, and has
a good Market for Provisions.

Swansey, commodiously seated on the Sea-shoar, Swansey.
an ancient Port-Reve Town, which is large and well built, which for Riches and
Trade is esteemed the chief in the County, and that by reason of their
Coal-Pits, and the great industry of its Inhabitants. It has weekly two
Markets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well frequented and traded
unto, affording great plenty of Commodities and Provisions.

County of Pembroke described.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE, is of fertile Soil both for Tillage and Pasturage, is well
stored with Cattle, and replenished with Rivers, which (with the Sea)
plentifully serves the Inhabitants with Fish and Fowl, and in the bowels of
the Earth are plenty of Pit-Coal.

It is well inhabited and garnished with Towns, numbering 145 Parish Churches,
and is traded unto by 8 Market Towns.

Pembrook, Pembrook.
the chief Shire-Town, seated on the Eastern and innermost Creek of
Milford-Haven, over which it has two fair Bridges for the convenience of
passage. It is a place of good account, well frequented and inhabited by
Gentlemen and Tradesmen, is much resorted unto by Shipping, by reason of which
they have a Custom-house. It is a place of good strength, being fortified with
a Wall, on which are several Towers, having three Gates for entrance, and also
with a strong Castle seated on a Rock. It is a large Town Corporate containing
two Parish Churches, is graced with well built Houses, is governed by a Major,
with other sub-Officers, enjoys several Immunities, sends a Burgess to
Parliament; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very good, and well
served with Provisions, etc.

This Milford-Haven is esteemed the best in all England, Milford-Haven.
not only for its largeness, being capacious enough to give entertainment to
about 1000 Sail of Ships at one time, and to ride secure at a good distance one
from the other; but also for its variety of deep and safe Creeks and nooked
Bays for Ships to harbor in, having within it 13 Roads, 16 Creeks, and 5 Bays,
all which are known by their several names.

St. David's, St. David's.
seated within a mile of the Sea in a barren Soil, and very destitute of Wood.
It was once a City of good account, but at present is very small, but thinly
inhabited, and its Market disused; yet is it the Sea of a Bishop, and its
Cathedral kept in good order, but the Bishops Palace is much ruinated.

Near unto St. David's is a Promontory called St. David's Land or Head, from
whence in a clear day Ireland may be seen; and on the Rocks in these parts the
Falcons have their Airies and breed. Also here is Whitesand-Bay, and at the
extreme point of the Promontory Ramsey Isle shows it self, nigh to which are
several small ones, which together bear the name of the Bishop and his Clerks.

Haverford-West, Haverford-West.
a Town and County of it self, commodiously seated on the side of a Hill, and
on a Creek of Milford-Haven, over which it has a good Stone Bridge which
leads to Prendergast, where there is a Church. It is a very large and fair
Town Corporate, containing three Parish Churches, is beautified with good
Houses, is well inhabited, enjoys a good Trade, having several Vessels
belonging to the Town; is the place where the Assizes are held, and the County
Gaol kept, and has weekly two Markets on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are
very great for Cattle and Provisions. It is governed by a Major, a Sheriff, and
Common Council, with Justices of the Peace; it enjoys several Immunities,
keeping Courts, and sending a Burgess to Parliament; and near to this Town
diverse Gentlemen have their Seats.

Tenby, Tenby.
seated on the Sea-shoar, where it has a commodious Haven or Road for Ships,
being formerly much frequented, especially by Fishermen, having a good Key,
enjoys a considerable Trade, and its Inhabitants were wealthy; but the Spoils
it suffered in the late Wars has much impoverished it, notwithstanding it
keeps its two Markets weekly, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are very well
resorted unto for Corn, Provisions, and Fish.

Newport, Newport.
seated near the Sea-shoar, and on the foot of a high Hill; a large, but ill
built and inhabited Town, governed by a Port-Reeve and a Bailiff, and has a
good Market for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions; and here is a Wear for Fishing.

County of Radnor described.
RADNOR-SHIRE. This County is of a sharp and piercing Air, and very ungraceful
to the Husbandman, as being so Mountainous and Rocky; yet is it well watered
with Rivers.

It has but 52 Parish Churches, and is traded unto with three Market Towns.

New Radnor.
New Radnor, well seated near the Springhead of the Somergil, and in a
pleasant Valley, at the foot of a profitable Hill for the feeding of Sheep and
Cattle, called the Forest of Radnor. It is a very ancient Town Corporate,
whose Jurisdiction reaches 10 or 12 miles in compass, is governed by a Bailiff
and 25 Burgesses, enjoys large Immunities, and has the election of a
Parliament man. It had formerly a Market on Tuesdays, but now disused.

Prestaine, seated on the Lug, and in a pleasant and rich Vale, which from a
small Village in former days, is now become a fair large and well built Town,
Prestaine.
with paved Streets, is well inhabited and frequented, where the Assizes are
held, and the County Gaol kept; and its Market, which is on Saturdays, is very
good for Provisions and Grain, especially Barley, of which they make good store
of Malt.

Knighton, seated in a Valley, and on the Teme, over which it has a Bridge;
Knighton.
a very fair and well built Borough Town, of a good resort, whose Inhabitants
enjoy a good Trade, and its Market on Tuesdays is very well served with Cattle,
Corn, Provisions, Iron-ware, Hops, Salt, Linen and Woollen, and other
Commodities.

The Kingdom of SCOTLAND, as it is divided in Firm Land, where are thirty fi^e
Provinces, to wit, Thirteen beyond the TAY (which with the Province of LORNE,
made the ancient Kingdom of the SCOTS,) whereof Five are toward the NORTH and
WEST; as, Strath-Navarn, ^trabubaster, Tongue.
Gathanes, Gi^^ego, Wick.
Sutherland, Dornok* Dunrobi^.
Rosse, Skyrassin, Cromarty, Canonry, Lovet.
Loquabrea, Kyntaile, Innerlethey.

Eight toward the EAST and SOUTH; as, Murray, Elgin, Invernes, Forres, Rothes,
Bean, Narden, Badgenoth.
Bucquhan, Rothemay, Stanes.
Marria, Aberdean, New Aberdone, Kildrumy.
Mernis, Fordon, Dumnotyr. Brechin,
Anguis, Monross, Dunde, Glammes, Forfar.
Perth, Perth, Scone, Dunkeldon.
Athole, -- Blaire. Braidalbin, -- Encerlothea.

Twenty two on this side the TAY (which, except the County of LORNE, made the
ancient Kingdom of the PICTS) whereof Nine are toward the Gulf of DUNBRITTON;
as, Lorne, Dunstaf^ge, Tarbart, Bergonum.
Cantyr, Swin, Sandell.
Arran, etc. Arran, Rothsay.
Argile, -- Duwwin. Lennox, -- Dunbriton. Cuningham, Yrwin, Androssan, Largis,
Kilwein.
Kyle, Air, Uchiltre.
Carrickt, Bargeny, Blaquhan.
Galloway, Witherne, Wighton, Ki^koubrick, Cardines.

Six toward the Gulf of EDINBURGH; as, Fife, St. Andrews, Cupre, Disert,
Kinghorne.
Strathnaverne, -- Abergeny. Menteith, Dumblain, Clackmannan.
Striveling, -- Sterling. Linlithquo, Linlithquo, Falkirck.
Lothien, Edinburgh, Dunbar, Leith, Haddington, Dalkith.

Seven in the Valleys toward ENGLAND; as, Cluydesdale, Glasquo, Lanrick,
Hamiltown, Reynfraw, Douglasdale.
Nithesdale, Dumfreis, Solway.
Anandale, Anan, Lochmabain.
Liddesdale, -- Harlay. Eskdale, -- Aefica, Teifedale, Peblis, Seltkirck,
Drimlar, Roxburgh, Yedburg.
Merch, Hum. Coldingham.



ISLES, which make three Bodies, viz. those of ORCADES, to the North of
SCOTLAND, Mainland, -- Kirkewall. SCHETLAND, to the N. North-east of ORCADES,
Mainland, -- Burgh. INCH GALLS, or Western Isles, To the West of SCOTLAND,
among the which are Lewis, -- Sterwaye. Sky, -- Tranternes. Eust, -- St.
Maria. Ila, -- Dunweg. Sura, -- Sodore. Mulla, -- Arrois. Colm-kill, --
Colm-kill. Rawghlin, -- Dowaneny.



The Kingdom and Isle of IRELAND, has formerly been divided into four
Kingdoms, which are at this day as many Provinces, which are subdivided into
Counties, and thus situated, viz. Toward the NORTH, the Province of ULSTER;
where are the Counties of Dunagall, or Tyrconnell, Donegal, Derry, or London
Derry. Calebe^k, Tirconnel.
Upper Tyroen, Strebane. Lower Tyroen, Dungannon. Colrane, Colrane. Antrim
Knoekfergus, Antrim.
Down, Down, Newry, S^rangford, Arglass.
Louth, Trodaugh, Dundalke, Carlingford, Ardeth.
Armagh, Armagh, Mountnorris.
Monaghan, Clogher, Churchland.
Cavan, Cavan, Kilmore.
Fermanagh, Baltarbet.
Toward the SOUTH, the Province of MOUNSTER; where are the Counties of
Tipperary, or Holy-Cross, Cassile, Holy-Cross, Clomel, Caryck, Emeley.
Lymerick, Lymerick, Kilmalock.
Kerry, Dingle, Ardart, Trayley.
Desmond, Donekyran, Downbay.
Cork, Cork, Kinsale, Ross, Voghall. Cloney.
Watersord, Watersord, Dungarvan, Ardmor, Lismore.

Toward the WEST, the Province of CONNAUGHT; where are the Counties of Majo,
Killaloy, Refrain.
Slego, Slego, Dundroes, Dunbroyle.
Galloway, Galloway, Kilmaculo, Clonford, Kingstown.
Clare, or Twomond, Clare, Kylaloe, Kilfenerog, Toam.
Rosecoman, Rosecoman, Atlon, Omacoghlan, Elphin.
Letrym. Letrym, Mewkerke. Achonry.

Toward the EAST, the Province of LEINSTER; where are the Counties of Dublin,
Dublin, Newcastle, Houth, Malcheal, Wicklo, Glandelour, Malehid.
East Mead, Trim, Aboy, Slane, Galtre.
West Mead, Molingar, Delvin, Kelskery.
Longford, Longford, Ardragh.
Kildare, Kildare, Mainoth, Athie, Carbre.
Kings County, Philipstown. Lee.
Queens County, Queenstown, Rheban.
Caterlough, Caterlaugh, Carickbrak, Areklo.
Wexford, Wexford, Ross, Ternes, Eniscort.
Kilkenny, Kilkenny, Thomas Town. Callan.



SCOTLAND.
Its situation.
THE Kingdom of SCOTLAND makes the Northern part of Great Britain, and is
divided from England by the Rivers Tweed and Solway, Ancient Inhabitants.
together with the Cheviot-Hills. A Country formerly inhabited by the Picts,
who were divided into two Nations, viz. the Dicalidonii and the Vecturiones;
but when the Scots became the chief Rulers (as Mr. Cambden notes) it was
shared into seven Part^, Ancient division.
and amongst as many Princes. The first contained Enegus and and Maern; the
second, Atheold and Goverin; the third, Stradeern, with Meneted; the fourth,
Forthever; the fifth, Mar, with Bucken; the sixth, Muref and Ross; and the
seventh, Cathanes, which Mound a Mountain in the midst divides, running on
forward from the West Sea to the East.

It was also (according to the relation of Andrew Bishop of Cathanes) severed
into seven Territories, which Mr. Cambden also takes notice of, as follows.
The first, from Frith or Scotwade to the River Tae; the second to Hilef,
according as the Sea fetches a compass to the Mountain Athran in the
North-east part of Strivelin; the third, from Hilef to Dee; the fourth, from
Dee to the River Spe; the fifth, from the Spe to the Mountain Brunalban; the
sixth, Mures and Ross; and the Seventh, the Kingdom of Argathel, which is the
Border of the Scots.

Modern division, and its Inhabitants.
But the Kingdom at present, according to the habitation of the People, may be
divided into Highland-men and Lowland-men; or into the Northern and Southern
parts. The People of the former live either on the Western Coast, and are very
rude, having much of the nature, disposition, speech, and habit of the Tories
or wild Irish, or in the out Isles, and are utterly Barbarous. The Lowlanders,
as bordering on England, have much of the disposition, civility, language, and
habit of the English, and are supposed to be descended from the Saxons; which
is confirmed by the Highlanders, who are the true Scoti, and are supposed to
descend from the Scythians, who with the Getes infesting Ireland, left their
Issue behind them.

Its extent.
This Kingdom is very spacious, extending it self from North to South about 250
miles in length; and in breadth, where broadest, about 150; but contracting it
self narrower and narrower as it approaches its extreme Northern limits, as
does appear by the Map.

Its name.
It is said to have been called Scotia from Scoti, Scitti, or Scythi, a People
of Germany, over whose Northern limits the name Scythia did extend; although
there be many that will have it to be so called from Scota, Daughter to an
Egyptian Pharaoh.

Its fertility and commodities.
Although this Kingdom is less fertile than England, and its Fruits not so
plentiful, nor so pleasing to the palate, (occasioned through the coldness of
the Clime,) yet is it found to have great plenty of Cattle, though but small;
and for Fish and Fowl an innumerable quantity, amongst which is a Fowl called
the Soland-Geese, which in many places are taken in very great plenty, and are
sound very profitable to the Inhabitants, not only for their Flesh to eat, but
for their Feathers and Oil. Their chief Commodities are Course Cloths, Freezes,
Lead-Oar, Feathers, Sea-Coal, Alum, Iron, Salt, Saltpeter, Linen Cloth,
Train-Oil, Hops, Wood, Alablaster, some Hides and Tallow, etc.

map of Scotland blazon or coat of arms of the dukes of MonmouthTo ye Rt Noble
James Duke of Monmouth, and Buckleuch Earl of Doncaster and Dalkeith, Baron of
Kendale Mi^eke^^ and Ashdale Knight. of ye Garter, and one of his Majs most Honbl
prvy Council This Mapp is most humbly dedicat^^ by Ric Blome.

A MAPP of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND By Ric Blome by His Majys command


Its Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants (especially those Southernly) are of a good feature, strong of
body, very hardy, courageous, and fit for Martial affairs; and their Nobility
and Gentry, which are of several degrees, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, are generally very
ingenuous, and accomplished men in all civil knowledge.

Nobility and Gentry of Scotland. Their Sessions of Parliament.
This Kingdom, like unto England, consists of a King, Nobility, Gentry, and
Commons; and these with the Lords Spiritual, assemble together in Parliament,
as often as they are called together by Writ from the King: And by reason of
his Majesty's residence in England, so that he is not here at their Sessions of
Parliament, he constituteth and sends one to act as his Viceroy, who is
commonly called Lord Commissioner; and such at present is the Right Noble John,
Duke of Lotherdale, etc.

Things worthy of note.
Amongst the things worthy of note in this Kingdom for Antiquity, famous was
that Fortification drawn from Abercorne upon Edenborough Frith unto Alcluyd,
now called Dunbritton, opening upon the West Sea, where (as Speed notes)
Julius Agricola set the limits of the Roman Empire, past which, according to
Tacitus, there were no other bounds of Britain to be sought for. And here the
second Legion of Augusta, and the twentieth of Victrix, built a part of the
Wall; as also an ancient coped Monument of an high and round compass, which
according to the opinions of some, was a Temple consecrated to the God
Terminus; but others there be that will have it to be a Trophy raised by
Carausius, who fortified this Wall with seven Castles.

Caledonian Wood.
Here began that Wood Caledonia, which name Tacitus attributes to all that
Tract of ground which lies Northward beyond Grahames Dike, or the Wall of
Antonius Pius, which Ptolomy divides into several Nations, as the Caledonii,
Vacomagi, Epidii, etc. who are all known to the Romans by the general name of
the Picts, from their painting themselves. This Wood or Forest was very
spacious, and over-shadowed with Thickets and tall over-spreading Trees, which
rendered it impassable, and was divided by Grampe-Hill, now cal^ed Grantzbain,
that is, the crooked bending Mountain. Solinus is of opinion that Ulysses was
in Caledonia, and to confirm his belief therein, he says, there was a Votive
Altar with an Inscription in Greek Letters. Plutarch ^aith, that Bears were
brought out of Britain to Rome; but for more truth (...) may be said, that here
were bred the wild white Bulls, a Beast of nature ^erce and cruel, whose thick
and curled manes resembled the Lions. In the ^ays of Severus Argetecox, a petty
Prince reigned over this Tract of Ground, those Wife being reproachfully called
by Julia the Empress, an Adulteress, ^oldly made this Answer, We British Dames
have to do with the best of men, Cambden, p. 32.
^^t you Roman Ladies secretly commit the same with every base and lewd
Companion.

Two famous Loughs.
In this Kingdom are two famous Loughs, Nessa and Lomund, the former never
Friezeth though in the extremest cold weather; and the waters of the ^atter,
most raging in the calmest and fairest weather; and herein is an Island, that
the Wind forces or moves to and fro.

In the Rivers Dee and Done, besides the great abundance of Salmons, is taken a
Shellfish, called the Horse-muskle, wherein Pearls are engendered, which are
very good in many Physical Medicines, and some of them not much inferior to
the Oriental Pearl.

Courts of Judicature, Court of Parliament.
As to their Courts of Judicature they are peculiar to themselves, and are
several. The chief amongst which is the High Court of Parliament, consisting of
Lords and Commons, has the same Authority as that of England, and is also
summoned by Writ from his Majesty at his pleasure, as occasion requires.

College of Justice.
The second Court is the Sessions, or College of Justice, consisting of a
President, 14 Senators, 7 of the Clergy, and as many of the Laity (unto whom
was afterward adjoined the Chancellor, who is the chief, and 5 other Senators)
besides 3 principal Scribes or Clerks, and as many Advocates as the Senators
see convenient: And this was thus constituted by King James the Fifth in Anno
1532, after the form of the Parliament at Paris. These sit and administer
Justice with equity and reason, and not according to the rigor of the Law,
every day (except Sundays and Mondays) from the first of November. to the 15 of
March; and from Trinity Sunday to the first Calends of August; and all the time
between (as being either Seed-time or Harvest) is vacation. They give judgment
according to the Parliament Statutes, and Municipal Laws; and where they are
defective, they have recourse to the Imperial Civil Law.

Other Courts.
There are likewise in every Shire or County inferior Civil Judicatories or
Courts kept, wherein the Sheriff of the Shire, or his Deputy, decideth the
Controversies and Lawsuits of the Inhabitants; from which there are ofttimes
Appeals to the Sessions or College of Justice. And these Sheriffs are for the
most part Hereditary.

Besides these Courts, there are other Judicatories, which they call
Commissariots, the highest whereof is kept at Edinburgh; and these have to do
with Ecclesiastical affairs, as, Wills and Testaments, Divorcements, Tithes,
etc.

In criminal Causes, the Kings Chief Justice holds his Court at Edinburgh.

Likewise the Sheriffs in their Territories, and the Magistrates in some
Boroughs may sit in Judgment of Manslaughter, in case the Manslayer be taken
within 24 hours after the fact committed, and being found guilty by a Jury, may
be put to death; but if the said limited time is past, the matter is referred,
and put over to the Kings Justice, or his Deputies.

There are also Civil Courts in every Regality holden by their Bailiffs.

Ecclesiastical Government.
This Kingdom, as to Ecclesiastical Government, is divided into two
Archbishopricks, viz. of St. Andrews (the Primate of Scotland) and of Glasco,
and under these are several Suffragan-Bishops, viz. under him of St. Andrews,
those of Dunkeld, Aberdon, Murray, Dunblan, Berohiu, Ross, Cathanes, and
Orkney: And under him of Glasco, those of Galloway, Argile or Lismore, and the
Isles.

Ancient Inhabitants of Scotland.
The ancient People of this Kingdom were, 1. The Gadeni, who possessed the
Counties of Lothien, Merches, and Teifidale or Tivedale. 2. The Selgovae, or
Counties Liddisdale, Eusedale, Eskedale, Annadale, and Nidthesdale. 3. The
Novantes, or Shires of Galloway, Carrickt, Kyle, Cunningham, and Arran. 4. The
Damnii, or Counties of Cludesdale, Striveling, Lennox, Menteith, and Fife. 5.
The Caldedonii, or Shires of Stratherne, Argile, Cantire, Lorne, Albany or
Bruidalbin, Perch, Athol, and Anguis. 6. The Vermines, or Counties of Mernis
and Mar. 7. The Talgali, or County of Buquhan. 8. The Vacomagi, or Counties of
Murray and Loquabrea. 9. The Cantae, or Shires of Ross and Sutherland. 10. The
Catini, or County of Cathanes: And 11. the Cornubii, or County of
Strathnaverne.

Scotland divided into Sheriffdoms.
These parts are again (according to their Civil Government) divided into
Sheriffdoms, Stewarties, and Bailiffwicks; viz. the Counties or Sheriffdoms of
Edinburgh, Lynlythio, Selkirk, Roxburgh, Peblis, Berwick, Lanarke, Renfrew,
Dunfreis, Wighton, Air, Bute, Argile, Tarbet, Dunbarton, Perch, Clackmannan,
Kinros, Fife, Kincardin, Forfair, Aberdene, Bamff, Elgin, Forres, Narne,
Innerness, Cromartie, Orknay, and Shetland.

The Stewarties of Menieith, Stewarties.
Kircudbrieht, Stratherne, and Annandale.

The Bailiwicks of Kile, Bailywicks.
Carrickt, and Cunningham.

Its further division.
Again, Scotland (according to the situation of its Parts, Provinces, or
Counties) may be divided into two parts, to wit, Southwards, and on this side
the Tay, which made the ancient Kingdom of the Picts, (so called, for that they
painted their Bodies like the ancient Britains, from whom they are said to
descend, which is the more confirmed, for that the Northern Britains, converted
to the Faith by St. Colombe, were called Britain Picts.) And Eastwards,
Northwards, and beyond the Tay, which made the ancient Kingdom of the Scots;
besides abundance of Isles dispersed in its Northern and Western Seas, the
chief of which shall be treated of.

Its Counties.
The Counties comprehended in the South-part, are Lothien, Merche, Teifidale or
Tivedale, Eskdale, Euskdale, Liddesdule, Annadale, Nydthesdale, Galloway,
Carrickt, Kyle, Cunningham, Cludesdale, Lennox, Striveling, Menteith, Fife,
Stratherne, Argile, Lorne, Cantyre, and Arran. And these in the North part are,
Albany or Badalbin, Paerch, Athol, Anguis, Mernis, Buquihan, Mar, Muray,
Loquabrea, Ross, Sutherland, Strathnaverne, and Cathanes. And of these in order.

Its name and fertility.
The County of Lothien, in former times by the Picts called Pictland, shoots
it self forth from Merche unto the Sea; a Country very Hilly, and but thinly
clothed with Wood: but for the fertility of its Earth, and the civility of its
Inhabitants, is deservedly esteemed the flower of all Scotland. The chief
places are,

Its chief places.
Edinburgh, or Edenborow, of old, Castrum Alatum, the Metropolis of the
Kingdom. Its situation is high, in a wholesome Air, and rich Soil; and by reason
of its commodious Haven (called Leth-Haven, Edinburgh.
not above a mile distant) it is a place of good Trade, and well resorted unto
by Shipping. This City chiefly consists of one Street, which runs about a
mile in length, which receives diverse petty Streets and Lanes, so that its
circuit may be about three miles, which is strongly begirt with a Wall; and at
the West End of the City, on the top of a Rock, is seated a fair and powerful
Castle, with many Towers, which commands the City, and is esteemed in a manner
impregnable. It belonged once to the English, till in Anno 960. the Scots took
it from them, when oppressed by the Danish Tyranies. It is well watered with
clear Springs and Fountains, is adorned with many fair Edifices, as well
public as private, the principal amongst which is the Kings Palace, a fair
Structure; and its private Houses are generally fair, lofty, built of
Freestone, and so well inhabited, that several Families have their abodes
under one Roof. It is also dignified with the Courts of Judicature, High Courts
of Parliament, and with an University. And being the Scale of Trade for the
Kingdom, it will be necessary to give an account of their Coins, Weights, and
Measures. As to their Coins, Their Coins, Weights, and Measure
note that 13 d. sterling, makes a Mark Scotch; 6 d. sterling, a Scotch Noble;
and 20 d. sterling, a Scotch Pound. Their Weight used in Merchandises, is the
Pound of 16 Ounces, 100 of which make their Quintal or C, which is found to
make at London 108 l. Averdupois. Their Measures for length is the Ell, and is
about 4 per Cent. greater than the English Ell. Their Liquid Measures are such
as in England, but of a double content, a Pint being an English Quart, and so
answerable. Their Dry Measures are also the same with those of England, but
also bigger.

Athelstanford, so called from Athelstane, a chief Commander of the English,
Athelstanford.
which was there slain with most of his Men, about the year 815.

Haddington, seated in a wide and broad Plain; a place of good account,
Haddington.
and which the English fortified with a deep and large Ditch, and other
Fortifications.

Dunbar, situate on the Sea-shoar, once defended by a strong Castle, Dunbar.
which was the Seat of the Earls of Merch; a place which has oft-times been
taken by the English, and as often retaken by the Scots, which was the cause of
its demolishment; since which it is honored with the Title of an Earldom.

North-Barwick, seated on Edenbrough-Frith, North-Barwick.
a place in former Ages famous for its House of Religious Virgins.

Not far from this place, and near the Shore, Bass-Island.
lies a small Isle called Bass-Island; which feemeth to be a high craggy Rock,
and to be almost cut through by the undermining Sea-waves. It has a Fountain
of Water, and fresh Pastures; and above all is remarkable for the exceeding
great abundance of those Geese called Scouts and Soland-Geese, which here
frequent and breed, which (as I before noted) is very profitable to the
Inhabitants in these parts.

Lyth, has a most commodious Haven, being the present Port to Edinburgh. Lyth.


Abercorne, seated on the Forth or Frith, Abercorne.
in former time of note for its famous Monastery; as at present for giving
Title of an Earldom unto the Duke of Hamilton.

Linquo, Linquo.
or Linlithquo, said to be the ancient City of Lindum, mentioned by Ptolomy; a
place once beautified with a House of the Kings, and a fair Church.

County of Merch described.
MERCH, a County so called, as being a March; it is wholly on the German Ocean,
was of great note for its Earls thereof; and has for its chief places,

Coldingham, Cadingham.
called by Bid the City Coldana; a place of great antiquity and note for its
chaft Nuns; for it is said, that they (together with Ebba their Prioress) cut
off their own Noses and Lips to render themselves deformed, that the Danes
might not deflour them; but this so exasperated them, that they not only burnt
their Monastery, but them therein.

Not far from Coldingham is Fast-Castle; Fast-Castle.
and here the Sea thrusts it self forth into a Promontory called St.
Abbs-head.

Kelso, Kelso.
formerly famous for its Monastery, which (with thirteen others) King David the
First raised from the ground, for the advancement of Gods glory.

Its chief places.
TEIFIDALE, that is the Vale by the River Teifie or Teviat, adjoining to
England; a craggy hilly Country. Its chief places are,

Roxburg, Roxburg.
which gives name to a Territory adjoining, seated between the Rivers Tweed and
Teifie, once a place of great strength, being defended by a Castle and towred
Fortifications; and here it was that King James the Second of Scotland, was
unfortunately slain by the breaking of a Cannon at the Siege.

Jedburgh, Jedburgh.
a well frequented and inhabited Borough-Town, seated near the confluence of
the Rivers Teviat and Yed.

Peblis, Peblis.
seated on the Tweed, and a branch thereof; a Market Town of some account.

Merlos, Merlos.
seated also on the Tweed, formerly of note for its ancient Monastery of
cloistered Monks, that gave themselves to Prayer, and to get their livings by
their handy labor; and this place holy King David restored, and replenished
with Cistertian Monks.

ESKDALE, Eskdale.
a small Territory, so called from a River which passes through it; its chief
place was,

Aesica, Aesica.
that ancient City, wherein the Tribune of the first Band of the Astures kept
Watch and Ward against the Northern Enemies.

EVSKDALE, Euskdale.
another small Territory, which takes its name from the River that waters it.

LIDDISDALE, Liddisdale.
also another small Territory, which receives its name from the River that
passes through it. Its chief places are,

Brankensey, Brankensey, etc.
Harlay, and Armetage.

ANNADALE, that is, the Vale by the River Annan. Its chief places are,

Annadale, Annadale.
seated at the Mouth of the River Annan. And

Lough-Mahun, Lough-Mahun.
a Town of good strength, as well by Nature as Art; nigh unto which is a strong
Castle.

Of a fertile Soil.
NITHESDALE, or NIDDESDALE, a County so named from the River Nid, which
waters it; a County of a fertile Soil, which bears good Corn, has rich
Meadows and Pastures; and in the Solway, which waters its Southern part, are
taken great store of excellent Salmons, which the Inhabitants (for their
Recreation) oft-times hunt on Horseback with Spears. Its chief places are,

Dunfreys, Dunfreys.
seated between two Hills, and on the River Nid, near its influx into the
Solway, once strengthened with a Castle; a Town of good account for making of
Woollen-Cloths; out more remarkable for the Murder of John Cummin, a man of
great eminency amongst the Scotch, who was slain by Robert Brus in the Church,
out of fear lest he should fore-close his way to the Kingdom.

Nigh unto this Town is Solway, Solway.
a small place, which seems to retain something of the old name of Selgovae.

Caer-Laverock, seated at the Mouth of the Nid, Caer-Laverock.
in former time of so great strength, that (for a good while) it stoutly
resisted the power of King Edward the First, who besieged it.

Corda, also a flourishing Town in former Ages. Corda.


GALLOWAY, a County so called of the Irish, who once here inhabited, in former
times had Princes and Lords over it. It is a Country much inclined to Hills,
which renders it more fit for Grasing than Tillage, breeding abundance of small
and well limbed Nags, which for their nimbleness and hardiness are esteemed
excellent for a Traveller: And the Sea, by which it is washed, together with
its Bays, Creeks, Meers, and Loughs, affords the Inhabitants store of excellent
Fish. Its chief places are,

Kircoubright, the most commodious Port-Town on this Coast; Kircoubright.
and the second Stewarty of Scotland.

Cardines, a place or Fort of great strength, as well by Nature as Art,
Cardines.
being seated on a craggy high Rock, by the River Fleet, and fenced about with
strong Walls.

Wigton, seated on a Bay of the Sea, between the Rivers Cre and Bladno; Wigton.
a good Haven-Town.

Not far from this Town, and on the Sea-shoar, Ptolomy placed the ancient City
Leucopibia, which is now called Wytherne; and here it is said, Ninia,
Leucopibia.
or Ninian, a holy Britain, who first instructed the South-Picts in the
Christian Faith, in the Reign of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, had his
Seat, and built a Church to the honor of St. Martin.

CARRICT, a County that has rich Pastures, and is well furnished with all
necessaries both by Land and Sea, where it bears the name of
Dunbritain-Frith; a large and capacious Bay, which with its Rivers and Loughs,
affords its Inhabitants plenty of Fish. Its chief places are,

Barganie, a place of great antiquity. Arduntoun and Cosregall. Barganie.


KYLE, a fertile County, and well inhabited; and has for its chief places,
Arduntoun.


Air, seated on a River so called, where it loses it self into the Frith;
Cosregal.
a place of some account, being a Sheriffdom: And Vchiltre. Air. Uchiltre.


CVNNINGHAM, also washed with Dunbritain-Frith; a County no less commodious and
fertile, than pleasant, being plentifully watered. Its chief places are,

Irwin, a Borough-Town, seated on a River so called, Irwin.
at its influx into the Frith, where it has a Haven, though now choked up.

Largis, Largis.
where Alexander the Third destroyed abundance of the Norwegians: And Androsan.
Androsan.


CLVDESDALE, a County so called from the River Cluid, that waters it. Its
chief places are,

Glasco, pleasantly situate on the River Cluyd, Glasco.
over which it has a fair Bridge sustained by eight Arches. It is a City of
good account, well frequented and inhabited, enjoys a good Trade, and is
dignified with the Sea of an Archbishop, as also with an University.

Douglass, seated on a River, and in a Vale so called. Douglass.


Lanrick, the Hereditary Sheriffdom of the Hamiltons, Lanrick.
who take their name from Hamilton-Castle, seated on the fruitful Bank of the
Cluid. Hamilton.


Reinfraw, which gives name to a Barony. Reinfraw.


Paslay, in former times a famous Monastery, Paslay.
founded by Alexander the Second, High Steward of Scotland, which for a stately
Church, with rich Furniture, was inferior to few.

LENNOX, a County very Hilly, and well watered with Rivers, amongst which is
the Cluid, and the large Lough Lomond, about 20 miles in length, Lomond Lough.
and in breadth, where broadest, about 8, in which are many small Isles,
amongst which some are said to float about; a place noted for great plenty of
Fish, especially for a Fish called a Polloc, found no where else: This County
is honored in giving Title to the Right Noble the Duke of Richmond and Lennox,
etc. Its chief places are,

Dunbritton; Dunbritton.
that is, the Britains Town, for that the Britains held it longest against the
Scots, Picts, and Saxons; being the strongest place in all the Kingdom, as well
by Nature as Art, being loftily seated on a rough, craggy, and two-headed Rock,
at the meeting of the Rivers near the large Lough Lomond, and in a green Plain;
in one of the tops is, or was placed a Watchtower, and on the other several
Fortifications or Bulwarks, on the East Side it has a boggy Flat, which at
every Tide is covered with water, and on the South it has the River Cluid.

Alcluyd, Alcluyd.
an ancient City, by some said to be the same Dunbritton.

Of a fertile Soil.
STRIVELING, or STIRLING, a County of a fertile Soil, and well inhabited; and
here is that narrow Land or Straight by which Edenburgh-Frith and
Dunbrith-Frith (thrusting themselves far into the Land, out of the East and
West Seas) are separated from meeting together; which space was fortified with
Garrisons between, by Julius Agricola, so that all the part on this side was in
the possession of the Romans, and their Enemies were forced to retire
themselves into the more Northern and Hilly part of the Kingdom; but this
lasted not long, for Agricola being called home, the Caledonian Britains forced
the Romans back as far as the River Tine: and when Hadrian arrived in Britain,
about 40 years after, instead of going farther, he gave command that the God
Terminus (which used not to give ground to any) should be withdrawn back; and
that a Wall of Turffs (commonly now called Grahams-Dike) should be made between
the Rivers Tine and Eske Southward; on this side Edenburgh-Frith, for about 100
miles, which proved successful unto them. And along this Wall has been
oft-times found several Inscriptions, and pieces of Romish Antiquities. And of
remark was that ancient round building, 24 Cubits high, and 13 broad, open at
the top, and framed of rough and unpolished Stones, without any Cement, Lime,
and Mor^ar; some call this the Temple of the God Terminus, others, Arthur's
Oven, and others, Julius Hoff, as supposing it to be raised by Julius Caesar;
but Cambden would rather believe it to be built by Julius Agricola, who
fortified these parts, had not Ninius said, it was built by Garausius, as a
Triumphal Arch in memory of some Victory. The chief places in this County are,

Stirling, Stirling.
Striveling, or Stirling-Borough, a place of good strength, and fortified with
a powerful Castle, high mounted on the brow of a steep Rock; a place dignified
with the birth of King James the Sixth of Scotland, and First of England, who
afterward caused it to be beautified with new Buildings.

Falkirke, Falkirke, etc.
Cumirnald, and Torwood.

MENTEITH, a County so called from the River Teith: Its chief places are,

Dunblain. Clackmannan.
Dunblain, seated on the River Teith, being the Sea of a Bishop; and
Clackmannan.

Of a very fertile Soil.
FIFE, a fertile County in Corn and Pasturage, has Pit-Coal, and the Sea with
its two Arms, Forth and Tau, which almost encompass it, affords store of
Oysters and other Fish. Its chief places are,

St. Andrews, St. Andrews.
of old, Regimund, that is, St. Regulus Mount, which Vng or Oeng, King of the
Picts, gave to God and St. Andrew, that it should be the chief and Mother
Church of the Picts Kingdom. It is a City pleasantly seated on the Sea-shoar
near Fif-ness, is fortified with a fair and strong Castle, is dignified with an
Archiepiscopal See, which is Primate of all Scotland; and is also honored by
being the Seat of the Muses.

Disert, Disert.
seated on the rising of a Hill, and in an open Heath so called, where there is
a large place called the Cole-plot, that affords good store of Bitumen.

Dunfirmling, Dunfirmling.
a famous Monastery in old time, and of note as well for its Building, and
being the Burial-place of King Malcomb the Third, as for giving Title to the
Earl of Dunfirmling.

Falkland, Falkland.
well, and pleasantly seated for Hunting, for which purpose the Kings have had
here their Retiring-house.

Cupre, Cupre.
a Borough-Town, of some note.

STRATHERNE, that is, the Vale along the River Ern, has for its chief places,

Abergenny.
Abergenny, once a City of good account, being the Royal Seat of the Picts
Kings, which (as it is said) Nectane their King dedicated to God and St.
Bridget, with a Tract of ground thereto belonging.

Drimein.
Drimein-Castle, well seated on the River Ern.

Tulibardin.
Tulibardin-Castle situate also on the same River.

ARGILE, a County well furnished with Pools, in which, together with the Sea,
and its many Arms which it sends forth, are taken great plenty of good Fish;
and in its Mountains are bred a kind of wild Deer. Places of good account are
none in this County.

LORNE, a Country of an apt Soil for bearing of Barley, is well watered, being
divided by the large Lough or Lake called Lean. Its chief places are,

Dunstafage.
Dunstafage, seated near the said Lake, once dignified with a House of the
Kings.

Tarbar.
Tarbar, where King James the Fourth ordained a Justice and a Sheriff, to
administer Justice to the Inhabitants of the out-Isles: Bergonum.
and Bergonum.

CANTTRE, that is, the Lands-head, as thrusting it self forth with a long and
tapered Promontory, which Ptolomy called the Promontory Epidiorum; This County
seated near Ireland. Kiltan. Sandell.
between the extreme point of which and Marlock, or Tor-Bay in Ireland, there
are scarce 13 miles. Its chief places are Killtan and Sandell.

Isle of Arran.
ARRAN, a small County and Isle near unto Cantire, has for its chief places
Arran and Rothsay.

The Highlanders.
ALBAINE, or BRAID-ALBIN, whose Inhabitants are called the Highlanders; a kind
of rude and warlike People, and much of the nature of the Irish in habit and
disposition. Its chief places are Enrer Lothea and Foyre.

PERCH, a large and fertile County, has for its chief places,

Perch.
Perch, or St. John's Town, a place of good account, and once larger than now
it is, being built by King William; it is pleasantly seated between two Greens,
and on the River Tau, which is navigable for Barges.

Dunkelden.
Dunkelden, dignified by King David with an Episcopal See, supposed to be a
Town of the Caledonians.

Berch.
Also on the Tau stood the little City of Berch, which was washed away by the
overflowings of the said River, together with many of its Inhabitants, amongst
which was an Infant-Child of the Kings in its Cradle.

Scone.
Scone, seated on the farther side of the Tau, dignified with an Inauguration
of the Scotch Kings before their Union to England, Westminster now being the
place; and where the Chair, in which the Kings were then Crowned, is, which is
at present made use of upon the like occasion.

Caladonia Wood.
ATHOL, an indifferent fertile County, and well clothed with Wood, where is that
large and overshadowed Wood Caladonia, already treated of; a Country said to be
infamous for Witches. Its chief place is Blaire.

Very fertile and well watered.
ANGVIS, a fertile County both for Corn and rich Pastures, is well watered with
several Rivers, which lose themselves in the Sea, which serves for its Eastern
bounds: It is interlaced with Hills and Forests, and garnished with diverse
Forts and Castles, Its chief places are,

Dundee.
Dundee, seated on the Mouth of the River Tay; a noted and well resorted Town
for Trade, by reason of its commodious Port for Ships.

Brechin.
Brechin, situate on the River South-Eske, near its fall into the Sea, and
dignified by King David the First with an Episcopal See. Nigh unto this Town is
Red-head, a place not unknown to Seamen.

Montross, Montross.
of old Celurca, of some account for being honored with the Title of an
Earldom.

Arbroth, seated near the Sea; a Town endowed with large Revenues, Arbroth.
and by King William dedicated to a Religious use, in honor of Thomas of
Canterbury.

MERNIS, Very fertile.
or MERNIA, a small, but plain and fertile Champa^^^ Country, which shoots it
self forth on the German Ocean: Its chief plac^ are,

Dunnotyr, Dunnotyr.
defended by a strong Castle, seated on an high and inaccessib^^ Rock, near the
Sea.

Fordon, Fordon.
seated also not far from the Sea.

BVQVIHAN, washed with the Sea, whose Waves did here cast up mighty Mass of
Amber of an inestimable value; it has good Pastures, most to feed Sheep, whose
Wool is excellent; and its Rivers breed store of Salmon* which are had at such
easy rates, that it is scarce worth the trouble of taki^ them. Its chief
places are Rotheniay and Stanes.

Adjoining to this Country lies Boena and Bamff, a small Sheriffdom; al^
Ajuza, a little Territory of no great note.

MAR, Mar.
a long and narrow County, somewhat inclined to Mountains, b^ well watered with
the Done or Dee, well stored with Salmons; and other Fis^ Its chief places are,

Aberdene, Aberdene.
feated on the Sea-shoar, at the Mouth of the Done, dignified wi^^ an Episcopal
See, has an Hospital, also a Free-Grammar-School, and is of no for taking of
Salmons: Kildrumy.
and Kildrumy.

MVRRAY, Murray.
a pleasant and fertile County, and the rather as watered wi^^ the Spey,
Findorne, and the River and Lake Nessa, which reaches abo^^^ 23 miles in
length, the water whereof is observed to be so warm, that it nev^ is sound to
freez; and this Lake is its Northern limits, as the Spey is its Easterr all
which empty themselves in the Sea, where it forms a Bay. Its chi^^ places are,

Innernes, Innernes.
Bean-Castle; which Ptolomy thinks to be Banatia; and here Anno 1460. a
Marble-Vessel artificially engraven, full of Roman Coins, w^ found.

Narden, Narden.
or Narne, an hereditary Sheriffdom; and here stood within a b^ land a strong
Fortress of a great height, which was kept by the Danes again the Scots.

Innernes, Innerlothea.
and Innerlothea, in former times two eminent Fortifications. Al^

Elgin and Rothes, Elgin. Rothes.
places honored with the Titles of Earldoms.

LOQVABREA, a County well stored with Rivers and Lakes, which empty themselves
into the Sea; it has also good Pastures, yet is it very Mou^^tainous, and well
clothed with Wood, and in the bowels of the Earth are Min^ of Iron. Iron-Mines.
Its chief place is,

Innerlothey, Innerlothey.
once of good account, being well frequented and traded unto but through the
Pyracies and Wars of the Danes and Norwegians, who raz^ it, it has now scarce
any Remain left.

ROSS, Its sertility.
a large, Mountainous, and Woody County, which reaches from one Sea to the
other; has great plenty of Stags, Deer, Wild-fowl, and Fis^* Its chief places
are,

Cromarty, Cromarty.
or the Haven of Safety, as having so secure and capacious an Ha^^ bour for
Ships. Ness-mouth. Lovet.
Ness-mouth and Lovet.

In this County is the Territory of Ardmanoch, Ardmanoch.
very Mountainous, from which the second Sons of the Kings of Scotland bear
their Title.

SVTHERLAND, regarding the Sea, is well watered with Rivers, b^ sides the large
Lough or Lake Shyn, almost in the midst of the Country; We^^^ wards of which
are great store of Hills, from which is dug excellent whi^^ Marble, very good
for curious Works. It is a Country more fit for breedi^ of Cattle, Dunrobin.
Dorne.
than for Tillage; and has for its chief places Dunrobin an^ Dorno.

Very cold and barren.
STRATHNAVERNE, a County far engaged Northwards, which with Cathanes have the
utmost Northern Coast of all Britain, which must o^ casion it to be of a very
cold temperature; it is very much inclined to sterility Strabubaster. Tongue.
is Mountainous, and but ill inhabited. Its chief places are Strabubaster an^
Tongue.

map of Ireland A MAPP of the Kingdom of IRELAND by Ric Blome by his Matys. Com
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of BurlingtonTo ye Rt Honbl Ric: Boil
Earl of Burlington, and ^^ron Cliford of Lansborro in England. Earl of Cork.
Viscount Dungaruen. (...) and Lord High Treasurer of Ireland etc. And to ye Rt.
Honbl Roger Boil Earl of Orrery and Baron (...) Broghill in Ireland and of
his Majs most Honble privy Council etc This Mapp is humbly Dedi^^^^^

blazon or coat of arms(...) ye Rt Honble Sr. Rob: Kilr^^ray of Terry and
B^^on, in England. Knight. and Bart (...) of Londonderry and Baron of Crallon (...)
in (...) County in (...) andc. his estate in Ireland being called Medinshill
This Mapp (...) of (...) is DD by Ric: Blo^^

blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Arran (Irish creation)(...) ye Rt
Honble Earl of Arran, Visc ^^llough Baron Butler of Clougrenan and (...) of
his Maies most Honble privy Council (...) This Mapp of ye Province of (...) is
humble DD by Ric: Blom^

blazon or coat of arms(...) Honble (...) Baron of (...) Mais Army of (...) his
(...) most Honble (...).

This Mapp of ye Provence of (...) Humbly DD by Ric: Blome.



CATHANES, a County washed with the Eastern Ocean, where it forms several
Creeks, and is well watered with Rivers, which afford good store of Fish, from
which, and by the grasing and feeding of Cattle, the Inhabitants get the
greatest part of their livelihood. Its chief places are,

Dornock, a mean place, yet the Sea of a Bishop. Dornock.


Catnes, a Maritim Town, dignified with an Earldom. Catnes.
Nigh unto this Town Southwards is Ness-head, and Northwards Dunesbe-head, both
Maritim places: and Girnego. Girnego.


Three Mountains.
In this Tract are three Promontories, to wit, Vrdehead, of old Berubium; Dunsby
or Dunscanby, of old Virvedrum; and Howbum, of old Orcas.

There are several Isles dispersed about this Kingdom of Scotland, as the
Orcades, Shetland, and Hebrides, which may properly be said to belong
thereunto; but as to the description thereof, they shall be treated of amongst
the other small Isles belonging in general to great Britain, after we have
treated of the Kingdom of Ireland.

IRELAND.
Its situation.
IRELAND, environed on all sides by the Sea, and next to Great Britain may
claim priority of all others in Europe: It is a Country generally of a fertile
Soil, and plentifully stored with Cattle, Fowl, and Fish; Fertility.
but is Mountainous, Woody, Waterish, and full of unprofitable Loughs or Bogs,
which oft-times prove dangerous (especially to New-comers) and occasion Rheums
and Fluxes, for the cure of which they drink a sort of hot Water, called
Vskebah.

Its Air and Temperature.
It is blessed with a mild and healthful Air, its Summer being not so hot, nor its
Winter so cold as in England, but more inclined to soggy Mists and Rains, which
makes it more unfit for Tillage than Pasturage, the Clime being not very
favorable for ripening of Corn or Fruits, but bears such great abundance of
long and sweet Grass, that the Cattle (which are the Inhabitants chiefest
wealth) are soon fat, and fit for slaughter therewith: And it is further
observed, That the Air is so pure, that it neither breeds nor suffers any
venomous Beast, Serpent, or Insect, being brought out of other Countries, long
to retain their life.

Its Names.
Many have been the Names (according to Tradition) that this Island has been
known by; Orphaeus, Aristotle, and Claudian, named it Jerna: Juvenal and Mela,
Iverna, or Hibernia; Diodorus Siculus, Iris; Eustachius, Oyernia and Bernia;
the Britains, Yuerdon; the Natives, Eryn; and the English, Ireland.

Why so called.
Some there be that will have it called Hibernia, from Hyberno tempore, that is,
from its Winter season; others, from Hiberus a Spaniard; and others, from the
ancient River Iberus; whilst some strive to have it so called from the Irish
word Hiere, which signifies West, or Western Coast, whence Eryn may seem to
fetch its derivation. Festus Avienus calls this Island, Sacram Insulam, the
Holy Island; for that the People are soon drawn thereunto, witness the many
Saints that it has produced.

Ireland long ago inhabited.
If you will take for truth what the Irish Historians report, this Island has
been exceeding long inhabited; for, according to Cambden, it is said that it was
possessed by Caesarea, Niece to Noah, before the Flood; that Bartholanus a
Scythian arrived here near 300 years before the Deluge; that many years after
Nemethus, with his four Sons, arrived here, but was soon forced hence by the
Giant-like sort of People of the Nimrods Race here inhabiting; that after this
the Five Grecians seized this Island; and that soon after (being about the time
of the Israelites departure out of Egypt) Gaothel, with his Wife Scota,
Daughter to Pharaoh King of Egypt, landed here, and called the Island Scotia,
from his Wifes name. And further, the British History says, that some Ages
after Hiberius, Hermion, Ever, and Erimon, Sons of Milesius King of Spain, by
permission of Gurguntius the British King, here planted Colonies after that the
Country had been wasted by a Pestilence, and from the eldest Son was called
Hibernia. Nor is it much to be doubted, but that the Britains settled themselves
here, seeing there is so great affinity betwixt them and the Irish in their
natures, dispositions, and speech.

Its Extent, Situation.
This Island contains in length about 240 miles, and in breadth about 120; it is
situate under the 10th and 12th Climates, the longest day making about 16
hours. It is a near Neighbor to Scotland, from which it is separated by an
Isthmus of about seven miles; but England far more remote, being from Dublin,
its Metropolitan City, to Holy Land in the Isle of Anglesey (the usual place
for taking of Landing) about 50.

Its strength.
It is an Island of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, by reason of its
situation in such Tempestuous and dangerous Seas, and the several
Fortifications and Castles that the English have built since they became
Masters thereof.

Its chief Rivers.
It is a Country well watered, having several great Rivers, the chief amongst
which are those of Shannon, being about 60 miles navigable, and after its
course of about 200 miles, loses it self into the Western Ocean. Liff,
Shower, Awidaff, Slanie, Sione, etc. And besides these Rivers there are several
Lakes or Loughs, amongst which that of most note is Lough-Erne, about 30 miles
in length, and 15 in breadth, in which are several small Isles.

Its Commodities.
The Commodities that this Island affords, are, great abundance of Cattle,
Hides, Tallow, Cheese, Wool, of which they make course-Cloth, Freezes, Rugs,
Mantles, etc. also Furs, Pipe-staves, Salt, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Honey, and Wax;
and its Seas likewise afford great plenty of Cod-fish, Herrings, Pilchards,
Oysters, etc.

Its Inhabitants.
Its Native Inhabitants were extremely rude and barbarous; they made use of
Women in common, without any difference of other men's Wives; they were very
bold, courageous, and greedy of honor, constant in love, impatient of
Injuries, of an easy belief, much addicted to fantastical conceits, as
holding it ominous to give their Neighbors Fire on a May Day, with many the
like Fooleries; they are much inclined to superstitious Idolatry, as
worshipping the Moon, after her change; about their Childrens Necks they hung
the beginning of St. John's Gospel, a piece of Wolves-skin, or a crooked Nail of
a Horse-shoe, which they thought preserved them from danger; the Hoofs of dead
Horses they held Sacred; with many such like ridiculous Fancies. They accounted
Ease and Idleness their greatest Liberty and Riches, not coveting Worldly
possessions, contenting themselves with mean Cottages, Hovels, or Cabins; nor
were they profuse in their Apparel or Diet, being well satisfied if they had
wherewith to keep them warm, and to fill their Bellies, their chief food being
Herbs, Roots, Butter, Milk, Oatmeal, and the like. For their dying, they hired
Women to Mourn, who expostulated why they would die, telling them, that they
had such and such things; and the Corpse were accompanied to the Grave with
howlings, clapping of hands, and such like sorrowful actions. But many of these
ridiculous and absurd Customs, since the English are settled amongst them, are
forgotten.

The Christian Faith was here first planted by St. Patrick; The Christian Falth
first planted by St. Patrick.
this Patrick (according to Writers) was the Son of Calphurus, by St. Martins
Sister, and born at Glasco in Scotland, who in his Youth was taken Captive by
the Irish Pirates, and sold for six years as a Slave in the meanest condition
to Macbuain; yet in this dejected condition he much desired the Conversion of
this Nation, from their extreme Idolatrous ways to the true serving of the
living God, insomuch that he dreamed, that the unborn Babes cried unto him for
Baptisin; and being at length redeemed from his bondage, by a piece of Gold,
which he found in the Field, (that was rooted up by some Swine) he lest the
Isle; but still having his thoughts on these People, in his Aged years he again
returned, (and in better state than before) preached the Gospel, converted the
People, became Bishop of Armagh; and when dead, was received or canonized as
their Saint.

The English become Masters of Ireland.
These Irish, having civil dissentions amongst them, prompted the English in the
Reign of K. Henry the Second, to attempt the Conquest of this Kingdom, who in
Anno Dom. 1172. landed his Army there, and obtained the Regal Dominion thereof,
which being passed over unto him by their Nobles and Commonalty, their Charter
so signed, was transmitted to Rome, and was confirmed by a Patent of Pope
Hadrian, by a Ring delivered unto him in token of his investure; and was
farther confirmed by the Authority of certain Provincial Synods: and ever since
that time it has remained in the possessions of the Kings of England.

The Temporal Government of Ireland.
The Temporal Government, since the English became Masters thereof, has most
commonly been, by one Supreme Officer, sent over by the Kings of England, and
called Lord Deputy, or Lord Lieutenant, who for Majesty, State, and Power, is
not inferior to any Viceroy in Christendom; living in great grandeur, and
having ample and Royal Power and Authority granted unto him; and as Assistant
unto him in so weighty a concern, he has his Privy Council, being a select
number of honorable and prudent persons chosen out of the Nobility, Clergy,
and Capital Officers of State: for their Degrees of Honor, and Offices of
State, they are the same with those of England, already treated of. The present
Lord Lieutenant is the Right Noble his Excellency Arthur Capell, Earl of Essex,
Viscount Maldon, Baron Capell of Hadham, etc.

Its Laws and Courts of Judicature.
The Laws of this Kingdom have correspondency with those of England, and have
likewise there several Courts of Judicature; as the Chancery, Common Pleas,
King's Bench, Exchequer, etc. but above all the High Court of Parliament. There
are likewise in each County Justices of the Peace, for the quiet governing and
well ordering the Inhabitants, as in England.

The Archbishops and Bishops.
As to the Ecclesiastical Government of this Kingdom, it is committed to the
care of four Archbishops, under whom are diverse Suffragan Bishops, whose names
are as follows. Under the Archbishop of Armagh, who is Primate of Ireland,
are the Bishops of Mead, or Elnamirand, Conuer, Rathluc, Dune, or
Dundalethglas, Ardachad, Derry, Dal-Liquir, Chlocor, or Lugundum, and Rathbot.
Under the Archbishop of Dublin, those of Fern, Lechlin, Glendalach, Ossery,
and Kildare. Under the Archbishop of Cassile, those of Limrick, Waterford,
Cork, Laonie, or Kendalnan, Gellumabrath, Lismore, Ardefret, the Isle of
Gathay, Clon, De Rosalither, Melite, or Emilech, and Ross, or Roscree. And
under the Archbishop of Tuam, those of Elphin, Gonany, Clonfred, Enachdun,
Achad, Duac, or Killmacduoc, Mage, Killmund^ach, Cellaiar, Roscomon, and Lade,
or Killaleth.

According to the Temporal Government of this Kingdom, it is severed into four
Provinces, to wit, Leimster, Vlster, Connaugh, and Mounster, which are again
subdivided into several Counties, which comprehend several Baronies, in which
are seated several Towns: And of these Provinces in order.

LEIMSTER.
Its fertility.
THis Part of Ireland (for the generality) is of a fertile Soil, affording great
plenty of Corn, Cattle, Fowl, and Fish, enjoys a wholesome and temperate Air,
is well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which are the Shour, Neor, and
Barraeo, Its Bivers.
which have their rise out of that great Mountain called by Giraldus, Bladinae
Montes: It is very well inhabited, as well by the Gentry as the Commonalty, and
the rather by reason of Dublin, the Metropolitan City of this Kingdom therein
seated. Its form may be said to be triangular, for from South-east to the
West-point, is above 80 miles; from thence to the North-west, about 70; and her
East-Coast, about 18; the circumference making about 270 miles. And for its
bounds, it has on the West the Province of Connough; on the North, that of
Leimster; and on the East and South, the Sea which regards England, from which
(that is, from Holy-head in the Isle of Anglesey) it is distant about 50 miles:
a Sea very dangerous for Sailors, by reason of the Flats and Shallows that lie
over against Holy-point, which are called the Grounds. And as to its division,
it is severed into ten Counties, to wit, Dublin, East-Meath, West-Meath,
Longford, Kildare, Kings County, Queens County, Caterlough, Weixford, and
Kilkenny; all which are again subdivided into several Baronies; and of these
Counties in order.

County of Dublin described.
DVBLIN, or Divelin, a fertile County for Corn and Cattle, but ill provided with
Wood, which defect is supplied by Peat or Turff, dug up in the clammy places,
as also by Sea-Coal brought from England. It is severed into seven Baronies,
viz. New Castle, Vpper-Cross, Rath-down, Castle-knock, Coolock, Balrudery, and
Nether-Cross; and by reason of its City Dublin, the Metropolis of Ireland, is
very well furnished with Towns, and inhabited by Gentry. Its chief places are,

Dublin, Dublin.
the capital City in the Island, by Ptolomy called Eblana, by the Latinists,
Dublinium, and Dublinia; by the West- Britains, Dinas Dulin; and by the Irish,
Balacleigh, that is, the Town upon Hurdles, by reason that when it began to be
first built (the ground being wet and moorish) the Foundation of its Houses
were laid upon Hurdles. It is a City of great Antiquity, and said to be built
by Harold the first King of Norway, who brought most of the Kingdom under his
obedience, though not without great Spoils; and after the Conquest of the
English, was Peopled by a Colony of Bristol-men. It is no less pleasantly than
commodiously seated on the River Liffie, (which after a small course emptieth
it self into a capacious Bay of the Sea, where it has a good Haven) and a fair
prospect; and on the South it has delightful Hills, which, with the several
Parks here adjacent afford great Recreation to the Gentry. It is a City
dignified and enriched with the residence of the Lord Lieutenant, as also with
the Sea of an Archbishop, with an University, and the Courts of Judicature, by
reason of which it is a place of good Traffic, being well inhabited and
frequented by Nobility and Gentry, as also by abundance of wealthy Merchants
and Shopkeepers. It is beautified with many fair Buildings, both publik and
private, the principal amongst which are the Lord Lieutenants Palace, a stately
Structure, built by order of King Henry the Second, in the East-Suburbs; then
the Cathedral Church, dedicated to St. Patrick, consisting of a Dean, Chanter,
Chancellor, Treasurer, two Archdeacons, and twenty Prebendaries: Nigh unto
which is the Archbishops Palace, both which are without the City in the Suburbs
called St. Patricks: Then the Collegiate Church consecrated to the Holy
Trinity, commonly called Christ-Church, seated in the midst of the City, which
Queen Elizabeth dignified with the Privileges of an University; and not far
from this is the Town Hall, called Toles-tale, a fair Stone-building of a
quadrangular form; and here the Lord Major, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and other the
Magistrates of the City assemble together for the management and consulting on
the public Concerns of the City; as, to hear Causes, hold Sessions, etc. Then
a beautiful College, with several other fair Edifices. It is at present a City
of a large Extent to what it formerly was, and does daily increase in its
Buildings, especially in its Suburbs, which is severed from the City by a Wall,
which gives entrance by six Gates. As touching the Trade of this Kingdom, I
shall include it under this City, as being the chief place of Traffic. The
Commodities exported are the product of the Country already treated of; and
those imported are all sorts of English Commodities, especially Apparel, Silks,
Stuffs, etc. also Wines, Oils, and several other Commodities. Their Coins, as
being under the Jurisdiction of England, have correspondency therewith, and are
here current, as also those of Spain; and an Irish Pound, which consists of
20 s. is but 15 s. sterling, which makes their Shilling but 9 d. sterling. And
as to their Weights and Measures, they are the same with those of England,
where see further.

Wickle, seated on the Sea, Wickle.
where over the narrow Haven there stands a Rock, enclosed with a strong Wall
instead of a Castle, and serves for a place of defense.

New Castle, a Town which regards the Sea, Newcastle.
where there are Shelves of Sand (which they call the Grounds) reaching a great
length, between which and the Shore is said to be about seven Fathom water.

Houth, seated on the River Liffy, at its fall into the Sea, Houth.
which almost encloseth it.

Malcheal, also seated on the Sea, Malcheal.
nigh unto which is a small Isle called Lambey.

County of East-Meath described.
EAST-MEATH, a County watered with the noble River Boyn, which cutteth the
Country into two parts, and after it has received the Waters of Lough-Ranmore,
discharges it self into the Sea. It is severed into twelve Baronies, viz.
Moyfenragh, Dunboyne, Ratoth, Duleeke, Kells, Morgallon, Skreen, Navan, Lune,
Slane, Foore, and Decce: And has for its chief place,

Trim, seated on the River Boyne, a Town of good account and Trade. Trim.


Aboy, a well inhabited and frequented Town. Aboy.


Navan. Drodagh. Slane.
Navan, Drodagh, and Slane, which also has a Barony.

County of West-Meath described.
WEST-MEATH, so called as lying Westwards, as the other is for lying Eastwards.
It is divided into twelve Baronies, viz. Farbill, Moyeashell, Clunlonan,
Brawney, Moygoish, Delvin, Corkery, Demyfoore, Maheredernon, Rathconrath,
Kilkenny-west, and Fartullagh: And has for its chief places,

Molingar, the chief Shire-Town, Molingar.
as being commodiously seated in the midst of the County.

Delvin, seated on the Summit of a Hill, a Town dignified with a Barony: Delvin.
and Kelskery. Kelskery.


County of Longford described.
LONGFORD, a County almost encompassed with Lakes and Rivers; amongst which is
the Shannon, the noblest River in the Kingdom. It is severed into six Baronies,
viz. Ardagh, Granard, Moydow, Longford, Rathline, and Abbyshrewle: And has for
its chief places,

Longford, which gives name to the County, seated on the Lake Eske, Longford.
or rather on the Shannon. Ardragh, another good Town. Ardragh.


County of Kildare described.
KILDARE, a rich and fertile County, severed into ten Baronies, viz. Salt, Nass,
Ikeathy, or Oughtereney, Claine, Connel Magna, Carbury, Ophaly, Noragh and
Rabane, Kilkullen half, Kilcah and Moon: Whose chief places are,

Kildare, a fair Inland Town, being well frequented, defended by a Castle,
Kildare.
and dignified with the Sea of a Bishop: A place much celebrated in the Infancy
of the Irish Church for its St. Brigid an holy Virgin, who was the Disciple of
St. Patrick.

Mainoth, defended by a Castle, and is a place of good account, Mainoth.
and well frequented.

Naas, Athie.
Naas and Athie, seated on the River Barrow, both Towns of some account.

Kings County described.
KINGS COUNTY, so called in honor to Philip King of Spain, Husband to Mary
Queen of England. It is divided into ten Baronies, viz. Cooles-Town,
Philips-Town, Marrius-Town, Ballicowen, Kilcoursey, Balliboy, Clonliske,
Garricastle, Ballibritt, and Fercale: And has for its chief places,

Philips-Town, or Kings-Town. Philips-Town.


Queens-Town described.
QVEENS COUNTY, full of Boggs and Woods, is divided into eight Baronies, viz.
Balliadams, Vpper-Ossery, Portnehinch, Tenehinch, Cullinagh, Mary-burrough,
Slewmargigh, and Stradbally: And has for its chief places,

Queens-Town, a place of good account, and is the chief in the County.
Queens-Town.


Rheban, once a City, but at present of small note. Rheban.


County of Caterlough described.
CATERLOVGH, a fertile County, and well clothed with Wood. It is severed into
five Baronies, viz. Ravilly, Caterlough, Forth, Idronye, and St. Mullin in
part: And has for its chief places,

Caterlough, Caterlough.
seated on the River Barrow, of good account and strength.

Leighlin, Leighlin.
also seated on the Barrow, once dignified with an Episcopal See.

Tullo, Tullo.
seated on the River Slane.

Carickbrak, Areklo.
Carickbrak and Areklo, which two last are seated on the Sea.

County of Wexford described.
WEXFORD, or WEISFORD, washed by the Sea; a County in former time (according to
Ptolomy) possessed by the Menapians, a sort of People which came out of
Low-Germany. It is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Gory, Scarwalsh,
Ballagheene, Bantry, Shellmaleere, Forth, Bargy, and Sheelburne. And has for
its chief places,

Wexford, Wexford.
supposed to be the ancient City Menapa, situate at the Mouth of the River
Slane, where it has a good Haven; a fair Town, and of note for being the first
Town that embraced a Colony of English, as also for its Herring-fishing; which
makes it to be well inhabited and frequented.

Ross, Ross.
seated on the River Barrow, which after a small course falls into a Bay or
Arm of the Sea.

Ternes, Ternes.
situate on the Slane, dignified with the Sea of a Bishop, and was in former
time fortified with a Castle.

Eniscort, Eniscort.
a Borough and Town Corporate.

County of Kilkenny described.
KILKENNY, a very fertile County, well graced with Towns, is divided into ten
Baronies, viz. Gowran, Fassaghdining, Kilkenny, Cranagh, Galmey, Callen,
Iverke, Sheelelogher, Kells, Knocktopher, Ida-Igrin, and Ibercon. And has for
its chief places,

Kilkenny, Kilkenny.
seated on the River Nur, which traverseth the County; a fair and wealthy
Borough-Town, far exceeding all other Mid-land Borough-Towns in the Kingdom. It
is divided into the English and the Irish Town, that part belonging to the
English being fenced on the West Side by a Wall, and defended by a Castle; and
that part which belongs to the Irish, (being as it were the Suburbs) is of
the greatest Antiquity, having in it the Canicks Church, and is honored with
the Sea of the Bishop of Ossery.

Thomas Town, Thomas Town.
seated beneath the River Nur, a small walled Town.

Callan, Callan.
seated on a River so called, a Borough and Town Corporate.

Religious Houses.
Amongst the places in this Province set apart for Divine Worship, these
following were of great note, viz. the stately Abbey called Thomas Court at
Dublin, built by King Henry the Second, in expiation of the Murder of Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury; the Monasteries of St. Mary's, of Oustmanby and
Tintern; and the Abbey founded by William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, to the
praise of God, for his safe delivery out of a desperate Storm and Shipwreck,
which he was in.

ULSTER.
Its temperature of Soil.
THis Province is of a large Extent, and of a different Soil, some places being
very fertile, and others as barren, which would be otherwise if it were well
manured; but generally it is inclined to fertility: It has many thick and
shady Woods, as also diverse large Lakes, in which are several small Isles; Its
Lakes and Rivers.
which said Lakes or Loughs, as also the Rivers which water the Province,
plentifully furnish the Inhabitants with Salmons, and other good Fish: and for
Flesh, Fowl, and Corn, they have more than they can well spend. This Province
by the Welsh-Britains is called Vltw, and by the Irish, Cui Guilly. Its Name.


Its Bounds.
It is bounded on the South with the Provinces of Leimster and Connaugh, and on
all other parts is washed with the Sea, which receives the Waters of those
many Loughs or Lakes, many of which are of a large extent, and have within them
several small Isles, the names of some are as follows, Lough-Neaugh,
Lough-Foylle, Lough-Swillie, Lough-Earne, and Lough-Cone.

Its Extent.
It is of a large Extent, reaching from Black-Abbey in the East to
Calebegh-Point in the West, about 130 miles; and from Coldagh-Haven in the
North to Kilmore in the South, about 100; and in circumference about 420 miles.

This Province is divided into Ten Counties, viz. Tir-conell or Dunagall,
Division.
Tyroen, Colrane, Antrim, Down, Louth, Armagh, Monoghan, Gavan, and Fermanagh;
all which are again severed into diverse Baronies* And of these Counties in
order.

County of Tir-conel described.
TIR-CONEL, or DVNAGAL, a Champain Country, and well watered with Rivers and
Loughs, which discharge themselves into the Sea, which washes its Southern,
Western, and Northern parts, and affords to the Inhabitants great plenty of
Fish and River-Fowl. It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Tirhugh, Boylagh,
Kilmacreanan, Raphoe, and Enishowen: And has for its chief places.

Derry, or Londonderry, a Colony of the Citizens of London; Derry.
a fair and well built Town, where sometime stood a flourishing Monastery.

Dunegall, which gives name to the County, seated on a Bay of the Sea, Dunegall.
where it has a good Haven, and between the Mouth of Lough-Earne and
Balewilly-Bay.

Calebeck, situate on the Sea, where it has a commodious Haven, Calebeck.
and Robogh.

Several Isles and Promontories along the Coast. St. Patricks Purgatory.
Along the Coast of this County are seated several small Isles, viz. Torr-Isle,
the Isles of Cladagh, North-Aran, etc. also the Promontories of Fair-foreland,
Rams-head, and St. Hellens-head: And in this County is St. Patricks Purgatory,
a Vault or narrow Cave in the ground, of which strange Fancies are believed by
the simple sort of the Irish.

County of Tyroen described.
TYROEN, a large, rough, and rugged, yet fertile County, which is divided by the
Mountains of Sliew-Gallen into the Upper and the Lower, in both which are three
Baronies, viz. Omagh, Strabane, and Dungannon: And has for its chief places,

Cloghar, dignified with the Sea of a Bishop. Cloghar.


Dungannon, the ancient residence of the O-neals. Dungannon.


Strebane. Charlement.
Strebane, and Charlemont. In this County is ^^e large Lake Neaugh, well stored
with Fish, in which are several small Isles; the chief amongst which are
Enis-Garden, and Sidney-Isle.

County of Colerane described.
COLERANE, a small County, seated in the most Northern part of the Province,
and washed with the Sea, as also with the large Lake Foylle, adjoining to the
Sea on its Western part, and watered with the River Band on its Eastern, which
carries a proud stream into the Sea from the Lake Neaugh, which breeds great
store of excellent Salmons. The chief places in this County are,

Colerane, Colerane.
which gives name to the County, seated on the River Band.

Banchor, Kilrough.
Banchor, and Kilrough.

County of Antrim described.
ANTRIM, the nearest County to Scotland, from which it is not far distant,
being almost encircled with Waters, having on the West the River Band, on the
South the large Lough Neaugh and Knockvergus-Bay, and on all other parts the
Sea, where along the Shore are several very small Isles, except it be one, to
wit, the Raglins, which is indifferent large. This County is severed into eight
Baronies, viz. Toome, Antrim, Killconway, Massereene, Bellfast, Dunluce,
Glenarne, and Carry: And has for its chief places,

Knock-fergus, Knock-fergus.
by the Irish, Carick-vergus, that is, the Rock of Fergus, seated on a large
Bay so called, where it has a commodious Port. It is a place of good strength,
is well inhabited, and better frequented than other places on this Coast; and
at the Mouth of this Bay lie several Isles. Not far from this place once stood
the famous Monastery of Magio, so much commended by Bid.

Antrim, Antrim.
seated on a small River, at its influx into the Lake Neaugh.

Glastalagne, Glastalagne.
situate on the Band.

County of Down described.
DOWN, a large and fertile County, washed on the East with the Sea, where it
thrusts it self forth with a large Creek or Arm into the Lough Cone, which
extends it self in length many miles, and forms two By-lands; That
Southwards called Lecall, which is exceeding fertile, and whose extreme point is
called St. John's Foreland; and That Northwards called Ardes: It is severed into
five Baronies, viz. Kinalearty, Lower Evagh, Ards, Upper Evagh, and Lecale: And
has for its chief places,

Down, Down.
of old Dunum, seated in the part called Lecall, near the Lough Cone; a Town of
good Antiquity, and dignified with an Episcopal See, as also with the Tombs of
St. Patrick, St. Bridget, and St. Columbe.

Newry, Newry.
seated on a River which falls into Carlingford-haven.

Stranford, Stranford.
seated on the large River Coin, or rather an Arm of the Sea, where it has a
safe Harbor.

Arglas, Arglas.
where (as it is said) St. Patrick founded a Church.

Conner, Conner.
or Conereth; an Episcopal See.

Kilwarny, Kilwarny.
much anoyed with Bogs, and full of shady Woods.

County of Louth described.
LOVTH, a County of a fertile Soil, very grateful to the Husbandman, and is
washed on the East with the Sea. It is divided into four Baronies, viz. Lough,
Dundalke, Ferrard, and Atherdee: And has for its chief places,

Tredaugh, Tredaugh.
or Droughdagh, seated near the Mouth of the Boyne, which divides it, but
joined together by a Bridge; and by reason of its commodious Haven it is a good
Town, being well inhabited and frequented, nigh unto which stood Mellifont
Abbey, founded by Donald a K. of Vriel.

Dundalke, Dundalke.
seated on the Sea, where it has a commodious Haven, and in former times was
strengthened with a Castle, which with the Town was burnt by Edward Brus,
Brother to the King of Scots, who proclaimed himself King of Ireland; but for
this good act, was soon after (with above 8000 of his Men) flain; not far
distant.

Carlingford, Carlingford.
another good and well frequented Port-Town.

Lough, Lough.
a fair Town, conveniently seated on the River Warren.

Ardeth, Ardeth.
a good Inland dry Town.

County of Armagh described.
ARMAGH, a County of an exceeding fertile Soil, and not inferior to any in the
Kingdom. It is sever^l into five Baronies, viz. Fowes, Orrior, Tawrane, Onelan,
and Armagh: And has for its chief places,

Armagh, Armagh.
scated on (or near) the River Kaisin, an ancient (but ruinated) City, yet
dignified with the Sea of an Archbishop, who is Primate of all Ireland; which
name it is said to receive from Queen Armacha; and is supposed to be the same
which Ptolomy calls Dearmach. And here (according to St. Bernard) St. Patrick
the Apostle of the Irish ruled, during his life, and when he departed this
World, was here Interred, in honor of whom it was a place greatly reverenced.

Not far from Armagh is Owen Maugh, the ancient Seat of the Kings of Vlster;
Owen-Maugh.
and on the River Blackwater are two Forts, one which bears the same name,
and the other called Fort Charles.

Mount Norris. Dornous.
Mount Norris, another Fort: And Dornous.

County of Monoghan described.
MONOGHAN, a County very hilly, and well clothed with Wood, is severed into
four Baronies, viz. Monoghan, Trough, Bartrey, and Cremorne: And has for its
chief places,

Clogher, seated on the River Blackwater. Clogher.


Monoghan, a large Fort; Churchland, and Lishanahan. Monoghan.


County of Cavan described.
CAVAN, a small County, and of less account, yet is divided into seven
Baronies, viz. Clonehy, Tulloghgarvy, Casterahan, Clonmoghan, Tullahagh,
Tullabonobo, and Loughtee. And has for its chief places,

Cavan, and Kilmore.
Cavan, and Kilmore, the one seated on the Lake Cane, the other on the Lake
Nivity, both which are joined to the Lake Earne, by the River Blackwater.

County of Fermanagh described.
FERMANAGH, a County well clothed with Wood, and very boggy in the midst,
having several Lakes or Loughs, the chief amongst which is that of Earne, which
is the largest and most famous in all the Kingdom, having therein seated diverse
small Isles; and in this Lough are such great store of Salmons, Trouts, and
other Fish, that they are oft-times found troublesome to the Fishermen, by
breaking their Nets. This County is severed into three Baronies, viz.
Magherestrephana, Maghereboy, and Clanawly. And has for its chief places.

Bal-Tarbet, Bal-tarbet.
seated on the same Lake.

Inis Killing.
Inis Killing, the principal Fort in this Tract, which in Anno 1593. was
defended by the Rebels, but taken from them by the valiant Captain Dowdall: and
near unto this place is a great downfall of water, called the Salmon-leap.

CONNAUGH.
Full of Bogs, and Woods.
THis Province, called by the Irish Conaughty, is full of Woods and Bogs, yet
not unfertil, nor wanting in Provisions. In this Province, at Knocktoe, that
is, the Hill of Axes, the greatest rabble of Rebels that ever were seen
together in the Kingdom, were gathered together, and commanded by William Burk
O-Brien, O-Carrol, and Mac-nemare, grand Rebels in that time, but were
discomfited by the noble Valor of Girald Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, and his
party. And about the Year 1316. upon the occasion of two Princes or Lords
falling at odds, there were said to be slain on both sides about 4000 Men, and
so great misery came amongst them through Famine, (being forced to eat one
another) and other calamities; that of about 10000 there were left alive not
above 300.

Its Bounds.
This Province has for its Eastern Bounds, Leimster; for its Southern, Monster;
for its Northern, Vster; and for its Western, the Sea, where it has many
commodious Bays, Creeks, and Navigable Rivers.

Its Extent.
Its Extent from Tromer in the East to Burrag-Bay in the West (being the
breadth) is about 80 miles; and from the River Shennon in the South to
Eniskelling in the North (being the length) is about 120; and in circumference
about 400 miles; and for its division is parted into sir Counties, viz. Mayo,
Slego, Galloway, Clare or Twomond, and Letrym; all which are subdivided into
several Baronies, as hereafter shall be named: And of these in order.

County of Mayo described.
MAYO, apleasant and fertile County, stored with Cattle, Deer, Hawks, and Honey,
and well watered with the two large Loughs of Meske, and Garogh, in which are
several Isles, which with the Rivers that fall into the Sea, where are seated
several Isles; the Inhabitants are plentifully supplied with Fish and Fowl. It
is severed into nine Baronies, viz. Tirrawly, Eris, Gallin, Coragh, Burishoole,
Muriske, Kilmaine, Clonmoris, and Castello; And has for its chief places,

Killaloy, Killaloy.
dignified with an Episcopal See, which formerly was at Mayo, where (according
to Bid) there was a Monastery for 30 English men, built by an Irish Bishop;
and was in a flourishing condition in the Reign of King John.

Refraint. Stackby.
Refrain and Stackby, both seated on the Sea-shoar.

SLEGO, a County full of rich Pastures, which breed and fatten store of Cattle,
County of Slego described.
and is well watered with the Sea, and the Lough Earne already treated of. It
is divided into six Baronies; viz. Carbury, Corran, Leny, Tirrarill, Tirreragh,
and Coolavin. And has for its chief places,

Slego, Slego.
seated on a Bay of the Sea so called, where it has a commodious Road for
Ships, and is defended by a Castle.

Dundroes. Dunbroyle.
Dundroes and Dunbroyle, both Maritim-Towns.

GALLOWAY, a large and fertile County both for Tillage and Pasturage, whose
Western part is washed with the Sea, County of Galloway described.
which thrusts forth several Arms, and has lying on its Shoars diverse Isles,
of which the three largest (which bear the name of Aran) are Great-Island,
Ifor-Island, Small-Island, all seated in the Mouth of Galloway-Bay. It is
separated into fifteen Baronies, viz. Moycullin, Ballinananen, Clare,
Downamore, Bealamo, Killehane, Kilconel, Clanemactonene, Longford, Tiaquin,
Athenry, Dunkillin, Kilcartan, Lough-Reagh, and Letrim. And has for its chief
places,

Galloway, Galloway.
a fair, large, and strong City, dignified with an Episcopal See, and is
commodiously seated for Traffic on a spacious Bay of the Sea so called, by
reason whereof it is well inhabited, frequented, and enjoys a good Trade.
Nigh unto this City is the Lough Carble or Carbles, about 20 miles in length,
and 3 or 4 in breadth, in which are abundance of small Isles.

Inis-Ceath, Inis-Ceath.
a place in times past well known for its Monastery.

Inis-Bovind, Inis-Bovind.
which Bid calls White-Castle-Isle.

Aterith. Clan-Ricard. Kilmaculo and Clonfert.
Aterith, or Athenry, once a place of good strength. Clan-Ricard, Kilmaculo,
and Clonfert.

County of Clare described.
CLARE, or TWOMOND, a County shooting it self far into the Sea toward the
West, with a tapred Promontory, which with the River Shannon, and the Lough
Derg (both full of small Isles) does almost encompass it. It is a Country well
provided of all things necessary for the sustenance of Man, is severed into
nine Baronies, viz. Burrins, Corcomroe, Ibrickam, Inchiquin, Islands,
Clanderlagh, Moyfertagh, Bounraty, and Tullogh. And has for its chief places,

Clare, Clare.
seated on a Creek which flows out of the Shannon.

Kylaloe, Kylaloe.
seated on the Shannon near the Lough Derg, dignified with an Episcopal See.

Kilsennerag. Bunraty.
Kilsennerag and Bounraty, not far from the Shannon; a Town of some account.

County of Roscomon described.
ROSCOMON, a long but narrow County, of a very fertile Soil, and breeds store
of Cattle; but Northwards, where the Curlew Mountains are, it is inclined to
sterility. It is divided into seven Baronies, viz. Roscomon, Boil, Bealanioo,
East and West Ballintuber, Athlone, and Moycarne. And has for its chief places,

Roscomon, Roscomon.
seated near the Lough Ree, once a place of good account and strength.

Elphen, Elphen.
honored with the Sea of a Bishop.

Athlone, Athlone.
situate on the Lough Ree, defended by a Castle, and beautified with a fair
Stone Bridge. And under the Curlew-Hills in former time was a famous Abbey,
together with the Abbey of Beatitude.

Country of Letrim described.
LETRIM, a hilly County, yet very fit for grasing of Cattle, which are here in
great abundance. It is severed into five Baronies, viz. Letrim, Drumaheire,
Rosdogher, Carrigallin, and Moyhill. And has for its principal place,

Letrim. Meukerk.
Letrim, seated in a fertile Soil, near the Lough Alyne; and Meukerk.

MUNSTER.
Its Commoditles.
THis Province in Irish called Mown, and in Latin, Momonia, is Mountainous,
Woody, and of a different Soil, but for the generality very fertile, and
abounding in Corn, Cattle, Fowl, and Fish; and the rather as being so well
watered with Rivers and Bays, which lose themselves in the Sea, which almost
encompasseth it, except toward the East and North, where it butteth upon the
Provinces of Leimster and Connaugh; which said Bays afford good Harbors for
Shipping, the chief amongst which being those of Bautre, Mare, Dingle, and
Sennon: And along the Shore are seated abundance of small Isles.

It is of a large extent, Extent.
being from Waterford-Haven in the East to Feriter-Haven in the West, about 100
miles; and from Baltimore-Bay in the South to Galloway-Bay in the North, about
90; and in circumference, tracing its many Promontories and Indents, above 500
miles.

And as to its Temporal Government, it is at present severed into six Counties,
Counties, Division.
viz. Limerick, Tipperary, or Holy-Cross, Kerry, Cork, Desmond, and Waterford;
all which are subdivided into several Baronies, as shall be treated of as they
come in order; and first with Limerick.

County of Limerick described.
LIMERICK, a fertile and well inhabited County, is severed into eleven Baronies,
viz. Abbey-Outheney-boy, Limerick-Liberty, Clan-Williams, Small-County, Coshma,
Coshlea, Killmalock, Poblebria, Kenry, Cuonagh, and Connelloe. And has for its
chief places,

Limerick, in Irish, Loumeagh, the chief City in the Province, Limerick.
seated in an Isle, so made by the River Shennon, which after 60 miles course
loses it self in the Sea; and by reason of its commodious situation, the
River being Navigable to the very City, makes it to be a place well inhabited
and frequented, is graced with good built Houses, beautified with a Cathedral
Church, and a fair Stone Bridge, is honored with the Sea of a Bishop, and is
strongly fortified with a Castle, and begirt with a Wall.

Kill-Mallo, a well inhabited Town, which is also begirt with a Wall. Killmallo.


Adare, seated on the Shennon, once a Town of good account: And Clan-William.
Adare.


County of Tipperary, or Holy-Cross described.
TIPPERARY, or HOLY-CROSS, more fertile in its Southern parts than elsewhere, is
divided into twelve Baronies, viz. Slevardagh and Compsey, Kilnemana, Ikerin,
Iffa and Offa, Iliogurty, Middle-third, Owney and Arra, Clan-Williams, Ileagh,
Kilnelougurty, Vpper-Ormond and Lower-Ormond; and has for its principal places,

Cassile, seated on the Shower, and dignified with an Archiepiscopal See,
Cassile.
by Eugenius the Third, Bishop of Rome.

Holy-Cross, seated on the River Shower or Swire, Holy-Cross.
once a place of good account and note for its famous Abbey, which was well
frequented by Pilgrims, and other devout persons, who came to see and worship a
piece (as was generally supposed) of the Holy-Cross, from whence the Country
adjoining is generally called County of the Holy-Cross of Tipperary.

Emeley, dignified with the Sea of a Bishop; once a place of good account,
Emeley.
and well inhabited and frequented.

Clomel, seated on the River Shower, a well frequented Town. Clomel.


Carick-Mac-Griffin. Thurles, and Tipperary.
Carick-Mac-Griffin, situate on a Rock. Thurles and Tipperary.

The North part of this County (which is very hilly, and not over fertile)
bears the name of Ormond, and is honored in giving Title to his Grace James
Butler, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Ormond, Earl of Brecknock and Ossery;
Viscount Thurles, Baron of Arklow and Lanthony, Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household, Knight of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.

County of Kerry described.
KERRY, a County watered with the Sea, where it thrusts forth a larg^ Bay
called Dingley-Bay, and has on its Shore diverse small Isles. It is ver^
Mountainous and Woody, but interlaced with fertile Valleys. It Is divided into
eight Baronies, viz. Glaneroughty, Iveragh, Dunkerone, Moygunnyhy, Trughanackme
Corkaguiny, Iraghticonnor, and Clanmorris; And has for its chie^ place,

Dingle, Dingle.
which has a commodious Port, on the other side of which is Smerwick-Sound, a
good Road for Ships.

Ardart. Traley.
Ardart, a place of mean account, although the Sea of a Bishop; and Trale^

County of Desmond described.
DESMOND, a Mountainous County, and well washed with the Se^ which thrusts
forth its Arms a good way into the Land, and forms thre^ Promontories, viz.
first that of Eraugh, lying between Baltimore and Ban^r^ a Bay sufficiently
well known for the great store of Herrings here taken. Secondly, that of Bear,
being enclosed between the Bays of Maire and Dingl^ It has for its chief
places,

Donekyran. Ardes. Downbay.
Donekyran, defended by a Castle: Ardes, and Downbay.

CORK, a large County, lying on the Sea, where it has good Roads an Ports for
Ships. County of Cork described.
It is severed into fifteen Baronies, viz. Duhallo, Condon^ a^ Clangibon,
Orrery and Killmore, Fermoy, Imokillire, Barrimore, Cork, Chursey Kinsale,
Barriroe, Ibawne, Bear and Bantry, Musbery, Carbury, and Barets. And has for
its chief places,

Cork, Cork.
the chief City in the Province, dignified with the Sea of a Bisko^
commodiously seated on a Bay of the Sea, where it has a good Haven, b^ reason
of which it is a place well inhabited, and frequented by Merchants an^
Tradesmen, who drive a good Trade; and is a place of some strength, being
begirted with a Wall, besides a River, over which it has a Bridge.

Kinsale, Kinsale.
seated at the Mouth of the River Bany, where it has a good Por^ and is a
place well fortified.

Ross, Ross.
seated on the Sea-shoar; once of good account, when it had a go^^ Road and
Port, which now is barred up.

Yoghall, Yoghall.
fortified with a Wall, and situate on the River Broadwater, at i^ influx into
the Sea, where it has a good Haven, which makes it to be well i^ habited, and
to enjoy some Trade.

County of Waterford described.
WATERFORD, a pleasant and fertile County, washed with the Sea, (...) divided
into seven Baronies, viz. Deeceis, Gualtier, Cashmore and Coshbrid^
Middle-third, Vpper-third, Glamhery, and Waterford-Liberty. And hat^ for its
chief places,

Waterford, Waterford.
by the Britains and Irish called Portblargy, said to be built (...) certain
Pirates of Norway, seated on the River Shower, on which it has (...) commodious
and capacious Port, where about a 1000 Sail of Ships may safe^^ ride at Anchor:
It is a fair and well inhabited City, enjoys a good Trade, (...) dignified
with the Sea of a Bishop, and is esteemed the second place of ^^te i^ the whole
Kingdom.

Dungarvan, Dungarvan.
a well fortified Town on the Sea-shoar, where it has a goo^ Road for Ships,
which makes it to be of some account.

Ardmore, Ardmore.
also seated on the Sea-shoar.

Lismore, Lismore.
a place of some note.

Diverse small Isles in the British Sea.
And thus much for the Description of Ireland, besides which, and Grea^-Britain,
there are a vast number of lesser Isles, which may be comprehende^ under the
denomination of the British Isles, and may be considered under fou^ sorts or
heads; viz. the Orcades, the Hebrides, the ^or^inges, and the Isles o^ Scilly,
with those of the Sporades: And of these in order.

maps of the Shetland Islands, the Isle of Man, the Isle of Wight, the Orkney
Islands, Jersey and Guernsey. MAPP OF THE ISLES (...) WIGHT, IARSEY, GARNSEY,
^^RKE, MAN, ORCADES, ^^D SHETLAND, BY RIC: Blome, by his Matys. Command.
SHETLAND
ISLE OF M^^
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Derby To ye Rt Honble Will: Earl^ of
Derby, Ld Stanley and Strange: of (...) and (...) and Ld Lieutenant (...)
County and (...) of Lancaster and Chesir and Admiral of ye (...) and Lord of
Man (...). This Mapp of (...) humbly dedicated by Rich Blome..

^^^E OF WIGHT
blazon or coat of arms of the baronetcy of Barrington, Essex To ye
Worshipful, Thomas Bucclugh of Swaynston and Brixton in ye Isle of Wight Esquire;
Son and heir to ye Sr. Io Barington of Barrington hall in Essex Knight. and Bart.
This Mapp of ye Isle of Wight is Humbly dedicated by Ric Blome.

ORCADES
^ARSEY
blazon or coat of arms of the Carteret baronetcyTo ye Rt Honble S.r George
Carteret Knight and Bart (...) Chamberlain of his Maj^^s household and one of his
Matys most honble privy Council etc This Mapp of Jarsey is humbly dedicate^ by
Ric Blome.

blazon or coat of arms of the Hatton baronetcyGARNSEY
To ye. Rt. Hon Christopher Haton, Baron Hatton of Kirby, Governor of ye Isle
of Garsey etc. This Mapp of Garnsey is Humbly DD. by Ric: Blome.



Isles of Orkney, when first discovered, and how subdued.
THe ORCADES, or ISLES of ORKNEY, are in number 32, and situate against the
Northern Cape of Scotland, from which it is separated by a narrow Straight. In
Solinus his time they were uninhabited, and overgrown with sledgy or rushy
Weeds, and at present they are not overcrowded with People, as not being very
commodious to dwell in, being very cold, destitute of Woods, and unfit to bear
Wheat, so that instead of Bread-corn they make use of dried Stock Fish, which
they beat to powder. And these Isles, according to Tacitus, are said to be
first discovered by Julius Agricola, when he sailed round Britain with his
Fleet, at which time he brought them under his subjection: After that,
according to Ninnius, Octha, and Ebissus, Saxons (who served under the
Britains) sailed about the Picts Country with 40 Sail of Cyules, that is,
Flyboats, or roaving Pinnaces, and sorely wasted these Isles: Soon after this
they fell into the hands of the Norwegians, who kept the possession thereof
until the Year 1266, at which time the Scots waging War with them, Magnius, the
Fourth of that name (then King of Norway) was constrained to surrender them up
again upon composition unto Alexander the Third, King of the Scots, which was
afterward confirmed by King Haquin: And in Anno 1498, Christian the First,
King of Norway and Denmark, upon the Marriage of his Daughter to James the
Third, King of the Scots, renounced all his Right for himself and his
Successors thereunto.

Its People.
And the People that inhabit these Isles, as well in Language as Behavior,
resemble much of the wild Irish, and are called Redshanks, a sort of People
utterly rude and barbarous. The chief of these Isles are as follows:

POMONIA, by Solinus called Pomona Diutina, Pomonia.
and by the Inhabitants Mainland, for that it is far larger than all the rest,
being about 26 miles in length, and 6 in breadth; an Isle well stored with Lead
and Tin, is indifferently inhabited, and has for its chief Town,

Kirke-wale, a large Town, dignified with an Episcopal See, Kirkwale.
is fortified with two Castles; and for Divine Worship has 12 Churches, one of
which, to wit its Cathedral, is a fair Structure.

Hoy, with other Isles.
HOY, indifferent large, having several Towns; Souna, Flotta, South-Ranals,
Burra, Siapins, Eglis, Roous, Wester, Papa, Fana, Heth, or Eda, Streoms,
Sand-Isle, and North-Ranals, with diverse others of less note, and not worth the
naming.

Shetland Isles.
The ISLES of SHETLAND, by some (though falsely) esteemed the Thule of the
Ancients, and by the Commentator upon Horace, the Fortunate Island, where
(according to the fabulous Opinion of Tzetzes) the Souls of good men are
Ferried over into those Elysiian Fields, which are always clothed in their
Summer-Livery; but the mistake is very gross, for on the contrary, this Isle
lying in the Latitude of 63 degrees, is extremely Cold, and the greatest part
of the Year pestered with Ice and Snow; and the more, as lying on every side
open to the bitter Storms of the Northern Ocean.

Isle of Hebrides described.
The HEBRIDES, HEBVDES, or Western Isles, as seated Westwards of Scotland, are
about 44 in number, and for the generality are plentifully provided with Corn,
Woods, Sheep, Salmons, Herrings, and other Fish, as also with Fowl, Deer, and
Conies. And for the People (according to Solinus) they are said to be uncivil,
ignorant of Religion, Arts, and Literature, contenting themselves in a mean
condition, for Food, Raiment, or Habitation; and all these Isles were anciently
ruled by a King of their own, which was not by succession, but election; and to
that end their Kings were prohibited to marry, but were permitted to enjoy
other men's Wives, which he fancied, when, and as long as he pleased. And it is
said, that in the other part of Scotland (according to ancient Custom) the
Virginity of all Newmarried Wives were the Landlords due, until such time that
King Malcolme made a Law, that half a Mark should be paid for redemption. It
seems Maiden-heads in these parts were then of no great value, for a Mark
Scotch is little above a Shilling English. The chief of these Isles are,

LEWIS, Lewis-Isle.
or LEVISA, the largest of all these Isles, being about 60 miles in length and
30 in breadth; an Isle full of steep, craggy, and stony Hills, not
over-thronged with Inhabitants, but has several small Towns.

SKY, Skye-Isle.
adjoining to the Seacoast of Scotland, almost as large as Lewis, has several
Inlets of the Sea, is Hilly and Barren: And has for its chief places,

Tanternesca, Tranternesca.
seated on the Sea-shoar, before which lies a small Isle.

Dunbegan. Dunskaca.
Dunbegan, seated on a Creek or Arm of the Sea, and Dunskaca.

EVST, Eust-Isle.
an Isle (or rather Isles) of a long, but narrow extent, in which are seated
several small Towns. And near unto the Southern part of this Isle lie several
small ones, the chief amongst which is Barray.

MVLA, Mula-Isle.
by Ptolomy called Maleos, about 28 miles long, and 20 broad, is seated near
unto the County of Lorne in Scotland, from which it is severed by an Arm of the
Sea, where are such abundance of small Isles, that the passage is almost
choked up. It is an Isle (as all the rest) hilly, and not over fertile, but
affords good store of Fish and Fowl, and has Mines of Lead and Tin. Its chief
places are,

Arroisca, Arroisca.
situate on the Sea-shoar, which regards the County of Laquebra in Scotland.

Dovert-Castle, Dovert-Castle.
also situate toward the Coast of Scotland Eastwards.

ILA, Ila-Isle.
of old EPIDIVM, of about 24 miles in length, and 16 in breadth, almost divided
into two parts by Inlets of the Sea. It is plentifully stored with Cattle and
Herds of Red-Deer, and its Land, which is of a Champain and fertile Soil,
bears good Corn, and participating something with the quality of Ireland,
from which it is not far distant. In this Isle are seated several Towns,
amongst which are Gwelwal, Kylmany, and Dunweg.

SVRA, Sura-Isle.
a small Isle, lying between Ila and Scotland, where, at Sodore, formerly the
Seat of a Bishop, who had Jurisdiction over all these Isles, stood a Monastery
famous for the Tombs of the Scottish Kings, and the frequent recourse of Holy
men thereunto; amongst whom Columbe, the Apostle of the Picts, was of chief
note, and from whose Cell the Isle is also called Columb-Kill.

ARRAN, Arran-Isle.
which Antonius calls Glotta, is an Isle seated in the Dunbritain-Frith,
between the Counties of Cantyr, Argile, Kyle, and Galloway. It has for its
chief places,

Arran, Brydyk. Glenkill.
Arran, seated on a Bay of the Sea. Brydyk, and Glenkill.

All the rest of the Isles, comprehended under the name of the Hebrides, are
very small and inconsiderable, being either stony, very barren, or else
inaccessible, by reason of the craggy Clifts; wherefore I shall omit the naming
of them.

The Isles of Scilly.
The ISLES of SCILLY, by the Dutch called the Sorlings, and by the ancient
Greeks the Hesperides and Cassiterides, are situate against the most Western
Cape of Cornwall, from which they are about 24 miles distant, and are about 145
in number; all being plentifully stored with Coneys, Cranes, Herons, and other
wild Fowl, which breed in the craggy Cliffs and Hills, and some of them fertile
in Grain. Amongst these Isles, these following are of chief note:

SCILLY, Scilly.
which communicates its name to the rest of the Isles; Armagh, Agnes, Sampson,
Brefar, Rusco, St. Hellens, St. Martins, Arthur, and St. Mary's, the largest
and most fertile of all both for Corn and Pastures, is about eight miles in
circuit; is strengthened with a Castle, called Stella Maria, built by Queen
Elizabeth; and has a large and commodious Harbor for Ships.

Under the Name of the SPORADES, may be comprehended several ISLES, which are
dispersed about the British Seas. And first the Isle of Man.

Isle of Man.
MAN, an Island situate in that part of the British Ocean, which is called St.
Georges Channel, and lies between the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, to wit, South of Scotland, West of England, Its situation.
and East of Ireland; from all which it is not so far distant, but that in a
clear day, on the top of Sceaful-Hill (which is in the midst of the Isle) all
the three Kingdoms may easily be seen.

Its Names.
This Isle by Ptolomy was called Moneda; by Pliny, Monabia; by the Britains,
Menow; by the English, Man; and by the Inhabitants, Maninge.

Its Air, temperature, and fertility.
The Air is sharp, but healthful, and subject to high Winds; yet the Frosts are
short, and the Snow lies not long in the Valleys. The Soil is reasonable
fruitful (yet very Mountainous) affording good store of Wheat and other Grain,
especially Oats, of which the Inhabitants make their Bread; and its Pastures
feed good Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle, which for smallness resemble
those of the ancient Irish breed. Here are great store of Fowl of sundry sorts,
especially in the Isle of Calf, a very small spot, Isle of Calf.
seated in the South-part toward Anglesey, where there are also abundance of
Puffines, a certain Sea-Fowl that breeds in Cony-holes, and are chiefly useful
for their Feathers, and the Oil made of them; yet their Flesh, if pickled or
salted, comes little short of Anchova's, by reason of their Fish-like taste.
Here are also Red-Deer, abundance of Coneys, and in its fresh water Rivers and
Seacoast, are taken store of Fish.

It produces Hemp and Flax in great plenty; also Wool, Hides, Tallow,
Goats-skins, Lead-Oar, Herrings in small quantities, and Corn, when they are
assured that there is enough to serve themselves.

Its Trade and Commodities.
The Inhabitants do not much addict themselves to Traffic, only contenting
themselves in way of Barter for such Necessaries as they have most occasion
for, as Iron, Salt, Pitch, Tar, and the like; and for support of this their
small Trade, they make choice of certain Merchants, which are chosen by the
Inhabitants at the Tinewald-Court, and accordingly are sworn by the Deemsters
or Judges to deal uprightly, and for the profit of the Inhabitants. And these
Merchants are the only persons that do negotiate with such as bring Commodities
unto them in way of Barter; and what Bargains the said Merchants make, the
Inhabitants are obliged to stand unto; and the said Commodities so taken in
Truck, are equally distributed to every one according to the Goods he parted
with.

Its Form.
The form of this Isle is long and narrow, being about 30 miles in length, and
about 9 in breadth, where broadest.

It is very destitute of Wood, which makes the Inhabitants use Turff and Peat
for their Firing.

It is generally an High-land on the Seacoast, and guarded with Rocks, at a
farther distance than the Low-water-mark.

Its Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants were anciently the Hehrides or Highlanders, which is apparent
by their Language; and before Christianity had footing here, were very rude and
barbarous; but at present they are a civil and laborious People, no ways
voluptuous in their Diet, nor costly in their Apparels or Habitations; they are
very Religious, and neglect not the Church, yet (as all People) they are
inclined to Venery; Contentions and Strifes they are not much addicted unto,
living in Amity together; and for Recreation, they are so much addicted to the
music of the Violin, that there is scarce any Family but is provided therewith.

The Government.
As to the Government for Spiritual Affairs, it has a Bishop, who at present is
the Right Reverend Dr. Henry Bridgman, and is called Lord Bishop of Sodore; and
for Temporal Affairs, a Lieutenant, or Governor, with two Deemsters or Judges,
a Controller, a Clerk of the Rolls, a Receiver, a Water-Bailiff, an
Attorney General, and other Officers. And to their further assistance (as
occasion requires for the deciding of Controversies, etc.) are usually called
the 24 Keys of the Isle, especially once every year, to wit, upon Midsomer-day
at St. John's Chapel to the Tinewild-Court, where (upon a Hill adjoining to the
said Chapel) the Inhabitants of the Isle, being there assembled, hear the Laws
and Ordinances agreed upon before in the Chapel, which is performed with no
small ceremony and pomp, especially if the Lord of the Isle be present, who is
seated on a Chair of State, with a Canopy over his head, and attended by his
Barons, viz. the Bishop, the Deemsters, the Gentry, and the Yeomanry. The
present Lord of the Isle (who is called King in Man) is the Right Honorable
Charles Stanley, Earl of Darby, Baron Strange of Knocking and Mohan, etc. a
Dignity hereditary to him and his Heirs.

Good Orders observed in their Law.
The Inhabitants have a great happiness above those of England, in that they are
freed from necessary and chargeable Suits, and heavy Fees of the Lawyers; for
here no Judge or Clerks take any thing for drawing up Orders, or making up
Processes, all Controversies being ended by the Deemsters without Writings, or
matter of Charge; and for the deciding the same they have their several Courts,
kept at certain times of the year for the Inhabitants of such a sheading or
division of the Isle, where they have particular Officers, which do observe
good Rules and Orders.

The People do here observe two very good Customs; the one, in not permitting
the Poor to get their living by Begging; and the other, that when the Women go
abroad, they begirt themselves with their Winding Sheet, to put them in mind of
their Mortality.

This Isle is severed into two parts, viz. South and North, whereof the
Inhabitants of the one have affinity with the Scots, and the other with the
Irish. And in these parts are numbered 17 Parishes, and many Villages; is
desended by two Castles, and for intercourse of Traffic has five
Market Towns. Its chief places are, Its chief places.


Douglas, Douglas.
the best Peopled Town, and of the greatest resort by reason of its commodious
Haven, unto which the French and others come to Traffic with them for their
Commodities, as aforesaid; and for the security of the Harbor here is a
Block-house.

Russin, Russin.
or Castle-Town, where (within a small Isle) Pope Gregory the Fourteenth
instituted an Episcopal See: It is fortified with a strong Castle, but of no
great importance, as to the security of the place, by reason of its distance
from the rocky and shallow Harbor.

Laxi-Town.
Laxi-Town, seated on a Bay so called.

Ramsey, Ramsey.
situate on the Sea, where it has a Haven, which for defense has some Guns
mounted thereon.

Peel, Peel.
or Peel-Castle, seated in St. Patricks-Isle, a place of great strength toward
the Sea, and defended by a Castle, being a Market Town, as are the former.
Amongst its other places are these following; Balacuri, honored with the
Palace of the Bishop, Kirh-Androw, Kirk-Patriark, Kirk-Balalough, Kirk-Mighill,
Kirk-Lennon, Kirk-Brodon, Kirk-Santon, and Kirk-Christ.

The Isle of Jersey described.
JERSEY, seated near the Coast of Normandy in France, and opposite to Hantshire
in England, of which it is a part; it is a place of good strength, as well by
Nature as Art, as being fenced about with Shelves and Rocks, and defended by
several Castlos. It is an Isle of a fertile Soil, and the more by reason of
their rich manuring it, bearing good crops of Corn, and other Grain, and
breeding store of Cattle, especially good Flocks of Sheep, whose Wool is fine,
of which they make Jersey-Stockings in great plenty. It is ill clothed with
Wood, instead of which they use for Fuel a kind of Sea-weed, which they call
Vraic, which plentifully grows on the Rocks, and in the craggy Islands, and
this being dried, they burn, and with the Ashes they manure the Land: Nor are
they permitted to gather it, but in the Spring and Summer-season, and then upon
certain days, according to the appointment of the Magistrates.

Its extent.
This Isle contains in length, from Mount-Orguil-Castle in the East to
Sentwon-pool in the West, about 10 miles; and in breadth, from Dubon-point in
the South to Plymouth-Bay in the North, about 6; and in circumference about 38
miles.

Its Air and temperature.
It is blessed with a sweet, temperate, and wholesome Air, not being subject to any
disease, except Agues in September. It is well watered with fresh Streams, and
has great plenty of Fruit: and the Inhabitants, who are much of the nature of
the French, in their Language, Manners, etc. live very happily, enjoy the
fruits of their labor, addicting themselves to Fishing, but principally to the
Manufacture of Stockings, which finds good vent in England, and elsewhere.

The Government of this Isle is as follows; Government.
viz. a Governor or Captain is sent over by the King of England, who appointed
Sub-Officers, as a Bailiff, who together with twelve Jurates, or sworn
Assistants, which are elected our of the 12 Parishes, by the choice of the
Inhabitants, sit and administer Justice in Civil Causes; but in Criminal
matters, he sits with seven of them; and in Causes of Conscience, which are
to be decided by reason and equity, with only three.

This Isle is every where furnished with commodious Creeks and Havens, and is
garnished with twelve Parishes, besides several Villages. Its chief places.
Its chief places are,

St. Hillares, so called from St. Hillary Bishop of Poictiers, St. Hillares.
who was hither banished, and here interred: a Town seated on the Sea-shoar,
nigh unto which is a small Isle so called, which is fortified with a Garrison;
and this Town is the principal in the Isle for its Market, Commerce, plenty of
Inhabitants, and for being the place where the Courts of Judicature are kept.

St. Albans, seated not far from the Sea, where it has a a Haven; St. Albans.
as also a small Isle so called.

St. Clement, seated on an Arm of the Sea; St. Clements.
not far from which is the Castle of Mount-Orguil, seated on a steep Rock on
the Eastern-shoar; Mount-Orguil.
nigh unto which is a place called the Rock, and another called St.
Katharines-point: also these Towns, Trinity, St. John's, St. Lawrence, St.
Brelade, St. Peter's, St. Owen, St. Mary's, and Greve de Leke; not far from
which on the North-shoar, is seated the strong Castle of Groness.

The Isles of Garnsey, described.
GARNSEY, seated about 15 miles North-west from Jersey, and on the same Coast;
an Isle not so large, nor altogether so fertile as Jersey, by reason the
Inhabitants do not addict themselves so much to cultivating and manuring it, as
they do to Traffic, for which this is more eminent; yet does it in a liberal
manner answer the Husbandmans labor, bringing forth good increase, and
breeding good store of Cattle. This Isle is seated very high, having many steep
Rocks, amongst which is found a hard and sharp Stone called Emerill, which is
used by Lapidaries, for the cleansing, cutting, and burnishing their precious
Stones; as also by Glasiers, for the cutting their Glafs. And for many reasons
this Isle may be preferred before Jersey, as for its greater strength, more
commodious Havens, which are better resorted unto by Merchants, and for that it
suffers neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or any other venomous Creature to live,
which the other does.

Its Government.
The Government of this Isle, as also the People, as to their Language, Customs,
etc. are much the same as in Jersey.

Chief places.
In this Isle are numbered ten Parish Churches, besides Villages; the chief
amongst which are,

St. Peter's, a Town not very large, St. Peter's.
but well inhabited and replenished with Merchants. It is a place of good
strength; for the entry of the Haven, which is Rocky, is fortified on both
sides with Castles, as also by Block-houses, of which that on the right hand
called Cornet, is seated on a high Rock, which at every High Water is
encompassed with the Sea; and here resideth the Governor, as also (for the
generality) the Soldiers, which are kept for the security of the Isle; and is
well provided with all sorts of Ammunition for War, if occasion should so
happen. Its other places are, Tortuville, St. Saviors, Other places.
St. Andrews, Trinity, St. Martins, St. Mary's, St. Sampsons, and St. Michaels.
On the West part of the Isle, near the Sea, is a Lake of about a mile and an
half in compass, which is well replenished with Fish, especially Carps.

This Island, as also that of Jersey, with several other small ones on the
Coast of Normandy and Britain, are under the Diocese of Winchester; amongst
which Isies are those of Serke, Serk-Isle.
encompassed with steep Rocks. And Jethew, which serves as a Park for the
Governor of Garnsey, Jethew-Isle.
to feed Cattle, to keep Deer, Coneys, and Phesants, and was formerly a
solitary place of Regular Canons, and after for the Franciscan Friars.

Isle of Wight.
ISLE of WIGHT, opposite to Hantshire, of which it is a part, already treated of
in the description of the said County.

PORTLAND, Portland-Isle.
a small Isle, adjoining to the County of Dorset, of which it is also a part,
and already there treated of.

And besides these Isles, there are diverse others which may not so properly be
ranged under these four heads aforesaid; and such are those of

Londay, Londay-Isle.
seated over against Devonshire, about two miles in length, and as much in
breadth, very fertile and strong, whose chief place bears the same name.
Chaldey and Dennoy Isles.
Also Chaldey and Dennoy, all in the Severn Sea.

Isles of Sheppey and Thanet.
Also the Isles of SHEPPY and THANET, in (and near) Kent, already taken notice
of; and lastly those of FARN, COCKET, and HOLY-ISLAND, on the Coast of
Northumberland, likewise there treated of.

Thus having given a Description of EVROPE, we shall in the next place take a
View of ASIA.

ASIA, as it is divided into Firm Land; whereof the principal Paris are, TURKEY
in ASIA, which comprehends the parts and chief places of Anatolia, Smyrna,
Ephesus, Lampsaco. Bursa, Scutari, Tripoli.
Sourie, Aleppo, Tripoli, Damascus, Said.
Diarbeck, Caraemit, Achanchive, Samosat.
Turcomanie, Erzerum, Cars, Majaferequin.

GEORGIE; which comprehends the parts and chief places of Mingrelie, Fazze,
Savatopoli.
Gurgistan, -- Cori. Zulrie, Chipeche, Stranu.
Little Turcomanie, -- Derbent.
ARABIA; with its parts and chief places of Arabia the Stony, Busseret, Moab.
Arabia the Desert, -- Anna. Arabia the Happy, Medina, Mecca, Aden.

PERSIA; with its chief Provinces and places of Servan, -- Tauris. Gilan, --
Gilan. Gorgian, -- Gorgian, Churdistan, -- Choy. Ayrack, Hispahan, Casbin.
Chorazan, -- Kayen. Chusistan, -- Souster. Fars, -- Chiraef. Kherman, --
Giroft. Sablestan, -- Zarani.
INDIA, as it is divided into the Empire of the GREAT MO GOL; wherein are
comprehended diverse Kingdoms, the chief of which are Attock, -- Attock. Calul,
-- Cabul. Lahor, -- Lahor. Delly, -- Delly. Agra, -- Agra. Malway, --
Rantipore. Guzurate, or Cambaya, Surat, Cambava.
Bengala, -- Bengala. Decan, -- Goa.
Peninsula of INDIA without the Ganges, with its several Kingdoms, etc. the
chief of which are, Golconda, -- Golconda. Bisnagar, Bisnagar, Harsingue:
Malabar, -- Calicut.
Peninsula of INDIA within the Ganges; with its Kingdoms and chief places of
Pegu, Pegu, Boldia.
Siam, -- Banckock. Malacca, -- Malacca. Cochinchina, -- Pulocacein. Tunquin,
-- Keccio.

CHINA; with its chief Provinces and Cities of Pequin, -- Pequin. Nanquin, --
Nanquin. Scianton, -- Xanton. Quicheo, -- Quicheo. Canton, -- Canton. Chequian,
-- Chequian.
TARTARIA; with its five Parts, and chief places of Tartaria Deserta, --
Cumbalich. Usbeck, -- Jarcham. Turchestan, -- Chialis. Cathay, -- Cambalu. True
Tartaria, -- Tartan.

ISLES, to wit, In the Ocean; as the Isles of JAPON; as Niphon, -- Meaco.
Xicoco, -- Sanuqui. Ximo, -- Bungo,
PHILLIPPINE Isles; as Luson, -- Luson. Mindanao, -- Mindanao.
Isles of MOLUCCO'S; as Molucques, -- Gamma. Celebes, -- Celebes. Gilolo, --
Gilolo.
Isles of SONDE; as Sumatra, Achem, Aru.
Borneo, -- Borneo. Java, Bantar^, Jacatra.

Isles of LARRONS, or THEVES, -- Deserte. Isles of CEVLAN, -- Colombo. Isles of
the MALDIVES, -- Tilla don Matis.
In the Mediterranean Sea; as In the LEVANT Sea; as Cvprus, -- Famagouste.
Rhodes, -- Rhodes. Scarpanto, -- Scarpanto.
In the ARCHIPELAGO; as Scio, -- Scio. Tenedo, -- Metelin. Samo, -- Samo.
Nicaria, -- Nicaria. Lango, -- Lango. Stampalia, -- Stampalia.




ASIA.
ASIA is one of the Tripartite division of our Continent; and if we consider
the advantages which the Author o^ Nature has given it, if the Actions which
have passed in it both before and after the Flood; Asia the first place of
Monarchies, of all. Religions, etc.
that the first Monarchies, and all Religions have here had their beginnings;
that the chief Mysteries (both of the Old and New Law) have there been laid
open; we may be induced to prefer in before all other parts, either of the one
or other Continent.

And as of the two Continents ours is much the greater, the more noble, and
most considerable; so is Asia among the three parts of our Continent, the
Greatest, the most Oriental, the most Temperate, and the Richest.

Its Extent from West to East is from the 55th Meridian or degree of Longitude
unto the 180, containing 125 degrees of Longitude, which are about 2500 of our
common Leagues; Its length and breadth.
and from South to North from the Equator to the 72 Parallel or degree of
Latitude, which is 72 degrees of Latitude, and makes about 1800 of our Leagues.
In this length and breadth we do not comprehend the Islands which belong to
Asia, which are as great, as rich, and possibly as numerous, as all the rest of
the Universe.

Its Situation.
Its Situation, for the most part, is between the Circular Tropic of Cancer,
and the Circle of the Artick Pole scarce extending it self beyond this, but
surpassing the other in diverse of its Isles, which it expands under the
Equator: so that almost all Asia is situate in the Temperate Zone; what it
has under the Torrid, being either Peninsula's or Isles, which the Waters and
Sea may easily refresh.

Asia the richest of all the four Parts.
ASIA being the greatest, the best, and most temperate part of our Continent,
it must by consequence be the richest; which not only appears in the goodness
and excellencies of its Grains, Vines, Fruits, Herbs, etc. but likewise in its
great quantities of Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Spices, Drugs, and other
Commodities and Rarities, which it sends forth and communicates to other parts,
and particularly to Europe.

Amongst the three divisions of our Continent, Asia is that which has the
fairest advantage for its greatness, and for its situation; being that Country
which saw the Creation of the first Man, the making of the first Woman; which
fed the first Patriarks, gave a place to the Terrestrial Paradise; that which
received the Ark of Noah after the Flood; which was the Portion of Sem, the
eldest Son of Noah, which built the Tower of Babel, which furnished the rest of
the World with Inhabitants; which established the Monarchies of the Assyrians,
Medes, Babylonians, and Persians; which formed the map of Asia A General MAPP
of ASIA Designed by MOUNSIER SANSON Geographer to the FRENCH KING and Rendered
into English, and Ilustrated by RIC: BLOME. By his MAJtis Especial Command
LONDON Printed for Ric: Blome 1669
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of AlbemarleTo The Rt. Noble Christopher
Duke of Albemarle. Earl of Torington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp and
Teys, Knight. of ye. most noble order of ye Garter, Lord Leivtenant of Devon-shire
and Ess ex, Captain. of his Matys. Guards of Horse, one of ye Gentlemen of his
Bedchamber, etc one of ye Lords of his most Honbl. Privy Council This Mapp is
most humbly D.D. by R.B

Arts and Sciences, Letters and Laws; which first and after the Law of Nature
received Paganism, Judaism, Christianity, and Mahumetanism; which saw the
Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of the Savior of the World: And therefore
for all these Reasons we ought to esteem Asia much above either Africa or
Europe. But let us proceed to its Name, Bounds, and Divisions.

Its Name.
The Name of ASIA is derived diversely by sundry Authors, but whether it took its
name from a Virgin-Woman, or a Philosopher; whether from some City, Country, or
Marish, or from whatever it were, most certain it is, that that Name was first
known to the Greeks, on that Coast opposite to them toward the East;
afterward it was given to that Region which extends to the Euphrates, and
which is called Asia Minor, and was communicated to all the most Oriental
Regions of our Continent.

Its Bounds.
Its Bounds are toward the North, with the Northern frozen, or Scythian Ocean,
to wit, that which washes Tartary; on the East and South with the Oriental or
Indian Ocean, the Parts of which are the Seas of China, India, and Arabia.
Toward the West, Asia is separated from Africa by the Red Sea, from the
Straight of Babel-Mandel unto the Isthmus of Suez; and from Europe, by the
Archipelago, by the Sea of Marmora, and by the Black-Sea; drawing a Line cross
all these Seas, and passing by the Straight of Galipoli, or the Dardanelles; by
the Straight of Constantinople, or Chanel of the Black-Sea, by the Straight of
Caffa or Vospero; the Line continuing by the Sea of Zabaque, and by the Rivers
of Don or Tana, of Volga and of Oby, where they are joined the nearest one to
another.

Its division.
Asia may be divided into firm Land, and Islands; the firm Land comprehends the
Kingdoms of Turkey in Asia, Arahia, Persia, India, China, and Tartary: We will
follow this order, and then end with the Isles.

TURKEY in ASIA, or that which the Grand Signior does possess in whole, or in
part, in ASIA; wherein are several Regions, Countries, Isies, etc. may be
considered as they lie Westernly, and toward EUROPE; as, ANATOLIA, or ASIA.
MINOR, wherein are comprised several Provinces; all which are at present by the
Grand Signior included under four Beglerbeglies, that is, Lord Lieutenants; to
wit, those of Anatolia, particularly so called, Smyrna, Ephesus, Pergama,
Troya, Burfia, Comana, Chaloedoine, Scutari, Sinopi, Castele, Angouri, Sardis,
Philadelphia.
Caramania, Archalich, Side, Nigdia, Tarsus, Satalia, Antiochia:
Tocat, Amasia, Tocat, Trebisonde, Caisaria, Caraisar, Marast, Arsingan, Sukas.
Aladuli, Vardar, Adana, Maaraz, Manbeg.

South-westernly; as, Diverse ISLES, as they lie in the ARCHIPELAGO,
MEDITERRANEAN, and AEGEAN Seas; the chief of which are, Cyprus, Nicosia,
Paphos, Salamis, Amathus, Arsinoe, Famagusta.
Rhodes, -- Rhodes. Metelin, of old, Lesbos, Metelino, Medina.
Samos, -- Samo. Tenedos, -- Tenedos. Scarpante, -- Scarpante. Lero, -- Lero,
Negropont, -- Colchis, Coos, -- Coos, Lero, -- Lero, Pathmos, -- Pathmos, Scio,
or Chios, -- Scio, Icaria, of old, Icarus, -- Nicaria,
Southernly, and regarding Arabia and the Mediterranean Sea; as, SOURIA, or
SYRIA; with its parts of Syria Propria, Aleppo, Aman, Zeugma, Antioch, Samosat,
Hemz, or Emsa, Hierapolis, Alexandretetts.
Phoenicia, Tripoli, Said, or Sidon, Tire, or Sor, Damascus, Acre.
Palestine, formerly Judea, Canaan, or the Holy Land, Jerusalem, Samaria,
Naplouse, Gaza, Joppa, or Jussa,

Southernly, and toward Arabia Deserta; as, ASSYRIA, now DIARBECK; with its
parts of Chaldea, or Babylonia, now Yerack, Bagded, or Babylon, Balsera, Cousa,
Orchoe, Sipparum.
Mesopotamia, or the particular Diarbeck, Orpha, Caraemid, Merdin, Asanchif,
Carra, Sumiscasack, Virta.
Assyria, now Arzerum, Mosul, of old, Ninive, Schiarazur.

Easternly, and regarding Persia; as, TURCOMANIA; with its parts of Turoomans,
Erzerum, Cars.
Curdes, Schildir, Bitlis.
Georgiens, Derbent, Tiflis.

North-Easternly, and toward the Caspian Sea; as, GEORGIA; with its parts of
Avogasia, -- St. Sophia, Mingrelie, Phazza, Savatopoli.
Gurgista^, Cori, Bassachiuch.
Quiria, Zitrach, Stranu, Chipicha.

Northernly, and toward Moscovy; as, COMANIA, Asof, Maurolaco, Serent.


blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Winchilsea and Nottingham ^VERS^^
SECVNDIS

To ye Rt Honble Heanage Earl of Winchelse^ Vist Maidstone Baron Fitz Herbert
of Eastwell Lord of the Royal Manor of Wye and Lord Leiutenant of Kent and
(...) This Mapp is humbly D. D by R. B

A MAPP of THE ESTATES of the TURKISH EMPIRE in ASIA, and EUROPE Designed by
Monsr Sanson Geographer to the French King


Turkey in Asia.
UNDER the name of TVRKY in ASIA we understand not all which the Great Turk
possesses, but only certain Regions which he alone possesses, or if there be
any Estates intermixed, they are inconsiderable. And in this Turkey we shall
find Anatolia, which the Ancients called Asia Minor; the greater Souria, which
the Ancients called Syria the Great; Turcomania, by the Ancients called Armenia
the Great; then Diarbeck, which answers to Mesopotamia, and to diverse parts of
Assyria; and the Chaldea, or Babylonia of the Ancients.

ANATOLIA is that great Peninsula, which is washed on the North by the
Black-Sea, Mare Major, or Euxine Sea; and on the South by that part of the
Mediterranean which we call the Levant Sea; which extends Westward to the
Archipelago or Aegean Sea, and thence to the Euphrates, which bounds it on the
East.

The Parts of Asia Minor, or Anatolia.
The Ancients divided this Great Asia Minor into many lesser Regions; of which
the principal are, viz. Pontus, Bithynia, Little Asia Minor; into Lycia,
Galatia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Caria, Ionia, Aeolis, Lydia, Phrygia
Major and Minor, Paphlagonia, Lycaonia, Pysidia, Armenia Minor, Mysia, the Isle
of Rhodes, etc.

But at present the Turks do in general call this Great Asia Minor, Anatolia,
which signifies Orient: That part of Anatolia, which is most exposed to the
North, to wit, Pontus, Bithynia, Galatia, and Cappadocia, by the appellation of
Rumla: The more Meridional parts they call Cottomandia, which are Lycia,
Pamphilia, and Cilicia: The Little Asia Minor, which is on the Archipelago,
has no other name than that of Anatolia.

But all these Names are little known amongst them, much less those which are
attributed to the lesser parts of Anatolia. The Turks division of Anatolia.
The Turks divide it into four Beglerbeglies, which are as our Lord
Lieutenancies; under which are 35 or 34 Sangiacats, which are as our particular
Governments.

The Beglerbeglies are of Anatolia, of Caramania, of Toccat, and of Aladuli:
The two first compose all the Western part of Anatolia; the two last all the
Eastern part. The Beglerby of Anatolia, has under him eleven or twelve
Sangiacks. The Beglerby of Caramania has only seven or eight; he of Toccat
likewise seven or eight; and he of Aladuli, five or six.

The Cities where the Beglerbies keep their residence, are Cuitage or Cutage,
formerly Cotyaeum, for him of Anatolia; Cogna, once Iconium; others put
Caesaria, once Caesaria penes Anazarbum, for him of Caramania; Amasia, which
keeps its ancient name; and sometimes Trebizonde, formerly Trapezus, for him of
Toccat; and Maraz, for him of Aladuli. But to proceed to the Provinces of
Anatolia.

The Province of Pontus described.
PONTVS is a Country of a large extent, and takes up all the length of
Anatolia, and was by the Romans anciently separated into four parts; viz.
Polemoniacus, Pontus Galaticus, Pontus Cappadocius, and Metapontus, or Pontus
especially so called.

POLEMONIACVS has for its chief places, Nixaria, formerly Neo-Caesarea, which
is the Metropolis; Zela, enlarged by Pompey, and called Megalopolis,
Barbanissa, and lastly Sebastia, so called in honor of Augustus, whom the
Greeks called Sebastos; a place for strength very considerable, and contended
against Tamerlane; which was no sooner taken by him, but (to satisfy his
Revenge) he caused most cruelly to be buried alive in great Pits about 12000
Men, Women, and Children. Nigh to this City is Mount Stella, where Pompey gave
Mithridates his fatal overthrow. Here Mithridates had his overthrow.
This Mithridates was a great and eminent King of Pontus, who for 40 years
withstood the Romans; not more excellent in War, than in Learning and Memory,
who spoke 22 several Languages, who invented that Counter-poyson, from him
named Mithridate; who at last, by the Rebellion of his Son, and the Valor of
L. Sylla, Lucullus and Pompey, was vanquished; where Pompey, upon a small
Island at the entrace of the Euxine Sea, erected a Pillar, which at this day
bears his name, and is by the Inhabitants showed to Strangers, as a memorial of
his Victories in these parts.

In this part of Pontus, on the rise and fall of the River Thermodon, and on
the Banks thereof, the Amazons, a sort of Warlike-Women were here said to
reside, so called, either because they used to cut off their right Breasts,
which otherwise would be an impediment to their shooting, or because they used
to live together. They were at first Scythians, and accompanied their Husbands
to these parts, about the time of the Scythians first coming into Asia, in the
time of Sesostris King of Egypt. These People held a great hand over the
Themiscyrin, who inhabited this Region, and the Nations round about them, and
at last by Treachery were murdered; A short account of the Amazonian Women,
who here inhabited.
but their Wives being grievously angered (as well through Grief and Fear, as
Exile and Widdow-hood) set upon the Conquerors, under the conduct of Lempado
and Marpesia; who not only overthrew them, but also much added to the largeness
of their Dominions, and for a considerable time continued in great reputation.
The Names of the chiefest of the Amazon Queens were, Lampedo, Marpesia, Ortera,
Antiopa, and Peuthesilea, who with a Troop of gallant Virago's came to the Aid
of Priamus King of Troy: who at last was slain by Pyrrhus, Son to Achilles.
These Amazons, in matters of Copulation, used to go to their neighboring Men
thrice in a year; and if it happened that they brought forth Males, they sent
them to their Fathers; but if Females, then they kept them, and brought them up
in the Discipline of War and Courage.

Chief places in Pontus Galaticus.
PONTVS GALATICVS is Eastward of Pontus; its chiefest Cities are, viz. 1.
Amasia, remarkable for the Martyrdom of St. Theodorus, also being the
Birthplace of Strabo the famous Geographer, and in these latter times for
being the residence of the eldest Sons of the Grand Signior, fent hither as
spon as circumcised, who are not to return till the death of their Father. It
is a great City, about 4 days Journey from the Black-Sea. 2. Themiscyra, now
Favagoria, seated on a large Plain near the Sea. 3. Diopolis, remarkable for
the great Overthrow Lucullus gave to Mithridates. 4. Sinope, of note for being
the Birth and Sepulcher of Mithridates. 5. Castamona, the chief City of the
Isfendiars, which for strength and situation, is by them preferred before
Sinope.

Chief places in Pontus Capadocius.
PONTVS CAPADOCIVS has for its chief places, viz. 1. Ceras^s, from whence
Cherries were first brought into Italy by Lucullus, after he had finished his
War with Mithridates. 12. Pharnacia, built by Pharnaces a King of Pontus 3.
Trebezond, the Metropolis of the Comneni, famous for the Trade of Fish, caught
by the People on the Euxine-shoars, here salted, and then transported in great
quantities to Constantinople, Cassa, and elsewhere. In this City did anciently
reside the Deputies of the Grecian Emperors, for the security of the Out-parts
against the Incursions of the Persians; and now is the place of such Galleys,
as by the Grand Signior are appointed for the scouring and securing their Trade
on the Coasts of the Euxine Sea.

The chief places of Metapontus.
METAPONTVS, whose chief places were, 1. Flaviopolu, so called in honor to
Flavius Vespasianus. 2. Claudiopolis, in honor to Claudius, Emperor of Rome.
3. Juliopolis, in honor of the Julian Family; all which are Mid-land Towns. 4.
Diospobis, of grent resort, on the Euxine Sea, so named from a Temple
consecrated to Jupiter. 5. Heraclia, a Colony of the Phocians, remarkable for
being the Seat of a Branch of the Imperial Family of the Comneni. But above all
is Tocat, a good fair City, built at the foot of a very high Mountain,
spreading it self round about a great Rock that is in the midst of the Town, on
the top of which is seated a Castle, with a good Garrison. It is well inhabited
by Armenians, Greeks, Jews, and Turks, who have the command thereof; its Houses
are well built, but its Streets are narrow, and amongst its Mosques there is
one very stately. Here the Christians have 12 Churches, has an Archbishop,
under whom are 7 Suffragans. Here are two Monasteries for Men, and two for
Women; the greatest part of the Christians are Tradesmen, and generally Smiths:
this is the only place in all Asia, where plenty of Saffron grows. This City
is one of the most remarkable Thoroughfares in the East, where are continually
lodged the Caravans from Persia, Diarbeck, Constantinople, Smyrna, Synopus, and
other places; and here the Caravans turn off as they are variously bound. Here
are excellent Fruits and Wine, and Provisions are had at easy rates.

The Province of Bithynia bounded.
BITHYNIA has on the North the Euxine Sea; a place famoused for the Victory of
Alexander against the Persians; then for Mount Stella, where Pompey overthrew
Mithridates; and Tamberlain with 800000 Tartans, encountered Bajazet with
500000, where 20000 lost their lives, and Bajazet in the pride of his heart
being taken, and penned up in an Iron-Cage, beat out his own Brains against the
Bars. Its chief places are, 1. Nice, Chief places in Bithynia.
where the first General Council was held by the appointment of Constantine the
Great, for the expelling of the Arian Heresy. 2. Chalsedon, where the 4th
General Council was, to repel the Nestorian Heresy. 3. Scutari, opposite to
the Haven of Constantinople, in which place the Persians received their Tribute
from the other Cities of these Parts; and lastly, 4. Bursa, once the Seat of
the Ottaman Kings in Asia, till they gained Adrianople in Europe, by Mahomet
the First; now inhabited by Turks, Jews, and Greeks; by some accounted as fair,
rich, and populous as Constantinople, and enjoys a great Trade. It is seated on
the Foot of Mount Olympus for its defense, and is adorned with fair Mosques,
and many Tombs of the Ottoman Princes.

The Province of Lycia bounded, and its Cities described.
LYCIA has for its Southern bounds the Mediterranean Sea, and is environed on
3 sides with the Mountain Taurus, which makes it very strong: It was formerly
exceeding populous, containing about 60 Cities; the greatest part whereof
remained in St. Paul's time, but now are reduced to ruins. The chiefest of which
were, 1. Mira, the chief City of this Province. 2. Patera, adorned with a fair
Haven, and Temples; one of which was dedicated to Apollo, having therein an
Oracle, and for Wealth and Credit suitable to that at Delphos. 3. Telmesus,
whose Inhabitants are famous for interpreting of Dreams.

The Province of Galatia bounded, and its chief places treated of.
GALATIA is bounded on the East with Cappadocia. Towns of note; viz. 1.
Augoura, seated on the River Sangar, 16 days Journey from Constantinople,
famous for the Synod here held in the Primitive times, and is one of the
greatest and richest places of this quarter, furnishing Turkey with a great
number of Chamlets and Mo-hairs. 2. Tavium, where there was a Brazen Statue of
Jupiter, in whose Temple there was a privileged Sanctuary. To this Province
St. Paul did dedicate one of his Epistles.

The Province of Pamphylia, and its chief places.
PAMPHYLIA has for its Southern bounds the Mediterranean Sea. The principal
Cities are, 1. Satalia, (founded by Ptolomy Philadelphus, King of Egypt,) is
the strongest, and best for Traffic of all its Coasts, communicating its name
to the neighboring Gulf, called Golfo di Satalia, and to the most Oriental
part of the Mediterranean Sea; famous for the rich Tapestries that are here
made. 2. Side, famous in the time of the Gentiles for a Temple of Pallas. 3.
Perge, renowned in Old time for the Temple of Diana, and for the Annual Feasts
there held in honor of her; and yet more famous for St. Paul's Preaching here.
4. Aspendus, and Inland Town, strongly situate, once the Metropolis of the
Province, famous of old for its Musicians. These Provinces were converted to
Christianity by the Apostles, St. Paul (who Journied through most Cities in
these quarters,) St. Peter, and St. John, as does appear by Holy Scripture. The
Country for the most part is very Mountainous, which proceed from Mount Taurus,
as branches thereof: Here are abundance of Goats, of whose Hair are made great
quantities of Grograins and Chamlets, which for fineness are not inferior to
Silk, with which it serves other Countries, being its chief Commodity; but
nearer the Sea it is more fruitful, being well watered and planted, more
populous and pleasant.

The Province of Cappadocia bounded.
CAPPADOCIA has for its chief places, 1. Mazaca, enlarged and beautified by
Tiberius the Emperor; and in honor to Augustus Caesar, by him called
Caesarea, being the Metropolitan City of Cappadocia, as also the Episcopal See
of St. Basil. 2. Nyssa, the Sea of Gregory, Surnamed Nyssenus, and Brother to
Basil. 3. Nazianzum, also the Episcopal See of another Gregory, Surnamed
Nazianzenus, which 3 for their admirable abilities in all kind of Learning, and
for their Piety, are not to be paralleled. 4. Comana, remarkable of old for its
Temple consecrated to Bellona, whose Priests, and other inferior Officers of
both Sexes, in the time of Strabo amounted to about 6000. 5. Erzirum, situate
in the Confines of Armenia Major, which is the Rendezvous for the Turkish Army,
when they have any design against Persia; at which place they are likewise
disbanded and sent home, being a Frontier Town. It is seated an the end of a
large Plain, circled with Mountains; its Houses are not very well built, but
has several great Inns for entertainment of Passengers, as at Tocat; and it is
observable, that Barley after 40 days, and Wheat after 60, is fit to cut: And,
6. Pterium, memorable for the great Battle fought between Croesus King of
Lydia, and Cyrus of Persia; in which Croesus lost not only the Field, but also
his Kingdom. The Country is very rich in Mines of Silver, Iron, Brass, and
Alum; has great plenty of Wine, and several sorts of Fruits; also Crystal,
Jasper, and the Onyx-stone: But the greatest Wealth which they have is their
Horses. The People of this Country were anciently very Vicious, and prone to
all kinds of Wickedness; but since Christianity was received amongst them,
their former Vices are now changed to Virtues.

The Province of cilicia, and its chief places.
CILICIA has on the South the Mediterranean Sea. Places of note here found
are, viz. 1. Tarsis, pleasantly seated, famous for the Birthplace of St. Paul;
2. Anchiala, on the Seaside; both which, with some others, were built in one
day by Sardanapalus King of Assyria. 3. Epiphania, the Birthplace of George
the Arian, Bishop of Alexandria. 4. Adena, seated in a fruitful Soil, abounding
in Corn and Wine, defended by a strong Castle. 5. Alexandria, built by
Alexander the Great; and to distinguish it from Alexandria in Egypt, was named
Alexandretta, but now Scanderone; a famous Haven-Town, serving for the Scale to
Aleppo, which is distant from it about 100 English miles, to which all
Shipping, either out of the Ocean or Mediterranean, come to lade and unlade
their Goods, which are hence transported by Camels to Aleppo; and here the
English, French, and Venetians, have their Vice-Consuls to protect their Goods
and Ships. 6. Amavarza, a City in the time of Strabo, of great antiquity. 7.
Nicopolis, founded by Alexander in memory of his great Victory: And 8. Issus,
seated on a large Bay, famous for the Battle here fought between Alexander
(with an inconsiderable Army of Macedonians) and Darius, and his vast Army,
which consisted of about 600000 Assyrians; whereof about 160000 of the Persians
were slain, and about 40000 taken Prisoners; in which Battle, the Wives and
Daughters of Darius were taken, Alexander not losing above 200 of his Men.

On the Right Hand of Cilicia is Isauria, which may bear the name of a
Province: It is fruitful in Vines, and several sorts of Fruits, having a rich
Soil. The chief Cities are, 1. Claudiopolis, into which Claudius the Emperor
brought a Roman Colony: And, 2. Seleucia, founded by Seleucus.

The Province of Caria bounded, and its chief places described.
CARIA has for its Southern bounds the Carpathian Sea. Its chief places are,
1. Miletus, not far from the Hill Latmus, the Birthplace of Thales, one of the
7 Wisemen of Greece; to this place St. Paul's called together the Bishops of
Ephesus and other of the adjoining Cities. 2. Mindus, which being but a small
City, and its Gates so big, made Diogenes the Cynick to cry out, to have them
shut their Gates, lest the City should run out at them. 3. Milasa, famous in
old time for two Temples dedicated to Jupiter: And 4. Borgylia, where Diana
also had a Temple.

In this Country is the Hill Latmus, which was the retiring place of Endymion,
who by the study of Astronomy did there find out the Changes and Courses of the
Moon, by the Poets feigned to be her Favorite; others there be who would have
it, that in a Cave under this Hill Jupiter hid him, and casting him in a deep
sleep, descended sometimes to kiss him.

The Province of Ionia bounded, with its chiefest places.
IONIA, bounded on the West with the Aegean Sea. Places of note in this Country
are, 1. Ephesus, famous for many things; as, First, for being the Burial-place
of St. John the Evangelist, who (as some say) went here alive into the Grave.
Secondly, for the Temple of Diana, which for its Greatness, Furniture, and
stately Workmanship, was accounted one of the Wonders of the World. Thirdly,
for St. Paul's directing an Epistle to the Inhabitants thereof. Fourthly, for
being the Episcopal See of Timothy the Evangelist, first Bishop hereof: And,
Fifthly, for its Ecclesiastical Council here; but now much ruined from its
ancient beauty, it being now reduced to a small Village. 2. Smyrna, which is
now the only City of Trade in these parts; famous for being one of the 7
Churches of Asia, to which St. John dedicated his Revelation, being one of
those 7 Cities that strove for the Birth of Homer, where (in a Cave hard by) he
is said to have writ his Poems: But now violated by the Mahometans, her Beauty
is turned into Deformity, her Religion into Impiety, and her knowledge into
Barbarism. This City is seated on the bottom of a Bay or Gulf, called the
Gulf of Smyrna, where the English, French, and Venetians keep Consuls to
protect their Merchants, and keep up their Trade, it being under the
Jurisdiction of the Grand Signior. 3. Colophon, another of those Cities which
strove for the Birth of Homer: Here the People are so well skilled in
Horsemanship, that whose side soever they took in War, were sure to gain the
Victory. 4. Erythra, the habitation of one of the Sibyls, from whence called
Sibylla Erythraea. 5. Ipsus, remarkable for the great Battle betwixt Antigonus
and Seleucus, two of Alexanders chief Commanders, wherein Antigonns lost both
the day, and his life. 6. Lebedus, of note in ancient times for those Plays
here yearly held in honor to Bacchus. 7. Priene, the Birthplace of Bias, one
of the 7 Wisemen of Greece: And, 8. Clazomene, seated on a small Ilet near the
shore, beautified with a Temple dedicated to Apollo.

The Province of Aeolis, and its chief places.
AEOLIS, North of Ionia, has for its chief places, 1. Cuma, the habitation of
Sibylla, Surnamed Cumana. 2. Elaea, on the Mouth of Caicus, being the Port-Town
to Pergamus. 3. Myrina, which in honor to Augustus is called Sebastopolis. 4.
Pitane, not far from the Aegean Sea; and here they had an art in making Bricks
that would swim above water.

The Province of Lydia, and its chief places.
LYDIA: Its chief Cities are, 1. Sardis, in which was one of the 7 Churches in
Asia, being the Royal Seat of Croesus, and the Kings of Lydia, until it was
subdued by the Persians: and, 2. Philadelphia, on the Banks of the River
Caystrus. Its People are said to be the first Inventers of Dice, Chess, and
other such Games; as also the first Hucksters, Pedlers, and the first Coyners
of Money. The Country by reason of the great plenty of gallant Rivers renders it
very fruitful and pleasant, being enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver, as
also precious Stones.

The Province of Phrygia Major bounded, and its chief places.
PHRYGIA MAJOR, bounded on the East with Galatia. The chief places are, 1.
Gordion, the Seat of Gordius, which from the Plough-tail was taken and chosen
King of this Kingdom, who tied such a Knot, (called the Gordian-knot) which
Alexander the Great cut in pieces, when he could not unty it. 2. Midium, the
Seat of Midas, Son to this Gordius; who covetously petitioned Bacchus, that
whatsoever he touched should be turned into Gold; which was granted, but soon
was forced to lose the benefit of it, else he would have been starved, his
Victuals turning into Gold: and falling into a second oversight in Judgment, in
preferring Pan's Pipe before Apollo's Harp, he for his small Judgment in
Music, was rewarded with a comely pair of Asses-ears. 3. Colossi, to whom St.
Paul writ one of his Epistles. 4. Pesinus, where the goddess Cybele was
worshipped, being called Dea Pesinuncia. This City is placed in the Borders of
Galatia. The Country is very rich, pleasant, and well watered with Rivers, the
People being anciently more Superstitious than in any other place of Asia, as
is manifest by the Rites used in their Sacrifices of Cybele, and other of their
goddesses, being accounted such as use Divination. They are a People which much
delight in Effeminacy. Here Reigned Tantalus, who wanting wisdom to make use of
his great Riches, is by the Poets feigned to stand in Hell up to the chin in
water, under a Tree whose Fruit does touch his Lips, but yet cannot reach them.

The Province of Phrygia Minor bounded, with its chief places.
PHRYGIA MINOR, bounded on the South with the Aegean Sea. Places of most note,
viz. 1. Dardanum, or Dardania, being the Town and Patrimony of Aeneas. 2. Troy,
seated on the Banks of the River Scamander, famous for having sustained a Ten
years Siege against the Greeks; in which time the Trojans lost 860000 Men, and
the Grecians 666000 Men, being then so famous a City, that it might be counted
the glory of the East, from whence all Nations desire to derive their
beginning; but now remaining nothing but Ruins. Four miles from which there was
another City, built by Lysimachus, one of Alexanders Captains, which from other
Cities there adjoining was peopled; by him called Alexandria, or Troas
Alexandria, or New Troy, in honor of Alexander the Great, who begun the Work,
which though not so great, rich, and famous as the first, yet was the
Metropolis of the Province; but now by the Turks quite ruinated, by their
carrying the Stones and Pillars to Constantinople, for the beautifying of their
Bashaws Houses. 3. Sigaeum, the Port-Town to Troy. 4. Assus, called by Pliny,
Apollonia, in which place the Earth will consume the Bodies of the Dead in 40
days. 5. Lyrnessus, opposite to the Isle of Lesbos, destroyed by Achilles and
the Greeks in the beginning of the Trojan War.

The Province of Paphlagonia, and its Cities.
PAPHLAGONIA has for its chief Cities, 1. Gangra, remarkable for a Council
there held in the Primitive times, called Synodus Gangrensis. 2. Pompeiopolis,
so called by Pompey the Great: And, 3. Coniata, or Conica, fortified by
Mithridates, when he was Master of this Country.

The Province of Lycaonia, and its chief places.
LYCAONIA, bounded on the East with Armenia Minor. The most eminent places in
this Country are, 1. Iconium (now Cogni) the Regal Seat of the Aladine Kings; a
place of great strength, whose situation is in the Mountains, advantageous for
defense and safety. 2. Lystra, famous for the Birthplace of Timothy, and where
Paul and Barnabas having healed a Cripple, were adored for Mercury and Jupiter:
And, 3. Derbe, where the said Apostle preached.

The Province of Pisidia, and its chief places.
PISIDIA has for its chief places, 1. Seleucia, built by Seleucus. 2.
Sagalassa, situate in the most fruitful part of this Country. 3. Selge, a
Colony of the Lacedaemonians: And, 4. Termessus, strongly seated. This Country
was famous for the Battle fought betwixt Cyrus and Artaxerxes; where Cyrus lost
his life, and the Victory; out of which Xenophon made that notable Retreat with
his Grecians, in the despite of 20000 Men, which pursued him.

Armenia Minor, and its Cities.
ARMENIA MINOR is bounded on the East with the Euphrates, which separates it
from Armenia Major. Cities of hot, viz. 1. Meteline, the Metropolitan City,
now called Suur, abounding in great quantities of Wine and Oil. 2. Nicopolis,
built by Pompey in remembrance of a Victory he there obtained against the
Forces of Tygranes, King of Syrid. 3. Garnasa, a strong Town. 4. Oromandus;
and, 5. Arabyssus, remarkable for the exile of St. Chrysostom, Patriarch of
Constantinople, confined here by the malice of the Empress Eudoxia. This
Country, as to its fertility, pleasantness, etc. is the same as Cappadocia
aforementioned.

The Province of Mysia, and its chief places.
MYSIA has for its chief places, 1. Cyzicus, seated in the Propontis, in an
Island of the same name, but so near the Continent, that it is joined to it by
two Bridges. The Metropolis of the Consular Hellespont, a place of great
strength and beauty, whose Walls, Bulwarks, Towers, and Haven, were made of
Marble. 3. Adramyttium where Paul took Shipping to go to Rome: And, 4.
Pergamus, seated in a goodly Plain, on the Banks of the River Caicus; a place
of great strength, beautified with a Library of about 200000 Volumes or
Manuscripts, all writ in Parchment; famous also for those costly Hangings known
to us by Tapestry. Here was one of the 7 Churches of Asia, to which St. John
writ his Revelation; and lastly, famous for the Birthplace of Galen, the
eminent Physician, who lived to the Age of 140 years in good health.

Mountains in Anatolia; worthy of note.
The Mountains and Rivers in Anatolia may have somewhat in particular observed
of them. Mount Taurus begins between Lysia and Caria, and extends it self all
the length of Asia, being a continual Ridge of Hills, running through Asia from
West to East; which for its length, height, and the branches it casts forth on
one side and the other, the greatest and most famous Mountain in the World. On
Mount Ida, the Trojan Paris judged of the Beauty of Juno, Pallas, and Venus,
and giving the Golden Apple to the last, drew on himself and his Friends the
enmity of the other two. On the Mountain Tmole in Lydia, Midas, having esteemed
Pan's Pipe to be more pleasant than the Harp of Apollo, was by him pulled by
the Ears, not to make them greater, but so hard as gave occasion to the Poets
to jeer him, and say, that he had Asses Ears. This Mountain is very fruitful,
especially in Vines and Saffron. On Cragus was feigned to be the Monster
Chimera, which Bellerophon made tractable. On Latmus in Caria passed the Loves
of the Moon, and Endymion, etc.

Amongst the Rivers, Rivers.
Pactolus has rouled down so much Gold in its Streams, since Midas washed
there, that the Riches of Croesus, and others, are come from thence. The
Granick was witness of the Victory of Alexander the Great, against the Satrapes
of Darius; but Alexander washing himself in the cold waters of Cidnus, had near
lost his life. The River Acheron, and the Lake Acherusia, near Heraclia in
Bithynia, are esteemed to reach to Hell; and that this way Hercules brought up
the Villain Cerberus. Halys (at present Lali) served for the bounds and limits
between the Kingdom of Croesus and the Empire of the Persians; but it proved
fatal to Croesus, etc.

Things worthy of note in Asia Minor.
There are many other things observable about, and within the lesser Asia. The
Bosphorus of Thrace, or Channel of the Black-Sea, or Straight of
Constantinople, is so narrow, that Darius Hystaspes built a Bridge over it, and
passed with his Troops over it from Asia into Europe, to make War against the
Scythians. Xerxes, the Son of Darius, did as much over the Hellespont or
Straight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, which we call the Castles of Sestos
and Abydos, which are seated three Leagues above the entrance, and at the
narrowest place of the Hellespont, opposite each to other: Formerly famous for
the unfortunate Loves of Hero and Leander, drowned in the merciless Surges.
Here also Xerxes, whose populous Army drank Rivers dry, and made Mountains
circumnavigable, is said to have passed over into Greece on a Bridge of Boats.
Sestos is strongly seated on the side of a Mountain, descending to the Sea on
the European shore; Abydos, on a low Level on the Asian shore. The Amaniden
Streights, or Passes of Mount Aman, between Cilicia and Syria, are easy to
keep; the Way for about 2500 Paces, being between Rocks and Crags; the Feet of
which are washed with many streams which fall off from the Mountains. Here it
was that Alexander the Great vanquished Darius.

The ISLANDS about ASIA MINOR.
THe ISLANDS about ASIA MINOR have been very remarkable to Antiquity, though
not so at present: Islands.
They are almost in the Archipelago; some in the Mediterranean Sea, almost none
in the Black Sea; yet at the entrance into that Sea, and near the Bosphorus of
Thrace, are n="1." Cyanees.
The two Islands called CYANEES, so near the one to the other, that the
Ancients would make us believe they joined. n="2." Lesbos.
METELIN, of old LESBOS, famous for the City Meteline, which for its greatness
and excellency of its Wines, gives name to the Island. In this place was born
Sappho, the Inventress of the Sapphick Verse: Pittacus one of the Sages of
Greece; and Arion, the Dolphin Harper. n="3." Scio.
SCIO, or CHIOS, distant from the Ionian shore four Leagues, being in compass
about 126 miles; remarkable for the Church of its Convent of Niomene, one of
the fairest in the World. It affords excellent Fruits in great plenty, but of
most note for its Mastick, not found elsewhere; it is now under the power of
the Grand Signior. n="4." Icaria.
ICARIA, now called Niceria, in compass 12 Leagues; here Icarus suffered
Shipwreck; abounding in Corn and Pasturage. n="5." Pathmos.
PATHMOS, in compass about ten Leagues; Mountainous, but reasonably fruitful,
especially in Grain. Here it was that St. John being banished by Domitian, writ
his Revelation to the Churches of Asia. n="6." Parmacusa.
PARMACVSA, near Miletum, where Caesar was taken by them. n="7." Claros.
CLAROS or CASAMO, about 13 Leagues in compass, very Mountainous, but has good
Harbors; in former times sacred to Apollo; abounding in great plenty of Aloes,
where they are gathered and transported to other Countries. n="8." Lero.
LERO, noted also for Aloes. n="9." Coos.
COOS, seated in the bottom of the Aegean Sea, furnished with sweet and
pleasant Streams, which refresh this Island, and makes it very fruitful; it is
in compass 23 Leagues, having its chief place so called, fortified with a
strong Tower, now a Garrison of the Turks. This Island is remarkable for being
the Birthplace of so many famous men, especially Hippocrates, the Revivor of
Physic, when almost decayed, unto the ancient practice of Aesculapius, unto
whom this Island was consecrated, having therein a Temple, made rich with the
Offerings of those that had been sick, whose Cures were there Registered; and
Apelles the famous Painter. n="10." Scarpante.
Scarpante, stored with the best Coral in the World. n="11." Nicosia.
NICOSIA, which was the Seat of the Kings of the Family of Lufigua, and the Sea
of an Archbishop, and Peopled with 40000 Families. n="12." Farmacusa.
FARMACVSA, situate on the Sea, much stronger than Nicosia. n="13." Bapho.
BAPHO, of old Baphus, famous for its Temple, dedicated to Venus. Mount
Olympus, now St. Michaels Mount, stands in the middle of this Island. n="14."
Negroponte.
NEGRO-PONTE, where the Sea ebbs and flows seven times a day; which because
Aristotle could not unriddle, he here drowned himself; the chief City is
Colchis. n="15." Samos.
SAMOS, about 30 Leagues in compass, strongly seated almost on all sides with
Rocks, having a fair Haven, fertile in Fruits, especially in Oil and Olives; the
Island much infected with Pirates. This is the only place in the World for
Spunges, under whose Rocks they grow in the Sea; for the getting of which they
have People which from their Infancy are bred up with dry Biscuit, and other
extenuating diet, to make them lean; then taking a Sponge wet in Oil, they hold
it part in their Mouths and part without, and so they dive down into the Sea to
get it; those that have been used to this trade, can abide under water almost
an hour together. n="16." Tenedos.
TENEDOS, situate at the Mouth of the Hellespont, opposite to Troy, remarkable
for the concealing the Grecian Navy, which proved the final destruction of
Troy. n="17." Rhodes.
RHODES, situate in the Carpathian or Rhodian Sea, being in compass 46
Leagues; a place of great strength, its Soil fertile, its Air temperate,
plentiful in all things, as well for delight as profit, full of excellent
Pastures, adorned with pleasant Trees, whose Leaves are alb the year long in
their verdure. In this Island the Sun is so powerful and constant, as it was
anciently dedicated to Phoebus. This Island, as Sandys in his Book of Travels
notes, was held Sacred to the Sun, to whom they erected that vast Colossus of
Brass, which may well be accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World: He
says, The Colessus.
this Colossus was in height 70 Cubits; every Finger as big as an ordinary
Statue, and the Thumb too great to be fathomed. It was 12 years a making, the
bigness was such, that being erected at the entrance of the Port, Ships past
between its Legs; but in 66 years, by an Earthquake it was thrown down and
broken in pieces: And besides the Mass of Stones contained therein, 900 Camels
were laden with the Brass, which was used about it. This City bearing the name
of the Island, is seated 4 miles from the ancient City, famous of old for their
Government, their expert Navigations, and since for the abode of the Knights of
St. John of Jerusalem, now in the hands of the Turk. This City and Island of
Rhodes, as indeed Tenedos, Samos, and the rest of the Isles in this Sea, are of
little or no Trade; yet they are found to produce several good Commodities:
And, n="18." Cyprus.
CYPRVS, which amongst all is the greatest, being in circuit about 183 Leagues
distant from the Cilician shore, about 20 Leagues it stretches it self from
East to West, in form of a Fleece, and thrusting forth a great many
Promontories. This Island, during the Empire of the Persians and Macedonians,
was accounted for Nine Kingdoms, most of them bearing the names of their
principal Towns; but by Prolomy divided into these 4 Provinces, viz. 1.
Lapethia, 2. Paphia, 3. Salamine, and 4. Amathusia. Provinces in Cyprus.
Places of most note are, 1. Nicosia, the Metropolis of the Island, being a
walled City, in form round, five miles in compass, adorned with stately
Buildings, resembling some Cities in Florence, as well for its beauty and
pleasant situation, as for its plentifulness in People. 2. Tremitas, the
Birthplace of Spiridon, a famous Bishop of the Primitive times. 3. Paphos,
seated near the Sea, built by Paphos, Son of Pygmalion, King of Phoenicia and
Cyprus, where stands Pygmalions Statue; which (as the Poets feign) was by the
power of Venus turned into a Woman; where she had her so much celebrated
Temple, and where her Votaries of both Sexes in their natural nakedness, did
perform her Sacrifices. 4. Salamis, once the Metropolitan City in the Island,
but now turned to Ruins; in which there was a famous Temple consecrated unto
Jupiter. 5. Aphrodisium, so named from Venus, where she had another Temple. 6.
Famagusta, though but small, yet one of the chiefest in this Island, strongly
seated. 7. Arsinoe, famous for the Groves of Jupiter. 8. Amathus, renowned for
the Annual Sacrifices made unto Adonis, the darling of Venus, where she had
another Temple. 9. Episcopia, where Apollo had both a Temple and a Grove. This
Temple was held so Sacred, that those which touched it were thrown into the Sea.

The situation, fertility, and Commodities of Cyprus.
This Island is seated under the Fourth Climate, which makes the longest day to
be but 14 hours and a half. It is exceeding rich and fertile, abounding in Corn,
Wine, Oil, Silks, Cotton, Turpentine, Wool, Honey, Salt, Verdigreace, Alum,
Storax, Colloquintida, Laudanum: All sorts of Metals, etc.

To this Isle, as to all other parts of Turkey, no English are suffered to
Trade, except those of the Company of Levant Merchants; where they have a
Factory, and a Consul, who is generally elected by the said Levant Company, and
established by the Ambassador. The People are very civil to Strangers, The
People of Cyprus.
delighting in Hospitality, also addicting themselves to War, being strong and
active; and the Women were in former times given to unchastity, by reason of
their so great adoration of their goddess Venus, it being the custom of these
Women to prostitute themselves on the Shoars to Passers by; where their Virgins
would do the same. But upon their receiving of Christianity, by the Preachings
of St. Paul and Barnabas, being the Birthplace of the latter, this (with other
of their uncivil and barbarous Customs) were laid aside.

This ANATOLIA, or ASIA MINOR, which I have hitherto treated of, is seated (for
the most part) all in a healthful and temperate Air, the Soil being generally
fruitful, once very populous, and replenished with many fair and goodly Cities,
now lamenting the loss of about 4000, some of which by Earthquakes, but most by
the Wars the Turks brought against them. The Commodities or Merchandises which
it abounds with, Commodities in Asia Minor.
and communicates to other Nations, are chiefly excellent Wines, Goats-hair,
Camels-hair, Grograin Yarn, Silk, Cotton Wool, Cotton Yarn, Cloth of a course
make, Coral, Gauls, though not so good as those of Syria, Grograins, Chamlets,
Mohairs, Turky-Carpets, Spunges, Turpentine the best in the World; Mastick,
with some other Commodities of less note which the English, French, Venetians,
and Dutch fetch from hence; but chiefly from Smyrna, it being the chief Town of
Trade, being a flourishing Factory, where those Nations (as has been said
before) keep their Consuls.

SOVRIA, or SYRIA.
Its Bounds.
SOVRIA, formerly SYRIA the Great, and at present Soristan with the Eastern
People, is near hand that which the Romans called their Diocese of the East, as
may seem by our now calling it the Levant. It extends from the Mediterranean
Sea, which washes its Western Coast, to the Euphrates, which on the East
divides it from Diarbeck; and from Mount Aman, or Monte-Negro, which bounds it
on the North, and separates it from Cilicia unto Arabia and Egypt, which border
on its Southern parts.

The Ancients have divided it into three principal Parts: the particular Syria,
called Syria Propria, which (as the greatest and best) held the name of all
Phoenicia, and Judaea or Palestine: This last stretches more toward the
South, Its Parts, or Division by the Turks.
Syria toward the North, and Phoenicia remains in the middle; and all are
along the Mediterranean Sea, from Anatolia into Egypt; the particular Syria
alone touches the Euphrates, the rest upon Arabia. At present the Turks divide
all Syria into two Beglerbeglies, Aleppo, and Damascus; some make a third of
Tripoli of Syria: and give to this last five Sangiacats, nine or ten to
Damascus, and seven to Aleppo; which in all are 16 or 20 Sangiacats, whose
Names and Scituations are for the most part unknown; we will content our selves
to speak something of the Cities, which have been, or which yet are, the
principal of all these Quarters, beginning with those of Syria.

SYRIA PROPRIA.
Syria Propria, its bounds, fertility, and people.
SYRIA PROPRIA is bounded on the East with the River Euphrates, and on the West
with the Mediterranean Sea. It is very fertile, affording plenty of excellent
Fruits, Cotton-Wool, Sheep, which have Tails that weigh about 30 pounds, with
several other good Commodities. The People were formerly very industrious, but
much addicted to Gluttony, as did appear by their often and great Feasting;
they were subtle in their dealings, much given to Superstition, being
worshippers of the goddess Fortune, and other of their Syrian goddesses, much
addicted to Plays and Pastimes, and given to Scoffing and Laughter. Its chief
places.
The chief Places in this Country are, 1. Antioch, or Antiochia, once the
Metropolis of Syria, once so fair, that it held the third or fourth degree
amongst the best Cities of the Roman Empire. Its Walls are yet standing, and
the most beautiful that Eye ever beheld; within it is nothing but Ruins. Its
situation is on the River Orontes, so called; at present Assi, or Haser, four
Leagues from the Mediterranean shore; a place of great strength, having for its
Fortification an enchosure of two strong Walls, on which for their further
defense were erected about 460 Towers, together with a strong Castle. The City
before its Ruins being adorned with stately Palaces, Temples, etc. fit for so
great a City, being formerly the Seat of some of the Roman Emperors, and of
the chief Officers of their Empire in the Orient. It was the first Seat of a
Patriarch, that St. Peter established, and which held in the Infancy of the
Church, 1. The Diocesses of Thrace, Asia, Pontus, and the East. 2. Daphne,
about five miles from Antioch, so named from Daphne, one of the Mistresses of
Apollo, who was here worshipped, famous for having here his Oracle and Grove,
which was about 10 miles in compass, all encompassed with Cypresses and other
Trees, so tall and close together, that the Beams of the Sun could not dart
through, though in his greatest power; watered with pleasant Streams,
beautified with Fountains, and enriched with abundance of Trees, which yield
variety of excellent Fruits, as well for taste as tincture; for its Temples
dedicated to Apollo; for its Sanctuary or Asyle, and for the place where Daphne
was changed into a Laurel, that it has been compared with the Valley of Tempe
in Thessaly. 3. Aleppo, built upon four Hills, at present is the greatest and
principal Town of all Syria, and one of the most famous of the East, being the
ancient Hierapolis, having large Suburbs, which are for the most part taken up
by Christians. It is seated between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean Sea,
and in that place where that Sea and the Euphrates make the nearest
conjunction, which makes it capable of the best and greatest commerce of the
World, to wit, of all the Levant, with the West, by the passage of the Gulf of
Ormus and Balsora, which brings Commodities up the Euphrates, just against the
City of Aleppo; from whence the Caravans bring them by Land to Aleppo, and
carry them from thence to Alexandretta or Scanderoon, situate on the
Mediterranean Sea; and thence into the parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe, which
border upon the Mediterranean, and farther into that Ocean. This City is the
ordinary residence of a Turkish Bassa, who commands all the Country from
Alexandretta to the Euphrates. 4. Aman, or Ama, seated between Tripoli and
Aleppo, in the midst of a great Plain, encompassed on all sides with very
pleasant Hills, abounding in Grains, Wines, with abundance of Orchards, stored
with varieties of Fruits and Palm Trees. It is almost encompassed with the
River Orontes, and with a great Lake; the Gardens are watered with many
Channels, drawn from the Rivers; there are very excellent Pastures, so that
Seleucus Nicanor there fed 500 Elephants, 30000 Horses, and a great part of his
Militia. And to this day this City is the best peopled of all Syria, next to
Aleppo and Damascus. 5. Emsa, or Hemz, seated in the spacious and fruitful
Plain of Apamene, watered with many pleasant Streams, which, for its
Situation, is almost the same with that of Aman; and because the Arabes call
it Hamsi, and that name comes somewhat near to Hus, some Authors will have it
to be the Country of the Patient Job. 6. Aradus, seated in a Rocky Island of a
mile in compass, just opposite to the Mouth of the River Eleutherus, which from
the Continent is distant not above a League. 7. Seleucus, so called from him,
as being the Founder of it, who was esteemed the greatest Builder in the World,
founding 9 Cities of this Name, 16 in memory of his Father Antiochus, six
bearing the name of his Mother Laodice, and three in remembrance of his first
Wife Apamia; besides several others worthy of note in Greece and Asia, either
repaired, beautified, or built by him. 8. Laodicea, built by Seleucus (as
aforesaid) abounding in excellent Wine, and choice Fruits. 9. Larissa, now
Laris, seated four Leagues Southwards of Laodicea, much noted in the Stories of
the Holy Wars. 10. Hierapolis, a City of great note in Ancient times for their
Idolatry, in adoring and worshipping the Syrian goddess. The Temple was built
by Stratonice, wife to Seleucus, in the midst of the City, encompassed with a
double Wall about 300 Fathom in height, the Roof thereof in-laid with Gold, and
built with such sweet Wood, that the Clothes of those which came thither were
as it were perfumed, Without the Temple were places for the keeping of their
Oxen, and other of their Beasts for Sacrifice; as also a Lake of about 200
Fathom in depth, for the preservation of their sacred Fishes. The Priests,
besides other subservient Ministers, which here attended, were about 300 in
number. 11. Zeugma, seated on the Banks of the Euphrates. Here it was that
Alexander the Great, with his Army, passed over on a Bridge of Boats. 12.
Heraclea, nigh to which Minerva had a Temple, where, for a Sacrifice, they used
once a year to offer a Virgin, which afterward was changed to a Heart. 13.
Samosat, seated near the Banks of the Euphrates, over which the was a Bridge
which served for a passage to Mesopotamia. In this City was born Paulus
Samosatenus, Patriarch of Antioch, who, for his teaching that our Savior was
not the Son of God, was (in a Council here held) condemned of Heresy. 14.
Palmyre, at present Faid, seated in a Desert and Sandy Plain, was built by
Solomon in the Wilderness, where one their Kings Odenat, and his wife Zenobia,
have been well known for their Victories, diverse times gained against the
Parthians; and for endeavoring to gain the Empire of the East. 15. Resapha, a
Town of great note in the Holy Scripture: And, 16. Adida, memorable for the
Victory that Aretas, K. of Arabia, obtained against Alexander, K. of Jewry.

PHOENICIA.
Phoenicia bounded, and its Cities, etc. described.
PHOENICIA has for its Eastern and Southern Bounds, Palestine; for its
Western, the Mediterranean Sea; and for its Northern, Syria Propria. This
Country was adorned with several great and beautiful Cities, though of no great
extent: For the most part seated on the Sea-shoar, which makes it much
frequented by Merchants, there being several good Commodities found therein, as
Corn, Oil, Honey, excellent Balm, etc. The People were here held to be very
ingenious and active. Places, of most note are, 1. Tire, at present Sor or
Sour, seated in a Plain so advantageous, (that is, on a Rock almost quite
encompassed with the Sea) that it often disputed the Priority with Sidon, and in
the end gained it. Nebuchadonozor ruined it after a Siege of 14 years; then
Alexander the Great, after a Siege of 7 or 8 months. It was many times restored
to its power and splendour, by means of its Purple, and of its Trade: and when
it was in its glory, it might be said, That if only its situation were
considered, it was a Fortress; if its Traffic, a Mart; if its Magnificence, a
Royal-Court; and if its Riches, the Treasure of the Universe. The Cities of
Carthage, Vtica, Leptis, and others in Africa, and of Cadiz in Spain, without
the Streights were its Colonies. And some have adventured to say, America was
peopled by them. Its Haven is likewise the best of all Phoenicia, and the
Levant. 2. Sidon, at present Said, and sometimes Sayette, has been much
esteemed in the Ancientest of times: It was built, or at least took its name
from Sidon, the eldest Son of the Children of Canaan, situate upon a Rock
along the Coast of the Sea, and with a fair Port. The Neighboring Champain is
very fertile, and watered with diverse Streams which descend from Libanus, with
which they watered and enriched their pleasant Orchards. It has been very
famous for Arts and Sciences, and particularly for being the first Authors of
Arithmetic and Astronomy; The first Inventers of Letters; the first Navigators
and Builders of Ships; the first Inventers of Glasses; and the first that
exercised Arms. From hence it was that Solomon and Zorobabel had their
principal Workmen, both for Stone and Timber, which were employed in the
building of the Temple. It has Peopled diverse Colonies; among others, Thebes
in Boeotia. The Persians were the first that ruined it, after them others, and
at last the Turks; who at present are Masters of it, as also of Tire. The
present Sidon is built somewhat West of the Old; but of small note in respect
to the splendour of the Old, yet still has some Trade. The chief Commodities
being Corn, Galls, Wools, Cottons, Cotton-Yarn, white Silk, and Wax. 3.
Damascus, called by those of the Country Scham; seated in a very fruitful
Plain, and begirt about with curious and odoriferous Gardens and Orchards,
which abound in all sorts of pleasant and delightful Fruits: watered with the
River Chrysorrhous, which sends forth many Rivulets; by which the whole City
is so well furnished, that not only most Houses have their Fountains; but also
their Gardens and Orchards receive the benefit of the cool Streams, which
gently glide through them: The fertility of the Country.
The whole Country round about being enriched with plenty of excellent Vines,
which bears Grapes all the year long; as also great plenty of Wheat. A place
so surfeiting of Delights, that the vile Impostor Mahomet would never enter
into it, lest by the ravishing Pleasures of this place, he should forget the
business he was sent about, and make this his Paradise. This City is famous,
first, for her Founders, who were Abraham's Servants; next for the Temple of
Zacharias, which was garnished with 40 stately Porches, and adorned with about
9000 Lanthorns of Gold and Silver, and last of all, for the Conversion of St.
Paul, who here first preached the Gospel; for which he was forced to make his
escape out of the House, being let down the Walls in a Basket. Josephus
believes that it was built by Us, the Son of Abraham, Grandchild to Noah:
However it were, after Type and Sidon began to decay, this began to be in some
repute, and has been esteemed the chief City of Phoenicia, and sometimes of
all Syria. It is beyond Mount Libanus, in respect to Tire and Sidon; seated in
a Soll so fertile and delightful, by reason of the Rivers and Fountains, that in
Holy Scripture it is called a famous City, a City of Joy, a House of Delight
and Pleasure; and some Authors call it the Paradise of the World. Yet has it
felt very great changes, as well as Tire and Sidon: It has been taken,
retaken, ruined, and re-established diverse times, by the Assyrians,
Babylonians, Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Parthians, Saracens, Tartars, by
the Soldans of Egypt, and in fine, by the Turks, in whose hands it is at
present, very flourishing and rich. The Houses of private persons are not so
fair without as within; the public Buildings are very beautiful; the Castle is
in the middle of the City, built by a Florentine. 4. Serepta, seated on the Sea
Coast betwixt Tire and Sidon, memorable in Holy Scripture for the Prophet
Elijah, in raising from death the poor Widows Son. Here is found excellent
Wines, accounted as good as those of Greece. 5. Acre, of old Acon, and
Ptolemais, is bounded with the Sea on two sides; the third is joined to a Plain
of the Continent. The City is very strong, being walled with a double Wall,
fortified throughout on the outside with Towers and Bulwarks, and in the
middle of the City a strong Castle, on the top of which there was every Night
set Lights, which served to direct Ships at Sea to their Port. The Plain is
fertile and well watered with Streams, which descend from the Neighboring
Mountains. The Christians took, lost, and retook this place diverse times, when
they made War into the Holy Land; in which, none more famous than Richard the
First, and Edward the First, both Kings of England. The same did likewise the
Saracens; the Soldans of Egypt ruined it, and after rebuilt it; and at present
it remains in the hands of the Turks. 6. Tripoli of Syria, (for distinction
from Tripoli of Barbary) seated in a rich Plain, is at this day by some
esteemed the Metropolis of Phoenicia, thought it has three times more Ruins
than whole Houses; and seated about two miles from the Sea, but not above half
a mile from its Haven, which formerly served for a Port to Aleppo, but since
removed to Alexandretta or Scanderone: But yet a place of some small Trade,
affording Corn, Cotton-Wool, Yarn, Silk, some Drugs, Potashes, and other
Commodities. The Buildings are generally low, and the Streets narrow, excepting
those which lead toward Aleppo, which are fair and broad; having many pleasant
Gardens, which are watered with delightful Streams, in which Gardens they keep
great quantities of Silkworms. The Soil is excellent good, if it were well
tilled; but the Air is unhealthful. 7. Biblus, now Gibbeleth, was the
habitation of Ciniras, the Father of Myrrha, Mother to the fair Adonis; from
whence the neighboring River took its name, remarkable in the infancy of
Christianity, for being the Sea of a Bishop; but now by the Turks made
desolate. And, 8. Barutt, or Beryte, a place formerly of great Trade, but now
of great concourse, and much frequented by Merchants, and others; it being the
Road for all those Caravans that travel from Aleppo, Damascus, and Jerusalem;
to Cairo, and Mecca. It is subject to the Grand Signior. Near to this Town is
that noted Valley, where (as some Authors say) St. George by killing the
Dragon, which had his abode in a Cave here, redeemed the Kings Daughter, which
was to be delivered to his fury.

PALESTINE.
Palestine bounded.
PALESTINE, formerly called Judaea, Canaan, or the Holy Land, is bounded on the
East with Mount Hermon, so much spoken of in Holy Scripture; on the South, with
part of Arabia Petraea; on the West, with the Mediterranean Sea, and part of
Phoenicia; and on the North, with the Anti-Libanus, which separates it from
Syria and the rest of Phoenicia. Its situation is between the Third and Fourth
Climates, which makes the longest day to be 14 hours and a quarter. So
populous, that before the coming in of the Israelites, they had 30 Kings; and
afterward David numbered 1300000 Fighting men, besides those of the Tribe of
Benjamin and Levi. This last and most Meridional part of Syria, which we call
Palestine, first received the name of the Land of Canaan, because the Children
of Canaan first seized it, and parted it amongst them; when God had promised it
to Abraham and his Posterity, it was called the Land of Promise; but when it
fell into the hands of the Hebrews, after their return from Egypt, and that
they had divided it by Tribes, it took the name of the Land of the Hebrews,
under which it was governed by Prophets, Judges, and Kings; but under these
Kings it was soon divided into two Realms, which they called Judah and Israel.
Under the Romans it was only known by the name of Judea, or Palestine: of
Judea, because that the Tribe of Judah was always the most powerful of the
Twelve; and the Kingdom of Judah the most noble, and preserved it self longer
than that of Israel: of Palestina, because the Philistines, which possessed a
part of the Maritim Coast of Judea, were powerful, and very well known to
Strangers. After the death of our Savior Jesus Christ, all this Country was
called the Holy Land. A description of the Jews, and their Religion.
The People which anciently possessed this Country were the Jews, being of a
middle stature, strong of body, of a black complexion, goggle-ey'd, a subtle
and ingenious people, and such as will live in any place, much given to
Traffic, Usury, and Brokage; not lending without Pledges, and taking the
forfeitures of them. Their Law or Religion was given them by God the Father,
which, with the several Ceremonies and Rites, etc. prescribed to them, may be
found in the five first Books of Moses; their Synagogues are neither fair
within nor without, save only adorned with a Curtain at the upper end, together
with several Lamps, and in the midst is placed a Scaffold in form of a
Reading-Desk, for their Priest which reads their Law, and sings their
Liturgy; they read in a strange tone, and sing as bad: during the time of their
Service, their heads are veiled with Linen fringed with Knots, answerable to
the number of their Laws, and observing a continual motion of their body to and
fro, and often jumping up, which they account for great zeal in their devotion;
they observe much reverence to all the names of God, but especially to Jehovah,
insomuch that they do never use it in vain talk. Their ancient Language was
Hebrew; they keep their Sabbath on Saturday, in which they are very strict;
they marry their Daughters at the Age of 12 years, as not affecting a single
life. The fertility of the Country.
This Country is so fertile in all things, that it was termed a Land flowing
with Milk and Honey; adorned with pleasant Mountains and luxurious Valleys,
enriched with pleasant Streams, and where the Inhabitants are neither scorched
with Heats, nor pinched with Colds. To speak of all the memorable transactions
that have happened in this Country would require a Volume by it self; I shall
only run over some of the chief, and then proceed to the description of some of
the Cities and Places of most note that are found therein. It is famous for
bringing our Savior Jesus Christ into the World, where he wrought so many
Miracles; but infamous for their horrid action of crucifying him, Memorable
Transactions in this Country.
the Lord of Life. Here it was that the Lord appeared to Jacob; here, out of
the Plains of Moab, the Ark was built of Sittim Wood; here, on Mount Tabor,
Christ was transfigured; on Mount Moriah, Isaac was to be sacrificed; on Mount
Sion was the Tower of David; on Mount Calvary, as some aver, was the
Burial-place of Adam, our Forefather. Here, over the Brook Kedron, David passed
in his flight from Absalom; over which our Savior, when he went to his
Passion, passed: Here runs the River of Jordan, sufficiently famous; nigh to
which stood the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha: Here, at a place called Endor,
Saul consulted with a Witch; near to Sichem, Jacob had his Wells: Here, at
Ashdod, in the Temple of Dagon, the Ark of the Lord was brought, when taken;
upon the entrance of which their Idol fell down: Here, at Hebron, is the Plain
of Mamre, where Abraham, sitting in his Tent, was visited by God from Heaven in
the likeness of a Man; this City he bought for a Burial-place, for him and his
Posterity, where Sarah his Wife was first interred: And on Mount Seir was the
habitation of Esau, after his departure from Canaan. I shall cease to trouble
the Reader with the mentioning of many more remarkable Passages which were here
transacted, but only refer them to the Books of the Old and New Testament,
where they shall find them recorded; also great satisfaction may be received
from Josephus, a Book of good repute.

This Country is at present possessed by the Turks, as Masters of it, but
inhabited by Moors, Arabians, Greeks, Turks, Jews, nay, I may say with People
of all Nations and Religions; But setting aside matters of History, let us
proceed to say something of the principal places found herein, and first with
Jerusalem.

Jerusalem; its chief Places.
Jerusalem is so well known in the Holy Scriptures, that we must confess it
has been not only one of the greatest, but one of the fairest Cities in the
World, being called the City of the Lord. Its Kings, Highpriests, Temple, and
Royal Palaces, have made it famous even amongst the remotest people; Its
circuit was onto 50 Furlongs, which are only 6250 Geometrical Paces, but so
well builded, that it was capable of the receiving of 150000 Families. Its
Temple and Palaces, especially those of Solomon, were the fairest, greatest,
and most magnificent which ever eye beheld: Its Gates, Walls, Towers, Ditches,
cut out of the Rock; and its situation in the Mountains made it seem
impregnable. This City, once sacred and glorious, elected by God for his Seat,
placing it in the midst of Nations, like a Diadem, crowning the head of the
Mountains, the Theater of Mysteries and Miracles, was once the glory of the
World; but its Pride, and other horrid Sins in the end lost it diverse times.
Nebuchadonozor was the first that ruin^d it; Pompey contented himself to
dismantle it of its Walls, and to fill up the Ditches; Vespasian and Titus
Caesar utterly razed it and destroyed in the place 1100000 People that were
assembled to the Passover; Adrian ruined likewise some Towers and Walls, which
had been left to lodge the Roman Garrison; and after caused a new City to be
built, partly on its ancient Ruins, and partly without them. But with the
diverse changes it has since fallen under, its beauty and magnificence is quite
decayed: Yet is it not so lost, but that there are several Places yet remaining
worthy of note, together with several others that were since built; as on Mount
Calvary, where Christ the Savior of the World was Crucified, there is a rich,
magnificent and large Temple, built by the virtuous Helena, Daughter to Coilus,
a British King, and Mother to Constantine the Great, which not only possesses
the Mount, but also all the Garden below, where his Sepulcher was; and in this
Temple there are several rich Structures, as one where Christ was imprisoned
before his Crucifixion, another where Christ was nailed to the Cross, another
where he was Crucified; also one where the Sepulcher was, the Altar of the Holy
Cross, the Altar of the Scourging, the Chapel of the Apparition, the Chapel of
the Angels, the Chapel of the division of his Garments, the Chapel of St.
Helena, who built this Temple, the Chapel of St. John, the Sepulcher of Joseph
of Arimathea under ground; together with several others, too long to recite. To
this place there is a great resort, as well of Protestants as Papists, though
for sundry ends, which brings a great Revenue; none being permitted to enter
without paying some Money, which the Jews here inhabiting do Farm of the Grand
Signior at a large yearly Revenue, and so become Masters thereof, making a
great profit by showing them to Strangers, which come hither from all Nations.
Several other places are yet remaining, as the Castle of the Pisans, the
Monastery of the Franciscans, the Church of St. James; the Church of St. Mark,
where once stood his House; a Mosque, where stood the House of Zebedaeus; a
Chapel, where stood the House of St. Thomas; the Church of the Angels, where
the Palace of Annas the High Priest stood; the Church of St. Savior, where the
Palace of Caiphas stood; the Court of Solomon's Temple, yet remaining; but in
the room of the Temple a Mosque.

Near about Jerusalem there are several places of note yet remaining, as in the
way between Jerusalem and the City of Bethlem, there are the Ruins of David's
Tower, the Tower of Simeon, Bathsheba's Fountain, the Cistern of Saget, the
Monastery of Elias, Jacobs House, the Sepulcher of Rachel, the Cistern of
David, the House of Joseph, the Monastery of Bethlem, the Monastery of the Holy
Cross. And at Bethlehem, over the place where Christ was born, the virtuous
Helena erected also another fair and goodly Temple, which is possessed by the
Franciscans of Jerusalem, being called by the name of St. Mary's of Bethlehem.
Nigh to Jerusalem is the Desert of St. John Baptist, where is yet the Ruins of
a Monastery over his Cave, and the Fountain; as also the Mountains of Judah,
where is the Church of St. John Baptist, the Fountain, and the House of
Elizabeth, also the Sepulcher of Zachary, a part of the Pillar of Absalon, and
the Cave of St. James. At Bethania, two miles from Jerusalem, is the House of
Simon the Leper, the House of Lazarus, as also his Sepulcher, where is the
Mount of Olives, where is the Sepulcher of the Virgin Mary, where Christ was
often, and from whence he ascended up into Heaven.

Joppa, or Jaffa, serves for a Port to Jerusalem, from which it is 10 miles
distant; and it was thither that the Wood and Stones, taken from Mount Libanus,
and destined to the building of the Temple of Solomon, were brought by Water,
and from thence by Land to Jerusalem. This is the Port where Jonah embarked to
fly from the face of the Lord. From this History the Heathens made the Fable
of Andromeda, and pretended to show in the Rock, which is before the Port, the
marks of the Irons, to which Andromeda was chained, and exposed to the
Sea Monster.

After Jerusalem there rests yet Gaza, now Gazere, greater and better inhabited
than Jerusalem. 1. Jericho, seated on the River Jordan, about 30 miles distant
from Jerusalem. a City once of great fame, being in the time of Christianity an
Episcopal See; also noted for her beautiful Palms, but especially for her
Bals^mum; but now turned to Ruins, in the place whereof stands a few poor
Cottages, inhabited by the Arabians. 2. Samaria, once the Seat of the Kings of
Israel, has now nothing left but the Ruins of some proud Buildings. And, 3.
Sichem, now Naplouse, has some Samaritans, and remains the Capital of that
Quarter, and the best inhabited, but with many Ruins; and to speak truth, there
is now scarce any place of mark in all the Holy Land; whereas under the
Cananites, under the Hebrews, under the Jews, there were so many People, so
many Kings, so many Cities, so rich, and so powerful, that throughout the whole
Continent of the Earth there was no Country might compare with it. Jerusalem is
at present governed by a Bassa, and Naplouse by another, which obey the
Beglerby of Damascus.

DIARBECK.
Diarbeck, and its Parts.
DIARBECK, taken particularly, answers only to Mesopotamia, which is but part
of the ancient Assyria; taken in general, it answers to the three parts of that
Assyria, of which the particular Assyria is now called Arzerum, Mesopotamia,
Diarbeck, and Chaldea or Babylonia, or Yerack. The first is the most Oriental,
and almost all beyond the Tygris; the second the most Occidental, and is
between the Euphrates and the Tygris; the third the most Meridional, and lies
on both sides the Tygris.

Its fertility and People.
This Country of Chaldea, now Yerack, is for the most part exceeding fruitful,
yielding ordinarily 200 fold, the blades of their Wheat and Barley being about
four fingers broad, having yearly two Harvests. The People anciently were much
given to Divinations, South-sayings, and Idolatry. Places of most note are, 1.
Babylon, formerly Babel, the ancientest City in the World, seated on the Bank
of the Euphrates, Its chief places.
first built by Nimrod, and much enlarged and beautified by Nebuchadnezzar; so
that it was accounted one of the nine Wonders of the World. This City was so
vast, that its Walls stretched in circumference 365 Furlongs, in height 66
Yards, and in breadth 25, situate on both sides of the Euphrates, which also
ran through the City, emptying it self into diverse Rivolets; over this River
Euphrates there was a stately Bridge, at each end of which there was a
sumptuous Palace, beautified also with the Temple of the Idol Bell; the whole
City being adorned with fair Buildings, stately Palaces, and Temples, with a
number of fair and large Streets, famous for its Tower of Babel^ which exalted
it selt 5164 Paces in height, which is something above 5 miles, having its
basis or circumference equal to its height. A City once esteemed the Mistress
of the World, and so rich, that it is said, that Alexander at his taking it
found treasured up 200000 Talents of Gold, (a Talent of our Money being
esteemed at 4500 Pounds) a vast Treasure; but the sins of the People drew the
wrath of God upon it; and by reason of its Invasions by the Medes, Persians,
and Macedonians, who subdued it, so ru^ned, that it soon lost its pristine
glory and magnificence, being reduced to Ruins; out of which was raised a new
City called Bagdad, Babylon, now called Bagdad.
so named from its many Gardens therein contained, but not to compare to the
old Babylon, neither in largeness nor glory, being not above 7 miles in
compass, but yet remains to this day a place of great Trade; between which and
Aleppo are found many Caravans to travel with many thousand Camels laden with
rich Commodities brought from India, and elsewhere, abounding with the same
Commodities as Aleppo does. At this place they make use also of Pigeons, as
they do at Alexandretta and Aleppo, which serve instead of Posts, which, when
occasion serves, as upon the arrival of Ships, Caravans, or the like, they
take these Pigeons and tie an Advertisement (which they write in a little piece
of Paper) about their Necks, which done, they carry the Pigeon to a high place,
and toss it up, and immediately it flies to the other place to which it is
designed, which gives notice to them. The Palaces in this City most worthy of
note are, the Mosque, a large and rich Structure, built of Freestone,
resembling Marble, in form orbicular; then the Sultans Palace adjoining to the
Buzzar, or great Marketplace, is a rich, large, but low Fabric; next the
Bridge, whose passage is over Boats, which are chained together, which, upon
occasion may be separated, having resemblance to that of Roan in Normandy; and
lastly, its Coho-houses, which are Houses of Good-fellowship, being in the
nature of Coffee-houses with us, which in this place are many, to which a great
resort of People comes to sip Coffee, which by them is highly esteemed, as
indeed by most People in these Regions: 3. Balsera, the Port-Town to Bagdad,
seated near the place where Tygris loses it self in the Persian Gulf; which is
likewise called the Gulf of Balsora and Ormus. This City is said to have 10000
Houses, and answers to the ancient Teredon. 4. Coufa, was sometime the Sea^ of
the Califfs, and near it was Ali interred; whence it has likewise been called
Masad-Ali, or Merat-Ali, the House of Ali; and there is always a Horse kept
ready to mount Mahomet Mahadin, the Son of Almansor, the Son of Ocem, the Son
of Ali, when he shall come to convert the whole World to the Law of Mahomet;
for this Conversion is to begin at Coufa: but they hitherto have had, and may
for the future have time enough to curry their Horse, expecting the coming of
their Cavalier. 5. Orchoe, now so called, is the Vrchoa of Ptolomy, and Vr, the
place of Abraham's Nativity. 6. Borsippa, by Ptolomy called Barsita, famous for
the great Victory which Cyrus, the first Persian Monarch, here obtained against
Nabonius King of Babylon. 7. Ctesiphon, seated on the Tygris; And, 8. Sipparum,
noted for the great Trench made near it, which was made to receive the
overflowings of the Euphrates, which was in compass 160 miles, and in depth 20
Fathoms, which was made to preserve the City of Babylon from overflowings.

Bagdad and Balsera have each their Beglerbies, and many Sangiacs; but to speak
truth, sometime the Turk, sometime the Persian possesses these Quarters; the
last took Bagdad in the year 1624, which the Turks regained in 1638. Fame now
speaks it the Persians.

MESOPOTAMIA.
Mesopotamia bounded, and its fertility.
MESOPOTAMIA, bounded on the West with the Euphrates. The Southern part of this
Country is very barren and full of Deserts, scarce affording any Herbage, nor
hardly so much as Trees. But as this part is so much deficient, that toward
the North has as great plenty, which makes amends, abounding with great store
of Corn and Wine, together with all such hecessaries as are required for the
life of man. Its chief Plac^^.
Place of most note are. 1. Rohai, or Orpha, which is the ancient Edesse, being
10 miles in circuit, situate on the River Scirtas, which passes through the
midst of it, not far from the Euphrates into which it falls. 2. Caraemid,
anciently Amida, seated near the Tygris, encompassed with a strong Wall, a
Frontier Town of great strength, being much desired by the Persians; now the
chief Seat of the Bassa, which governs this Country for the Turk, where the
Patriarch of the Jacobite Christians also had his residence. 3. Merdin, not
above 4 or 5 miles in circuit, but is very strongly seated on a high Mountain,
and having a Castle of about a mile in circumference; not far from which, in
the Monastery of Saphran, is the Patriarchal See of the Jacobite Sectaries 4.
Asanchif, esteemed the Metropolis of the Country* yet not being of above 4 or 5
miles compass, but has four great Suburbs well filled with Inhabitants. 5.
Carra, where Crassus and the Romans were defeated, is now called Herren, or
Harrar, the City to which Abraham did remove when he went toward Canada;
remarkable in former times for its famous Temple, dedicated to the Moon, which
was here worshipped under both Sexes. 6. Sumiscasack, not far from Edesse, has
its Castle seated very advantagiously. The Castle of Corna, that is pointed, is
one of the most important places the Turks possess in all these quarters, being
built above the place where the Tygris and Euphrates meet, to keep in awe both
these Rivers: And 7. Virta, by some Authors supposed to have been built by
Alexander the Great, encompassed with Walls, and fortified with Towers and
Bulwarks, that it was in a manner impregnable.

ASSYRIA.
Assyria bounded.
ASSYRIA, particularly so called, has for its Western limits Mesopotamid, and
is called at this day, Arzerum. A Country very fruitful, seated in a Plain, Its
People, and their Customs, etc.
and watered with several good Rivers; the People were anciently much addicted
to Marshal-affairs, yet very demure in their Habit and Behavior, not going out
of their Doors without first being perfumed, adorned with Rings on their
Fingers, and a Scepter in their Hands; they were much given to Bathing, and
especially after Copulation. In their Nuptial Ceremonies, they never see the
Woman until they are married; but when they hear a good Report of a Maiden,
being such as likes them, they go to her Parents, and with them agree; which
done, on an appointed time they meet in the Church, in such a part of it as is
designed for that use, where there is a Partition with a Hole in it: on one
side the Bridegroom and his Friends stand, and on the other the Bride and her
Friends; then the Cassisse or Priest bids the Bridegroom put his hand through
the Hole, and take his Bride by the hand; which no sooner done, but her Mother,
or some other of her Friends, being prepared with a sharp Instrument, pricks
his hand all over; and if he does not pull away his hand when he is so pained,
but still holds her so fast that she cries, they hold it a sign that he will
love her; and if he lets her go, a sign of no great love.

Chief places in Assyria.
Places of most note: 1. Ninive, first built by Nimrod, and afterward so
enlarged by several succeeding Kings, that it became at last to exceed Babylon,
as well in largeness as otherwise; its Walls being in circuit 60 miles, being
about 33 yards in height, and 24 in breadth; and on whose Walls there was (for
further strength) 1500 Tunrets, or Towers, which made it to be thought
impregble, To this City the Lord sent Jonah the Prophet, to Preach Repentance
to them; but afterward for their Sins, it was destroyed by Astyages King of
the Medes, out of whose Ruins the City, 2. Mosul was ^aised, which at present
is the chief City of Assyria, seated on the Tygris, most eminent for being the
residence of the Nestorian Patriarch, where, are founded 15 Christias Churches.
It is enclosed within a Wall, and is the residence of a Bashaw, a place much
ruined, but of note for the great concourse of Merchants, this being a
thoroughfare City. 3. Schere^e zull, or Schi^hrazur, is very near to Persia,
and is the Seat of a Turkish Beglerby, or Bassa, who has 10000 Timariots under
his command, for the defense and security of this Country. It is near to, if
not the same as Arbela, renowned or the Victory of Alexander the great against
Darius, and is said to retain its ancient name, and to be an Archbishopric of
the Jacobites. 4. G^gilamela, noted for the last and greatest Battle betwixt
Alexander and Darius, King of P^^sia, in which Alexander gained the Victory. 5.
^alach, built by Nimrod, being one of the Cities to which Sa^inanassar
transplanted the Ten Tribes. 6. Arbela seated on the Banks of the River Caprus,
by some supposed to be the place where Noah's Ark was framed: And 7. Sittace,
pleasantly seated in a fruitful Soil.

TVRCOMANIA.
Turcomania pou^ded.
TVRCOMANIA, or ARMENIA MAJOR, touches the Ca^pian Sea between Georgia and
Servan; and on the Black Sea, between Anatolia and Georgia, it extends from
East to West little less than 200 Le^g^e^, and from South to North, 150
answering to the great Armenia of the Ancients.

Its People.
Some divide it only into two sorts of People, the Turcomans and the Curdes; I
would add at least the Armenians and the Georgians, these possessing a great
part of the Country as well as the others, who are the natural and most an^^ent
Inhabitants: for the Turcomans are esteemed to descend from Turquestan in
Tartary, from whence come the Turks, and to whom they are most resertbling; the
Curdes descend from the ancient people of Assyria, Mesopotami^, Chaldea or
Babylonia; the most Easternly of these three parts being yet called by the
Turks and by the Persians, Curdistan, or the Country of the Curdes: and the
Georgians descend from Georgia, which is above, and contiguous to our
Turcomania.

Of these four sorts of People, the Armenians are the most indurstrious and
civil, addicting themselves to Merchandise, as appears by their Manufactures,
especially in their rich Tapestries, Grograins, watered Chamlets, etc. with
which they drive a trade; being also proper Personages and good Archers. The
Turcomans apply themselves to the Field, and to look after their Flocks* the
Curdes are almost ever on Horseback, having much of the Arabic Nature: the
Georgians are the most docil, and the most peaceable. The Tarcomans and the
Curdes are Mahometans; the Georgians and Armenians, the greatest part
Christians. And the Armenian Tongue is one of the most general in all Asia;
extending it self likewise other where, and having Armenian Patriarchs and
Bishops, not only in Armenia, but likewise in Anatolia, Persie^, the Holy Land,
Egypt, Russia, and Polonia.

Amongst the Ceremonies observed by the Armenians, I shall take notice of some
few, as I find them in the Travels of Tavernier. They are very costly in
adorning their Churches, especially the Choir and the Altar; at the ceremony of
the Mass they light abundance of Tapers, and after the Gospel is read, several
of the Noviciates, some having Bells fixed to long Sticks, and others having
Copper Plates hung about with Bells, shaking and striking them one against
another, together with the Ecclesiastics and Laity, who sing, and make an
indifferent harmony; during which the Archbishop and Bishops performs several
Ceremonies, and says certain Prayers; which being done, having the Chalice in
his hand, and the Bread upon it, he turns toward the People, who immediately
prostrate themselves on the ground, beating their Breasts, and kissing the
Earth, whilst the Archbishop pronounces these words, This is the Lord, who
gave his Body and Blood for you: then he turns toward the Altar, and eats the
Bread dipped in Wine, (for they never drink the Wine;) then he turns again to the
People with the Chalice in his hand, and they that will receive, taking the
Bread from the Archbishop; and this Bread is consecrated the day before. That
which is observable amongst them, they give the Communion to Children of 2 or 3
Months old; and they never administer the Sacrament all the time of their Lent:
They have four Feasts in the year besides their Lent, at which times they
observe the same Ceremonies as at Lent, eating no Flesh, Fish, Butter, Eggs, or
Oib for 8 days; the Feasts are Christmas, the Ascension, the Annunciation, and
St Georges.

When a man designs his Son for the Priesthood, he brings him to the Priest,
who puts the Cope about his Shoulders, open on both sides; after which he takes
him home, and keeps him till the age of saying Mass, which is 18 years; then he
goes into the Church, out of which he is not allowed to depart for a year,
during which time he is employed in the service of the Church. And the Priest
that is married after he has said Mass, must be 5 days before he returns home
to eat, drink, or lie with his Wife.

They generally Baptize their Children on Sundays, which is performed by
putting it naked into the Water, then gives it to the Godfather, anoints it in
several places in form of the Cross with holy Oil, and pronounces these words,
I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and
says several Prayers suitable to the occasion.

In their Marriages the Ceremonies are too many here to repeat: See Tavernier,
fol. 173.
I shall take notice of some few. They are permitted to marry at 3 or 4 years
of age; the agreement is made betwixt the Mothers, or for want of them, by the
Females next of kin; which agreement the Father stands unto, and after a Ring
is presented to the intended Bride, the Contract stands. The Bridegroom and
Bride never sees one another till after the Nuptial Ceremonies are ended, both
riding to the Church with their faces Veiled, the Bridegrooms is a Carnation
Tiffany, or else Gold and Silver Network, and the Bride with a large white
Veil, which covers her body; thus Riding, they are attended by their
Relations and Friends with Tapers in their hands, also the Drums, Trumpets, and
other Musical Instruments wait on them to the Church-door: being entered and
advanced near the Altar, they lean Forehead to Forehead, then the Priest lays
the Bible on their Heads (instead of a Desk) and so pronounces the Ceremony,
which is much like ours; after the Benediction they hear Mass, and so return to
the House of the Bride. At their Feasting the Men sit by themselves, and the
Women by their selves; the Man goes to Bed first, and the Woman pulls off
his Breeches, but puts not off her Veil till Candles be put out; and at all
times of the year the Woman rises first, so that the poor Bridegroom knows
not whether he has met with a Beauty, or a course and ill-favored piece of
flesh; but be she what she will, he must keep her.

About their Dead; the Body is washed, wherein is put some Holy Water, then it
is dressed with a clean white Shirt, a pair of Breeches, a Waist-coat, and a
Bonnet; then it is put in a Linnen-Sack, and sewed up; then it is carried to
the Church, accompanied with the Friends and Relations of the deceased, who
carry in their hands Tapers, and being come to the Altar, after some Prayers
are said, they leave the Corpse there all Night; the next Morning the Bishop or
Priest, attended as before, says Mass; several Prayers being said, and Dirges
sung, the Corpse is puts in the Grave, and the Bishop casts 3 handfuls of Earth
in, one after another, saying, From earth thou came, to earth thou shall
return, and stay there till our Lord comes; then the Grave is filled up, and
the Relations and Friends that will, go back to the House of the Deceased,
where a Collation is prepared. These, with many other Ceremonies, are performed
by them.

Its Air, and fertility and trade.
The Air is healthful, though its temperament be cold, because of the Mountains
and Hills, which overspread the Country; but intermixed with fertile and and
delightful Valleys, the Soil producing more Grain and Fruits than Vines; It
yields Bolearmoniack, Honey, and, toward Servan, Silk, together with some Mines
of Silver. The Pastures are every where excellent, and particularly for Horses,
of which they make great account; for when Armenia was subject to the ancient
Kings of Persia, it furnished them yearly with 20000 Horses. At present the
Turk possesses the greatest part of the Country, and keeps still, or did not
long since, Beglerbies at Erzerum, Cars, Revan, Van, Schildir, Tefflis, and
Derbent: besides which there are many Cities of considerable note, some of
which the Persians hold.

1. Its chief Places.
Erzerum, on the Euphrates, near the black Sea, on which, and not far from
Erzerum, is Trebisonde, which facilitates a great trade between the East, West,
and North; for coming from the Indian Ocean by the Gulf of Ormus, and so up
the Euphrates, they may receive passing by what comes from the West to Aleppo,
and carry it unto Erzerum; from whence, to Trebisonde by land, is not above 25
or 30 Leagues. 2. Gars, Chars, or likewise Chissery, is four or five days
Journey from Erzerum toward the East, on the River Euphrates; it has been
taken and retaken diverse times by the Turks and Persians. The same may be said
of Revan, Schilder, and Van: this last is not great, but well Walled, and with
greater Ditches, and has a Castle whose situation is such, as renders it
almost inaccessible. 3. Tefflis is likewise in some esteem at present, but much
more formerly under the name of Artaxata, which Artaxias, Father of Tigranes
King of Armenia, caused to be builded and fortified at the persuasion of
Hannibal. 4. Derbent, of great antiquity, being supposed to have its foundation
laid by Alexander the Great; who also erected that no less great than strong
Castle, which is called Kastow, adjoining to the said City, which is the
greatest and most ordinary passage between Turcomania, Persia, and other
Southern Provinces of Asia, to Zuire, the Kingdom of Astracan, and other more
Northern Estates of Europe and Asia. Its situation is upon the utmost
Mountains, which regard the Taberestan, or the Caspian Sea: and all is so well
fortified, that the Turks have took occasion to call the place Demir, or Temir
Capi, or the Port of Iron: and the name of Derbent signifies a Straight Port;
and in all likelihood these are the Caspiae Portae, so famous among the
Ancients; because that in the black Sea, and the Sea of Tabarestan, which is
about 3 or 400 thousand Paces: It is all high, Mountainous, and hard to be
passed; and if there be any passages, they are infamous for Robberies and
Incursions, which the Inhabitants of the Countries, or the Princes which
possess them, make. This City is a place of great strength, being environed
with two strong Walls, and fortified with Towers and Iron-gates, being
accounted the Key or Inlet to Persia, now in the hands of the Grand Signior. 5.
Bitlis, and Manuscute, belong to the Curdes, who have here many and diverse
Lords, better affected to the Persians than the Turks. Bitlis is between two
Mountains, watered with a River, which receives many fair Fountains. The Houses
are built with Stones, which is rare in that Country; others being of nothing
but Wood and Earth. The Castle is seated advantagiously, but I believe this
place is not now in the hands of the Turks; and to speak truth, we have at
present little knowledge of any thing concerning these quarters.

ARMENIA was much better known, and more famous in Ancient time than at
present, under the name of Turcomania. The Bounds of Armenia.
Its Bounds are very advantageous, being quite encompassed with high Mountains,
large Rivers, and washed by diverse Seas, and seated Northwards of the Caspian
Mountains, which divides it from Media, now called Servan.

The Mountains of Armenis.
This Country is well replenished with Mountains, Valleys, Rivers, and Lakes.
The Mountain Anti-Taurus divides it East and West, almost from one extremity to
the other; whose most Easternly point is called Abus, from whence the
Euphrates, Tigris, and Araxes take some of their Streams. The Gordian Mountains
pour forth the greatest supplies to Tigris; and the Pariardes increase most the
Streams of Euphrates, Araxes, and Farza.

Chief Rivers in Armenia.
Farza turns his course toward the North, and after having passed Colchida,
and pressed through 100 or 120 Bridges, falls into the Euxine Sea. Araxes turns
toward the East, watering the fairest and richest Plains of Armenia; and falls
into the Caspian Sea between Media and Albania. Both the one and the other
Euphrates descend toward the West; but approaching the Euxine Sea, it turns
again toward the South; and reunites its two Channels into one, traverses the
Anti-Taurus and Taurus, divides Armenia and Mesopotamia from Asia Minor, Syria,
and Arabia; descends into Chaldea, where it waters the ancient Babylon, and
loses it self in the Tigris. This last descends from Mount Abus, and the
Georgian Mountains, falls into diverse Lakes, loses it self and rises diverse
times out of the Earth; cuts the Mountain Niphates, separates Mesopotamia from
Assyria, washes Ninive, Seleucia, Ctesiphon; receives all the branches of the
Euphrates, and discharges it self in the Persian Gulf.

Lakes of most note in Armenia.
The greatest Lakes of Armenia are, Thospitis, Areessa, and Lychintes; this last
is toward the Araxes and the Caspian Sea: Areessa is the same that Pliny and
Solinus call Arethusa. Thospitis, according to Ptolomy, is another Lake the
Tigris likewise crosses; after which it loses it self the second time. The
first has its Water so, as it will take spots out of Clothes, but is not good
to drink.

Kings of eminent note in Armenia.
Among the Kings of Armenia, which made themselves most known to the Romans or
Parthians; Tigranes, Son-in-law to Mithridates King of Pontus, has been the
most famous. This Tigranes, after having been an Hostage in the hands of the
Parthians, regained his Estates by their means, in recompense of which he gave
them 70 Valleys, on the confines of Media and Assyria; but after he knew and
had gathered together his Powers, he retook all those Valleys, beat the
Parthians out of them, pillaged Assyria as far as Ninive and Arbela, subjected
to himself a part of Media; and afterward all Mesopotamia, Syria, Phoenicia,
and Cilicia. But whilst he believed himself above Fortune, Mithridates his
Father-in-law was diverse times defeated, and driven from his Realm of Pontus by
Lucullus and the Romans, and retiring himself into Armenia to his Son-in-law,
his refusal to abandon or deliver him into the hands of Lucullus, drew the
Romans into Armenia, where Lucullus several times defeated Tigranes, took
Tigranocerta, where was his Regal Diadem, and likewise in a great Set-Battel,
where Tigranes had 150000 Foot, and 1000 or 1200 Horse, flew 100000 Foot, and
the greatest part of his Cavalry, constraining him to yield to the Romans the
Provinces of Cilicia, Syria, Phoenicia, and Mesopotamia, and content himself
with Armenia only; but for the present let us lay aside History.

The division of Armenia, according to Ptolomy.
Ptolomy divided Armenia into four principal Parts, and allotted to the first 7
Regions or Provinces, 6 to the second, 3 to the third, and 4 to the fourth:
placing in the first part 30 Cities, 27 in the second, 12 in the third, and 18
in the fourth; which are in all 4 Parts, 20 Regions or Provinces, and 87
Cities. Pliny accounts 120 Strategies in Armenia, which are the Governments or
particular Jurisdictions of every Province; six for each, and one as much as
the other. Armenia is not only known in profane History, but likewise in Holy
Writ. After the Deluge, the Holy Scripture makes mention, that the Ark of Noah
rested upon the Mountains of Armenia: to say precisely at present which they
were (there being so many in Armenia) Authors cannot agree. We only conjecture,
that they must be either Abus, which ends the Anti-Taurus, or the Pariardes, or
the Gordons, which are the highest in all Armenia; and from whence the
Euphrates, the Tigris, the Phazza or Phasis, and Araxes descend.

Now Euphrates is called Frat or Forat, the Tigris, Diglath or Digelath; these
two names, Frat and Diglath, are found among the four Rivers, which Moses says
came forth from the Terrestrial Paradise: We must therefore seek this Paradise
not far from hence; the difficulty is to find the other two Rivers, Phison, and
Gihou.

The Terrestrial Paradise in Armenia.
Almost all Authors conclude the Nile for Gehon, and the Ganges for Phison; but
as the Bible describes these Rivers no us, they must descend from the same
place; which the Tigris, the Euphrates, the Nile, and the Ganges cannot do. The
Tigris and the Euphrates have some Springs, which are not far distant the one
from the other; but those of Ganges are more than 200 Leagues, and those of the
Nile more than 1500 Leagues from those of the Tigris or Euphrates; and moreover
those of Nile and of Ganges, are more than 2000 Leagues one from the other.

Phasis has its heads in the same Mountain with the Euphrates, and may
therefore better answer to Phison then can the Ganges. The Araxes has its
Springs in the same Mountains with the Phasis and Euphrates, and so may better
answer to the Gehon than the Nile; for as for the Gehon, or Jehun, which we now
know it answers to the Oxus of the Ancients; which runs between Bactriana and
Sogdiana, and discharges itself into the Caspian Sea; but it has its Springs
in Mount Caucasus in India, a little on this side the Springs of the Indus,
which are likewise 8 or 900 Leagues from those of Tigris and Euphrates.

Since then the Tigris, Euphrates, Phazza, and Araxes, have here their Springs,
we may judge that the Terrestrial Paradise was in these Mountains. The Holy
Scripture says, that it had in the midst of it a Fountain, from whence issued
a River alone, which divides itself into four others, which it names Phison,
Gehon, Diglath, and Fratt. It is to be believed, that this Fountain was in the
midst of the World, to the end the Rivers might have a course almost equal to
water all parts of the World. It must likewise be concluded, that this Fountain
must be in some high part of the World, to the end that Rivers might have an
equal fall. The Mountains of Armenia are directly in the middle of our
Continent: which may easily be proved by casting the eye upon the whole
Continent: they are likewise the highest in the World, since they were first
discovered after the Deluge, and those on which the Ark of Noah rested; and the
modern names of the Rivers not being very different from the ancients, at least
the three or four; I am bold to say, that if there yet remains any marks by
which we may discover the place where the Terrestrial Paradise has been, it is
rather in these quarters than any other.

GEORGIA.
Georgia, and its parts.
A Bove Turcomania, and between the Black Sea and the Caspian, as far as Mount
Caucasus, lies GEORGIA; which is divided into three or four parts, Mingrelia,
Avogasia, Gurgiston, and Quiria: Avogasia is sometimes comprehended under the
name of Mingrelia; and on the other side a part of the ancient Armenia passes
likewise under the general name of Georgia: Mingrelia and Avogasia together,
are the same with Colchis of the Ancients, or little more: Gurgiston, to the
ancient Iberia, and sometimes likewise to that part of Armenia, which falls
under the general name of Georgia: Quiria answers to the ancient Albania.

The Georgians are docil, peaceable, lovers of Christianity, much addicted to
drinking, and the stronger the Drink the better acceptable: At Feasts the Women
never eat with the Men. They are great lovers of Onions and Herbs, are much
addicted to Trade, are great Travelers, are very expert at the Bow and Arrow,
and are esteemed the best Soldiers in all Asia.

Its chief places.
The Cities of Phans, or Phazza, and Savatopoli, are the most famous of
Mingrelia and formerly of Colchis. Savatopoli, once Sebastopolis, and before
that Dioscurias had the confluence of 300 different Nations, and different
Tongues, which came hither from the North, in way of Traffic. Phazza,
anciently Phasis, on the River of the same name, was the abode of Aeetes, who
kept the Golden Fleece, which the Argonauts took away, after having vanquished
all those difficulties which presented themselves to their hindrance.

Of the Golden Fleece.
I believe that this Golden Fleece was no other thing, than a Trade of Wool,
Skins, and Furrs, which all the Northern People brought to Phasis, which Jason
and the Greeks, among all the People of Europe were the first Discoverers of:
And because there was great profit, and many hazards and dangers in the first
Navigations, it was feigned that the Fleece was of Gold, and that it was
guarded by furious Bulls; Men well armed, and a horrible and affrightful
Dragon. It may be added, That Jason with the Golden Fleece brought Medea with
him, which after caused so many displeasures in his Family; that is, that
Riches having introduced some Luxury among the Greeks, their Women became more
proud and troublesome.

Places in Georgia.
Cori and Bassachiuch are the best Cities of Gurgistan: Tefflis and Derbent the
fairest of that part of Armenia, which passes under the name of Georgia;
Bassachiuch may answer to the ancient Artamista; Cori to Harmastis, or
Armactia; Tefflis to Artaxata; and Derbent to Caspiae Portae: Bassachiuch and
Cori, with some other places of Gurgistan, have their Princes, of which there
are many throughout Georgia; Cori is most advanced toward the Sea, and
Bassachiuch more engaged with the Mountains. Tefflis and Derbent are in the
hands of the Turks, as we have said in Turcomania.

Country of Quiria, its Provinces, and the chief Places.
QVIRIA extends it self from the particular Georgia, which lies on the West and
South unto Mount Caucasus, which bounds it on the North side. Some Authors
divide it into two, others into three Provinces; of which the chief Cities are
Stranu, Zitrach, and Chipicha; instead of Stranu: others put Zambanach; and
instead of Zitrach, Gorgora; possibly these names are not different but to
diverse People, though they be the same places. However it be, Stranu, or
Zambanach, answer to the ancient Albana, Metropolis of Albania; Zitrach, or
Gorgora, answers to the ancient Getara, which the Greek Text in Ptolomy writes
Gagara, and both the places are on the Sea: they have been, and may possibly
yet be, rich and Merchandising. Chipicha is farther up in the Land, and was the
ancient Chabala.

COMMANIA.
Commania, and its bounds.
A Bove Georgia lies COMMANIA, little known by the Ancients, and less at
present; Mount Caucasus bounds it on the South, and separates it from Georgia;
the River Don or Tana is its Northern limits, and parts it from Muscovia; the
Euxine or Black Sea, and the Sea of Zabaque or Tana, does wash it on the West,
and divides it from the petty Tartars: the Caspian Sea, or the Sea of
Taberestan lies to the Eastward of it, and gives it Traffic and Communication
with Persia and Tartaria.

Its length and breadth.
This Region may have 300 Leagues of length from the Straight of Vospero unto
the River Volga, which are its extreme bounds from East to West, and about 100
from North to South. Its People.
The People pass all under the general name of Circasses, which the Polonians
call Peint Zeorstki, that is, the Inhabitants of the five Mountains. They are
free, having some Chiefs or Governors, and living very near after the manner
of Switzers in Europe, hiring themselves to War, sometimes to the Turks, their
Neighbors, on the Black Sea; sometimes to the Tartars or Moscovites, which are
next them on the Sea of Zabaque and River Don; and sometimes likewise to the
Sultan of Persia, who is their Neighbor on the Caspian Sea. They have been
Christians of the Greek Churches, but with many Superstitions; at present, for
want of Teachers, many let themselves fall to Mahumetism, others to Idolatry.
They are warlike, nor care they for fortifying their Towns, confiding in their
Arms, and in the situation of their Country. At their Funerals, the Relations
and Friends of the Deceased scarifie their Flesh, prostrating themselves on the
ground, and tear their Hair. If a man have no Children by his Wife, he may take
others to raise up Issue; and Women are allowed their Gallants, and the more
she has, the more she is respected; which proceeds from her handsomness,
Beauties being admired by them; and this is no disgrace to her Husband, as
amongst us: and if the Man or Woman cannot agree, they are parted. The People
for the generality are of an excellent Complexion, especially the Women. All
the Country People are slaves to the Lord of the Village where they live, and
are employed to till his ground, and other services.

its ancient People the Amazons.
But the People of these Quarters have been much more famous formerly, under the
name of Amazons; for this was their true and natural Country, from whence they
came, and made their incursions into diverse parts of Europe and Asia. They had
Sovereignty in Colchida, in Albania, in Cappadocia, in Asia the Lesser, in
Cilicia in Syria; and did in diverse places build many fair Cities, as
Themiscyra in Cappadocia, and on the Euxine Sea; Mirlea in Bithynia, and on the
Propontick, Pytane, Myrina, and Cuma on the Coast of Aeolia; likewise Ephesus,
Smyrna, and Pyrene: On the Coast of Ionia, (these two Quarters, Aeolia and
Ionia, being on the Aegean Sea,) Mitelene in the Isle of Lesbos, and Paphos in
the Isle of Cyprus, who made themselves known in those Wars they sustained
against Hercules, near Themiscyra; against Theseus, near Athens, whither they
carried the War against the Greeks, before Troy, whither they went in favor of
Hector, against the Persians, and other People, in diverse occasions. Some of
them made their abode at Themiscyra, others at Alope, which was afterward
called Ephesus; and others at Zeleja, not far from Troy.

To conclude, the Ancients have spoken so many wonders of them, that the least
of them have passed for Fables. It may be believed, that some Estates in these
Quarters being fallen under the Government of Women, their Husbands being
deceased, and their Children young, or for some other reason, these Women
administered the public Affairs with so much conduct and generosity, both in
Policy and War, that they excelled the greatest part of Men; from whence the
Greeks, according to their ordinary custom, took occasion to speak things not
only beyond the Truth, but all that came nigh to Truth. And so much for Turkey
in Asia.

ARABIA, which may be considered in LAND, with its three Parts, as they lie
Between the RED SEA, and Gulf of BALSERA and ORMUS; as, HYAMAN, GEMEN, or
ARABIA the HAPPY. Medina, Chaibar, Algiar, Egra, Soquia, Mecca, Ziden, Nageran,
Dhafar, Magara, Zerzer, Cubid, Gilan, Zibith, Sanaa, Mechlaf Atherda, Aden,
Abin, Odeida, Laghi, Almacharama, Saada, Fartach, Agiaz, Caxem, Gubit, Dolfar,
Pescher, Nerbante, Guebelhaman, Alibinali, Calhar, Cor, Tybi, Dayma, Curiac,
Spalheiro, Cueva, Cerique, Hor, Calajaoe, Mascates, Sohar, Orfacan, Doba,
Mocandon, Mirabat, Masfa, Sir, or Sour, Mascalat, Jemen, Zirisdin, Lalach,
Elcatif, Bahar, Ahso, Manabon, Fararan, Jamama, Borani.
Near PALESTINE, or the HOLY LAND; as, BARRAAB, or ARABIA the STONY, Madian,
Medava, Sur, Thara, Herat, of old Petras, Moab, Bussereth, St. Catherine.
Near CHALDEA, and the EUPHRATES; as, BERIARA, or ARABIA the DESERT, Anna,
Mexat-Ali, Mexat Ocem, Sumiscasac, Sukana, Faraa, Kadhema, Anna, Abadon,
Tangia, Thaalabia, Remala, Maaden Alnocra.

ISLES adjacent, as they lie In the PERSIAN GULF, or GULF of BALSORA, and
ORMUS; as, Baharem, Manama. Oulximi. Cori. Tome. Andrani. Quaro.
In the SOUTHERN OCEAN; as, Mazira, Mazira. Curia. Muria.
In the RED SEA, or Sea of MECCA; as, Tincce. Camaran, Camaran. Decor. Zaiban.
Turach. Muchi. Monte Marzoan. Genaman. Chifale. Cajas.



map of Arabia ^ENERALL Mapp of ARABIA, with the Red Sea and Circumiacent
Lands, Designed by Monsieur Sanson.
blazon or coat of arms of the Brouncker viscountsTo the Rt. Honorable William
Viscount Brouncker of Lions, and Baron Brouncker of New Castle in the Kingdom
of Ireland. This Mapp is humbly DD. by R.B.



ARABIA.
Arabia; Its Bounds.
ARABIA has for its Eastern Limits, the Persian Gulf and Chaldea; for its
Southern, the Ocean; for its Western, the Red Sea and some part of Egypt; and
for its Northern Limits, the River Euphrates, together with some part of
Palestine.

Arabia, has been well known both to the Ancients, and at present. They
commonly divided it into three parts: Baraab, Its Paru.
or Arabia the Stony, which lies near the Holy Land; Berjara, or Arabia the
Desert, near to Chaldea and the Euphrates; Hyaman, or Gemen, or Arabia the
Happy, which advances it self between the Red Sea, which separates it from
Africa and the Gulf of Ormus, which divides it from Persia, into the Indian
Ocean. And this part is the greatest, the richest, and best inhabited of all.

Arabia the Stony, and its chief places.
Arabia the Stony has for its chief places, 1. Petra, now called Herat, which
signifies a Rock, whereon it was built with an advantageous situation; a place
of great strength, and much noted as well in profane History as Holy Writ. 2.
Bostra, now called B^sesereth, rebuilt after its former Ruins by Augustus
Caesar; a City of great Antiquity, and memorable for being the Birthplace of
Philip, one of Alexanders Successors, who was the first of the Romans Emperors
which embraced Christianity. 3. Medava, now Moab, according to the Translation
of the Septuagint; and being so, the name may be taken from Moab, Son of Lots
eldest Daughter, from whence the Moabites descended, of whom mention is made in
the Old Testament. 4. Berenice, so named from an Egyptian Queen, but better
known by the name of Esion-Geber; here it was that the Children of Israel did
encamp; where also those Ships employed by Solomon to Ophir, did make their
ordinary Harbor. 5. Sur, one of the chief Cities of the Amalekites, giving
name to a Wilderness there adjacent, remarkable for the great Victory which
Saul gave the Amalekites, where also the Children of Israel first encamped
after their passage through the Red Sea. 6. Thara, where Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, were punished: And, 7. Madian, seated toward the Red Sea, being the
City of Jethro, whose Daughter Zipporah, Moses took to wife.

Remarkable things here transacted.
Besides these Cities there are some others, yet the Country is for the most
part Desert, and is the same where the Children of Israel wandered 40 years;
there, where then inhabited the Moabites, Amalekites, Midianites, Idumaeans,
and others; there, where are the Mountains of Sinai and Horeb. The Israelites
being in these Deserts, lay a whole year near this Mountain, and during that
time Moses received from God the Decalogue, dedicated the Tabernacle, ordained
a High Priest, Priests and Levites, and established Ecclesiastical and
Political Laws. There is at present a Monastery of St. Katherine, built by
Justinian,; and all sorts of Pilgrims are received by the Caloyers, that is,
Religious Greeks which inhabit there. The Burning Bush, in which God appeared
to Moses, was near Mount Horeb. The Rock which Moses struck to have Water, was
of this Mount; and likewise on this Mountain it was that Moses besought God for
the Israelites against the Amalekites: also Mount Hor, bordering on Idumea,
where Aaron died.

On the Coast of the Red Sea is the Castle Tor, a Borough or Walled Town, and a
Port very famous, where it is believed, that the Israelites having passed the
Red Sea, entered the Deserts this way: And it is likewise a great Passage, where
the Caravans stop at their return from Mecca.

Arabia the Desert described.
ARABIA the Desert, so called by reason of the vast Sandy Deserts; and the
uninhabitableness thereof, scarce affording either food for Man or Beast; so
that those which travel this Country are forced to carry with them their
Provision, and guide themselves to the place designed by the help of Stars, as
they do at Sea; and are forced to go in great Companies or Caravans, for fear
of being robbed and rifled by the wild Arabs (who here inhabit in Tents, which
they remove as occasion serves from place to place, either for fresh Pasture,
or otherwise,) and yet much traveled by Merchants, who Trade into Babylonia,
Egypt, and elsewhere. Some Authors have observed in the course of their Trade,
that the Sandy Deserts are their Seas, the wild Arabs their Pirates, and their
Camels their Ships; each Camel carrying 600 or 1000 pound weight.

Its People.
The People are much addicted to Theft, by which they get their chief living,
being stout and warlike Men, and not Tilling the Earth, and planting Fruits,
Plants, or the like; their chief food being Venison, Milk, Fowls, and Herbs.
They go half naked; their Wives they hire for what time they please, who in way
of a Portion bring a Tent and a Spear to their Husbands. Both Sexes are much
given to Carnal lusts, and when Women are delivered of a Child, they leave it
without troubling themselves with it.

Its chief Cities.
There are found in Arabia the Desert two Cities of the name of Anna or Anua,
one on the Euphrates, and the other on the River Astan, not far from the Gulf
of Balsora: this last is least famous; the other is the most considerable of
the Province, seated both on the one and the other Bank of the Euphrates; but
the greatest part and the richest is on the Arabian side. There is in all about
4000 Houses, which have been much ruined in the late Wars between the Turks and
Persians. The City contains diverse Isles, on one of which is a Castle. At
Suskanna, a Borough upon the great Road between Anua and Aleppo, Texera says,
That the Women are as fair as Angels; if he had likewise said as wise, and had
spoken truth, all Men from the four Corners of the World had been obliged to go
to seek them. 3. Mexat Ali, that is, the Oratory of Ali, had once 6 or 7000
Houses, when the Sect of Ali bore sway in those quarters: there remains at
present not above 500 Inhabitants. 4. Mexat Ocem, that is, the Oratory of Ocem,
is not walled, nor has above 4000 Houses. Saba, now Simiscasac, according to
the opinion of Guillandin, is the place from whence the Three Wisemen departed
to go to Bethlem, to adore the Savior of the World.

This Arabia the Desert, according to some, has diverse Lords, which command
it, and which for the most part are Vassals or Tributaries to the Great Turk;
who holds likewise a part. But these People being more inclined to the
Mohammedan Sect of Ali, which is that of the Persians, than to that of Omaz,
which is that of the Turks, are more affectionate to the Persians than to the
Turks; and some of these Lords likewise hold of the Persians.

Others give all Arabia the Desert to one King, and will have the City, or
rather the Court of that Prince, to have a wonderful disposition and
situation; and that the Prince can make it all a March or Walk when and as
often as he pleases, which is still by going thither where they may best find
food for their Horses and Camels; and they say, that the place being chosen,
they dispose the Quarters and Streets after the ordinary manner: and at the
same time pitch all the Tents; that of the Prince in the midst, and the others
about always in the same fashion; that part which is toward the North, South,
East, or West never changing. And the Quarters and Streets have their Names and
their Tents in the same form; insomuch that who once knows the order, may
easily find any which inhabit therein.

This moving City, or rather this Court Errant, contains not only the Militia
of the Prince, which are above 2000 Men, but likewise a great number of their
Nobility, Merchants, Artizans, and diverse Strangers which follow this Court.

Arabia the Happy bounded.
ARABIA the Happy is a great Peninsula, which stretches it self from the
Mountains which divide it from the other two parts of Arabia to the Ocean,
being 3, 4, and in some places 500 Leagues long and broad. The Gulf of
Balsora, and Ormus, otherwise the Persian Gulf, washes it on the left side;
the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecca, otherwise the Arabian Gulf on the right; and the
Oriental or Indian Ocean, which is there called the Sea of Arabia on the Front.

Its fertility and commodities.
Arabia the Happy may aptly be so called by reason of the fruitfulness and
richness of the Soil, which produces plenty of Corn, Wine, Fruits, Odoriferous
Spices, great increase of Cattle; also abounding in Gold, Pearls, Balsom,
Myrrh, Frankincense, several sorts of Drugs, together with diverse useful and
beneficial Commodities. Also seated in an exceeding healthful and temperate
Climate, and enriched with many pure and pleasant Streams and Fountains, whose
Waters are Medicinal.

Its People.
These People are very faithful and punctual in their Promises, boasting of
their Nobility, as being descended from Jupiter; hating any base or mechanical
Art, but applying themselves, some to grasing of Cattle, and others to
Merchandise. Here it is held Adultery for a Man to enjoy any Woman, save those
of his own Kin, as his Sisters, Mother, Cousins, and the like; whom also they
take as Wives. Here in this Country are great quantities of Ostriches, which
for the most part abide in the Deserts.

The Ancients mentioned a great number of different People, Cities, and
Kingdoms; and we at this day find the same. The Turks possess one part, the
Persians another, but much less than the Turks. The Sultan, or Xecque or Mecca,
another; and diverse Princes, People, and some Republics, the rest.

Its chief Places.
Its chief Cities toward the Red Sea are, Medina, or Medina-Elnabi, or Talnabi,
that is, the City of the Prophet; and Mecca: this last the Birthplace, that
the Burial-place of Mahomet. Medina, though situated in a barren and desolate
place, adjoining on Arabia the Stony; yet by reason of its being the Sepulcher
of that vile Impostor Mahomet, is become a fair City (though not containing
above 6000 Houses) being a place of great Trade and resort, by reason of the
Pilgrims which hither flock to pay their blind Devotion. This Sepulcher or
Tomb, wherein their Prophet lies, Mahomets Tomb.
is enclosed within an Iron-Grate, and covered with Green Velvet, having the
supply of a new one every year from the Grand Signior, and the old one being
the Fees of the Priests, they cut into little shreds and pieces, which they
fell for great Relics to the Pilgrims, which brings a great Revenue to them.
In this Temple there are about 3000 Lamps of Gold and Silver, wherein is
Balsom, and other such rich Odours, Ointments, and Oils, which are continually
kept burning. Thus much for his Tomb: now a word or two concerning his Life.

He was (as I said before) born at Mecca, distant from Medina about 60 Leagues,
seated also in a barren Soil; but of great resort and Traffic, abounding in
the Commodities of Persia and India, which from hence are transported on Camels
to Egypt, Palestine, Syria, and other parts of the Turks Dominions. The City is
very fair, filled with about 6 or 7000 well built Houses, having a very
sumptuous Temple; the place not Walled, except by Mountains, between which
there are four passages, which give entrance and issues to the City. Here it is
made death for any Christian to approach within five miles. But to proceed: A
story of the life and death of the Impostor Mahomet.
The Father of this Impostor was an Idolatrous Pagan, and his Mother as
perverse a Jewess; at the age of two years he was left to the tuition of his
Uncle, who after he had kept him to the age of 16 years, to quit himself of
further charge and trouble, sold him to the Ishmaelites, who in their Markets
sold him again to a rich Merchant; who at first was employed about servil work,
till at last the Merchant perceiving him to be of so ripe a wit and solid
judgment, advanced him from his Kitchen to be his Factor, sending him with his
Camels laden with Merchandise, into Egypt, Persia, Syria, and other places; in
which he was so fortunate, that he gained his Master a great Estate, together
with no small fame and credit to himself. He was of personage low, but comely,
with which his Mistress was so much taken, that upon the death of her Husband,
his Master, she soon married him, and endowed him with her wealth. He was much
troubled with the Falling Sickness, which he said were Heavenly raptures, in
which he had conversion with the Angel Gabriel; he was well skilled in Magic,
by which he taught a white Pigeon which he kept to feed at his Ear, where he
put Barly-corns; and this Pigeon he reported was the Holy Ghost, which
instructed him in the Law he afterward published, which was a new Religion,
whereby he might bring the Jews, Gentiles, and Christians into one form of
Religion; where, in a Cave not far from Mecca, with the help of Sergius a
Nestorian Monk, and the aid of a certain Jew, he made the Alcoran; a Book so
highly adored by them, that on the Cover is written, Let none that are unclean
touch this Book, 3. Ziden, seated on the Red Sea, and in the midst of all the
Coast of Arabia, serves for a Port to Mecca, from which it is distant 40 miles;
well built, rich, and of great resort, which has been walled and fortified
since the Portugals have made themselves known, and are become powerful in the
East. 4. Egra, by the Arabians called Algier; seated on the Red Sea, serving
for a Port-Town to Medina, from which it is distant about three days Journey.

Mecca, Medina, and a good part of Arabia the Happy does belong to Xeriff,
descended from Hascem, great Grandfather to Mahomet, and for this reason both
the Turks and Persians do much respect him, suffering him freely to enjoy his
Estates without his paying Tribute to either: for on the contrary, the Turk
causes to be given him a third part of the Revenues of Egypt, that the
Pilgrims which go to Mecca may be protected against the Arabs Beduins, who by
their incursions much trouble those quarters; and not only Pilgrims, but
likewise Emperors, Kings, and Mohammedan Monarchs, often make him great
Presents. 5. Zibit, near the Mouth of the Red Sea, is fair, rich, well built,
and of a good Trade in Drugs, Spices, Perfumes, etc. It was once the Seat of a
Kingdom till the Turk seized it, when he did Aden, causing the King of this
place to be hanged at the Yards-arm of his Ship, and the others head to be
stricken off. Seated nigh the Red Sea in a large Plain, being the residence of
the Turkish Beglerbeg. Aden, and its great Trade.
6. Aden is the strongest, fairest, and most pleasant City of all Arabia,
enclosed with Walls toward the Sea, and Mountains toward the Land. On the top
of these Mountains are many Castles of a curious prospect; it has about 6000
well built Houses, and inhabited by a miscellany of People, as Arabians, Turks,
Indians, Persians, and Ethiopians, which here reside for the benefit of that
great Trade, which is here driven from several parts of the World. It is
situate without the Red Sea, at the beginning of the great Ocean, and by the
industry of the Inhabitants is made an Island, fortified with a strong Castle,
which commands the Road. This City or Island is now become the Magazine for the
Commodities of India, Persia, and Arabia.

Other Cities in Arabia.
Above Aden, and farther in the main Land, are many fair Cities, as Laghi,
Agiaz, Almachazane, Sanaa, and others, subject to the Xecque of Mecca. Laghi is
not far from the Sea; Agiaz, or Hagias, sometime gave its name to these
quarters. Almachazane is seated on the top of a very high Mountain, and of a
difficult access; it has a Cistern capable to hold Water to furnish a 100000
Men: The Xecque ofttimes keeps Court here. Sane, or Sanaa, stands at the foot
of a Mountain, and is one of the greatest, fairest, and strongest of Arabia,
having many Vineyards, Meadows, and Gardens within its Circuit. Its Houses are
well built, its Vineyards and Gardens well cultivated, its Walls 10 Cubits
high, and its Ramparts 20 Cubits thick. Its Territory is watered with many
Fountains, produces excellent Fruits, and feeds the best Horses of Arabia.

Kingdom and City of Fartach, its People and Trade.
Toward the East, and almost 150 Leagues from Aden, is Fartach, a Kingdom and
City near the Sea, and having a Cape of the same name. The Tarquins are
valiant, and their King defends himself courageously against the Turks, having
seen their treatment to his Neighbors of Aden and Zibit. The Ports of Dolfar,
(which is the Turks) and Pescher, are the most renowned of this Coast, and send
forth the best Frankincense of Arabia in great quantity. Higher on the Coast,
and farther on the Land, are the Cities and Kingdoms, or as they call them, the
Sultanies of Gubel haman, Alibmahi, Amazirifden, and others.

Other Cities and Kingdoms.
The rest of the Coast unto Cape de Raz-al-gate is very barren; from Cape de
Raz-al-gate unto that of Moccandon, the Soil is the best of all Arabia; and
some would here alone confine the name of Hyaman, which signifies Happy. There
are here many fair Cities, both on the Seacoast and higher in the Land; one of
chief Traffic between the East and Arabia the Happy, was formerly called
Sohar; but this Trade was after transported to Ormus on the Persian side. In
our time it was restored to the Arabian side, to wit, at Mascates held by the
Portugals: Sohar and Mascates are between the Capes of Raz-al-gate, and
Moccandon, and are not above 20 Leagues distant from each other. Within the
Land are Masfa, a City and Kingdom, Mirabat, Sour, or Lyr, and others.

Beyond the Cape Moccandon, and advancing toward the Mouths of the Tigris and
Euphrates, among many other places we have Elcatif, or El-Catif, a famous Port,
and which communicates its name to the adjacent Gulf, which the ancients
called Sinus Bersicus, and we at present the Gulf of Balsora and Ormus.

Near Elcatif is Bahar, whose Territory is called Bahareim, or Baharem; and the
Isle and City before Baharem, farther in the land, is Mascalat, a City and
Kingdom; Jemen, likewise a Kingdom and: City, according to some; Lazach, or
Lassach, likewise a Kingdom and City; where are of the best Horses of Arabia,
as at Sanaa. Lassach, Elcatif, and some other are the Turks; Elcatif is the
ancient Gerra, and that part of the Gulf nearest the City called Gerraticus
Sinus, and the Isle of Barem is the ancient Tylos.

There yet remains some Cities, of which some have their Kings or Sultans*
others live in Republic, which is very rare in Asia. The Arabs Bengebres, a
free People.
Toward the middle of Arabia are the Arabs Bengebres, a free People, and which
live only of the Prey and Tribute they force from their Neighbors; yet possess
they 200 or 250 Leagues of Country, and are for the most part in the Mountains.
The Beduins toward Mecca are of the same nature.

Bound about Arabia are a great number of Isles which belong unto it, which are
dispersed either in the Southern Ocean, Red Sea, or the Persian Gulf.

Arabian Isles in the Southern Ocean.
In the Southern Ocean are found three Isles, which bear the name of COCCONATI,
seven by the name of ZENOBII, and two by the name of Insulae AGATHOCLIS; and
lastly, CVRIA and MVRIA, where there is found white Tortoises, whose Shells are
great curiosities.

In the Red Sea.
In the Red Sea these Islands; 1. CANARAN, very hot, but fruitful. 2. DALAQVA,
being the largest of all, in length 125 miles, and not above 12 broad, having a
City of the same name, where they gather Pearls; And, 3. and lastly, the
Samaritan Islands.

In the Persian Gulf.
In the Persian Gulf these Islands are found: BAHAREM, the most famous, because
it has the Pearl-fishing, the best in the Oriental parts. This Isle is between
Balsora and Ormus, about a 100 or 120 Leagues from Balsora, and 150 from Ormus:
It is near the Coast of Arabia, and directly opposite to the Coast of Elcatif,
which is the Turks; but the Isle of Baharem, which is still the Persians, once
belonged to the Kingdom of Ormus. The Waters here are almost all salt; but near
Manama, the Capital City of the Island, there are Springs of Fresh Water at the
bottom of the Sea, which the Diverse go and fetch, gathering it into Borracho's
or Goats-skins, with much cunning, and bringing it forth of the Sea, do
afterward sell it. The Pearls of this Isle are very much esteemed, both for
their largeness and roundness; and this fishing is yearly worth 500000 Ducats,
besides the value of 100000 and more, which is diverted. Those of the Isle of
GIONFA are of no great value: those of the other neighboring Isles are less;
except it be at MASCATES, 60 Leagues from Ormus. They fish here all June, July,
and August; if they begin sooner the Pearls are unripe, and not hard enough.

The Air of all Arabia is very healthful, but not; nor Rains it in some places
above twice or thrice in 3 or 4 years: but the abundance of the Dew makes their
Fruits excellent.

The People of Arabia; their Manners, etc.
The People for the most part are of a mean stature, lean, swarthy complexioned,
effeminate voices, very swift of foot, and expert in the Bow and Dart. They
first exercise themselves in Manufactures, using all sort of Trade and Traffic
far off; and some addict themselves to Learning, particularly to Philosophy,
Physic, the Mathematics, and to Astrology; there have been amongst them many
Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Historians, and Interpreters of the Alcoran, which
is in their Tongue, and which has made the Arabic Language spread itself
through all the East, at least in the most Southerly parts of Asia, and part of
Africa, but little in Europe.

Those which range the Country are great Wanderers, and greater Thieves; they
are divided into many Families, which know each other, and how to distinguish
the one from the other. Every Family, how numerous soever it be, has a
principal Xecque, that is, a Chief, which conducts and commands them, they
living almost in the same manner as the 12 Tribes of Israel did in the Deserts:
They preserve a good Intelligence amongst themselves, their chief design being
only upon Strangers. They assault likewise the Caravans, if they think
themselves able enough to master them, or snatch any thing from them.

Their Horses commonly are little, lean, and sparing Feeders; yet courageous,
swift, and of great labor: They are so skilful in managing them, that they
command them as they please; and themselves are so active, that at full speed
they will shoot an Arrow within the breadth of a Shilling, take from the ground
those Arrows they have shot, and avoid an Arrow flying directly toward them;
nor do they manage less skilfully the Sling, either in charging, retiring, or
flying.

The first rise of Mahometism.
Mahomet came not into the World till about the year 570 after Christ, and
began not to publish and show abroad his Doctrine till a little after the year
600; a Doctrine intermixed with Christianity, Judaism, and Paganism, that he
might draw both the one and the other; and which established its principal end
in Delights, carnal and sensual Pleasures, whereto the Oriental People were
very much inclined; and withal he found the means to make use of Arms for the
establishment of this Doctrine; his Califs or Successors in a short time
carried their Government and Religion into the best parts of Asia and Africa,
and into some places of Europe.

Its People are almost all Mahometans. There are some Greek Christians toward
the Mounts of Sinai and Horeb; likewise toward the Red Sea, and in the Deserts
of Arabia the Stony, and Arabia the Desert. Arabia the Happy is unhappy in
having the fewest; yet the Portugals hold Mascates, Calasates, and some places
about it, which are Catholics.

PERSIA, or the Empire of the SOPHY of PERSIA, with its several Provinces, as
they lie Toward the CASPIAN Sea, or Sea of BACCU and SALA, which makes the
Northern part of PERSIA; and are those of Servan, Tauris, Sammachi, Servan,
Ardevil, Serga, Bacca, ^^k^era.
Gilan, Rast, Gaxhar, Mazandaran, Layon, Mosun, Gilan, Cassabi, Gadiour.
Dilemon, Allamoed, Dilemon, Thalekan.
Tabarestan, A^^er^^ad, Zar^^^^^, Mag^^^^n.
Gorgian, Gorgian, Ob^^oen, Dar^egan, Semnan.
Rhoemus, Bestan, B^y^^, Zabrawar, Thous, Mas^ndn, Feraway.

In the MIDDLE; to wit, those of Churdistan, Naksivan, Merend, Choy, Maraga,
Salmas, Ourmaya, Cormaba.
Ayrack, or Yerack-Agemi, Hispahan, Casbin, Saltania, Dankane, Hamadan, Hrey,
Sauwa, Kom, or Com, Kargh, Cassian, Yesd.
Chorasan, Thabs Gilack, Kayem, Thon, Zuzan, Mexat, Nichabour, Zarchas,
Firabad, Maruwe, Bonregian, Balch, Herat.
Sablestan, Zarang, Bost, Necbesaet, Gisna-Cassaby.
Tocharestan, -- Thaalan. Candahar, -- Candahar. Patanes, -- Grees. Bach, --
Balch.
Toward the South, and washed by the ARABIAN, or INDIAN Ocean; and by the
Gulf of BALSORA and ORMUS; and are those of Chusistan, Souster, Askar
Moukera^, Ardgan, Hawecz, Ramhormoz, Siapour, Saurac.
Fars, Chiraef, Aftackar, Lar, Darabegred, Stahabonon, Gombroun.
Kherman, Cherman, Girost, Zirgian, Mocheston, Guadel, Nahyan, Patanis.
Sigistan, -- Sistan. Mackeran, Mackeran, Basir.

Together with several ISLES, as they lie in the Gulf of BALSORA, and nigh
unto PERSIA; the chief among which are, Ormus, -- Ormus. Queixome. Pulor.
Coyar. Ficor. Lar. Mulugan. Garge.


PERSIA.
THe Kingdom or Empire of the Sophy of the PERSIANS is one of the most famous
and greatest of all Asia; it extends it self from the Tigris and Euphrates on
the West, almost to the River Indus on the East; and from the Gulf of Persia
and the Arabian and Indian Sea, which bounds it on the South, unto the River
Gehon, and to the Caspian Sea, now the Sea of Baccu, or Tabarestan, which are
its Northern limits; The extent, bounds, situation, etc. of Persia.
so containing about 600 Leagues of length, and 500 of breadth, being seated
under the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth Climats. Nevertheless this is but a
part of the ancient Empire of the Persians; for the Assyrians having ordinarily
held in Asia all that which both Turk and Persian at present possess; and that
Monarchy having begun under Ninus, and lasted under thirty and odd Kings 13 or
1400 years, ending in Sardanapalus, divided itself into that of the Medes and
Babylonians, who continued it little less than 300 years, afterward the
Persians made themselves Masters of it: and these during 200 and odd years,
which they Reigned, remitted to it the best part of what the Medes and
Babylonians had possessed. But when they would have passed into Europe, and
have seized on Greece, the Macedonians and Greeks leagued themselves together,
The Persian Empire formerly much larger than now it is.
and naming Alexander King of Macedon their Chief, descended into Asia, several
times defeated Darius, ruined the Empire of the Persians, and gave a beginning
to that of the Macedonians.

Alexander the Great held this Empire but few years, and dying, it was divided
among many of his Captains; who took in the end the title of Kings, and waged
War against each other, till the Romans seized the Western, and the Parthians
the Oriental part of that Monarchy; these Parthians freed themselves from the
Rule of the Macedonians 250 years before the Birth of Jesus Christ, and Reigned
near 500 years. Artaxerxes restored the Persians 228 years after Christ's
Nativity. The Caliphs of Bagdat became Masters about the year 650. The Tartars
in 1257, or 58. The Turcomans in 1478. Xa, or Xecque Ismael-sophy
re-established the Persians, a little after the year 1500; and though they
possess only the Oriental part of the ancient Empire of the Persians, yet it is
still very great and powerful.

The several Parts, or Regions of Persia.
And we find at present under it, all that the Ancients knew under the names of
Media, Hircania, Margiana, Assyria in part, Parthia, Aria, Paraponisa, Chaldea,
or Babylonia in part, Susiana, Persia, Caramania, Drangiana, Arachosia, and
Gedrosia; all these Regions taken apart being great, fair, rich, and populous.

The Province of Servan.
The Province of SERVAN has for its principal City, 1. Tauris, being the
Summer-Seats of the Persian Sophies, containing in Circuit about 16 Miles, and
including above 150000 Inhabitants, before its being so often taken, and
retaken by the Turks and Persians. It is strongly fortified, seated about six
days Journey from the Caspian Sea, in a cool and wholesome Country, and
encompassed with several great Towns of note, famous for their Manufactories.
The People in this part being more addicted thereunto, than unto the Sword. The
Commodities that are here found, Its Commodities.
are Silk, raw, and in several Manufactures; Cottons, Wool, Galls, Alum, some
Spices and Drugs, with several other Commodities. 2. Sammachi; And, 3. Servan,
once both the Metropolis map of Persia blazon or coat of arms of the Courtenay
baronetcyTo ye Right Worshipful Sr: William Courteney of Powderham Castle in
Devonshire Bart. This Mapp is Hu-mbly didicated by RB

A MAPP OF THE EMPIRE OF THE SOPHIE OF PERSIA, WITH ITS SEVERAL PROVINCES.
Designed by Moncr. Sanson Geographer to ye French King.
Metropolis of this Province, abounding in Silk and excellent Carpets, to which
the People are wholly addicted. 4. Ardevil, was the Signory and Birthplace of
Xeque Aidaz, Father Ismael-sophy, who restored this Empire to the Persians
about the year 1500. Here are many Tombs of the last Kings of Persia. 5. Bocca,
a place of so great trade, that the Caspian Sea often takes its name: Near the
City there is a Spring of Black Oil, which serves to burn throughout all Persia.

Province of Gilan, and its chief places, etc.
The Province of GILAN, or GVEYLAN, contains five Governments, of which the
chief Cities are Rast, Gaxhar, Layon, Gilan, Mosun, and Gadiour, besides about
30 fair and rich Cities; Mazandaran, which some separate from, others join to
Gilan, has in its Government 25 Cities, and in the City of Mazandaran about
50000 Souls. All these quarters would have revolted in 1594. but Xa Abbas soon
brought them to their duty, and chastised them for their offense.

Province of Dilemon.
The Province of DILEMON has its Metropolis of the same name; then Allamoed,
Gowar, and Thalekan. In the description that those of the Country give us of
these places, Allamoed seems to answer to Dilemon.

Province of Tabarestan.
The Province or TABARESTAN extends more than 60 Leagues on the Coast of the
Caspian Sea, which is often called TABARESTAN from the name of this Province.
It stretches 100 Leagues up the Land, containing in its Territory 12 fair
Cities; of which Asterabad, or Starabat, which has something of common with
the name of the Province, is the principal; then Maglasen, Zariach, and others:
this Country affords quantity of Silk.

Province of Gorgian.
The Province of GORGIAN touches not the Sea, the chief City is of the same
name; then Obscoen, Damegan, and Semnan. Gorgian answers to the ancient
Hircania Metropolis.

Province of Rhoemus.
The Province of RHOEMVS is in the East of TABARESTAN and GORGIAN: Its chief
Cities are, 1. Bestan; then 2. Beyad; 3. Zab^awer; and 4. Thous, higher in the
Land; 5. Feraway; 6. Masinon, and others toward the Sea and Mouth of the River
Gehon. Nassir Eddin, that excellent Mathematician, was a Native of Thous, who
drove Mustalzin from his Caliphat or dignity of Babylon, because Mulstalzin had
demanded of him, Where were his Horns. So dangerous it is to mock a man of
Spirit and Courage. The City of Thous is esteemed very considerable, being
large, and encompassed with a noble Wall, adorned with stately Structures, and
among others with about 200 or 300 Towers, distant from one another a
Musquets^ot. It is famous for the stately Sepulcher of Iman Risa of the Family
of Ali, one of the Twelve Persian Saints, where great Devotions and Ceremo^ies
are performed by them, which brings in a great Revenue to this City.

Province of Churdistan.
The Province of CHVRDISTAN is divided into three Parts or Provinces, of which
Salmas is the chief City of the first, Maraga of the second, and Cormaba of the
third. Besides which there are a great number of fair Cities, as 1. Nakziovan,
2. Choy, 3. Guienche, etc. Salmas is near the Salt-Lake of Kannudhan, which
yields Fish only at a certain time of the year. This City has under its
Jurisdiction 20 other strong and fair ones; yet is not without those wandering
People which live under their Tents. Maraga is (...) or 4 days Journey from
Tauris, 5 or 6 from Salmas. Near Maraga the Per^ans were defeated by the
Sarazens, about the year 650, and their Monarchy ^ell into the hands of the
Califfs. Cormaba is on the East of Tigris, and not ^at from Bagdad and Mosul.
Its Inhabitants are esteemed the true Curdes, as good at incursions as the
Arabs, who lose nothing they can catch. Near Choy are the Calderonian Champains
(of Chelder,) renowned for the Battle between Selim, Emperor of the Turks, and
Ismael Sophy of the Persians; where this last, who had till then almost always
been Victor, was defeated and lost a great Battle; and after it Tauris, where
was his wife Tallucanum and his Treasures: but whilst he prepared new Forces,
the Turks retired to Amasia. At Guienche, formerly a City and a Kingdom,
contains likewise 7 or (...) fair Cities, the Can Caidogli caused to be builded
one of the fairest and strongest Towers that is in Persia; besides the Stone,
making use of the Heads of 540000 Turks, which he had defeated in those
quarters, and which he caused to be bruised among the Mortar.

Province of Ayrack, its Commodities, etc.
The Province of AYRACK is the fairest and richest of Persia. The Sophies have
for sometime past made here their residence; formerly at, 1. Casbin, at present
at. 2. Hispahan, which are two great Cities; 3. Cassian, 4. Hamadan, 5.
Dankana, 6. Sauwa, 7. Com, 8. Yesd, 9. Soltania, 10. Hrey, 11. Cochera, 12.
Kargh, with several others, are likewise very fair. Near Hrey is gathered
excellent Manna. Soltan has great quantity of the fairest Fountains, and takes
its name from the Soltans, which sometimes resided here. Yesd yields the
richest and fairest Tapestries in the World. Near this City, and on the
Mountain Albors, there are yet some worshippers of Fire, which have used it
above 3000 years. Hamadan has born the title of a Kingdom, and had 15 Cities
under it. Casian produces many Silk and Cotton Manufactures, and has drawn to
it all the Traffic that was at Com, not suffering any Vagabonds or Beggars.
Com has been as great as Constantinople; but Tamerlain having ruined it, it
could never regain its splendour. The Inhabitants addict themselves to labor in
their Vineyards and Gardens. Its Bridge is of Stone, and the fairest in all
Persia. Casbin was the residence of Xa-Thamas, when the Turks had taken Tauris:
Some esteem it the ancient Arsacia, others Ecbatana. It is not well built, but
great, and filled with no less than 100000 Souls; its fair Palace, its many
Bazars, and its Atmaiden, are remarkable. Bazars are places or great Streets,
where there are but one sort of Merchants; the Atmaiden, or greater Market,
which is about a mile in Circuit.

Hispahan the chief City of Persia.
Hispahan, the Metropolitan City of the Persian Monarchy, seated in the
Parthian Territory, which in its situation is pleasant and delightful; in its
Soil, fruitful, and well watered by the River Sindery; in its Air, serene and
healthful; and for bigness, is now become the greatest City in all Persia,
whose Walls are in circumference a reasonable days Journey. Its buildings,
which are many, (scarce containing less than 75000 Houses) are proud and
elegant, and was said to be once so populous, that it gave entertainment to
500000 Inhabitants. But after a certain Revolt, (for which they were severely
chastised by the command of the Prince) it has not had so great a quantity of
People; yet it is exceeding populous, and much frequented by Strangers; rich in
Trade, eminent for all sorts of Exercise, and more magnificent as being the
residence of the Sophy of the Persians, who had here built diverse Palaces,
which are inhabited by his Nobles; so rich and stately, with Gardens so
delightful and magnificent, that not the industry of man, nay, scarce his
thought can comprehend or imagine any thing more beautiful. This City, besides
its Walls, is fenced about with a Ditch, and defended by a strong Castle. The
chief buildings are the Palaces, the Mosques, the Hummums or Hot-houses, and
the Mydan or Marketplace, which without dispute is the fairest, richest, and
noblest Building in the World, being about 1000 Places in length, and 200 in
breadth: The inside resembles our Exchange, being filled with Shops, where all
sorts of rich Commodities are vended; and sustained by Arches; and below,
furnished with such things, both for Food and Raiment, as the Country
affords. Its Palaces and Seraglio's, exceeding stately and delightful.
On the West Side are seated two stately Palaces or Seraglio's, for the King
and his Ladies, far exceeding in state and magnificence all other the proud
Buildings in this City; the Walls being of Red Marble, and pargetted with
diverse colors, and the whole Palace paved with fretted and Checkered work,
over which it is spread with stately Carpets; the Windows are made of
Alablaster, and white and spotted Marble; and the Posts and Wickets of massy
Ivory, checkered with glittering Ebony, so curiously wrought in winding knots,
that it may sooner stay than satisfy the eyes of the Beholder. To which
stately Structure there is joined a no less pleasant, and delightful Garden,
wherein are no less then 1000 several Fountains, Brooks, and Rivolets,
furnished with store and variety of curious Fruits, together with what else may
make a place delightful. The great place of the City is before the Palace,
where the Sophy ordinarily resides. The Fruits in and about this City are the
best in the World; their Vines yield in nothing to those of the Canaries: Their
Horses and Mules are fair and good; their Camels so strong, that they carry
almost twice as much as those of other places. They have permitted in this City
some Monasteries of Christians, as of Carmelites, Augustine Friars, Capuchins,
and others.

The Inhabitants of this City negotiate their affairs on Horseback Hispahan
and its Commodities.
The Inhabitants do all their affairs on Hors-back, as well public as private,
in the buying and vending of their Commodities. But the Slaves never ride,
which makes the difference betwixt them. This City being the residence of the
Sophy, and being inhabited by so many eminent persons, which always attend this
Monarch, makes it to have a great Trade, and be much frequented by Merchants
almost from all places; as English, Dutch, Portugals, Arabians, Indians, Turks,
Jews, Armenians, etc. whereby it is furnished, not only with all the Native
Commodities of Persia, as Gold and Silver, Raw Silk, in such great quantity,
that they furnish most part of the East; as also other places, some Drugs and
Spices, Wine, Fruits, etc. Also sundry curious Manufactures, as, Carpets,
Arras-work, Hangings, etc. Cloth of Gold and Silver, Fine Cotton Cloths, with
several other Commodities which are here made; but also with those of Arabia,
India, China, and Turkey, which hither are brought in exchange for theirs, by
Caravans or Camels, Dromedaries, and Mules, by reason they want the benefit of
the Sea. They had formerly the benefit of several good Ports, as, Tauris and
Balsora, but now in the custody of the Grand Seignior, together with some
others: The Ports that they now enjoy, and make use of, are Ormus and Jasques.
In this City is erected a Column or Pillar, composed of the Heads or Skulls of
Men and Beasts, being about twenty foot in circumference at the Basis, and
exalting it self near sixty foot in height. Now the reason of erecting of this
terrible and horrid Column and Monument, was this. The People surfeiting with
Luxury, through their Pride and Impudence, denied their duty to their
Sovereign, not only in refusing to contribute a small sum of money (being
toward the extirpation of the Turks and Tartars, who did much annoy the
Kingdom) but also audaciously opposed his entrance; whereupon he vowed revenge:
And having made a forcible entrance, in his rage fired a great part of the
City, pillaged each House, and in two days, he put to the Sword near 30000; and
to terrify others, erected a Column or Pillar of their Heads.

Province of Chorazan, its chief Cities and Commodities, etc.
The Province of CHORAZAN, is the greatest of all Persia; some divide it into
Cohazan, Chorazan, and Chowarazan, which others esteem to be the same. It has
every where a great number of brave Cities, as, Kahen on Kayem, which yields
great store of Saffron. 2. Thou abounds in Silk Manufactures. 3. Mesched or
Mexat, is the chief of Chorazan, and shows the Tombs of many Persian Kings. It
is about twelve miles in compass, and has about 100000 Inhabitants. Its
Territory is fertile, its Inhabitants well made, strong, and warlike. 4. Herat
is likewise called Salgultzar; that is. The City of Roses; it producing greater
quantities then any City, in the World besides. It yields likewise Rhubarbe and
Vines, which last a long time; and so much Silk, that there are sometimes 3 or
4000 Camels laden in one day. 5. Nichabour so near to Rhoemus, that some
conceive it belonging to it; others make it a particular Province: The City
has been much better peopled then now it is. Tamerlane here, and hereabouts,
put to death in one day about 400000 persons. 6. Bouregian, is near a great
Lake of the same name. This Lake receives many Rivers, but like the Caspian
Sea, sends not one to the Ocean. But let us return to the more Southerly parts
of Persia; we will say nothing here of Yerack, since the Turk at present holds
it, with several others.

Province of chusistan, its chief places, etc.
The Province of CHVSISTAN, answers to the Ancient Susiana, the Soil is so
fruitful, that it often yields 100 or 200 for one. Its Cities are Souster,
Ardgan, Hawecz, Asker-Moukeran, and others. 1. Souster is the Ancient Susa.
Here the Prophet Daniel had the Vision concerning the determination of the
Persinn Monarchy, and the beginning of the Grecian; and where Ahasuerus kept
his great Feast, which continued 183, days, for his Princes and Lords, imitated
to this day by the Sultans of Persia, who do annually entertain their Nobles,
where Ahasuerus kept his Court, when Esther demanded grace, in favor of the
Jews; andt here where Mordecai was exalted to the place and charge of Haman,
who was hanged on the same Gibbet which he prepared for Mordecai. The Persians
observe great Feasts.
It is held, that the ancient Palace was built by Memnon (Son of Tithonus, who
in the Trojan Wars was slain by the Thessalans,) of the spoils of the Great
Thebes in Egypt; and that with such expense and magnificence, that the stones
were bound together with Gold; but whether this be true or false, without
doubt, it was very rich; for it is said, that Alexander found here 50000
Talents of uncoyned Gold, besides Silver Wedges and Jewels of an inestimable
value. This City is of about 25000 paces in circumference, and is the residence
of the Sophy in the Winter season. 2. Ardgan a fair City, on the borders of
this Province, and not far from Hispahan. 3. Hawecz called by the Arabian of
Nubia, Ahuaz, and made chief of the Cities of Chusistan, which he calls
Churdistan. He places next to it Askar-Mocran, alias Askar-Moukeran, on the
River Mesercan, where there was a Bridge supported by twenty Boats. 4. Tostar
with a River of the same name. And 5. Saurac with some other.

The heats in these parts, in the Summer season, are so great, especially
toward the South part of the Mountain; that the Inhabitans are forced to
forsake the Cities, and retire themselves into the Mountains for coolness.

Province of Fars, its chief places, fertility etc.
The Province of FARS or FARC, formerly Persia, now a particular Province, has
a great number of large, rich, and beautiful Cities. As 1. Chirdef, which is
said to be about 20000 paces in circumference; where sometimes the Sophy has
made his residence, situate in a large and pleasant Plain, well built, and
beautified with fair Gardens, and magnificent Mosques. Two of which are larger
than the rest, and beautified with two Spires or Steeples, covered with a
painting of Gold and Azure: These Mosques, by reason of 1000 Lamps which are
kept burning, are as light by night, as by day. This City for its good Wine,
pleafant Fruits, gallant People, and above all, for its pretty Women, may
compare with the best in all Persia. The Ladies here are so fair and pleasant,
that Mahomet passing through these quarters, would not enter this City for fear
lest he should lose himself in its delights. The Soil is very good, and Mastick
is gathered in its Forests. The Arms they make here, are excellent. 2. Astachar
was one of the greatest of these quarters, as likewise in the time of the
Arabian of Nubia. The ruins of its Castle Chilminare, show the remains of the
ancient Palace that Alexander the Great burned, at the solicitation of the
Curtisan Thais. At the taking of which City, Alexander for his share found
120000 Talents of ready money, besides the Plate, Images of Gold and Silver,
and Jewels of a vast value: But its beauty did surpass it riches, having its
Royal Palace built on a Hill, environed with a treble Wall; the first in height
sixteen cubits; the second 30; and the third 60: All of them of Black polished
Marble, with stately Battlements, on which were 100 Turrets. Nor was the
outside more stately than the inside, which was built with Cyprus Wood, and
beautified with Gold, Silver, Ivory, Amber, and such like. 3. Lar or Laar, has
been the chief of a Kingdom, and gives name to the Larins, Pieces of very good
Silver which they coin. 4. Near Stahabonon, a pretty Town, the Momnaki-Koni,
that is, the precious Momy is drawn out of a Rock; but it is only gathered for
the Sophy, who carefully keeps it: Being a most assured counter-Poyson or
Antidote, and an excellent Salve against all Cuts or Ruptures, even within the
body. Bezar comes likewise from this quarter. 5. Chabonkera. 6. Darabegerd: and
7. Baesd, are on the confines of Fars and Kerman. Some esteem them under the
Province of Fars, others under that of Kerman; others make that a particular
Province, which takes its name from the first of them, and which certainly is
the greatest and the fairest. Darabegerd, as I believe, is the Valasegerd of
the Arab, and the ancient Pasagardae; there, where sometime resided, and where
was the Tomb of Cyrus, who here by this place defeated Astyages, the last King
of the Medes, And 8. Gombrone, seated on the Gulf of Persia, a fair Town, well
frequented; and where the English, Dutch, and Portugals, keep their Factories
for the benefit and support of the Trade; this place being now the Scale of
Trade for all Persia (as was formerly Ormus and Jasques, being at present of
little use.)

Province of Kherman, its Commodities, chief places, etc.
The Province of KHERMAN, of old Caramania, is one of the greatest, but not one
of the best of Persia; yet they send forth several Commodities, as Steel,
Tarquesses, Rose Water, Tutty, Bourbatan, Hebe, or Kilworm, of which they make
the Confection Alkermes, Sarmack, which are black and shining Stones, which
cures sore eyes, and paints black. Carpets the best in Persia, after those of
Yesed (those of Chorazan hold the third degree.) Arms which the Turks buy at
any rates, and Scimitars, which will cut a Head-peece without blunting the
edge. The Country is somewhat uneven and Mountainous, which causes barrenness;
but the Valleys are very fertile and delightful, every where adorned with
Flowers, and especially Roses, of which they make a great Revenue. Amongst its
Cities, which are many, 1. Cherman, which communicates its name to the
Province, makes a great quantity of Cloth of Gold and Silver; As also those
Scimitars aforementioned. 2. Zirgian. 3. Nahyan, and others, are likewise in
some reputation; but the Coast of Ormus is of great esteem, after it Mochestan.
The Isle and City of Ormus with its Trade and Commodities.
4. The City of Ormus is seated in an Isle at the Mouth of the Gulf of Persia,
being in compass about 20 miles; the City well built, and strongly fortified,
seated at one end of the Isle, being in compass about two miles, adorned with a
fair Market place, and some Churches; famous throughout the World for the great
Trade, there negotiated; but of itself, exceeding barren, and only composed of
Salt Rocks, of which their Houses and Walls are made; and in the Summer, is
found so excessive hot, that the Inhabitants are forced to ly and sleep in
Wooden Cisterns made for the purpose, and filled with Water, where both the Men
and Women ly naked up to their Chins. In this Island there is no fresh Water;
but what they fetch from other places there adjoining, which they keep in
Cisterns; from whence they likewise get other Provision for their Food, being
seated not above 12 miles from the Continent. The Commodities that are here
found, are the rich Gems and Spices of India; The Tapistries, Carpets, etc. of
Persia; the Grograms, Mohairs, and Chamblets, of Turkey; the Drugs of Arabia,
etc. The People hereof, in their Religion, The People of Ormus.
in their persons and habit, have something of the Arabians in them, but more
of the Persians. 5. Mochestan is the ordinary residence of the Kings of Ormus,
because it is cool, its Waters excellent to drink, and its Land fruitful in
Corn and Fruits, which is not found in the Island. 6. Guadell: and 7. Patanis,
are the most famous Ports of the Coast.

Province of Sablestan.
The Province of SABLESTAN, enclosed with Mountains, between Chorazan and
Khermon; it answers to Caramania Deserta; yet it has many Cities and inhabited
places, amongst others, Zarany toward Khermon. 2. Bost. 3. Nechesaet, and 4.
Gisna-Cassaby, toward Chorazan. Some place here Balasan, from whence come the
Balais Rubies.

Province of Sigistan, Sistan, Candahar, and Mackeran.
The Province of SIGISTAN, SISTAN, or SAGESTAN; PATANES, CANDAHAR, and MACKERAN,
are the most Easterly Provinces of all Persia, and nearest the mouth of the
Indus. Sistan is the chief City of Sigistan; Mackeran of Mackeran, which is
seated on the Sea; and also Basir, which seems to keep its ancient name Parsis.
The River Ilmenel, waters all these Provinces, and falls into the Indian Ocean,
not far from the Gulf of Indin. Also Grees is the chief of Patanes, and
Candahar of Candahar.

The Neighbors of the Persians.
These are the Estates of the Persians, and we are to observe, that his
principal neighbors are, the Turks on the West, the Tartars on the North, the
Mogols on the East, and the Portugals on the South, in and about the Gulf of
Ormus. These last cannot deprive him of any great part, their design being only
to maintain their commerce in the Indies, yet they cease not to perplex him on
the Sea; and have diverse times taken and retaken Ormus from him. The Mogols;
the Tartars, and the Turks, are troublesome neighbors unto him, and often times
his Enemies; because they are powerful and capable to seize on whole Provinces;
which he recovers rather by strength, then otherwise: For it must be confessed,
that the Persians are more Active in their Arms, then all their Neighbors,
except the Portugals: And they are likewise esteemed more courteous to
strangers, more civil in their conversation, and more exact in their Policy and
Government, The Persians much different from the Turks.
then all the Mahometans. And if we would compare the manners of the Turks,
with those of the Persians, we should find a great difference, and often much
contrariety: For the Persians are courteous to strangers, the Turks abusive:
The Persians esteem study, the Turks neglect it: The Sophies of the Persians
hold in honor, their Brothers and Kinsmen, the Turks often put them to death: The
Persians have amongst them great quantity of Nobles, the Turks make account of
none but the Officers sent them from the Port: The Persians have the Cavalry,
the Turks the better Infantry: both the one and the other are Mahometans, but
they explain their Alcoran so diversely, that that alone is capable to carry
them to the ruin of one or the other Empire, if they could effect it; and it
seems, that the disposition of the one, and the other estate is very different,
caused by their contrary manners, which makes them follow Maxims quite
different from one another.

The Empire of the Turks is divided into many parts, cut asunder by several
Seas, one upon the neck of another, and bygre at navigable Rivers; as the
Danube in Europe; the Nile in Africa, and the Euphrates in Asia; which gives it
great advantages, both for Trade, and the transport of its Forces; Whilst the
Empire of Persia, consisting of an entire and solid Mass, full of Mountains in
the middle of the Country; few navigable Rivers, and those which are distant
one from the other, and falling into diverse Seas, that they can have no
communication one with another. Trade cannot be commodious, but abroad; and if
they have occasion to transport any Troops from one Coast to another, The
Persian forces consists in Cavalry.
it cannot be done without the expense of much time and pains: And it is for
this reason, the Persians serve themselves more of Cavalry, who at a need, are
able to put into the field One hundred thousand Horse, and they have for the
most part ready, 30, 40 or 50000: They entertain little Infantry, and those for
the most part are strangers.

The Empire of Persia of a different Soil.
The Empire of PERSIA, is of a large, and of so different a nature, as one would
not take it to be the same, being in some places very barren, cold, and
comfortless, scarce affording either Food for Man or Beast, as are the North
parts which ly betwixt Mount Taurus, and the Hircanian-sea, whereas Southerly
it is very fruitful, the Soil rich, affording plenty of Corn, Wine, and all
things necessary for the use of man, being pleasant, full of rich Pastures
which are stored with abundance of Cattle, the Country watered with streams. The
Persians are of a low stature, The People of Persia, and their habits.
yet have great limbs, and strong, they are of an Olive color complexion,
hawked nosed, and black hair'd, which they shave every eight days, and those
which have not black hair naturally, by art make it so, as being in great
esteem amongst them, they paint their hands and nails of a reddish color. In
their habit they follow much of the Turks, their clothes have no proportion to
their bodies, hanging loose and large, much in the fashion of the Women's; their
Mendits, by the Turks called Turbants, are made of Cotton, Cloth or Silk,
Stuff, which is fine and of several colors, which they wear on their heads, as
we do Hatts, many of them wear them of Red, but the Priests, as also his other
Garments are white, their Garments they girt about their waists with a Scarf;
under these Garments they wear breeches like our drawers, their stockings are
for the most part made of Cloth without any shape in them their shoes are
picked toed, and like slippers; by reason of their often putting them off and
on, not wearing them in Houses. The Women wear much finer Stuffs then the men,
and have nothing to ty about their waists, their drawers, stockings, and shifts
are like those of the men; they wear their hair loose about their shoulders in
several tresses, having no other Ornament except it be 2 or 3 rows of Pearls,
which they fasten to their forehead, and so hangs down on each side of their
face to be fastened to their chin; the young Maids wear rings, and bracelets
about their hands and arms, also rings with precious stones in their right
nostrills, as the Tartarian Women do. The Women in the Streets go with while
Vails over their faces, down to their knees. The People in this Nation as well
Men as Women, according to their degrees in honor, or riches do exceed in
costly habits, in which they are exceeding neat and curious, not admitting so
much as a spot upon their Clothes, which neatness they like wise observe in
their Houses, which are for the most part well furnished; as also in their
meats and drinks, which are excellent, delightful and curious. They are great
dissemblers, and much addicted to ill language if provoked to it. They are of a
good nature, and very sensible of kindness done to them; but where they hate,
are mortal enemies: They are courageous and good Soldiers, great haters of
Cowards; very ingenious, of a ready Wit, and sound Judgment, much addicted to
reading several Authors, which tend to the knowledge of Poetry, Philosophy, the
Law, Medicine, several of the Mathematics, Their manners dispositions, etc.
as Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and its influences, as Astrology, which
they give much credit unto. These and the like Arts and Sciences are studied
and taught young Students at several Colleges and Universities, by experienced
persons in the same, who there reside. They are very ingenious in Fire and
Waterworks, are great lovers of their pleasure, in several recreations, as
Hawking, Hunting, Riding a tilt, etc. they are very complementory, obliging,
and courteous, especially to strangers, not addicted to covetousness, usury
being forbidden amongst them; they are generally much given to Luxury, not
contenting themselves with several Wives, but must also have the use of
Concubines, which is allowed them; they are also given to Sodomy, but Adultery
they severely punish. When a young man desires to marry, and has heard of a
maid as he thinks he can love, he has some of his friends to treat with her
parents or friends about it; for the maid is not to be seen, and if they agree,
then they proceed to Articles, Their Marriages.
which is to be performed by the friends of the Bridegroom, it not being there
the custom for the man to receive a portion with her, as it is here with us,
but contrarily, the Dower which by both of their friends is agreed on, he
either sends unto her two or three days before the consummation of the
Marriage, which is either in Money or Goods, as a recompense to her Parents or
Kindred, for their care in her education; or else engages to pay her if in case
a Divorce should happen, which is usual amongst them upon a dislike or
disagreement, as being allowed of by their Law, this done their Agents, in the
name of the betrothed couple, go to their Priests or Ecclesiastical Judge, who
being satisfied that it is done by the mutual consent of their friends, marries
them by the said Agents, but very privately: the Marriag day being agreed upon,
the Bridegroom sends his Bride several toys, as Pendants, Bracelets, Rings or
the like Ornaments; also several dishes of meat, for the entertainment of her
friends and relations; who about the evening brings the Bride to the
Bridegroom, being mounted on a Horse, Mule or Camel, being covered with a Vail
of Crimson Taffety, over her face down to her knees, and accompanied all the
way with Music, and being entered the Mosque, the Muloy demands their liking;
then the Bride requires three things, viz. Bed-right, Food and Raiment; and
the Parents having declared their consent, the Priest encircles them with a
cord, conjoynes their hands, takes a reciprocal Oath, and calls Mahomet to
witness, which ended the Caddi enrolls their names, with the day of the month,
year and hour of the day of their Nuptial, and so dismisses them; and being
come to the Bridegrooms House, they take her off, and lead her into a room
where she and her friends sup, the Bridegroom and his friends being in another
room, and after supper is ended, they conduct her to another room where she is
to ly, to which the Bridgroom is soon brought, where he receives his first
sight of her, the campany withdrawing themselves out of the room, he falls to
his embracing her, and after the first enjoyment of her, he leaves her, and
goes to his friends, to spend some hours in their company; if he finds that
she has lost her virginity before, he hath-power to cut off her Ears and Nose,
and to turn her, and her relations and friends out of doors, which is a great
disgrace unto her and them; but if she be a pure Virgin, then he sends the
tokens of it, by an ancient Woman, to her relations, and then for joy they
continue their entertainments three or lour days together, having several
divertisements, as Music, Singing, Dancing, or the like, the next day after
their Marriage, they both wash and bathe themselves, they are allowed by the
Law four Wives, (of which the first has the preemency,) but they must be of
their own Religion; and for Concubines, they may be of any Religion, and have
the liberty of taking as many as they please, paying them a certain stipend or
salary, Men allowed many Women.
as they shall agree by they week, month, or longer, as they shall agree, at
the end of which term, they are quit from their Obligation; and may leave each
other without another agreement made betwixt them, the men are exceeding
jealous of their Wives, insomuch as they are forbidden the liberty of society
with any man, which custom is used among the Italians.

Their Feasts are munificent
In their Feasts they are very stately, having not only all varieties of Meats,
as Flesh, Fowls, Fish, Baked-meats, with excellent Wine, and great attendance,
but also pleasant Fruits, stately Banquets of Sweetmeats, and to make their
entertainments complent, they are furnished with curious Music, as well Vocal
as Instrumental, their Rooms or Halls, where they make these entertainments,
are very spacious, and curiously adorned with stately Hangings of Tapestry, and
beautified with varieties of Paintings, but most of them being naked Figures
which amongst us would be accounted unseemly, their rooms being perfumed with
sweet Odors and Waters, so that nothing is wanting for the pleasing of the
senses; their way is to sit upon the ground on Carpets, being the Custom of the
Turks and other Eastern Countries so to do; being also used to Collations in
afternoons and nights, wherein they have excellent Fruits, Sweetmeats, Wine,
Music and Dancing. They are much addicted to Women.
They are great lovers of Women, insomuch that at their Feasts they are always
furnished with them, being such as they call Dancing-women, who being brought
up in Dancing, Singing, and playing on Instruments, make it their employment so
to do at Feasts; these Women for the most part are very handsome, and richly
attired, having about them costly Jewels, Pendants, Rings, having about their
legs Bells, like Morris-dancers; and he who has a desire to enjoy a Woman,
rises from his Seat, and takes which of these Dancing-women he most fancies,
and goes into a private room, and after he has enjoyed her to his content, he
comes to his place, and the Woman goes to Dancing, without any shame to the
one, or notice taken of the other. They are much given to drink Wine, Tea, and
Coffee.

The Persians very superstitious.
The Persians are very strict, superstitious, and ceremonious in their Religion,
(as the Turk is, but differ much from them in the exposition of their Alcoran)
as in their Pilgrimages to Mecca, in their Sacrificings, in their observing of
days, on some of which they will not do any business, either tending to profit
or pleasure, refraining from all Acts of Sin as nigh as they can, and one of
these days they hold to be the next Wednesday before the Vernal Equinox, by
which they begin their new year, in their processions, and celebrated Festivals
in commemoration of their several Saints, which they perform with great
devotion, mixed with no less state in their several Sepulchers, where their
Saints are interred, which are very large and magnificent Structures, so rich
in Gold and Silver, with which it is adorned, as well in Lamps and
Candlesticks, as otherwise, that it can hardly be expressed; in which places they
have their Priests, which attend and offer up their devotions and explain the
Alcoran, which they read out of Books, which they have in their Library being
Manuscripts either upon Paper or Parchment, being curiously bound, neatly
painted within, and covered with Plates of Silver or Gold, carried or imbossed,
or with paintings; also the Persians have not the same Miracles, the same
Saints, the same Mosques, Their Religion
and the same Ceremonies as the Turks have; they use Circumcision, but not till
the Children are 7, 8 or 9 years old, they are very devout, especially in their
prayers, which they use five times a day, as being obliged by their Religion so
to do; also in their Prayers for the dead, over their Graves which devotion is
used during the time of their Lent, which they keep for a month, in which time
they neither eat nor drink betwixt Sunrising and Sunsetting, but in the
n^ghts they eat and drink what they please; yet for a sum of money they may
have a dispensation: they interr their dead within three hours after the life
is departed, unless it be in the night, so that then they let the corpse alone
until the morning, they wash or bathe the bodies of their dead, before they
are interred, in a great Cestern, Ceremonies in their burials.
which they have for the same purpose near the Church, to which place they are
carried on a Bier in their Clothes, and after they are stripped and Washed, they
put them in clean linen, anoint them, and so bear them to the Grave, being
accompanied with his Friends, Relations, Servants, etc. in this order; first
goes those of his blood, rext his Varlets, who go naked to the Waist, the rest
in troozes, who to express their love, scratch, and burn their Breasts, Arms,
and other parts, so that the blood often issues forth; then follow many youths
on whose shoulders are affixed some texts taken out of the Alcoran, together
with Elegies of the deceased, in the next place follow several persons of the
best rank, each holding a cord that is affixed to the Hearse; and on every
side abundance of People bearing in their hands, Garlands of Flowers, Laurels,
and such things as befit the Season, then follow some Horsemen half naked, who
often times massacre their carcasses, and in the last place follow weeping-Women,
that is, such as are hired to weep and howl, the better to provoke others to
passion; and being brought to the Grave, the Priest after he has performed
several Ceremonies which he reads out of the Alcoran, the Corpse is interred
with his head toward Mecca, his face toward Heaven, and his arms expanded,
(as they say) to embrace their Prophet Mahomet, placing two Stones, one at the
head, and the other at the foot of the Grave, on which are engraven in Arabic
Characters, the persons name, quality and time of burial, and so take their
leave, but for a good while cease not to visit the Grave twice a day,
beseeching Mahomet to succor him against his two bad Angels, of whom they have
this opinion; So soon as the Corpse is interred, there are two hiddeous Devils
assail him, the one they call Muengar, which is armed with an Iron Club, and
the other Quarequar, armed with a Hook of Flaming brass, and in this horrid
posture, they view the Carcass, and in an insolent manner, command him to raise
his head, to fall prostrate upon his knees, and beg his soul, which then
reenters the body, and gives an account unto them of all the actions of his
life, and upon examination and confession, if it appear that his life was good,
they vanish away like Spirits, and two good Angels come (apparelled in white)
to be a comfort unto him, and protect him until the day of doom, not stirring
from him, but sitting one at his head, and the other at his feet. But on the
contrary, if it happen that his life is found bad, then these Infernal Imps are
his tormentors, the one knocking him on the head such blows with his Iron Club,
as beats him (as they say) ten yards into the Earth, and the other drags him up
with his Flaming hook; and thus is he knocked down by one, and dragged up by the
other, until Mahomet sends him a deliverance; and this (as Sir Tho. Herbert
relates in his book of Travels) is their belief, which if it be true, I doubt
they will have many a sound knock and torn place before their delivery. To
persons of quality, they observe more Ceremonies than to those of the ordinary
degree, making Feasts on the third, seventh, and fortieth day after the Corpse
is laid in the Grave, at which Feasts they are charitable to the poor in their
Alms Deeds.

The King of Persia his power.
The King of Persia governs by an absolute power, disposing of the lives and
estates of his Subjects as best pleases him, making his Will his Law, not any
one daring so much as to murmr, though his actions are never so much unjust.
Their Kings come to the Government by succession, and not by election, insomuch
that if the King has no Children which are lawfully begotten as by his Wives,
for want of such those of his Concubines shall succeed him.

The Coronation of their Kings.
Upon the Coronation of their Kings, amongst other Ceremonies, he is presented
with a Crown, by one of their chiefest Lords, which he takes putting it to his
forehead, and after kissing it thrice in the name of Mahomet, and of Aaly, he
delivers it to the grand Master of the Kingdom, who puts it on his head, the
People making great shouts and acclamations, kissing his feet, and presenting
him with great presents, which done, the rest of the day they spend in feasting
and other jovialties, but in all their Ceremonies there is not so much as an
Oath imposed upon him; as, for his well governing them, and keeping and
preserving their fundamental Laws, and other of their rights; as amongst us
done, but all being left to his sole power, as being absolute.

There are belonging to the Court several Officers, as Chancellor, Secretary of
State, Controller, Master of the Horse, Master of the Ceremonies, together with
several other Officers, Their Courts of Judicature, and their Justice.
as amongst our Courts are found. The Administration of Justice is decided by
the King, but first tried by the secular Judges who examine the same, and
deliver up their opinion to the King. They have several strict and severe
punishments, which they inflict upon the offenders according to the hainousness
of their crimes, for some offenses they cut off the Ears or Nose, sometimes the
Feet or Hands, for others to be beheaded, for some again, they are tied between
two boards and so sawed asunder, with several other cruel deaths which are too
tedious to name. In their Military affairs they are very experienced, Their
Military Affairs.
their Army consisting only of Horse, who have for their Armor Darts and
Javelins, yet have they some in the nature of our Dragoons, which are mounted
on Horses, who have Muskets for their Arms, as for an Army of Foot, together
with the assistance of great Guns by them, is not so much set by, as being
troublesome, and a detarder of them from their speedy and great marches, they
are very expert in all stratagems of War, which gives them a great advantage
over their enemies.

Here does inhabit a sort of People called Gaurs, and are of a much different
Religion from the Persians, observing diverse Ceremonies peculiar to themselves.
In their Baptism they use no Circumsition, instead of which they wash the
Child, etc. At their Nuptials after the Priest has said some Prayers, he takes
water, washes both their foreheads, and gives the Benediction. When they are
sick they make Confession to the Priest, and bestow their Alms in hopes of
Pardon of their Sins. They bury not their dead, but carry them to certain
enclosed places, where they fasten them to high Stakes, with their faces
toward the East. They bear a great adoration to Fire. They are exceeding
cleanly in all things, and wash often in Cows-piss, which they hold to be a
good purification. Upon confession of their Sins to their Priests, they are
constrained to Penance, in which several Ceremonies are observed. They have so
great esteem for Dogs, that when any die they are carried out, and prayers are
made for them.

They have great quantity of all sorts of Cattle, Grain and Fruits. Amongst
their Fruit Trees, they have great quantities of white and black
Mulberry-trees, which grow not above 5, or 6 foot high, so that one may easily
reach up to the branches, and in the Spring time, when these Trees begin to
shoot forth their leaves, A discourse of Silkworms, and making of Silk.
they begin to hatch their Silkworms, which they do by carrying the seed under
their armpits in little baggs, which in seven or eight days will receive life,
then they put them into a wooden dish, upon the Mulberry-leaves, which they
once a day change, and take a great care that they be not wet, at the end of
five days they sleep three, after which they dispose of them into Rooms or
Barns, prepared for the same purpose, upon the beams of these buildings they
fasten laths, or such like pieces of wood, upon which they lay
Mulberry-branches, which has the leaves on, whereon they put the Silkworms
shifting them every day, and as they grow in bigness, so oftener to twice or
thrice a day; before they begin to spin, they sleep about eight days more,
after which they begin, and in 12 days they have finished their Cod, the
biggest they make choice of for seed; all the rest they cast into a Kettle of
boiling Water; into which they often put a whisk made for the purpose, to which
the Silk sticks which they immediately wind up; and that which they keep for
Seed, they lay upon a Table, out of which, in the space of fifteen days comes
forth great Buggs, which afterward turn to things like Butter-flies, which in
a few days they gender and lay Eggs, and then die, not eating any thing from
their first spinning; which is much, for things to live so great a while
without eating any thing: And of these Silkworms thus ordered they make a
great Revenue.

INDIA, or the EAST INDIES; which (according to its form and disposition of its
Estates) may be divided into three several Parts; to wit, The Empire of the
GREAT MOGOLL, which comprehends that which is upon the Main Land, wherein are
contained several Kingdoms or Provinces; the chief of which are, Cabul, --
Cabul. Attock, -- Attock. Multan, -- Multan. Candahar, -- Candahar. Buckor, --
Buckor-Suckor. Tatta, Tatta, Diul.
Soxet, -- Janagar. Cassimere, -- Sirinaker. Bankish, -- Beishar. Kabares, --
Dankalar. Naugracut, -- Naugracut. Siba, -- Serenegar. Jamba, -- Jamba. Bakar,
-- Bikaner. Samball, -- Samball. Gor, -- Gor. Kanduana, -- Barabantaka. Patna,
-- Patna, Jesual, -- Rajapore. Udessa, -- Jekanac. Mevat, -- Narvall. Pitan, --
Pitan. Guzurate, or Cambaya, Surat, Baroche, Cambaya, Armadabad, Diu.
Chitor, -- Chitor. Malway, -- Rantipore. Candis, -- Brampore. Berar, --
Shapor. Gualeor, -- Gualeor. Narrar, -- Gehud. Bengala, Bengala, Chatigan,
Goura, Halabass, Satigan.
Lahor, -- Lahor. Jenupar, -- Jenupar. Jesselmere, -- Gislemere. Bando, --
Bando. Delly, -- Delly. Agra, -- Agra.
The Peninsula of INDIA without the GANGES, and Westwards, and between the
Mouths of the INDUS and the GANGES; with its several Kingdoms, or Countries of
DECAN, Amedanager, Chaul, Visapor* Paranda, Goa, Doltabad.
GOLCONDA, Golconda, Musulipatan.
BISNAGAR, or NARSINGUE, Onor, Bisnagar, Trivalur, Gingi, Negapatan,
Sadrapatan, or Fort St. George. Maliapur, Geld^ia. Madure, Tutucori, and
Manancor.
MALABAR, Calicut, Cochin, Cananor, Coulan, Cranganor, Cotate, Cota, Changanara.

The Peninsula of INDIA within the GANGES, and Eastwards; wherein are contained
several Kingdoms, Countries, Isles, etc. the chief among which are PEGU, Pegu,
Brema, Canarane, Ava, Tinco, and Prom.
SIAN, Odiaa, Banckock, Lugor, Martaban, Camboya, Sacortay.
Peninsula of MALACCA, Tanasserin, Juncalaon, Queda, Pera, Malacca, Ihor,
Patane.
COCHIN-CHINA, Palocacein, Keccio.
ISLES in the Gulf of SIAN, among which are Macara, Panian, Goeteinficos.
ISLES in the Gulf of BENGALA, among which are, Chubedu, Chudube, Durondiva,
Dos Cocos, Andemaan.



The Empire of the GREAT MOGOLL; with its several Kingdoms, or Provinces, as
they lie Westwards, and toward PERSIA, from the first Streams of the INDUS
unto its falling into the Sea, are those of Cabul, Cabul, Gaidel.
Attock, Attock, Pucko.
Multan, Multan, Seerpore.
Candahar, Candahar, Gusbecunna.
Buckor, Buckor-Suckor, Rauree.
Tatta, Tatta, Diul, Lourebander.
Hajacan, Chatzan, Dunki.
Soret, Janagar, Cacha.

On the North, and between the Mountains which divide this Empire from
TARTARIA, or between the Springs of the GANGES and the INDUS, are Cassimere,
Syrinakar, Chonab.
Bankish, -- Beithar. Kakares, Dankalar, Purhola,
Naugracut, Naugracut, Callamaka.

On this side, or without the GANGES; where are those of Siba, Hardware,
Serenegar.
Jamba, Jamba. Balcery.
Bakar, -- Bikaner. Samball, Samball, Menepore, Chappergat.

Within the GANGES, are those of Gor, -- Gor. Kanduana, -- Barakantaka. Patna,
-- Patna. Jesual, -- Rajapore. Udessa, -- Jekanac. Mevat. -- Narvall. Pitan,
Pitan, Camojo.

Southernly, and toward the Gulphs of BENGALA and CAMBAYA, and the Peninsula
of INDIA within the GANGES, are those of Guzurate, or Chambaya, Surat, Baroche,
Cambaya, Armadabad, Agra, Diu, Brodra, Cheytepour, Bisantagan, Mangalor,
Jaquete.
Chitor, Chitor, Chitapur.
Malway, Rantipore, Ougel, Narvar.
Candis, Brampore, Mandow, Pala.
Ranas, -- Gurchitto. Berar, -- Shapor. Gualeor, Gualeor, War.
Narvar, -- Gehud.
Bengala, with its Parts of Patan, Bengala, Chatigan, Goura, Patana, Tanda,
Daca, and Bannara.
Prurop, Ragmehel, Holobass.
Bengala, Satigan, Mandaran, Ougely, Xore, Bellesor, and Angara.

In the Middle of the EMPIRE; and are those of Lahor, Lahor, Fetipore, Temmeri,
and Guzurat.
Jenupar, Jenupar, Sirima, Tanasser.
Hendowns, Hendowne, Mearta.
Jesselmere, Gislemere, Moulto, Radinpore.
Bando, Bando, Toury, Asmere.
Delly, Delly, Acarnapori.
Agra, Agra, Secandra, Fetipore, Scanderbade, and Ilay.



The Peninsula of INDIA without the Ganges: In which are the several Kingdoms,
or Countries of DECAN, with its Parts of Decan, particularly so called,
Amedanager, Chaul, Dabul.
Cunkan, Visapor, Soliapor, Paranda, Goa, Pagode, Zanguizara.
Balaguate, Lispor, Beder, Doltabad.

GOLCONDA, Golconda, Musulipatan, Guadavari, Vixaopatan, Narsingupatan, Orixa,
Palhor, Calecote.
BISNAGAR, or NARSINGUE; with its Estates and Coasts of Canara, Onor, Gorcopa,
Barcelor, Baticala, Magalor, Bacanor.
Bisnagar, particularly so called, Bisnagar, Narsingue, Vellur, Cangevaran,
Cirangapatan, Trivalur, Tripity.
Gingi, Gingi, Cindambaram, Chistapatama.
Tanjaor, Tanjaor, Castan, Trinidi.
Maritim Places in BISNAGAR, GINGI, and TANJAOR, bearing and known by the name
of the Coast of Choromandel. Negapatan, Triminapatan, Trangabar, Coloran, Fort
St. George, or Sadrapatan, Maliapur, Paliacate, Chiricole, Musulipatan,
Caletur, Gueldria, Pentapou^^.
Madure, Madure, Brimaon, Periapata^, Punicale.
Maritim Places of MADURE, and called the Coast of Pescheria, Jacancury,
Manapar, Vaipar, Trichandur, Chereacale, Tutucori, Isle of Kings, Bembar,
Calecure, Mananco, C^^^mcir^.

MALABAR, with its serveral Kingdoms, or Provinces, to wit, On the Sea, or
Coast of Malabar, as Calicut, -- Calicut. Cochin, -- Cochin. Cananor, --
Cananor. Coulan, -- Coulan. Chambais, -- Chambais. Montigue, -- Montigue.
Badara, -- Badara. Tanor, -- Tanor. Cranganor, -- Cranganor. Porca, -- Porca.
Calecoulan, -- Calecoulan. Travancor, -- Travancor. Cotate, -- Cotate.
In the High Land, as Cota, -- Cota. Auriola, -- Auriola. Cottagan, --
Cottagan. Bipur, -- Bipur. Coucura, -- Coucura. Panur, -- Panur. Curiga, --
Curiga. Muterte, -- Muterte. Marta, -- Marta. Batimena, -- Batimena.
In the Mountains, as Mangat, -- Mangat. Paru, -- Paru. Pimienta, -- Pimienta.
Changanara, -- Changanara. Trivalar, -- Trivalar. Panapelli, -- Panapelli.
Angamala, -- Angamala. Ticancutes, -- Ticancutes. Punhali, -- Punhali.
Caranarette, -- Caranarette. Pande, -- Pande.


The Peninsula of INDIA within the Ganges: In which are the Kingdoms,
Countries, Isles, etc. of PEGU, with its Kingdoms or Parts of Martavan, Manar,
Tangu, Marsin, Jangoma, Brama,
Pegu, Brema, Canarane, Pandior, Mandranelle, Cassubi, Boldia, Ava, Tinco,
Prom, Tolema, Largara, Tipoura, Chacomas, Maon, Arracan, Dogon, Ledoa, Cosmi,
Xara, Dunbacaon, Chibode.
SIAN, with its Kingdoms or Estates of Sian, Odiaa, Banckock, Ogmo, Lugor,
Mirgin, Sacotay, Juropi^an.
Martaban, Martaban, Macur^a, Cuidad de los Reyes* Macaon.
Jangoma, -- Jangoma. Camboia, Camboya, Ravecca, Langor, Carol, Tarvana,

Peninsula of MALACCA, whose Parts Toward the Gulf of BENGALA, and Westwards,
are Tanasserin, -- Tanasserin. Juncaldon, -- Juncaldon. Queda, -- Queda. Pera,
-- Pera. Malacca. -- Malacca.
Toward the Gulf of SIAN, and Eastwards, are Ihor, -- Ihor. Pahang, --
Pahang, Patane, -- Patane. Singora, -- Singora. Brodelong, -- Brodelong. Ligor,
-- Ligor.

COCHIN-CHINA, with its Kingdoms, People, etc. of COCHIN-CHINA, particularly so
called, with its Provinces of Chiampaa, -- Pulocacein. Ranran, -- Baday.
Pulocanbis, -- Naroman. Quagiva, -- Ciomoy. Cacciam, Cacciam, Faifo, Turaoh.
Sinuva, -- Sinuva.
TUNQUIN, with its Parts or Provinces of Bochin, whose chief place is Keccio.
Ghean, whose chief place is Keccio. Tinhoa, whose chief place is Keccio.
Beramar, whose chief place is Keccio. Kedom, whose chief place is Keccio.
Kenam, whose chief place is Keccio. Kethay, whose chief place is Keccio.
The People called the Lays. The Kingdom of Ciocangue. The People called the
Gueyes. Timocoves.

ISLES seated in the Gulf of SIAN, viz. Macara. Panian, Cara. Goeteinficos*
Tyamciefi. Cosyn.
ISLES seated in the Ocean, called the Gulf of BENGALA; viz. Chubedu, Chudube,
Ledoa, Dos Alevantados, Durondiva Siriaon, Sobollas, Dos Cocos, Andemaon, Dos
Caboses, Tanassesi, Tavay, Alta, Crara, Caremubar, Raza, Dos Sombreros de Palm,
Siano, Sambilano, Batun, Pera, Pinaon, Ganal de St. Jorgo, Nicubar.



map of India A General Mapp of the East Indies Comprehending the Estats or
Kingdoms of the Great Mogol, the Kingdoms and Estats of Decan, Golconde,
Bisnagar, Malabar etc in the Peninsula of India with out the Ganges, and the
Kingdoms Isles of Pegu, Sian, Malacca, Cochinchina etc in the Peninlula of
India within the Ganges. with the Isles of Maldives. by Monsieur Sanson
blazon or coat of arms of the East India Trading Company DEUS IN DEAT

To the Honorable the Governer Deputy and Court of Committies of the Company of
Merchants tradeing in to the East Indies This Mapp is humbly dedicated by Ric:
Blome.



INDIA, OR THE EAST INDIES.
Its Name.
INDIA, of which we treat at present, is that which the Ancients have known
under the name of India, or the Indies, and which the Moderns call the
Asiatick, or East Indies; because they likewise call America, though very
improperly, the West Indies; these lying West, those East from our Meridian.
But under the name of East Indies diverse Authors comprehend all the most
Oriental parts of Asia, that is to say, all that is above and beyond the River
Indus, from whence the Country takes its name; and likewise China, and the
Isles of Asia, which are in the Oriental Ocean, pass under the name of these
Indies.

Its bounds, and division into Parts.
But leaving China and the Isles of Asia apart, we may divide India, both
because of its Form and the disposition of its Estates, into three several
parts; of which, the first shall comprehend that which is upon the Main Earth,
the rest shall be in two Peninsula's; of which, the most Western, and between
the Mouths of Indus and Ganges, shall be called The Peninsula of India without
the Ganges; and the most Oriental, and beyond the Ganges, shall be called The
Peninsula of India within the Ganges.

We will esteem in the first part, that which the Great Mogoll at present
possesses, and what is engaged in his Empire. In the two Peninsula's we shall
have a great number of Kingdoms and Principalities; neither the one nor the
other having less than fifty, which by little and little are reduced into a
less number, the strongest becoming Masters of the weakest. Thus the great
Mogoll made himself Master of 35 or 40 Kingdoms, of which some had before
ruined many others.

The Empire of the GREAT MOGOLL.
OF the several Provinces, or Kingdoms, under the Empire of the Great Mogoll,
as appears in the Geographical Table of the Empire apart, have their Names
common with those of their chief Cities, and are all rich, and since their
separation they compose fair and powerful Estates: And first with Cabul.

Kingdom or Province of Cabul.
CABVL, whose chief City bears the same name, is the most advanced toward
Persia, with Vsbeck or Zagatha. The Springs of Nilab and Behat, which fall into
the Indus, and possibly likewise of Indus, are in this Kingdom or Province. The
City of Cabul is great, but the Houses low; its strength lying in the two
Fortresses, and in the great Road of Lahor to Samarcand in Vsbeck; and to
Yarchan, the chief City of Cascar, from whence they bring Silk, Musk, and
Rhubarb, from China and Cathay.

ATTOCK is on the Indus; Attock.
Its City is fair, the Fortress good; and when the Limits of the Estates of the
Kings of India lay between Lahor and Attock, it was of greater consideration
than possibly it is at present.

MVLTAN is rich, Multan.
by reason of the fruitfulness of its Soil and Traffic, which the Rivers of
Indus, of Behat, of Nilab, and of Rawey, which fall into the Indus, do much
enrich. The City of Multan is great, ancient, and not above two or three
Leagues distant from the Indus. Its principal Commodities are Sugar, Galls,
Opium, Brimstone; several Manufactures of Silk and Wool, etc.

CANDAHAR is far engaged toward Persia, its chief City being so called, which
is great, Candahar.
and of some Trade.

BVCKOR has for its chief City Buckor-Suckor, Buckor.
which lies along the River Indus (which runs through the Province) which makes
it very fertile. The City is of an indifferent extent, and of some Trade.

TATTA, Tatta.
whose chief City bears the same name, is divided by the River Indus into
several Isles. In this City and Province are held to be the most industrious
Tradesmen of the whole Kingdom, by reason of which here is found a good Trade,
drove by Merchants of several Countries.

Buckor, there where the Rivers of Rawey and Caul fall into the Indus, and
between Multan and Tatta; and Tatta where Sinde goes, between Buckor and the
Sea: Lourebander and Diul serve for Ports to Tatta. Lourebander, there where
the Indus begins to divide it self into several Branches; Diul on the great
Sea. Moreover Diu and Diul are two different places, being distant 150 Leagues
from each other. Diu in the Kingdom of Guzurate or Cambay, belongs to the
Portugals: Diul in that of Tatta, is the Great Mogolls, who keeps there a
Governor.

The Province of HAJACAN, Westwards of the Indus; of very small account,
Hajacan.
having no places worthy of note.

SORET is seated between the Kingdoms of Tatta on the West, Soret.
of Guzurate on the East. It has for its chief City Janagar; the Province is
but of little extent, but very fruitful, rich, and well Peopled.

Cassimere, Bankish, Kakares, Naugracut.
CASSIMERE or QVERIMVR, BANKISH, KAKARES, and NAVGRACVT, are between the River
Indus and Ganges; all encompassed with the Mountains of Bimber toward the
Indus, of Naugracut toward the Ganges, of Caucasus toward Tartaria, of
Dalanguer which crosses them, and separates the one from the other; and they,
the Forests of these Mountains, which yielded so much Wood for the Vessels
which Alexander the Great caused to be builded, to descend the Indus. And these
are at present those Forests which give so much divertisement of chase to the
Great Mogoll. Sizinaket, or Sirinakar, though unwalled, is the chief City of
Cassimere; Beishar of Bankish; Dankalar, and Purhola, of Kakares; and Naugracut
of Naugracut. In this last the Temple of the Idol Marta is paved, Wanscotted,
and Seiled with Plates of Gold: And in Callamacka there are Fountains very
cold, and near to Rocks, from whence seem to flash out flames of fire.

The Province of SIBA has for its chief City Hardware, Siba.
which gives its rise to the River Ganges; and Serenegar on the River Mansa.

The Province of JAMBA gives name to its chief City. Jamba.


The Province of BAKAR lies on the West of the Ganges, Bakar.
and has for its chief City, Bikaner.

The Province of SAMBAL takes its name from its chief City so called. Sambal.


This Province is likewise called Doab, that is, two Waters; its situation
being between the Ganges and Semena: which, together with the three Provinces
last mentioned, are without, or on this side the Ganges, reaching almost from
its Springhead unto the River Semena, or Gemeni.

The Province of GOR takes its name from its chief City, Gor.
and gives its rise to the River Perselis, which falls into the Ganges; the
Province being very Mountainous.

The Province of KANDVANA has for its chief City Karakantaka. Kanduana.
This Province, and that of Gor, which is beyond the Ganges, does end the
Estates of the Mogoll toward the North, meeting with the Tartars of Turquestan.

The Province of MEVAT is very barren, whose chief City is Narval, Mevat.
which ends it toward the People called Maug; and others which we esteem to be
in the Peninsula of India, which is in the Ganges.

The Province of VDESSA, Udessa.
is the utmost of the Mogolls Territories toward the East, which is also
within the Ganges; its chief place is Jebanac.

The Province of PITAN is on the West of Jamba, Pitan.
being very Mountainous, whose chief City gives name to the Province. The River
Randa runs through the City and Province, and falls into the Ganges.

The Province of PATNA is fruitful, whose chief City is so called, Patna.
seated on the River Persely; but we have a very feeble and uncertain knowledge
of all these Parts or Kingdoms; but those which are toward the South, and
particularly Guzurate or Cambaya, and Bengala, are better known.

Gusurate, or Cambaya, exceeding rich and fertile.
The Province of GVSVRATE, by the Portuguese called the Kingdom of CAMBAYA, has
more than 30 great Trading Cities, and is without doubt the noblest, greatest,
richest, and most powerful Province of all the Mogolls Country, yielding a
yearly Revenue of 15 or 20 Millions of Gold; and its King has brought into the
Field 150000 Horse, and 500000 Foot, 1000 Camels, etc. The Country likewise is
esteemed the most fertile of all India; producing all sorts of Grains, Fruits,
and living Creatures, quantity of Drugs, Its Commodities and Trade.
Spices, and precious Stones, not having any Mines of Gold or Silver, but three
Plants which bring it an inestimable quantity; as well from the Gulf of Persia
and the Red Sea, as from all the Coasts of India and China. These Plants are
Cotton, Anniseed, and Opium: besides which there are varieties of other rich
Commodities, as Oil, Sugar, Indico, Ambergreece, Soap, Comfits, Medicinal
Drugs, Paper, Wax, Honey, Butter, Saltpeter, Manufactures of Cotton,
Linen Cloth, Carpets, Cabinets, Coffers, Cases, with a thousand other
curiosities, which its Inhabitants know how to make and sell, being the ablest
Merchants of India.

Its Inhabitants
They are likewise of a good Spirit, and addicted to Letters; serve themselves
of all sorts of Arms, yet know nothing of Nobility, but by abundance of Riches:
They are all Pagans or Mahometans. The Pagans for the most part are
Pythagoreans, holding the immortality of the Soul, Pythagoreans.
and that it passes from one body to another: for which reason they so much
honor Beasts, that they eat them not, but keep Hospitals to receive such as
are sick and lame. The Cows here are in such esteem with them, that a Merchant
Banian (according to the report of Texera) spent 10 or 12 thousand Ducats at a
Nuptial, marrying his Cow with his Friends Bull. This Kingdom is in part
Peninsula, between the Gulphs of the Indies and Cambaya, and in part on the
Main, which stretches it self toward Decan. Its extent by Sea.
This Province though of a large extent, yet has above 120 Leagues of
Seacoast, on which it has several fair and rich Cities, and of a good Trade:
As also great quantities of Inland Towns and Cities, the chiefest whereof are,
viz. Surat, Surat.
seated on the River Tapta, which falls into the Sea 12 miles below the City.
It is a City no less great and rich, than populous and famous, and enjoys as
great a Trade as any City in India; being much frequented by the English and
Dutch, where they have their Presidents and Factories, and where they have
their Houses for the negotiation of their affairs, which are spacious and well
built. This City is built four square, its Houses flat, after the Persian mode,
and reasonably beautiful, having the benefit of pleasant Gardens: It has
several Mosques, but none deserves commendation; it is defended by a strong
Castle, and has a strong Wall on all sides, except on that which is seated on
the River, and for its entrance has three Gates: Its Port is six miles from
the City, where the Ships are unladen, and the Commodities brought to the City
by Land. The Inhabitants are either Benjans, Bramans, or Mogolls; but there are
several other Nations which here reside, as Persians, Turks, Arabians,
Armenians, Jews, etc. driving a Trade; but none comparable to the English or
Dutch. Its other places of note are. 1. Brodra, Brodra.
seated on a sandy Plain upon a small River, well fortified with Walls and
Forts, the Inhabitants being for the most part Dyers, Weavers, and other
workers of Cottons, for which it is the chiefest place in the whole Province.
The Governor of this City has also under its Jurisdiction about 210 Towns and
Villages. Baroche.
2. Baroche, 12 Leagues from Surat, and 8 from the Sea, seated strongly on a
Mountain with Walls of Freestone; it is well Peopled, most following Dying,
Weaving, and making of Cottons, as they do at Brodra. About this City are very
fertile Fields, which bring forth Wheat, Barley, Rice, and Cotton, in great
abundance; and out of the Mountains they find the Agats. Cambaya.
3. Cambaya, seated on a River, and on a Sandy place, encompassed with a Wall
of Freestone about 10 Leagues in circuit; its Streets are strait and broad,
its Houses fair and large, having 12 Gates for entrance, 3 large Marketplaces,
and 4 stately Cisterns, large enough to keep Water for the Inhabitants all the
year long. They have also about this City 15 or 16 public Gardens, for the
recreation of the Inhabitants, being places of great pleasure and delight. The
Inhabitants are for the most part Pagans, Benjans, or Rasboutes. This City is
at the bottom of its Gulf, and so famous, and of so great Traffic, that the
Kingdom sometimes bears its name, being frequented by most Nations, where the
English and Dutch keep a Factory. Amadabad, the Metropolis of Guazarete,
4. Amadabad is the Metropolis of Guzurate, being about 7 Leagues in compass; a
place of good strength, the Buildings are very stately and fair, especially the
Mosques, the Governors House, and other public Places; the Streets are large
and many; is very populous, and of a great Trade, abounding in diverse Indian
Commodities. It is seated on a small River, which falls into the Indus about 45
Leagues from Surat, and is by the English compared to London. Here the
Merchants pay no Custom; the Governor of this City is Viceroy of all
Guzurate, being answerable for what he does to none, but the Great Mogoll; he
lives in a greater state than any King in Europe: his Court large and stately;
his attendance great, not stirring abroad without great pomp and state, as in
his attendance of Nobles, and others, in his Guards of Horse and Foot, in his
Elephants with brave furniture, together with several playing on certain
Instruments of Music. His Revenue is exceeding great, which by some is
accounted to be about Ten Millions of Gold yearly: out of which he is at great
expenses, as in the maintaining the charge of the Kingdom, his own expenses,
and the keeping 12000 Horse and 50 Elephants, for the Mogolls service. In and
about this City there are great quantities of pleasant Gardens, plentifully
stored with variety of Fruit Trees. 5. Diu is in an Island of the same name,
The City of Diu, its Trade and Commodities.
and lies about 20 Leagues from the River Indus, and not far distant from the
main Land. It is now subject to the Portugals, who have strongly fortified it.
This City is well built, indifferent big, and has a great and good Haven,
being a place of great Trade, and having a concourse of Merchants of diverse
Nations, by reason of which it brings a great profit to the King of Portugal,
whose chief Commodities are Cotton-Linnen of sundry sorts, which we call
Callicoes, Cocos-Oil, Butter, Pitch, Tar, Sugar Candy, Iron; several sorts of
curious Desks, Chests, Boxes, Standishes, which they make of Wood neatly
carved, gilded, and variously colored, and wrought with Mother of Pearl; also
excellent fair Leather, which is artificially wrought with Silks of all
colors, both with flowers and figures, which is there (and elsewhere) used
instead of Carpets and Coverlids. 6. Bisantagan, by reason of the fertility of
the Country there adjacent, is of good repute, well peopled, having in it about
20000 Houses. 7. Cheytepour, is seated on a small River, the Inhabitants being
Benjans, who by Profession are Weavers, who make great quantities of
Cotton-Linnen. Here are also several other Cities of less note, as Nassary,
Gaudui, and Balsara, which are under the jurisdiction of Surat, Agra, a
pleasant City, and much frequented by the Mogoll.
from which they are not far distant. 8. Agra, seated on the River Gemini,
which falls into the Ganges; of a very large extent, and strongly fortified
with a Wall and a great Ditch. Its Houses are fair, it Streets spacious;
several being inhabited by those of one Trade, each Trade having its Street
alloted it. It has a fair Marketplace, and has for the accommodation of
Merchants and Foreigners about 80 Caravanseraes or Inns, which are large
Houses, wherein are good Lodgings, and Warehouses for their Goods. In this
City there are about 70 great Mosques or Churches, besides diverse little ones;
in the greatest of which are several Tombs of their Saints. Here are also a
great quantity of Baths or Hot-Houses, which are much used amongst them.

The Great Mogoll does often change his dwelling; so that there is scarce any
City of note, but what he has abode in, and where he has not Palaces, but
there is none which has his presence so much as this, it being the most
delightful of all others, where he has a sumptuous Palace, as also several
Gardens and Houses for his retirement without the City. His Palace is seated
upon the River Gemini, and if some Authors may be credited, is about 2 Leagues
in compass; it is very strong, being encompassed with a strong Wall, and a
great Ditch, or Moat, having at every Gate a Drawbridge which are strongly
guarded. For the description of this Palace, I must be beholding to J. Albert
de Mandelslo, in his Book of Travels, where he says, That being entered in at
the Gate, there is a spacious Street with Shops, which leads to the Mogolls
Palace; to which there is several Gates which are called by several names.
Under the Gate called Cistery, is the place of Judicature, to which is adjoined
a place where all Ordinances and other Writs are sealed, and where the Records
are kept: At the entrance of this Gate is the spacious Street aforesaid. The
Gate called Achobarke Derwage is a place of great respect with them, and it is
the place that the Singing and Dancing Women are lodged at, who are kept for
the diversion of the great Mogoll, and his Family; these Women dance before him
naked. There is another Gate which they call Dersame which leads to a River, to
which he comes every morning to worship the Sun at his rising: Near this place
it is, that his Nobles and Officers about his Court, come every day to do their
submission to him; to which place he comes every day, except Fridays (which is
set apart for their Devotions, (as Sunday is with us) to see the fighting of
Lions, Elephants, Bulls, and the like fierce Beasts, which are here used for
his recreation.) He speaks of another Gate which leads into the Guard-Hall,
through which, at the farther end of a Paved Court, under a Portal, there is a
row of Silver Pillars, where there is a continual Guard also kept to hinder all
people, except great Lords, to enter any farther, it leading to the Mogolls
Lodgings, which are exceeding rich and magnificent; but above all is his
Throne, which is made of massy Gold, and enriched with Diamonds, Pearls, and
other precious Stones: Above the place where this Throne stands, is a Gallery
where he shows himself everyday, and receives the complaints of those who
have received any injury; but they must be sure to prove it, else he runs a
great hazard of his life, to trouble him vainly. But in his inner Lodgings
there is no person to enter, save the Eunuchs, who wait upon the Ladies in his
Seraglia, which is about 1000. Among the several fair Structures which are
within this great enclosure, there is one great Tower, rich without (being
covered with Gold) but not to compare to the wealth within; in which, are 8
spacious Vaults, which are filled with Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones of an
Inestimable value.

Province of Agra.
This City of Agra gives name to a Province or Kingdom which is of a fertile
Soil, and well peopled and frequented, and ows its beauty and enlargement to
Ekebar, Emperor of the Mogolls. The Palace of the Great Mogol, as I said
before, is of 2 Leagues circuit; the other Palaces of Princes and Lords, which
are also seated along the River, stretching toward the North, are all proudly
built, but not of so large an extent; that of the Great Mogolls being the
fairest, richest, and most magnificent of all the East. On the other side is
the City of Secandra, about 2 Leagues long, almost all inhabited by Merchants.
Fetipore, that is, Desire accomplished, 12 Leagues from Agra; and toward the
West, is likewise one of the works of Ekebar, who having obtained Children to
succeed his Estates, caused this place to be built for pleasure, with a very
stately Palace and Musqueito or Temple; but its ill Waters have caused it to be
abandoned. Biana to the West of Fetipore, has the best Wood of all India.
Scanderbad on the West of Bayana, has been the Residence of some Kings, and
the Castle above it is very advantagiously situated, where Xa Selim kept
himself, till such time as Ekebar had straightly besieged him, and forced him
to retire into the Mountains. The name of this place, and likewise this of
Secandra, directly opposite to Agra, retain something of the name of Alexander.

Province of Lahor.
The Province of LAHOR or PENGAB, is large, very fertile in all sorts of Fruits
and Grains, which makes it considerable, its chief City bears the name of the
Province; and I believe this City to be the same with Alexandria Bucephalus,
which Alexander the Great built, and named of his name and that of his Horse
Bucephalus. The Ancients place it by the River Hydaspes, which may at present
be Bowey. The City has been so much enlarged by Xa Selim, that it contains 24
Leagues of circuit. It is very pleasantly seated, especially toward the River,
on which it has many delightful Gardens: Its Fortress is good, is adorned with
many stately Palaces and great Houses where their Nobles and persons of quality
reside; among others, that of the Kings, which is (though seated within the
City,) yet separated from it with a high Wall, being magnificent, and adorned
with great quantities of fair Pictures. Here is also by reason the Inhabitants
are Mahometans, abundance of Mosques and Bathing-places, for their ordinary
purifications, which is a ceremony much used amongst them. Here it is by many
thought, that Noah seated himself after his coming out of the Ark; and
likewise, that from hence Ophir and Havilah, Sons of Joktan, removed toward
the Ganges and Malacca. This Province is esteemed one of the most pleasant
Countries in all India, being so well shaded with Mulberry and other Trees,
whose verdure is no less delightful to the eye of the beholder, then refreshing
to the wearied Traveller, under whose Boughs he may rest, and shade himself
from the shallure of the Sun. At Fetipore, not far from Lahor, the Sultan
Gansron, the Son of Selim, but a Rebel, was by his Father defeated; from whence
the place had its name, which signifies Desire accomplished: As the other
Fetipore near Agra was built by Ekebar, after having obtained Children to
succeed him in his Estates. This Country bears the name of Peng-ab, that is,
five Waters, by reason it is watered with five different Rivers.

Province of Delly.
The Province of DELLY gives name to its capital City, which is on the Road from
Lahor to Agra; watered by the River Gemini or Semena. Before the Mogolls
descended into all these quarters, the Kings of India made it their Residence,
were here Crowned, and here had their Tombs: There are yet found some very fair
Obelisques, believed to have been erected in the time of Alexander the Great,
and the Greeks.

Kingdom of Bengala*
The Kingdom of BENGALA occupies all the lower part of the Ganges, and may be
divided into three parts. Prurop on this side the Ganges, Patan beyond it. The
particular name of Bengala may be given to that which lies between the Branches
of the Ganges, and along the Coast. This Kingdom has been divided into 12
Provinces, which have been so many Kingdoms, and which took their names from
their principal Cities; but we have no certain knowledge either of their names,
or situations. Bengala likewise is placed by some between the Branches of the
Ganges, by others beyond it: Some esteem Chatigan its chief City, when as
others will have it to be Goura on the Ganges, higher in the Land, and more
then 100 Leagues from the Sea. However it be, Bengala is of so great Traffic,
and so rich, that the Kingdom and Gulf of Ganges, on which it is at present, is
called the Kingdom and Gulf of Bengala. The City of Chatigan is pleasantly
seated on a fair and large River, whose imbosure is not far distant from that
of the Ganges. This River has so fierce a Current, that Boats and Vessels,
without the help of Sails or Oars, are driven in 24 hours about 100 Miles; so
that those who have no occasion to pass up and down this River, are forced to
fasten their Vessels to certain Trees or other things which are for the same
purpose fixed along the shore. By which means they are sheltered from the
violence of the Tides, which else would spoil them. Here are several other
Cities, as Ragmehel, Daca, Banara, Tanda, Patana, Holobasse on the joining of
Gemini and Ganges, is one of the fairest and greatest Cities of India, and I
esteem it in the place of the Ancient Palibothra, where the streams of the
Jomanes and Ganges do meet, with other Cities of less note.

The extent of Bengala.
This Kingdom of Bengala extends it self 300 Leagues from East to West, and
sometimes 200 from North to South, having no less then 150 Leagues of Coast,
which is much frequented by Merchants of several Countries, which hither come
for their Commodities, which by reason of the temperatness of the Air, and the
fertility of the Country do here abound. The Inhabitants are courteous, Its
Inhabitants.
but deceivers: Their Kings have been esteemed as rich and as powerful as any
in India.

Province of Candis.
Between the Kingdoms of Cambaya and Bengala, are those of Candis, Chitor,
Malway, Berar, Gualeor, Narvar, Ranas and Berar. Brampore is the chief City of
Candis, seated on the River Tapta, which descends into the Gulf of Cambaya,
below Surat. The City is great, but ill built, unhealthful, and a place which
has been unfortunate to many Children of the Great Mogolls. In the old City of
Mandow, are the Sepulchers and Remains of the Palace of its Ancient Kings; the
new City is better built, but less.

Province of Chitor.
The Province of CHITOR, with its City of the same name, is quite engaged in the
Mountains, which meet in the way of Amedebat and Cambaya to Agra. The City was
of 5 Leagues circuit, before Ekebar took it from Raja Cana, and ruined it. It
has now little more then the Remains of 100 and odd Temples, and of a great
number of Buildings which have been stately and magnificent. The Castle was in
a place so advantageous and strong, that the Kings of Delli could never take
it; and Sultan Alandin was constrained to raise the siege, after having been 12
years before it.

Province of Malway.
The Province of MALWAY, has its Territory fruitful, and for its principal
place Rantipore, others put Vgen or Ougell. Its chief Fortress is Narvar, whose
City is near the Springhead of a River, and at the Foot of Mountains of the
same name, and which stretch themselves from the Kingdom of Guzurate, unto that
of Agra and Narvar; and in these Mountains abide some Princes which obey not
the Mogoll.

Province of Gualeor.
The Province of GVALEOR takes its name from its chief City, where there is one
of the best Cittadels or Fortresses of the Estate, wherein the Mogoll confines
such as are Prisoners of State, and those Lords of which he has any jealousy;
and where he also keeps a great part of his Treasure.

Province of Ranas.
The Province of RANAS, has for its chief place Gurchitto, seated on a high
Hill.

Province of Narvar.
The Province of NARVAR, has for its chief City Gehud, seated on a River which
falls into the Ganges, and touches on the Mountains of Narvar.

Province of Berar.
The Province of BERAR, has for its capital place Shapor, which reaches
Southward, and touches that of Guzurate, and the Mountain of Rana.

Several other Provinces.
In the midst of all the Mogolls Estates, are the provinces of JENVPAR,
HENDOWNES, JESSELMERE and BANDO. The Province of Jenupar, takes its name from
its chief City. Hendowns of Hendowns, which is toward the Indies. Jesselmere,
whose chief City is so called, in whose Castle Ammer in 1548. Zimlebege, Wife
of Hymayon, flying into Persia Lay in of Ekebar, who restored the Mogolls, and
made their Estates so great and powerful in the Indies. And lastly, the
Province of Bando, whose chief City bears the same name, is between the Cities
of Jesselmere, Delli and Agra, at 70 or 80 Leagues from the one and the other,
besides its City of the same name. Asmere is famous for the Sepulcher of
Hogimondee, a Mahumetan, whom the Mogolls esteem a Saint, and there where
Ekebar made his devotions, to the end he might obtain a Son to succeed in his
Estate; and afterward caused to be set up at every Leagues end, a Pillar of
Stone, and several Lodgings to be built on the way, to receive Passengers and
Pilgrims.

The extent bounds, etc. of the Great Mogolls Country
These are the Provinces or Kingdoms which the Great Mogoll possesses; whose
Empire stretches from South to North 500 Leagues, and from West to East 6 or
700, is bounded either with Mountains or the Sea. Its Neighbors are the
Vsbeck, the Cascar, the Thibet, and the Turquestan, parts of Tartary toward
the North; the People of Maug, and others which have been of Pegu, toward the
East; the Persians toward the West; and the Kingdom of Decan and Golconda
toward the South. The Indian Ocean, where are the Gulfs of Indus and Cambaya
on one side, and that of Bengala on the other side, wash the rest.

The Tartars and Persians, very troublesome to the Mogol.
Of all his Neighbors, the Tartars and Persians are the most powerful: The
Tartars, nevertheless, being divided into many Estates, where they border on
him, are more likely to damage him by Inroads, then by open War. The Persian
regained from him Candahar, some years past: which he lost not again, till he
had at the same time to deal with the Mogolls, and Turks. The others have much
ado to defend themselves against him; as the Kings of Golconda and Decan; this
last having lost some part of his Estates, and the other giving him some
present in the way of Tribute.

But the great Mogoll would make nothing to seize both these Kingdoms, if he
were not often perplexed with intestine War; and if there remained not in his
Estates diverse Princes, which they call Rahias or Kings; and many people of
whom he cannot absolutely dispose, neither the one nor the other obeying him,
or paying any Tribute to him, but by constraint; and the greatest part paying
it only when and how they please, and sometimes not at all. Amongst these
little Kings and People are the Rahia Bossou, Petty Kings and people under the
Mogoll.
who resides at Temery, 50 Leagues from Lahor. The Rahia Tulluck Chan, who
resides at Naugracut 80 Leagues from Lahor. The Rahia Decomperga is 150 Leagues
from Agra, residing at Calsery; the Rahia Mansa is 200 Leagues from Agra,
residing at Serimgar. The Rahia Rodorou is beyond the Ganges, residing at
Camayo. The Muggi likewise beyond the Ganges to the South of Rahia Rodorou, is
very powerful as well as the two last; between the Arms of the Ganges, is a
Prince of the ancient family of the Kings of Delli, who likewise maintains
himself. Above Cassimere the Rahia Tibbon acknowledges neither Mogoll, nor
Tartar; descending often, and making incursions both on the one and the other.
The People called Balloches or Bulloques, do unpunished live like Vagabonds in
the Province of Haiacan; likewise the Aguvanes, and the Patanes in Candahar,
likewise the Quilles or Colles, and the Resbutes in the Mountains between
Cambaya and Decan, and sometimes the Colles of Decan, the Rebustes of Cambaya,
and the Patanes of Candahar have raised Tribute.

These Kings and People are almost all Pagans, descending from diverse Kings and
People which possessed diverse parts of the Indies before the Mogolls. There is
one Rahia of the Colles above Amadebat; another the Rahia Partaspha near
Breampure, who has some time taken and pillaged Cambaya. The Rahia Rana
resides at Gorchitto; and after having well defended himself against the
ancient Kings of India, yields now some Tribute to the Mogoll.

Yet is the Great Mogoll one of the greatest, and most powerful Princes of
Asia; Mogol very potent.
he can bring into the field 200000 Horse, 500000 Foot, and 2 or 3000
Elephants; he gives pensions to the greatest part of the Princes, Lords, Nobles
and Gentry of the Country, on condition that they keep for his service, some 1,
some 2, 3, 4, 5, some 10, some 100, some 1000 and upwards of Horses, which are
to be always in readiness; his Armies nevertheless consist for the most part of
100000 Horse, and 200000 Foot; and this besides his ordinary Garrisons. His
Subjects are strong and robustious, use all sorts of Arms, go freely to all
occasions, wanting nothing but Order and Policy. They have no considerable
Forces at Sea, since the Portugalls hold from them in the Kingdom of Cambaya,
the City and Fortress of Diu, Daman, Basaim of the Isle of Saltette near
Bensaim, the Fort of Manora, and the Rock of Asserim.

The Country stored with Cattle, Foul, and Fish.
The whole Country is stored with several sorts of tame and wild Creatures, as
Buffes, Oxen, Cowes, Sheep, Deer, Wild-Asses, Bores, Hares, etc. Variety of
Fowl and Fish; here are also found Crocodiles, some of which are 30 foot long;
Cormorants, and Bats as big as Crows.

The Mogols guard.
The great Mogolls ordinary Guard consists of about 12000 men, besides 600 of
his life guard; he never stirs abroad to hunt, take the Air or the like,
without the attendance of about 10000 men of all degrees; besides to make his
stare the greater, there are 100 Elephants richly trapt, and covered with
Scarlet, Velvet, or the like; on these Elephants there are seated two men, the
one to guide him, and the other which supports a large Banner of Silk, richly
embroydered with Gold and Silver; but on some of the Elephants which go
foremost, instead of carrying Banners, they play upon Simbretts, and other such
like Instruments; after these 100 Elephants, comes the Mogoll, either mounted
on an excellent Persian Horse, or else in a Coach, or Sedan, attended by his
Nobles and other Courtiers, after whom come about 500 Elephants, Camels, His
State and great attendance.
and Wagons which are to carry the Baggage; for commonly he encamps in the
Field, in which he takes great delight by reason of the coolness, as also by
reason few Cities are able to give entertainment to so great a retinue; and
besides his going thus to hunt or take the Air, he often changes the place of
his abode according to the seasons of the year. The Mogoll celebrates with
great pomp and state the first day of the year. They have several Festival
days which they keep in great triumph, wherein they have several
divertisements of sports and recreations, and especially the birth day of the
Mogoll. The language which the Great Mogoll, and most people of quality speak,
is the Persian tongue. The Inhabitants are very expert at the Bow. The diseases
which are common amongst them, are Fevers, and the Bloody Flux. Their Horses
are not good, but their Oxen are excellent, being here used instead of Horses,
which are very mettlesome. As in this great extent of ground (which we call the
Mogolls Country) there are several sorts of People, so likewise are there
diverse sorts of Religions, some of which I shall speak a word or two of.

The Benjans are Pagans, they use neither Circumcision nor Baptism; they
believe there is a God who created them, and made the Universe; but they
worship the Devil, believing that God created him to govern the world, and do
mischief to mankind, to which end in all their Mosques they have the figure of
him in Statues of Gold, Silver, Ebony, Ivory, Marble, Stone and Wood; this
figure in shape is ugly and horrid to look on; it is placed on a Table of
Stone, which serves for an Altar, and receives the Offerings which are made to
the Pagode; on the right side of this Table is placed a Trough, in which those
who intend to do their devotions wash and Purify themselves; and on the other
side there is a Chest in which is put their Offerings, night to which in the
wall is a Vessel, out of which the Braman or Priest takes out a kind of yellow
stuff, with which he marks the foreheads of them; this Braman sits at the foot
of the Altar, from whence he rises often to say Prayers. In their Mosques they
always burn Lamps, and about the Walls of them are abundance of Figures, as
Beasts, Devils, etc. which they adore. They much use as a part of their
Religion corporal purification, bathing themselves every day. They are very
ingenious, subtle, and civil, there being no trade but what they apply
themselves unto, and are very expert in the adulteration of all Commodities.
They are civil in their Apparel, but their Children go naked until the age of
5 or 6 years, and at 7, 8, 9 or 10 years of age they marry them, seldom staying
until the age of 12, especially the female sex, as thinking it a great shame
to live so long unmarried; and in their marriages they observe several
ceremonies. The Men are not only permitted to marry twice, or thrice in case of
mortality, but also if their Wives prove barren; but the first has a
preeminence as being mother of the Family; their Sons are Heirs to their
Fathers Estates, but withal they must maintain the Mother, and take to Wife
their Sisters.

The Bramans or Priests are of great authority, and highly respected amongst
them, insomuch that the Benjans will hardly engage themselves in any matter of
concernment, without the advice and approbation of them. These Priests besides
their expounding the mysteries of their Religion according to their fancies
(which soon take impression in the minds of these superstitious people) have an
oversight of Schools where Children have their education. When the men are to
go a journey they desire the Braman to have a care of their Wives, until they
return, and to supply their places; another custom they have, that when any are
married, the Bride is brought to the Braman, and he is earnestly requested to
enjoy the first fruits of her, without which they think the marriage is not
blessed, and for so doing he has gifts presented him according to the qualities
of the persons.

The Benjans believe the transmigration and immortality of the Soul, thinking
that the Soul of a good man is departed into the body of a Chicken or a Pigeon,
that of a wicked or cruel man into a Lion, Tiger or Crocodile, that of a
glutton into a Swine, that of a crafty man into a Fox, etc. for which reason
they neither eat nor kill any thing that has life; nay they are so far from
destroying them, that on the contrary they will purchase them of the
Mahometans, and set them at liberty, and for those that be lame, or sick, they
have Hospitals for them as in Persia.

J. Albert de Mandelslo, in his Book of Travels says, that the Benjans are
divided among themselves, into 83 principal Sects, besides an infinite number
of others; those of most note as comprehending all the others, are those of
Samarath, Ceurawath, Bisnow and Goeghy.

The Parsis and their Religion.
Besides the Benjans there is another sort of Pagans whom they call the Parsis,
who for the most part reside by the Seacoast, addicting themselves to Trades
and Commerce; they believe that there is one God, preserver of the Universe,
who acts alone and immediately in all things; but he has as they fancy about
30 several Servants, to whom he gives an absolute power over the things which
he has entrusted them with, but withal they are obliged to give an account
unto him; and for these Servants they have a great veneration, who have each
their particular charge, as one having the Government of the Earth, another of
Fruits, another of Beasts, another of Military affairs: Others who have
influences on men, some giving understanding, others wealth, etc. Another who
takes the possession of the Souls departed; which conducts them to the Judges
where they are examined, and according to their good or evil deeds, receive
their Sentence, and are carried by the good or bad Angels, who attend the
Judges to Paradise or Hell, where they think they shall abide until the end of
the world, which will be 1000 years; after which time, they shall enter into
other Bodies, and lead a better life then they did before. Another has the
government of Waters, another of Metals, another of Fire, which they hold
Sacred, etc.

They have no Mosques or public places for their Devotion; they have a very
great esteem of their Teachers and Doctors, allowing them a plentiful Estate.
Their Widows are suffered to marry a second time. Adultery and Fornication they
severely punish. They are forbidden the eating of any thing that has life.
Drunkenness they likewise strictly punish. These People are much given to
Avarice, and circumventing those they deal withal. The Mahomitans or Mogolls
that here inhabit are of a good stature, have their Hair black and flaggy, but
are of a clearer Complexion then the other sort of People aforementioned. Their
habit and behavior.
They habit themselves something like the Persians; their Garments about their
Waists, are close to their Bodies, but downwards wide; they use Girdles and
their Shoos and the Covering of their Head, is much the same with those of the
Turks. And they are likewise distinguished by their Glothes, which according to
the degree and quality, and the person, does exceed in richness. They are very
civil, ingenious, and reserved, yet are expensive in their Appareb, Feastings,
and great lovers of Women. And so much for the Mogolls Country.

The Peninsula of INDIA without the Ganges.
Its bounds.
THe Peninsula without the Ganges, is between the Mouths of Indus and Ganges,
and advances from the East of the Great Mogoll, unto the eighth degree of
Latitude, on this side the Equator. The Ocean or Indian Sea washes it on three
sides; to wit, the Gulf of Bengala, once Gangeticus Sinus, on the East; the
Gulf of Cambaya, anciently Barigazenus Sinus, and the Sea which regards
Arabia, on the West; toward the South, that which regards Cylan on one side,
and the Maldives on the other.

We will divide this Peninsula into four principal parts, which shall be Decan,
Golconda, Narsingue or Bisnagar, and Malabar. The three first, Its parts.
and the greatest, have each their King; or if there be more, they depend and
hold of one alone: The fourth and last part, has likewise formerly been a
Kingdom alone; at present is many, but which hold one of another.

DECAN.
THe Kingdom of DECAN is washed on the West, by the Indian Ocean, the Gulf of
Cambaya. It is divided into three others, Kingdom of Decan.
which they call Decan, Cunkan and Balaguate; the two first on the Coast.
Balaguate is Eastward of the other two up in the Land, and composed of Valleys
which are below, and between the Mountains of Gate; beyond which, are the
Kingdoms of Golconda and Narsingue or Bisnagar.

In the particular Decan, are the Cities of Amedanagar, Chaul, Dabul, etc. In
Cunkan are the Cities of Visapor, Soliapor, Goa, Paranda, Pagode, Its chief
places
etc. Likewise in Balaguate, Lispor, Beder, Doltabad, Hamedanager, Visapor and
Beder, are the principal Cities, and those where the Dealcan or Idalcan makes
his residence; but none more considerable then Goa, though they are fair, well
built, large, and populous.

Goa is a City as fair, rich, and of as great Traffic as any in the East;
being situated in an Island of the same name, which the Rivers of Mandova and
Guari make at their falling into the Sea. Alphonso Albuquerque took it in the
year 1510. and since the Portugals have established themselves so powerfully,
that their Viceroy, a Bishop, and their Council for the East Indies have here
their Residence. The Commodities found in this City (being the Staple of the
Commodities of this part of the Indies, as also of Persia, Arabia, China,
Armenia, etc.) are Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silk raw and wrought,
Cotton, of which they make several Manufactures; also Spices, Druggs, Fruits,
Corn, Iron, Steel, with diverse others which the said Countries afford, but the
Natural Commodities of Goa are not considerable. Besides their great Traffic
with several Nations, their Riches and Policy which they observe, Its riches
beauty, etc.
Vincent Blanc makes account that its Hospital is the fairest, the best
accommodated and served, and the richest of any, making it exceed that of the
Holy Spirit at Rome, and the Infermerica at Malta, which are the best of all
Christendom. Their Streets large, their Houses fair, especially their Palaces
and Public Buildings which are very magnificent: Their Churches are stately
and richly adorned; their Windows are beautified with Mother of Pearl, and
Shells of Tortoises of diverse colors; which are ingeniously cut in neat Works.
This City is in compass above 15 miles, and though it is without Gates or
Walls, yet by reason of its Castle, Forts, and the strength it receives from
the Island, is a place of great strength and force: It has a great and good
Haven, Its strength.
which they make their Harbor for their Indian Fleet, by which they command the
Seas there abouts. The Portugals here live in all manner of delight and
pleasure; and with a pride and presumption so great, that the least and most
beggarly among them, take to themselves the titles of Gentlemen of the House
and Chamber of the King, Knights, Esquires, etc. being very highly conceited of
themselves, and exceeding proud and stately, but withal very civil and
courteous; no person of quality walks the Streets a-foot, but are carried by
their Slaves in a Palanquin, or ride on Horses, and the Women seldom go abroad
publicly. Both Sexes are extremely given to Venery, by reason of which, the
Pox is very frequent among them, of which abundance dies: Their Women have an
excessive love to white Men, and will use their uttermost endeavors to enjoy
them. The Men are so jealous of their Wives, that they will scarce suffer their
nearest Relations to see them, by reason they are so much desirous of the
enjoyment of Men, and they so much of them.

In their Apparel, as also in the furniture of their Houses, they are very
costly. The Women are here delivered without pain, and not having the use of a
Midwife, or any one but her self; and no sooner is she delivered, but she is
about her occasions, not observing the custom among us, in keeping their
Chamber a month together. Most of them live to the age of 100 years, and that
in perfect health; but these are not the Portugals, but are the Natives which
are Pagans and Benjans. To this City do resort Merchants from Arabia, Persia,
Armenia, Cambaya, Bengala, Siam, Pegu, China, Java, Malacca, and from several
other Countries, it being the Staple of all Indian Commodities. In the heart of
the City, is a Street, where every morning, from seven to nine, not only the
Merchants meet for the vending and buying of Commodities, which are here set
forth for sale, like our Fairs; but also the Gentry of the City meet, as well
to hear news, as to satisfy their fancies in the sight of the Commodities: And
besides this Street, every Trade has its particular Street, one Trade not
intermixing with another.

Besides Goa, the Land of the Bardes, the Islles of Salsette, of Coran, of
Divar, and some other Lands about Goa, are the Portugals: As likewise, the City
of Chaul, on the Coast, where they have a great Trade of Silk; and from these
places they have their provision brought them, and that at very easy rates;
for the Island of it self is so barren, that it will scarce produce any thing.

Decan taken altogether, has one King alone, which they call Idolcan or
Dialcan. The Great Mogoll has taken from him some places in the particular
Decan, and the Portugals Goa, Chaul, and some other places on the Coast. This
Prince is yet powerful, at least in regard of the Indians: He has taken Dabul
from the Portugals, and ruined it. He once besieged Chaul, and diverse times
Goa, leading in his Armies near 200000 men. In fine, he made Peace with the
Portugals; the Viceroy of the East Indies for the Crown of Portugal, having
always an Ambassador at the Idolcans Court, and the Idolcan having one at Goa
with the Viceroy. And though this Prince is so powerful in men, and so well
provided with Ammunition, and his Artillery greater and better then any Prince
about him, yet is he become Tributary to the Great Mogoll.

Its Commodities.
All the Country is good, fruitful, watered with several Rivers, has store of
precious Stones, of Cotton and Silk, of which they make diverse Manufactures; of
Pepper, of Fruits and other Commodities.

The Inhabitants or Natives of the Country are Pagans, and for the most part
Benjans, but eat any kind of Flesh, except that of an Ox, Cow, Buffe, Swine or
Wild-Bore. A Swine they abhor, but have a great veneration for a Cow or an Ox.
But as to the manner of their life, as in their Marrriages, Interments,
Purifications, and other Ceremonies in their Religion; as also in their Habits
and Houses, which are very mean, their Houses being made of Straw, and withal,
small and low; having no light but what enters in at the door, which is not so
high as a man's Waist: In which, their chiefest furniture and houshold-stuffs,
are Mats to lie upon in the night, on which they also eat their Meat; their
Dishes, Drinking-cups, etc. are made of Fig Leaves, which they daub and
plaster together. In these, and the like Ceremonies and Customs, they imitate
the Benjans aforementioned, The rest of the people which here inhabit, are
Mahometans and Jews, which here enjoy the freedom of their Religion, but the
Subjects of the King of Portugal are Catholics, those of the English
Protestants.

GOLCONDA.
The Kingdom of Golconda; its bounds and extent.
THe name of GOLCONDA has been known but for few years; nevertheless this is a
powerful and rich Kingdom; but which has been confounded with the name of
Orixa. It is upon the Gulf of Bengala, which it regards toward the East and
South, neighboring on the Mogolls and the Kingdom of Bengala, toward the
North. It stretches 200 Leagues on the Coast in length, and near 100 up in the
Land in breadth. It yields 20 Millions of yearly Revenue, is very well peopled,
and its People addicted to all sorts of Manufactures. They make Cotton
Pintado's so artificially, and with such lively colors, that it is esteemed
better than Silk. They build great Ships, trade to Mecca, Aquem, Bengala, Pegu,
and throughout all the Indies:

Its chief places or Fortresses.
There are in this Estate 66 Castles and Fortresses, where the ordinary
Garrisons are kept; and these Castles are on inaccessible Rocks, which they
call Conda. Golconda, which the Persians call Hidrabrand, is the chief and
residence of the King; it is distant from the Port of Musulipatan about 60
Leagues, which is a fair City seated on an Arm of the Sea; adjoining to the
Kingdom of Bisnagar, and not far from Cape Guadavari. Has its Air pleasant,
its Soil fruitful, of about 5 or 6 Leagues circuit; nor does its King yield
much to the Great Mogoll in Riches, precious Stones, in store of Elephants, or
all sorts of magnificence. But his Estates being much less, and his People less
warlike, constrains him to send him every year 400000 Pagodes in form of
Tribute.

The Country rich in Diamonds and Precious Stones.
This Country moreover has no Mines of Gold, Silver, or Copper, some it has of
Iron and Steel, but many of Diamonds and other precious Stones, so rich and
abundant, that in 1622 the King caused it to be shut up, and the labor to
cease, fearing lest the too great quantity should make them neglected. Others
say, for fear it should draw the Great Mogoll into his Estates.

Condapoli; its chief Fortress is so great, that in circumference it contains
six others; and these six are one above the other, each having Wood, Fruits,
and Land sufficient to maintain the Garrisons destined for their defense, which
amount to 12000 Men. Candavara is another Fortress, 15 or 16 Leagues from
Condapoli; and thence at certain intervals there are Towers, on which with
certain Lights they give signal of all that passes in the Country. On the
Seacoast or Gulf of Bengala, are seated several Towns, some of which are well
known by Merchants; as Guadavari, which gives name to a Cape, on which it is
seated, Vixaopatan, Narsingapatan, Pulacate, Palhor, Manicapatan, Calecote,
Caregara; on the Cape Segogora, or Das Palmas, Polarin, Contiripatan, and
others. The Portugals have a Fortress at Masulipatan, which is one of the best
Ports of the Country; the City is not walled, and belong to the Prince.

The Air and fertility of the Country.
The Air is every where healthful, the Soil fertile, producing twice or thrice a
year Grains, Fruits, etc. almost all different from ours. Their Seasons are
distinguished in three manners; they have very great heats in March, April,
May, and June; and that is their Summer. Much Rain in July, August, September,
and October; and that is their Autumn. Fresh Weather, or little heat in
November, December, January, and February, which is their Spring: For Winter
they have none. One of their principal Revenues comes from Salt, which alone
yields 1800000 Pagodes, or so many Crowns. Their other Revenues are drawn from
several Commodities; amongst the rest Diamonds, of which all above 5 Carats
belong to the Prince; nor dare any keep them on pain of death.

BISNAGAR, or NARSINGVE.
The Estates of Bisnagar; and its Parts.
SOuth of Decan and Golconda are the Estates of BISNAGAR otherwise NARSINGVE;
these two places being the principal ones of the Realm. Narsingue, not far from
the Port of Paleacate, about the midst of the Coast of Choromandel: Bisnagar,
toward the Mountains of Gate, and near Canara. The whole Estate is divided
into three principal quarters, and these 3 quarters into 7 Kingdoms, and
extends it self on two different parts of the Indian Sea, on the Gulf of
Ganges or Bengala, toward the East; and on the Gulf of Indus or Cambaya,
toward the West. On this side, the Coast is 65 Leagues long; in the other 250.

The three principal quarters are called CANARA, BISNAGAR, and CHOROMANDEL.
Canar^ occupies all the Western Coast, between the Estates of Decan and
Malabar; Bisnagar and Choromandel hold all the Eastern Coast: the last toward
the Coast of the Peschery, and Isle of Ceylan; and the first toward Golconda.
Canara has the Kingdoms of Onor and Baticala on the Sea, and that of Borsopa
farther in the Land, which stretches to the Mountains of Gate. Bisnagar has
the Kingdoms of Tienlique and Bisnagar; Choromandel, those of Choromandel and
Tamul.

The chief Cities and Fortresses.
Onor, Baticala, and Gorcopa, are the capital Cities each of their Kingdoms;
the two first to one, the last subject to a particular King; but all
Tributaries to Bisnagar. Those four on the East and Gulf of Bengala, are
immediately subject to the King of Bisnagar, except that the Portugals hold
Maliapur and Negapatan. But moreover the Estates of the Naicques, of Tanjaor,
of Gingi, and of Madure, are esteemed to be of Bisnagar, because they make part
of it, and are likewise at present Vassals and Tributaries of the King of
Bisnagar. Formerly these Naicques were only Governors of the Quarters they at
present possess, these Governors revolting, and each seizing his Government.
The Kings of Bisnagar having long made War upon them, to reduce them to their
duty: They in the end remained Naicques, that is, Hereditary Lords, and
absolute over those Quarters, paying some Tribute to the Kings of Bisnagar.

The City of Gingi is esteemed one of the greatest and fairest of India, in the
midst of which is a Fortress, and in that Fortress a Rock almost inaccessible;
they give likewise to this Naicque the City of Cindambaram, after it
Chistapatama; and on the Coast of Choromandel, Coloran, the Princes of Trinidi
and Salavacca, are subject to him.

The Naicque of Tanjaor has his Estate between those of Gingi and Madure, and
near the Port of Negapatan, which belongs to the Portugals. Besides Tanjaor and
Castan in the Upland, the Cities of Triminapatan, of Trangabar, and of
Triminavez, belong unto him.

The Naicque of Madure, besides Madure his capital City and a very fair one,
holds almost all the Coast of the Pesoheria, and the little Isle of Manar near
Ceylan. This Coast extends from the Cape of Comori unto the Cape of Negapatan,
viewing in the Ocean the not far distant Isle of Ceylan: And the name of the
Pescheria has been given it, by reason of the Pearls which they yearly fish
there for about the end of March and the beginning of April; and this Fishing
endures only 15 or 21 days, there being then about 50 or 60000 Persons employed
either to fish, or to keep the Fishermens Vessels from trouble. These Pearls
are exposed to sale in July, August, and September. Tutucori and Manancor, are
the best Cities of this Coast, which is of 75 Leagues length, where there is
about 25 Cities. The people of Paravas are mixed along the Coast, and live in
some form of a Republic, paying some rights to the Naicque of Madure; and
these are they that fish or the Pearls: this fishing being all the riches of
the Country, which of it self is neither fertile nor pleasant, but dry and
scorched.

The King of Bisnagar very powerful.
Yet is the King of Bisnagar very powerful, formerly marching against the
Idalcan, it has been accounted that he had in his Army 40000 Horse, 700000
Foot, and 700 Elephants. His chief City is Bisnagar or Visnagar, a City very
beautiful, seated in a temperate Air, and by reason of the fertility of the
Country about it, which brings forth sundry Commodities naturally, besides the
industry and ingenuity of the Inhabitants in several Manufactures; but
especially in their fine Cotton-Linnen, which they make of diverse colors, and
interwoved with several sorts of Loom-works and flowers, which are esteemed
better than Silk. Also the goodness of its Haven, has made it a place of as
great Commerce as any City on the Coast of Choromandel; An English Factory at
Musulipatan,
though at Musulipatan the English have settled a Factory (both for the
providing and lading hence the Commodities of the Country,) more by reason of
its situation, than for the goodness of place, it being of no beauty nor
grandeur; its Houses being low and ill built, and its Streets not many, and
those that are, narrow and ill contrived; but above all it is seated in a
barten Soil, by reason of the extraordinary Heat, which here rages from March
to July; them from July to November, the great Rains and Winds, which reign
continually, so that their Temperate weather is but from November to March.

Vincent le Blanc says, That the City of Bisnagar is able to set forth 100000
Horse; next to it Narsingue, on the side of a little Hill toward the Sea;
Tripity, not far from Chandegry; and Cangevaran, not far from, Maliapor, or St.
Thomas Trivalur, is famous for the great number of its Idols. Cirangapatan is
between Chandegry and Mangalor, which is on the Coast of Canara: the Fortress
of Vellur, between Chandegry and Narsingue, was the Kings Court in 1609. All
the Country is healthful, rich, and fertile in Corn and Fruits, The fertility,
temperature, etc. of the Country.
breeding store of Cattle and Fowl; and Diamonds are found in the Mountains of
Gate, near Chandegry, and in other places quantity of Amethysts and white
Saphirs. They have all sorts of Beasts, both tame and wild: their Elephants are
docil, their People healthful and well disposed, but not courageous. The Pepper
of Onor is esteemed the most weighty and the best of all these quarters: the
Portugals lade from thence 7 or 8000 Quintals a year. Baticala, a Port of Rice
of several sorts, different both in price and goodness; the black Rice is
esteemed more healthful, and better than the white.

Between Peleagate and Narsingue, there is an obscure and deep Valley full of
Trees, which still drop water like those in the Isle of Ferr in the Canaries:
near this Valley there is abundance of Sugars, whose Canes pressed serve to feed
Beasts, among which Hogs most delight in them, which makes them contract a
favor rather of Sugar than Salt; yet are they worth little.

The Revenue of the King.
Some give the King of Narsingue but 10 or 1200 l. Sterling of yearly Revenue,
whereas others report him to have 10 or 12 Millions of Gold yearly, which is
most likely. He entertains ordinarily 40000 Naires, 20000 Horses; and for the
service of his House 12 or 15000 Persons, 1000 Horses, and 800 Elephants.

Its People.
Almost all the People are Idolaters, some Mahumetans, and a few Catholics. The
Jesuits have two residences; one at Chandegry, and the other at Vetlur, to no
small benefit. Amongst the Customs of these Barbarians, they have the inhuman
custom for the Women to burn themselves with the Corpse of their deceased
Husbands. Texera says, that the Naique of Madure deceasing in his time, his
400 Wives and Concubines cast themselves into the same Fire, and burnt
themselves with the Kings Body. There was 375 burnt with the Naique of Taujaor,
in the year 1600, and as many or more with the last Naique of Gingi.

Here the Women burn themselves with the Corpse of their deceased Husbands.
As for the form and custom observed in the burning of these silly wretches, I
shall borrow from Sir Tho. Herbert, as he has it in his book of Travels, p.
362. where he says, that the Husband being dead the Wife prepares her self for
her Funeral, habiting her self in transparent Lawn; her Nose, Ears, and Fingers
she adorns with Precious Stones, etc. but her Legs, Thighs and Arms she
fettereth with Chains, which they hold as expressions of Love; in one hand she
holds a Ball, and in the other a Nosegay of Flowers, both as Emblems of
Paradise: and being thus habited, she is accompanied to the place by all her
Relations, Friends, and Acquaintance; and all the way going the Branchman or
Priest denotes the joys she is to possess, together with the assurance of
enjoying her Husband in the Elysium: which words do much excite her to valor;
so that when she comes to the place, sees the flame, and the Carcass of her
dead Husband, whom she longs to be with in Elysium, being as it were like a
hotheaded Lover, transported with joy, she takes leave of her Friends and
Relations, and jumps into the flame, in which the Corpse of her Husband was
first put, which soon unites in Ashes; during which time they have several
sorts of Music: and to make the Ceremony the better, their Branchman exhorts
them not to quit their Husbands, casting store of sweet Wood and Oil into the
fire, to take away the unsavory smell; and this Law was made, because the
Women did frequently poison their Husbands upon any discontent, and so took
others: but as Linscot says, this is only a Custom for their Nobles and
Priests, it being prohibited to the meaner People. A Custom, I think, not
greatly to be desired by any; and besides this Heathenish Custom, they have
several others as bad and Idolatrous, Satan having here displayed his Banner of
Impiety, being a People for the most part averse to Law and Morality. Likewise
the Custom which they observe in their Marriages is as strange; for the
Branchman, with a Cow and the Man and Woman, go together to the Waterside,
where the Priest (after he has muttered a short Prayer) joins their hands to
the Cows Tai), and having poured upon them hallowed Oil, he forces the Cow
into the River, where she continues a good while, and being come out they unty
them; and this they hold for a solemn Marriage, and sacred for ever, the Cow
being a creature which by them is highly esteemed and reverenced.

The Coast of Choromandel, and its Trade.
Among the places which are on the Coast of Choromandel, Negapatan, and
Maliapur, belong to the Portugals, and formerly they alone of the Europeans had
all the Traffic; now the Hollanders hold Gueldria, the English the Fort St.
George, called by the Indians Sadrapatan; and both have their Factors
throughout the Coast. Megapatan is great of Trade, though seated in an
unhealthful Climate, uttering many valuable Merchandises: They gather Rice in
quantity sufficient to serve their Neighbors. Maliapur a small, but well known
Town on this Coast, is the place where those of the Country believe that St.
Thomas was Martyred and interred; and there were many Christans who called it
St. Thomas, when the Portugals entered the Indies; they are still a considerable
body, and may easily be made return to true Christianity. The old City is
ruined, the new was rebuilt by the Portugals, where there is a Chapel dedicated
to St. Thomas; and it is erected into a Bishopric under the Archbishop of Goa.

MALABAR.
Malabar, its fertility, commodities, etc.
MALABAR is the last of the four parts we have proposed in the Peninsula of
Indus without the Ganges; the least in Continent, but not in goodness. All the
Country is healthful, fruitful, and rich: It has little Wheat, but instead of
it, it has great plenty of Rice, Mayz, and other Grains, Fruits, quantity of
Drugs and Spices, Precious Stones, Silk, Ginger, Cassia, and abundance of all
sorts of Beasts, yields Wood, and such fair Trees for the Masts of great Ships,
that Norway boasts not better; yet its greatest Riches consists in its Pepper
and Precious Stones.

Its Limits.
Some extend Malabar from the River of Aliga, or from the Cape of Ramos unto
that of Comorin; but all that is between the River of Aliga and Cangerecora,
having already passed under the name of Canara, where the Kings are Tributaries
to him of Bisnagar; we will follow the others, who limit Malabar between the
River of Cangerecora and the Cape of Comorin; where there are many Kings, all
once subject to the Samorin of Calicut: At present those of Calicut, Cochin,
Cananor, and Coulan, are the most powerful.

The Coast of Malabar, and its Parts or Kingdoms.
The Coast of MALABAR is about 125 Leagues in length, and is divided into
several Kingdoms, of which the King of Cananor holds 20 Leagues, he of Calicut
25, he of Cochin 15, and he of Coulan with Travancor, 40 and odd; the rest is
possessed by many. Those of Chambais, Montigue, and Badara, are very near one
another, and between Cananor and Calicut: Those of Tanor and Cranganor, are
between Calicut and Cochin: Those of Porca and Calecoulan are between Couchin
and Coulan; and he of Travancor, between Coulan and Cape Comorin, near which
the Country is not so good as the rest of Malabar.

In the High-lands are those of Cota near Cananor, of Auriola, of Cottagan, of
Bipur, of Coucuran, of Panur, and of Curiga; above Calicut, Tanur and
Cranganor; Those of Muterte, of Marta, and Batimena, toward Cochin: In the
Mountains are those of Mangatt, of Paru, of Pimienta, of Changanara, of
Trivilar, of Panapelli, of Angamale (where there was an Archbishop of
Christians of St. Thomas, reduced to a Bishopric; and transferred to
Cranganor:) two of the Ticantutes, of Punhali, of Caranaretto, and others. The
people called Maledus, and those of the Mountains Pande live in the form of a
Republic Cotate, near Cape de Comori, is of the Kingdom of Travanco, and has
good trading. Calicut is esteemed able to bring more than 100000 men into the
Field; Cananor few less, Cochin and Coulan each 50000. They use little Cavalry,
because the Country is low, moist, and divided by many streams. Calicut
pretends to have some authority over all the Kings of Malabar, for which those
of Cananor, Cochin, and Coulan, to which Travancor is sometime past united,
seem to care little at present, a good part of the rest still hold for him.

Cananor, besides what it possesses in the firm Land, holds likewise some
Islands among the Maldives, for having assisted one of their Kings against his
Rebels; he possesses for the same reason the Isle of Malicut, 35 or 40 Leagues
to the Northward of the Maldives: and the five Isles of Diavandorou, likewise
30 Leagues North from Malicut. All these Isles are small, Malicut of only 4
Leagues circumference, the others each 6 or 7: they are more healthful than the
Maldives, their Inhabitants rich, and trade to the Continent, to Malabar, and
to the Maldives, and elsewhere.

Cochin has gained some reputation since it allied it self with the Portugals,
by whose means it is freed from the tribute it ought to the King of Calicut,
and has drawn to its Estates the greatest trade of all Malabar; and the City
is so increased, that it is not now inferior to Calicut.

The chief Cities.
And in all these Kingdoms aforementioned, contained in (and along the Coasts
of) Malabar, there are several good, large, and well built Cities, being well
inhabited, rich, and of a considerable trade; but those of most note in the
said Kingdoms are called by the same names, as that in Calicut, Calicut; that
in Cananor, Cananor, etc.

The Natives and Inhabitants of Malabar.
The Original Inhabitants of Malabar, are divided into Bramenis, Nayres, and
People. The Bramenis are the priests, Sacrificers to Idols; some addict
themselves to Arms with the Nayres, others to trade; but to whatsoever vocation
they apply themselves, they have a particular manner of living. The Nayres
addicted themselves wholly to Arms. The People meddle only with labor,
Manufactures, Fishing, etc. and are like Slaves.

Besides the Natives, there are many Strangers, who live only on the Coast, and
these are called Malabares, whence the name is communicated to the Country.
These Malabares are Mahumetans, whereas the others are Pagans, and very
Superstitious, worshipping an Idol seated on a Brazen Throne, and Crowned, but
of a horrid form, enough to fright one; and unto this Idol, besides their
Religious Ceremonies, they offer up the Virginity of all their Daughters before
they are married, or else to their Priests. This Idol having in the place of
his Privy parts, a sharp bodkin of Gold or Silver fastened, on which the Bride
is forcibly set, which by reason of the sharpness forces great store of blood
to come; and if, though by her Husband, she proves with Child the first year,
they believe this Idol got it, which they highly esteem; but by reason of the
pain, the Priests by enjoying them first, does quit them from the other, out of
which two, all are served: they commonly marry at 10 or 12 years of age; they
are very black, and well limbed; they wear their Hair long, and curled about
their shoulders; they go naked, having only a cloth about their middle to hide
their nakedness, which hangs down to their knees; they are treacherous, cruel
and bloody-minded; there are likewise some Jews, and since the Portugals have
set footing, many Christians, besides those which they call of St. Thomas;
these being of the Mountains, and those of the Coast.

The Peninsula of INDIA, within the GANGES.
THE Peninsula of India, its bounds.
which is beyond or within the Ganges, is our third and last part of the
Asiatique, or East Indies. We will give unto it all that rests of India unto
China, and bound it on the East by China, and by the Sea of the Philippine
Islands; on the South with that Sea, which flows amongst the Islands of Sonde;
On the West by the Sea or Gulf of Bengala, and by the Estates of the Mogoll;
and on the North we will stretch it as far as the Tartars: so that it will take
up all India beyond the Ganges, what is possessed by the Mogoll excepted.

It Kingdoms and parts.
We have in this Peninsula a great number of Kingdoms, which we will consider
under the three Principal ones; viz. Pegu, Sian, and Cochinchina. Under the
name of Pegu we will range all those Estates and Kingdoms which lie upon the
River, which descend from the Lake of Chiamay unto Pegu; under the name of
Sian, all the Estates and Kingdoms which are about Sian; and under that of
Cochinchina, all that is nearest to and on the West West of China. This last
part is most Easterly of the three, the second most Southerly, and the first
more to the West; and this has almost all been subject to the King of Pegu;
the other to the King of Sian, and the last was part of China.

PEGV.
The Kingdom of Pegu, and its parts.
THE Kingdom of PEGV when in its splendour was so rich and powerful, that some
would equal it to China. Vincent Blanc says that it contained two Empires, and
26 Kingdoms or Crowned Estates; I believe that the two Empires were Pegu and
Siami, or possibly Sian, this having been subject or tributary to Pegu: and the
Kingdoms are Martavan, Manar, Tangu, Marsin, Jangoma, and Brama, whose chief
Cities are Pegu, Brema, Canarane, Pandior, Cassubi, Ava, Boldia, Mandranelle,
Tinco, Prom, Dunbacaon, Tolema, Maon, Arracon, Largaray, Cassubi, Ledoa,
Tipoura, Xara, and Chacomas. The greatest part of these Estates taken apart,
are rich, and powerful, being able to set forth to War, some 2, some 3, some
400000 men. They have in many places Mines of Gold, Silver, and Precious
Stones, besides Grains, Fruits, Herbs, Fowl, and Beasts, which are here found
excellent. The Kingdoms of Tangu and of Brama are the most powerful; since this
has sometime seized, and the other with that of Arracan ruined the Estates of
Pegu.

Brama and its fertility, and chief places.
Brama besides its Mines of precious Stones, has Benjamin, India-Lake, and
certain Herbs, from which they take Silk; they make diverse Manufactures,
particularly Caps much esteemed. Ava abounds in all sorts of Victuals, has
diverse Metals, Musk, and Rubies. Canelan has the finest Rubies, Saphires and
other Stones. Prom has Lacque and Lead. Tinco fetches many Merchandises from
China. Vincent Blanc esteems the City of Canarana as rich and magnificent as
any in India; he places it between the Rivers of Jiama, and of Caypoumo or
Pegu, giving it four Leagues Circuit, and making it Metropolis of the Kingdom
of Caypoumo, which is likewise called Canarana. This Country has Turquesses,
and Emeralds the fairest of all the East. Cassubi is in a Plain, bounded with
high Hills, from whence descend many streams, which water the Plain, where
there are excellent Fruits, among the rest Pomegranates the largest and best of
India, excellent Raisins and Manna, which must be gathered before Sunrise,
which else dispatches it. Their Mountains are filled with savage Beasts, where
they get the Skins and Furs of Ermines and Sables of diverse sorts, all very
exquisite. The people of Transiana are fair, and white; the Women exceeding
beautiful, and the Men very proud: They have Mines of Gold, Silver, and
Diamonds; their King keeps ordinarily 50000 Horse, 1000 Elephants, and paies
his tribute to the King of Pegu in Horses, which are very excellent. Their
Forests have many Wild Beasts; among the rest, that which gives the Bezoar. The
Inhabitants of Boldia are esteemed the most honest and civil of all these
quarters: So that they cannot but be people of Trade; and indeed all these
Kingdoms have diverse Commodities which make them rich.

Pegu exceeding rich in Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones.
The Kingdom of Pegu, which has commanded, and had for Subjects or Tributaries
almost all these Estates, and likewise others toward Sian, and Sian it self,
cannot but be extremely rich and powerful. And truly, Gold, Silver, Pearls, and
Precious Stones, have been as common in the Courts of the Kings of Pegu, as if
all the Orient had brought all its Riches thither. The Floors of Buildings, the
Movables, and the Vessels, with which they served themselves for
divertisement, were so enriched within and without, with Gold and Azure, that
it is not imaginable, if we did not know this to be the Aurea Regio, and
likewise the Argentea Regio of Ptolomy: Yet this must be believed to have been
long since; but however, that it is at present the richest Country of all the
Indies: And for the same reason, one of the best peopled, and most powerful.

Its fertility and Commodities.
This Country, by reason of the overflowing of the River Pegu, which runs
through the Kingdom, makes it become exceeding fruitful, and of a fat and rich
soil; so that it produces great abundance of Grains, Fruits, and other
products of the Earth in great plenty. Also Beasts, Fowl, and Fish, great store
of Civet-Cats, from whom they take Civet, Lacque, which is made by Ants, (as
Bees make Wax with us) Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Drugs, Spices, Lead,
Sugar, etc. This Kingdom has plenty of good Towns and Cities, The City of
Pegu, the chief of the Kingdom, described.
its Metropolis bearing the name of the Kingdom. It is divided into the Old and
the New; the one and the other together make a Square; being encompassed with a
strong Wall, and a great Ditch well fortified, having on each side five Gates,
besides many Turrets richly beautified. It is large, strong, rich, and stately;
the King and his Nobility and Courtiers takes up the New City, which is
separated from the Old by a Wall and Ditch well watered; in which are kept many
Crocodils for the watching the place by night: The Wall has several Gates on
all sides, for the convenience of the people to pass in and out. The Streets
are very fair, straight, and so broad, that fifteen men may ride abreast on
both sides. The Houses well built, having before every door Palm Trees, which
are set, not only to make a pleasant show, but also to keep the Passengers from
the heat of the Sun, which is very great.

The Palace Royal.
The Palace Royal is seated in the midst of the City, having its particular
Wall, Moat, and other Fortifications; the Palace being very stately and large
the greatest part of the Buildings being sustained by Pillars of Jet, and all
the Stones so shining, that those which are without, represent the Neighboring
Gardens and Forests; and those which are within the Paved Chambers, other
Rooms, and the Ceilings above, so well, that one seems to walk on Gold and
Azure. Nor does this his stately Palace exceed his Magnificence and Pomp,
without which he is never so much as seen. The Old City is inhabited only by
Merchants, Artificers, and Seamen, where there is great store of Warehouses
strongly built of Brick to prevent fire (which the City is much subject unto,)
in which the Merchants keep their Goods. And for the better increase of Trade,
the King does constitute Eight Brokers, whose Offices are to look after and
sell the Goods, as well of strangers, as the Inhabitants; giving a very just
account thereof: For which, they are allowed two pence per Cent. The like is
observed in the buying of Commodities. And these Brokers by their places, are
obliged to provide Strangers or Merchants with a House, and orders certain
Maids of the City to go to him, that out of them he may make his choice; which
done, he contracts with her friends to pay them a certain sum for the use of
her, as they can agree, which is not great; and this Maid serves him as his
Servant by day, doing what he commands; and as his Wife by night: And at the
expiration of the term agreed upon, he leaves her, and she goes to her
Friends without any disgrace at all. The People are of a mean stature, The
People, their Habit.
nimble and strong, great lovers of Women, which takes them from warlike
affairs, in which they are not very expert. Their habit is but mean, contenting
themselves for the most part, with a piece of Linen to cover their nakedness;
they all black their Teeth, because they say Dogs teeth are white. They are
generally all Pagans, Their belief.
and believe that God has under him several other Gods; that he is the Author
of all good which arriveth to mankind: But he leaves all evils which belong to
man, to the Devil; by reason of which, they so much adore and fear him, lest he
should hurt them; which God, being good, they say, will not. Their Devotion
they perform on Mundays, their Priests going about with Tin-basons, making a
noise to waken the People, and inviting them to their devotions, in which they
chiefly exhort them to Morality, as to avoid Theft, Adultery, Murder, etc. and
to love Virtue. They have a great esteem for their Priests, who live a very
solitary and exemplary life. They have Five principal Feasts which they observe
very strictly, ceremoniously, and with greast state and pomp. Marriage not kept
during life.
They that Marry buy their Wives of their Parents; and when he is weary of her,
he may send her home, but must lose the Money he paid for her: But if she leave
him, as she may do, then he may receive the Money paid for her.

SIAN or SIAM.
Kingdom of Sian, its parts.
THe Kingdom of SIAN, and those Estates, which we will comprehend under the name
of Sian, are to the North of Pegu. We may consider them in two principal parts;
of which, one shall retain the name of Sian, and the other that of Malacca.
This latter is a Peninsula, which extends it self from the first degree of
Latitude, unto the 11 or 12; from whence the first advances it self into the
Main Land, unto the 19 or 20 degree on this side the Equator. Its extent.
They reach then each 250, and together 4 or 500 Leagues from South to North.
But the Peninsula of Malacca is very straight, not being above 10 or 12 Leagues
broad in the Isthmus, which separates it from Sian; in other places 20, 30, 40,
and some times 80. Sian is almost of an equal length and breadth.

Under the name of Sian, separated from the Peninsula of Malacca, we comprehend
the Kingdoms of Sian, Martaban, Jangoma, and Camboya; under the name of
Malacca, those of Tanacerin, Juncalaon, Singora, Queda, Pera, Patane, Pan,
Malacca, Ihor, and others, as in the Geographical Table.

The chief places of the particular Sian.
The Kingdom of Sian, especially so called, has several Cities of note, viz.

First, Odiaa which some call Sian; the Metropolis being a City of a large
extent, a place of so great strength, that in 1567. they stoutly defended
themselves against an Army of 1400000 fighting Men, which the King of Pegu
brought against them, for twenty Months together: By reason of which, together
with several other mutations that have since happened amongst them, the City has
been much eclipsed of its former beauty, splendour, and riches; yet by reason of
its commodious situation on the River Menam, is still a place of great Trade
and Commerce, is rich, and populous. The Houses are built very high, by reason
of the annual overflowing of this River about the Month of March: So that it
covers the Earth for about 120 Miles in compass; which renders these
Countries very fruitful, as the Nile does Egypt. During this Inundation, Its
Inhabitants retire to the upper Rooms of their Houses; and to every House there
is a Boat, or other Vessel belonging; by which means, they negotiate their
affairs, until the River returns to her usual bounds.

Its Commodities and Trade.
The principal Commodities of this City, or indeed of the Kingdom, are
Cotton-Linnens of several sorts, Benjamin, Lacque, of which they make excellent
Hard Wax; Also that costly Wood which the Portugals call Palo Dangula, and
Calamba, which is weighed against Silver and Gold; for (...) Perfumes; and the
Wood Sapon, used by Dyers; also Spices, some Drugs, Diamonds, Gold, Camphora,
Bezar-Stones, Musk, Porcelaine; and lastly, that excellent Wine, or Distilled
Liquod, which they call Nipe, which they make of Cocos or Indian Nuts, being of
great esteem over all India, and elsewhere.

Its other places are Bankock, noted for excellent Pepper. Lugor seated on the
Seashore, and Socotay, famous for having a Temple only made of Metal, which is
80 Spans high, and answerable in length and breadth, being adorned with
abundance of Idols, built by one of their Kings at his coming to the Crown.

Martaban, its commodities; etc.
The Kingdom of MARTABAN, toward the Gulf of Bengala, is contiguous to Pegu,
to which it has been subject, at present is to Sian. This Kingdom has many
Ports frequented for Trade; for besides its Grains, Fruits, Oils, and Medicinal
Herbs, it is rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Steel, and Copper. It
has Rubies, Lacques, and Benjamin, etc. And they make Vessels of Earth, which
they call Martabanes; of which some are so great, that they hold a Bushel. This
is a kind of Porcelain varnished with black, and wherein they keep Water, Wine,
Oil, and all sorts of Liquors; and for this reason they are esteemed in all the
East.

Jangoma, and its commodities.
JANGOMA, on the confines of Pegu, Siam, and Brama, has been subject or
tributary sometimes to one, and sometimes to another. It has Gold, Silver,
Copper, Musk, Cotton, of which they make Manufactures, Pepper, etc. Its People
are more addicted to Horse than Foot service.

CAMBOJA is the last and most Southerly part of the Peninsula, Camboja.
which is between the Gulphs of Sian and Cochin-china. The principal Cities are
Ravecca and Camboja, of which the Kingdom takes it name, which is under the
10th or 11th degree of Latitude, and on the principal and most Easternly branch
of the River Menam, which (as it is believed) comes from China; but it should
be said from some Regions formerly subject to, or which were part of China.

Its People.
The People in their Manners and Customs resemble those of Sian, whose Subjects
they have been, and whose Tributaries but lately they were.

MALACCA.
Peninsula of Malacca; its parts, commodities, etc.
IN the Peninsula of Malacca are diverse Kingdoms, which are taken notice of in
the Geographical Table; which all (except the City of Malacca) are likewise
tributary to that of Sian. Tenasserin is a Country of Trade, by reason of its
Archipelago, which contains several Islands; and of its Isthmus, which
facilitates the transportation of Merchants from one Sea to another; and of its
Ports, which are commodious. Its other places are Juncalaon, Zueda, Pera, and
Malacca, all which places afford Nipe of burning Wines.

Ihor, its chief places and commodities.
IHOR is beyond Cape de Sincapura, and on the utmost point of the Peninsula:
Its chief City was taken and ruined by the Portugals in 1603, who took from
thence 1500 Brass Cannons. The King of Ihor for revenge besieged Malacca in
1606 with 60000 Men, but was constrained to raise his Siege; there are some
petty Kings which are his Tributaries, Pahang has Lignum Aquila and Calamba,
near to that of Cochin-china; of Camphire, like to that of Borneo: Gold, but of
a lower alloy than ours; Petra Porea, of near as much virtue as the Bezoar
against poison; Diamonds, Nutmegs, Mace, etc.

Patane, and its Trade.
PATANE within few years is grown famous; the Kingdom being frequented by
diverse Nations, particularly by the Chinois, who bring thither Porcelaine,
diverse Manufactures and Instruments of Husbandry; instead of which they carry
back Timber for Building, Cordage made of Cocos, Rice, and diverse Skins, etc.
The Pepper is excellent, but dearer than at Bantam. Their Saroy-Boura, that is,
the matter of Swallows Nests, which we shall speak of in Cochin-china, is much
sought after. The Soil is good, producing Fruit every Month in the year. Their
Hens, Ducks, and Geese, often lay Eggs twice a day. Amongst an infinite number
of Fowl they have white Herons and Turtles of various colors, like Paroquetoes.

Patane, Singora, Brodelong, and Ligor, are on the same Gulf, which may be
called also by Patana, and makes part of that of Sian: Patane and Ligor toward
the two ends; Singora and Brodelong in the midst, and at the bottom of this
Gulf; and these two last are head Cities of Provinces (others call them
Kingdoms) under Sian; the two first Kingdoms are tributary to Sian: They have
nothing particular above Patane, to which they are all united. The chief City
of Patane takes its name from its Kingdom so called, The City of Patane, and
its Trade.
seated on the Seaside betwixt Malacca and Siam. Its Houses are well and
handsomely built, either of Timber or Canes. The Palace Royal is encompassed
with a Pallisado, and its Mosques are made of Brick. This City (as also the
whole Kingdom) is very populous, and enjoying a good Trade. Its People are
inclined to a Swarthy brown complexion, well proportioned, ingenious, using
Arts, especially Navigation; but above all, great lovers of Women. The Country
affords most of the Indian Commodities, by reason of which it has a good
Trade. The City of Malacca, and its Trade.
Malacca, a City and Kingdom, is at present the most famous of all those which
of the Peninsula we have comprehended under the name of Malacca: It has been
subject to the King of Sian. A particular King had made himself Master of it,
before that the Portugals entered the Indies: the Country remaining still to the
Kings of Sian. That which has made this City great, rich, and powerful,
(though the Air be unhealthful, and the Soil almost barren) is the advantage of
its situation, being seated on the River Gasa, which is about 3 Leagues broad,
and in the center of the firm Land, and of all the Islands of the East Indies,
commanding a Straight, which is the Key which makes it the Staple of all the
Indian and China Commodities; by reason of which it is a place of great
Traffic, and very populous, containing about 12000 Families, besides
Strangers. Its Houses are low, and not over curiously built, and the Streets
narrow; the City is about 2 miles in length, and of half the breadth, being a
place of good strength, and defended by a strong Wall and Castle; is watered by
the River Gaza, and the chiefest place of pleasure is the Buzzar. Before, and
nigh to this City, are the Islands by the Portugals, called Ilha de Naos, and
Ilha de Pedra. The usance of diverse Nations of the Indies has so fashioned the
Malayois Language, that it is the best and most elegant of all others.

Arbor tristis, a great rarity.
Among the Rarities of Malacca, or rather among the wonders of the World, may be
counted Arbortristis, or the Sad Tree, which bears Flowers only after Sun set,
and sheds them so soon as the Sun rises, and this it does every Night
throughout the whole year. These Flowers are almost like to (but faire^ and
more odoriferous than) Orange Flowers. Some of these Trees have been
transported and brought as far as Goa, and some other places of the Indies; but
no care could ever preserve them unto Europe.

The Provinces of thin Kingdom of SIAN are very populous, The People of Sian,
their habit, disposition, etc.
especially those which have the benefit of the Sea or navigable Rivers; but
inhabited by different People, but for the most part well proportioned, of a
Swarthy complexion, more addicted to Venus than Mars; ingenious, but lazy,
unconstant, and deceivers. Their habit is a painted Cloth, which they wear
about their middle, and hangs down to their knees; besides which the Men wear
short Shirts, and the Women cover their Breasts with a piece of Linen, which
they tie about their Necks, all observing one fashion; the Persons of Quality
being only known by their attendance. Their Marriages, Burials, and other
Ceremonies, are much the same as those aforesaid; they bring up their Children
very well, instructing them in Arts: by which, according to their abilities,
they are advanced to preferment. In their Punishments they are severs and
different, Their Arms.
according to the nature of the crime. His Army does consist of his own
Subjects in the nature of our Trained-Bands, which are to be ready upon all
occasions, and not of a standing Army. Their Arms are Bows and Arrows, Swords,
Pikes, and Bucklers; they have no Firearms; their Horse is not good, their
chief strength consisting in their Elephants.

The Kings of Sian absolute Monarchs, are rich, powerful, and live in great
state.
The Kings of Sian are esteemed absolute Monarchs in their Dominions, making and
breaking Laws as they please; imposing Taxes on their Subjects; punishing,
condemning and seizing the Estates of those who speak or act contrary to their
minds; make War and Peace as often as they please. These and the like actions
he does of himself, without consent of any; yet he has a Council, which are
his Nobles, of whom he will hear their Opinions and Advice, but act as best
pleases him. He has but one Wife, who bears the title of a Queen, but has
many Concubines. In his Apparel and Attendance he is very magnificent and
stately, not stirring abroad without great pomp; by reason of which, as also
through his austerity, he has great veneration showed him. His Revenue is very
great; he bestows his Honor or Preferment on those who best please him, not
regarding Birth and Education, it being not hereditary. For the administration
of Justice, most Cities have their Jurisdictions and Judges.

This great Kingdom is not in all places alike; for in some parts it is covered
with Wood, in others Mountainous, and to the Seaside, Marshy, Flat, and
Fertile, affording diverse and rich Commodities, as aforementioned; and being
plentifully furnished with Rivers, Bays, and Harbors, for the convenience of
Shipping.

COCHIN-CHINA, TVNQIN, etc.
Cochin-china, its bounds and extent.
I Esteem under the Name of COCHIN-CHINA taken in general, all that lies to the
Eastward of the Kingdoms of Camboja, Sian, Pegu, and Ava, etc. to the Westward
of China, and the Gulf of Cochin-china; and which is washed on the South with
the Oriental Ocean, and bounded on the North by those high Mountains which
limit Tartary; extending it self from the 9th degree of Latitude on this side
the Equator, unto the 34th or 35th toward the North, which make more than 6000
Leagues; the breadth not being above the 8th or 10th part of its length.

Its Name, why so called.
The name of Cochin-china, according to some, signifies West China: so the
Natives of the Country call it Onam or Anam, that is, the Occidental Quarter;
and this extends to the view of China, of which it was once part, and whose
Language, Manners, Customs, Government, Religion, and other Ceremonies they yet
retain, (which having occasion to treat of in China, as more convenient, for
brevities sake I omit them here, referring the Reader to the description of
China.) But these Quarters being retired from the subjection of the Chinois
above 800 years ago, were a little after as easily divided into diverse Estates.
The name of Cochin-china being kept in the most Southern parts; that of Tunquin
having taken the middle and more Northernly parts, passing under the name of
the People called Lays, the Kingdom of Ciocangue, the People Gueyes, Timocoves,
etc. who have in part taken and received the manners and barbarousness of the
Tartars, their Neighbors.

Its parts and chief places.
Cochin-china likewise is divided into Chiampaa and Cochin-china: Chiampaa,
between Camboja and Cochin-china, regards the Isles of Sonde toward the South;
the Philippines toward the East, and touches on Tunquin to the North. Its
principal City bears the same name, according to most Authors; but according to
others, Pulocacein. It has nothing which is not common to Cochin-china, and
therefore we shall say no more.

Cochin-china particularly taken, is better known than all the neighboring
Countries, because it is wholly upon the Sea, having 150 Leagues of Coast, and
not above 40 or 50 in breadth, between the Mountains of Kemois (a barbarous
People) and the Sea. Its Provinces are descending from North to South: Sinuva,
Cacciam, Quangiva, Quingin or Pulacambis, and Ranran. The two first touch upon
Tunquin, the last touch on the Kingdom of Chiampaa. The King makes his ordinary
residence in the Province of Sinuva, or at Cacciam, Cities of the same name
with their Provinces.

Its fertility, commoditi^ temperature, and people.
All the Country is fertile, abounding in Rice, Fruits, and Herbs, breeding many
Fowls and Beasts, and the Sea excellent Fishes. It produces Cinnamon, Pepper,
Lignum Aquilae, Calamba, and Benjamin. Its temperature is pleasant, though
under the Torrid Zone; the Air healthful, and the Soil so abundant in all
things, that the Inhabitants have no knowledge either of Contagion or Famine.
They have Gold, Silver, Silk, Porcelain, and diverse other valuable Commodities.
All sorts of Nations frequent its Coast, by reason of the goodness of its
Ports; and because its Inhabitants are Courteous, Liberal, kind to Strangers,
and faithful in their dealings. They are courageous, and more warlike than
those of Tunquin or China, handling all sorts of Arms with no small activity.
They are Idolaters: Christianity was introduced in 1620, and began to flourish;
but their Kings have of date very much persecuted them.

Amongst the particularities and rarities of the Country, we must place the
Lutt, an Inundation, which in Autumn covers with its Waters almost all the
Country; it renews from 15 to 15 days, remaining only 3 days at a time, making
the Earth so fruitful, that it brings forth its increase twice or thrice a
year. Their Saroy-Boura, Several Rarities here found.
or matter wherewith certain Swallows make their Nests, which after those Birds
leave dry and hardened, they gather in great quantities, which being steeped and
moistened in Water, serves for Sauce to all sorts of Meat; and as formerly Manna
communicating such a variety of taste, that it seems to be composed of
Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, and other Spices. Their Lignum Aquilae and Calamba
come from the same Tree; the first from the Trunk of a young Tree, the last
from the Trunk of an old Tree: but this last is much more esteemed than the
other, both for its odor and virtue. A pound of it on the place where it is
beaten down is worth 5 Ducats, being brought to the Port, 15 or 16; and if
transported to Japan, 200. If some piece be found to make a whole Pillar, it is
worth 3 or 400 Ducats the pound. The Lignum Aquilae amongst other things,
serves to burn the dead Bodies of their Kings, Princes, and Priests.

Wood as heavy as Iron, and which consumes not, except burnt.
Among the Wood they use for Buildings, there are two sorts which they call
uncorruptible, whether in Water or Earth; their Trees they call Thins: the Wood
of the one is near as black as Ebony, the other near the color of Yew. Both
the one and the other taken out of the Bark is smooth and glib, so solid and
weighty, that it sinks to the bottom of the Water, and serves also for Anchors
for Ships. They make Pillars, on which they erect their Buildings; and before
the time of the Lutt, they drive Joists and Planks between those Columns, and
with Canes and Reeds accommodate diverse Apartments, which they take away in the
time of those Inundations, that the Water may run the freer.

TVNQVIN.
THe Kingdom of TVNQVIN is part on the Sea, and part on the Main Land; The
Kingdom of Tunquin, its bounds, extent, and situation.
it bounds on the Sea at the bottom of the Gulf of Cochin-china, there where
it divides China from Cochin-china, and has about 150 Leagues of Coast. On the
Land it extends it self from the seventeenth degree of Latitude, on this side
the Equator, unto the twenty third, which are likewise 150 Leagues from North
to South: Its breadth being only about 100 Leagues from East to West.

Its Parts.
This Kingdom contains Seven Provinces, of which the three most Southernly are,
Bochin, Gehan, and Tinhoa; the four most Northernly are, Beramar, Kedom, Kenam,
and Kethay. Bochin touches on Cochin-china, and the two other advance along the
Gulf toward the North; amongst the four last, Beramar and Kedun are toward
China, Kenan and Kethay toward the People Lays. The King very powerful.
The King of Tunquin ordinarily entertains a Militia of 50000 Men, taken from
the three Southernly Provinces, and paid by the four Northern, because these
last lately revolted, and the other remained in obedience.

Its chief Places.
Kecchio is the chief City of the Kingdom, where the King ordinarily resides.
It is not above twenty miles in circuit, but has a Million of Inhabitants.
Some Authors will have it called Tunquin, that is, the Court of the West, and
that the Kingdom took its name from it. The Land has beautiful Plains, and
watered with many great Rivers; which with the Rains and melting of the Snow,
which descends from the Mountains that separates it, from the Lays, the
Kingdom of Ciocangue, China, and Cochin-china, make it fruitful by their
Inundations, rendering it better and more abundant than Cochin-china. Yet has
it neither Corn, Vines, nor Olive Trees; Its fertiliy and commodities.
but they gather Rice twice a year, of which they make Bread; they fetch in
Wine, and instead of Oil make use of the matter taken from Swallows Nests, of
which they have no less quantity than Cochin-china. They have neither Asses nor
Sheep, but many Horses, Elephants, and Rhinocerotes, whose Flesh, Skins, Bones,
Teeth, Nails, and Horns, serve for Antidotes against Poison; they have so much
Pullain, Pigeons, Turtles, and other Fowl, that they give them almost for
nothing.

Amongst their Fruits they have fair Pomgranates, which beyond the ordinary
excellency of that Fruit has here a particular and delightful Juice. For Fish
they make account, that in the Seasons there daily goes 10000 Barks out of
their Ports to Fish. They embrace Christianity.
The Catholic Religion was so introduced here some years past, that there was
esteemed to be more than 200000 Christened Souls, 200 great Churches, and a
great quantity of Chapels and Oratories: there has since happened diverse
changes. In these Kingdoms the Portugals have several Towns and Cities, by
which they have a great Revenue.

Isles seated on the Gulf of Sian.
In the Gulf of Sian are seated several Isles, some of which are well known; as
the Isle of Goeteinficos, about 27 Leagues long, and 15 broad, seated about
three or four Leagues from Ligor and Bordelong, in the Peninsula of Malacca;
and between this Isle and the Land of Malacca lies several small Isles. The
next of note are the Isles of Macaria and Panian; then the Isles of Cara, which
are four in number; and the Isles of Cosyn, which are three in number; with
several others of no account.

Isles seated in the Sea, called the Gulf of Bengala.
In the Gulf called the Gulf of Bengala, are likewise seated several Isles;
the chief of which are the Isles of Chubedu, Chudube, and Ledoa, of Dos
Alevantados, Aligada, and Durondiva, whose chief place is Siriaon; the Isles of
Andemaon, which are 10 in number, two of which are indifferent large; likewise
the Isles dos Cocos, dos Caboses, Tanasseri, Tavay, Alta, and Craro, which said
Isles are not far distant from the Sea-shoar of the Land of Sian, two of which
are each about 20 Leagues in length; and the one 10, and the other about 7 in
breadth. Also in this Gulf are the Isles of Caremubar, of Raza, dos Sombreros
de Palm, Siano, Sambilano, Batun, Pera, Pinaon, Canal de St. Georgo, Nicubar,
and others; many of which are well known and frequented by Merchants, affording
several of the Indian Commodities.

The Kingdom of CHINA, with its Provinces and Isles, which may be considered as
they lie Northernly, and Regarding the Sea; as Leaoton, Leaoton, or Leaoyang.
Richeo
Pequin, Peking, Quangping, Himpin, Tianchevoy.
Scianton, Xanton, or Cinan, Pamnihu, Cincoyan, Laicheu, or Lincheu.

On the Firm Land; as Sciansi, Taven, Lugan, Tatong, Sciansi, Pingans, Suchio.
Sciensi, Siganfu, Jengan, Pingleang, Pichin, Linyao.
Honan, Honan, Temechio, Caifung, Nanyang, Chinchio.


Southernly, and On the SEA; to wit, Easternly, as Nanquin, Nanking, Chicheu,
Lucheu, Funiam, Xanuchi.
Chequian, with its Isles of Quinsay, now Hancheu, Haugcheu, Liampo, Aucheo,
Succu, Chequia.
Mochosa, or Cheuxan, Sunkiam, or Changque, Suan, Olepio, Avarello, Chaposi.
Fuquien, Chincheo, Focheu, Yenping, Chining, Hinghoa, Isles of Lanquin,
Baboxin.


Southernly, as Canton, Canton, Nanhium, Lampaca, Quanycheu, Uchuen, Zauquin,
Luicheu,
Isles belonging to Canton; as Aynan Kinchensu, Bancao,
Thinosa, Amacao, Omandari, Pulotio.
Quancy, Quancy, Colin, Nangan.
Zunnan, Junnan, Hilan.


Within Land; as Chiamsi, Nanchang, Kiencham, Linkiang, Juencheu, Nangam.
Huquan, Cingiang, Huchang, Vuchang, Yocheu, Cangte.
Suchuen, Paoning, Xunking.
Quicheu, Quincheo, Rueyang, Hiauchoau, Liping, Cipan, Pauhu^.


In Isles and Peninsula's about the Coast of CHINA; as those of Corey,
Hianking, Kingzan, Civenlo.
Larrons. Fuego. Lequejo Grande. De los Roys Mages. de Pescheurs, Gillira,
Wankan, Tayoan.
Formosa. Tabaca Miguel. Tabaca Xima. Hainan.


map of China A New Mapp of y Empire of CHINA With its several Provinces or
kingdoms Together with. the adjacent Isles of Iapon or Niphon Formola Haman etc.
To ye Worshipfl Thom^^ Robinson of ye Inner Temple London (...) chief (...) of
his Maty Court of Common Pleas This Map is humbly DD by RB



CHINA.
The Kingdom of China.
CHINA is on the East of Asia, and of all our Continent; and if we consider its
greatness, fruitfulness, riches, the great number and politeness of its
Inhabitants, the beauty of its Cities, its Manufactures, and for having had the
inventions of Silk, Printing, Paper, Artillery, etc. it is worthy of note.

Its several Names.
Ptolomy knew this Country under the name of Sinarum Regio; but it has been
observable by us, that the Chinois knew not any thing of that name; and that
when this great Empire falls from one Family to another, he that begins the
Family gives such a new name as he pleases to the Kingdom: and these names are
very specious; as formerly it had the name of Than, that is, Boundless; You,
that is, Repose; Hin, which signifies, Great; Sciam, which is an Ornament;
Cheu, that is, Perfect, and so others: The Family that reigns at present gave
it the name of Miu, that is, Brightness; and the last Kings of the same Family
have added Ta, which is, Kingdom, so that Ta-Min signifies the Kingdom of
Brightness. The People neighboring upon China take little heed of the changing
of these names; but on the contrary, some name it in one manner, and some in
another: Those of Cochin-china and Siam call it Cin, from whence we have formed
the name of China; those of Japhan, Than: the Tartars, Han: the Saracens and
Mahometans of the West call it Cathay; under which name is likewise
comprehended the Eastern part of Tartary.

Its greatness extends from the 18th or 19th, Its extent.
unto the 43th or 44th degree of Latitude: and from 147 to 166 degrees of
Longitude, and in some places from 145 to 172; that is about 24 degrees of
Latitude, which amount to 600 Leagues from North to South; and 18 or 20, and
sometimes 25 degrees of Longitude, which amount to 4, 5, or 600 Leagues from
West to East: some Authors have esteemed this Kingdom greater; but the Father
Jesuits have observed the height of Pequin, and its most Northern parts.

The number of its Provinces, Parts, Cities, and Towns.
It contains 16 Provinces, all rich, plentiful, and which might well merit the
name and title of Kingdoms; they are subdivided into 28 Regions, or less
Provinces, of which some have 12, some 15 fair Cities; amongst which are 180
great Cities, 319 great Towns, and 1212 lesser; in all 1771 Cities and fair
Towns.

China very populous.
However it be a great number, there is the same likewise of lesser places;
insomuch that in Anno 1557 there was found in China more than 40 Millions of
Men which paid Tribute or Tax: In 1616 there was near 60 Millions. Among which
the Women, Young men under 20 years, Eunuchs, Soldiers, Officers, Sick people,
and those of the Kings kindred were not comprehended, which together would
amount to a very great number.

Diverse Kings subject to the King of China.
There are accounted likewise Tributaries to the King of China, 3 Kings toward
the East, 53 toward the West, 55 toward the South, and 3 toward the North,
which are 114; and many have assured his Revenue to be 150 Millions of Gold per
annum.

China bounded.
The bounds of this great Monarchy are very advantageous, the Sea washing it on
the South and East, where there are diverse little Islands and Rocks along the
Coast; a Mountain of above 500 Leagues long being its Northern bounds, and
great sandy Deserts and Forests, mixed with Mountains, limit it on the West unto
the South Sea: these were its natural defense; but upon the Tartars often
invading them, and being at once Master of 33 important Towns, and fearing lest
they should be quite subdued, concluded a Peace with the Tartars, agreeing to
pay them 2000 Picos of Silver for the defraying the charges of their Army, and
they to return home and render up the 33 Towns to the Chinoises. This Peace
continued a good while; but they fearing the incursion of the Tartars again,
the King at a general Council with his Peers, for their further peace and
safety did agree to build a Wall about their Kingdom, or rather Empire, which
might serve for a Bulwark against all Invaders, in pursuance whereof there was
raised 10000 Picos of Silver, which at 1500 Ducdts, each Pico amounts to 15
Millions of Gold; and entertained 25000 Men to carry on this work, whereof 3000
were appointed as Overseers of the rest; and thus in the space of 27 years, A
Wall about China.
they quite finished the circumference of the Wall, which is 70 Jaos, in length
each Jao being 3 Leagues, which is 650 miles. This Wall is 30 foot high and 10
foot broad, being made with Lime, Sand, and Plaistered on the outside, by means
whereof it is so hard, that it is Cannon proof; instead of Bulwarks it has
Watch-Towers 2 Stages high, flancked with high Buttresses as thick as a
Hogshead, and exceeding strong; the expenses for the performing of this Work
was divided into 3 parts, of which the Commonalty paid one, the Priests and
Isles of Aynan another, and the King and Peers the other: and in this great
enclosure there are but 5 Entries, in which both the King of China and Tartary
keep Garrisons; in each of which the Chinois continually keep at great expenses
about 6000 Horse, and 1000 Foot, which for the most part are all Strangers of
different Nations bordering upon this Empire, which are kept for defense
thereof, when occasion shall serve; in all this length of Wall there is 320
Companies, each of them containing 500 Soldiers, which in all are 160000,
besides Officers, etc. which will make up the number 200000, and are all
maintained at the Kings charge; but most of these are Malefactors, which does
much lessen the pay, they working for nothing. But for all this strong Wall,
and their great care in keeping it, the Tartars of late have almost overrun
all China. Besides its extent, the great number of its people, and the Forces
of this Kingdom, the Soil is generally exceeding rich and fertile, and abounding
in all things; and so divided by Rivers and Navigable Channels, that some have
affirmed that there are as many River-boats in China, as in all the World
besides.

Its Fertility and Fruits.
They have all sorts of Grains and Fruits, except the Olive and the Almond,
instead of which they have many others not found elsewhere; and moreover their
Grains, Fruits, as also their Plants and Herbs; are far beyond ours in
excellency and goodness, and their Flowers more beautiful and various than
ours. This Country produces all sorts of living Creatures, as Beasts and Fowl,
both tame and wild; and so excellent, that the flesh of their Camels, Mules,
Asses, Dogs, etc. are sweet, and good to eat; all Provision is here found so
plentiful, that a fat Cow is not worth above 10 Shillings. a Buffter a Crown, a
Hog 2 Shillings; all sorts of Fowl they sell by the pound, the common rate
after their Feathers are off, being not above 2 Pence, and Fish they have in
such great plenty, as well in their Rivers as in the Sea, that they are not
worth the selling. The like may be said of their Grains and Fruits, which are
found in as great abundance; they have also as great plenty in diverse rich
Commodities, Its Commodities.
as in excellent Sugar, Wax, Honey, all sorts of Spices, several Drugs, Rice,
Wool, Wines; great quantities of Silk and Cotton, of which they make a great
number of different Manufactures. They have all sorts of Metals, but their Gold
and Silver is of a lower alloy than ours; and therefore it is that they so much
esteem English Gold, and Pristols and Rials of Spain: they have much Rhubarb
and Amber, quantity of Musk Civet, which would be the best in the World, if
they did not falsify it: their Capphire is not near so good as that of Borneo,
and their Pearls are all Barroques. They have much Saltpeter, with which they
make (besides Gunpowder) a thousand divices and artificial Fires. They have so
great plenty of Salt, that the Custom only in the Town of Canter, (as Mr. Lewis
Roberts reports) does bring in to the King 180 thousand Ducats yearly.

They Chinoises very ingenious
They have abundance of very fine Inventions, of which some are common with us,
but which they had before us; as the disposition of their Poasts, their Paper
which they make of the bark of Bambus or Canes, but so thin, that it will bear
Ink on both sides. In their writing they make use of Pencils, and not Pens,
which by reason of the smoothing of the Paper, they cut their Characters
exceeding neat, their writing consists only of Characters, Their way of
writing.
which make so-ma^^^ Syllables, and the Syllables so many different names,
whose signfications are various; of these Monosyllables they have near 60 to
80000, they write from top to bottom, advancing their lines from the left hand
to the right, and almost all their knowledge consists only in reading well. In
their Printing, they are so expert, that they can take away, augment, or change
as much or as little as they please in a moment. Their Artillery which they
dismout by pieces, and their Chariots which they make run with a Sail, etc.
Their Manufactures of Silk, which they say they have had 3 or 4000 years. They
make use of Tables and Seats when they eat, and of Beds when they repose, which
their Neighbors do not. Their Highways are straight, paved, and cut sometimes
out of the Mountains. They have Salt which they extract from the Seawater and
from Mines. They make and subtract their Sugar, Honey and Wax, from diverse
things, to wit, from Bees, from the fruit of certain Trees, and from certain
little Worms they keep in those Trees; and this sorts is the best, the whitest,
and its Candle burns the clearest of all.

Those things which they have most particularly, are their Drinks, which they
make with the leaves of certain Shrubs; a Gumm, and an excellent Varnish, which
they get from the Barks of Trees. Also their Porcelain, which they make of
Earth, in the Province of Quiamsi, of which they make excellent Cups, Dishes,
etc. far exceeding Glass-Metal.

Their shape and stature.
The Chinoisses are for the most part well shaped, of a good Stature; they have
commonly broad faces, flat noses, little eyes; they never cut the hair of their
heads, but on the contrary they wear little or no Beards, and as to their
complexion they differ according to the Climat under which they abide, as those
in the Province of Pequin lying in the most Northern part of China, are of a
fair complexion like the English, when as those toward the South, as in the
Province of Canton, etc. are like the Moors of Barbary; their Women are
handsome, yet make use of Paint; they seldom are seen abroad.

Their habit.
They wear their Garments very long, with long loose sleeves; those of the
Northern Provinces make use of Furs, and those of the Southern wear Silk; but
persons of quality are richly habited and adorned with many Pearls and Precious
Stones. They are great lovers of Women, as also of their bellies, commonly
eating thrice a day, their diet being good and cleanly dressed, and they as neat
in eating it, making use of Knifes and Forks.

They are addicted to Arts and Sciences.
They are very ingenious, and much more industrious and Politic then their
Neighbors, having the use and understanding of Arts and Sciences, both liberal
and Mechanical, as Philosophy, Physic, Astronomy concerning the Heavens and
Stars, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, etc. in the which they have abundance
of vain fancies. Also they are expert in Music and making of Musical
Instruments, Navigation, Architecture, Painting, Sculpture, making of Clocks,
casting of Metals in Images, Medals or the like; these with several other
inventions too tedious to name, they had the benefit of before us; yet are they
not in that perfection as they are with us. And as for Arms, they have their
courage so low, Not good Soldiers.
that both the Soldiers and the Commanders submit themselves to the whip, when
they have been wanting in their duty; so that it was said that when the Tartars
affaulted them, it sufficed them only to have showed them the whip, to have put
them to slight, as the Scythians their predeceisors once served their slaves,
who during their long absence had married their Mistresses. It is likewise
reported that the China Horses could not suffer the weighing of the Tartarian
Coursers; and the Chinois Cavaliers being of the same humor, they were more
likely to run than fight.

Moreover the Chinois are very ceremonious, courteous, and great complementers,
for which they have several Printed Books which they teach their children, not
passing by any one, that they know, without kind salutations; and if they
happen to espy any friend which comes out of the Country, besides their kind
greeting, his first question will be to ask him whether he has dined or
supped; which if he has not, he will carry him to a Tavern and give him a
treatment of Flesh, Foul and Fish; and if he has dined, a collation of Fruits
and Conserves.

They are also very costly in their Feasts and Entertainments, as in variety of
Meats, Fruits, Preserves, to which may be added other delights; as Music,
Singing, Dancing, Plays, and other pastimes. And for persons of quality they
observe more state, some Feasts lasting about 15 or 20 days.

They have several days which they make great account of in Feastings and
merriments, but above all others, their new years day, which is in March, where
also their Priests are present at their rejoycings, adding to the solemnity of
the day Sacrifices which they make to their Gods.

In their Marriages they also very expensive in their Feasts; for the
Bridegroom receives no other Portion from her friends, then what they bestow in
their entertainments; but on the contrary, he gives her a Portion, which the
gives to her friends in thankfulness for their care in her education.

Their Religion and belief.
The Chinois may be held as Pagans and Idolaters, not knowing the true Religion,
but worshipping Idols; they invoke the Devil, they hold the immortality of the
Soul, and after this life it goes to eternal bliss, or torment; they also hold
a kind of Purgatory, and that their friends and relations upon their prayers
and supplications, may have some ease, for which purpose they have a day set
apart for the performing of this ceremony. They have four orders of Religious
men; they observe all one fashion, but are distinguished by their color; they
all shave their beards and heads, they make use of Beads, and say their Matins,
etc. as the European Monks do. Mandelsloe says that they are much addicted to
incantations and charms, not doing any thing of concernment, without they have
first consulted it by their charms; and if they prove not according to their
desire, they will rail and abuse their. Gods with scurrilous language, fling
them down, beat them, whip them, and tread upon them; but when their choler is
assuaged, they will cogg with them, give them good words, and pretend sorrow;
and if the charm favor them, then they offer to them Geese, Ducks, boiled
Rice, etc. These charms are commonly two small pieces of wood, one side being
flat, and the other being hallow, which they, fling upon the ground; and if it
happen that the round side of both, or of one is downwards, they take it for an
ill omen; if uppermost, for good. They believe that all things visible and
invisible were created by Heaven, who by a Vicegerent governs the Universe,
another who governs all Sublunary things; they also add three principal
Ministers; one looks to the production of Fruits, and the generation of Men and
Animals, another governs the Air, and causes Rain, etc. and the other
governs the Waters and Sea.

Mandelsloe says also, Their funeral Ceremonies.
that at their Funerals they have several ceremonies; as soon as any person is
deceased, they wash his body, put on his best Clothes, and set him in a Chair,
where his Wife, Children, and other Relations kneeling down about him, take
their leave of him, which done, they put him into the Coffin, set it upon a
Table, covering him with a Winding Sheet, which reaches to the ground, on which
they draw the Picture of the deceased, where they leave him 15 days, during,
which time in some other Room they set on a Table Wine, Fruit and Lights, for
the Priest who watches; after which time, they carry the Corpse to the Burial
place, his Relations commonly mourning for a year.

The King governs by his own Will.
The Government of the Kingdom or Empire of China, is wholly at the power of the
King, either to change, take away, or augment Laws, when and as often as he
pleases; yet does he not execute any rigorous Laws upon them scarce acting or
imposing any thing upon his Subjects, without the Advice of his Council of
State; besides this Council of State, he appoints others, as well for the
Administration of Justice, as for the oversight of other affairs in the
Kingdom; but they neither inflict any punishment to Criminals, or determine any
thing of themselves, but make their report to the King, who decides the same.

They are very circumspect how they condemn any person, not passing their
sentence, till the offense is found so clear and evident, that the offender is
not able to justify himself, they use fair means first for the finding out of
the truth; and if that will not do, they then inflict several tortures upon
them; their executions are various and more cruel according to the offense
committed; some being hanged, some they impale, some they burn; their greatest
punishment is inflicted on thieves, which they much abhor. Debtors they
imprison; for which purpose there being so many, there is in every great City
several Prisons, in which they are strictly kept and looked unto; by reason of
which that their lives may not be burdensome unto them, they have in their
Prisons, Gardens, Courts, Walks, Fish Ponds, Drinking-houses and Shops, which
furnish the Prisoners with such things as they have occasion for.

Kings of China hereditary.
The Dignity of the Crown of China is hereditary, falling to the eldest Son of
the King after his decease; the King they highly reverence, calling him the Son
of Heaven, the Son of God, or the like, not that they think him so, but being
the chiefest of men, they esteem him dear to the Gods, and as a gift of Heaven.

The Chinois have many Books and descriptions of their Kingdom: observing
exactly all that their Provinces particularly possess: what is the extent,
quality, and force of each, how many Cities they have, how many Officers, how
many men which study, how many which bear Arms, who pay Tribute, and a
Thousand particularities; of which however writers have recounted to us but few
things, scarce can we gather the Names of the sixteen Provinces, and of some
Cities and Rivers; these Names being so diverse in several Authors, that it is
a difficulty to reconcile them; we will say something of them giving them those
names which seem to us best received.

The division of China into Provinces.
CHINA is divided into two principal parts, Northern, and Southern: there are
six Provinces in the Northern part, and ten in the Southern: The River
Jamchucquian traverses these; and the River Caramoran those. Of the six
Northern parts, three are washed by the Sea, as Leaoton, Pequin and Scianton,
and of these three, the two first touch the great Wall or Mountain; the three
other Provinces are on the firm Land; as Sciansi, Sciensi, and Honan, likewise
of these three, the two first touch the great Wall; amongst the ten Southern
ones, there are six on the Sea; three toward the East, as Nanquin, Checquian,
or Aucheo and Fuquien; and three toward the South, as Canton, Quancy, and
Yunnan; the other four Provinces are up in the Land, and are called Chiamsi,
Huquan, Suchuen, and Quicheu. And of these Provinces in order.

Province of Leaoton described.
The Province of LEAOTON is almost quite separated from the rest of China: Its
chief City bears the same name; this City, as also most of the Cities in China,
is well built, and of one form, being square, and with good Walls made of
Brick, and plaistered over with Porcelain, which renders it exceeding hard and
strong; they are commonly broad, and having the benefit of several Towers, as
well for beauty as defense. Its Soil amongst other things produces the Root
Ginsen, which preserves the well in health and strength; strengthens and
restores health to the sick; they sell it commonly at double its weight of
Silver. Its Inhabitants are less civilized then the rest of China, but more
robustious and proper for War. Its other places of most note are Richeo, and
Chincheo, and both seated on the Sea.

Province of Pequin, and its chief places.
The Province of PEQVIN, though of great fertility, yet by reason of its
popu^^usness, occasioned by the residence of the Kings of China in its
principal City lo Xunthienfu by us called Pequin, makes it that it cannot
furnish Mayz, Wheat, Rice, and other Provisions enough for its Inhabitants and
resort of People; which defect is supplied from the adjacent Provinces. The
City of Xunthienfu or Pequin is of a vast bigness, containing within its Walls
(made of Freestone, and strongly fortified with Bulwarks) which are in
circumference near 30 Leagues, about 3300 Pagodes or Temples, wherein are
continually sacrificed a great number of Wild-Beasts and Birds: These Pagodes,
especially those of the Order of the Menegrepos, Conquinys and Talagrepos, who
are the Priests of the 4 Sects of Xaca, Amida, Gizan and Canon, are sumptuous
Structures. To the Wall which encompasseth this City, for the convenience of
its Inhabitants are 360 Gates, to each of which is joined a small Fort where a
Guard is continually kept, as also a Register, to take the names of all Persons
that pass thereat. The Streets are long, broad, and well composed, and its
houses fair and lofty; each of the chief Streets having its Captain and other
Officers, who are to look after the same, which every night are shut up by
Gates. Here are about 120 Aquaeducts or Canals, which traverse the City, upon
which are near 1800 fair Bridges sustained on Arches. Without the City in a
tract of 7 Leagues long and 3 broad, are about 80000 Tombs of the Mandarins,
which are small Chapels, richly beautified, nigh unto which are about 500 great
Palaces, which they call the Houses of the Sun, which are inhabited by those
that can no longer bear Arms for the Emperor of China; either through age,
sickness or other infirmities. Also here are about 1300 stately Houses
inhabited by Religious Men and Women. There are several Streets of a great
length, only possessed by People of one profession, as one by near 14000
Taverns; another by innumerable many Courtizans, and another by about 24000
Oarmen, which belong to the Emperors Panourers. Here are also 32 great
Colleges for those that study the Laws. Likewise there are abundance of large
Houses, with spacious enclosures of Gardens, Woods, provided of Game, near this
City, which said Houses or rather Inns, serve only to give entertainment to
people of all degrees, by seeing of Plays, Combats, Bulbaitings, etc. and the
Palace Royal of the Emperor, which is in this City for its largeness, fairness
and richness, is not inferior to any in the East; this City being his residence
for the Northern Provinces, as Nanquin is for the Southern.

And thus much for the City of Pequin; its other chief places are, first,
Tianchevoy; secondly, Himpin; and thirdly, Cichio, seated on a fair River about
70 Miles from the Sea.

The Province of Scianton, its fertility, etc.
The Province of SCIANTON, is between that of Pequin and Nanquin; it is well
watered with Rivers, which makes it very fertile, abounding in so great plenty
of al sorts of Flesh, Fowl, Fish, Grains, Fruits, etc. that its Inhabitants,
which are esteemed about seven Millions of Persons, cannot devour the increase
but are forced to furnish other Provinces; they have also great store of Silk,
and other rich Commodities. It has several great Cities, the chief of which
are, 1 Xanton, not far from the Sea; 2 Pamnihu, 3 Cincoyan, and 4 Linceu,
seated in an Isle so called: Besides which, here are found in this Sea, 9 other
Isles, most of which do belong to this Province, and are well known, affording
many of the China Commodities.

The Province of Sciansi, its fertility and chief places.
The Province of SCIANSI, which Purchase calls Cansas, has many Mountains, by
reason of which it is not so fertile, as that of Pequin; neither is it so
large, so populous, nor so pleasant; yet with the industry of the Inhabitants,
it produces Corn, Rice and Mayz; but in recompense it breeds great quantity of
Cattle, and has so many Vines, that it furnishes the whole Kingdom with
Pickled Grapes and Raisins. It has likewise two sorts of Mines, the one of
Brimstone, the other of Stones which burn, and may be called Coals. In the
Sulphur Mines they make little holes, to draw out heat enough to boil any thing
they need. The Mines of Coals are inexhaustible, increasing from time to time:
and these Coals well prepared, will keep fire day and night without being
touched.

In this Province are about 90 Cities and great Towns, six of which are of
considerable note; as, 1 Sciansi, 2 Taven, 3 Lugan, 4 Talong, 5 Pingans, 6
Suchio; all which are well built and very populous.

The Province of Sciensi described.
The Province of SCIENSI or XEMSI, which Purchase calls Soyohin, Mendoza, Sinsay,
is the most Westward of all the Six Northern Provinces, and the greatest of all
the 16 Provinces; Siganfu is esteemed its chief City; the great Mountain and
Wall does bound it from the Tartars; the Soil is dry, yet yields good store of
Wheat, Mayz and Barley, but little Rice; it feeds much Cattle, and the Sheep
are sheared thrice a year, in Spring, Summer and Autumn; their first shearing
is the best: It yields Musk, which is the Navel of a Beast, of the bigness of a
Hind. They have Gold, which they gather amongst the Sand of the Rivers; for
the Mines, though it has some, yet they are not open. It produces diverse
Perfumes and Rhubarb, which they carry into Persia, and other places: And it is
through this Province, that the Caravans come from the West.

This Province is very populous, and is well stored with great Towns and
Cities, having 8 great Cities, as, 1 Siganfu, its Metropolis, before spoken of,
2 Jengun, 3 Pingleang, 4 Pichin, 5 Lynyao; with a great many of less note.

The Province of Honan, and its chief places
The Province of HONAN, which Purchase calls Oyman, is very fertile, and the
Climate very temperate; the freest from Mountains, and the farthest from the
Sea. It produces the best Fruits in the World, as well those known to us in
Europe, as others; and that in so great quantity, that they are scarce valued.
The River of Caramoran after having divided the Provinces of Sciansi, and
Sciensi takes its course through the middle of Honan, and discharges it self
into the Sea, by the Province of Nanquin. It comprehends 7 great Cities, the
chief of which bears the name of the Province; its other chief places are, 1
Tem^chio, 2 Caifung, 3 Nanyang, and 4 Chinchio, besides about One hundred less
ones, all well inhabited. Hitherto we have surveyed the six Northern Provinces
of China; we come now to the 10 more to the South.

The Province of Nanquin its Cities.
The Province of NANQVIN is the fairest and richest, and its Inhabitants the
most civilized of all the Kingdom; and the Kings of China did always make
their residence at Nanquin, till of late they have made it at Pequin. It
comprehends 14 great and fair Cities, viz. 1 Vmthienfu or Nanquin, which is the
Metropolis of the Province, 2 Chicheu, 3 Lucheu, 4 Funiam, and 5 Zanuchi, all
which are very populous; some of which have about 200000 people, which only
work in making of Calicoes: All which are commodiously seated on arms of the
Sea, which make several Isles. And beside these Cities, there are about 100
small ones of less note: I shall only speak something of Nanquin.

The City of Nanquin described.
Vmthienfu or Nanquin, as we call it, yet ceases not to be the greatest,
fairest and richest City of the whole Kingdom, next to Pequin. The form and
Symmetry of its Buildings in its Palace, in its Temples, in its Gates, in its
Towers, and in its Bridges, as likewise in its public and particular Houses,
and their Ornaments, are wonderful. It is situate upon the River of Batampina,
and upon an indifferent high Hill; so that it commands all the Plains there
adjacent. The circumference is 8 Leagues, 3 long, and 1 broad, all encompassed
with a strong Wall of hewed Stone; about which there are 130 Gates, at each of
which there is kept a Porter with two Halberdiers, whose Office is to take the
names of every one that passes every day in and out; and besides the strong
Wall, there are for further defense 12 Forts or Cittadels. In this City there
are accounted above 800000 Houses, besides 80000 Mandarins Houses, 60 great
Market places, 130 Butchers Shambles, each containing about 80 Shops, 8000
Streets, whereof 600 are fairer and larger then the rest; all which are broad,
straight and well disposed, and are compassed about with Ballisters of Copper.
The Houses are about two stories high, and built of Wood, except those of the
Mandarins, which are composed of Hewed Stone, and encompassed with Walls and
Ditches, over which they have Stone Bridges, with rich Gates and Arches. The
Houses or rather Palaces of the Chaems, Auchacys, Aytans, Tutons, and Chumbims,
which are Governors of the Kingdoms or Provinces of the Empire of China, under
the Emperor, are stately Structures of about 6 or 7 stories high, and richly
adorned with Gold, in which are kept their Magazins for Arms, Ammunition; as
also their Treasuries, their Wardrops, and their Fine Porcelain, which by them
is so highly esteemed. Here are about 2300 Pagodes, a thousand of which were
Monasteries for Religious Persons, which are exceeding rich. Here are also
about thirty great Prisons which will contain about two or three thousand
Prisoners a-piece: Also a great Hospital for the relief of the Poor. At the
entrace of every principal Street, for the security of the Inhabitants, there
are Arches and Gates which are kept shut every hight; and in most of the chief
Streets are pleasant Fountains.

In this City there is accounted about ten thousand Trades for the working of
Silks, which from thence are sent all over the Kingdom; which at every New and
Full Moon, amongst diverse other Commodities, are vended at Fairs in several
places of the City. Its Traffic and Commerce bring thither so great a
multitude of People, that its Streets are scarce able to be passed for the
throng. Its Commodities and Manufactures are in so great esteem, that they
utter better then others; and all the neighboring Countries make a great
number of Manufactures.

The Revenue which the King receives from this Province is exceeding vast, the
Inhabitants paying into his Exchequer Sixty Millions of Crowns yearly; besides
great Excises upon all Commodities, if Mandelsloe may be believed; and if he
receives so much out of one Province, judge what a vast Revenue he has from
all the Provinces, many of which are no ways inferior to this.

The Province of Chequian.
The Province of CHEQVIAN which Purchase calls Essiram, passes likewise for one
of the best Provinces of China. The pleasant Rivers which run through it, and
the many good Ports, with its Isles it has on the Coast, does facilitate the
utterance of its Merchandises; and particularly, both Raw Silk, and prepared in
Thread, and in Stuffs, which it distributes to the other Provinces of China, and
throughout all the World; the other Provinces of China, not having enough for
their use. Of this Silk there is one sort which is reserved to be employed in
diverse works mixed with Gold, with great art and curiosity, and those are only
for the Kings Palace. This Province has about seventy Cities, Its chief places
of which six are of considerable note, as 1 Quinsay, now called Hamceu, once
the Metropolis of China; 2 Liampo, a fair City seated on the Sea; 3 Aucheo also
commodiously seated on the Sea; 4 Scanutanu an Inland City, 5 Chequian also an
Inland City, but fair, well built, and frequented; and 6 Succu, seated on the
Sea, and about 25 Leagues from the City of Nanquin.

All which are fair, strong, well built, and very populous Cities, but not
comparable to Quinsay, of which a word or two.

The City of Quinsay described.
Quinsay or Hamceu, as I said before, was once the Metropolis of China, being
(if we may give credit to Authors,) 100 miles in circuit, and having in the
midst thereof, a Lake of about 30 miles in compass, in which are two fair
Islands, and in them two stately Palaces adorned with all necessaries, either
for Majesty or Convenience; the City having variety of stately Palaces. Its
Houses as well private as public, are fair and well built, having abundance of
Pagodes, the Streets large, well ordered and paved with Freestone. To this
City are said to belong about 10000 Sail of great and small Vessels, which are
inhabited by People, who there negotiate their affairs, and remove from one
place and City to another, as their occasions serve them. There are said to be
in this City about 15000 Priests, and besides the vast number of Inhabitants,
there are about 60000 persons which are employed in working of Silk. But this
City, since Pequin and Fanquin are become the Residence of the King and Court,
has much-lost its former splendour.

This Province is observed to have a great number of Temples magnificently
built, and the Lake Sibu bordered with stately Palaces, and encompassed with
Hills covered with Trees and rare Plants. A place so pleasant and delightful,
that the greatest and richest of the Province pass here their time, and expend
their goods.

There are also in this Province whole Forests of Mulberry-trees, by reason of
which they have the greatest product of Silk, of any Province in China; which
they furnish several Kindoms with, as well in Europe, as in Asia.

Along the Coast of this Province are seated several Isles, some of which are
very considerable, as Mochosa and Sunkiam, which is about 25 Leagues broad, and
as many long; high to the shore of which ly several others, but of a lesser
bigness. Its other Isles, are 1. Suan. 2. Olepio, 3. Avarella, and 4 the Isles
of Chaposi, which are a body of several small Isles.

The Province of Fuquien. Its Commodities and chief places.
The Province of FVQVIEN is not so fertile as Chequin and Canton, between which
it is situated. Its Inhabitants endeavor to repair that default by their Trade
with Strangers, and principally with Japan, the Philippines, Fermosa or Fair
Island, which is directly opposite to their Coast. The Earth produces Gold,
Iron, Steel, Sugar, Calamba, Spices, Drugs, Quicksilver, Precious Stones,
Fruits, Grains and Cattle; also Silk and Cotton, of which they make diverse
Manufactures, as also they make all sorts of Paper.

There are in this Province several Cities of note, but its chief are 1 Fochen,
seated on a fair River not above 17 Leagues from the Sea; 2 Chincheo, also
commodiously seated on a fair River or Arm of the Rea, from which it is distant
about 10 Leagues, 3 Yenping, 4 Chining, and 5 Hinghoa.

The Inhabitants of Fermosa are almost all Savages, the Spaniards have built
one Fortress on the East side, and the Hollanders another on the West side and
toward the Continent, which they call Zealand. The Air is temperate, and
healthful, which makes the Province become very populous; and along the Coast
are seated several Isles, as Lanquin, Baboxin, etc.

The Province of Canton, its Fertility, commodities, etc.
The Province of CANTON or QVANTVNG, though one of the least Provinces of China
in extent, yet by the reason of the goodness of its Soil, and the convenience
of its situation, being the first that presents its self to those of Europe,
Africa and Asia, which come to China, it abounds in Wheat, Rice, and other
Grains, Sugar, Gold, Precions Stones, Pearis, Steel, Quicksilver, Silk,
Saltpeter, Calamback-wood and Copper, Iron and Tin, of which they make curious
Vessels, which they varnish with Charam, and which are brought to Europe. They
make also the Barrels of their Guns in that nature, that though they are never
so much laden, yet they do not break.

Its Inhabitants:
The Inhabitants are very civil, industrious and ingenious, but they are better
in imitation then invention; being in the first so great masters, that there is
no rarity or manufacture whatsoever that comes to their sight, but they will
exactly pattern as well as the Europeans; and in all manner of Goldsmiths work
they far exceed them.

Three things noted in this Province.
In this Province are observed to be three things which are not in the other
Provinces, that is, Men which spit Blood continually; Mountains without Snow;
and Trees always green.

Its chief places
In this Province are about 80 Cities both small and great, the chief whereof
are 1 Quangchen or Canton, under which I shall include the Trade of China, as
being the chiefest place of Traffic. It is well built, of great Traffic,
rich, and very populous; to which the Portugals have a great Trade, being
commodiously seated on an Arm of the Sea.

The Isle and City of Amacao and its Trade.
2. The Island and City of AMACAO is seated opposite to the City of Canton, on
the North side of a Bay, which is at the mouth of the great River of Canton,
which issues out of the Lake of Quancy. This place is inhabited by the
Portugals, intermixed with the natural Chinois; their particular Trade is with
the City of Canton, which may be counted the Staple of all the China
Commodities, whether they are permitted to come twice a year; at which time
there are Fairs kept for the vending of their Commodities, which they carry to
Malacta, Gone, and so into several parts of Europe. But though they are admitted
the liberty of Trade, yet are they denied the freedom of lying in the City at
nights, neither to enter the Walls without setting down their names in Books,
which are kept by persons at each Gate for the same purpose, which when they
depart at night, they cross out.

Its other chief places are 1 Xauquin, a Maritime City, 2 Luicheu, also seated
on the Sea, very commodious for Traffic, and opposite to the Isle of Aynan,
from which it is distant about 5 Leagues, 3 Lampaca, also seated upon the Sea,
and 4 Nanhium seated far within Land, and among the Mountains which parts this
Province from Chiamsi.

The Isle of Aynan, and its commodities.
The Isle of AYNAN is also comprehended under this Province, and is the greatest
of all the Islands that belong to China. It is distant from Amacao, on the
South 50 or 60 Leagues; it is almost as long as broad, having 50 Leagues from
South to North, where it almost joins upon the Southern Coast of China, and on
the other side regards Cochinchina. It abounds in Grains, Fruits, Tame and Wild
Beasts: The Sea has Pearls, Lignum Aquilae and Calamba. Their Craw-fish taken
out of the Water die, and grow hard like a Stone; which being reduced to
Powder, serves for a remedy against many diseases. The Earth has Mines of Gold
and Silver, for which the Inhabitants care little. In the midst of the Island,
the People are likewise half Savages: The chief City is Kincenfen, seated on
the Seashore, and regarding the Province of Canton.

The Province of Quancy, and its chief Cities.
The Province of QVANCY, which Purchase calls Guansa, enjoys the same temperament
with Canton, yields the same Commodities, and with the same plenty, but is not
so much frequented by Mexchants, nor has scarce any confluence of Strangers;
the reason is, because its Rivers loose and discharge themselves all in the
Province, and at the City of Canton, which forces them to pass through the
hands of those of Canton, to utter their Merchandises, and receive those of
others. In this Province there are Ten large Cities, of which Quancy is chief,
all well built and very populous, besides about one hundred small ones.

The Province of Zunnan, and its chief places.
The Province of ZVNNAN, which Purchase calls Vanam, is the last on the South
Coast, where it is washed by the Gulf of Cochinchina, and on the West, where it
touches on the Kingdom of Tunquin, and on diverse People beyond those Mountains
which enclose the West of China. The Women have here the liverty to go in
public to buy and sell, which those of other parts of China do not. It has
Mines which yield a kind of Amber redder and less pure then ours; but which
has some particular virtue against Fluxes. Besides this, it transports few
Merchandises into other places. This Province has likewise good store of small
and great Cities, the chief of which bears the name of the Province, and Hilan,
seated on a Lake so called, which is inform of a Crescent.

The Province of Chiamsi, its Trade and chief places.
The Province of CHIAMSI, which Purchase calls Lansay, is enclosed with
Mountains, which have their passages open to the Neighboring Provinces, and
particularly on the Coast of Canton. On the Mountain of Muilin there is a great
concourse for the carriages of Merchandises, which are transported from Canton
to Nanquin, which is done by mounting the River of Canton, unto the foot of the
Mountain: From whence the carriages being taken out of the Vessels, are laden,
and born upon Men's backs to the other side of the Mountain, where there is
found another navigable River, which crosses the Province Kiamsi, till it falls
into the famous Jamchuquiam, which leads to Nanquin, and the Sea.

This Province is so peopled, that a part of its Inhabitants are constrained to
spread themselves through all other Provinces of China, to seek their fortune.
It is in one of the Cities of this Province that they make Porcelain; the Water
here being fit to give it perfection: The Earth is fetched from other places,
beaten and fashioned at the same time; the tincture they most commonly apply,
is Azure, some lay on Vermilion, others Yellow. In this Province are 12 great
Cities, besides about sixty small ones, its chief City being called Nanciam,
seated on a Lake, as is Quianhanfu, and others. Its other chief places are, 1
Kienchan, 2 Linbiang, 3 Juencheu, 4 Nangam.

The Province of Huquam, and its Commodities.
The Province of HVQVAM is so abundant in Rice, that it is able to furnish a
good part of China: It is likewise rich in Oils and Fish. The Jamchuquian, and
many other Rivers and Lakes cross it on all sides, and carry its Commodities
toward Nanquin, and to Quincheu. It is very populous, containing 15 great
Cities, and about 100 small ones, the chief of which are, 1 Chingiang, 2
Huchang, 3 Suchang, 4 Yocheu, etc.

The Povince of Suchuen described.
The Province of SVCHVEN, which Mendoza calls Susuan; Purchase, Soin, is one of
the lesser Provinces of the Kingdom; it is high situated, and pours down its
Rivers into the Neighboring Provinces. Here is found good store of yellow
Amber, and excellent Rhubarb. Its chief Cities are in number 8 together with
about 120 lesser ones; all which are exceeding populous, the chief bearing the
name of the Province.

The Province of Quicheu, and its chief places.
The last of the Provinces I have to treat of is QVICHEV, or likewise CVTCHEV,
according to Purchase. It borders on the People Timocoves, Gueyes, the Kingdom
of Ciocangue, and the People called Lays: Here is that famous Lake C^ncui-Hai,
from whence comes diverse Rivers which water China. They make here quantity of
Arms of all sorts, to serve against those People which border upon them which
once belonged to China; but which now, for the most part, are Enemies to it.
This Province is Hilly and unever, which makes it not very fertile in Corn,
Fruits, etc. but it has abundance of Quicksilver; and also it breeds the best
Horses of any Province in all China. Cities in this Province are very few,
there being not above 15, both small and great; the chief of which are, 1.
Quicheo, seated on the River Yanchuquian^ 2. Rueyang. 3. Hianchoau. 4. Liping.
5. Cipan. etc.

All these Provinces, or rather all these Kingdoms of China, are governed by
diverse Magistrates, which those of Europe call in general Mandarins. These are
persons that have Patents, whom the King or chief Officer of State does choose,
after knowledge of their capacity and honesty; the degrees given to Students,
the general and particular Governments, the charges of the Militia, the receipt
of, and management of Revenues, the building and repairing of Public
Buildings, the Civil and Criminal Justice, are in their hands. And there are
Appeals from one to the other, according to the order and nature of Affairs.
The Council of Estate always resides near the person of the King, and has a
general eye over the Kingdom.

But it shall suffice; what we have said of China let us finish by saying, That
we have described it as it was before the Tartars made an irruption in ^618.
These Tartars kept it wholly for some years, since which the Chinois have
repulsed them, and have established their former estate, receiving likewife
Christianity with hopes of great fruits and progress; but of late they have
broke into China again, and have committed great Spoils.

The Isles about China.
Besides the Isles already spoken of, here are about the Coast of China several
others, as the Isle of Corey in the Gulf of Nanquin, of good account, and well
frequented, affording many of the China Commodities. It is of a large extent,
being 100 Leagues in length, and about 50 in breadth. Its chief places are,
Tauxem, seated on the Northern part of the Isle, regarding the Province of
Leaoton; from which it is parted by a Straight or Gulf not above two Leagues
broad. 2. Corey, seated on the Gulf of Nanquin, Southernly. 3. Tasoran, also
seated on the Sea Eastwards; and on the South of this Isle are seated a Body of
several Isles, called the Isles of Larrons. Likewise the Isles of Fuego,
Lequeio Grande, Les Roys Mages; the Isles of Pescheurs or Fishers; of Pa^an or
Formosa; of Tabaco Miguel, and Tabaco Xim^.

TARTARIA may be considered, as it is divided into the Parts of TARTARIA
DESERTA, Cumbalich, Glustins, Jerome, Risan, Frutach, Centaz, Risan, Divasi,
Caracus.
USBECK, or ZAGATHAY, with its Provinces or Parts of Usbeck, particularly so
called, Jarchan, Samarcand, Nesaph, Mogalachfu, Horn, Xibuar, Reven, Targama,
Teras, Sachi, Tanchit, Tersis, Sachania.
Sacae, Sachi, Istigias, Busdascha^, Rigul, Coman, Termend, Escalcand,
Sermegan, Asareft, Kax, Etaican, Nesaph.
Sogdlans, Bachars, Pogansa, Madrand^n, Carassat, Zahaipa, Corui, Chiargan,
Corfim, Bechet, Siminan, Cant, Chesolitis, Caracol.

TURQUESTAN, with its Kingdoms or Proviaces of Chialis, Chialis, Turfan,
Cuchia, Uga.
Chinchintalas, Camul, Aramul.
Cascar, Emil, Sark, Cassia, Taskent.
Thibet, Andegen, Raofa, Tamafi.
Cotam, Cotam, Pinegle, Cogricamri, Peim.
Ciartiam, Ciartiam, Lop, Sazechiam, Carazan, Vociam.

CATHAY, with its Kingdoms or Provinces of Tainfu, Cambalu, Achbaluch, Tinzu,
Xandu, Caidu, Gouza.
Tenduc, Tenduc, Zambir. Ciandu.
Egrigaja, Ciangli, Tudinfu, Serr^, Suidio, Mulon.
Tanguth, Sachion, Quiqui. Hoyam, Gauta.
Ergimul, Campion, Ergimul.
Serguth, -- Erzina. Belgian, -- Belgian.
True TARTARIA, with its Provinces or Hords of Mongul, -- Mongul. Molair, --
Caracoran. Tartar, -- Tartar. Bargu, -- Catacoran. Carli, -- Taingin. Naiman,
-- Naiman. Cavona, -- Cavona. Colmack, -- Colmack.


map of Tartary To the Right Worshipful Sr James Shaen of Shine in Surrey
Knight and Baronet This Mapp is humbly D. D. by R. Blome.

A MAPP of ye Kingdom of TARTARY. By Monsieur Sanson.


TARTARY.
Tartary, its extent.
TARTARY, or TARTARIA, is seated in the most Northern part of all Asia, and
extends it self from East to West, from the River Volga and Oby, which
separates it from Europe, unto the Straight of Jesso; which separates it from
America; and from South to North, from the Caspian Sea, the River Gehon, and
the Mountains of Courasus; and Vssonte, etc. which divides it from the more
Southernly part of Asia, unto the Northern Frozen or Scythian Ocean.

Its length and breadth.
It reaches in length from the 19th unto the 180th degree of Longitude, which is
the half of our Hemisphere; and in breadth, from the 35th or 40th unto the 70th
or 72th degree of Latitude, which is half the breadth of all Asia; So that it
may contain 1500 Leagues from West to East, and 7 or 800 from North to South.

Its position is almost entirely in the Temperate Zone; Its Position.
nevertheless its more Southern parts being in the midst of this Temperate
Zone, and the rest advancing to the Cold or Frozen; and its Southern parts
being almost all bounded with very high Mountains, which keeps off the heat of
the midday Sun, and renders it more cold toward the North; We may say, that
Tartary in general has its temperature much more cold than temperate.

Its Neighbors are the Moscovites, on the West; the Persians, Its Neighbors.
the Indians or the Mogolls and the Chinois, on the South; the rest is washed
by that Sea of which we have little knowledge; some place toward the East, the
Straight of Anian, which should separate it from America; others, the Straight
of Jesso, which divides it from the Land or Isle of Jesso, which is between
Asia and America, as we shall declare after Japan. Some esteeming the Northern
Ocean in one manner, and some in another.

Its Name, why so called.
The name of Tartaria is apparently taken from the River, Quarter, or Hord of
Tartar; from whence these People being issued, have overrun and made
themselves known in all parts of Asia. Others take it from the word Tatar or
Totar, which in the Syriack signifies Remnant or Forsaken, because they esteem
them the Remnant of the Jews, of which Ten Tribes were transported into Media
by Salmanzer. They must then add, that these Ten Tribes passed from Media into
Scythia, which is not observed by the Ancients. However it be, the Persians yet
call this Country Tartar, and its People Tatarons; the Chinois, Tagun.

The People which possess this Country differ something from one another, Its
Inhabitants.
as well in Personage as in Religion and Manners; but of the most part they are
of an indifferent Stature, ugly countenances, thick Lips, hollow Eyed, flat
Noses, broad Fated very strong, stout, valiant and good Warriers; very active,
vigilant, and exceeding quick of Foot; patient in all Afflictions; they are
very rude, barbarous and revengeful, not sparing their Enemies, whom in revenge
they eat, first letting out their Blood, which they keep, using it as Win^ at
their Feasts.

Their Habit is very mean, which is for the most part made of course stuff,
Their Habit^
which reaches but to their Knees; yet are they very proud, despising all other
Nations, and thinking their Cham to be the greatest Prince in the World; whom
they greatly fear and reverence, being no better, than his Slaves. They are
very nasty and sluttish, much given to drink of a treacherous and thievish
nature.

Religion.
In matters of Religion, they are generally Pagans and Mahumetans, which about
the year 1246. crept in amongst them, which since has spread it self over
their Country, and intermixing with Paganism; yet has it not so much prevailed
as to extinguish Christianity, which was first planted amongst the Scythians
(which were the Ancient people of Tartary) by the preaching of two of the
Apostles, St. Philip and St. Andrew, which of latter years has much lost it
self, and not only by the prevailing of the Nestorian Sect, but chiefly for
want of instructing the People in the true Orthodoxal points of Christian
Religion.

Diet.
Their Food is mean and very sluttishly dressed; yet use they entertainments, and
refuse nothing but Swines flesh, and eat all without Salt. They are much given
to Hawking, and other Sports; but not much to Arts or Literature: The Women are
much of the nature with the Men.

Their from of Government.
The Government (as Heylin observes) is Tyrannical, their great Cham or King
being Lord of all, in whose breast lies their Laws, taking the Estates and
Lives away of whom he pleases; whom they so much reverence, that they call him
the shadow of Spirits, and Son of the Immortal God, and esteem him the Monarch
of the whole World. In their execution of Justice they are very severe,
punishing every small offense with sudden death. His Revenue without doubt must
be very great; The Revenue of the Cham.
for besides the sole trade of Pearl-fishing, which upon pain of death none
dares to fish for, besides those employed by him; also all the Gold and Silver
that is either found in, or brought into the Kingdom, he does assume to
himself, as also the Tenth of all things that the Country does produce; and
also what else he thinks fit; as being (as I said before) Lord over them all.

Here the Men have the liberty of 2 or 3 Wives, which they never choose but out
of their own Tribe: and every Tribe has a Chief, who is one of the Nobility of
the Country, and carries for his Banner a Horses-Tail fastened to a Half-Pike,
and died of the color belonging to his Tribe.

Their Forces.
As concerning the Forces that the Great Cham is able to raise, they may be
supposed to be very great, by that which may appear by Tamerlanes Army, which
consisted of a 1200000 Horse and Foot; besides, if we consider what a disturber
he has been, and how he has enlarged his Territories of his Neighbors, as
the Chinois, the Moscovites, etc. we may judge him powerful; but as his power
is great on Land, it is as weak by Sea, scarce being Master of any Ships, and
as little does he regard them, though other Princes esteem them as a great
security to their Kingdom.

Tartary divided into parts.
I shall divide Tartary into five principal Parts; which are, Tartaria the
Desert, Vsbeck or Zagathay, Turquestan, Cathay, and the True Tartaria; the
first and last are the most Northern, barbarous, and unknown. The others more
Southerly, are better civilized and known, having abundance of fair Cities, and
driving a good Trade.

TARTARIA the Desert answers to the ancient Scythia intra Imaum; Vsbeck or
Zagathay to the ancient Bactriana and Sogdiana; both the one and the other new
Name retaining, in my opinion, something of the ancient; Sogdiana of Zagathay,
and Bactriana of Vsbeck: Turquestan to the ancient Scythia extra Imdum. Cathay
is the Serico Regia. As for the True Tartary it is unknown unto the Ancients,
or at least it holds the most Northern part of the one and the other Scythia.

Tartaria Deserta, its bounds.
Tartaria Deserta is bounded on the West with the Rivers Volga and Oby, which
divides it from Moscovy on the East, by Mount Imaus, which separates it from
the True Tartaria, and from Turquestan; on the North by the Septentrional
Ocean; on the South by the Caspian or Tabarestan Sea, by the River Chesell, and
by certain Mountains which join themselves with Imaus, and divide it from
Vsbeck or Zagathay. All the Country is inhabited by Peoples or Tribes, which
are Troops or Bands which they call Hordes, having very few Walled places,
whither they only retire themselves when forced; for they have no settled stay
or abode, Its People, and the manner of their abode.
but wandering perpetually, carrying and driving with them their Tents,
Chariots, Families, and all they possess, stopping only there were they find
the best food for their Cattle, to which, as also in Hunting and War, they most
addict themselves. They Till not the Earth, though it be good and fertile; and
hence it is that this is called Tartary the Defart. The chief places in this
part are; 1. Cumbalich, seated on a Lake. 2. Gerstina, seated between the two
other Lakes, which are conjoined together by a River. 3. Jerome, on a branch of
the River Oby. 4. Risan, seated on the River Jaick. 5. Frutach. 6. Centan. 7.
Caracus. 8. Organci, and 9. Davasi. The People that inhabit in this part, have
their rise from three several Originals, which are disposed of into many
several parts; as, 1. The Circassians, which are for the most part Christians,
and border upon the Euxine Sea. 2. The Samoyeds, who are altogether Idolaters,
inhabiting toward the Northern Ocean: and, 3. Tartars, which are Mahometans,
and seated betwixt both the other. And those again are subdivided into diverse
Tribes or Hordes; the chiefest of which are, 1. The Nagajan Tartars, The
Nagajan Tartars, etc.
which are held to be more fierce and cruel, and better Warriers than the other
Tartars, but void of all Arts; despising Money, or the use of Corn, accounting
Mares-milk and House-flesh their best diet, which they are not overcurious in
dressing, it sufficing if it is only heated, though with the Sun: and this
Horde paies yet some Tribute to the great Duke of Moscovy, to whom likewise
part of this Tartaria Desert a belongs. 2. The Thumenenses, who are also a
warlike People, and much addicted to Divinations and Sorceries. 3. The
Zavolhenses are very powerful. The Kirgessi are also very strong and warlike;
they are partly Gentiles, and partly Mahometans: They care not to bury their
Dead, because of their so after removing, thinking never to see them more, and
so leaving them hanging upon Trees. The Country is very fertile, if tilled,
being fit to produce several good Commodities, and is also very fit for
Traffic, having commodious Havens; and if they would addict themselves to it,
would soon gain a good Trade with several other Nations.

VSBECK, or ZAGATHAT, Usbeck, id bounds.
extends it self from the Caspian Sea unto Turquestan, and from Persia and
India unto Tartaria Deserta: possessing all that is upon the Rivers of Chesel,
and of Gehan or Albiamu.

Its People are the most civil and ingenious of all the Western Tartars, Its
people.
fierce in War, being strong and active, patient in labor, not much addicted
to vices, Thest they punish severely; they have a great trade with the
Persians, Their trade.
to whom they have sometimes been Subjects, sometimes Enemies, and sometimes in
good Intelligence; and with the Indians, where they have likewise something to
do; and with Cathay, where they utter their much prized Manna, bringing back
Silk, which they make into Manufactures, and sell in Moscovy.

This part of Tartary did contain several Provinces: 1. Zagathay, especially so
called. 2. Sacoe. 3. Sogdiana, with some other of less note, in all which are
not many considerable Cities, the most famous of which are S^narcand, which was
both the Cradle and Grave to Tamberlan the Great, from whom the Great Mogolls
boast themselves to be lineally descended, who enriched it with the fairest
Spoils of Asia, and adorned it with an Academy, yet in some repute among the
Mahometans: Also Bachara and Budaschan, and also Balick, according to some; but
which I esteem in Chorasan, which has diverse times been in the hands of the
Chams of Vsbeck. Badaschian is likewise on the Frontiers of Chorasan, Bochara
or Bachara, where lived Avicenna one of the most famous Philosophers and
Physicians of all the East. Its parts, chief places and fertility.
The Country is of a different Soil; that of Zagathay is indifferent fertile,
which is much augmented by the industry of the Inhabitants, who are likewise
held the most ingenious, being lovers of Arts, and well skilled in
Manufactures, by reason of which they have a good trade with Merchants, which
come from several places. Sacae is very barren, and ill manured, and full of
wild Deserts, Forests, and Uninhabited places, by reason of which the
Inhabitants remove their Herds of Cattle from place to place, where they can
find best food for them. Sogdian^ has very rich Pastures, and watered with
many good Rivers, which much conduces to its fertility; in which, as also in
Zagathay, are several Towns and Cities; as 1. Jarchan. 2. Sachi. 3. Istigiaes.
4. Busdaschan. 5. Bachara: and 6. Pogansa, which last is seated on the Sea.

Turquestan, its bounds and chief places.
TVRQVESTAN lies East from Vsbeck or Zagathay, West from Cathay, North from
India, and South from True Tartary. It is subdivided into some Kingdoms, of
which the best known are Castar, Cotam, Chialis, Ciartiam, Thibet,
Chinchintalis, etc. A part of their chief Cities being of the same name. Some
name Hiarchan instead of Cascar, and Turon or Turphan instead of Chialis, for
the chief Cities of the Kingdom. That of Cascar is the richest, most fertile,
and best cultivated of all: That of Ciartiam is esteemed the least, and all
sandy, having in recompense many Jaspars and Cassidoines; but that of Cascar
has likewise excellent Rhubarb, Its fertility and commodities, etc.
and in great quantity. Those of Cotam and Chialis have Corn, Wine, Flax, Hemp,
Cotton, etc. Thibet is more advanced toward the Mogolls of India, and the most
engaged in the Mountains of Imaus, Caucasus, and Vssontes. It has many wild
Beasts, Musk, and Cinnamon; and they make use of Coral instead of Money. The
Relations which have been given in 1624 and 1626, have made this Estate so
great and rich, that they would confound it with Cathay: but those of 1651 make
the Region very cold, and always covered with Snow; esteeming its King wholly
barbarous, and less powerful than him of Serenegar, who is only a Rahia in the
Estates of the Great Mogoll: so little assurance is there in the most part of
these Relations. The other places of note in Turquestan are, Camul, Turfan,
Emil, Sark, Cassia, Andegen, Raofa, Cotain, Peim, Finegle, Lop, Ciartiam,
Sazechiam, and Vociam; and in this part is the Lake of Kithay, which is 65
Leagues in length, and 40 in breadth.

CATHAY is the most Eastern part of all Tartaria, Cathay, its bounds.
and esteemed the richest and most powerful Estate. It is contiguous to
Turquestan, on the West, to China on the South, to True Tartary on the North;
and on the East is watered by the Straight of Jessa.

Some esteem all Cathay under one only Monarch or Emperor, whom they call Chan
or Vlacan, that is, Great Cham, and speak him one of the greatest and richest
Princes in the World. Others account diverse Kings, but all Subjects to the
Great Cham. Its ^ertility and commodities.
The Country is much frequented, well tilled, and in most places very fertile,
abounding in Wheat, Rice, Wool, Hemp, Silk, Musk, Rhuburh, great Herds of
Camels, of whose Hair they make Chamlets, and abundance of Horses, with which
they furnish other Countries, and especially China, Its chief place Cambalu.
with what other things can be desired. Cambalu is esteemed its Metropolitan
City, in which the Great Cham resides, pleasantly seated in a fertile Soil, and
on the River Palysanga, which has its course through the City, which is seated
in the midst of the Country, being as it were the center to others. This City,
besides its Suburbs, is esteemed to be 28 miles in circuit, being as it were
four square, each Angle being 7 miles in length, all encompassed with a strong
Wall 10 paces thick; to which, for entrance into the City, there is at each
Angle 3 Gates, to every one of which there is a Palace; besides in every Angle
a more sumptuous Palace, in which the Armor of the Garrison Soldiers are
kept, which are accounted 1000 of each Gate. The Buildings are (for the most
part) of Freestone, and very proportionably built; the chief Streets large,
and so strait, that one may see from one Gate to the other, which gives it a
gallant prospect.

The Great Chams Palace.
In the midst of this City is a stately Palace, where the Great Cham resides;
together with his Queens and Children. This Royal Palace is four square, and of
a vast bigness, having besides its Out-walls several other enclosures; adorned
with stately Structures, beautified with pleasant Walks, Gardens, Orchards,
Fishponds, with several other places for Recreation. His Attendance, State, and
Riches, is great. Without the Walls are 12 Suburbs, each 3 or 4 miles in
length, Its Trade and Commodities.
adjoining to each of the 12 Gates; and in these Suburbs the Merchants and
Strangers reside, each Nation having a several Cane or Storehouse, where they
both lodge and exercise their Trade, bartering their Commodities for one
another, being of a great Trade, and frequented by Merschants and Strangers of
several Countries, but more especially by the Persians, Chinois, Indians, and
the Tartars themselves, which renders it very populous, it being the chief
place for Trade in all Tartary, abounding not only in those Commodities
aforesaid, but also in the Spices of India, the Gems of Pegu and Bengala, the
Drugs of Arabia; also the Carpets, Tapestries, Silks and Manufactures of
Persia, etc.

Their Moneys.
The Money current here, and throughout this large Territory, is very different,
neither is it made of Gold, Silver, or Copper, as with us; but of the middle
Bark of the Mulberry Tree, which being made smooth and firm, they cut round
into great and small pieces, on which they imprint the Kings Mark, as we do on
our Money; and these pieces, according to the bigness and thickness, are valued
at a certain rate, and are passable for the buying of all Commodities; and it
is deemed death for any one to counterfeit, or make any of this Money. But in
some places under the Great Chams jurisdiction, they use polished Coral instead
of Money: and in other places they use twigs of Gold, which is distinguished
into several parcels by weight, but without Stamp or Character, and this is
held in case of great importance: they also use in some places Porcelain
instead of Money; likewise they make a kind of Money of Salt, which they boil
until it be congealed hard, and then make it up into round lumps, on which is
put the Princes Stamp. And these are the several sorts of Money which passes
amongst them; yet by reason of the Trade that this place has with other
Countries there adjacent, their Coyns are here found current, as are those of
the Grand Signior, as also those of Moscovy.

Besides this Palace aforementioned, he has another which is esteemed the
principal of his abode, which is not far from this City, which Merchants are
not permitted to enter; the Palace is called Zaindu, being four square, and, if
Authors may be believed, every Square is 8 miles in length, and within this
Quadtant is another, whose sides are 6 miles in length, and within that another
of 4 miles square, and this is esteemed the very Palace it self, and between
these several Walls are stately Walks, Gardens, Orchards, Fish Ponds, Parks,
Forests, Chases, for all manner of pleas^es and game, as also several other
places for all manner of Courtly and Military exercises. This Palace is
exceeding richly built, having many sumptuous Edifices; his attendance great,
12000 Horse being his daily guard, besides an exceeding great number of other
Attendance and Servitures.

Tanguth, and is chief places.
The greatest and most potent Parts or Kingdoms of Cathay, are TANGVTH, whose
chief City is Campion; where the Caravans of Foreign Merchants stop, it not
being permitted them to go farther; a City well built, and where the
Christians, in the time of Paulus Venetus, had 3 fair Churches; but of later
time have much lost themselves through the great increase of the Gentiles, who
have here several Monasteries, where they keep and worship their Idols, where
they have also several Religious persons only dedicated to their service; and
this Kingdom has much Rhubarb. The Kingdom of TENDVC, with its City of the
same name, Tenduc.
furnishes Cloth of Gold and Silver, Silks, Chamlets, etc. and it is thought
that Prester John resided in these quarters; there being yet a particular King,
who is a Christian, but of the Sect of the Nestorians, and subject to the Great
Cham.

THAINFVR is known for the great number of its People, Thainfur.
for the excellency of its Vines, for the goodness of its Arms, and of its
Cannon, etc. for the rest, all great Travelers count Marvels, of the
greatness, power, and magnificence and riches of this Great Cham; of the extent
of his Estates, The state and power of the Great Cham.
of the Kings subject to him, of so many Ambassadors always in his Court, of
the reverence and respect bore him, of the power and infinite number of his Men
of Arms; but it is so far from Europe, that we could scarce believe them, till
he made seen his power in 1618, having possessed the Ports and Passages of that
great Mountain and Wall which separates Tartaria from China; casting an
infinite number of Men into the great Kingdom, taking and pillaging its fairest
Cities, and almost all its Provinces, forced the King of China to retire
himself into Canton; leaving him in possession of not above 1 or 2 of its
Provinces: But the relations of 1650 gives the King of China re-entrance into
the greatest part of his Estates; its other parts are, Egrigaja, whose chief
places are Serra and Mulon: also Egrimul, whose chief place is so called; then
Serguth, whose chief place is Erzina; and lastly, Belgian, whose chief place is
so called.

The People of Cathay.
The People in this part of Tartaria are generally strong of body, stout,
warlike, and courageous, though in the greatest dangers; also very active, and
patient in afflictions, ingenious, and given to Manufactures, more civil and
courteous to Strangers than the rest of the Tartars; loving to wear good
Apparel, and feed deliciously, which the others are negligent of; in Stature
they are but of a mean size, but well proportioned, and of an indifferent good
Complexion.

Their Religion.
In matter of Religion they are either Gentiles, Christians, or Mahometans,
which latter is most used, it being publicly and generally allowed amongst
them, in which Religions they observe several Ceremonies, not much different
from those of other Countries, especially in Christianity and Mahometism.

The True Tartary described.
The True and Ancient TARTARY, is the most Northern of all the parts of Tartary
taken together, and likewise the coldest, the most untilled, and most barbarous
of all: nevertheless it is from hence that the Tartars issued in the year 1200,
and having made themselves Masters of 6 Hordes most adjacent to theirs, have
since made themselves known, and have carried their Arms and their Government
into the greatest and fairest parts of Asia. This is the place where the Ten
Tribes are supposed to have rested, which were transported into Media; and some
say, that the name of Dan, Nepthalim, and Zebulon, are yet found amongst them;
but it is easy to forge what names men please in parts wholly unknown. The
Kingdoms, Provinces, or Hordes of the Great Mogoll, of Bargu, Tartar, Nayman,
Annibi, etc. are the most known. Some Authors place here Gog and Magog, which
others will have to be in the Estates of the Mogoll, and of China, and toward
Maug, above the Lake of Chiamay.

Its Commodities.
The principal Riches of the True Tartary consists in their Cattle and Furs,
among which most esteem is had of their white Bears, black Foxes, Sables, etc.
they live on Milk and Flesh, of which they have great plenty, neither caring
for Fruits nor Grains; and in a word, have still something of the ancient
Scythian. Some amongst them have their Kings; others live by Hordes, or
Communalties; almost all are Shepherds, and the greatest part subject to the
Grand Cham of Cathay.

The chief places in this part of Tartary, do commonly take their names from
their Kingdoms, Provinces, or Hordes, in which they lie.

The ISLES of JAPON, which may be considered under The GREAT ISLE of JAPON, or
NIPHON, with its Parts of JAMAYOIT, Nagato, Amanguchi, Juami, Jezuma, Aqui,
Bingo, Bitchu* Bigen, Mimalaca, Janaba, Foqui, Isle of Oqui.
JETSENGO, Meaco, Vacasa, Vechisen, Tamba, Tango, Ozaca, Sacay, Cavachi, Ixe,
Xima, Quinocum, Isle of Avangi.
JETSEGEN, Yomda, Inga, Voari, Mino, Xinano, Micava, Tatomi, Yetchu, Canga,
Noto, Isle of Sando, Nivata.
QUANTO, Yendo, Conzuque, Cai, Surunga, Idzu, Sangami, Canzula, Ava.
OCHIO, Aquita, Aizu, Voxu, Fitachi, Kimotauque, Isles of Marayxima, Toy,
Xynoxima.


The ISLE of XICOCO, or TOKOESI, Sanuqui, Tofa, Xyo.
The ISLES of XIMO, or SAYCOCK, Fige^, Bugen, Funay, Bungo, Fingo, Nanaqui,
with the Isles of Firando, Fica, Goto, Amacusa.



The PHILIPPINE ISLES, which may be comprehended under Great, as the ISLES of
LUSON, Manille, Luson, Cagajon:
MINDANAO, -- Mindanao. PARAGOYA, -- Damacan.
Small, and lying Between the Great ISLES, as Mindora, -- Mindora. Luban.
Ban^on, Masbate. Rebujan. Negoas. Cebu, -- Ville de Jesus. Bohol, Matan. Panay.
Coyo.
Eastwards, as Pondam. Catandanis. Paracella. Tandaya, -- Acha^. St. John, --
St. Joari. Das Palmas.
Southwards, as Taylaya. Carangaon. Sagym. Solo^. Tagyma. Candagari.
Westwards, as Kapull. Philippina.
Northwards, as -- Babuyonnes.


THE Oriental Isles OF ASIA.
The Oriental Isles of Asia.
THe Isles of Asia are as many in number, and as great, rich, and populous as
those of all the rest of the World. They are spread here and there, in the
great Oriental or Indian Ocean, and for the most part about the Indies. I shall
divide them into 5 Parts or Bodies, and call the Isles of Japan, those which
are on the East of China; the Philippine Isles, those which are likewise on the
South East of China; the Isles of the Moluccoes, those which are to the South
of the Philippines; the Isles of the Sound, those which are to the West of the
Moluccoes; and I put for the fifth Ceylan and the Maldives, which are East, and
South-East from Cape Comori, the utmost point of Malabar. There are moreover
many Isles which belong to Asia, but not to compare with these; of which we
shall also speak a word as occasion offers.

The Isles of Japan, are on this side the Tropic of Cancer; the Philippines
between the Tropic and the Equinoctial Line; the Moluccoes, the Isles of the
Sound, and the Maldives, are about this Line, returning from East to West.

The Isles of JAPAN or JAPON.
The Isles of Japan.
WE call the Isle or Isles of Japan, a certain multitude of Isles, and of
different bigness, which are on the East of China, distant from it about 100
Leagues; and so are seated in the most Oriental part of our Continent: They
stretch together in length about 300 Leagues from West to East, and from South
to North 40, 50, 60, and sometimes 100 Leagues in breadth.

Amongst these Isles there are 3 very considerable. The first and which is much
greater then the two others, is called by us Japan or Japon; by its
Inhabitants, Hippon or Niphon, which signifies The Spring of Light, or of the
Sun: A name proper for it, since it lies to the East, and Sunrising of all
Asia, and of all our Continent. The second is called Ximo, that is, a Low
Country or Saycock; that that is, Nine Kingdoms. The last Tokoesi or Xicoco,
that is, Four Kingdoms.

We must likewise make account that these three great Isles are cut asunder by
several Channels, which divide them into several Isles; but because these
Channels are very narrow, these parts are esteemed pieces contigious in regard
of the others, where the Channels, or rather the Arms of the Sea which divide
them, are much larger.

They have all those Fruits, Trees, Herbs and Beasts, which we have in Europe,
with several others not known amongst us; as also abundance of several Fowls,
both tame and wild; the surface of the Earth is well clothed with Woods and
Forests, in which are found very lofty Cedars; and the bowels of the Earth
stored with diverse Metals, as Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, etc.
though not so good as in the Indies, except it be their Silver, which is
excellent and abundant. Their Pearls are great, red, and of no less esteem then
the white ones. These with several Manufactures which are her^ made, are the
chief Commodities of this Island,

Chief places. Meaco described.
In this Island are several Cities of some note; as 1 Meaco, seated in the midst
of the great Isle of Japan, a fair and large City, formerly 21 miles in
compass; but now by reason of their Wars, it is reduced to the third part of
what it was, in which the Jesuits did formerly esteem it to have 180000
Houses, and judged it to have near 100000 when they were there. This City is
the ordinary residence of the Triumviri, or the three principal Magistrates,
which rule or sway the affairs of these Islands; of whom the first is entitled
the Dayri or Voo, that is, the Emperor, who has the care of Civil Affairs; the
second is the Cube or King of Tenza, who is chief of the Militia, managing the
Affairs of Peace or War; and thirdly the Zazo or Xaca, who is chief in Religion
and Sacred matters. The City is divided into the higher and lower; the one and
the other together were not above 20000 paces long, and 8 or 10000 paces large.
The Palace of the Dayri was in the higher City, great, The Palace of the Dayri.
stately and adorned with all things which may add to its luster; and the
Houses or Palaces of his Conges, with the Houses of the chief Lords of all
Japan, were about that of the Emperor. The lower City was almost contigious to
Fuximi, which serves for a Fortress to Meaco. This City, as most of all those
in these Islands, are unwalled; but its Streets in the night are chained up,
and a Watch of two men at each end of every Street, who are to give account of
the transactions that happen in the night. Its Streets are large and well
composed, its Houses well built, and most of Wood; all their Pagodes are made
of Wood, they are neither large nor high; and in these Pagodes they have
several ill-shapen Figures, to which they address their Prayers, and bestow on
them great gifts in way of Alins, which their Priests make use of. Nobunanga
was the first that lessened this City, which he did by burning a part of it in
1571 and since it has received diverse jostlings of ill fortune. 2. Amangucki,
a Maritime City, and the fairest of the Kingdom of Nangato, has been formerly
well known for its Trade, containing few less then 10000 Families. It was
burned in 1555 during some revolt; it was builded again, and again burnt, and
afterward rebuilt. These fires happen often in Japan, the greatest part of
their building being of Wood; but the wood is very near and curious, marbled;
etc. Nangasaki was the most famous of the Isles of Saycock, and there are a
great number of fair Cities through all Japan.

Amongst these Cities, that of Sacay, on the South of Meaco; which Ferdinand
Mendez Pinto (provided that he does not lie) says, he has known not to have
depended upon any King or Lord, but was governed of it self, in form of a
Republic, created all its Magistrates and Officers; and he assures us, that
all the Masters of Families rich or poor, make themselves be called Kings and
Queens, and their Children Princes and Princesses. This liberty and vanity is
observable if it be true.

The City of Yendo.
Mandelssos in his Book of Travels, makes mention of a City called Yendo, which
he makes to be a fair, large, and well built City; in which, he says, there is
a Castle about two Leagues in compass, being strongly fortified with 3 Walls,
and as many Moats* The building is very irregular but fair, having to the Walls
abundance of Gates: Within the last Gate, he says, there is a Magazin of Arms,
for 3 or 4000 men, on which all the Streets that are fair and broad take their
rise (...) in which said Streets, on both sides, are many magnificent Palaces
for the Nobles. In the midst of this Castle, is seated the Emperors Palace,
having belonging to it many stately edifices and apartments, as Halls,
Chambers, Galleries, Gardens, Orchards, Groves, Fish Ponds, Fountains, Courts,
etc. as also several Select Houses for his Wives and Concubines. And here is
his ordinary Residence, being in the Province of Quanto, about 120000 paces
from Meaco, between which are abundance of stately and magnificent Palaces and
Houses, for the entertainment of the Emperor in his journey between Jendo and
Meaco: But the most beautiful Palace next to Yendo, is that of O Jaca on the
Sea, and South of Meaco; the buildings of Yendo, are so beautified with Gold,
as well without as within; that at a distance it seems to be rather a Mountain
of Gold than a building.

The Mountains of Japan.
Amongst the Mountains of Japan, there are two very well known. Figenojama, four
Leagues from Meaco, renowned for its height, which stretches it self above the
Clouds; and Juy or Juycan in the Kingdom Hietcheu, which vomits Fire in great
abundance, as some time did Aetna in Sicilia, Vesuvius at Naples, and the Isles
of Volcan and Strongoli among those of Liparia: And on the top of this
Mountain, the Devil, in a white and shining Cloud, shows himself in diverse
forms, but only to such of his Votaries as live about this Mountain an
abstemious life, like the ancient Hermits, as in Fasting, undergoing many
austerities, and completing the Vow they made for this purpose.

The People of Japan their dispositions.
The Country has hot and medicinal Waters in several places; the common Waters
are healthful; the Inhabitants of a good stature, strong and active; in
complexion they are inclining to an Olive color, well disposed, judicious, apt
to learn, of sound memories, subtle in their dealings, more inclined to Arms
then Letters, though they become perfect in both, having many Academies and
Universities: They are ambitious of glory, patient in affliction, hating
Idleness, Gaming, or all ill-husbandry; as also slandering, swearing, lying,
theft, and generally all vices, which they severely punish, and oftentimes to
death.

Their Arms are esteemed the most excellent of all the Indies, they being more
valiant and warlike then the Chinois, and more patient of labor; one of their
Kings conceived no less then that he could conquer China, and to that purpose
levied 2 or 300000 men, which went against it, and brought back good booty.
They have long used the Art of Printing, they are very civil, and much given to
visits and entertainments; they delight in rich and costly furniture in their
Houses, with the adornment of Pictures, Cabinets, Arms, etc. They are very
punctual in performing their promises.

Their Religion and belief.
In matters of Religion they are for the most part Gentiles, adoring anciently
the Sun, Moon and Stars, giving adoration to Wild Beasts; but they chiefly
worship the Devil, and that partly for fear of hurting them: To which purpose,
they have in all their Pagodes, which are numerous, several ill-shapen Figures
which they pray to. And to these Pagodes, there belongs a great many Priests,
to whom they show a great respect, and allow a good subsistence who by their
habit are known from other persons, and live a very strict life, abstaining
from Flesh, even to the use of Women.

Amongst them they have several Sects, which possibly are so many different
ways in performing their Devotions, in which they are not over strict, nor over
devout. Some of them believe the immortality of the Soul, that the Body is
reduced to its first principles, and becomes dust and ashes; and that the Soul
is either raised to joy, or condemned to eternal sorrow, believing the
Resurrection; and that at its return into the World, it shall find good or
evil, according to its actions: Whereas others make no account of the
dissolution of the World nor put any difference between the Souls of Men and
Beasts.

They are very jealous of their Wives and Concubines, not admitting them the
liberty of walking abroad, or society with men at home; they are very modest,
and not given to meddle with any kind of business that appertains to their
Husbands. Adultery they severely punish, but Fornication is permitted amongst
them: They are very indulgent to their Children and give them good education:
They are very tender of their honor, being shie of doing any thing which may
eclipse it; and as they will give no injuries to others, so they will take none.

The state power, etc. of the Emperor.
Their Emperor dwells in great state and pomp, having attendance of Nobles and
others: He is highly esteemed and reverended of his Subjects, even to
adoration. In his Government he is in a manner tyrannical, having in his power,
the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, though he does not often show it; his
Revenue is exceeding great, and his power, as has been spoken of before, very
strong.

All his Nobles (which are very many) live exceeding stately, and have great
Revenues: And when any of them happen to die, they have a custom, that about 20
or 30 of their Slaves do voluntarily kill themselves to wait upon the Souls of
their deceased Lords, which they hold to be a great honor to them, and a
discharge of their fidelity and love they bear to them.

But there are many defaults observed in their government, and in their manner
of living: The great number of their Kings and their Princes, which still
endeavor to make themselves great; The Revolts and Rebellions, to which those
people are subject on the least occasion; The principal form of the Government,
which is almost wholly tyrannical. The little care they have of Tillage, and of
keeping fowl at home, or Flocks in the Field, makes them often want needful
Food. And it is observed, That they have many manners and customs different,
and often contrary to ours, or those of their Neighbors: The Japanoises differ
in many Customs from other Nations.
As when they go out of the house, they leave off their Cloak, which they put
not on again, till they come in; whereas we leave it off in the house, and put
it on abroad. When they meet a friend, they salute him by putting off their
Shoo, and shaking their foot; we salute by uncovering the head. In walking they
give the left hand, esteeming it most honorable, whilst we believe the right
so to be. Receiving a friend at home, they remain seated on the ground; we
stand till he who comes to see us is seated. The Earth covered with Mats,
serves for Bed, Table and Seat, (for they uphold themselves on their knees, on
that Mat, when they eat;) our Bed, Table and Seat, are raised from the ground,
for our repose or eating. They esteem Black Hair and Black Teeth; we Fair Hair
and White Teeth. They mount on Horseback from right to left; we from left to
right. They set the name of their Family before their proper name; we our
proper name before that of our Family. They will not that those Women they take
in Marriage should bring any riches; here we seek after those who have most. So
soon as their Women are married, they have no longer liberty to go abroad; here
more then before. Black is their sign of joy, and White of mourning; Black our
mourning, and White our joy. Their richest Tapestries are Mats, thin, close,
and of diverse colors; ours of Wool, Silk, and oftentimes of Gold and Silver.
Their Stone Buildings have neither Mortar nor Plaster; here they build not
without both. They despise all Precious Stones, and esteem more their Vessels
of Earth, which serve to keep their Drink; which we make little esteem of, but
much value Precious Stones. They drink nothing but what is hot; those most
delicate with us is cool. Their Physic is sweet and odoriferous; ours bitter
and unpleasant. They never let their sick Blood; which with us is very common
upon the least occasion. These with several other customs, contrary to ours, do
they observe amongst them, which are too long to set down. Nor want they fine
Reasons to sustain their Customs better then ours; they say we must conserve
our Blood, as one of the principal sustainers of our Life; that we must not
give a sick person that which is displeasant, troublesome, and sometimes
affrights him to see, much more to drink or eat; that hot water augments the
natural heat, opens the conduits, and quenches thirst; that cold closes the
Pores, begets the Cough, weakens the Stomach, and quenches natural heat; that
their Vessels, of which they make such esteem, are necessary for many things in
a Family, which Precious Stones are not; that their buildings may be easily
taken down, carried other where, and erected in another manner, when they will;
which ours cannot, etc.

Amongst their Manners, there are some very good; they hate Games of Hazard;
they are very patient in bad fortune; they maintain themselves honestly in
their Poverty; suffer hot themselves to be transported with Passion; speak not
ill of the absent; know not what it is to swear, lie, or steal; suffer easily
all incommodities of heat, cold, famine, or thirst; yet all this, rather to get
the honor of being esteemed constant and virtuous, then being so truly; for
they are subject to Vices, as well as their Neighbors. But lot us leave their
Manners, and speak a word of their Government, which of late has encountered a
diversity, and deserves to be known.

The general Estate of all these Isles, was not long since divided into 66
Kingdoms; of which the Isle of Japan alone had 47, which with some little
Neighboring Isles was made up 53, that of Ximo or Saycok had 9 according to
its name, and Chicock the other four.

The Estate of these Isles.
At present the order is much changed; the whole Estates are fallen into the
hands of one alone, as it has been formerly; and is divided into 7 Provinces,
or principal parts; and those 7 parts subdivided into many others; which ought
to pass under the name of Lordships; some of which yet retain the name of
Kingdoms, others of Dutchies, Principalities, etc.

Those which command in the lesser parts, are called generally Tones. Caron
ranges them in six different degree, and calls them Kings, Dukes, Princes,
Knight-Barons, Barons and Lords, which according to our degrees of honor are
distinguished by Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls and Barons. Caron
makes 21 Kings; some of which possess 1 or 2, and some 3, and in all 30 and odd
of the 66 ancient Kingdoms. After the Kings, he puts 4 Dukes, 6 Princes, 17
Knight-Barons, 50 Barons, and 41 Lords, giving each a Revenue of at least
100000 Livers per annum, and so augmenting to the greatest to whom he gives 10
Millions and more; and makes account that the Cube or Caesar of Japan spends at
least 100 Millions of Crowns yearly, as well in the expense of his house, as in
his Militia, and what he disburses to the Tones.

The parts of Japan.
The names of the 7 principal parts, into which the Estate of Japan is divided,
are Saycock, Xicoco, Jamasoit, Jetsengo, Jetsegen, Quanto and Ochio. Saycock
with the Isles which belong to it, is the nearest to China; Chicock is on the
East of Saycock; the other five parts are in the great Island, and extend
themselves advancing from East to West. Jamosoit being the most Western part of
all, and answering to the 12 Kingdoms, which the King of Nangato or Amanguci
has formerly possessed. Jetsenco and Jetsegen together make the middle of the
great Island, and apparently that which passed under the name of Tenza, and
contained 20 others. Quanto and Ochio advance themselves from the East, unto
the straight of Sangaar, which divides Japan from the Land of Jesso, of which
more anon; Quanto, comprehended 8 Kingdoms, and Ochio the rest, and in these
parts there are abundance of Cities and Towns, which I have observed in my
Geographical Tables.

But because the diversity of names of Dayri or Emperor, of Cube or Caesar, of
Tones or Kings, Princes, Dukes, etc. may breed some confusion; to give a more
particular knowledge, we will say succinctly, that before the year 1500 there
was in all Japan only one Sovereign, which they called Voo or Dayri, that is
Emperor.

The Isle or Land of JESSO.
The Isle of Jesso.
AFter the Isles of Japan, let us speak a word of the Isle or Land of Jesso,
Yedzo or Jesso, for diverse Authors write its name differently, some calling it
the Isle, some the Land abovesaid, and to the East of Japan, in the manner that
the English, Portugals and Hollanders deseribe it, this Land must extend from
Asia to America: They say that from Tessoy, which is the most Western point of
it, opposite to Coray, and near Tartary, advancing toward the East, it is 60
days journey to the Province of Matzumay; and that from Matzumay unto the most
Easterly point, and nearest America, it is likewise 90 days journey, so that it
is 150 days journey from one end to the other, which after only 8 Leagues a day
will be 1200 of our Leagues. Its breadth is not spoke of.

The straight of Tessoy.
The Straight of TESSOY, which separates this Isle from Tartary, has great
currents, caused by the discharging of several Rivers which come rom the
Northern parts, and from Tartary and Jesso. The other straight which separates
it from America, may in all likelihood be that Anian; and those two streights,
limit the two extremities of Jesso, toward the midst, must be the Province of
Matzumay and apparently beyond the Straight, which separates the Isle of Japan,
from the Land of Jesso; and this straight may be called the straight of
Sangaar, which is the utmost East-Land of Japan.

The traverse, or traject of this straight is not above 10 or 12 Leagues;
others say not above so many miles; others there are affirm it no straight, but
an Isthmus which fixes Japan to Jesso; and that both the one and the other
together are but one Isle; so difficult it is to find the truth of a thing so
far distant.

This Isle or Land of JESSO is so great and vast, that the Inhabitants cannot
but have different manners; those which are nearest Japan, resembling the
Japanois, those which are near Tartary, the Tartars; and those near America,
their neighboring Americans; and in all likelihood they are more barbarous
then all their neighbors.

Its Inhabitants.
They are all Idolaters, covering themselves with the skins of Beasts, which
they take in Hunting; having their bodies all hairy, and wearing their Beard
and Mustachoes very long: they are Warlike, Cruel, and Formidable to the
Japanois; In War they have no other remedy for their wounds, but washing them
in salt water.

Its fertility.
The Land is little inhabited; it would be rich if it were well tilled; it has
many Mines of Silver, and quantity of excellent Skins and Furs, which make it
appear that the Earth stretches to the Northward. They have some Trade with
Aquita, which is on the East of Japan; but those of Aquita go seldom into
Jesso, because they cannot with security reside with, or trust those Barbarians.

The PHILIPPINE Islands, or of LUSON and the MANILLES.
Philippine Isles
THe PHIPPINE Islands are so called by the Castilians, because they conquered
them under Philip the second, King of Castile. The People of the East call them
the Isles of Luson, because of the greatest and most famous of these Isles,
which they call Luson, a principal City of this Isle, being likewise The
Irnames.
so called. The Portugals call them Manilles, from the City them Manilles, from
the City Manilla, at present the chief City of the Isle of Luson. They are in
the Oriental Ocean, to the Southward of China, to the Eastward of India, North
of the Moluccoes, and Westward of the Islands of Thieves: But they are 4 or 500
Leagues distant from these, not above 100 from China, and much nearer the
Moluccoes, and the the Isles of the Sound.

Their situation is between the Equator, and the Tropic of Cancer; Situation.
to wit, from the 5 unto the 20 degree of Septentrional Latitude: and from the
155, unto the 170 Meridian or Degree of Longitude; and so contain 15 or 16
degrees of Longitude and Latitude, extending themselves in length and breadth 3
or 400 Leagues,

The chief Isles and places described.
LVSON, MINDANAO and PARAGOYA, are the greatest: Luson toward the North,
Mindanao toward the South, and Paragoya to: wards the West; so that they form
almost an Equilateral Triangle. Tandaya otherwise Philippina, Mindora, Panay,
Masbate, Rebujan, St, John, Cebu or the Pintados, Negoas, Matan, Bohol, and few
others are of a lesser circuit. Tandaya is South-East from the most Southerly
point of Luson; and the straight between is called of Manilla, not because of
the City Manilla, more then 100 Leagues distant; but because of the Isles of
Luson, which are called likewise of Minilla. Mindora on the South of the Isle
of the Gulf, and City of Manilla: The rest are between Luson and Mindanao.

We might likewise make account of Messane, Calegan and Buthuan, near Cebu; of
Abuyo and Capuli; of Banton, Rebujan, Vireges, Marinduque and Luban, between
Masbate and Mindora; of Iloques, Mauris, Coyo, Bankingle and Kapull, between
Mindora and Paragoya, and between Paragoya and Mindanao; of the Little
Philippine on the West; of the Babuyonnes on the North; of Catandanis,
Paracalla, Linton, and others on the East of Luson; of Palms and St. John on
the East of Mindanao. But we cannot name them all, there being so great a
number, that some esteem them 1000 or 1200 of considerable note, and in all 10
or 12000.

Magellan was the first of the Europeans, who discovered these Islands in 1520
In 1564 Don Lewis de Valasco, Viceroy of Mexico, sent Michael Lapez de
Legaspes to establish some Spanish Colonies; and facilitate by that means their
Traffic from Mexico with China and Japan, who seized upon Luson, Cebu, etc.
The Spaniards possess at present above 50 of them, among which, Luson, Tenday
and Cebu, are the most famous.

The Isle of Luson.
Luson sometimes called New Castle, begins before the 13, and ends after the 19
degree of Latitude on this side the Equator, which are not above 6 degrees or
150 Leagues; but it stretches one of its points toward the East: So that from
Cape Bojador toward China, unto that of Caceres toward Tenday, is more then
200 Leagues, passing cross the Isle. Its breadth is very unequal, and sometimes
only 20, 25, and sometimes likewise 50, 60, and 75 Leagues.

Manille is its chief City, seated in the most Southernly part of the Island;
well built, after the modern way; and its Houses are of Freestone, strong, and
so great, that the Spaniards have been forced to divide some part of it from
the rest, to serve them for a Citadel, in case of necessity; by which means,
they are not at so great a charge in keeping of so great a number of Soldiers,
as would otherwise be requisite for the security of the place. They have a good
Port, the entrance into which is yet somewhat difficult, by reason of the Isles
and Rocks of Mirabelles, at the opening of the Gulf or Bay of Cavita or
Cavite, at the bottom of which, is Manilla. The Governor or Viceroy of these
Isles, as also an Archbishop, who has a Spiritual Jurisdiction over all the
Philippine Islands, which he exercises by three Suffragan Bishops, and some
Priests have here their Residence. This City is very populous, here commonly
residing about 15000 Chinois, besides Japonesses, and a great number of
Spaniards which drive a Trade, in several good Commodities which the Earth and
their ingenuity produces, which are brought hither, as being the chief City, of
which I shall speak anon.

The other Cities of the same Isle are Cagajon or Nueva Segovia, in the most
Northern part; then Caseres, in the most Southern part of the Isle. The City of
Luson is by all Authors described on the Coast, which regards China: And this
name has been most famous. Now it is difficult to know, whether Luson or
Manilla are two Cities; Linscot thinks them one and the same.

The Isle of Mindanao.
Mindanao is composed of three different Isles, which are almost contiguous,
the greatest, which is in the middle of the other two, retains the name of
Mindanao, having about 100 Leagues of length, and little less of breadth.
Canola toward the West, 75 Leagues long, and 25 or 30 broad. Las Buenas
Sennales, or the Good Ensigns; or likewise St. John on the North East, has
only 25 or 30 Leagues of length and breadth: And these three together, are
between the fifth and the ninth Parallel or degree of Longitude, and between
the 162 and 169 Meridian or degree of Longitude, and contain little less then
200 Leagues from the Point of Galere on the West, to Cape Bicajo on the East.

They belong to diverse Mohammedan or Pagan Kings, who are all in good
intelligence with the King of Ternate of the Moluccoes, and ill-affected to the
Portugals. Their principal Cities are Mindanao, which others call Tabouc,
Saragos or Suriaco, Lomiaton, or Lomiatan, Dapita and Canola. Of the situation
of other Cities, of which some Authors make mention, we have no assurance.

The Isle of Paragoya.
PARAGOYA or CALIMIANES of Boterus, is the same thing as Calamian of Linscot;
and as Puloam or Puloaym of Maginus, and others: it begins almost at the 8, and
ends not till the 11 Degree of Latitude, stretching it selt from South-East to
North-East, in length more then 100 Leagues, not having above 10, 15, or 25 of
breadth. Boterus and Pigafette say, that it bears Figs half as long and as
thick as ones Arm; and others, only of a Palm long, but better then that of
Dates. Its King is Vassal to him of Borneo.

The Isle of Tandays.
TANDAYA is about the twelfth Degree of Latitude, and the 167 of Longitude; Its
utmost length is about 50 Leagues, and its breadth about 40. It has born alone
the name of Philippine, for being the first discoverer of these Islands, and
that name has been communicated to the rest. It is esteeined the best and most
pleasant of all; Fruitful, rich, easy to be approached, and its Inhabitants
courteous. Its chief place is Achan.

The Isle of Mindora.
MINDORA is not much less then Tandaya, but not so famous; yet the Straight
between the Isle of Manilla and Mindora, is called Mindora; from whence it may
be judged, there is likewise a City of Mindora on that Straight and that this
place has formerly been famous. There are here Mines of Gold.

The Isle of C^bu
CEBV is in the midst of the Philippines. The Spaniards have built on the East
Coast Ville-Jesus, under the 10 Degree of Latitude, and 165 of Longitude. The
Port is good, and here it was that Magellan contracted Alliance with the King
of this Isle, received him into the Protection of the King of Castile, and in
his favor passed into the Isle of Matan, and made war upon its King, where he
was killed.

Their Fertility
All these Isles in general, are very fruitful, and yield a great quantity of
Grains, of Rice, Fruits, Wine, Honey, etc. which are given almost for nothing.
They have Wine of Dates, which yields not to those of Grapes, and which are as
strong as Sack: They feed much Cattle, and Fowl, as Oxen and Sheep, which they
carry into New-spain; Hogs, whose Flesh is excellent, Goats, Pullain, etc. They
have many Wild Beasts, as Stags, and several sorts of Venison, Wild Boars,
Tigers, Foxes, Bears, Lions, Apes, Civet Cats, etc. which inhabit in their
Forests and Mountains; and in their Rivers they have Crocodiles and an infinite
number of several sorts of Fish, which are likewise found in their Seas:
Amongst others Tortoises, whose shells are much esteemed for the beauty, and
variety of their colors, there being none found like these, and those of the
Maldives.

Their Commodities.
They produce likewise Gold, Iron, Steel, Saffron, Wax, Cinnamon, Long Pepper,
Ginger, Sugar, with several other Metals, Spices, Drugs, and Precious Stones.
They fish Pearls on their Coasts, and particularly near to Negros and Abujo.

Its Trade.
But besides the cheapness and abundance of Victuals which these Isles afford,
and the Traffic which they have so commodiously with China, and with Mexico or
New Spain, has made the Spaniards resolve to keep them: And therefore they
built some Fortresses in 1589 and transported some Families from New Spain,
with Horses, Sheep, and other Beasts to breed a Race.

The Chinois have a great Trade to these Islands, bringing hither all their
Commodities, as Silk, Cotton of all colors, Porcelain, Brimstone, Cannon
Powder, Iron, Quicksilver, Steel, Copper, and other Metals; also Chests,
Cabinets, Pictures, Laces, Coiffs, Vales, and other curiosities for Women. Of
all these Commodities, there remains a part in the Philippines, and the
Castilians take away the other, and with the Gold, Wax and Spices, which they
get in these Isles, carry them to Mexico: From whence they bring what is
proper, both for the Philippines, for China, and the East Indies. And this
trade which is driven by the South, or Pacifick Ocean, is a great, and
frequent, as that which is between Spain and Mexico by the Ocean, or North Sea.

The MOLUCCO ISLES; which may be comprehended under the The ISLES of the
MOLUCCOES, particularly so called; as the Isles of Ternate, Gamma-Lamma, Nostra
Sennora dello Rosaria.
Tidore, Marieco, Castello Viejo.
Timor, -- Nassaw. Machian, Tabillol^. Mauricio.
Bachian, Marigoram, Gammeduore.

The Greatest ISLES of the MOLUCCOES; as, The Isle of the CELEBES, Celebes,
Ciaon, Bantachaja, Machasar.
The Isle of GILOLO, Gilolo, Tolo, Isiau, Jaffougo,
The Land of PAPOUS, Bay a Fonda. Bay a de Ant-Boto.

Small ISLES about and between the Isles of CELEBES, GILOLO, and the Land of
PAPOUS; as On the South of CELEBES, are the Isles of Buquerones. Solayo.
Cobana. Cabinces. St. Mathews. Flores, Lasataja, Batuliar.
Susu. Malva. Cabanazze, -- Timor. Solar, -- Adonare. Ombo. Teralta:
On the East, and North-East of CELEBES, are the Isles of Wawany. Xulla.
Paugay. Tasouro. Meao. Saranbal. Syem.
Between the Isles of CELEBES and GILOLO, and on the South Coast, or Sea of the
Land of PAPOUS, are the Isles of Bouro. Rilan. Manipe. Attabuti. Ouby. Sinomo:
Mesol. Seram-Cambello: Amboyna, -- Amboyna. Pulorin. Puloway. Celayon.
Guligiej. Subiana. Corer. Away. Tenimber. Kedguey. Aru. Banda, London,
Ortattan, Comber.
Nassau, Belgleque, Labetack.
Poloway. -- Reve. Gumanapy, -- Gumanapy. Pulorin.
On the North of GILOLO, are the Isles of Morotay, -- Sian. Camafo, Noba.



The ISLES of LARRONS, or THIEVES, viz. The ISLES of LARRONS, or THIEVES,
particularly so called, where are the Isles of Deserte. Malabrigo. Englese.
Angloise. Mana. Chemochoa. Gregua. Agan. Artomagan: Guagan. Cheraguan. Natan.
Sepan. Metan. Can. Volia. Botaba, and Bacim.
ISLES Westwards, and between the Isles of LARRONS and the PHILIPPINE Isles; as
those of Pulo-Vilan. De los Arecisos: De los Matelotes, De Bidima.
ISLES Southwards of the Isles of LARRONS; as those of Dancers, Martyrs* Birds.


THE ISLES OF THE MOLUCCOES.
The Isles of Moluccoes ^^^ny.
I Comprehend under the name of the MOLVCCOES, not only the Isles of TERNATE,
TIDORE, MOTILL or TIMOR, MACHIAN, and BACHIAN, which are particularly called
the Moluccoes; but likewise those of GILOLO, of the Land of PAPOVS, which lie
on their East; of CELEBES, which are on their West; of them of CEYRAM, of
FLORES, and TIMOR, which are toward their South, and several others
thereabouts.

They make a Body of many and diverse Isles, South of the Philippines, Eastwards
of those of the Sound, West of New Guiney, and North of Terra Australis, and
are under or near the Equinoctial Line, stretching themselves only to the third
degree on this side that Line, and to the 10th or 12th beyond it, and extending
themselves from East to West, from the 160th degree of Longitude unto the
180th; and thus they have together 15 degrees of Latitude and 20 of Longitude,
which are almost 400 Leagues of breadth and 500 of length. The English were the
first of any Christians that traded hither.

The Isles of Celebes, Gilolo* etc.
CELEBES, the Lands of PAPOVS and GILOLO are the greatest; then CERAM, FLORES,
and TIMOR, those which are the particularly called the Moluccoes are the
smallest, Celebes is 200 Leagues long, and about 100 broad: Gilolo about 100
Leagues long, and near as broad: Ceyram, Flones, and Timor, each 60 Leagues
long; but for the most part their breadth is not above a third or quarter of
their length. The True Moluccoes are only 2, 3, 4, or 5 Leagues long, and 5, 6,
10, 12, and 15 in circuit.

Their Commodities and Ferillit*
Amongst all these Isles, the True Moluccoes are the most known by reason of
their Cloves, with which they abound and furnish all Asia and Europe. They have
neither Grains nor Mines of Gold, few Beasts, much exellent Fruit, and several
Spices, as Ginger, Cinnarion, Mace, Nutmegs, etc. and diverse Drugs; amongst
others, a kind of Wood, that being put to the fire, burns, flames, and yet
consumes not. The Cloves are their principal Riches; Ternate, Tidore, and
Machian have the most, and Machian fewer. Ternate yields yearly 400 Bahars of
Cloves; Tidore and Machian, each 300* And in the great Harvests, which are but
once in seven years, Machian yields 15 or 1600* Tidore, 12 or 1300; and
Ternate, 1000 or 1200; each Baher is 600 li. Flemish.

Their situation.
These Isles lie to the Westward along the Coast of Gilolo, so neat the Equator,
that the most Southerly part is not above 24 or 25 Minutes beyond that Line,
nor the most Northerly above 48 or 50 Minutes on this side i^^ so that together
they have not above one degree of Latitude, and about 10 or 12 Minutes, which
maks 30 Leagues. Their Longitude* is between the ^0th and 30th Minutes of the
168 Meridian, or degree of Longitude.

The Isles of Ternate, Tidore, etc.
TERNATE is the most North; and from it Southward are, TIDORE, TIMOR, MACHIAN,
and BACHIAN, for little account is made of the rest. Bachian is 15 or 16
Leagues circuit, Ternate, Tidore, and Machian, 10 or 12; Timor, 5 or 6. the
rest less.

The Isle of Ternate, its chief places, fertility and commodities.
TRENATE is esteemed the principal Isle, being about 8 Leagues in circuit, and
its Kings the most powerful, both of the True Moluccoes and of all that I have
passed under the general name of Moluccoes; yet he suffers in Ternate, Nostra
Seniora della Rosario, and Gammalamme in the hands of the Spaniards, Ta-comma,
Talucco, and Malayo in the hands of the Hollanders, which are in good
intelligence with him, as Enemies to the Spaniards. The chief place is called
Gamma-Lamma, is seated on the Seaside, more long than broad, and of an
indifferent bigness; its Houses, Mosques, as also its Palace-Royal, are built
of Canes or Timber; its Road and Haven is good, and frequented by Ships. The
Country is not bad, yet it yields but little provision besides Poultry and
Goats; it yields also excellent Almonds, and bigger than ordinary, and that in
great plenty; they have also abundance of Cloves, and other Spices, some Drugs,
with such other Commodities as are found in the rest of the Islands.

The Isle of Tidore, and its chief places, etc.
TIDORE, (those of the Country say Tadura, which signifies Beauty) is a little
greater than Ternate, and as fruitful. Here the People are very industrious in
pruning and watering the Clove-trees, by which means they are exceeding fair
and strong. Here grows white Sandall-wood, which is held the best in all the
Indies. Here are also found the Birds of Paradise. It has its particular King.
The Spaniards hold Taroula, Castello-Viejo, and Marieco, which the Hollanders
have sometimes taken. Timor or Mother was once so ill treated by the Spaniards,
that its Inhabitants abondoned it and retired to Gilolo. The Hollanders built
the Fort of Nassan, and have invited near 2000 of its Inhabitants to return.
Machian as well as Timor, belongs to the King of Ternate; the Hollanders hold
Taffasso, Tallibola, Nuhaca or Naffaquia, and Mauritio; it is peopled with
about 9 or 10000 persons.

The Isle of Bachian described.
BACHIAN, or BAQVIAN, is the greatest of all the Moluccoes, but ill peopled,
and having but few Cloves; but in recompense it has plenty of Fruit, and its
Sea stored with Fishes. It is divided by several little Channels scarce
navigable, which yet divide it into many parts, of which Marigoram is in the
midst of the others, where the King of this Isle resides. The Hollanders hold
on the Coasts the Forts of Gammeduore and Laboua, both once called Barnevelt.
This Isle is of an indifferent large extent; the King is absolute, the Soil
good, and would become very fertile, if the Inhabitants would leave off their
Idleness, and give it Tillage.

MACHIAN is indifferent large and fertile, and well inhabited; its chief places
are 1. Tassaso. 2. Tabillola: 3. Mauricio: and 4. Nubaca.

TIMOR, Motir or MOTIL, is of a less compass, and Triangular. Its chief place
is Nassaw.

The Isle of Gilolo described.
GILOLO or BATOCHINE extends it self to the second Degree on this side, and
only to the first beyond the Equator: It has then 3 degrees of Latitude. Its
Longitude begins a little after the 168th Meridian; and reaches to the 172,
which are near 4 Degrees, which amount to little less than 100 Leagues of
length and breadth; but it is composed but of 4 Peninsula's, of which one
advances toward the North, the other three toward the East; and of these
three the middle one reaches so near the Land of Papous, that there is but a
Straight between them.

Its People, and chief places.
It is subject in part to the King of Ternate, in part to the Kings of Gilolo
and Loloda. It has Savage People on the North part, where is the Coast of
More, and in some Mountains in the middle of the Country; and the City of
Mamaye is in form of a Republic. The City of Gilolo is not above six Leagues
from Ternate toward the North. Those of Gilolo, Sabugo, and Aquilam^, are near
together Eastward of Tidore, and on the West Coast of Gilolo. On the other
side, and toward the East, are the Fortresses of Tolo, Isiau, and Jaffougo;
these six places are in the Spaniards hands. The Hollanders hold Sabou and
Coma; Sabou a little above Gilolo, Tacoma or Cuma on one of the three Eastern
points.

The Air.
The Air of Gilolo is intemperate hot, which makes it unhealthful; the Soil not
very fertile, yet has it great plenty of Rice, wild Hens, and other Fowls. On
its Shoars it has Shellfish, whose Meat in taste is much like Mutton, and
about the Isle plenty of Trees, which they call by the name of Sagou; from
which they have a Fruit which they make their Bread of; of the Sap or Juice
they make a pleasing Drink, which they use instead of Wine; and of a Hair which
grows on its Bark they make their Clothes. It has but few Cloves, neither have
they many Cattle, except tame and wild Hogs. The People are well proportioned,
but rude and savage; some of them Gentiles, the rest Mahometans.

The Isle of Celebes described.
CELEBES is composed of many Islands so near the one to the other, that they
are commonly esteemed but one. They are fruitful in all Provisions, especially
Rice; they yield Gold, Ivory, Saunders, and Cotton; feed much Cattle, and their
Sea affords plenty of Fish and Pearls. The Air is healthful, though almost in
the same situation with Gilolo, except that they advance to the 6th degree of
Latitude toward the South. They are well peopled, and its People are tall and
comely. They are Idolaters, and much addicted to Piracy. Here is esteemed to be
six principal Kingdoms; of which that of Macasar, which gives sometimes a name
to all these Isles, is the most powerful; that of Cion the second; then those
of Sanguin, Cauripana, Getigan, and Supar. the greatest Cities are Macasar and
Bantachia, 30 or 40 Leagues one from the other; as also Celebes, seated on the
Sea.

The Land of Papous.
The Land of PAPOVS, that is, of Blucks is little known, yet is no other than
New Guiney, and other than the Isle of Ceyram, though some would confound it
with them. This last is to the Westward of it, and the other to the Eastward;
both the one and the other more toward the South. There are some Whites among
its Inhabitants, but few; all lean, deformed, and Traitors. They have Gold,
Ambergreece, and Birds of Paradise, with which they pay Tribute to their Kings,
and to the King of Ternate.

The Isles of Ceyram, Flores, etc.
CETRAM has the same qualities, and its Inhabitants like to Papous, and well
peopled. Flores, Solar, Malva, Susu, Timor, Ombo, Terralta, etc. are diverse
Isles under the 8th, 9th, and 10th degrees of South Latitude, and which advance
from the 160th unto the 175th degree of Longitude. Timor (an other than that
Timor of the Moluccoes) is the most esteemed. It produces store of Grains and
Fruits, feeds many Cattle and Fowl; amongst its Drugs and Spices, it has
Ginger, Cinnamon, and whole Forests of white and yellow Saunders. Its
Inhabitants are Idolaters, half Savages, and had the use of Fire but lately.
Malva on the West of Timor, has quantity of Pepper. Solar is other than Soloe,
or Solayo. This last is 10 Leagues from Celebes, and between the 6th and 7th
degree of Latitude; that 15 or 16 Leagues from Timor, and between the 8th and
9th degree of Latitude. The City Adonare is the residence of the King of Solor,
and there is a great trade for Saunders between this Isle and Cabanazza in
Timor. Solor has likewise Gold and Pearl.

Almost in the midst of these Isles, which we call in general the Moluccoes,
are those of Amboyna and Banda, which are but small, yet are in great esteem.
Those of Amboyna are, Amboyna, Veranula, Hittou, Noesan, and some others.

The Isle of Amboyna, its fertility and commodities.
The Isle of AMBOYNA has its chief City of the same name, which is of some
considerable note, besides several other small Towns and Villages. This Island
was first discovered by the Portugals, who had here the command of a Castle and
other Forts, which the Hollanders took in 1605, and have possessed likewise the
Fortress of Coubella, Lovio, and the Redout of Hittou, in the Isle of Hottou.
The Spaniards dispossessed them a little after 1620, and the Hollanders have
regained them since, where they drive a great and profitable Trade. The Land at
first was barren, but by their industry it is now become very fertile, producing
Rice, Sugar, quantity of Fruits, especially Lemmons and Oranges, Coco-Nuts,
Bonanas; several Spices, but principally Cloves; of which alone they receive
great profit. Here it was that the Hollanders did once, with a never to be
forgotten cruelty and barbarousness, murder the English that resided and
traded thither, on purpose to gain the whole Trade to themselves.

Its Inhabitants
The Inhabitants were heretofore Brutish Cannibals, insomuch as they would eat
one another, though their nearest Relations, when age or sickness seized them;
and all Pagans: but since by reason of the Commerce they had with the Persians
and Arabians, Mahometism is somewhat received amongst them, as also
Christianity, by reason of the Portugals and Dutch; which in time may come to
some perfection, though at present it is but very small. But notwithstanding
they make use of their Paganish Superstitions, adoring the Devil, who appears
to them when they invoke him; in which they are very superstitious and
ceremonious. They are much given to Sorcery and Conjurations, very profane,
barbarous, not given to Arts or Literature. They are naturally unsaithful,
thievish, covetous, stupid, and very timorous. In their Marriages they make no
great Ceremonies, taking one another words, which as slightly they evade,
leaving one another upon the least occasion of offense, and are free for
another.

The Isles of Banda, Nera, and Gumanapi described.
The Isles of BANDA are three principal ones. Banda, which communicates its name
to the rest, Nera and Gumanapi, and 3 or 4 lesser ones, Wayer, Poloway, and
Pulorin; some add Poelsetton, the most Western of all. Banda has the Cities or
Towns of Londor, Ortatan, and Combor; Nera has that of Nera and Labetach;
Gumanapi has only one of its name, underneath a Mountain which vomits Fire;
Nera is the chiefest of all. The Hollanders hold in the Isle of Nera the Forts
of Nassau and Belgica, and in the Isle of Poloway the Fort of Revenge.

These Isles are unhealthful; the Nutmegs and Mace, which these Isles produce,
make them frequented by Strangers. These Fruits they gather thrice a year, in
April, August, and December.

Besides these Isles already spoken of, there are these following which are
ranged and numbered with those of the Moluccoes, and are found as they lie,
either on the Coast or Shore of the Isles Celebes, Gilolo, or Land of Papous,
to participate of their nature, temperature, soil, or the like; which I have
taken notice of in the Geographical Table.

Its People.
The Inhabitants are Mahometans, in which they are very zealous and
superstitious, not entering into their Mosques without washing their Feet; and
when they are there, very fervent in their Prayers, which they use often. They
are very obstinate, and the Men are much given to idleness, minding their
Recreations, and leaving their affairs to their Wives. The People are here
observed to live to a great Age. The People of all these Isles, which have
passed under the names of Moluccoes, are of different humors; those which are
on the Coasts most frequented by Strangers, are the most civil; yet others more
barbarous. And on the Coast they are either Mahometans or Christians, the rest
Idolaters; but the Spaniards and Portugals on one side, and the Hollanders on
the other, do much trouble these Islands, making themselves Masters now of one,
and then of another; for the most part making War betwixt themselves, or with
the Islanders; among which there are diverse Kings, some subject to the
Portugals, and others to the Hollanders. Amongst all these Kings the most
powerful is he of Ternate, Their Kings.
to whom belong Ternate, Mothir, and Bachian; likewise Cayoa, and Gazea,
amongst the True Moluccoes; and thereabout, those of Mean, where are built his
Carcoles, that is, Vessels of War; Tofoura, Xullo, Buro; those of Amboyna,
among which Ceyram seems to be comprised: Then part of the Land of Papo^s; part
of Gilolo, and the Celebes, whose Kings are tributary to him. Argensola faith,
That in 70 Islands, which are in his Estates, he can raise 200000 Men^ and that
he keeps ordinarily a great number of Carcoles, with many Cannons, and all
things necessary; and that the Captains of his Militia are aged Men, which have
been bred and educated in Arms.

The Isles of LARRONS, or THIEVES.
The Isles of Larrons described;
WE have almost nothing to say touching the Isles of THE EVES. They are 16 or 20
different Isles, which continue from about the 8th unto the 20th and 21st
degree of Latitude on this side the Equator, and are almost all under the 188
Meridian. Their names, situation and greatness, a guess may be given of by the
Chart.

The Isle of Dancers, of Martyrs, of Birds, etc. Toward the South those of
Pulo Vilan, De los Arecisos, De los Matelotes, and Bidima, etc. are toward the
West, and between the Larrons and Philippines: The Volcanis toward the North,
where there is Cochineal: Malpelo toward the North-East, but indeed rather
toward the East, and seeming to belong to America. Also the Isles of Bacim,
Botaba, Volia, Can, Mata, Sepan, Natan, Chereguan, Guagan, Artomagan, Agan,
Gregua, Chemochoa, Mana, Englese, Angloise, Malabrigo Deserte, etc.

All these Isles are poor, having little to live on; scarce any tame Beasts, no
Metals; the Inhabitants are naked, active, great Thieves, particularly of Iron.

The ISLES of the SONDE; which may be comprehended under Great ISLES, and
particularly called the Isles of the SONDE; and such are those of SUMATRA, with
its Kingdoms of Achem, Achem, Daya.
Pacem, Pedir, Pacem.
Aru, Aru, Bancalis.
Baras, Baras, Batham.
Camper, -- Camper. Guadahyri, -- Guadahyri. Priaman, Priaman, Potenban.
Menancabo, Menancabo, Batacapas.
Jamby, Jamby, Votaboura.
Baras, Baros, Palimbam.

BORNEO, Borneo, Hormata, Bendarmassin.
JAVA, with its Kingdoms or Cities of Bantam, Jacatra, Sura, Japara, Tuban,
Jortan, Panarucan, Balambuan, Depresado, Surbaja, Sidajo, Saraboy, Carovang,
Materan.

Small ISLES; and may be considered as they lie On the Coast of JAVA; among
which are those of Madura, -- Madura. Baly, -- Bali. Pater Noster. Mulusura.
Luboc. Graciosa. Sapy. Cariman Java. Selam.
On the West, and South-West Coast of SUMATRA; as Engano. Nassau. Good Fortune.
Calippes. Nays. Gavia. Oura. Cocos.
Between SUMATRA and BORNEO, are those of Pedra. Bruca. Bitam. Linga. Monpin,
-- Banca. Billeton. Lucubare. Suronton.
On the North-West, North, and North-East Coast of BORNEO; and belonging to it
are the Isles of Tomveta. Timbolan. Ananiba. Matuma. Tigaon. Tiga. Ciumbabon,
St. Maria. St. Michael. Zolo. St. John. Boquerano.



The ISLES of CEYLAN, with its Kingdoms, Cities, and Isles, as they lie
North-Easternly, and on the Sea; as, Jafanapatan. Trimquilemale. Baticalo.
Westernly, and on the Sea; as, Punto Gallo. Colombo. Chilao.
Within Land; as, Jala. Ceitavaca, Candea. Das set Corales.
Isles about, and Close to CEYLAN; as Manar, -- Manar. Grande. Barra de Cardiva.


The ISLES of the MALDIVES, as they are know buy the Names of the ATTOLLONS of
Tilla don Matis. Milla dove Madoue, Padypola. Malos Madou. A^iatollon. Male
Atollon. Poulisdou. Molucque. Nillandoux. Collomadous. Adoumathis. Sovadou.
Adou, and Pove Molucque,

THE ISLES OF THE SOUND.
The Isles of the Sound. Their situation.
THE Isles of the SOVND are those of Sumatra, Borneo, Java, the greater and
lesser, and others: They are underneath and about the Equator, advancing on
this side, to the seventh and eighth degree of Latitude, toward the North; and
beyond it, unto the ninth or tenth degree of South Latitude; beginning at 135
Degrees of Longitude, Westward, and ending about the 160 Eastwards: So that
they are together 16 or 18 Degrees of Latitude, which are 400 and odd Leagues;
and 24 or 25 Degrees of Longitude, which are 600 or thereabouts.

Their Name.
The Portugals called them the Isles of the Sound, because they are to the South
of Malacca, as Pyrardus says. I believe rather, because of the Straight of the
Sound, which is between the two chief, and best known of these Islands, to wit,
Sumatra and Java major; or else, because of the Port of Bantam, which is called
of the Sound, being the best Port, and of the greatest concourse that is in all
these Islands.

The Isle of Sumatra, in situation.
The Island of SVMATRA is 10 or 12 Leagues from the Peninsula of Malacca, and
extends from the sixth Degree of Latitude on this side, near to the sixth on
the other side the Equator, which are about 11 or 12 Degrees of Latitude; but
it lying from North-west to South-east, stretches from its Northerly point
toward Achem, unto that of Labansamora toward the South, and on the Straight
of the Sound, near 400 Leagues, being not above 50, 60, or at most 80 broad.

Its parts.
Some Authors divide it into 4, others into 10, and others into 30 Kingdoms. It
is to be believed, that it had sometimes more, sometimes less, or that the
least were Vassals or Tributaries to the greatest. At present those most famous
are Achem, which holds likewise Pedir, to which it has been subject, and Pacem
on the Northern Coasts toward India; Camper almost underneath Palimbam, Jamby,
Guadahyri, Priaman, Baras, and Manancabo, beyond the Equator: All which are the
Seats of so many of their Kings. But a word or two of Achem, which is of the
greatest esteem.

The City of Achem described.
The City of Achem is seated on the side of a very broad River, and in a large
Plain: It has neither Gates nor Walls to defend it self, but a Castle, which
is the Palace Royal, which is fortified with a good Wall and Pallisado, and
well armed, and so seated, that it commands the whole City: They enter into
this Castle or Palace by seven several Gates, one after another, which are
guarded by Women that are expert at their Weapons, which are also the ordinary
Guard of the King's Person; and without the leave of the King, or his Guard,
none are suffered to enter the Pallisado. The Buildings in this Castle are but
mean, which are the same with those of the City, which by reason of the often
overflowing of the River, are built upon Piles, and covered with Coco Leaves,
but the furniture which is rich and costly. On two sides of the Castle, there
are pleasant Forests, well stored with Apes, Herns, and all manner of Birds,
and other delights, in which the King recreates himself; as also in
Cock-fighting, Hunting the Elephant, or Bathing Himself in the River. In all
which, he seldom is without a Company of Women, in whom he most delights. He
observes great state, seldom showing himself; he is much reverenced by his
Subjects, whom he uses no better than Slaves: In his Laws he is very severe;
and in his Punishment cruel. His Government being absolute and merely
arbitrary. His Revenue, without doubt, must be great, by reason of the rich
Commodities that are found here. He is so powerful, that in 1616 he put to Sea
60000 Men of War, in 200 Ships and 60 Galleys, with store of Cannons and
Ammunition, to make War against the Portugals in Malacca; and he alone drove
them from the Fort which they had in Pacem; and hindered them from taking
footing in Sumatra.

The Fertility, Commodities, etc. of these Isles.
The Air, by reason of the great heats, is very unhealthful, but withal, is very
fertile, abounding in Rice, Millet, Oil, Beefs, Goats, Sheep, Fowls, Fish,
store of Fruits; also it is rich in Gold, though of a lower alloy, in Silver,
Copper, Iron, Tin, in Precious Stones, in Silks, in several Spices, as long and
common Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs,; also in Medicinal Drugs, in
Wax, Honey, Camphire, Cassia, Bezar, Lignum, Musk, Civet, Amber, Alloes, whole
Woods of white Sandale, abundance of Cotton, etc.

The Hollanders are in good intelligence with the people, and Kings of Sumatra;
and particularly with him of Achem: They have no place or Fortress in the Isle,
but at Jambay, a Kingdom, City, and River of the same name; in one degree and
fifty minutes beyond the Equator. They have built on this River, and 25 Leagues
from the Coast, a House to accommodate their Traffic with the Islanders: Their
Trade is for the most part Pepper, which they send from this House to the Sea
by Canoes. The Inhabitants are many of them good Artificers and expert
Mariners; they are for the most part Gentiles, yet of late Mahometism has
crept in amongst them: They are of an Olive color Complexion, flat-faced, but
indifferent well proportioned, and content themselves with a mean habit.

The Isle of Borneo, its situation; and fertility.
The Island of BORNEO, like to Sumatra, is part on this side, and part beyond
the Equator; but it reaches on this side unto the seventeenth degree of North
Latitude, and beyond only to the fourth of South Latitude. Its Form is almost
round, having only 250 Leagues from North to South, and little less from West
to East; containing in its Continent more than Sumatra, or any other Isle we
have knowledge of in Asia; but it is not so well inhabited, nor of so great
Trade as Sumatra, yet more fertile, and besides the same Commodites has
quantity of Myrabolans. Its Forests are full of Trees, which bear the most
excellent Camphire in the World, which is uttered in the Indies, being too dear
to be brought farther: That which comes to us from China, is so falsified, and
of so little value, in respect of that which comes pure from Borneo, that one
hundred pounds of the one, is not worth one pound of the other. It has also
plenty of Provision. Borneo, Bendarmissin, Lave, and Hormeta, are the fairest
Cities, or at least the best known of the Isle; for we yet know nothing of the
Eastern Coast. Borneo is on a Salt Lake, or rather at the bottom of the Gulf of
the Sea, as Venice is, and is on the North-West of the Island. Its Houses are
built of Wood, and upon Piles, and are accounted to be 20 or 25000. Through
every Street runs a Channel or River of Water; the Palace of the King, and
the Houses of the principal Lords are of Stone, and on the firm Land,
Bendarmassin and Lave are toward the South, regarding the great Java, and both
belong to the same King: They build many Juncos at Bendarmassin. The River of
Succadan, and the Neighboring Forests furnish them easily with Wood, and all
that is necessary for the building of those Vessels. Lave is near a River of
the same name; and this River, as Succadan, yields Diamonds. Hormeta, is
described by the Hollanders on the Coast, Westwards of the Isle, and they
esteem it to have 2 or 3000 Houses.

Its Inhabitants
The Inhabitants are great, of an Olive color, of a good countenance; their
Women brown and chaste, a thing very rare in the Neighboring Islands. They
trade little to distant places, being more inclined to Theft and Piracy, then
to Trade; exercising this only with their Neighbors, the others with strangers
far off. They are expert in all sorts of Arms, of good Wits, and capable of
Arts. Their Apparel is much the same with the Indians, which is a Linen Cloth
about their privy Parts, and on their Heads Turbets. In their Religion they are
either Mahometants or Gentiles.

Several small Isles.
About Borneo are a great quantity of little Isles, Bonquerano 3 Degrees, St.
John 4. Jolo or Zolo 5. Tagyma 6. and Combahan 8 Degrees of Latitude: This last
is on the North of the Gulf, and City of Borneo; near that Gulf is
Pulogitgan, etc. all these Islands belong to the King or Kings of Borneo.

Isles of Java Major and Minor, their situation, length, and breadth.
The two Islands of JAVA Major and Minor are to the South of Borneo: however
there is much dispute about the seat of the little one, the greater lies from
the sixth, unto the eighth, ninth, or tenth Degree of South Latitude, for we
know not its certain breadth: And from the 145 Meridian beyond the 155, this
length being 250 Leagues, and its breadth little less. We have scarce knowledge
of any but the North-coast of this Island, none at all of its Southern.

The City of Bantam described, with its great trade.
Along the North-Coast of Bantam, where is one of the greatest Trades of all the
East Indies, and where the Merchants of the East India Company of England have
their residence, and where once there was a like Company for the Hollanders,
which they have transported to Jacatra or Batavia. Bantam is at the foot of a
Hill, from which descend three Rivers; of which one passes through the middle,
the others long, and on the two sides of the City, communicating by diverse
Channels, convenient for the Mahometans, who believe themselves purged from
their sins, as often as they wash, but all too shallow for Ships to sail in;
the Walls of the City are of Brick of no great strength, as also are their
Gates, which makes them have the greater care in guarding them: The City is
indifferent great, yet have they but three principal Streets, and these all but
upon the Castle; at every corner of the Streets there stands a guard, and at
Sunset they make fast all passage Boats, so that in the night there is no
stirring in the Streets. The Houses are but meanly built, either of Reeds or
Straw, and covered with Coco leaves; but for preservation of Goods, they have
Storehouses made of Stone; they have several places or Markets for the sale of
Commodities, as also an Exchange where Merchants meet.

Its Commodities.
The Commodities of Bantam are these of the Isle, as all sorts of Druggs,
Pepper, Sugar, Preserved Ginger, and all sorts of Sweetmeats, both wet and
dry; Rice, Honey, etc.

Also in this City is found several good Commodities, which are the product of
other places, which are here had at easy rates, viz. Spices, precious Stones,
Ammunition, Sandal-wood. Silk both raw and wrought into several Fabrics, as
Velvets, Sattins, Damask, Cabinets, Lacque, Porcelain, Callicoes, Frankincense,
Camphora, Benjamine, etc.

It is governed by a Supreme or Sovereign Prince, whom they entitle the
Mattaran, and has four Deputies or Tetrarchs his Subordinates. It is very well
peopled; the Houses of persons of quality are better built then the rest,
having square Courts at their entrance; and commonly there is a Mosque
belonging to every one of them, as also a Cistern to wash themselves in. The
Palace is indifferently well built; showing some kind of State; here the
Chinesses (who are great traders to this City, bring in most of the Commodities
except Pepper, Cotton, Wool, and Rice) have a place of meeting for their
worship.

The Cities of Jacatra,
Fifteen or twenty Leagues from Bantam is Jacatra, now Batavia, since the
Hollanders have builded this on the ruins of the other, where they had a fair
Magazine: The King of Jacatra assisted by some English, besieged it about the
year 1618. the Hollanders defended themselves till March 1619. that their
General Koen returning from the Moluccoes raised the siege; took and ruined
Jacatra, and rebuilt Batavia, with a very good Citadel: This place is at
present the Seat or Court of the General and Counselors of the East India
Company, for the United Provinces.

Continuing along the Coast, Japara.
and 100 or 120 Leagues from Batavia is JAPARA, a City and Kingdom with a good
Port, and a fair River. TVBAN 20 or 25 Leagues from Japara, likewise a City and
Kingdom, and Gulf: Jortan.
Fifty Leagues farther is the City, River, and Port of Jortan, which is of
great concourse, for those that go or return from Bantam to the Moluccoes, and
from the Moluccoes to Bantam; Passaruam.
Passaruam is 20 Leagues from Jortan, and Panarucan yet 8 Leagues farther: This
makes the most Easterly point of Java Major: Balambuan is 12 or 15 Leagues from
Panarucan, inclining toward the South. All these Cities have each their Kings.
Balambuan regards the Isle of Baly, Balambuam.
and the straight that is between them, takes its name from Balambuan as the
most famous. Many Portugals remained at Panarucan to facilitate the Commerce
they had of the Moluccoes, of Amboyna, Banda, Timor, etc. with Malacca, or
those places they possess on this side, Panarucan being in the way between.
Near this City a Sulphurous Mountain cast forth such great quantity of Stones
and Cinders in 1588, that 10000 persons were stifled.

In the midst of the Isle of JAVA, and toward the South Coast is the City of
Maderan or Materan, Maderan described.
the residence of the most powerful King of Java: This City is 100 Leagues from
Bantam, 100 or 120 from Balambuan, and only 35 or 40 from Japara. This King
once commanded the whole Isle; he yet commands those Kings which are in the
High-land, and on the South Coast: Those on this side have freed themselves
from his Rule, rendering him only certain Duties, yet some places he holds on
this Coast.

The Isle of Java Minor.
We have no certain knowledge of JAVA Minor, if we do not esteem it to be those
Isles to the East of Java Major, and whose Northern Coast we only know. Mark
Paul of Venice, who made the first Relation, says that it contained 2000
Leagues Circuit, which would be more then our great Java, as we know it at
present; he says it had eight Kingdoms, of which he had seen six; gives to the
soil the same qualities with the great one; but that its Inhabitants were more
savage, and some Man-eaters: we shall presently speak a word or two of both
Java's.

The Isles of Baly and Madura.
On the East of Java is BALY Isle, which has not above 40 Leagues Circuit, yet
is peopled with 600 thousand Souls, has its particular King, rich, and
magnificent. Madura Ifle on the North-East of Jortan in the Java Major, is
likewise full of people; Its Cities are very fair; has its particular King;
its people are wicked and perfidious.

Its People.
The people of all these Isles are Mahometans on the Coast, up in the Country
great Idolaters; and some Man-eaters. They have many Kings, and have hitherto
been able to hinder the Spaniads, Portugals, and Hollanders, from building on
their Coasts; yet these last have lately got Butavia, which they bravely
maintain.

The people are corpulent, of a middle stature, broad-faced, little eyes; they
wear long hair, of a Chestnut complexion; they are addicted naturally to theft,
stout and courageous, very malicous when angered, very proud, deceitful, and
great liars; their clothing is as the other Indians, that is, only a piece of
cloth tied about their privy parts. Yet some exceed, whereas others go quite
naked. They yet retain diverse barbarous Customs and Ceremonies, as well in
matters of Religion as otherwise. Their weapons are the Bow and Arrows, the
Dart, the Lance, and Shield, and Crizes, a strange and cruel weapon.

Its Fertility.
The Country or Islands are very fertile, affording very many rich Commodities,
as has been spoken of already, which are all very excellent; they have several
sorts of both tame and wild Beasts, abundance of Fowls and Fishes, among the
rest Oysters, which if Mandelsloes may be credited, weighs 300 pound weight;
among their Serpents they have Crocodiles very large; and for their Fruits,
they may compare with most places, as well for the fairness, pleasant tastes,
as for the great variety of them.

This Isle is much troubled at some part of the year with dreadful Thundrings
and Lightnings.

Let us now make a short observation on the one and the other Java, and the
neighboring Isles and Countries, according as Mark Paul of Venice has
described them. It seems that his great Java must be the Isle of Borneo, his
Isles Sondor and Condor must be Pulo Londor, his Province of Beach, the
Peninsula of Malacca, his Isle Patan, that of Sumatra, and his Java minor our
present Java major: And it is to be believed that Borneo, Sumatra, and Java are
likewise the three Sindes of Ptolomy.

The Isles of CEYLAN, and the MALDIVES.
The Isles of Ceylan, and the Maldives.
NOt far from the Cape of Comori are the Isles of CEYLAN on one side, and the
MALDIVES on the other. Ceylan, 60 Leagues toward the East; and the Maldives
150 between the East and the South.

Ceylan, its situation and extent.
CEYLAN is the Trapobane of the Ancients, though Ptolomy makes it unmeasurably
greater then Ceylan is now found. Its situation is on this side the Ganges,
and near Cape Comori, of old Comaria Extrema; likewise near Cape de Cael, of
old Gori or Caligicum promont. and on the straight of Manar or Quilao, of old
Argaricus Sinus, near which, or a little farther, is the Land of Madura, of old
Madura Regia Pandionis, and diverse other particulars making sufficient proof.

The Indians name it Tenerasin, that is, the Land of Delights; the Arabs Zeilan
Dive, that is the Isle of Ceylan. It extends it self from 6 to 10 Degrees of
Latitude, and so comprehends four whole Degrees, which makes 100 Leagues from
South to North: It has but two Degrees and a half, or little more of
Longitude, which amounts to sixty and odd Leagues from East to West: The whole
Circuit is about 300 Leagues; its form is almost Oval, or rather like a Pearl
or Pear, whose tail is North, and its head South.

Some place in this Isle 7 Kingdoms, others 9, and others more; Its parts.
that of Jafanapatan is the most Northerly; those of Trinquilemale, and
Baticalo are the most Easterly; those of Chilao and Colombo the most Westerly;
and that of Jaba the most Southward; those of Candea, of Set Coralles, and
Ceitavaca, hold the middle. Candea is at present the most famous; those of
Colombo and Ceitavaca have sometimes been the residence of Kings, which have
commanded all the Island.

The Portugals here inhabit.
At present the Portugals hold Colombo, Chilao, Manar Isle and Fortress,
Jafanapatan, and some other places on the Coast, which regard the straight of
Chilao and Manar. Columbo and Chilao are not above 60 Leagues, or little more,
from Cape Comori, Manar 25 or 30 Leagues from Cape de Cael, and Jafanapatan 15
or 20 from the Cape of Negapatan.

The best Ports of this Isle are those of Gallo, Columbo, and Chilao: That of
Galla is one of the best known of all Indra, because all that come, or go, are
constrained to make the point of Gallo, for fear of falling on the Banks of the
Maldives: Some years past the Hollanders took this important place from the
Portugals.

Its Air, Fertility, and Commodities.
The Air is so temperate, and the Land so fruitful, that some esteem it the
Earthly Paradise. Its Fruit, Herbs, and Plants have a mavelous pleasant odor;
its Cinnamon is the best in the World, and particularly toward Colombo and
Ceitavaca, there is found much Cardamom, Areca, Nutmegs, Pepper and other
Spices, and several Druggs, also Lignum Aquilae, Lignum Serpentis, Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron and other Metals; though the Mines are not wrought; many
precious Stones, among others those which the Portugals call Oats-eyes; they
have no Diamonds, but many Pearls, which they fish for in the straight between
this Island and the Continent. The Soil produces Corn, Oil, Wine, Cotton,
abundance of Rice, several roots for Diers. Among their Beasts their Elephants
are so excellent, and so docile, that those of other places bear honor to them
as to their Superiors. They have great plenty of Fowls, Cattle; and their
Rivers yield great store of Fish.

As concerning the Coyns, Weights, and Measures of the Isles of Ceyland, and
the Maldives, I have no certain account thereof, wherefore I omit them.

The Islanders are generally great, The Inhabitants.
black, deformed, having their Ears long, and their Nostrils large, for the
rest well disposed and active, great Dancers, insomuch that they may furnish
all India with Comedians and Juglers; they are rich, and smother themselves in
delights, all things agreeing to it, yet are they inclined to War. In those
places possessed by the Portugals are many Christians, the rest Idolaters or
Mahometans.

The MALDIVES.
The Isles of the Maldives, their situation, and parts or Attollons.
THe MALDIVES take their name from Male the chief City of these Islands, and
Dive which signifies and Island; they are an infinite number of very little
Islands, all seated in the Indian Ocean, on this side Cape Comori, beginning at
the eighth Degree of Northern Latitude, and not ending till the third or fourth
of the South, the Equinoctial Line passing over them, so that they extend in
length 300 Leagues, in breadth not above 15, 20 or little more.

They are divided into thirteen Attollons, separated the one from the other by
certain Channels, and containing each a great number of little Isles: From
hence the King of Maldives terms himself King of 13 Provinces, and 12000 Isles;
though there be many less, and the most of them desert, and which the Sea
covers when it is high.

The disposition of these Attollons is admirable; then their Banks, their
Entrances, their Currents; the Attollons are almost round, or Oval; each having
30, 40, or 50 Leagues circuit; and succeeding one another from North,
North-west, to South, South-east, there resting between them but certain
Currents, large, little or more, but all dangerous.

These Attollons are each encompassed with a great bank of stones, there being
no human Art could better wall a place, then these banks do their Attollons,
the Sea breaking its waves against the banks, and within the Attollons there
being a perfect calm, and but little depth of water. The entrances are certain
open places of 40, 50, some of 100, 200 common paces, which the Author of
Nature has given to every Attollon; that is four to each, to facilitate their
passage from one Attollon to another; for the Currents which are between the
Channels, being carried six Months to the East, and six Months to the West; it
was impossible to pass from one Attollon to another, if there were but two
openings, one opposite to another. These Currents moreover are so rapid, that
when it is calm, and when the wind goes with them, they carry a Vessel
sometimes to Malabar and Ceylan, and sometimes to Sumatra, without possibility
of stopping of it; and on the other side, even to Arabia and Africa.

The names and order of these Attollons descending from North to South, are
Tilladou Matis, that is the high point, and by the Spaniards, Cabexa das Ilhas,
head of the Islands; then Milla dove, Madoue, Padypola, Malos: Caridon,
Ariatollon, Male Attollon, where is the Isle of Male Poulisdou, Moluque,
Nillandoux, Collomadoux, Adoumatis, Souadou; Addou and Poue Moluque, the two
last being esteemed but one.

The largest Channels, and there where the Currents are the strongest, are
those of Malos, Madoue, Caridon, Aldou, and Sovadou. Francis Pirard a great
Traveller was shipwrackt on the first, and remained five years in the Maldives,
where at leisure he learned the tongue, situation, and manners of the
Inhabitants, and has set out a public description of every particular.

The King of these Isles resides in the Isle of Male, which is one of the
greatest, though not above a League and a half in Circuit: It is one of the
most fruitful, and seated in the middle of the Longitude of three Islands.
Strangers frequent it, because of the Court. There are no Cities through all,
their disposition being sufficiently commodious; their situation denotes a
great heat, yet the days being equal to the nights, and the nights subject to
great Dews, they refresh the Earth; so their Summers are without rain, and
their Winters without ice; but these pouring down rain with a constant West
South-west wind, the Fever among the Maldives is very common, and dangerous to
Strangers, whom it often kills in few days.

Provision very plentiful.
There grows neither Rice nor Wheat; yet are Provisions better cheap than in the
rest of the Indies. They have Rice from the Continent and gather at home Millet
in abundance, and the Grain of Bunbi, like to Millet, but black. They have much
Fruit, Citrons, Pomegranates, Oranges, Bananes; and above all, so great
abundance of that Nut of India, called Cocos, that no Country in the World has
so much. All the Levant is furnished hence, lading every year several Ships.
They have many Animals, little Beef or Mutton; no Dogs, for they abhor them:
Quantity of Fish.

Shells pass instead of Money.
They have many little Shells, which pass in many places for Money, and they
lade yearly 30 or 40 Ships with these Shells for Bengala only, besides what
they lade for other parts. Their Tortoise Shells are much esteemed at Cambaya,
because they are smooth, black, and well figured; with which they make Combs,
Cases of Looking-glasses, etc. Their Tavarcarre or Cocos, particularly of the
Maldives, is very Medicinal, and of greater value then their Ambergris, and
their black Coral. The King alone is to have this Tavarcarre and Ambergreece,
not permitting his Subjects to trade in it.

There is brought to the Maldives, in exchange of their Commodities, Rice,
Cloth, Silk, Cotton, Oil, Areca, Iron, Steel, Spices, Porcelain, Gold and
Silver, which come not thence again. Its Inhabitants make use of all sorts of
Arms, yet their King is neither rich, nor powerful, except in his Isles, and in
regard of his own Subjects.

The Coco-Nu^ and Tree of great use for several things.
Amongst the rarities of this Isle, their Candou and their Coco's are
observable. They make Planks of the Wood of Candou, with which they draw out of
the Sea all sorts of weights, though of 10000 pound. Their Tree is as great as
our Walnut-Tree, leaved like the Aspin, and as white, but very soft: It bears
no Fruit; they make Fisher-boats of it, and with rubbing two pieces of this
wood together, kindle fire as we do with a Flint and Steel; yet it neither
burns nor consumes.

As for the Coco's or Walnut of India, it furnishes them with all things
necessary for man's life; they extract from it Wine, Honey, Sugar, Milk, Oil,
and Butter. Its Kernels they eat instead of Bread, with all sorts of Meat; the
Leaf being green, serves for Paper to write; being dry, they fold it in little
Bands, and make Panniers, Dossers, Vmbrello's, Hats, Coverlids, and Carpets;
the Sprig which is the middle of the Leaf, being dry, hardneth, and of it they
make Cabinets, Chests, and other Movables; of the Shell, which incloses the
Fruit, they make Ladles, Spoons, Plates, Cups, etc. They may build a whole
House out of these Trees; the Trunk may serve for Beams and Joints; the
Branches cut in two or three for Pails, to pail in Gardens or Houses, and for
Laths to cover them; and the Leaves sewed together and disposed in ranks upon
those Laths, cast off the Water as well as our Tiles. They build likewise many
Ships only out of the Coco-Tree; the Keel, Sides, Planks, Pins, Hatches, Masts
and Yards, Cordage, Anchors, Sails, and even all the Utensils of a Ship, are
taken from this Tree, and sometimes their Lading, whether for Provision or
Movables, or to furnish Rigging for other Ships, is likewise taken out of this
Tree alone.

And so much for the Eastern Isles and all Asia.

AFRICA, as it is divided into AFRICA, or LIBYA, Exterior or Outward, and
comprehends BARBARY, which contains the Kingdoms of Morocco, -- Morocco.
Fez, Fez, Sala.
Telensin, -- Telensin. Algier, Algier, Bugia.
Tunis, -- Tunis. Tripoli, -- Tripolis. Barca, -- Barca. Desert of Barca, --
Ammon.
BILIDULGERID, which contains several Kingdoms and Provinces, the chief of
which are, Sus, or Tesset, -- Tesset. Darha, -- Darha. Segellomessa, --
Segellomessa, Tafilet, -- Tafilet. Tegorarin, -- Tegorarin. Zeb, -- Nesta.
Bilidulgerid, Fezzen, Gademes,

EGYPT, which is divided in Said, or Bechria, -- Cairo. Errif, Alexandria,
Rosetta.
Coast of the Red Sea, Sues, Grodol.


Interior, or Inwards, and comprehends ZAARA, or SAARA, where are the
Kingdoms and Cities of Zanhaga, -- Tegassa. Zuenziga, -- Zuenziga. Targa, --
Targa. Lempta, -- Lempta. Berdoa, -- Berdoa. Gaoga, -- Goaga. Borno, -- Borno.
The Land of NEGROES, where are the Kingdoms, People or Countries On this side
the Niger, as of Gualate, -- Gandia. Genehoa, -- Genehoa. Tombut, -- Tombotu.
Agades, -- Agades. Canun, -- Cano. Cassena, -- Cassena. Gangara, -- Gangara.
Between the branches of the Niger, as of The Jaloses People, -- Solul. The
Biatares People, -- Biatares. The Sous^s People, -- Beria.
Beyond the the Niger, as of Melli, -- Melli. Mandinga, -- Mandinga. Gago, --
Gago. Guber, -- Guber. Zegzeg, -- Zegzeg. Zanfara, -- Zanfara.

GUINEE, with its Kingdoms, Parts, and chief Places of Melegutte, -- Bugos.
Particular Guinee, or the Ivory Coast, St. George de la Min^* Cape of Palme^.
Benin, -- Benin.


AETHIOPIA, Higher, or under Egypt, and comprehends NUBIA, where are the
Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities of Bugia, -- Bugia. Jalac, -- Jalac. Nuabia, --
Nuabia. Dancala, -- Dancala. Cusa, -- Cusa. Gorham, -- Gorham. Damocla, --
Damocla. Somna, -- Somna.
The Empire of the ABISSINES, where are several Kingdoms, Countries, and
Cities; the chief of which are, Tigremahon, -- Chaxumo. Barnagasso, -- Barva.
Angota, -- Angotina. Dancala, -- Degibeldara. Amara, -- Amara. Bagamedri, --
Beza. Ambian, -- Amasen. Damute, -- Damute. Agag, -- Agag. Cafates, -- Cafates.
Narea, -- Zeb. Ambiam, -- Ambiam.
BARBARY, or ZANGUEBAR, which is divided into Zanguebar, with its Kingdoms and
Cities of Mozambique, Quiloa, Quilmanca.
The Coast of AJAN, with its Kingdoms and Cities of Adea, Adel, Magadoxo.
The Coast of ABEX, with its chief Places and Isles of Arquico, Suaquen.


Lower, or Interior, and comprehends CONGO, with its several Kingdoms or
Provinces; the chief of which are, Loango, -- Loango. Pemba, -- Pemba. Angola,
-- Engaze. Bamba, -- Bamba. Songo, -- Sonho.
The Coast and Country of CAFRES, with its several Estates, Kingdoms, Capes,
Ports, and Isles; the chief of which are the Cape of Good Hope, Cape of St.
Nicholas, Port of Carascalis, Isles of St. Christophers, Isles of St. Lucia.
MONOMOTAPA, with its Kingdoms and chief Places of Monomotapa, -- Monomotapa.
Butua, -- Butua. Monoemugi, -- Agag. Zesala, -- Zesala.


In diverse ISLES In the Mediterranean Sea, -- Malta, -- Valetta. In the Western
Ocean, as the Canary Isles, Canaria. The Isles of Cape Verd, St. Jago. The
Isles of St. Thomas, Pavoasa^.
In the Eastern Ocean, as Madagascar, Vingagora. Zocotora, Zocotora.



map of Africa A New MAPP of AFRICA Designed by Mounsir Sanson, Geographr to
the French King. Rendered into English and Ilustrated with Figurs By Richard
Blome By the Kings Especial Command
blazon or coat of arms of the earls of Carlisle VOLO VALEO

To The Right Honible Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle Viscount Morpeth, Baron
Dacres of Gisland, Lord Leivtenant of Cumberland and Westmoreland Vice Admiral
of ye Caost of Northumberland Cumberland Westmoreland Bishopric of Durham
Town and County of Newcastle and Maritin parts adjacent and (...) of the Lords
of his Maities most Honble privy Council and. This Mapp is most humbly D. D.
by R. B.



AFRICA.
AFRICA is a Peninsula so great, that it makes the Third and most Meridional
part of our Continent. It approaches so near to Spain, that only the Straight
of Gibraltar divides them; and touches so little upon Asia, that only an
Isthmus of 30 or 40 Leagues, between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, joins
them together.

Its Bounds.
Besides this Isthmus, Africa is bounded on all sides by the Sea, as appears by
the Map. The Latins called it most commonly Africa, Its Name.
and the Greeks, Libya; yet both the one and the other are indifferently found
in the Authors of the one and the other Tongue. The first was given by one
Afer, descending from Abraham and Kethura; others say, of one Afer, Son of the
Libyan Hercules; or (according to the Greeks) it is taken from (...), that is,
Sine Frigore, because (according to its situation) it must be without Cold.
According to the Arabs the name should be taken from Ifriquia, that is,
Divided; because were it not for that Isthmus which joins it to Asia, it were
quite divided from our Continent. According to the Punick Tongue it signifies
the Land of Corn, for the abundance of Grains gathered in that particular part
called Africa.

The name of Libya, is taken either from Libya, the Daughter of Epaphus, the
Son of Jupiter; or from Libya, one of the three Lakes which descend into the
River Triton; or from (...), which in the ancient Greek Idiom signifies Black,
because its Inhabitants are Black; or from Lub, which among the Arabs signifies
Thirst, because a good part of the Country wants Water. But these Histories,
Fables, and Etymologies, are taken from diverse Authors of diverse Tongues; and
for different Reasons there may be new ones found or made, to content those
which are covetous of them.

Its Form and Promontories.
The Form of Africa is near Triangular, yet it advances four Promontories to the
four principal places of the World. Cape Bona, toward the North; the Cape of
Good Hope, toward the South; Cape Guard a Fuy, toward the the East; and Cape
Verd, toward the West: the three last are on the Ocean, and the first on the
Mediterranean Sea.

Its length and breadth.
Its length, taken from Cape Verd to Cape Guard a Fuy, is about 2000 Leagues,
Its breadth, from Cape Bona to that of Good Hope, is about 1800 Leagues; but
both its length and breadth, are found much less in all other places.

Its Situation.
Its situation is under or about the Torrid Zone; the Equinoctial Line passing
over it, and cutting it in two, though unequal parts. The most part of Africa
is between the two Tropicks, which it out passes 11 Degrees, and and 15 Degrees
on one and the other side, to wit, 11 Degrees beyond the Tropic of Capricorn,
and 15 on this side that of Cancer.

How Inhabited.
It is every where inhabited, though not so well as Europe or Asia; whether by
reason of the insupportable Heats which reign there, or because it has many
Countries dry and without Water; or because it has others, where there is much
Sand easily removed by the Wind, often burying Men in it; or by reason of the
great number of venomous, fierce, and cruel Beasts, which are found through the
whole; or because they sell and transport one another for Slaves, I leave to
judge.

It is moreover observable, that it is fresher and cooler under and about the
Equator, than under and about the Tropicks. The reason is, because the Sun
makes two Summers and two Winters, under and near the Equator; and that the
Nights are equal to the Days, which is a great refreshment.

Its Division.
Diverse Authors divide Africa in a very different manner; yet most agree to make
first the Division into two great parts, calling that Oriental which is on the
East of the Nile, and that Occidental which is on the West; others by the
Equator, calling it Northern on this side, and Southern on the other side the
Equator: Others by the Colors of the People, observing that on this side the
Tropic of Cancer they are white, and beyond it black. But all these Divisions
have many faults, to avoid which, and to make our Division of Africa into two
great Parts, agree with that of ancient Authors, and with the disposition in
which the Country is now found, I draw a Line from the Gulf of St. Thomas unto
the extremity of Egypt, on the Red Sea. This Line carried along where the
Estates are distinguished one from the other, divides Africa into two equal
parts, cuts no Estate in two; and that which is on this side is called by the
Ancients, and by the Modern more precisely, Africa or Libya; that which is
beyond this, is called both by the one and the other Ethiopia.

This first Division will facilitate those of the other parts, dividing Africa
or Libya into two, and Ethiopia likewise into two; Africa or Libya into the
higher and farther, in regard of us; and exterior and interior in regard of
those of the Country. Ethiopia into high and low, according to the Moderns, or
into Ethiopia under Egypt, and Ethiopia Interior, according to the Ancients.

Its Parts, and their bounds.
In the Higher and Exterior Africa or Libya we have Barbary, Billedulgerid, and
Egypt: In the Farther and Interior Africa and Libya, Saara or Desert, the
Country of the Negroes and Guinny. In the Higher Ethiopia, or under Egypt, are
Nubia, Abissina, and Zanguebar: In the Lower or Interior Ethiopia, Congo, the
Mono-Motapa, and the Cafres.

Barbary extends it self along the Mediterranean Sea, from the Ocean unto
Egypt, and is bounded on the South by Mount Atlas. Billedulgerid lies along
this Mountain, likewise from the Ocean unto Egypt, bounded on the South by
Saara or Desert. Egypt is only one Valley, from the Cataractes of Nile unto the
Mediterranean Sea. This last part has retained its ancient name; the other two
put together, answer to what the Ancients called Mauritania, Africa proprie
dicta, and Libya likewise proprie dicta: so that the most Western parts of
Barbary and Billedulgerid together make Mauritania, the Middle Africa, and the
most Eastern Libya.

Likewise Saara or Desert, the Country of the Negroes and Guinny, stretch
themselves from the Ocean unto the High and Low Ethiopia: And the most Western
part of Saara answers to the ancient People Gatuli, the Easternly part of
Garamantes. The Country of the Negroes, to Nigritarum Regio: Guinny to many
People, of which the most famous have been the Perorsi. This Guinny is 750
Leagues long: The Country of the Negroes near 1000: Saara, Billedulgerid, and
Barbary, each 11 or 1200 Leagues; their breadth being only 100, 200, or 300
Leagues. The length of Egypt, from South to North is not above 200 Leagues. Its
breadth, if we esteem it only the Valley along the Nile, is very narrow; and
sometimes only 5, 10, sometimes 12 or 15 Leagues.

We have divided Ethiopia into the Higher and the Lower, placing in the Higher,
Nubia, Abissina, and Zanguebar; in the Lower, Congo, Mono-Motapa, and Cafres.
Nubia is for the most part on this side, and to the West; Abissina above, and
Zanguebar beyond the Nile, and in the most Easternly part of Ethiopia. Congo
makes the most Western part of Ethiopia; the Mono-Motapa, and Cafres, the most
Southern: This on the Coast, the other within Land.

Nubia, Abissina, and Zanguebar together, answer to the Ethiopia sub Egypto of
Ptolomy; Nubia to the most Northern part, and nearest to Egypt; Abissina more
Southern; Zanguebar to that which is on the Coasts, and there where Ptolomy
describes the Regions of Barbary, Azania, and Trogloditica; which answer to the
particular Zanguebar, on the Coast of Ajan, and the Coast of Abex; which we
esteem under the general name of Zanguebar. In the Lower Ethiopia, Congo
answers to the Hesperii Aethiopes, the Mono-Motapa to Agisymba Regio, the
Cafres to the Anthropophagi Aethiopes.

The Coast of Cafres reaches 1200 Leagues; the Mono-Motapa is 4, 5, or 600 long
and broad; Congo 6 or 700 long, and 300 large; Nubia 400 long, and 200 broad;
Abissina 7 or 800 long, and 4 or 500 broad; The Coast of Zanguebar stretches 15
or 1600 Leagues, with not above 100 of breadth, like to that of Cafres.

Its chief Mountains, viz.
The Mountains of Africa are in great number, and very remarkable, both for
their height, extent, the Metals wherewith they abound, and other particulars.
The most famous are Atlas, those of the Moon, and Serre Lione.

Atlas was the most famous Mountain among the Ancients, Atlas.
who believed it bounded the World on the South. Its name was taken from Atlas,
King of Mauritania, whom Perseus turned into a Mountain, by making him see the
Head of Medusa; and because he had been an Astronomer the Poets feigned, that
he bore up the Heavens. It is true, this Mountain is so high that it seems to
touch the Skies; it extends it self from the Great Sea or Occidental Ocean, to
which it has given the name of Atlantic, even near to Egypt, for the space of
more than 1000 Leagues, leaving Barbary on the one side, and Billedulgerid on
the other; casting forth branches under diverse names on both sides. There is
the Great and Little Atlas.

The Mountains of the Moon.
The Mountains of the Moon, now of Beth, are higher than any of Europe, and are
always covered with Snow and Ice: But these Mountains make diverse branches
toward the Cape of Good Hope; they are called Picos Fragosos; toward the East
of Congo, the Mountains of Crystal; above the Lakes of Zaire and Zafflan, the
Mountains of the Sun, and of Saltpeter; and it may well be, that the highest
between Abissina, the Mono-Motapa and Cafreria, retain the name of the
Mountains of the Moon.

The Mountains of Serre Lione.
The Mountains of Serre Lione, by the Portugals, Sierre Lioa, are the Chariot of
the Gods of the Ancients: And this name was given, because from their top they
send forth continual Lightnings and Thunders, as if the Gods could not march
with less noise. Their principal ridge is between the Country of the Negroes
and Guinny, where they make two Branches; one advancing into the Farther Africa
or Libya, and the Higher Ethiopia; the other between the Higher and Lower
Ethiopia: this seeking the Mountains of the Moon, the other Atlas.

Its chief Rivers, viz. The Nile.
The largest and most famous Rivers of Africa are the Nile and the Niger; the
Nile has been known in all times. Ancient and Modern Authors have been
troubled to tell where its Head-spring is, and more to give the reason of the
Increase and Decrease of its Waters; we will speak something of it in Egypt.
Its course is 1200 Leagues in a strait line, and little less than 2000 in its
turnings: It descends from the Lake Zaire, traverses the Higher Ethiopia,
Nubia, and Egypt, and falls with several Mouths into the Mediterranean; about
the middle of its course it embraces the Isle of Meroe or Gueguere: And this
Isle has many Estates and Signories, and may boast it self the greatest and
fairest of all River Isles that we have knowledge of.

The Niger.
The Niger has its Springs in the Kingdom of Damont, above the Lake Niger, and
not far from the Nile, when it is out of the Lake of Zaire. This Niger does in
some part divide the Higher Ethiopia from the Lower, approaches Nubia, and the
Country of the Negroes; hitherto rolling its streams from South to North, till
losing it self in the Earth, it rises again near the Lake Borno; turns its
course, and continues it to the West, traversing the whole Country of the
Negroes 200 Leagues from the Sea, it divides it self into many Branches, which
have diverse names, and falls into the Ocean between the 11th and 16th degrees
of Latitude. Its course is a little longer than that of the Nile; its streams
more violent, and has the same property of overflowing and fatning the Earth;
engenders the same Creatures, but not so strong; has grains of Gold in its
Sand: But the Country which it traverses is neither so well habited, rich, nor
known, as that of the Nile. Some believe the Nile and the Niger come from the
same Springs, and that they begin not to divide but between the Higher and
Lower Ethiopia; one continuing its course toward the North, the other turning
from East to West: So the Arab of Nubia calls both, Nile; and to distinguish
them adds, Nile of Egypt, and Nile of the Negroes.

The Zaire.
The other Rivers of Africa are not to compare with these. Zaire in Congo may be
considered for the quantity of Waters it streams down, and for the greatness of
its Mouth at the Sea, and so some others: but let us pass to the Promontories.

Its Promontories.
We have already touched a word or two on the principal ones, to wit, the Capes
of Bona, Hermea, Promontorium, Cape Verd, Arsinarium Prom, Guard a Fuy, Aromata
Prom; (this Name was given, because of the Drugs and Spices of the East, which
passed before, this Cape to descend by the Red Sea into Egypt, and from Egypt
into the Mediterranean, and through all the West,) and of the Cape of Good
Hope, of which the Greeks and Latins have had no certain knowledge, much less
those before them; nevertheless we find some Authors among the Ancients, who
would make it appear that the Barbarians, that is, the stranger Nations, have
made (or caused to be made) the Circum-navigation of Africa, which could not be
done without knowing of this Cape.

The Emperors and Kings which possess Africa.
The Kings, Emperors, or Princes, which at present possess Africa, are in very
great number; the most powerful and considerable are the Great Turk, or Sultan
of the Ottomans, who holds all Egypt, a great part of Barbary, and almost all
the Coast which touches the Red Sea. The Negus of the Abissines, who possesses
the fairest and greatest part of the Higher Ethiopia; the Xeriffs of Fez and
Morocco, which have held those two Kingdoms in Barbary, and likewise Dara, and
Segelmesse in Billedulgerid. The King of Tombutt, among the Negroes: the Mona's
or Mani, that is, Kings of Congo, Monotapa, and Emugi; and the Soba of Angola,
in the Lower Ethiopia; he of Adel, in the Coast of Ajan; besides which there
are many Xeques of the Arabs, many free and vagabond People, who (for the most
part) live without Chiess, Faith, or Law.

The Kings of Castile and Portugal hold many places on the Coasts of Africa;
those of Castile hold some on the Mediterranean Sea; those of Portugal hold a
great number on all parts of the Ocean, which encompasses Africa; but the
Hollanders have taken some from them, and others are delivered to the English.

Languages or Tongues spoken in Africa.
Amongst a great number of different Tongues that are in Africa, the three or
four principal and most general ones are the Beribere or African, which comes
from the Ancient Punick, the Arabic and Ethiopian. The African and Arabic
extend themselves through all Barbary, Billedulgerid, Egypt, and Saara,
according as the People of these Countries, descend from the Africans or Arabs.
The Ethiopian is in the greatest part of Ethiopia; if it be not on the Coast,
where the commerce and confluence of Strangers has long since changed the
Tongue: But the Negroes seem to have a particular Language. These Tongues have
diverse Idioms, and very different the one from the other; all (or at least the
three first) descending from the Hebrew, or Tongues derived from it.

Their Religions.
The Religions which have course in Africa may be reduced to four; Mahometism,
Paganism, Christianity, and Judaism. Mohometism possesses Barbary,
Billedulgerid, Egypt, Zaara or the Desert, part of the Negroes, and a good part
of the Coast of Zanguebar. Paganism holds part of the Negroes and Nubia,
Guinny, and almost all the Lower Ethiopia (I comprehend the Cafres with the
Pagans,) part of Zanguebar, and some mixture otherwhere. Christianity holds in
Africa almost the whole Empire of the Abissines, part of Egypt; but the most
part Schismatics; and along all the Coasts of Africa, where the Portugals are
the strongest, they have introduced Christianity: as in Congo, Angola, and some
Coasts of the Cafres and Zanguebar. As for Judaism, it is scattered in many
Cities on the Coast of Barbary; as at Morocco, Fez, Algier, etc. Likewise in
Egypt, and on the confines of the Abissines and the Negroes, they have the
Kingdom of Ximen tributary to the Abissines; but the Jews are but a small
number in Africa in comparison of the others. I make account that Africa being
divided into 16 equal parts, Mahometism would possess 5 or 6, Paganism 6 or 7,
Christianity 3, and Judaism only one.

Its division into Parts, as at this day known.
AFRICA, as it is at this day known, may be divided into these 8 parts
following, viz. 1. Barbary, (in which is found the Kingdoms of Morocco, Fez,
Algier, Telensin, Tunis, Tripoli, and Braca.) 2. Billedulgerid or Numidia. 3.
Egypt. 4. Zaara or Libya Interior, in which is comprehended the Country of the
Negroes, Guinny, with some certain Isles. 5. Nubia. 6. The Empire of the
Abissines, or the higher or greater Ethiopia, in which I comprehend Zanguebar.
7. Ethiopia the Lower, in which are found the Kingdoms of Congo, the Empire of
the Monomotapa, the Land of Cafres: And 8. and lastly, the Isles of Africa. And
of these in order.

Under the Name of BARBARY, are comprehended several Kingdoms, to wit, The
Kingdom of MOROCCO, wherein are several Provinces; and which may be considered
as they lie On the Sea, as Susa, Taradante, Messa, Tagavostum, Tojouta,
Gartguessemum.
Hea, Tednest, Teculethum, Goza, Tefethna.

Within Land, as Guzula, -- Guzula. Morocco, Morocco, Agmer, Elguimha, Temella.
Hascora, Elmadina, Tagodaft.
Teldes, Teiza. Tedza.
Ducala, Azamor, El Medina, Asafi.


The Kingdom of FEZ, with its several Provinces; which may be considered as
they lie On the Ocean, as Temesne, Anfa, Almansor, Rabatt, Adendum.
Fez, Fez, Mahmora, Salla, or Sally.
Asgar, Cafar-el-Cabir, Lharais.

On the Straight of Gibraltar, Habar. Arzila. Tangier, Tettinguina.
On the Mediterranean Sea, as Errif, Gomer, Bedia.
Garret, Mellila, Fetis.

Up within Land, as -- Chaus, Teza, Dubdu, Ga^sis.

The Kingdom of ALGIER, with its Provinces; which may be considered as they lie
On the West, as Telensin, with its Quarters Telesin, Telesin, Oran,
Marsalquibi^.
Hanghad, Guagida. Beni-Rafid Batha.
Tenez, Tenesa, Sersela, Meliana.

In the Middle, as -- Algier, Algier, Temendfufta, Taddeles.
On the East, as Bugia, Bugia, Chollum, Gergelum, Steffa.
Constantina, Constantina, Bona, Tabarca, Tebessa.


The Kingdom of TUNIS, with its Governments; and which may be considered as
they lie On the Sea, and are Maritim, as Benserta, -- Benserta. Goletta, Tunis,
Goletta.
Sousa, Susa, Hammmetha.
El-Media, or Africa, -- El-Media.
Within Land, as Beija, or Bege, -- Beija. Urbs, Urbs, Arbes, Musti, Marmagena.
Cayroan, Cayroan, Cafsa, Hama.


The Kingdom or Province of TRIPOLI, whose chief Maritim places are those of
Capes, Et-Hamma, Tripolis the New, Lepeda, Tripolis the Old.
The Country of BARCA, or LIBYA, which may be divided into The Kingdom of
BARCA, as it regards the Sea, and makes the most Eastern Coast of BARBARY,
whose chief places are Camera, Bernichum, Torachara, Tolometa, Zadra, Barca,
Cayroan, Boni-Andreas, Musolomarus, Albertonus, Rox^. Ripaealba.
The Desert of BARCA, within Land, more Southward, and under the Tropic of
Cancer; whose chief places are, Ammon, Gorham, Angela, Alguechet, Erner, Sert^,
Ascor, Eb^ida, and Couzza.



map of the Barbary coast A GENERAL MAPP OF THE COAST OF BARBARY, WHERE IN
ARE THE KINGDOMS, AND ESTATES OF MOROCCO, FEZ, ALGIER, TUNIS, AND TRIPOLIS ALSO
THE KINGDOMS, ESTATES, AND DESERTS OF BARCA, EGYPT, LIBYA, BILEDULGERID
SEGELMESSE, AND DARHA; With the Circumjacent Counteries. By Mounsieur Sanson
Geographer to the French King; and Rendered into English, and Illustrated By
Richard Blome: By his Majesty's Especial Command.
London Printed for Ric Blome Ao 1667.

Francis Lamb Sculpit



MOROCCO.
Kingdom of Morocco, its bounds.
THE Kingdom of MOROCCO is the most Western part of Barbary, bounded by the
Ocean, the River Sus, Mount Atlas, and the River Ommiraby: The Ocean washes it
on the West; the River Sus separates it from Tesset on the South; Mount Atlas
divides it from Darrha, and Segelmesse, on the East; and the Ommiraby from the
Kingdom of Fez, on the North.

In Provinces.
It is divided into 7 Provinces: those of Sus, Hea, Guzula, and Morocco, are
between the Rivers of Sus and Tensift; the two first on the Sea, and the other
within Land. The Provinces of Teldes, Hascora, and Ducala, are between Tensift,
and Ommiraby: the two first up in the Land, the other on the Ocean: and these
three last stretch toward the North and East; the four first toward the South
and West.

Province of Sus, its chief places, etc.
1. The Province of Sus is about the River Sus, and is sometimes extended as far
as Cape de Non. Taradante, not far from Atlas, is esteemed the chief City of
this Province, its Governors and Kings having here made their residence; much
enriched of late by the English and French Merchants, who have here a Staple
for their Sugars. The Town is large and well built, seated in a spacious Plain,
which affords great plenty of Sugar. 2. Messa, at the flux or mouth of the
River Sus, it is composed of three little Cities walled apart; and betwixt
which the River passes. 3. Tejent, seated higher; and on the same River, on a
spacious Plain, is likewise composed of three Towns, each distant a Mile from
each other, having their Temple common in the midst of the three. 4. Tedsa,
beyond the River Tagavost, containing about 8000 Houses; its chief Ornament
being a fair Mehometan Temple. 5. Capo d' Aguer, seated on a Promontory so
called, and is a place of great importance.

The Fortress, and City of Guarguessen in the midst of the Coast, and on a
branch, which this Mountain under the name of Idevacall, stretches into the
Sea, belongs to the Crown of Portugal.

Province of Guzula, its bounds and chief Places.
The Province of Guzula is to the East of Sus; to the South of Hea, and Morocco;
to the West of the Province or Kingdom of Darrha; and to the North of Tesset.
Here are observed to be no walled Cities, or Fortresses of note: but it has
many Buroughs and Towns of 1000 or 1200 Houses: where there are Markets kept
thrice a week, and a great Fair yearly, which lasts two Months, to which many
People from most parts of Africa do resort. The chief place bears the name of
the Province; the People are rude and barbarous, and with much ado are subject
to the King of Morocco. In the Country are many rich Mines of Gold, Brass,
Iron, and other Metals.

Province of Morocco, and and its chief Cities.
The Province of Morocco, particularly so called, lies all between the Rivers of
Asifnuall, and Tensift; from their Springs at the Mount Atlas; until they meet
about 15 or 20 Leagues from the Sea, Asifnual divides it from Guzula, and Hea;
Tensift from Hascora, and Ducala. The City of Morocco is the chief of the whole
Kingdom, and has been a long time in great esteem, and once accounted the
Metropolis of all Barbary, and reckoned amongst the greatest Cities in the
World. At which time it had twenty four, or twenty five Gates, being in circuit
12 Miles, and contained about one hundred thousand Families. It is strongly
girt about with Walls, and adorned within with many public and private
Buildings; as, its Palace, which they name the Alcasar. Its Churches or Mosques
are very fair, especially one, Morocco, its Trade and Commodities.
which is held the greatest in the World, seated in the midst of the City,
adorned with many sumptuous Pillars, which were brought out of Spain when the
Moors had the possession of the Country. It has a very large and strong
Castle, esteemed as big as a reasonable Town. Here is also a Burse for
Merchants, who trade hither. But of late, by reason of the defacement and
Spoils which it has suffered by the Arabians, together with the removal of the
Seat Royal to Fez, now the Metropolis of all Barbary, it has lost much of its
splendour, a great part of the City being deserted, so that they make use of but
4 or 5 Gates; neither is that part so populous, rich, nor has so good a Trade
as formerly. 2. Agmett, seated on a River of the same name; and at the meeting
of diverse passages which descend from Mount Atlas in the Plains of Morocco,
has been very fair and populous, and its Hills and Valley about it so fertile,
and beautified with pleasant Gardens, that it was called the Little Morocco; at
present it is almost Desert. 3. Elgiumuha, near the Mountain, and on the River
Secsiva. 4. Imegiagen, seated on a Mountain very steep on all sides: And, 5.
Tenezze, a Town of some note. All which are strong places, and very
advantagiously situated.

Province of Hea, its fertility, People, and chief places.
HEA, West of Morocco; a Province Mountainous and Woody, yet watered with many
good Rivers; the Soil indifferently fertile, and would produce several good
Commodities, were it inhabited by industrious People; these being a sort of
idle and in a manner barbarous, altogether ignorant of Arts, except some
Teachers of their Law, which can hardly read; as also some Chirurgions, who are
chiefly employed in the circumcision of their Children; they are generally very
courteous to Strangers, but very contentious among themselves. Its chief Cities
are, 1. Tednest, once a place of good esteem, seated on the River Savens. 2.
Hadequis. 3. Teguleth: and, 4. Tejeut, places of good note and Trade, the first
containing about 1000 Houses, having the benefit of a good Port, and beautified
with a fair Mosque, with some Hospitals. But about the year 1500 they were much
ruined by the Portugals, in whose possession they are, who have since somewhat
added to its former Estate. Tednest has about 1600 Houses, the most part Jews,
which are esteemed the chiefest. In the Mountains, Tesegdelt is most
considerable, containing above 1000 Families, and well situated; its Walls
being no other than thick Rocks. So are Ileusugagen, Tegtesse, Eitdeset,
Culejat, etc. situated upon Mountains, and of good strength. Tefethna, on the
Coast, and at the Mouth of a River of the same name, The Isle of Mogadour.
has a Port, where there is some Trade. The Isle of Mogadour, near the Cape of
Ocem, is distant from the Coast two little Leagues. The Kings of Morocco have
built here a Fortress to keep some Mines of Gold and Silver which are in the
neighboring Mountains.

Its Mountains west inhabited.
The Mountains of Aidvacall or Idevacall, near Cape de Guer; of Demensera, near
the Province of Guzula, and Gebel el Haden, near the Tensit, take up a part of
the Province; and are so well inhabited, that the last can set forth 12000
fighting Men, the first 20000, and the other 25000.

Provinces of Hascora and Teldes, and their chief places.
North of the Province of Morocco are those of Hascora, and Teldes separated the
one from the other by the River Quadel Habid. Tefza is the chief City of
Teldes, and near the River Derna, which falls into the Ommiraby; a rich City,
built by the old African Moors, and beautified with many Mohammedan Mosques; and
its Walls were made of a kind of Marble. 2. Elmadine is the chief City of
Hascora, Its People.
peopled with about 10000 Families, situate in a pleasant Valley, and begirt
with Hills; it is well built; its Inhabitants are civil, ingenious, and addict
themselves to Arts, Traffic, and Manufactures: the Women are fair, as in 3.
Tagodaft, which is on a Mountain, whose Foot is washed with many little
Streams, which water their Gardens. 4. Elgiumuha, toward the South, built by
the People, and in a like situation with Tagodaft. And, 5. Bzo, likewise a
City of some Trade. Between the Mountains Teldes has more than 50 walled
Towns, built near the streams of the River Darha. These Provinces are fertile,
having rich Fields, feed a great quantity of Goats. of whose Skins are made the
Cordovants, and of their Hair, plain and watered Chamlets; also store of
Cattle, Grains; excellent Fruit amongst others their Grapes as big as
Pullets-eggs; they have plenty of Fowl, The fertility and Commodities.
and their Rivers breed store of Fish.

Province of Ducala.
Ducala the most Northern part of Morocco, and possesses that which is between
the River Tensift, and Ommiraby: a Land fruitful for Grains. Its best Cities
are, 1. Azamor where the Ommiraby enlarges and forms a Gulf to disburthen it
self into the Sea, which before the Portugals became masters of it, had above
5000 Houses. It sell again into the hands of the Moors, and entirely restored,
having a strong Garrison. 2. Elmadine toward the Sea, and in a fair Plain,
has been esteemed the Capital of the Country. 3. Magrizena-Sanut, which they
have fortified; and on the same Coast have dismantled Tite, the easier to fetch
in Tribute thence, and from the Neighboring places. 4. Asafi or Satfy not far
from Tensift, is strong, and has a good Trade, where the French has a Consul.

Kingdom of Morocco.
The Kingdom of Morocco has suffered great changes, within these few Centuries
of years; having been often united, and as often separated from that of Fez.
And sometimes likewise its South parts, Sus and Gurula have made a Kingdom
apart. Its principal Ports are those of Messa Azafi, Its chief Ports,
Promontories and Rivers.
Mazagan and Azamor. Its Promontories those of Guer, Ocem, Cantin and Carvos,.
Its Rivers; the Sus, which waters its Southern parts; Tensift which divides the
Estate in 2 equal parts; and Ommiraby which separates it from the Kingdom of
Fez.

Its Air, Fertility and Commodities.
The Air of the Plains, and Fields of Morocco is much hotter then in Europe,
that of the Mountains according to their height is more or less cold. In
general this Kingdom is provided with all things necessary for man's life; they
have Grains and Pulse in abundance; as also Fruits which are excellent,
especially their Grapes. They have likewise Flax, Hemp, Honey, Wax, Sugar,
Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Marble, Cordovants, Amber, Chamlets and many good
Manufactures.

The Kingdom of FEZ.
Kingdom of Fez.
THe Kingdom of FEZ lies between that of Morocco and the Mediterranean; and
between the Ocean, and the Kingdom of Telensin or Argiers* Its Provinces are
Temesne, Fez and Azgar on the Ocean; Its Provinces.
Habat on the Straight; Errife and Garret on the Mediterranean Sea; and Chaus,
all up in the Land.

Province of Temesne.
Temesne extends its self from Mount Atlas, unto the Ocean, has formerly been
so flourishing, that it numbered 40 Great Cities, more then 100 middle sized,
and 300 little ones, besides an infinite number of Villages.

Besides the Intestine Wars of the Country, the Portugals have diverse times
levelled and ruined the fairest Cities of the Coast as Anfa and Al-Mansor in
1468. and afterward Rabatt likewise suffered their Incursions and Plunders.
Rabatt and its Fortress, are on a Rising ground between the River of Buragrag,
and the Se^. King Mansor caused it to be built after the Model of Morocco; but
much less, and made it one of the most considerable places of all Barbary,
erecting many Palaces, Temples, Hospitals, Colleges, Baines, Shops, etc. and
without the South Gate a Tower as high as that of Morocco; it was very populous
and of a good Trade. And because the Waters round about were salt, he made an
Aquaeduct as beautiful as those about Rome. But at present these fair Edifices
are almost ruined, it being possessed with not above 500 families, and much
soldiery because of the Neighborhood of the Portugals; most of the ground
within the Walls being turned into Gardens, Vineyards, and Meadows.

Anfa on the Coast, and in a delightful Plain, has been one of the most famous
Cities of Africa, for its Trade with the English and Portugals; but its being
addicted to Pyracy, was the cause of its ruin, as of that of Al-mansor on the
River Guir.

Within the Land, Muchaila on the Guir, and in the Road from Morocco to Rabat,
has been rich, well built, with a great Territory, and fruitful in Grain. It
was ruined by the Kings of Morocco; and is not known at present, but for the
Tomb of one of their Morabuts whom they esteem a Saint, and where the Country
people lay in pledge their Ploughs and Instruments of labor, which no persons
dare touch. They have another Morabut near Thagia, whom they believe to work
Miracles, and to preserve them when they are met by Lions; a place much
frequented by those of Fez, as being the Sepulcher of one of their Prophets to
which they go in exceeding great numbers in Pilgrimage. Adendum toward the
Sea, well walled, and fenced on one side by a Lake or Pool. Tegeget above the
Ommiraby has store of Grains, where the Arabs have a Toll, once of great note.

The Ornament of this Province, and of the whole Kingdom (nay we may say of all
Barbary) is Fez, which the Mahometans call the Court of the West: It is 100
Thousand paces from the Ocean, and as much from the Mediterranean. Its form is
a long square, of which the middle is in a Plain, the two ends on Hills; and
without several Suburbs, some of 500, some 1000, and others of 2000 Houses.
This City bears the name of Fez, from the abundance of Gold which was found in
the digging the Foundation thereof. It has 12 principal Quarters or Regions,
62 great places for Trade, and much frequented by Merchants, of diverse Nations
who are allowed a public meeting place for their Commerce, and lodging for
their residence, and also Storehouses for their Commodities; this place may
rather be called a Court, than an Exchange, it being enclosed within a strong
Wall, in which are 15 fair Streets, for several Nations to meet and reside for
the better negotiating of their affairs; to this enclosure there are 12 Gates
which every night are shut up and kept guarded at the Cities charge for the
security of their Goods and Persons. Its Houses are well built, has abundance
of Temples, amongst which about 50 are well built, and beautiful. The greatest
and most sumptuous of all, is seated in the heart of the City, containing about
a Mile in Circuit, has 31 great high Gates; and round about are several
Porches containing 40 yards in length, and 30 in breadth, under which are the
public Storehouses of the City: The Tower is sustained by 35 Arches in
length, and by 20 in breadth: All the Temple has 900, and almost all these
pieces enriced with Marble. Its Revenue is 200 Ducats a day, others say 400,
which are either 75 or 150 thousand Ducats yearly. Within and without the City
there are above 200 Hospitals, of which 25 are for the sick people of the
Country, among which one can daily provide for 2000 Persons, others are for
strangers; but their Revenues are much squandred, and they give nothing but the
Bed and Coverlet, but in some Food for three days. There is likewise 200
Banias or Stews, 200 Inns, of which some have more then 100 Chambers, 400 Mils
which daily work 1200 Mules. Among its Colleges, the building of that of King
Hahu Henon cost 500 thousand Ducats, being a most curious and delicate
Building, all enriched with Mosaicque work of Gold, Azure and Marble; its Gates
are of Brass. In this College are abundance of stately Buildings, as
Cloisters, Halls, Baines, Hospitals, etc. It has a stately Library, in which
besides other Books are 20000 Volumes in Manuscript. They have 150 public
necessary houses built so commodiously, that the Waters carry away the ordure.
To its Walls it has 86 Gates which serve for entrance into the City.

South East of the old Fez is the new City, The New City of Fiz.
at a Mile or 1200 paces distance; this is almost only for the House, and for
the Officers of the King. The Palace where he ordinarily resides, and the
Palaces of the principal Lords, the Mint, a stately Temple, etc. are in the
first quarter. The Officers of the Court, and the Captains of the guard hold
almost all the second, and the Kings Guards alone had formerly the third. Now a
good part of this last quarter is possessed by Jews and Goldsmiths; and part of
the second, by diverse Merchants and Artisans.

In this City of Fez, (as generally throughout these parts) they have abundance
of Conjurers, Fortune Tellers, Juglers, and Inchanters, who are in some War
esteem amongst them. Its People are of a duskish or blackish complexion, of
sly, Stature tall, and well proportioned; they are of an active disposition for
and Horse-manship, otherwise excessive idle; they are very subtle; close,
perfidious, inconstant, proud, much addicted to Luxury, and therefore by
consequence very jealous of their Wives, whom they keep with great severity,
and that the more according to their external graces; they are very revengeful
if injured, and hard to be reconciled. In their gait they have much of the
Spaniard in them; in their Apparel they go very sumptuous and rich, but their
Food is but very gross.

Their Religion.
As to their Religion they are either Mahometans or Heathens; and are for the
most part inclined to Literature and Arts.

Their Magistrates and Justice.
In this City are four sorts of Magistrates: one for the Canon Law, one for the
Civil-Law, another for Marriages and Divorcements; and another as an Advocate,
to whom they make their appeal. In the Administration of Justice they are more
or less severe, according to the hainousness of the offense.

In their Marriages they observe many Ceremonies; as being agreed, they are
accompanied to the Church by their Parents, Relations, and Friends; which
Ceremony being ended, they are invited to two Banquets, the one at the
Bridegrooms cost, and the other at the Brides Relations; which being done, the
Bridegroom causes the Bride to be conducted to his House with Music and
Torches, being accompanied with their Friends; and being entered the House, she
is immediately lead to the Chamber door; and delivered by her Father, Brother,
or some of her Kindred to his Mother (if living) who there waits for her
coming, who immediately is redelivered to him; who forthwith conducts her to a
private Chamber, where he enjoys her; and if she is found to be a Virgin,
which will appear by the blood which will proceed, which perceiving they dry
up with a Napkin, and carry in their hands to show the Company, with great joy;
and then they make Feasts, and are very merry: But if she be contrary, and that
no blood is caused, then they judge her Virginity lost; and thereupon the
Marriage is frustrated, and with great disgrace she is turned home to her
Parents. This with several other Ceremonies are omitted in the Marriage of a
Widow.

Here the Women at the death of their Friends assemble themselves together,
habit themselves in Sackcloth and Ashes, and sing a Funeral Dirge to the
praise of the Deceased; and at the end of every verse, howl and cry; and this
they do for seven days together; during which time her Friends send in
Provisions, and come and comfort her; for their custom is not to have any meat
dressed in the House of Mourning, during the said time, especially until the
Corpse is interred.

1. The City of Mahmora fell into the hands of the Portugals in 1515, was
presently retaken by the King of Fez, who defeated 10000 Christians, and gained
60 pieces of Artillery, The Kings of Spain likewise made themselves Masters of
it 1614 and have fortified it because of the goodness of the Port. 2. Sala or
Sally, has been the residence of some Kings of Fez. It is composed of two
Cities, the Old and the New; and has a great Trade with the English, French,
Hollanders and Genoueses. Its Fortress is on a rising ground, with a high Tower
which discovers the Sea. In the Castle the King Mansor, and others his
successors, have their magnificent Tombs.

The place was taken by the Castilians, and retaken from them some years past;
and afterward abundance of the Moors of Granado driven from Spain, retiring
thither, have fortified and enriched it with their Piracies. 3. Mechnese
between Sally and Fez, is in the middle of a Plain, where for 5 or 6000 paces,
there is only Gardens filled with excellent Fruits. The City is well built, its
Streets large and well ordered. Its Inhabitants liberal, and civil, but always
in jealousy against those of Fez. Diverse Aqueducts bring water to the City,
and furnish the Temples, Bains, Hospitals and Colleges, and private Houses.

Asgar is a Province between the Rivers of Suba, Province of Asgar.
and Lusus or Lixa, on the Coast; it extends itself far up the Land, toward
the City of Fez, and has fair and fertile Fields, with an Air so pleasant,
that formerly the Kings of Fez passed here a part of the Spring in Hunting. 1.
Elgiumha or Elgiuhma, in the way from Fez to Larrache, and formerly the fairest
of the Provinces; serves now only as the Granary, where the Arabs store up
their Corn. 2. Casarel-Cabir, a place of pleasure which Mansor caused to be
built between the Fens, the Forests, the Sea, and the River, may now have about
1500 Houses, adorned with a stately Hospital, a College, and many Temples. The
Battle which Don Sebastian King of Portugal lost, was here fought. In which it
is observable, that the three Chiefs of the Armies, which that day met, all
died, viz. Don Sebastian of Portugal, in the field of the Battle; Muley Mahomet
of Fez, in favor of whom Don Sebastian passed into Africa, was drowned passing
the River of Mucazin to save himself in Arzile; and Abdelmelech of Morocco, the
Conqueror, died with labor and pains, or with the sickness with which he was
seized before the Battle; all three competitors for this Kingdom; with several
others of eminent quality. 3. Lharais or Larrache, once Lixos; which some among
the Ancients say, was greater then the Great Carthage, and has made the Royal
Residence of Antaeus, whom Hercules defeated, and from whence he brought the
Golden Apples, gathered in the Hesperides Gardens. It is at present one of the
principal Fortresses of the Kingdom, and has often been attempted by the
Portugals and Spaniards.

The Province of Habat is part on the Ocean, Province of Habat.
part on the Mediterranean Sea, and holds all the straight of Gibraltar on the
African side, opposite to Spain in Europe.

The principal Cities of this Province are, Arzila, which the Portugals took in
1471, carrying away all its inhabitants, and among the rest Muley Mahomet el
Oataz, then seven years old, after King of Morocco, who remembering more his
imprisonment, then the liberty he had from Spain, in the year 1508 raised 10000
Moors, besieged, and took the City of Arzila, and the Castle, the Portugals
hardly defending themselves in a Tower, which was yet relieved, the City and
Castle retaken, and the Moors well beaten. The Portugals afterward, and under
some pretext, abandoned this place, which Muley Mahomet called the Black,
returned it to Don Sebastian, King of Portugal in 1578, but which the Xeriffs
retook again, and do at present possess. The City is great and strong, with a
Port on the Ocean; the soil produces more fruits and Pulse, then Grain and
Wood. 2. Tangier, of old Tingis, has been the most famous among the Ancients,
builded, as they say, by Antaeus; and so renowned, that the neighboring
Mauritania took from it the name of Mauritania Tingitana and the Straight, of
Fretum Tingitanum; yet were its Bishop and Government united not long since to
that of Ceuta, where they had their residence, till the disunion of the
Estates of Portugal and Castile; Ceuta remaining in the hands of the Spaniards;
Tangier and Cazar Ezzaghir returning to the Portugals. The former of the two
last is now delivered into the hands of the English upon the marriage of Donna
Catharina, Infanta of Portugal, with our Sovereign Lord King Charles the
Second, of happy memory. Where we have a good Fort and Mold, for the
convenience of shipping; by which means, it may be in time a place of a
considerable Trade. It is made a very strong place since the English have been
masters of it, and does contain about 1500 Houses well built; they have
pleasant Gardens. Near to this place it is said, that Hercules overcame
Antaeus, a monstrous Giant of 64 Cubits high. 3. Tettuan or Tetteguin, has not
above 800 Houses, which are as well built as any in Barbary; and a good part of
the Moors driven from Granada, being retired thither, it is maintained in a
good estate; they are continually coursing on the Sea, and keep many Christians
their Slaves.

In this Country are abundance of other Cities, though of no such considerable
note as those aforementioned. Its Mountains which are counted about 8, are
inhabited by the Tribes of Gumera, who drink Wine, though contrary to the Law
of Mahomet, and pay some 3, some 4, others 6000 Ducats yearly. That of Rahon
has Vineyards, and its Inhabitants make quantity of Soap and Wax.
Benifensecare, besides its Wax, yields Hides and Linen Cloth; and on its
Srturday Markets, the Christians muy Trade. Benihurus is almost dis-inhabited,
by reason of the Neighborhood of Gazar Ezzaghir, under whose government it has
been. Chebib on the contrary, is much augmented, after that the Portugals took
Tangier, the ancient Inhabitants of this retiring thither. Benichessen has its
Inhabitants addicted to Arms; as likewise Quadres near the Straight, and
Bemguerdarfeth near Tittuan, to whose government they are obedient, serving
against the Garrison of Centa. They have formerly furnished the Kings of
Granada with a great power, and among them with one Helul, whom their Poems and
Romances esteem the terror of all Spain. Angera has Flax, of which they make
Linen Cloth; as also Timber fit to build Ships.

Province of Errif.
Errif above the Mediterranean Sea, and between the Rivers of Gomer and Nochor,
advances it self in the Land as far as the Mountain which separates it from the
Provinces of Fez and Chaus. It is very Mountainous and Woody; it is little
fruitful in Grain, abundant in Barley, Vines, Figs, Olives and Almonds: Has
quantity of Goats, Asses and Apes; few Sheep or Oxen. The Houses are only of
one Floor, and ill covered; the Inhabitants are valiant but much addicted to
drink. Its Cities are almost all on the Coast, as Gomer, Terga, Bedis, Mezemma,
and others. The most part ill inhabited by reason of the Neighborhood of the
Spaniards. 1. Gomer is seated on a River of the same name, 2. Those of Terga
use much Fishing, uttering their Salt-Fish to the Inhabitants of the Mountains;
but at present almost quite deserted. 3. Bedis or Belis, with its Castle, its
Palace, and its Port, is in some esteem, and maintains some Galleys: But much
molested by the Fort of Pennon de Velez, which the Spaniards hold in an Island
not above 1000 or 1200 paces from Bedis. 4. Mezemma seated on a Mountain,
formerly great and well peopled, has now nothing but Walls. The Mountains have
Vines, Barley, Horses, Goats, Fruits, etc. Some pay some tribute, and others
none at all. That of Bemguazeval can arm 25000 men, has quantity of Towns, and
a City famous among them, and a Volcano which continually casts forth fire.
Susaon is one of the most fruitful and most pleasant places of Africa. Its
people under their Xeque keeping themselves in liberty.

Province of Garret.
Garret possesses the rest of the Coast upon the Mediterranean Sea, unto the
River Mulvia, which separates it from Telansin. Mellila has been its chief
City, at present in the hands of the Castilians; as is Chasasa, and both the
one and the other have their Port; that of Mellila much better, and may count
2000 Houses, serves as a passage to the Traffic between those of Fez, and the
Venetians. There are excellent Mines of Iron in the neighborhood. The middle of
this Province is Mountainous. Its extremity toward the South, joining to the
Province of Chaus, is untilled, and without Water.

Province of Chaus.
The Province of Chaus is so great, that it contains a third part of the
Kingdom: The Rivers of Cebu or Suba, of Mulvia, of Nocor, and some others have
here their Springs at the foot of diverse Branches of the Atlas. This Country is
but meanly inhabited, considering its bigness; and its people fierce and
warlike, to which they are addicted, not caring much for Traffic or Tilling
their Ground, which if well ordered, would produce several good Commodities.
Among its Cities, Tezza is the chief, and is esteemed the Third of the Kingdom
of Fez, and makes no less then 5000 Houses. The Nobility have here many rich
Palaces, but the private Houses are not fair. It is adorned with 3 Colleges,
23 Baniaes, many Hospitals, about 100 Mosques or Temples, among which there is
one greater, though not richer then that of Fez. It has a magnificent Castle,
and the Kings Marins sometimes made here their residence, and gave it to their
second Son; as well because of the beauty of the City, and the civility of its
Inhabitants; as for the goodness of the Air, and the abundance of all sorts of
Fruits, which they gather there. 2. Turet is beyond the River Mulvia, and on
the River Quhas; so advanced on the Frontiers, that the King of Fez and
Telensin have often carried it, the one from the other. It is seated on a Hill
in the midst of a Plain, but encompassed about with Deserts, very
advantagiously enclosed with strong Walls; well built within, and filled with
about 3000 Houses. 3. Dubdu is on the side of a high Mountain, from which many
Fountains descend, and run through the City. 4. Garsis. And 5. Haddaggia are on
the Mulvia. 6. Gherselvin only is beyong the Atlas, and on the borders of
Segellesse, it is handsome within, but beautiful without, etc.

The Inhabitants of its Mountains.
Among the Inhabitants of the Mountains, there are some rich, who pay little or
nothing; others poor and over burdened with Tribute. The Plains of
Sabhelmarga, has almost nothing but Charcoal-men, by reason of the adjacent
Woods; that of Asgari-Cameren, Shepherds, because the Grass grows all the year;
that of Guregra, Husbandmen, the Land being proper for Grain. In this Province
there is a remarkable Bridge over the River Sebu, which runs between Rocks so
high, A strange Bridge.
that this Bridge is 150 yards from the Water. It is a Basket or Pannier hung
upon two Cords, which turn upon two Pullies fastened to the ends of two great
Piles of Wood, on each side of the Valley: And those who are in the Basket
(there may go about ten persons) draw themselves from one side to other by the
Cords which are made of Sea-Bulrush, as well as the Basket.

The Country of Fez and Morocco of a different nature.
The Kindoms of Fez and Morocco, ought to be considered in four sorts of Lands,
Mountains, Valleys, Plains, and Coasts; and the most part of their Provinces
have these sour sorts. The Mountains are almost all in the hands of the Arabs
and Bereberes, who live partly free, partly tributary. The Valleys are almost
all the same, according as they are more or less engaged in the Mountains, or
near the Plains. The Plains are all obedient. The Coasts in part belong to the
Kings of Fez and Morocco, in part to the Portugals and Spaniards; these holding
what is on the Mediterranean Sea, the others on the Ocean. So that considering
the Continent of these two Kingdoms, even when they were united, there was
always a quarter or third part which obeyed not the Xeriffs, or Kings of Fez
and Morocco. But if they had been absolute in these two Kingdoms, they might
easily have brought into the field One hundred thousand Horse, and more then so
many Foot.

The Moors of this Kingdom, and their disposition.
The Moors of Fez and Morocco, are well disposed, strong, Active, and yet
melancholy; they may marry four Wives, and repudiate them when they will,
giving them the Dowry they promised when they espoused them. And if they would
be rid of them better cheap, they treat them ill; and these Women may forsake
their Husbands, quitting their Dowry. Besides these four Wives, they may have
as many Concubines as they can keep; but the Law permits them not to lie but
with the one or the other of the four Wives. Persons of Estate spend so much on
their Weddings, that they say commonly, That the Christians spend the greatest
part of their Goods in Lawsuits; the Jews, in their Paschal-Feasts; and the
Moors in their Nuptials. They enterr their dead in Virgin-Earth, that is, where
no person has been before enterred, fearing least at the general Resurrection
it should be difficult to unmix all their pieces.

Arabs here inhabiting which much annoy the Country.
Besides these Moors, in the Estates of Fez and Morocco, there are many Arabs
which go by Cabilles or Lineal Descent; and which make War and Peace as they
please, between themselves, and with the Moors: Wandering continually, and
pillaging now one Coast, and then another. They either assault or convoy the
Caravans according to their interest; sometimes serving the Kings of Morocco,
sometimes making War upon them. Those that are in the highest Mountains of
Atlas, are so rude and barbarous, that the Ancients have believed them to be
Satyrs, Pans, Aegipans, that is, Half Devils. In some Cities there are quantity
of Jews; almost no Christians, except they be Slaves, or some Merchants.

The Kingdom of ALGIER and TELENSIN.
The Kingdom of Algier.
THe Kingdom of ALGIER is at present the most famous, or rather the most
infamous on the whole Coast of Barbary: As well for its Riches and Forces, as
for those Pyracies it exercises toward the Christians, and the barbarousness
it uses toward its Captives.

Its name is taken from the principal City, seated in the midst of its Coast on
the Mediterranean Sea; toward the West, it is separated from the Kingdom of
Fez, by the Rivers of Zhas and Mulvia; toward the East, divided from that of
Tunis, by the Guad-il-Barbar. The Northern Coast is washed by the Mediterranean
Sea; the South confined by the Mountains of Atlas, which divide it from
Segelmesse, Tegorarin, and Zeb, parts of Billedulgered. Its length from West to
East, is near 300 Leagues, its breadth 50, 60, or 75 Leagues.

Its Division and parts.
We will divide it into five parts, of which that of Algier shall make the
middle one; Telensin and Tenes shall be on the west; Bugia and Constantina on
the East. The Turks (as Grammajus says) has established 20 Governments,
whereof 10 are on the Coast, and 10 others within Land. On the Coast there are
5 West ward of Algier, and 5 Eastward of Algier. Sargel, Tenes, Marsalquibir,
Hunain, and Haresgol, advance toward the West: Algier, Bugia, Gigell,
Constantina, and Bona, toward the East. Of the 10 Governments which are within
Land, Grammajus places 6 in the Mountains of Telensin, or Benrasid, Tenes,
Algier, Bugia, Constantina, and Bona. These names of Mountains being taken from
Cities, neighboring on them, and almost all on the Coast. The 4 Governments
remaining are, Steffa, Necab or Necaus, Mezella or Mesila, and Mastin, which
are the names of their chief places.

But Grammajus not contenting himself with this division within Land, makes yet
other 10; of which, 4 he calls Kingdoms, and which are only Tributary.
Huerguela or Guergela, Cuco, Tricarta or Techcort, and Labes. 2 Provinces,
Benirasid, and Tebesse. 2 Dynasties or Signiories, Meliana, and Angat: And
likewise 2 Kingdoms subject, Telensin and Tenes. Of these 10 pieces, Telensin,
Angat, Benirori, Tenes and Meliana, are toward the West; Coco, Labes and
Tebesse, toward the East; Guerguela and Techcort, far toward the South.

These 2 last are so engaged in Billedulgerid, that I cannot well describe them
with the Kingdom of Algier, though they be Tributary to it. And the Governments
or Provinces within Land, are so near, and sometimes so engaged with those of
the Coast, that I will not change the order I have taken to consider this
Kingdom in 5 principal parts; in each part observing the Governments, Provinces
and Kingdoms therein. Hunain, Haresgol and Marsalquibir, on the Coast;
Telensin, Hanghad and Benirafi, within Land, shall compass the quarter of
Telensin. Tenes and Sarsell, on the Coast, and Meliana, within Land, shall be
the quarter of Tenes. Algier on the Coast, and Cuco, within Land, that of
Algier. Bugia and Gilgili, on the Coast, Stefe, Labes, Necaus and Mesila,
withing Land, that of Bugia. Bona on the Coast, Constantina and Thebesse,
within Land, that of Constantine.

Province of Telensin.
The City of Telensin, which those of the Country now call Tremecen and
Tilmisan, has once been chief of a Kingdom of the same name; of which, the
Provinces of Telensin, Tenes, Algier and Bugia, were the parts. The City is not
above seven or eight Leagues distant from the Sea: It has been one of the
greatest and fairest of all Barbary. This may appear in that there remains but
eight Mosques of consideration, it having had 250; but four Bania's of 160; but
two Inns for the Franks, and four for the Moors of 34; but six Hospitals of
thirty or forty. It had 16000 Houses about the year 1000, 20000 about the year
1200, 25000 in the year 1550, and the Jews had ten great Synagogues. The diverse
changes which it suffered, and the rude treatment which they received from the
Turks, has made many of its Inhabitants retire into Fez, and some other where,
which has reduced it low. That which remains, is magnificent, its Houses
better built, its Streets more large and spacious, its Gardens more
embellished: Its People more civil, and its Merchants of better credit then
those of Algier. It has a Citadel built after the Modern Fortifications.
Humain.
2. Humain, which others call Humanbar and Vnhaim, is the ancient Artifiga. Its
Port is not great, but good; its Land has much Figs, Oranges, Citrons,
Pomgranates and Cotton; of which, the Inhabitants make diverse Manufactures. In
1535 this place was ruined by the Castilians, and not restored till long after.
Haresgol
3. Haresgol is the ancient Siga, a Roman Colony, the residence of Syphax,
(sometimes King of this Country) before he seized the Estates of Massanassa:
Its situation is on a Rock, whose foot is washed by the Sea, and has no
communication with the firm Land, but on the South side. This City has been
much greater then it is; the takings and retakings which it suffered by the
Kings of Fiz, by the Califfs, by the Moors, by the Castilians, and by the Arabs
reduced to the estate it is at present under the Kings of Algier, City of Oran.
who kept a Garrison in its Castle. 4. Oran and Marsa-el-Quibir, which belongs
to the Marquisate of Oran, are in the hands of the Catholic King. Oran which
the Africans call Tuharan, the Arab of Nubia, Vaharan, is the Cuisa of the
ancients; and Marsa-el-Quibir, there Portus Magnus, since this name signifies,
the great Port. This was taken by the Marquess of Comares, in the year 1505;
the other by the Cardinal Ximenes, in the year 1509. At the taking of this
last, the Castilians lost only 30 men, killed 4000 Moors, and delivered 20000
Christian Captives. This City of Oran before it was taken, had above 6000
Houses, abundance of Temples, Hospitals, Canes, Bania's, etc. and had sometimes
been the residence of the Catholic Kings: The Venetians, Genouese,
Catalonians, etc. having here so great a Trade, that its riches and power
inclined its Inhabitants to deny Tribute to the Kings of Telensin, and to make
some incursions on the Coast of Spain, which was the cause of their loss. At
present it is a Suffragan Bishopric to the Archbishopric of Toledo; it has
some Convents and Hospitals, among others one very rich. It is strongly seated
on the Mediterranean Shore, powerful at Sea in their Galleys, and is a place
of some Trade, affording most of the Commodities the Country produces.
Marsalquibir.
5. Masalquibir has one of the fairest, greatest and most secure Ports that is
in all Africa. The Government or Marquisate of Oran comprehends likewise some
Castles and Mountains, where there are good Garrisons which keep the
Neighborhood in jealousy. Mazagran with its Castle on the Coast, is in the
hands of the Moors.

Province of Anghad.
The Quarter of ANGHAD or RANGVAD, though for the most part desert, yet has
some fertile places, where are the Cities G^^gida, and others. Guagida has yet
about 3000 Families, its Land fruitful in Grains, and watered with many Rivers.
The Desert is possessed by the Arabs, and amongst them many Lions, Wild-Boars,
Stags, and above all Ostriches, in hunting of which, the Arabs often exercise
themselves, making profit of their Feathers, eating their Flesh, and currying
their Skins to carry their Baggage in. They keep the heart to make use of in
Charms or Witcherasts, the Fat to mix in their Medicaments, and the Nails or
the Horn to make Pendants for the Ears, to deck themselves with, when they
utter the other parts.

Province of Benirasid.
BENI-RASID or BENIRAXID, has some Plains toward the North, many Mountains
toward the South, is fruitful almost every where, and has three or four places
of some consideration in these Mountains. 1. Beni-Arax, of Old Bunebora, is not
walled, it contains more then 2000 Inhabitants. 2. Calaa or Calat-Haoara, of
Old Vrbara, between two Mountains, is strong. 3. Moascar, of Old Victoria, has
a Castle where the Governor of the Country resides. 4. Batha, of Old Vaga, on
the River Mina, having been ruined by the Inhabitants of the Mountain of
Guanseris, some Morabut out of their opinion of his sanctity, restored it in
Anno 1520. And 5. Medua.

Province of Tenes, its chief places, fertility and people.
The Province of TENES is between that of Telensin and Algier, to whose Kings it
has been subject sometimes to one, and sometimes to others, and sometimes it
self has born the Title of a Kingdom. Its principal places on the Sea are,
Tenesa and Sargel; within Land, Meliana. 1. Tenesa, part on the side of a Hill,
and part on a Plain descending to the Sea; has a Castle and a Palace, formerly
the abode of its Kings or Lords, now of its Governors: Its Inhabitants are
addicted to Traffic. The Country, both in the Mountains and Plains, yields
them Grains, Fruits, Hides, Wax, Honey, and some other Commodities. 2. Brischa:
and 3. Sersela, East of Tennesa, and between Tennes and Algier, have many Roman
Antiquities. The first is the ancient Icosima, the other is Rusubricari. This
has suffered diverse Ruins; the Moors driven from Granada rebuilt it, and
enriched it with their Piracies, with their Silks and Fruits. The Inhabitants
both of the one and the other, are for the most part Weavers. 4. Meliane, or
Malliana, is on a Mountain, where yet the most part of the Houses have their
Fountains and Wall-nut Trees. 5. Mezume, is adorned with a Castle, a Palace,
and a fair Temple. 6. Teguident has a large circuit, which had been empty, had
not sometime since a Marabut repeopled it. These two places are by some
esteemed in the Quarter of Telensin. Among the Mountains Beni-Abucaid, is near
to and of the appurtenances of Tennes. Guanseris can set forth 2 or 3000 Horse,
and 15 or 16000 Foot.

The Quarter of Algier, and its parts and places.
The Quarter of ALGIER comprehends likewise that of Couco, in the Mountains of
Eguiel-Vandaluz alias Couco, and Tubusuplus, which is the principal place,
built on the top of a Rock, craggy on all sides. It may contain about 1600
Houses: the Kings or Lords of the Country reside here, and have often disputed
their liberty with the Kings of Algier. These Mountains are two or three days
Journey long, and their approaches very difficult: They yield Olives, Grapes,
and especially Figs, of which the King makes his principal Revenue; Cattle,
Iron, Saltpeter; and the Plains afford Corn, and every where Spring of
Running-water. The People are Bereberes and Azuages, well armed and courageous.
The Metropolis of the Kingdom is ALGIER, at present the most famous place of
all the Coast of Barbary, The City of Algier described.
either for its Riches and Power, or for the extent of its Estates. It is
seated on the declension of a Mountain in form of a Triangle, so that from the
Sea all its Houses appear one on the top of another, which renders a most
pleasant prospect to the Sea. Its circuit is not above 3400 Geometrical paces,
fortified with some ill-disposed Bastions; but the Island, which was before it,
is joined to the City some years past; where is built a Pentagone, the better
to secure the Port and Island, and keep it from being fired, as in 1596, 1606,
etc. It is a City not so large as strong, and not so strong as famous: Famous
for being the receptacle of the Turkish Pirates, who so much domineer over the
Mediterranean Sea, which too often proves to the great damage of all Merchants
who frequent those Seas. This City has at present 12 or 15000 Houses; it had
not when J. Leon of Africa wrote above 4000. The Streets are but narrow, but
the Houses fair and well built, yet one which runs along the Sea is fair and
large; they count 100 Mosques, whereof 7 are very sumptuous; 5 Houses or
Lodgings of Janissaries, capable to hold each of them 600 Men; 62 Bania's, of
which two are very beautiful; 100 Oratories of Turkish Hermits, and almost as
many public Schools. Out of the City are many Tombs of Turks, Moors, and Jews;
the burying place of the Christians is without ornament. Among these Tombs is
remarkable that of Cave, Daughter of Julian, Earl of Baethica, who having been
ravished by Roderic King of the Goths, was the cause of the Moors descent into
Spain. It has almost no more Suburbs, the City being encompassed with many
Hillocks and rising Grounds, whose sides and Valleys are covered with 12 or
15000 fair Gardens, abounding with store of pleasant Fruits, with their
Fountains and other places of delight. Beyond these Hills is the Plain of
Moteja, 15 or 16 Leagues long, and 8 or 10 broad, very fruitful in Grains. This
place is famous for the Shipwreck which Charles the Fifth here suffered, who
besieging this Town, Here Charles the Fifth suffered Shipwreck.
lost in its Haven at one Tempest (as Heylin notes,) besides a great number of
Karvels and small Boats, diverse strong Galleys, 140 Ships, a great many Pieces
of Ordnance, about half his Men, and such great quantity of gallant Horses,
that in Spain they had almost like to have lost their race of good and
serviceable Horses.

The Cities, 1. Temeudfusta, about 7 or 8 Leagues from Algier, with a good
Port: and, 2. Teddeles, 18 or 20 are the best places of the Coast: the first
answers to the ancient Jomnium Municipium, the other to Rusipisir; likewise
Municipium. 3. El Col de Mudejares, of old, Tigisi, is newly repeopled by the
Morisque Mudejares of Castile and Andalusia; and the Tagartins, which were of
Valentia: It is 8 or 10 Leagues from Algier, beyond the River Selef, which they
here call the River of Saffran. 4. Gezaira, a City seated on the Sea-shoar. 5.
Mensora: And 6. Garbellum, both Sea Towns.

The Fertility and People of Algier.
The Air about Algier is pleasant and temperate: The Land has excellent Fruits,
as Almonds, Dates, Oils, Raisins, Figs, some Drugs, etc. The Plain of Moteiia
is so fertile, that sometimes it yields 100 for one, and bears twice a year good
Grains. In the most Desert Mountains are found Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron,
quantity of fierce Beasts. The Country affords excellent Barbary Horses, also
Estridge Feathers, Wax, Honey, Castile Soap, etc. Besides they have good
quantities of most Commodities, which by reason of their Piracy they take from
other Nations, to the great enriching of the place, most of the Inhabitants
living by it, setting out Vessels in Partnership and sharing the Gains, selling
the Commodities and the Men they take as Slaves in open Markers. The Natives of
Algier are fairer, and not so brown as the Moors; but the City is filled with
all sorts of Nations. The Janissaries make the greatest part of the Militia: The
Turks have the chief Trade, who are found to transport several Commodities to
other Countries; but there are many of the Moors driven from Spain, and others
who have retired themselves from the Mountains; many Arbas, Jewish, and
Christian Slaves. The number of the Inhabitants of this City cannot be esteemed
by the 12 or 15000 Houses it contains; for there are some Houses where are
found 100, 200, or 300 Persons; the Christian Slaves only amount to about 30 or
40000 within and about the City; and there are no less than 6000 Families of
Renegadoes. But the Right Honorable the Earl of Sandwich, late General of the
English Fleet, by order from King Charles the Second, put out to Sea with a
Fleet of Ships, scoured those Seas, forced them to deliver up all the Slaves,
who were Subjects in any of the Kings Dominions, as well as Englishmen, and
brought them to very honorable terms: By which they are not to seize or stop
any English Ship, but give them free liberty of Trading where they please; and
the like Peace is made with Tunis, and other of the Turks Territories: But
these perfidious People soon violated it.

Province of Bugia, its chief places and fertility.
The Province of BVGIA is between the Rivers Major and Sefegmar. This on the
East, that on the West. On the Coast are two principal places, Bugia and
Ghegel; in the Land are Steffa, Labes, Necaus, and Messila, in some
consideration. 1. Bugia is a great City, its circuit capable of 20000 Houses,
but has not above 8000; but that which is uninhabited is Mountainous and
inconvenient: It was built by the Romans on the side of a lofty Mountain, which
regards the Sea; now the chief City of this Province. Its Streets and Houses
are in good order; it is adorned with many sumptuous Mosques, some Monasteries
and Colleges for Students in the Law of Mahomet, and many fair Hospitals for
the relief of the Poor: Its Castle is good and strong, seated on the River Guad
al Quibir, that is, Great River. 2. Ghegel, formerly famous, is now only a
Borough of 500 ill-built Houses. Its Castle is very good; its Land has little
Corn, store of Hemp, Figs and Nuts. They hold this place to have been the
beginning of the fortune of Barbarossa. 3. Labez makes a separate Estate above
Bugia, and consists only in Mountains of so difficult access, that the Kings of
Algier, and the Turks, can scarce force them to pay Tribute. The chief Fortress
of these Mountains, and the residence of their King or Xeque, is Calaa. The
others are, 4. Coco de Teleta; 5. Tezli, at the foot of the Mountain. These
Mountains have little Corn or Fruit; they can raise 5000 Horse, 5000
Harquebusiers, and 20000 Men, armed after their mode; all valiant, and better
defenders of their liberty than those of Couco. 6. Necaus. 7. Mesila, are
beyond the Abez, but near the same River. Necaus is the most pleasant place of
all Barbary: It has something of particular in its public Buildings, every
House has its Garden so embellished with Flowers, Vines, Fruits, and
Fountains, that it seems a Terrestrial Paradise. 8. Chollum. 9. Gergelum, etc.

Province of Constantina, its parts and chief places.
The Province of CONSTANTINA has sometime had its Kings. This is the New
Numidia, of the Ancients the most Occidental part of the True Africa, and which
touches on Mauritania to the West, the River Sugefmar making the separation.
This Province comprehends three quarters, of which that of Constantina extends
to the Sea, and a good way in the Land; that of Bona likewise on the Sea, but
little on land; that of Tebessa is farther in the Land, touching on
Billedulgerid. 1. Tebessa, formerly Thebeste, The City of Tebessa,
surpasses (as they say) all other Cities of Barbary in three things: In the
force of its Walls, beauty of its Fountains, and great number of its Wall-nut
Trees. In counter-change its Inhabitants are brutish, its Houses ill built, and
its Air unwholsom. 2. Bona, of old Hippo Regnis; ill inhabited at present, The
City of Bona.
part of its Inhabitants being retired into the Mountains: has been famous to
Antiquity for its greatness, but much more for its Bishop St. Augustine, so
famed among the Doctors of the Church. It has suffered great changes under the
Romans, Vandals, Moors, and afterward under Barbarossa. 3. Tabarca, a City and
Isle is of this Government, likewise the Hills and Mountains of Bona, where are
gathered much Fruits of Jujubes, Grains, and store of Cattle; and the Coast
has red, white, and black Corral, which the French near to Bona, and the
Genouese near to Tabarca, go to fish for. The Family of the Lomolins in Genoua
having a Fortress in the Isle of Tabarca, the French a Bastion between Tabarca
and the Point of Mascara; the one and the other for the security of their
Fishing and Commerce. 4. Constantina, The City of Constantina.
which the Moors called Cusuntina, the Ancients Cirta Julia, is a great City,
not having less than 8000 Houses. Its situation on a Mountain, which has but
two Advenues, the rest being Precipice, makes it strong. The River Sufegmar
washes the foot of the Mountain; its Castle stands to the North, Collo and
Sucaicada (on the Coast) are under the Government of Constantina, likewise the
Mountains which extend themselves to the Mediterranean Sea, and to the confines
of Bona. The Country about Constantina is fertile, its Mountains tilled. Collo
has its Inhabitants more civil than those of Constantina, those having no
trade but with those of Billedulgerid, the others with those of Europe. The
Inhabitants of the Mountains can raise about 40000 Men, and maintain themselves
almost in liberty, both against the Kings of Algier and the Arabs. 5. Cirta, in
the Roman History, was the residence of many Kings of Numidia; The City of
Cirta.
among others of Massinissa, afterward of Syphax, who drove Massinissa from his
Estates, and settled himself at Cirta with his Wife Sophonisba, who had been
promised to Massinissa. This Woman a little after having persuaded Syphax to
favor Carthage, of which she was against the Romans; drew their Arms into his
Estate, where Scipio defeated and took Syphax Prisoner, Massinissa besieged,
and took Cirta where Sophonisba was; who had so many attractions, and so much
cunning, that in the same day she beheld her self Captive and Wife to
Massinissa: But she killed her self soon after, that she might not fall into
the Romans hands, and be led in Triumph through Rome. 6. Stora: and, 7. Mabra,
both Maritim Towns.

The Kingdom of TUNIS.
The Kingdom of Tunis, and its division Into Governments.
THE Kingdom of TVNIS, besides its particular Province, has sometimes extended
it self over Constantina and Bugia on one side, and over Tripoli and Ezzab on
the other. At present it has only its own Province, and something in
Billedulgerid.

This Kingdom of Tunis is divided into 4 Maritim Governments, and 3 or 4 Inland
ones. The Maritim are, Biserta, Goletta, Sousa, and Africa; Beg, Vrbs,
Cayroan, and part of Billedulgerid, are the third or fourth within Land.
Altogether extend themselves from the River Guad il Barbar, unto that of Capes:
this separating them from the Kingdom of Tripoli, the other from the Province
of Constantina.

The chief Rivers of Tunis.
The River Guad il Barbar, or Hued il Barbar, takes its source near Vrbs, which
it waters with a Channel made on purpose, and discharges it self into the Sea
near Tabarca. In its course it makes so many turnings and windings, that it
must be passed 25 times in the Road between Bona and Tunis, and that with much
difficulty and danger, there being no Bridges, and scarce any Boats to Ferry
over. The River Capes, of old Triton, descends from Billedulgerid, and waters
at first a very Sandy Country, leaves Capes on the Right, and on the Coast of
Tripoli, and disburthens it self into the Little Syrtes, now the Gulf of
Capes. Magrada, another River, has its Spring likewise in Billedulgerid on the
Confines of Zeb, which it waters in part, washes Tebessa of the Province of
Constantina, cuts the Kingdom of Tunis into two almost equal parts, and
disburthens it self in the Sea near Garilmesse, between Tunis and Hammamet. Its
increases are sometimes extraordinary, and all of a sudden, so that Travelers
are often forced to wait some days for a passage.

The Government or City of Benserta.
BENSERTA, of old Vtica, is a City but of an indifferent greatness, but strong,
and peopled with about 6000 Families. It looks Eastward on a Gulf so called,
which is about 16000 Paces long, and 8000 broad. Here is a fair Burse or
Exchange for Merchants; two great Prisons for their Slaves, and some Bastions
to defend the Port, which is good and large. This place is famous for the death
of Cato, surnamed Vticensis, who for fear of falling into the hands of Caesar,
here slew himself; and is of note in the Carthaginian Wars.

The Government or City of Goletta.
The Government of GOLETTA is much esteemed, because of the neighboring
Carthage; or rather, because of Tunis, whose Key it is. It is a Fortress built
in the neck of the Gulf between Tunis and the Sea, by which all must
necessarily pass: And it has given occasion to build a Fort on the top of a
Hill, whose foot is washed by the Sea. There was heretofore the old Fort, and
the now; the Old was only an entrenched Bastion, guarded by 30 or 40
Janissaries; the New is great, well fortified and furnished with all things
necessary. A Fountain of Running-water crosses the place, so that it seems
rather a City than a Fortress. Charles the Fifth took this Fort in 1535, which
the Turks retook in 1574. Under this Fort was it, that General Blake with the
English Fleet, The City of Tunis.
fired the Pirate Ships of Tunis in 1654. Tunis, at the bottom of this Gulf,
is at present one of the fairest Cities of Barbary; it counts 8 Gates, 8 chief
Streets, which are crossed by abundance of others, 10 Places or Markets, more
than 300 Temples and Synagogues of the Jews, and many Oratories, some likewise
for the Christians; 150 Bania's or Hot-Houses; 86 Schools; 9 Colleges, where
Youth is nourished and instructed at the public expense; 64 Hospitals, and a
great number of Canes or Inus for Merchants and Christians, etc. The Buildings
of the Royal Palace are magnificent; it had long since 10000 Houses, and is
much increased since the Moors of Granada were driven out of Spain. Among its
Inhabitants are many Merchants, Apothecaries, Druggists, Confectioners, Cooks,
Bakers, Butchers, and above all, Drapers and Weavers, etc. Their common Bread
is kneaded with Oil, of which they have abundance, and utter quantity into
Egypt. Their Linen and Manufactures have vent through all Africa: It is a
place of great Traffic, Its Trade and Commodities.
and much frequented by Merchants of Foreign parts, affording several other
good Commodities, as Gold, Saffron, Wax, Oil, raw and salted Hides, variety of
Fruits, Wool, Spunges, Hard Soap; they have also a great trade for Horses and
Ostrich Feathers, etc. and above all for Christian Slaves. Commodities most
vendible here are, English Cloths, Perpetuanoes, Iron, Lead, etc. They have no
Water either of Well or of Fountain, (except that which is reserved for the
Bassa,) but make use of Cisterns and Rainwater: They are fain to have their
Mills turned by their Slaves, or by Oxen. The Arab of Nubia, Sanutus, and some
others, esteem Tunis to answer to the Ancient Tarsis. This place (as Heylin
notes) is observable in the History of the Holy Wars, for the Sieges and
Successes of two of our English Princes, viz. Edward the First, in his Fathers
life time, and Henry the Fourth, then but Earl of Darby; by both of which the
City was forced to a composition. But the Ruins of Carthage, Tunis received its
splendour from the ruins of Carthage.
from which Tunis had its increase are remarkable, because of the Antiquity,
Situation, Greatness, and Power of this City. The beginning of it is given to
Dido, the Phoenician, who enclosed with the Wall the Quarter or Castle of
Byrsa, which is two miles and a half in Circuit, which in the Country they
still call Bersac, and Byrsa signifying a Hide to the Greeks, and a Fortress to
the Phoenicians; the one agrees with the Fable that Dido had bought, and
builded the place on the greatness and extent of an Oxes Hide; the other, to
the situation and advantage of the place where this Fortress was built. This
Situation, and the goodness of the neighboring Port, drew so many People,
that it became one of the fairest Cities in the World. Its circumference in its
splendour was 360 Stadia, like to that of Babylon, and its Inhabitants have been
so rich and powerful, that they disputed with the Romans for the Empire of the
World, being once called the Lady and Mistress of Africa. The particular power
of this City was not known till the third and last Punick War; when after
having had to do with Massinissa, to whom they yielded a good part of their
Estates, after having granted and put into the Romans hands their Ships of War,
their Elephants, their Arms, and their Hostages, which were demanded: when they
commanded them to leave the City, and to inhabit from the Seacoast, despair
made them resolve on the War. They made other Arms, built new Ships, the Women
and Virgins giving their Hair to make Cables and Cordage, and defended
themselves yet 3 or 4 years. It was afterward restored, and at diverse times;
but the Vandals, and in the end the Arabs, have wholly ruined it, there not
remaining above 7 or 800 Houses of Fishermen, Gardiners, etc.

The Government of Soussa its Cities, People, etc.
The Government of SOVSA contains the Cities of 1. Hammametha, which
communicates its name to the neighboring Gulf, at the bottom whereof it is
situated; its Walls are strong, and its Harbor safe. 2. Susa is in a higher
and lower City; the former on a Rock, and of difficult access; the last on the
Sea, with a good Port, where are laded great quantities of Oils. both the one
and the other well built. The Duke of Savoy made an enterprise on them in 1619.
3. Monastero, so called, because there was once a famous Monastery of the Order
of St. Augustine. The Riches about Susa is in Olives, Pears, and other Fruits
and Pastures for Cattle. The ordinary Food for the Inhabitants is Barly-bread,
the Country affording no other Grain. The Inhabitants of Susa and Hammametha
addict themselves to Traffic, others to Whitning of Cloth; they make Charcoal,
and draw some profit from their Fishing.

The Government or City of Africa, or El-Madia.
The Government of AFRICA, or EL-MADIA, has nothing considerable; but this
place may be made far better than it is. Its situation is in a Peninsula,
which touches not the Main but by an Isthmus of 2 or 300 Paces, where there is
likewise some Marsh; and on this side the City is invested with a double Wall
and good Ditches. Its Port within the City is capable to lodge 50 Galleys; but
its entrance is so narrow, that a Galley is forced to lift up its Oars to pass.

The Coasts about Sousa and Elmedia, and what Transactions happened there.
The Coasts about Susa and Elmedia have been well known in the Roman. History,
in the time of the Wars between Caesar and the Party of Pompey. Caesar landed
at Rhuspina, now Susa, Adrumetum, now Hammametha, being in the Enemies hands;
and in the beginning had diverse little favorable encounters thereabout. In the
end he happily defeated both Scipio and Juba, near to Thapsus, now Elmedia; and
after that defeat, Cato despairing slew himself at Vtica, now Benserta: Scipio
saved himself in some Ships; but being met by Caesar's Fleet, passing his Sword
through his Body, he precipitated himself into the Sea. Juba would have retired
to Zama, where he had left his Wives, Children, and Treasures; but Zama having
refused to open him the Gates. He and Petrejus retired into a House in the
Fields, where they killed themselves. During this War, and almost upon the
landing of Caesar, happened near Hammametha a thing incredible, which was, that
30 Gaul-Horsmen assaulted a Post of 2000 Moorish Horse, put them to rout, and
pursued them into the City.

For Zama, or Zama Regia, it is far distant from the position which Ptolomy
gives it, and from that of Ortelius, which we at other times, and which all
others have since followed. This Author places it 500000 Paces from Carthage,
and 600000 from Adrumetum; but it appears both by the Roman History, and by the
Itinerary Table, not to be distant from Carthage above 100, or 120000 Paces,
and from Adrumetum 100000 Paces, or little more.

The Governments or Cities of Big and urbs.
BEG or Beija, and VRBS; this in the Road from Tebessa to Tunu, that in the
way from Constantina to Tunis; are both seated in fair Plains, so fertile in
Grains, particularly Beg; that those of Tunis say, that if they had two
Begges, they would yield as many Corns as there is Sand in the Sea; and nigh to
Vrbs is Camud, Arbes, Musti, and Marmagen; all fair Cities.

The Government or City of Cayroan.
CAYROAN, of old, Thesdrus, ought as it seems to be among the Maritim
Governments, since it holds on the Coast Tobulha, Asfachusa, and some other
places; but its principal place being on the main Land, its Government is
likewise esteemed to be within the Land. This City is seated in a Sandy-plain,
which affords neither Grain, Fruit, nor scarce any Water but what is preserved
in Cisterns; it is about 100 miles from Tunis, and about 36 from any part of
the Sea. It was first built by Hucha, who was the first that conquered Africa
for the Saracens; who adorned it with a stately Mosque, supported on Pillars of
Marble, of which two or three are very fair ones, and of a prodigious
greatness, who also placed in it a College of Priests, and now in much esteem,
being the residence of a High Priest of the Law of Mahomet: and to this place
(from all parts of the Country) the Corpse of their chief Men are brought to be
interred; who believe, that by the Prayers of those Priests, they shall find a
shorter way to Heaven, than if interred at any other place. Its Inhabitants are
now reduced to about 4 or 500 Families. Not far from Cayroan, Mountains of
Zaghoan and Gueslet,
are the Mountains of Zaghoan and Gueslet, the last not above 12000 Paces
distant; both the one and the other have diverse footsteps of Roman Buildings.
But I believe it was from the last that Scipio considered the Battle between
Massinissa King of Numidia, and Asdrubal chief of the Carthaginians; and of
this encounter Scipio would sometimes say to his Friends, That he was the third
who had had the pleasure to see a famous Battle, without having run any
resigoe; to wit, Jupiter from the top of Mount Ida, and Neptune from some
eminence in the Isle of Samothrace, who beheld the Battles between the Trojans
and Greeks; and himself this between Massiniss^ and the Carthaginians. The
other Cities of this Kingdom of Tunis, and toward Billedulgerid, are Caffa,
Hama, Techios, Neifa, and Nafta.

The Kingdom of TRIPOLI.
Kingdom of Tripoli.
THE Kingdom of TRIPOLI takes up the just moiety of the Coast of Barbary from
Capes unto Egypt, and divides it self into two principal parts or Provinces,
which bear likewise the Title of Kingdoms, to wit, Tripoli and Barca. Tripoli
is between the two Syrtes, now the Sands or Banks of Barbary. These are Gulphs
of different greatness, but of the same nature; infamous for the Shipwreck of
Vessels lost on their Flats or Rocks: among which the depth of the Water is
very unequal, and changes often, there being sometimes much, sometimes a
little, and sometimes none at all. The Little Syrtes, now the Gulf of Capes,
separates Tripoli from Tunis: The Great Syrtes, now the Gulf of Sydra, divides
it from Barca; this toward the East, the other toward the West, and on the
South it is bounded with Billidulgerid, and on the North with the Mediterranean
Sea. Its principal Cities are El-Hamma, Capes, Zoara, the two Tripolies, Old
and New, Sarmana, Lepeda, etc. 1. El-Hamma is in the Land, Its chief places and
people.
Capes and the rest on the Sea; between El-Hamma and Capes is a Lake excellent
against Leprosy. 2. Capes of Old Tacapa has good Walls, and a good Castle;
but its Port dangerous, and incapable to receive either many or great Vessels;
it is situate at the fall of the River Triton into the Lesser Syrtes. 3.
Zoara, of old Pisida, between Capes and Tripoli, has its Land so dry, that the
Inhabitants are forced to water it, and yet will scarce produce any thing save
Barley and some Fruits; among which, Lotos, with which they make an excellent
Metheglin, but it lasts good not above 9 or 10 days. Flesh is here very scarce,
they not having wherewith to feed Beasts. The Arabs frequent their Markets, and
serve them with Wools, wherewith they make Clothes and other Manufactures. 4.
Tripoli the Old, of old Sabrata, and which the Arab of Nubia calls the Tower of
Sabrat, has only some Hamlets, and Remnants of fair and stately Edifices. 5.
The New Tripoli, of Old Oea, is better maintained, Tripoli, and the Trade
thereof.
though it has many Ruins, by reason of the diverse changes it has had. The
disposition of its places, Streets, and the order of its Buildings is
agreeable, being adorned with many fair Mosques, Colleges, Hospitals, etc. The
Inhabitants subsisted only on their Commerce, which is of what they got from
their Palm Trees, Lotos, and Linen Cloth, which they uttered in Africa,
Sicily, and Malta; besides their black and Ethiopian Slaves, which they sold;
till of late they have much enriched themselves by Piracy, it being the usual
retreat for Pirates, who infest these Seas, and do much mischief to Christian
Merchants on the Coasts of Italy, Sicily, and elsewhere. 6. Lepeda is in some
repute, as it was in the time of the Arab of Nubia, and more under the Romans:
Farther is the Great Syrtes, at the bottom of which is the Isle Sydra, which
communicates its name to the Gulf; and on the Firm Land are the Tombs of
Philenes or Arae Philenarum, which set the Limits between Africa and Libya; and
afterward between the Estates of the Carthaginians and the Cyrenians; and in
fine, of the Eastern Empire against that of the West: And, 7. Sebeicum, a City
near the Sea-shoar, nigh to which are three small Isles. Along the Coast are
some Isles, among which that of Gerbes is well known; The Isle of Gerbes
described.
formerly it was joined to the Firm Land by a Bridge. It had two Cities; now
has nothing but one Castle worth notice, and many Hamlets which gather little
Corn, but much Fruits; among the rest Lotos, so sweet and pleasant, that the
Companions of Ulysses having tasted them, sought no longer to go into their
Country. This Isle has about 18000 Paces circuit, yields one of the greatest
Revenues to the King or Bassa of Tripoli, by reason of the confluence of
Merchants, who fetch thence Cloth and diverse Scuffs, and carry them to
Alexandria in Egypt, etc. one of the principal parts of the Revenue of the same
Bassa, is the Saffron of the Mountain of Garian, which is on the South of
Tripoli: And this Saffron is found the fairest, and the best of all others.

BARCA.
Barca, on the Coasts of Barbary described.
THE rest of the Coast of Barbary, is now known under the name of BARCA; it is
bounded on the East with Egypt, on the South with the Desert of Nubia, on the
West with Tripoli, and on the North with the Mediterranean Sea, which is also
some of its Western bounds. The Ancients called it particularly Libya,
comprehending that which is farther in the Land, and which we call the Desert
of Barca, and divided this Libya into the Cyrenaick, the Marmarick, and Libya
Exterior. This last being the nearest to Egypt; the Cyrenaick to Tripoli; and
the Marmarick resting for the middle. Likewise the most Northern and Maritim
part of the Cyrenaick, has passed under the name of Pentapolis, because it had
five fair Cities; to wit, 1. Bernichum. 2. Torochara. 3. Ptolemais, now
Ptolometa: and 4. Boni-Andreas; and these four are on the Sea; the fifth,
Cayroan, within Land. This, by much the most famous, was a Colony of the
Lacedaemonians, and has yielded Learned Men: Its situation is on an eminence
that discovers the Sea; and its Campaign, as of those other Cities, is moistened
by diverse Waters; and their Soil so fruitful, that some have esteemed the
Hesperian Gardens with their Golden Apples about Berenice. Its other chief
Towns and Cities are, 1. Barca, an Inland City of some account. 2. Melela. 3.
Careora. 4. Camera. 5. Zunara. 6. Avium: and 7. Saline. All Maritim Towns and
Cities, and of some account.

Battus gave the first beginning to Cyrene, and he and his Successors reigned
near 200 years; after which the City was sometimes in Liberty, and sometimes
under Tyrannism: Among which Nicocrates having put to death Phaedimus, Husband
of Aretaphila, to espouse her; she endured him sometime her Husband, and that
until she had occasion to gain the Brother of Nicocrates, named Leander; to
whom she gave her Daughter in marriage, and by his means rid her self of
Nicocrates, and soon after (by the means of her Daughter) of Leander also, and
so set the City at liberty; which endured till the time of Alexander the Great,
when the Country fell to the Ptolomies, Kings of Egypt; afterward, to the
Romans, to the Soldans of Egypt, and to the Turks; having almost always
followed the Fortune famous of this Quarter, and has given its name to the
Kingdom. The Arab of Nubia makes much account of it in his time, and lays out
diverse ways, and gives the distances from this place to others farther in the
Desert. Moreover this quarter of five Cities is called by some Mesrata, and its
Inhabitants esteemed rich. The fertility of the Country, its Trade and
Commodities.
They trade both with the Europeans, Negroes and Abissines, fetch from them
Gold, Ivory, Civet, Musk, and Slaves, which they transport into Europe, besides
their Native Commodities; and bringing from Europe, Corn, Linen, Woolen Cloth,
etc. which they carry to the Negroes, Abissines, and elsewhere. Its other chief
places in the Kingdom of Barca are, 1. Doera. 2. Forcella. 3. Salinae. 4.
Luchun. 5. Solana. 6. Musolomarus. 7. Cartum. 8. Albertonus. 9. Roxa. 10.
Raibba; and, 11. Ripaealba. All Maritim Towns and Cities; and most of which
having good and commodious Roads, Ports, and Havens, and well frequented and
inhabited.

Between Cayroan and Alexandria, there is on the Coast the Port of Alberton
Paraetonium, which is considerable both for its goodness and greatness: And
sometimes the Ancients have called it Ammonia, because from hence was a way to
the Temple of Jupiter Hammon. This Temple has been very famous among the
Pagans. Bacchus returning from Asia, which he had overcome, caused it to be
built in honor of his Father, who under the shape of a Ram had showed him, as
he passed with his Army, where to find Water in those Deserts; and he first
consulted the Oracle, and put it in such repute, that diverse other Heroes
afterward consulted it. Perseus, when he was sent to fetch the Head of Medusa,
the Gorgon: Hercules going from Mauritania, where he had overcome Antaeus,
toward Egypt, where he was to defeat Busiris. Alexander the Great, to make it
believed he was likewise the Son of Jupiter, and that the Empire of the World
was destined to him. But Cambyses, the Son of Cyrus, having a design to pillage
this Temple, beheld his Army perish in these Deserts, and was saved himself
only to see his own madness, and to die unhappily by his own Weapon. About this
Temple there are some Springs of Running water, and some Trees, which makes
this quarter pleasant. Among these Waters, that which they called the Fountain
of the Sun, had this particular quality, that it was very hot at Midnight, and
very cold at Noonday; the cold increasing from Morning till Noon, and
diminishing until Evening; and from thence the heat increasing till Midnight,
and diminishing until the Morning. There were three several ways which they
used ordinarily to go to this Oracle: the shortest was by Alberton, which (as
we have said) was upon the Coast, and from whence it was but 1300 Stadia, which
are about 162000 Paces. Another way was from Cayroan; from whence it was 3000
Stadia, or 375000 Paces. 'Pliny says, 400000; the difference is 25000 Paces.
The longest way was from Memphis, from whence it was 3600 Stadia, or 450000
Paces. These are 180 Leagues for this last, 150, or little more, for the
second, and 65 for the first. All these ways are very difficult, the Country
being only Deserts of Sands; so dry, that the Wind moves them like the dust of
the Highway, and that in so great a quantity, that they are able to interr
Carravans. And if there be any Habitations in these Deserts, and where there is
any Springs of Water, they are distant one from the other 40, 50, 60, sometimes
a 100 Leagues; and these Habitations have little or nothing, since that of
Hammon, the most considerable, is not above 80 Stadia, or 4 Leagues circuit;
and yet it had a King, a Great Priest, etc.

The Desert of Barca, with its chief Places and People described.
In the Desert of BARCA there are some Parts peopled and frequented amongst
those vast and floating Sands; as, 1. Angela, where there are three Cities, and
many Villages; and their People have a great power against the Serpents, and
therefore may answer to the Ancient Billi, (if the South Wind have not buried
these in the Sand, for resolving to make upon him, because he had dried up all
their Waters,) 2. Serta, which has been once a great City, but at present
reduced to Ruins. 3. Alquechet, which has three Cities, and some Villages; and
possibly Elchochat or Eleocath, is the same; or if they be two, they answer to
the ancient Oasis Magna, and Oasis Parva. Its other chief places are, Sabia,
Ernet, Couzza, Ascor, Angela, Ebaida, Gorham, and Ammon, spoken of before.
Among these Deserts are many Arabs, of which some are powerful in Horse and
Foot, and will not suffer any Cities, except of some Africans, which pay them
Tribute.

The People of Barbary.
At present the People of these Deserts are in part Africans or Bereberes, part
Arabs, and all extremely barbarous. And since we are fallen on these People, and
that we have here the occasion, let us say, That Barbary, Billedulgerid, and
likewise Znaxa, and part of Nubia, are for the most part inhabited by these two
sorts of People. The Africans and Bereberes are, the Natural Inhabitants of the
Country, or at least have been long seated there. They are divided into five
principal Races, to wit, of Zanhagia, Musmuda, Zeneta, Haora, and Gumera: And
these five Races are subdivided into more than six hundred Branches or numerous
Lines, which distinguish themselves very well the one from the other, being
very curious to keep the Antiquity of their Race, and to know from what People
they are descended.

The Race of the Arabs which inhabit in Barbary.
The Arabs passed into Africa in the year of Grace 999, or the 400 of the Era
of Mahomet: and there was but three Races which passed, viz. those of Esquequin
and Hilel, coming from Arabia Deserta, and that of Maquil from Arabia the
Happy, they might make together 50000 Fighting men; but they so multiplied
afterward, that the Race of Esquequin has eight or nine principal Lines,
under which are many Branches, which they call Heyles or Cob-Heyles, that is,
Assemblies, and live by Aavares, which are like Boroughs, of 100, 150, or 200
Tents, which they carry along with them, and dispose as they think fit; they
may make together about 40000 Horse, and 400000 Foot, in 1200 Advares. The Race
of Hilel is divided into 11 Lines, these Lines into many Branches, and may make
30000 Horse, and 150000 Foot. The Race of Maquil has 23 First or Second Lines,
and may raise about 30000 Horse and 400000 Foot; which are for the three Races
100000 Horse, and near a Million of Foot. We cannot find how many Advares or
Communalties are in the two last Races.

And these Arabs are on all Coasts among the Bereberes; yet so, that they have
their Habitations distinct the one from the other, some in one quarter, some in
another of the same Province. And it is to be observed, that there are
Bereberes and Arabs still in the Cities, and others still in the Field; but
these are accounted the most Noble, because the freest, often reaping the
Harvest of their Neighbors labor.

BILLEDULGERID, with its several Kingdoms, Parts, or Provinces, which may be
considered as they lie Southwards of MOROCCO, as The Kingdom of SUS, or TESSET,
with its Quarters and Cities of Ydausquerit, Extues, Nun, Tesset, Guadenum,
Istena, Archa,
Ydausquerit, Simotamat, Ydiausan. Ydunadaf. Mereit, Deudyzdud, Yduquinsus.
Arabala, Aragati, Ynduzel, Denseniz, Tizitit, Aytiacoli, Buleza, Tesset, Suana,
Ydaubagul, Deursumugt, Monasterium, Ausulima, Buaadora, Nun, Albene, Utemila,
Intrena Castra.

The Kingdom of DARHA, with its Cities of Taragalel, Benisabih, Quitera,
Temesguit, Tagumadert, Timesguit, Darba, Tabarnost, Timulin, Tamegu^rut, Tesut,
Afra.
Southwards of FEZ and ALGIER, as The Kingdom of SEGELOMESSE, with its Estates
and Cities of Gastrium, Segellomesse, Tamaracrostum, Zebbelum, Chasaira,
Manunna, Mazaligum, Abuhinanum, Feghiga Castra, Melelum, Tebelbotta Castra,
Humeledegum, Vnaelhefenum, Tebubassatum, Sugailfilum.
Southwards of ALGIER, and TUNIS, as The Quarter of TEGORARIN, with its Parts
of TEGORARIN, Tegorarin, Tegdeat. Calamati.
TESSEBIT, Tessebit, Tuat, Teguat, Benigorait.

The Quarter of ZEB, with its Estates of ZEB, Peschata, Borgium, Dusena,
Teolacha, Nesta,
MEZZAB, Macaza. Mezzab. Deuser.
TECHORT, Techort, Ne^au, Statio.
GUERGUELA, Guargals, Statio, Statio.


Southwards of TRIPOLI, as The Quarter of BILLEDULGERID, with its Parts of
BILLEDULGERID, particularly so called, Tensar, Caphesa, Nesiioa, Chalbiza,
Clemena, Neszara.
GADEMES, Gademes, Statio, Stat, Stat.
FEZZEN, Fezzen, Samela, Nati Morti.
JASLITEN, -- Jasliten. TEORREGU, Teorregu, Masta, Statio, Tega, Stat, Serai
Mons, Stat.



BILLEDULGERID.
Billedulgerid, its Bounds and Parts.
BILLEDVLGERID is very improperly called Numidia by the Modern Authors: Numidia
having been upon the Mediterranean Sea, which Billedulgerid touches not at all.
Its confines are on the North of Barbary, from whence it is separated by Mount
Atlas, on the South Zaara, on the West the great Ocean Sea, and on the East
Egypt. Its principal Parts, Kingdoms or Provinces, are, Sus or Tesset, Darha,
Segelomesse, Tegorarin, Zeb, Billedulgerid, and the Desert of Barca, which
stretch themselves from the Ocean unto Egypt. And this length is of 1000 or
1200 Leagues, its breadth being for the most part not above 100, or little
more, from which they have what is needful for them. Its People.
The Air is healthful, they live long, are deformed, are held base People,
ignorant of all things, are addicted to Theft, murder, are very deceitful,
they feed grossly, and are great Hunters. They acknowledge Mahomet for their
Prophet, whose Principles of Religion they observe, though they differ in many
Ceremonies; their Garments are but mean, and so short, that not above half
their body is covered with them; the better sort are distinguished by a Jacket
of blew Cotton, which is made with wide Sleeves. They make use of Camels, as we
do of Horses. Among them are many Arabs, which live by Advares, that is,
Communalties, each of 100, 150, or 200 Tents, which they transport whither they
please, that is, where they find best feeding for their Cattle; and when they
stop, they dispose their Tents in a circle, making therein diverse Streets and
common places; and leaving some inlets and outlets, which are shut up and
guarded like a City. These Arabs esteem themselves the most noble of all,
calling those which till the Earth and prune Vineyards, Servants; and those
which abide in Cities, Courtiers, and Effeminate: And these Arabs are esteemed
more civil and ingenious than the Numidians are.

The Kingdom of Sus, and its parts.
SVS, which Sanutus passes under the name of TESSET, and which is called the
farthest Sus, to distinguish it from that of the Kingdom of Morocco, is the
most Western part of Billedulgerid: It may be divided into seven Quarters, of
which Ydausquerit, Extuca, and Nun, are on the Sea; Tesset, Guadenum, Ifrena or
Vfaran, and Archa within the Land. Each of these parts have many Cities, Its
chief places, and its fertility.
Castles, and Villages; and the most part of its People are Bereberes,
Africans, or Arabs. 1. Ydausquerit is the best Quarter, and the most fruitful,
yields Fruits sweet and sour, as Oranges, Citrons, etc. Also Wheat, Barley,
etc. Feeds much Cattle, among others multitudes of Horses; can raise 5000
Horse, and 30000 Foot: They are held the best Soldiers in all Billedulgerid,
and almost of all Africa. 2. Extuca is proper only for Pastures, abounds in
Goats. 3. Nun has but little Barley, and few Dates. 4. Tesset is a Town of
about 400 Houses, has some trade with the Negroes. The Inhabitants of Guadenum
live of Goats Milk, by Hunting, and of Dates; and the Country has Ostriches.
Those of Ifrena trade with the Portugals at Guarguessen, and those of Archa
has only Dates. And in these seven Quarters there are several other Towns and
Cities, as Buzedora, Vtemila, Albene, Ausulima, Buleza, and Suana, all Maritim
places, opposite, and not far from the Canary Isles.

The Kingdom of Darha, and its chief places.
DARHA is on the East of Tesset and Morocco: It is divided commonly into three
parts, of which the chief retains the name of Dara; the other are, Taffilet and
Ytata, which pass likewise under the name of Taffilet. All these parts have
been diverse times under the Dominion of the Xeriffs of Fez and Morocco. Darha
is about a River of the same name; and where the River does overflow it, it is
indifferent fruitful. Among its chief Cities are, 1. Bemsabih. 2. Quitera,
Tagumadert, from whence came the Xeriffs of Fez and Morocco. 3. Taragalel, of
4000 Houses, and a Jewry of 400. 4. Tinzulin, the most spacious of all. 5.
Timesguit, of 2000 Families: And, 6. Tesuf, once the Royal City of all these
Quarters, now in Ruins.

The Kingdom of Taffilet, with its chief places.
TAFFILET has born the Title of a Kingdom, as well as Dara; and its chief City
of the same name has more than 2000 Families of Bereberes. To this place (as
Heylin observes) did Mahomet the Second, Son of Mahomet Ben Amet, and second
King of Morocco, of this Family, confine his eldest Brother Amet, having took
him Prisoner in Anno Dom. 1544. Ytata is for the most part esteemed under
Taffilet, though near upon as great. The Land belonging to the one and the
other, are harsh and Mountainous, and situated between Dara and Segelomessa:
Taffilet toward Morocco, from whence it is separated from Mount Atlas: Ytata
toward the Saara or Desert, where is that of Zuenziga.

The Kingdom of Segelomessa described.
SEGELOMESSA is one of the greatest and best Provinces or Kingdoms of all
Billedulgerid. Its chief City bears the same name, is made famous by the Arab
of Nubia: It has been ruined and rebuilded within 100 and odd years; it is
seated in a Plain, and on the River Ziz: Where, and on those of Ghir, Tagda,
and Farcala, are likewise some other Cities; more than 300 walled Boroughs, and
a great number of Villages. The Rivers overflow, and make fertile the Country,
as does the Nile in Egypt. The Inhabitants may raise about 120000 Men to bear
Arms: they have sometimes been subject to their Lords, sometimes to the Kings
of Fez and Morocco; now are partly divided into Lines and Communalties, and
partly subject to the Arabs.

Several small Estates in and about Segelomessa.
Under the name of Segelomessa we will pass with Sanutus 12 or 15 little
Estates, which have but few Cities or walled Towns, and some Villages; Poor,
and almost all subject to the Arabs. QVENEG has 3 Cities, of which Zebbellinum
the chief, is on a very high Rock, and holds the passage of Segelomessa to Fez
by Mount Atlas. Gastrirum, another City, is on the side of a Mountain.
Tamaracostum is on a Plain. Besides these Cities there are about 12 Towns, and
twice as many Villages. They have sometimes aided the Xeriffs of Fez and
Morocco with 8000 Men. Helel is the principal of its quarter, and the residence
of the Lord of Malgara. Manunna the chief of Rheteb, is peopled with Moors and
Jews, all Merchants and Artizans. These places are on the Ziz, descending from
the Atlas toward Segelomessa. Suhail, Humeledegi, and Vmmelhefen make each
their Estate apart. The last is on the way from Segelomessa to Dara. The Land
is quite Desert, covered with Sand and black Stones. TEBELBETTA has 3 Cities,
12 Villages: FARCALA, 3 Cities, 5 Villages: TEZERIN, 5 Cities, 15 Villages:
BENIGOMIA, 8 Cities, 15 Villages; the Cities Mazalig, Abuhinanum, and Chasaira,
make each their Estate: BENIBESSERI, GVACHDA, and FEGHIGA have each 3 Cities,
and some Villages. Those of Feghiga addict themselves to Traffic and Letters;
gather quantity of Dates, as does likewise Guachda: An excellent Mine of Iron
employs those of BENIBESSERI, in carrying it to Segelomessa: A rich Mine of
Lead, and another of Antimony, yields profit to those of Chasair, who carry
them to Fez: the others bear only Dates, and their Inhabitants are oppressed by
the Arabs, who rule over them. Togda, besides its Laborers of the Land, has
some Tanners of Leather, and the Soil yields Grains and Fuits.

I have made Tegorarin and Zeb the 4th and 5th Parts of Billedulgerid, taken in
general. Under the name of Tegorarin I shall comprehend Tesebit and Benigorait;
under that of Zeb I comprehend Mezzab, Techort or Techortina, and Guergela.

Quarter of Tegorarin described.
TEGORARIN has more than 50 Cities or walled Towns, and 100 or 150 Villages;
the chief of which are, Tegorarin, Tuat, and Tegdeat. The Country is abundant
in Dates, yields Corn when watered; feeds no Cattle, except it be a few Goats
for their Milk. Its People addict themselves to Trade, fetch Gold from the
Negroes, which they carry into Barbary, and bring from thence several
Commodities to carry to the Negroes: Receiving Strangers with delight, and
letting nothing be lost that they can leave with them to enrich their Country.
Tesebit or Tesevin has 4 Cities, 28 Villages; the most part of the Men are
black, the Women only brown and comely. All poor, as likewise in the Desert of
Benigorait.

Province of Zeb, and its chief places.
The Province of ZEB is more to the East than Tegorarin, it touches the Kingdom
and Province of Algier and Bugia, near Mesila, on the North, is divided from
the Regions of Mezzab, Techort, and Guergela, toward the South, by diverse
Mountains. Its principal Cities are five, Pescara, Borgium, Dusena, Nesta,
Teolacha, and Macaxa. One part of these Cities were ruined when the Arabs
entered into Africa, a part by Barbarossa; the most part afterward resloted. At
present the Turks, the Kings of Couco and Labes, and the Arabs, receive some
Tribute from them. The Inhabitants of Pescara live in the Fields in the Summer,
being constrained to abandon the City by reason of the multitude of Scorpions,
whose biting is mortal; as is that of the Black Scorpions, which are toward
Calaa in the Kingdom of Labes: yet here the Inhabitants taking but two drams of
a little Plant, it cures them though bitten, and preserves them a whole year
(says the Arab of Nubia) from biting. Borghia is well peopled, has many
Artizans and Laborers. The Water which passes at Deusen is hot, as likewise
that which passes at Nefta. The Inhabitants of Teolacha are proud and haughty.

Quarter of Mezzab, its chief places, etc. described.
The Quarter of MEZZAB is to the South of that of Zeb, and is a great passage
from diverse parts of Barbary to go toward the Land of the Negroes; which makes
those of the Country trade on the one, and the other side. They have six walled
Towns, and a great number of Villages; are Tributary to some Arabs.

The Estates of Techort and Guerguela.
The Estates of Techort and Guerguela have each their Prince or King; they have
sometimes been free, sometime Subjects or Tributaries to Morocco, Telensin,
Tunis, and in fine to the Kings of Algier, to whom they give a certain number
of Negroes in form of Tribute. Each Estate takes its name from its chief City;
besides which they have each of them many walled Towns, and about 100 or 150
Villages, and about 150000 Ducats of Revenue: They can raise 40 or 50000 Men,
but they are but bad Soldiers. Techort, though on the top of a Mountain, and
having 2500 Houses, was yet taken by the Turks of Algier with a very few people
and 3 Pieces of Cannon. They have abundance of Dates, from whence flows their
Riches; they want Corn and Fish, they treat Christians favorably, and are more
civil than their Neighbors.

Quarter of Billedulgerid, with its parts and chief places.
BILLEDVLGERID, or BELED-ELGERED, that is, the Country of Dates, is a
particular Province of Billedulgerid taken in general. This Province is above
the Coast of Tripoli, and we add the Quarters of Teorregu, Jasliten, Gademez,
and Fezzen. The particular Billedulgerid is so rich in Dates, that it takes
thence its name, and has communicated it to the neighboring Countries, and to
all that part which is above Barbary. Its principal Cities are Tensar, Caphsa,
and Nefsaoa, and a great number of Villages, Teorregu has 3 walled Towns and
26 Villages, of which the chief bears the name of Teorregu. Jasliten 3 or 4
Towns, and 30 Villages, and the chief so called. Gademez has 16 walled Towns,
and about 60 Villages, the chief of which are Gademes and Statio. Fezzen more
than 50 Cities or walled Towns, and above 100 Villages. The two last Estates
are free, the other subject to the Turks, or to the Kings of Tunis and Tripoli.
Caphsa, of old, Capha, which is believed to be built by the Libyan Hercules, is
put by some among the Governments of Tunis.

EGYPT may be divided into three Parts, and then The first shall contain the
Twelve Cassilifs or Governments within EGYPT; as In the Higher EGYPT, the
Cassilifs of GIRGIO, Asna, Barbanda, Girgio, ^^id, Chiana,
MANFE^OUT, Ma^^^o^^, A^^otha.
AEBENSUEF, Fium, M^ni^, Benisuaifa.
MINIO, Assuana, Chana, Minio, Ichmina.
CHERK^FFI, Almona, Paulicella; Anthium.
FIUM, Fium, Cosora.
GIZA, -- Gez^. CAIRO, Cairo, Sues, Elmena, Larnabula, Ant^^li, Emelcocena.

In the Lower EGYPT, the Cassilifs of MANSOURA, Heroa, Mansoura, Belbesa,
Sahidum, Ber^lies, Mesela, Elboera, Te^exa, Faramida, Cassia.
GARBIA, Damiata, Petra, Bourles, Beltina, Mig^^, Eli^ala, Demanohoura.
MENUFIA, -- Menufia. BASBEIH, or CALIOUBIEH, with the Territory of ERRIF, or
ALEXANDRIA, Tureta, Zuga, Euo^, Sebennets, Alexandria, Tur^is, Bochira, Arabum,
Rosetto, Atacona, Tunia, Turamania, Alhaman, Democuria,


The Second Part shall contain the Cities seated on the RED SEA; among which
are those of Buge, ^ibid, Sa^, Cosur, Ficte, Dacati, Suguam, Libelezaita.
Azirut, Grodol.
The Third shall be the Cassilif or Government of BONHERA, or BAERA, without
the True EGYPT, and in LIBYA, but under its Jurisdiction; whose chief places
may be considered as as they lie On the Sea, among which are those of
Ripaealba, Roxa, Lagoseium, Albertonus portus, Solona, Musulomara, Trabochus
portus, Patriarcha portus, Salinae, Favara, Forcella, Bon Andreas, Doera,
Laaneum, Zadra, Tolome^a, Taochara, Berzebona, Ber^ichum, Careora, Camera,
Av^um portus; Salinae.
Within Land; as Cayroan, Barca, Solue. Altahune, Nachel, Maghar Alacquin.



EGYPT.
OF all the parts of Africa, EGYPT is the nearest, and only contiguous to Asia,
and this Neighborhood has persuaded some Authors, both Ancient and Modern, to
esteem Egypt either in whole, or in part, in Asia. At present we hold it all in
Africa, and give for its bounds the Red Sea, Egypt bounded.
and the Isthmus which is between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, on the
East; the Deserts of Barca on the West, Nubia on the South, and the
Mediterranean Sea on the North. The Nile alone washes this Region through its
whole length, which is from its Cataracts to the Sea, about 20 Leagues or more;
its breadth not being above half so much, and of that breadth, that which is
between the Mountains, which incloses the Valley of Nile on the East, and the
Coast of the Red Sea, is but Desert; there being nothing inhabited but the
Valley, which lies on both sides the Nile, enclosed with Mountains, and very
narrow in the higher part of Egypt, but enlarging it self much more as it
approaches the Sea. Of this Figure which the Country makes, the Ancients have
taken occasion first to divide it into high and low; Its Division and Names.
after into high, middle, and low: Higher, which they called Thebais, by reason
of Thebes, at present Saida: Middle, which they called Heptanomos, by reason of
the 7 Nomi, Provostships or Governments it contained, at present Bechria, or
Demesor: Lower, and more particularly Egypt, and sometimes Delta, the best part
of the lower having the form of a Greek, the two sides of which were enclosed
by the branches of the Nile, and the third by the Sea, and this part is now
called Errif. The Romans changed something in the number, and in the names of
these Provinces, which we shall now omit.

At present Egypt is divided into 12 principal Cassilifs, Sangiacats or
Governments, of which five answer to the Higher Egypt, viz. Girgio, Manfelout,
and Aebensuef, on the left hand of the Nile; Minio and Cherkeffi on the right,
still descending the Nile; two, with the Territory of Cairo, answer to the
Middle Egypt, viz. the Cassilifs of Fium and Giza on the left, and Cairo with
its Territory on the right hand of the Nile: then four others answer to the
Lower, viz. Mansoura, Garbia, Menoufia, Callioubech, or Basbieh, with
Alexandria and its Territory: for the Cassilif of Bonhera, or Baera, is out of
the limits of the ancient and true Egypt, and in Libya, which passes commonly
under the name of the Kingdom of Barca.

Egypt of great Antiquity.
EGYPT is very famous in that they would make us believe, that the first Men
were here formed; and as there are yet formed a great number of Creatures,
which appears when the Inundation of the Nile diminished; saying, that the
Gods, after them the Heroes, and in fine, Men have reigned for almost an
incredible number of years. Of these Gods there are three degrees, of which Pan
was the most ancient of the eight first, Hercules of the 12 second, and Denis
of the (...) third. They divide the times of their men Kings by Dynasties, that
is, Dominations of diverse Families; and give so great a number to their Kings,
and so great a time to their Reigns, that they must have beginning long before
the Creation of the World; and likewise by their account, their Gods and Hero's
had reigned before Men the space of 20 or 25000 years: They attribute the
foundation of most of their Cities to their Gods, Hero's, and Kings; and these
they make, and build many Labyrinths, Pyramids, Obelisques, Colosses, etc. not
knowing how to expend their Treasures, or employ their People.

In the History of the Kings of Egypt, one Sesostris or Seostris, subdued all
Europe and Asia, if we will believe them. Joseph an Hebrew servant, and after
master of the House of Potipher, from the prison, rose to such favor with the
King, that he alone had almost the whole Government of the Kingdom, established
his brothers in Egypt; and their descendants multiplied so that in the end, the
Kings of Egypt became jealous and fearful, lest they should make themselves
masters of the Kingdom, another Sesostris subdued Syria, Assyria, Media, the
Isles of Cyprus, etc. and was esteemed as much* or more then any of his
predecessors. Mephres or Memnon it was that dedicated his Statue to the Sun,
which it saluted at its rising, and showed some sign of Joy, so artificial was
it made. Busiris treated the Hebrews so ill, that he left him the name of an
infamous Tyrant. Cenchres was the Pharaoh who was drowned in the Red Sea.
Proteus gave occasion to say that he turned himself into a Lion, sometimes into
a Bull or Dragon, etc. by reason of his different arming his head, or possibly
for his different actions. Rempsis had no other care but to keep up riches.
Chemnis caused to be built the first and greatest Pyramid, employing therein
three hundred sixty thousand men, for the space of twenty years, of which more
anon. Sesac or Sesouchis, armed four hundred thousand Foot, sixty thousand
Horse, and One thousand two hundred Chariots against Rehoboam; took and
pillaged Jerusalem and its Temple. Bocchoris though weak of body, was so
prudent, that he gave Laws to the Egyptians. This was he that leagued himself
with Hosea against Salmanazar King of the Babylonians. Sevecho or Sebeko
reigning in Egypt, Sennacherib King of the Assyrians being come to assault him,
an infinite number of Wild Rats, knawed in one night the Arrows in the Quivers,
and the Strings or Cords of the Bows, and the Thongs of the Assyrians Arms,
which caused on the morrow both their flight, and overthrow. Necao or Necaus
began the Channel between the Nile, and the Red Sea, passed by the Meridional
or Ethiopian Ocean, by the Occidental or Atlantic Ocean, reentred by the
straight of Gibraltar, and returned into Egypt, at the end of three years; he
vanquished Josias King of Judea, and was also vanquished by Nebuchodonozar.
Apryes happy in his beginnings, was in the end defeated by those of Cyrene in
Libya; and saw all Egypt revolt, who chose for their King Amasis, under whose
reign there were counted twenty thousand Cities in Egypt, as Pliny says. Under
this Amasis, the Estate fell into the hands of the Persians, after to the
Macedonians (Greeks,) and then to the Romans, etc. Among the Kings of Persia
who ruled in Egypt, Cambyses was the first and best known; among the
Macedonians and Greeks, Alexander the great; after whom the Kings of Egypt took
the names of Ptolomies, from the name of him who first bore the title of King
after Alexander, but after the Romans had to do with the affairs of Egypt,
there was nothing more remarkable of their History but Cleopatra; after whom
Augustus reduced this Kingdom to a Roman Province: and it remained under the
Romans, and under the Emperors of the East, near seven hundred years, till
about the year of Grace six hundred and forty, that the Arabs seized it under
their Califs, who resided first at Medina, then at Bagdad, Damascus, and
sometime at Cairo. The Soldans abolished this Califate in Egypt, and among them
the Christians have but too well known one Saladine, who drove them out of a
great part of the Holy Land. Among these last Soldans, Campson, Gaurus and
Tomombey were esteemed valiant, yet were so ill served, that the Turks under
their Emperor Selimus, became Masters of Egypt in 1518, and do yet possess it.

The Tribute they pay to the Bassa,
At present the Port sends a Bassa to command in Egypt, and the 12 Cassilifs or
Governors of the Country depend on this Bassa, and are as it were only his
Farmers: They give him every year a certain number of Purses, (every Purse of
750. or 760 Lion dollars) some 25, 30, 40, some only 10 or 12, according to the
goodness of the Country, or the greatness of their Cassilifs or Governments,
some having only 40 or 50 Towns, other 100, 200, 300 and more: besides these
Purses for the Bassa, they give to the Tihaja or Haja (who is as it were his
Chancellor) and other Officers, about the sixth, or at least the fifth part of
what they give to the Bassa. And for the Prince, or Grand Signior, some pay 6
times more, others ten times more then they give to the Bassa; and besides
these Purses they furnish a certain number of Ardeps, or measures of Grain,
Pulse, etc. The constant Profit or Revenue that the Grand Signior draws^rom
this Kingdom is 1800000 Zeccheens yearly, The Grand Signiours revenue from
Egypt.
each Zeccheene is valued at 9 s. sterling, which is 8 millions and 10000 l.
sterling, and this Revenue is divided into 3 equal parts, of which one is
allotted for the furnishing and accommodating the Annual Pilgrimage to Mecha;
the second goes for the payment of the Soldiers and Officers, with other
necessary charges for the management of the Kingdom, and the third and last
goes clear into his Chequer.

The several Cassilifs in Egypt.
The Cassilif of Girgio, or of Sait is one of the best and richest; it passed
not above 100 years since for a Kingdom, and received its Bassa from the Port.
It has likewise its Dievan, disposes its Cassilifs, or under-Governments,
which lie in its extent, the Soil is fruitful, bears much Corn, and feeds many
Cattle. The Cassiliffs of Manfelout, and Benesuef, are not so great but better
peopled, and worth little less then that of Girgio. On the other side of the
Nile are those of Minio and Cherkeffi. which have as large an extent as the
other 3 together; but are incomparably less as to the goodness, scarce yielding
the tenth part of what the others do; so great difference is there in being at
the foot, and on the East of a Mountain. These 5 Cassilifs answer to the higher
Egypt, or the Thebais of the Ancients; in which are a great many Cities, Walled
Towns and Villages, as are generally found throughout all Egypt, as anon I
shall have occasion to treat of. Those Cassilifs of Fium and Giza with the
Territory of Cairo to the middle. The Cassilifs of Fium and Giza have very good
Earth, and which is easily watered by the Nile; it yields store of Grain,
Fruits, as Raisins, etc. Flax, Milk, feeds many Cattle, etc. but the Cassilif,
or Governor of the last has not a free sword, that is, has not power of life
and death as he pleases, as the others have, being out of the course of the
Arabs, and too near Cairo, of which a word or two.

City of Cairo described.
This City of CAIRO has for a long time been all the Ornament of Egypt: It was
the Residence of the Sultans, is now of the Bassa, some make it very great,
others much less; the first compose it of 4 parts, to wit, Old Cairo, New
Cairo, Boulac and Charafat; there being some void places between each; they say
that these 4 parts together with their Suburbs may be about 10 or 12 Leagues
long, and 7 or 8 broad; nor give they it less then 25 or 30 Leagues Circuit.
They count 16 or 18000 Streets, 6000 Mosques, and if the particular Oratories
be comprised above 20000, as also they account about 200000 Houses, among which
are diverse Bazars or Markets, Canes or Magazines of certain Merchandises, many
Hospitals, and magnificent structures. The Castle is great, strong, and well
fortified, situate on the top of a Rock, which overlooks the City, and
discovers the Plain on all sides, even to the loss of sight. The buildings,
paintings, and other Ornaments which yet remain, do testify the magnificence of
the Soldans. This Castle (as Heylin notes) for largeness, Walls, and divided
into many Courts, in which were stately buildings, but now has lost much of
its glory; being in part destroyed by Selimus; that which now remains, serves
for the Court or habitation of the Bassa. In and about this City, are abundance
of delicate Orchards, which are places of great delight in which are excellent
Fruits, Walks, etc. and nigh to this City, there is a pleasant Lake which is
much frequented by the Inhabitants, who for their recreation pass some time
daily on this Lake in boats, for their further mutual society, and seeing
their friends and acquaintance.

Coesar Lambert his description of Cairo.
Coesar Lambert of Marsillia in his relations of the year 1627, 28, 29, and 32,
says, that Cairo (separated from the other Cities and Towns) is not so great
as Paris, (and if an eye witness of both may be believed he speaks truth) and
takes for witnesses some eminent French Gentlemen then at Cairo; who confesses
that joining it to the Cities and Boroughs adjacent, it may with reason be
called Grand Cairo; but however he maintains this to be but almost the shadow
of Cairo, as it was 100 and odd years since, so much is the trade diminished,
and that according to the report of the people of the Country. He says
likewise that the Castle has been much greater, and more magnificent then it
is at present, and observes several footsteps or proud buildings, now of no
use; and after all, says, that this is not strong.

Sandys his description of Cairo.
Sandys in his book of Tavels among other remarkable things, makes this
description of it, saying, that this great City called Grand Cairo, is
inhabited by Moors, Turks, Negroes, Jews, Copties, Greeks and Armenians, who
are observed to be the poorest, and yet the most laborious, the civillest and
honestest of all others; they are not subject to the Turk, neither do they pay
him any Tribute of Children, as other Christians do; and it they happen to be
taken in Wars, they are freed from bondage; and this privilege they gained, by
a certain Armenian that foretold the greatness and glory of Mahomet. Here he
says they hatch* Eggs by artificial heat, and that in exceeding great numbers,
which they do in this manner. In a narrow entry, on each side are 2 rows of
Ovens, one over the other. On the floors of the lower they lay Flax, over those
Mats, and upon them Eggs. The floors of the upper Oven, are as roofs to the
under, being grated over like kilns, only having tunnels in the middle, which
have covers over them. These gratings are covered with mats, and on them they
lay dry and pulverated dung of Camels, etc. three or four inches thick, at the
farther and higher sides of these upper Ovens are trenches of Lome, which are
about a handful deep, and two handfuls broad, The hatching of Chicken.
and in these they burn the aforesaid dung, which yields a gentle heat,
without any fire, under the mouths of the upper Ovens are conveyances for the
smoke, having round roofs, with vents at the top to open and shut; and thus ly
the Eggs in the lower Ovens for the space of eight days, turning them daily,
and looking that the heat be gentle and moderate, then they put out the fire,
and put the one half into the upper Ovens, then they shut all close, and let
them alone ten days longer, at which time they become hatched.

Sir Henry Blunt his description of this City Cairo.
I shall conclude my description of this City, with some observations which Sir
Henry Blunt has observed during his abode there, first, he says that there
are Mosques and Oratories to the number of thirty five thousand, some of which
are very stately and magnificent; next he says there is twenty four thousand
noted Streets, besides by-Streets and Lanes, and some of these Streets are
about two miles in length, and to all these Streets, at each end, there is a
Door which every night is locked up and kept guarded, by which means tumults,
robberies, fire or the like is prevented; and without the City to hinder the
Incursions of the Arabs from abroad, there does also watch every night four
Saniacks, with each of them one thousand horsemen, the number of men that do
every night guard this City is twenty eight thousand. This City is built, he
says, after the Egyptian manner, high, and of large rough stones, with part of
Brick, the Streets are but narrow, but as the Houses decay, they are rebuilt
after the Turkish manner, mean, low, and made of Mud and Timber; yet their
Palaces are stately, with spacious Courts, wherein are fair Trees to keep them
from the heat of the Sun; also other Courts belonging to their Palaces
adjoining to curious Gardens, wherein are variety of excellent fruits, and
watered with Fountains, nor want they any state in their Edifices, which are
vast, lofty, and very magnificent. This City notwithstanding its greatness, he
says, is so exceeding populous, that the people pass to and fro, as it were,
in throngs; near to this City are Joseph's 7 Granaries, now brought to ruins,
yet 4 of them are so repaired, as they are made use of to keep the public
Corn. On the South end of this City, he says, there yet remains a round
Tower, wherein Pharaohs daughter lived when she found Moses in the River which
runs hard by it.

South West of Grand Cairo, on the other side of the Nile, about four Leagues
distance, stands the three oldest and greatest Pyramides; the Jews affirming
them to be built by Pharaoh, who was drowned in the Red Sea; the fairest for
himself, the next for his Wife, and the least for his only Daughter. The
greatest of the three, and chief of the Worlds Seven Wonders, is made in form
Quardangular, lessening by equal degrees; the Basis of every Square, is 300
paces in length; and so lessening by degrees, ascending by 250 steps, each
being about 3 feet high; the Stones are all of a bigness, and hewed four
square. And in this, as also in the others, there are several Rooms. There are
also about 16 or 18 other Pyramides, but of less note, and not so ancient as
these 3 aforesaid are, which I shall pass by. Nigh to this City, in the Plain,
is the place where they did inter their dead; in which, they used such art,
that the bodies of their dead remain to this day perfect sound; and these we
call Mummies. The places where these bodies ly, are about ten fathom under
ground in Vaults; either in the Sand, or upon an open stone: The Earth is full
of dry Sand, wherein moisture never comes; which together with their art of
Embalming them, does thus preserve the bodies for some thousand years past. In
the breast of these Mummies is set a small Idol, some of one shape, some of
another, with Hieroglyphics on the back side of them. This City of Grand Cairo
was formerly of a very great Trade but that which has now ruined it, as
likewise that of Alexandria, is the discovery of the East Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope* by which, the English Portugals and Hollanders, at present go to
these Indies, and bring into the West all those Drugs, Spices, Precious Stones,
Pearls, and a thousand other Commodities which came before by Aleppo, or by
Egypt; but passing by Cairo, let us come to the other Cassilifs.

The Cassilifs in the lower Egypt.
In the lower Egypt, are those of Garbia, Menufia, and Callioubech, within the
Delta, and between the Branches of the Nile. That of Mansaura, without, and
Eastward toward the Holy Land, and Arabia: Likewise without, and Westward of
the Nile, is the Cassilif of Bonhera or Baera, which stretches it self from the
Nile unto the Cape of Bonandrea. This last Cassilif is almost quite out of
Egypt, though within its Government, and the length of its Sea Coast, not less
then that of all Egypt along the Nile: But that which is distant from the Nile,
is subject to the Arabs, and very Desert; that which is near it is better
worth. Its Governor is obliged to Mannel a Callech or Channel of 100000 paces
in length, to carry water from the Nile to Alexandria; and when a new Bassa
arrives in Egypt, this Governor has likewise to furnish him with Horses and
Camels for himself, his Train and Baggage, and to defray his charges from
Alexandria unto Cairo. But since the Wars with the Venetians, the Bassa's have
generally come round by Land, and not adventured by Sea to Alexandria. Among
the Deserts of this Cassilif, those of St. Macaire have had 360 and odd
Monasteries: And here is likewise to be seen, a Lake of Mineral Water, which
converts into Nitre, the Wood, Bones, or Stones, that are thrown into it.

The Cassilifs of Callioubech, Menousia and Garbia, being between the Branches
of the Nile, and out of the course of the Arabs, ought to be esteemed the best
in Egypt; and particularly, the last which yields more abundantly Sugar, Rice,
Milk, Grains, Oil, Flax, Herbs, Honey, Fruits, etc. And Maala, one of its
principal Cities, which they call the Little Medina, is a place of great
devotion with them, where they hold yearly a famous Fair, which the Governor
opens with great pomp, observing many Ceremonies. The Cassilif of Mansoura does
produce the same Commodities, but not in so great a quantity, though of a
greater extent then Garbia; but more over it yields Cassia. These four or five
Cassilifs take up the whole Coast of Egypt, and of its Government, and on this
Coast are the Cities of Alexandria, Rosetto, Damiata, and some others.

The City of Alexandria.
Alexandria, among the Turks, Scanderia, was built by the command of Alexander
the Great, and by him peopled with Greeks, immediately after the conquest of
Egypt; and the Moddel traced by the Architect Dinocrates, who for want of other
matter, made use of Wheat Flour to mark out the circuit; which was taken for a
good Augury. It was afterward beautified by many, but especially by Pompey. It
is situated Westward of the Delta, over against the Isle of Pharos, and built
upon a Promontory, thrusting it self into the Sea; with which, on the one side,
and on the other, the Lake Mareotis. It is a place of good defense; its circuit
is about 12000 paces, adorned with many stately Edifices, among which, the most
famous was the Serapium, or the Temple of their god Serapis. Which for curious,
workmanship and the stateliness of the Building, was inferior to none but the
Roman Capitol, then the Library erected by Ptolomy Philadelphus; in which there
were 200000 Volums, which Demetrius promised to augment with 300000 more. And
this in the War against Julius Caesar was unfortunately burnt. And this is that
Philadelphus who caused the Bible, to be translated into Greek by the 72,
Interpreters, which were sent him by the High Priest Eleazar. In this City, in
Anno 180, Gantenus read Divinity and Philosophy; who, as it is thought, was the
first institutor of Universities. This City has been enriched with 400 high
and strong Forts and Towers; and the Ptolomies or Kings of Egypt, having made
here their residence after the death of Alexander the Great, and caused many
stately and magnificent Palaces to be built: Under the Houses are Gisterns
sustained with Pillars of Marble; as also Pavements for their refreshment,
being their Summer habitation; their ancient custom, by reason of the heat,
being to build their Houses as much under ground as above, the upper part
serving for their Winter habitation. It was their custom also to erect great
Pillars of Marble or Porphyry; among others, that of Pompey, which stands upon
a four square Rocky Foundation without the Walls, on the South side of the
City: It is round, and of one entire piece of Marble, and of an incredible
bigness, being above One hundred foot high, not far from the place where he was
slain in a Boat at Sea, and where his ashes were laid. In this City are also
two square Obelisks, full of Egyptian Hieroglyphics of a vast bigness, and
each of one entire piece of Stone; said to be thrice as big as that at Rome, or
that at Constantinople. Near these Obelisks, as Sir Henry Blunt relates, are
the ruins of Cleopatra's Palace, high upon the shore, with the private Gate,
whereat she received Mark Antony after their overthrow at Actium. And he says,
That about a bow shoot further. upon another Rock on the shore, is yet a round
Tower, which was part of Alexanders Palace. This City, after the Romans were
Masters of Egypt, was steemed the second of their Empire: And when the Arabs
seized it, there was counted 12000 Sellers of Herbs, 4000 Bathing-houses, 400
Playhouses, etc.

Thus was the former state of this City, but at present almost a heap of
ruins, especially, the East and South parts; not the moiety of the City being
inhabited. And were it not for some conveniences of Trade, or the like, more
then any pleasure of the place, by reason of the evil Air which reigns there,
it would be soon left wholly desolate. It is now inhabited by a mixture of
Nations, as Turks, Jews, Greeks, Moors, Copties and Christians. Now remarkable
for a Mosque, in which St. Mark, their first Bishop, was said to be buried: Yet
their rests still within, and near the City, many Obelisks, Columus, Footsteps
of pround Building, etc.

The City of Rosetto.
Raschit or Rosetto, a pretty little City, seated on the Nile, four miles from
the Mediterranean Sea; a place of no strength, but of a great Trade, and well
furnished with several sorts of Commodities. Its Buildings are stately, both
within and without, and is only defended by a Castle, being without Walls, or
other Fortifications. This City in ancient times, was noted for a place of all
kinds of Beastliness and Luxury. Damiata is a fair City, The City of Damiata,
and its Land excellent, famous for the often Sieges laid unto it by the
Christian Armies, in Anno 1220. Who for 18 Months continuance, did stoutly
defend themselves; till in the end, the Enemy hearing no noise, some of them
did adventure to Scale the Walls, who finding no resistance, the Army marched
in; who then found in every house and corner, heaps of dead bodies, and none to
give them burial; and searching them, found them to die of Famine and of the
Pestilence, which grievously raged amongst them: Which lamentable spectacle,
must needs add terror to the beholder. This City was built, as some Authors
say, out of the ruins of Pelusium, which was built by Peleus, the Father of
Achilles; who for the murder of his Brother Phocus, was by the gods commanded
to purge himself in the adjoining Lake. This place (as Heylin notes) was the
Episcopal See of St. Isidore, surnamed Pelusiotes, whose Pious and Rhetorical
Epistles are yet extant. And at this place Ptolomy, the famous Geographer, drew
his first breath. And these three Cities, after Cairo, are at present the
fairest of Egypt. There are abundance of other Cities which are yet in some
repute; as Suez and Cossir, seated on the Red Sea; Suez noted for its Arsenal;
and Cossir, for its reception of the Merchandises of the East; and Saiet, a
fair Town not far from Cairo, on the Nile, by some said to be the dwelling
place of Joseph and Mary, whither they sled with Christ for fear of Herod,
where are yet the ruins of a fair and beautiful Temple, which as they say was
built by Helena, the Mother of Constantine, with several others too tedious to
name. But to speak truth, Egypt is nothing in regard of what it was under its
first Kings, with several other, as I have set down in my Geographical Tables,
as they are found in the said Twelve Cassiliffs; and are all commodiously and
pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Nile, which traverses the whole Country,
dividing it self into several streams, especially in the Higher Egypt, where
with several Mouths it full^ into (or receives) the Mideterranean Sea: Also I
have noted several Cities seated on the Red Sea, to which I refer the Reader.

The Lakes of Bucheira and Moeris.
In this Country are two Lakes, the one is called The Lake of Bucheira, in the
Territory of Alexandria, and is about twelve Leagues in length, and seven in
breadth; the other is called The Lake of Moeris, in the Cassilifs of Giza and
Fium; and is about 27 Leagues in length, and 20, 15, 10, 5, and 3 in breadth.

Thus much for the Description of the Country; In the next place, I shall
treat of the Inhabitants, as to their Laws, Religion, Customs, Antiquities,
Hieroglyphics, Stature, Habit, etc. Also the Fertility and Rarities of the
Country, amongst which I shall end with the Description of the Nile.

Their Laws and execution of Justice.
Their Laws, as to Justice and Government, are perfectly Turkish; and therefore
I shall refer the Reader to the Description of the Turks, as ye may find it
treated of in the Description of Constantinople, their Metropolitan City. Yet
for rigor in their punishments, they exceed other parts of Turkey, and that by
reason of the treacherous, malicious, and base dispositions of them; their
executions being different according to the quality of the Crime, for some
offenses they use slaying alive; for others impaling; cutting them off with a
red hot Iron at the Waist; for others oynting with Honey in the Sun; also, some
they hang by the Foot, and the like cruelties. The ancient People of this
Country were Heathens, worshipping the Sun, Moon and Stars, sacrificing to
Apollo, Jupiter, Hercules, and the rest of the gods; also attributing divine
honors to Serpents, Crocodiles, as also to Garlic, Onions, and Leeks. But the
god which they most adored, was Apis, a coal-black Ox, with a white Star in his
Forehead, two Hairs only in his Tail, and the form of an Eagle on his back;
but now Mahometism is much received amongst them. The Christian Faith was here
first planted by St Mark, who was the first Bishop of Alexandria. And these
Christians are all of the Jacobites Sect, observing the same Customs and Forms
of Ceremonies in their Religion, as those formerly treated of in Asia.

Its antiquities.
Among the many Rarities or Antiquities of this Country, are the Pyramides; as
also the Obelisks and Columns spoken of before; next on the Banks of the River
Nile, stood that famous Labyrinth built by Psamnicus; a place of an exceeding
great bigness, containing 1000 Houses, besides 12 Royal Palaces, within an
entire Wall, Which had but one entrance; but exceeding many turnings and
windings, which caused the way to be exceeding difficult to find, the building
being as much under ground as above. The buildings were of Marble, and adorned
with stately Columns: The Rooms were fair and large, especially a Hall, which
was the place of their general Conventions, which was adorned with the Statues
of their gods, and composed of polished Marble. Not far from the Pyramides does
stand the Colossus, being in form of an Ethiopian Woman, which heretofore was
adorned as a Rural Deity. This Colossus is of a vast bigness, and is made out
of the natural Rock, together with huge flat Stones. Also the Isle and Tower of
Pharos, opposite to Alexandria; a place of a great bigness, and of great rarity
and magnificence; its Watchtower, was of an exceeding great height, being
ascended by steps, and on the top of this Tower there were placed every night
abundance of Lanthorns with Lights, for the direction of Sailors, by reason of
the dangerousness of the Sea on that Coast, being so full of Flats.

The Egyptians instead of Letters, made use of Hieroglyphics; of which, Their
several Hieroglyphics.
an example or two shall suffice; viz. For God, they painted a Falcon; for
Eternity, they painted the Sun and Moon; for a Year, they painted a Snake with
his Tail in his Mouth; for any thing that was abominable, they painted a Fish;
with a thousand more in the like nature too tedious to name. They are said to
be the first that invented Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, Philosophy, Physic;
and by reason of the perpetual serenity of the Air, found out the course of the
Sun, Moon and Stars; their Constellations, Risings, Settings, Aspects and
Influences; dividing by the same, Years into Months, grounding their
divinations upon their hidden properties. Also the first Necromancers and
Sorcerers. These People are much given to Luxury, prone to Innovations,
Cowardly, Cruel, Faithless, Crafty and Covetous; much addicted to Fortune
telling, wandering from one Country to another, by which cheating tricks they
get their livelihood: But these people are not the same as the ancient
Inhabitants were, being a Misceline of other Nations as aforesaid, these People
not addicting themselves to Arts or Letters, as the former did. They are of a
mean stature, active, of a tawny complexion, but indifferently well featured;
and their Women fruitful in Children, sometime bringing two or three at a time.

Their habit is much after the Turkish dress, Their habit.
in which they are not over curious.

They have in this Country a Race of Horses, which for one property may be
esteemed the best in the World; that is, they will run without eating or
drinking, one jot, four days and nights together: And there are some
Egyptians, which with the help of a Sway bound about their body, and carrying
with them a little Food to eat, are able to ride them. For shape, these Horses
do not surpass others; and for this property they are held so rare, and
esteemed at three years of age, to be worth 1000 pieces of Eight, and sometimes
more: And for this breed of Horses, there are Officers appointed to look after
them, and to see the Foles of them, and to register them in a book with the
color, etc. which they receive from the testimony of credible persons, to
avoid cheats. But these Horses are not fit for any other then such a Sandy
Country, by reason of their tender feet.

But let us come to the Nile, which is the principal piece in all Egypt: I hold
it for one of the most considerable Rivers of the World. The length of it,
course, and the diverse Mouths by which it discharges it self into the Sea. Its
inundation at a perfixed time, the quality of its Waters, and the fertility and
richness it leaves where it passes, are my inducing Reasons. It begins toward
the Tropic of Capricorn, ends on this side that of Cancer, running for the
space of above 45 degrees of Latitude, which are 11 or 1200 Leagues in a
straight line, and more then 2000 in its course, crosses a great Lake, embraces
the fairest River Island, and waters the richest Valley, we have knowledge of.
Among its Inhabitants this is particular, that naturally some are black and
some white; and that in the same time, the one have their Summer, or their
Winter; when the others (which is not known elsewhere) have their Winter, or
their Summer. Its true Spring is likewise almost unknown, it is certain that
the River that comes out of the Lake of Zair, and takes its course toward the
North, is that which we call the Nile: But this Lake receives a number of
Rivers which descend from the Mountains of the Moon. To tell whether any of
these Rivers bears the name of Nile, and which they be, cannot be done: Though
there have been Kings of Egypt, Roman Emperors, Sultans, and Kings of Portugal,
which have made the search. In sum, and according to Ptolomy, who has said as
much as any hitherto, it must be that most advanced toward the South, and
which washes at present the City of Zambery, crosses the Lake of the same name,
or of Zair; the City of Zair being likewise on the same Lake. At the coming out
of the Lake, the Nile passes between the Kingdoms of Damont and Goyame in the
Abissines; receives a little on this side the Equator, the Zafflan, which comes
out of the Lake of Zafflan; near the Isle of Mero or Gueguere, the Cabella or
Taguezzi, which descends from the Lake of Barcena; and at the entrance into
Egypt of the River Nubia, which crosses Nubia, and comes from Saara and
Billedulgerid; and apparently answers to that, which Juba believed to be the
true Nile. These 3 Rivers are the greatest of all those which disburthen
themselves in the Nile, and carry a great many others. But in Egypt the Nile
remains alone, passes between two ranks of Mountains, approaching the Sea, the
Valley enlarges, and the Nile divides it self into many Branches, and glides by
many Mouths to the Sea. The Ancients made account of seven, nine, or more, now
except in the time of Inundation, there are only two principal ones, which pass
by Rosetto and Damiata, and three lesser by Turbet, Bourles and Maala: These
not being Navigable, but during the Inundation; the others always. This
Inundation of the Nile is wonderful, some attribute it to certain Etesian
winds, that is, North-West, which repulse the current, and make it swell:
Others to the quantity of Snows which melt; and to the continual Rains which
fall there, where the Nile has its beginnings, or there where it passes.
Others will have the Ocean then to swell, and under ground communicate its
waters to the Nile, etc. But there are so many different opinions touching the
cause of this Inundation, and so many Reasons are given pro and con, that a
whole treatise might be made of it. This Inundation begins about the sixteenth
or seventeenth of June, Its Inundation and effects.
increases for the space of forty days, and decreases for other 40 days; so
that its greatest height is about the end of July, and it ends about the
beginning of September. If it begins sooner or later (which is observed by
certain Pillars in the Towns; and particularly in the Castle of Rhoda, which
stands in a little Isle opposite to old Cairo, and where the Bassa resides,
during the solemnity of opening the Channel, which passes through and fills the
Cisterns of Grand Cairo; and in the Fields by the Aspes, Tortoises, Craw-fish,
Crocodiles, etc. who remove their Eggs or Young from the Banks of the Nile,
immediately before the Inundation, and lay them there where it will bound) they
give judgment, whether there will be more or less Water; and the people are
advertised, to the end, they may take order for what they have to do.

The King Maeris had expressly caused to be dug the Lake of Maeris, to receive
the Waters of the Nile, when it had too much, or to furnish it when too little:
At present they remedy it when little, by Channels, advanced toward the higher
Country, that they may be watered: When too much, by certain Floodgates which
they open to let the Water slide away.

For the effect of this Inundation, is, That all that the Nile covers with its
Water, is made fruitful, and no more. It Rains sometimes in the Lower Egypt,
very little in the Higher, and not sufficient to moisten the Earth; but when
the Nile increases too much, or too little, it does hurt: At 12 Cubits, it is
yet Famine; at 15 or 16 sufficient; at 18 or 20 abundance. The little cannot
moisten the highest Lands, and nearest the Mountains. That which lies too long,
leaves not time to Sow the lower Grounds; but the little, or none at all, is
more dangerous then the too much; and often besides the Famine, presages some
other misfortune near. So before the death of Pompey, there was little; before
that of Anthony and Cleopatra, none at all.

Moreover, the Dew which causes this inundation, is imperceptible, as the same
Author says: He assures us however, that so soon as it falls, the Air is
purified, and all Diseases and Pestilential Fevers of the Country, (which are
there very rife) cease; which makes it appear that these Waters are excellent,
and indeed all Authors agree, that the Waters of the Nile are sweet, healthful,
nourishing, and that they keep a long time without corrupting; so that they be
discharged from the Mud and Sand they bring along with them from the Grounds,
through which they pass. The first Kings of Egypt made so much account of them,
Its Water exceeding nourishing.
that they drank nothing else than the Waters of Nile; and when Philadelphus
married his Daughter Berenice to Antiochus. Theos, King of Assyria, he gave
order, That from time to time there should be the Water of Nile carried her,
that she might drink no other. And the fruitfulness which these Waters cause,
is not only known by their making the Earth so exceeding fertile, (which
otherwise is as barren) so that if they do in a manner but throw in their Seed,
they have four rich Harvests in less than four Months; and in that they produce
and nourish an infinite number of strange Creatures, as Crocodiles, which from
an Egg no bigger than that of a Goose, comes to be 20, 25, and sometimes to 30
foot long: His Feet are armed with Claws, his Back and Sides with Scales so
hard not to be pierced; but his Belly soft and tender, by reason of which he
receives many times his deaths wound: His Mouth is exceeding wide, has no
Tongue; his Jaws very strong, and armed with a sharp set of Teeth as it were
indented: His Tail is equal to his Body in length, by which he infoldeth his
prey and draws it in the Water: At the taking of his prey he gives jumps, and
it is a pretty while ere he can turn himself; so that if it be not just before
him, it may escape him. Four Months in the year it is observed to eat nothing,
which is during the Winter Season; the Female is said to lay one hundred Eggs
at one time, which she is as many days a hatching; and they will live to the
age of one hundred years, and growing to the last. Also this River breeds
River-Horses, of old called Hippopotami; they have great Heads, wide Jaws, and
armed with Tusks as white as Ivory; they are proportioned like a Swine, but as
big in Body as a Cow; smooth Skinned, but exceeding hard. Also River-Bulls,
about the bigness of a Calf of a Twelve month old, and in shape like a Bull.
Also here are found abundance of great and small Fishes. And lastly, the
fruitfulness of these Waters is showed, in that the Women and Cattle which
drink thereof are very fruitful, ordinarily bringing forth their Children and
Young by two and three, and sometimes by four and five at a time.

There are yet many fine things might be said of the Nile, as its diverse Names,
its Cataracts, etc. But we have likewise omitted many things which might be
said of Egypt, which has been famous in Holy Writ as well as in Profane, and
which would swell into a Volume. Let us end with saying something of the
fertility of the Country, what Commodities it produces and communicates to
other Countries.

It is plentifully furnished with several Metals; The fertility of the Country,
and its Commodities.
the Ground along the Nile produces abundance of Corn, Rice, Pulse, and other
Grains, that it may well be termed the Granary of the Turkish, as it was
formerly of the Roman Empire: and it feeds much Cattle, produces great plenty
of Fish, has store of Fowls, yields excellent Fruits, Lemmons, Oranges,
Citrons, Pomegranates, Figgs, Cherries, etc. Also, Capers, Olives, Flax,
Sugars, Cassia, Sena, Oil, Balsom; some Drugs and Spices, Wax, Civet, Elephants
Teeth, Silk, Cotton, Linen Cloth, with several good Manufactures; also Hides,
besides the Ashes of two little Weeds growing about Alexandria, whereof
quantity are transported to Venice; and without which they cannot make their
Chrystal-Glasses. We may add, that Incense, Coffee, and other Commodities of
Arabia and India, pass through this Country, to be transported into the Western
parts of Turkey.

Throughout the Country they have abundance of Palm Trees, Its Palm Trees, and
the nature of their growing, etc.
which may be reckoned among the Rarities of the Country, and that for several
Reasons. These Trees are observed always to grow in couples, Male and Female:
They both thrust forth Cods full of Seeds; but the Female is only fruitful, but
not except it grows by the Male, and having his Seed mixed with hers, which they
do not fail to do at the beginning of March. The Fruit it bears is known by the
name of Dates, which in taste resemble Figs. The Pith of these Trees is White,
and called the Brains, which are in the uppermost parts. And this is held an
excellent Sallad, in taste much like an Hartichoke; of the Branches they make
Bedsteads, Lattices, etc. Of the outward Husk of the Cod, Cordage; of the
inner, Brushes; and of the Leaves, Fans, Feathers, Mats, Baskets, etc. This
Tree is held among them to be the perfect Image of a Man, and that for these
Reasons: First, because it does not fructify, but by Coiture: Next, as having
a Brain in the uppermost part, which if once corrupted (as Man's) does perish
and die: And lastly, in regard that on the top thereof grow certain Strings
which resemble Hair; the great end of the Branches appearing like Hands
extended forth; and the Dates as Fingers. And so much for Egypt.

LIBYA INTERIOR, which does comprehend ZAHARA, or SAARA, with its Parts or
Provinces of ZANHAGA, -- Tegassa. ZUENZIGA, Zuenziga, Ziz, Ghir.
TARGA, Hair. Targa.
LEMPTA, Lempta, Dighir, Agades.
BERDOA, -- Berdoa. BORNO, Borno, Kaugha, Amasen.
GAOGA, -- Gaoga.
The Land of NEGROES, with its Parts or Kingdoms, as they lie On this side the
Niger, as GUALATA, Guadia, Angra, Arguya.
GENEHOA, Genehoa, Walade, Ganar, Samba-Lamech.
TOMBUT, Tombut, Salla, Berissa, Guegneve.
AGADES, Agades, Deghir, Mura.
CANUM, Cano, Tassana, Germa.
CASSENA, Cassena, Nebrina, Tirca.
GANGARA, Gangara, Semegonda.

Between the Branches, and about the Mouth of the Niger, as JALOFFES, Emboule,
Lambaya, Yagoa, Bersola, Nabare, Besu, Catcheo, Boyla, Codan, Julieto.
GAMBIA, CASANGUAS, BIAFARES, Emboule, Lambaya, Yagoa, Bersola, Nabare, Besu,
Catcheo, Boyla, Codan, Julieto.

Beyond the Niger, as MELLI, -- Melli. SOUSOS, -- Beria. MANDINGUE, Mandinga,
Tocrur.
GAGO, Gago, Dau.
GUBER, -- Guber. ZEGZEG, Zegzeg, Channara.
ZANFARA, Zanfara, Reghebil.


GUINY, and regarding the Atlantic Ocean; with its Parts or Kingdoms of
MELEGUETTE, with its chief Places, as they lie On the Sea, as Bugos, Timaa,
Bagga, Serbora, Masfah, Faly Hamaya, Samwyn, Crou, and Growaly.
Within Land, as Bolombere, Quinamora.

GUINY, particularly so called, or the IVORY or GOLD Coast, with its chief
places, as they lie On the Sea, as Tabo, Taboe Petoy, Wetoe, Moure, Nassau, St.
George del Mina, Cormantir, Berku, Pompena.
Within Land, as Labor, Uxoo, Quinimburm, Acanes Grandes, Dauma, A^^^raus,
Adios, St. Eaurenco, Zabandu, Buma, Roggis, Jamo.

BENIN, with its chief Places, as they lie On the Sea, as Popou, Jackeyn,
Loebo, Fosko, Borli, Bodi, and Cesge.
Within Land, as B^din, O^verre, A^ovon, and Curamo.




ZAHARA, That is, DESERT.
Zahara, its name, and description of the Country.
IN our Africa or Libya Interior, we have placed ZAHARA, the Country of the
NEGROES and GVINY. Zahara is an Arab name, and signifies Desert; and this name
is taken from the quality of the Country: so the Arabs divide the Land into
three sorts, Cehel, Zahara, and Azgar. Cehel has only Sand, very small,
without any Green. Zahara has Gravel and little Stones, and but little Green.
Azgar has some Marshes, some Grass and little Shrubs. The Country is generally
hot and dry; it has almost no Water, except some few Wells, and those Salt: if
there fall great Rains the Land is much better. But besides the leanness of the
Soil there is sometimes such vast quantities of Grasshoppers, that they eat and
ruin all that the Earth produces. Through this Country the Caravans pass,
which adds no small advantage unto it. It is so barren and ill inhabited, that
a Man may travel above a week together without seeing a Tree, or scarce any
Grass; as also without finding any Water, and that Water they have is drawn out
of Pits, which oft-times is covered with Sand, and tastes very brackish, so
that many times Men die for want of it; which knowing the defect, those
Merchants which travel in this Country, carry their Water, as well as other
Provisions, on their Camels backs.

Its People.
The People are Bereberes and Africans, likewise Abexes and Arabs; of which the
first are seated in the most moist places, the others wander after their
Flocks: Some have their Cheques or Lords, almost all follow Mahometism. Though
the Air be very hot, yet it is so healthful, that from Barbary, the Country of
the Negroes, and other places, Sick people come as to their last remedy.

Its division and parts described.
This great Desert is divided into seven principal Parts, of which the three
Western are, Zanhaga, Zuenziga, and Targa or Hair: The four toward the East
are, Lempta, Berdoa, Gaoga, and Borno. Almost every part reaches the full
breadth, and all together make but the length of this Desert.

ZANHAGA is most Westward, Zanhaga.
and touches the Ocean; with this Desert are comprehended those of Azaoad and
Tegazza. This last yields Salt like Marble, which is taken from a Rock, and
carried 2, 3, 4 or 500 Leagues into the Land of the Negroes, and serves in some
places for Money, and for this they buy their Victuals. These People use it
every moment, letting it melt in their Mouths, to hinder their Gums from
corrupting; which often happens, either because of the heat, which continually
reigns; or because their food corrupts in less than nothing. In the Desert of
Azaoad, and in the way from Dara to Tombut, are to be seen two Tombs, the one
of a rich Merchant, and the other of a Carrier: The Merchants Water being all
gone, and ready to die for want, buys of the Carrier (who had not overmuch) one
Glass full, for which he gave him 10000 Ducats; a poor little for so great a
Sum: but what would not a man do in necessity? yet at the end the Carrier
repented his bargain, for both the one and the other died for want of Water
before they could get out of the Desert. Those near the Sea have some Trade
with the Portugals; with whom they change their Gold of Tibar for diverse Wares.

map of Libya blazon or coat of arms of the Company of Royal Adventurers or
Royal African Company To ye Honoble. ye Governor, Sub Governor, Deputy
Governor, and Court of Assistants of ye Honoble. Company of Royal Adventurers
of England tradeing into Africa: This Mapp is humbly dedicated by Ric. Blome.

^FRICA or LIBIA ULTERIOUR Where are the COUNTRIES of SAARA DESERT ^he COUNTRY
of NEGROES and GUINE With the Circumjacent Countries and Kingdoms Designed by
Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King and Rendered into English by
Richard Blome By the Kings Especial Command Printed for Richard Blome


The Country or Desert of ZVENZIGA, Zuenziga.
under the name of which passes that of Cogdenu, and is more troublesome and
dangerous than that of Zanbaga, as also more destitute of Water; and yet it
has many People, among others certain Arabs, feared by all their Neighbors,
and particularly by the Negroes, whom those Arabs take and sell for Slaves in
the Kingdom of Fez: But in revenge, when they fall into the hands of the
Negroes they are cut into so many pieces, that the biggest that remains are
their two Ears. Its chief places are Zuenziga and Ghir.

The Desert of TARGA or HAIR (some esteem this last the name of the Principal
Place, Targa.
and the other of the People) is not so dry nor troublesome as the two others.
There are found many Herbs for Pastures, the Soil indifferent fruitful, and of
a temperate Air. They have some Wells, whose Water is good. In the Morning
there falls store of Manna, which they find fresh and healthful, of which they
transport quantity to Agades, and other places. Its chief places are Targa and
Hair.

LEMPTA is likewise esteemed the name of a People, Lempta.
and its principal place also Digir. This Desert is dry, and more troublesome
than that of Targa; and its People haughty, brutish, and dangerous to them that
cross it, going from Constantina, Tunis, and Tripoli, to the Negroes.

BERDOA is no less Desert than that of Lempta; Berdoa.
but it has Dates about those places, which are inhabited, and which are well
furnished with Water. They count three little walled Cities and some Towns, the
chief bearing the name of the part.

Borno and Goaga.
BORNO and GOAGA are scarce Desert. They have each their King. He of Borno is
of the Race of Berdoa, and his People part Black, part White, are civil, and
drive some Trade. But they have likewise their Wives and Children in common,
and scarce any Religion, as formerly the Garamantes. The King of Goaga
descended from a Black Slave, who having seized on the estate of his Master,
after having bought some Horses, ran over the Neighboring Countries, traded
for some time for Slaves against Horses, whom he made mount on his, and became
Master of this Estate more than 200 years ago. Part of his People are
Christians, as those of Egypt; but ignorant, and almost all Shepherds. The
chief places in Borno are, Amasen, Kaugha, and Borno; the two former seated in
the Lake Semegda: The chief place of Goaga bears the same.

The Land of NEGROES.
The Land of Negroes, its Name, People, and Parts described.
THE Negroes are People about the River Niger, which has taken its Name from
these People; and these People from their Color, and not the People from the
River, as some have believed. They are divided into many Parties or Kingdoms,
of which some are on this side, others beyond, and others between the Branches
of the Niger. We have placed on this side the Kingdoms of Gualata, Genehoa,
Tombut, Agades, Canum, Cassena, and Gangara. Beyond, those of Melly, Sousos,
Mandingue, Gago, Guber, Zegzeg, and Zanfara.

Between the Branches, and about the Mouths of Niger, are a great number of
People, Kingdoms, and Signiories. The principal People are the Jaloffes,
between the Branches of Sanega and Gambea; the Casanguas, between St. Domingo
and Rio Grande; and the Biafares beyond and along Rio Grande. The most famous
Kingdoms of the Jaloffes are those of Sanega and Gambea: Among the Casanguas,
those of Casamanse and Jarem; among the Biafares those of Guinala, Biguba, and
Besegue. All these Kingdoms and People, and likewise the others which are about
the Niger, are so little known, that some think it not worth the pains to set
down their Names. We will speak only of what shall seem most remarkable.

Kingdom of Gualata.
GVALATA is one of the least, having in it not above three Towns, of which
Guadia is the chief; besides some few Villages. Fruitful in Dates: they are
coal black; live in a mean condition, and without any form of Government or
settled Laws. They have no Gentry among them, but to their power are civil to
Strangers.

Kingdom of Geneboa.
GENEHOA is rich in Grain, Cotton, Cattle, and Gold; for which they have a good
trade with the Merchants of Barbary; and by reason of the overflowing of the
Niger, the Soil is very fertile; yet have they not many Towns: that most known
is where their King resideth, who is a Vassal to the King of Tombut, bears
the name of the Kingdom. And here it is that their Priests, Doctors, and
Merchants inhabit. The Priests and Doctors wear white Apparel, and for
distinction all the rest wear black or blew Cotton. Its other places are,
Samba-Lamech, Ganar, and Walade.

Kingdom of Tombut.
TOMBVT has quantity of Gold, is well watered with the Niger, which makes it
very fruitful, especially in Grains, and it has good Pastures, which feed many
Cattle. The chief place gives name to the Kingdom, situate on a branch of the
River Niger: It is the residence of their King, who has a fair Palace, built
of Lime and Stones, all the rest of the Houses (except one fair Church) is made
of Mud, and Thatched. It is well filled with Merchants, who drive a good Trade
betwixt this and Fez. This King, within this 100 and odd years, has subdued
and made tributary a great part of the Negroes, is magnificent in his Court, of
the Mohammedan Religion, keeps ordinarily 3000 Horse for his Guard, and has
marched against the Xeriffs of Morocco with 300000 Men. Its other places are
Salla and Berissa, also seated on the Niger, Gugneve, Carogoli, and Cassali.

Kingdom of Agades.
AGADES has great quantities of Cattle, and are much given to grasing and
looking to them, making it their livelihood, using the Ancients custom of
Tents, and removing up and down for the convenience of fresh and good Pasture
for their Cattle; and among their Moveable Towns their chief bears the name of
the Kingdom in which the King resideth, who is Tributary to him of Tombut. Its
other places are, Deghir, Mayma, and Mura, seated on a Lake of the Niger.

Kingdom of Canum.
CANVM, besides its Cattle, has Grain, Rice, Cotton, and Fruits; has Springs
of Running-water, as also a good River, which issues forth many little
Rivulets; it is well stored with Wood, is very populous; and has several
Towns; the chief being Cano, wherein is the Palace of their King, who is also
Tributary to him of Tombut. This Town is environed with a Wall of Chalk-Stone,
of which most of the Houses are built, and well frequented by Merchants. Its
next chief place is Germa.

Kingdom of Cassena.
CASSENA is craggy, barren, and very Woody; yet it yields some store of Barley
and Millet. The People live very meanly, wanting many things that the other
Kingdoms have plenty of; and their Houses and Towns are as poor, among which
Cassena is the chief, next Nebrina and Tirca.

Kingdom of Gangara.
GANGARA is rich in Gold, has not many Towns, the chief whereof bears the name
of the Kingdom, in which the King resideth, being also the habitation of many
Merchants; and its King is very absolute, and has a great Revenue. His Militia
is in some esteem among the Negroes, being observed to keep in continual pay
500 Horsemen, and 7000 Men which use Bows and Scimitars. The next is Semegonda,
seated on a branch of the Niger.

Kingdom of Melly.
MELLY is a spacious and fruitful Kingdom, seated all along on a branch of the
River Niger, which makes it very fertile in Corn, Cattle, Dates, Fruits, Cotton,
Wool, etc. And by reason of the convenience of the said River, has a good
Trade for their Commodities with other Countries. Its chief Town takes its name
from the Kingdom, containing about 6000 Houses, indifferently well built, but
unwalled. It is the Seat-Royal of their King; they have likewise here a famous
College, and many Temples, which are well furnished with Priests and Doctors,
who read the Mohammedan Law, and under whom the youth of this Kingdom, as also
those of Tombut, and other parts of the Negroes are educated. These People are
esteemed the most ingenious, the wittiest, and most civil to Strangers of all
the Negroes. Their King is also tributary to the King of Tombut.

Kingdom of Souson.
SOVSOS has diverse petty Kingdoms, and all subject to their Concho or
Emperor; among which, that of Bena has seven others under it. Its quarter is
Mountainous, covered with Trees, and well watered with Rivers. It has some
Towns; its chief takes its name from the Kingdom, and yields Corn, Cattle,
Fruits, etc.

Kingdom of Mandingue.
MANDINGVE begins at the River Gambea, and reaches near 200 Leagues up in the
Land: They have quantity of Gold, good Ships of War, and Cavalry; and there are
diverse Kings or Lords in Guiny, which are his Tributaries.

Kingdom of Gago.
GAGO has store of Gold, Corn, Rice, Fruits, and Cottle, but no Salt besides
what is brought from other places, and which is ordinarily as dear as Gold. The
People are idle and ignorant, but bear so great a respect to their King, that
how great soever they be, they speak to him on their knees; and when they are
faulty, the King seises on their Goods, and sells their Wives and Children to
Strangers, who remain Slaves all their lives. But besides these, there is here
(as well as in other parts of the Negroes) great Traffic for Slaves, either of
certain Neighboring people, which those of the Country can take, or of the
Malefactors of the Country, or of the Children whom the Fathers or Mothers
sell, when they are in need, or when they please them not: And these Slaves are
bought by many people of Africa; but more by the Europeans, who transport them
into the Isles of St. Thomas, Cape Verd, the Canaries, Brasil; and the English,
to the Barbados, Carolina, Jamaica, and elsewhere for Slaves. They have many
Towns and Villages, among others that of Gago is the chief, and is the
residence of their King; as also of many Merchants, and containing about 4 or
5000 Houses, but unwalled.

Kingdom of Guber.
GVBER is well fenced with Mountains, does produce Rice and Pulse; and above
all, have exceeding great flocks of Cattle, from which they get their
livelihood. This Kingdom is very populous, and well stored with Towns, its
chief bearing the name of the Kingdom, which is well inhabited by Merchants,
and containing about 6000 Houses; being also the residence of their King. The
People are ingenious, good Artificers, and make several rich Manufactures.

And the Kingdoms of Zegzeg and Zanfara.
ZEGZEG and ZANFARA are barren, the People idle and ignorant, have some Towns,
whose chief are so called; the Land yields, Corn, Grass, etc. and feeds great
quantities of Horses.

The fertility of the Land of the Negroes.
The Country of the Negroes is esteemed as fertile as those watered with the
Nile. It bears twice a year, and each time sufficient to furnish them with Corn
for five whole years; which makes them not sow their Lands, but when they judge
they shall have need. They keep their Corn in Pits and Ditches under Ground,
which they call Matamores.

GVINEA, or GVINY.
The Coast of Guiny, its extent and bounds.
GVINY is the Coast of Africa, which is found between the River Niger and the
Equinoctial Line. Some give it a larger extent, some a less: There are they who
begin it on this side the Niger, and continue it unto the Kingdom of Congo. We
have comprehended in the Country of the Negroes that which is about the Niger;
and in the Lower Aethiopia, that which is beyond the Gulf of St. Thomas: And
so Guiny will remain between the Cape of Serre Leon, which will bound it on the
West, and against the Negroes, to the River of Camarones, which is on the East,
will separate it from the Lower Aethiopia. This Coast right from East to West
is 7 or 800 Leagues long, and not above 100 or 150 in breadth. The form being
much more long than broad, we will divide it into three principal parts, which
we will call MELEGVETE, Its parts described.
GVINY, and BENIM: This the most Eastward, the first the most West, and the
other in the middle; yet each of these three parts separated make the breadth,
and the three together the length of this Guiny. After this Guiny we will speak
something of what is on this side toward the Niger, and of some Isles which
are beyond, The Parts of Meleguete and Guiny.
as St. Thomas, etc. Under the name of MELEGVETE, we comprehend that which is
between the Capes of Serre Leon and of Palms: Under the particular name of
GVINY we esteem not only that which is between the Capes of Palms and of Three
Points; but likewise that which advances to the River Volta, and beyond, where
the Kingdom of Benim begins, and ends not till the River Camerones. Of these 3
parts Guiny is the largest and best known, communicating its name to the rest.
Its Coast, which is between the Capes of Palms and that of Three Points, is
called the Coast of Ivory; that which is beyond the Cape of Three Points, the
Coast of Gold: for the abundance of Gold and Ivory found in the one and the
other.

The Ivory and Gold Coasts, and their Trade.
The Coast of IVORY is very commodious, and well inhabited. The English, French,
Hollanders, and Hanse-Towns trade likewise in diverse Ports on the same Coast;
fetching thence, Gold, Ivory, Hides, Wax, Ambergris, etc. On the Gold Coast
are diverse Kingdoms or Realms, as of SABOV, FOETV, ACCARA, and others. The
Kingdom of SABOV is esteemed the most powerful of all, and that his Estates
extend sixty and odd Leagues on the Coast, and near 200 up in the Land. In 1482
the Portugals built on the Coast of FOETV the Fort of St. George de la Mina,
and long time after the Hollanders that of Nassau, adjoining to the Town of
Moure, on the Coast of Sabou; the one and the other to maintain their Traffic.
Its other places, and which are within Land are, Labor, Vxoo, and Quinimburm.

The Part of Meleguete.
MELEGVETE took its name from the abundance of Meleguete, here gathered of
diverse sorts: It is a Spice in form like French Wheat; some of a taste as
strong and biting as Pepper: from which the Portugals receive great gain, but
the English, French, and Hollanders bring it. The Portugals call it
Pimienta-del-Rabo; the Italians, Pepe della Coda; Tail Pepper, that is, Long
Pepper. Of their Palm Trees they make Wine as strong as the best of ours: They
have likewise, Gold, Ivory, Cotton, etc. Its chief place is Bugos, on the Cape
of Sierre Leonne.

The Kingdom of Benim, with its Inhabitants described.
The Kingdom of BENIM has more than 250 Leagues of the Coast; Cape Formoso
dividing it into two parts: That which is on the West forms a Gulf, into the
middle of which the River Benim disburthens it self; and more to the West that
of Lagoa: That which is on the East extends it self on a right line, where the
Rio Real de Calabari, and the Rio del Rey, disburthen themselves near to that
of Camarones, which ends the Estate toward the East. This last part is more
healthful than that of the particular Guiny, the Inhabitants living 100 years
and more. The Land produces the same Fruits, and feeds the same Beasts with
Guiny, and its People are more courteous to Strangers. Their principal City, so
called, is esteemed the greatest and best built of any, either in Guiny or the
Land of the Negroes. Its King is powerful, and very loving to his Subjects;
they are all much addicted to Women, the King being said to keep about 5 or 600
Wives, with all which, twice a year he goes out in great pomp, as well for
Recreation, as to show them to his Subjects; who according to their abilities
do exceed; Those of the gentile or better sort keeping 20, 30, 40; others 50,
60, or 70: and those of the poorest rank 5, 10, or 12. Their Custom both for
Men and Women, till they are married, is to go naked, and after their clothing
is only a Cloth, which is tied about their Middles, and hangs down to their
knees. Its other chief places are, Ouwerre, Focko, Boni, and Bodi.

The Soil of Guiny.
The Soil of Guiny is generally fertile, the most part bearing twice a year,
because they have two Summers and two Winters. They oall it Winter when the Sun
passes their Zenith, and that the Rains are continual. All the whole Country is
very fertile, Its fertility and commodities.
abounding in Corn, Rice, Millet, and in many sorts of Meleguete; in Fruits, as
Oranges, Citrons, Lemmons, Pomegranates, Dates, etc. Also in Gold, both in Sand
and in Ingots, in Ivory or Elephants Teeth in great abundance, in Wax, Hides,
Cotton, Ambergris; they extract Wine and Oil from their Palm Trees; and of
this Oil, and the Ashes of the Palm Tree, they make excellent Soap. They have
many Sugarcanes, which are scarce at all Husbanded: They have Brasil-Wood,
better then that which comes from Brasil: they have abundance of Wood, proper
to build and Mast Ships; and Pearls, which they find in Oysters, toward the
River Des Ostros, that is, of Oysters; and of St. Anne, between the Branches of
the Niger. Commodities here found.
And for these good Commodities in way of Barter, they truck or take course
Cloth, both Linen and Woollen; Red Caps, Frize Mantles and Gowns; Leather
Baggs, Sheep-skin Gloves; Guns, Swords, Daggers, Belts, Knives, Hammers,
Axheads, Salt, Great Pins, little pieces of Iron, which they convert to several
uses; Lavers and great Dutch Kettles with two handles. Basins of several sizes,
Platters, Broad Pans, Posnets, Pots, etc. made for the most part of Capper,
which are sometimes Tinned within. Some of which Vtensils are made of Tinn, and
others of Earths, which are here desired: Also Looking-Glasses Beads, Corals
and Copper, Brass and Tinn Rings, which they wear about them for their
adornment. Hors-tails which they use to keep away the Flies which annoy them,
as also when they Dance. And lastly, certain Shells which pass instead of Money;
having here, and in many other Countries, no current Money of Metal, as the
Europeans have; but make use of those Shells, which they hang in bundles upon
strings; for which they buy in their Markets such things as they want.

Its Beasts and their nature. The Elephant.
Among their Beasts they have Elephants, which are said to be the biggest of all
four footed Beasts: Of nature they are very gentle, docile, and tractable; they
live to a great age, seldom dying till the age of 150 years. They are very
serviceable, both in War and Peace, and as profitable by reason of their Tusks.
It is said, That when the Male has once seasoned the Female, he never after
touches her. Next the Elephants may be reckoned the Musk-Cats, The Musk-Cats
which with Springs they take in the Woods, when they are young, and keep them
in Hutches, and take from them the Musk, which they keep in Glasses or Pots,
and so vend it: And these Cats they vend to the English and other Nations at
good rates. Then their Apes, Monkeys and Baboons, Monkeys, Apes, and Baboons.
which are strong and lusty being taken and brought to it young, serve like
men: They send them to fetch Water at the River, make them to turn meat at the
Fire, serve at Table to give Drink; but they must be very watchful, otherwise
they will do mischief, and eat the meat themselves; and these are much beloved
by their Women, doing the duty of Men, which they are as desirous of
themselves, and hating Men. Again, there are some of these Monkeys or Apes,
which love Men and hate Women. They have variety of Birds, among which, Its
Birds. Its Fruits.
they have several sorts of Parrots which are brought to talk. Their Fruits are
excellent, as Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Dates, Annanas or Pynes,
which for smell and taste, resembles all Fruits. Trennuelis, a Fruit so
delicate and delicious that it is thought it was the Fruit in Paradise which was
forbidden Adam and Eve to eat of. Iniamus, Battatas, Bachonens, the Palm Tree,
and above all here is a Tree called the Oyster Tree, by reason of its bearing
Oysters thrice every year; a thing, if report may be credited, is true; and if
true, very strange.

The Inhabitants, especially before the coming of the Portugals, Its People.
were rude and barbarous, living without the knowledge of a God, Law, Religion,
or Government, very disingenious, and not caring for Arts or Letters. Their
disposition.
They are much addicted to Theft, and take it for an honor, if they can cheat
or steal any thing, (though not considerable) from a White Man. They are very
perfidious, Liars, given to Luxury; in matter of Justice, they are indifferent
severe, Their Justice.
punishing ofttimes with death; but paying a fine will free them; and the place
of Judicature is in the open Market Place. Their Food is gross and beastly,
Their Food and Apparel.
as is their Habitations, mean and beggarly. They go naked, save about their
Waist they tie a piece of Linen; yet very proud and stately: Their Stature.
They are of a Corpulent body, flat nosed, broad shouldred, white eyed. and
teeth'd, Their Religion and belief.
small eared, etc. In matters of Religion, they are great Idolaters, worshipping
Beasts, Birds, Hills, and indeed, every strange thing which they see; they hold
there is two Gods, one does them good, and the other hurt; and these two Gods,
they say, fight together. Also they believe there is a God, which is invisible,
which they say is black; yet of late they have tried many Forms of Religion, as
Judaism, Mahometism and Christianity; but care not much for any. Nevertheless,
some of them believe they die not, and to that end, give their dead bodies
something to carry with them into the other World. They keep their Fetissoes
day, that is, one day in seven for a day of rest, as their Sabbath, which is on
a Tuesday, (a day that no other Nation in the World keeps) very strict; at
which time, they offer Meat and Drink to their Fetisso or God, on a four square
place, covered with Wires or Fetissoes straws, which the Birds (by them called
Gods Birds) devour. During which time, the Fetissero sits upon a Stool with a
Pot of Drink in his hand, using several Ceremonies. Their Marriage, theirabode.
Amongst their Barbarous Customs they have one very good, and that is, when
their Daughters are of a fitting age to marry, they put them into Houses, which
are in the nature of Monasteries, where for a year they are educated by Old Men
of good repute amongst them. And at the expiration of the said year, they are
brought well habited (according to their Custom) and accompanied with Music,
and Dancing; and when a Young Man makes choice of any of them, he bargains with
her Parents, and satisfies the Old Man that educated her, for his pains and
charges (which is not much) and then takes her to Wife. The Portion being thus
paid, they meet one another naked, and the Woman swears to be faithful to the
Man, both at Bed and Board, and so the Marriage is concluded: But the Man
swears not, being at liberty; so that upon the least offense, he may put her
away, or force her to pay a Fine of so many Potoes of Gold: And according to
the ability of a Man, he may buy and keep as many Wives as he pleases; among
which, the eldest is subservient to the youngest. The Man never lies with any
of his Wives, neither eats with them, but on Tuesdays, which is their
Sabbath. And although the Husband commands, yet the Wife is the Purse-bearer
until she be with Child, and ready to be delivered; at which time, being stark
naked, and in the Field, among the People, she throws the bag to her Husband,
until taking a handful of Manniget and a spoonful of Oil, she goes abroad the
next day, as well as if she had not been with Child, or suffered any pain; and
then feasteth her Neighbors, circumciseth the Child; and after it has lain
sprawling upon the ground two or three days, she takes it, and carries it on
her shoulders, How they bring up their Children.
like those which we call Gypsies; and is about four years of age, the Mother
brings it to the Father, who teaches it to Swim, make Nets, Fish and Row,
giving it nothing but what it can earn; and when it can be master of so much
Gold as will purchase Linen to make it a Wastcloth, it is rich.

In Guiny there are several Petty Kingdoms who make War one against the other;
Their War.
during which War, they destroy and burn the Country, to the end that the
enemy may find no succor, removing their Goods to a Neighboring Kingdom, with
whom they have peace; and the whole Kingdom surrounds the King, Their Weapons.
for his defense and safeguard; and thus they march. Their Weapons are the Bow
and Arrows, with which they are so expert, that they can shoot within the
breadth of a Shilling. Also they make use of the Poniard, the Dagger, the
Shield and Turbant. In which Wars, those they kill, they eat; those they take,
they make Slaves; and such are those, that the English, Dutch and other Nations
buy of them; and whom they subdue, they take Hostages from. The Riches,
Revenue, State and Power of their Kings.
Their Kings are not over-rich, that Revenue which they have comes from the
Customs and Tithes upon Goods; as also in the two Ounces of Gold paid by every
Man that lies with another Wife: Likewise, in Fines levied for Theft for
their ransom; and lastly, in the Sixpenny forfeitures for bringing their
Weapons within any of their Cities: Neither do they live in great pomp and
grandeur; a poor Cottage with us, being with them a Princes Palace. Yet they
are had in such reverence, that none comes to speak with them (though of their
Nobility and Gentry) but must crawl upon the hands and knees, and so deliver
their business unto them. But the White Men are had in so much respect (though
never so poor) that they sit cheek by jowl by their Kings. Upon the Coronation
day, as also upon the Quarter days, when the Kings receive their Customs, they
make a maguificent Feast which lasts for two or three days; at which times
they have all the varieties in their way as the Country will afford; and many
of them are held very powerful.

And here, on this Coastof Guiny, the Dutch have been great Traders, having
several Holds and Factories, but of late in Anno 1663 and 64, the English have
had many struglings with the Dutch, whom they have pretty well subdued; and
have now settled their several Factories, and are incorporated into a Society
at London, called the Royal African Company, who have many Factories and
settlements, driving a very considerable Trade, to the great benefit of the
Nation.

Isles of St. THOMAS, etc.
BEtween Guiny and the Lower Aethiopia, is a Guph, where are the Isles of St.
THOMAS, Princes Island, Fernand Poo, Annobon or Bon Anne; and farther in the
Great Sea, St. Matthew, the Ascension, St. Helena, etc. These Isles have their
names from the day whereon they were discovered: That of the Prince, because
its Revenue was designed for the Prince of Portugal; that of Fernand Poo, from
him that discovered it.

But of all these Islands that of St. THOMAS is by much the greatest, The
Island of St. Thomas described.
and the best: Its form is almost round, it is thirty, others say forty;
others, and with more apparent truth 60000 Paces Diameter; which are 180000
Paces, or 65 Leagues circuit, seated under the Equator; and by reason of the
excessive heats which are there predominant: The Air is found very prejudicial
and unhealthful to strangers, especially to the Europeans, who scarce ever
reach to the age of fifty years, and the Women much less: Yet the Natives of
the Country live commonly 100 years, and without sickness. They have no Rain
but only in March and September, yet by reason of the Dews, which at all other
times of the year falls, the Earth is well moistened, so that it brings forth
all sorts of Fruits, Roots and Pot Herbs; but their principal riches is their
Sugars, of which, they have sometimes exported 150000 Arrobes, each Arrobe
being 32 l. weight, which is five Millions of pounds yearly: Also Ginger, etc.
there is carried them in exchange for their Commodities, Wines, Oils, Cheese,
Stuffs, Beads, Drinking-glasses, Corn-Flower, and little white Shells which
serve for Money in Aethiopia, as in Guiny, etc. They Trade in the Neighboring
Coasts, where are the Rivers of Barca, Campo, St. Benito, St. Juan, and the
Isle of Corisco: Those Grains and Vines which they would have sown and Planted,
have not thriven, the Earth being too fat. They make their Bread of diverse
Roots; have their Wood from Palm Trees: They feed much Fowl, have abundance of
several sorts of Fish, both great and small, among others, Whales. They have
also great store of four-footed Beasts, among others, their Hogs bear the Bell;
which being fed with Sugarcanes, after the Juice is drawn out, grow fat, and
become so excellent, that their Pullain is accounted for no value to them, even
for sick people. The middle of the Isle is filled with Mountains, which are
laden with a great number of Trees, which are always covered with Clouds,
which so moisten the Trees, that from them ^alls so much fresh water, as makes
many little streams, which waters all parts of the Island. The Portugals have
built the City Pavoasan, containing about (...) or 800 Houses, and some Forts,
to defend the Port: They have erected a Bishopric, and do allow of no
Religion, but the Christian. This Town is vell frequented by Portugal
Merchants, who trade in the Commodities aforesaid. The Inhabitants are Negroes,
and very black.

PRINCES ISLAND has a little City, and the Inhabitants live conveniently; the
Isle being fruitful, Princes Island.
yielding Fruits, Sugar, some Ginger, etc. Once taken by the Hollanders, who
for some reasons soon abandoned it.

The Island of Annobon.
The Island of ANNOBON yields Sugars, Cottons, Cattle, and excellent Fruits
especially large Oranges. In this Isle there is a Town of 100 or 120 Houses of
Blacks, who are governed by some few Portugals.

The Isle of St. Hellena.
The Island of St. HELLENA was first discovered by the Portugals upon the 21 of
May; on which day, is celebrated the memory of St. Helena, the Mother of
Constantine the Great; from whom it took its name. This Isle is so fertile,
that it is observed no place in all Europe yields the like plenty; for with
manuring and cultivating the Earth, it produces excellent Fruits, which are
here found all the year: It has great store of Barbary Hens, Feasants,
Partridges, Pigeons, Quails, Peacocks, with several sorts of small Birds in
great plenty; it has also Goats, Swine, etc. Yet this Isle is not inhabited,
but serves for the English, Portugals, Spaniards and Hollanders, to refresh
themselves in going, but for the most part in returning from the Indies; it
being sufficient to furnish Ships with Provision for their Voyage; here being
Salt to preserve the Meat from stinking; and besides, the Air is so healthful,
that they often leave their sick people there, who in a short time are restored
to perfect health; and by the next Ships that put in there, are taken in again.
During which time, they find wherewithal to feed them: But some years ago, the
Hollanders ruined all that was good, only to spite the Spaniards, who
afterward did the same, that the English, Hollanders, etc. might have no
profit by it. This Island is well furnished with good Waters, which alone is a
great refreshment to Ships.

Other Isles not inhabited.
The Islands of FERNAND POO, St. MATTHEWS, and ASCENSION, are also not
inhabited, and of no great account, nor much known; which we shall pass by,
saying only, that they have some Fowls, Wild Beasts, and their Seas yield
Fishes.

NVBIA.
Nubia and its bounds.
NVBIA is bounded on the North, West and South, almost every where with
Mountains; which separate it from the Desert of Barca and Egypt on the North;
from Saara and the Negroes, on the West; and from the Abyssins, on the South;
the rest toward the East, is hounded in part by the Nile which separates it
from the Isle of Gueguere; in part by an Imaginary Line, which separates it
from diverse Provinces; of which, some belong to the Turks; who hold all that is
on the Red Sea, which they have taken from the Abyssins.

Its length and breadth. Its chief places
NVBIA thus taken, makes a long square, whose length from South-West, to
North-East, is about 400 Leagues; and its breadth from South-East, to
North-West, almost every where, 200 Leagues. The chief Cities of Nubia, are,
Cusa, Gualva, Dancala, Jalac and Sula, according to the Arab of Nubia: Moreover
and in the same Author, I find that Tamalma, Zaghara, Mathan, Angimi, Nuabia,
Tagua, and some others fall likewise in Nubia; and by some Authors Gorham,
which some would put among the Negroes, should be likewise in Nubia, because it
is on the Nile: There where it can have no communication with the Negroes, who
ought to be upon, and about the Niger. Likewise Damocla, toward the Negroes,
and Bugia toward Egypt, ought to be esteemed in Nubia.

The City of Gorham.
Gorham is on the Nile, and on the Coast of the Isle Gueguere. Sanutus make: a
Kingdom, a Desert, and a People of this name, and extends them almost al^ the
length of the Isle Gueguere; not making any mention of the City of this name,
nor John Leon of Africa, nor the Arab of Nubia, nor Vincent Blanck, who says,
he has been in these quarters, and speaks only of the Desert o^ Gorham. Other
Authors make mention of this City, and describe it on the Nile. Sanutus says,
that there are found Emeralds in those Mountains, which bound Gorham on the
South.

Except only Gorham, the Arab of Nubia observes the distances between all the
other Cities which we have taken notice of; and says, that Tamalma has many
Inhabitants, no Walls; makes little account of Mathan and Angimi: Moreover, he
esteems Mathan the Residence of the King of Canem, who holds here many Cities;
makes Zaghara better, and says, it has some Trade, Tagua and Nubia more, from
which last the Region and People took their names. John Leon and Sanutus after
him, esteems Dancala or Dangala, the chief of the Kingdom, seated on the Nile,
and that it has about 10000 Families. And he says, its Houses are built with
Chalk, and covered with Laths or Boards: The Inhabitants civil and rich,
driving a good Trade through all Egypt, even to Cairo; whither they carry Arms,
Cloths, Civet, Sanders and Ivory. They have a certain Poison worth 100 Ducats
an Ounce, which they sell only to strangers, which promise not to use it in the
Country. And also Bugia seated on the Nile, a City of some account and Trade;
as is Jalac, Gualva and Cusa, also seated on the Nile.

The Empire of the ABISSINES or the HIGHER AETHIOPIA, wherein are comprehended
diverse Kingdoms, Countries, Coasts, Isles, etc. which may be considered as they
lie Northernly and toward EGYPT, as The Kingdom of NUBIA with its Estates and
Cities of Gorham, Jalac, Mathan, Gualva, Dancala, Cusa, Zaghara, Bugia, Angimi,
Tamalma, Sula, Tagua.
North-Easternly and toward the Red Sea, as The Coast of ADEX which
comprehends the Kingdom of BARNAGASSO. Suaquen, Ercocco, Carna, Corberia,
Barva, Zama.
ISLES of Bahia, Suaquem, Mire, Macruma, St. Peitre.

Easternly and toward the Sea of ZANGUEBAR; as The Coast of AJAN which
comprehends the Kingdom of ADEA Brava, Magadoxa, Barraboa, Quilmanca.
Kingdom of ADEL Adel, Zeila, Barbora, Meta.
ISLE of -- Zocotora.
The Coast of ZANGUEBAR with its Estates and Cities of Mongale, Chelicia, Pate,
Lamon, Angos, Mongalo, Melinda, Mombaze, Angos, Quiloa. Mozambique, Darcelum.
ISLES about the Coast of ZANGUEBAR, as Monfia, Santus Rochus, Zanzibara, Penda.

Southernly, Westernly and toward the Kingdom of CONGO or the LOWER AETHIOPIA,
where are the Kingdoms or Provinces of TIGREMAHON Chuxumum, Saibana
ANGOTA Angotina, Bugano, St. Maria.
XOA -- Xoa. FATIGARA -- Mundinae, CANCALA Degibeldara, Degibelcora.
BAGAMEDRI Chilcut, Ermita, Azuga, Baza, Machanda,
GOYAME Chilcut, Ermita, Azuga, Baza, Machanda,
AMBIAN Cemenia, Ambiami, Amasen, Sire.
DAMBEA Ambadara, Chedaflan.
VANGUE Matagazi, Vangue.
DAMOUT Damute, Harode, Gaga.
AMARA Amara, Fungi, Baraena, Burn.
AMBIAM Ambiam, Therva, Azuga, Ougne, Losa, Sesila, Agola.
GEMEN Gemen, Dara, Jaflan.
GORGA Gorga, Bara, Gafat.
GAVI-GASA -- Gasabella. NAREA Falaccia, Gavi, Zet.
GAFATES Cafates, Maurama.
FUNGI -- Fungi. QUARA Quara, Nova.
AGAG Agag, Gorava, Giarva.



map of the Abyssinian or Ethiopian empire A MAPP OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER
AETHIOPIA. COMPREHEND YE SEVERAL KINGDOMS. etc IN EACH. TO WIT IN THE EMPIRE
OF THE ABISSINES THE COAST OF ZANGUEBAR, ABEX, AND AIAN, WITH THE KINGDOMS OF
NUBIA, AND BIAFARA, etc IN THE LOWER AETHIOPIA THE KINGDOM OF CONGO. YE EMPIRE
OF MONOMOTA^ AND MONOEMUGY. Y^ COAST AND LANDS OF CAFRES. AND OF THIS SIDE CAPE
NEGRES. With the Isles of Madagasoar etc by Monsieur Sanson Geograper, to ye
French King
blazon or coat of arms of the Glynne baronets To the Rt. Worshipful Sr.
William Glynne of Bissister in Oxfordshire and of Hawarden in Flintshire Bart.
This Mapp is humbly DD by R.B.



THE EMPIRE OF THE ABYSSINGS, Or, THE Higher Aethiopia.
Empire of the Abissins, its extent, length, and breadth.
ABYSSIN, or the Empire of the ABYSSINS, is commonly called the Higher and
Great AETHIOPIA; because it makes the greatest and better part of the one, and
the other Aethiopia; and is the greatest and most considerable Estate of all
Africa, under one name. It extends it self on this side, and beyond the
Equinoctial Line; from the Mountains of the Moon, and the Springs of the Nile,
even near unto Egypt; and from the Kingdoms, and Estates of Congo, and the
Negroes, unto the Coasts of Zanguebar, Ajan and Habex. Its greatest length from
South to North, is 800 Leagues. Its breadth from West to East, 4, 5 and
sometimes 600, and in Circuit about 2500.

Its parts.
Some divide this great Estate into many Kingdoms and Provinces, as are set down
in the Geopraphical Table of the Higher Aethiopia; we shall observe the most
known.

Kingdom of Barnagasso described.
BARNAGASSO signifies King of the Sea, because formerly all this Kingdom or
Government held all the Coast of the Red Sea, from Egypt unto the Kingdom of
Dancala; which is 250 Leagues; At present the Turks hold this Coast, where are
Suaquen, Mezzua, Arquico which we will describe with Zanguebar, under the name
of the Coast of Habex. Barva or Daburova is esteemed the chief of Barnagasso;
after which some put Canfila, Daffila, and Emacen: others esteem Canfila and
Daffila Provinces or Governments, and Emacen a City of the Government of
Daffila, 20 Leagues from Barva; 50 from Suaquen. Chaxumo is the chief of Tigre;
a fair City, and according to the common opinion, the Ordinary Residence of the
Queen of Sheba or Saba, that came to see Solomon. Both the City and Quarter of
Sabain, not far from Chaxumo, seem to retain the name. There are every where,
here abouts, found a great many fair Churches: Angotine is a City in the
Kingdom of Angota, and here they use Salt, or little pieces of Iron instead of
Money.

Kingdom of Amara described.
The Kingdom of AMARA is farnous, by reason of its Mountain, where the Children,
and nearest of Kindred to the Grand Negus are guarded: This Mountain is very
high, of a great circuit, and whose approaches are very difficult, being craggy
on all sides, and easy to defend; which made this use be made of it, to keep
those which may cause any commotion in the Estate. The top of the Mountain is
formed into a great Plain, where there are fair Buildings, many Cisterns, a
rich Monastery, etc. Some speak wonders of this Mountain, and that the Grand
Negus being deceased, they take thence him who is the trueinterior, if he be
capable to govern the Estate, if not the second or third, etc. in order. Others
say that there are no such things as they put here, neither Monastery, Library,
Gold, Precious Stones, etc.

Kingdom of Bagamedri with its Provinces etc. described.
BAGAMEDRI is subdivided into Provinces, like to Tigre; has a greater extent,
and should be better, lying along the Nile. The Prince resides often at Dambea,
which is beyond the Nile, as well as Damout. Some place the Springs of the Nile
in Goyame, others in Cafates. The one and the other Kingdom being about the
Lake of Zaire. Goyame where this Lake reduces it self into a River, which is
the Nile: Cafates on one of the principal Rivers of those that fall into the
Lake; which apparently should be called the Nile. Narea is between the Lake of
Zaire and Zafflan; which are two Lakes, from whence descend the principal
Rivers which make the Nile.

The Air fertility, commodities, etc. of the Abissin.
The Air of Abissin is very temperate considering its situation: Tigrema^on
particularly is esteemed so, by reason of the Northerst Winds which re^^esh it.
All the Country is in Plains, except some Mountains, which are espe^^ally
toward its bounds. The Soil is generally good, fruitful in Grains and Pulse,
of which, it has excellent, not known to us; they have few Vines, as also few
Herbs, the Grasshoppers much annoying them. The Land feeds many tame and wild
Beasts; and much Fowl, among others an infinite number of Turtles. Their Rivers
have Cro^odiles and River-Ho^ses, which they call Gomaras; it is a hardy Fish,
and will assault men in the Water. It has much Metals, as Gold, Silver, Lead,
Tin; and the Mountains so full of Sulphur, that they may afford wherewith to
make Saltpeter more then any Country in the World, Tigremahon has Mines of
Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Copper and Sulphur: Damout has more Gold, then all
the rest: Bagamedri and Goyame has likewise Gold.

The Inhabitants are generally black; some more, some less; they are (for the
most part) of a good stature, flat nosed, woolly haired, of a nimble spirit,
and very jovial: They have scarce any thing of Literature, neither do they much
desire to attain to any. They Coin neither Gold nor Silver, but receive it by
weight. Some Authors make this Prince so rich, that there is scarce any in the
World has so much present Gold in his Coffers. Sanutus says, that he once
offered to the Kings of Portugal a Million of Drams of Gold, and as many men to
exterminate the Infidels. Its People.
And Queen Helena writing to Emanuel of Portugal, and speaking for her
Grandchild David, says, that if the King of Portugal would furnish them with
1000 Vessels of War and People fit for the Sea, that she would on her part, Its
Kings very rich and powerful.
furnish them with all things necessary for the War, and give them 200 Millions
of Gold; and that she had Men, Gold and Provisions, in suchgreat number and
plenty, as there were Sands in the Sea, or Stars in the Firmament.

Zaara, King of Aethiopia, led against Asa, King of Judah, 90000 Foot, and
10000 Horse; which are 100000 Men. Pliny esteems the Isle of Meroes alone have
250000 Men fit to bear Arms; and 400000 Artisans. At present, the Grand Negus
is held able to raise a Million of Men; and Barnagas alone to furnish 200000
Foot, and 20000 Horse. The Prince is always in the Field, and 5 or 6000 Tents
attending on him, where are are Churches, Hospitals, Shops, Taverns, etc. which
furnished with all things necessary for himself, and his Train.

There are scarce any Fortresses in the Country, except where Mountains of
themselves make them. The Neighbors to this Estate, are the Turks, who hold all
the Coast of Haber on the Red Sea, the King of Adel, and some others, on the
Coasts of Ajan and Zanguebar; the Monomotapa, or the Monoemugi, toward the
Mountains of the Moon; the Congo, or some Estates neighboring on Congo, and the
Negroes toward the West; some Kings of Nubia, toward the North. Except the
Turks, the Abissins having no Civil War, can easily reduce the greatest part of
them to reason, or at least, hinder them from molesting him.

ZANGVEBAR.
Zang^^bar, its Coasts or Parts, and their Situation.
UNder the name of ZANGVEBAR, I comprehend all the Coasts of the Higher
Aethiopia: And these Coasts are on the Ethiopian Ocean, and the Red Sea or
Gulf of Arabia. I subdivide them into three parts, the Coast of Zanguebar, the
Coast of Ajan, and the Coast of Abex. The Coast of Zanguebar extends it self
from the Cafres to under the Equator, for the space of 5 or 600 Leagues: That
of Ajan is between the Equator and the Straight of Bab-el-Mandel, likewise 600
Leagues: The Coast of Abex advances from that Straight to Egypt, and has not
above 4000 Leagues. The first part was called by the Ancients Barbaria Regio,
the second Azania Regio, and the last Trogloditica Regio.

The particular Coast of Zanguebar toward the East regards some Isles,
Zanguebar.
among which that of Zanguebar, which has communicated its name to the Coast,
and then those of Penda and Monfia are the best known. Maffy makes mention here
of the Isle and City of Querimba, and Texera of Anisa; the one and the other
possibly, answer to some of those which Sanutas calls St. Rocq and Monfia,
which (he says) are four Islands, two great and two small.

Penda and Zanguebar are the greatest, Penda.
and according to the form Sanutus gives them, are each of 100 Leagues circuit,
Monfia 50, and the others much less. All, and particularly Zanguebar, produces
quantity of Grains, as Rice, Millet, etc. quantity of Fruits, as Citrons,
Oranges, etc. and many Sugar Canes, which they know not how to resine; nor want
they Fountains of fresh Water. Aniza and Querimba has Manna, but not so much
esteemed as that of other places.

On the Coast are the Estates or Kingdoms of Mongale, on one of the branches of
Cuama, Angos or Angouche, on another Branch, or on another River of the same
name, Mozambique Isle and City on the Coast, as likewise Quiloa and Mombaze.
Melinda is no Isle, but on the Coast: so are Lamon, Pate, etc. Mongalo and
Angos are little considerable; their Inhabitants black, Mahometans and Pagans;
they traffic in Gold, Ivory, Calicoes, and Silk. The Isle and City of
Mozambique is on that Coast of Africa which regards the Isle of Madagascar
toward the East, Isle and City of Mosambique described.
and just between the Capes of Good Hope and Guardafuy, near 1000 Leagues from
the one and the other, some account is made of this City and its Fort, for the
goodness and depth of its Port, though small; but of a very important retreat
for the Vessels of Portugal, after they have passed the Cape of Good Hope,
where oft-times the Heat, or the working or motion of the Ship distempers many
Men, who refresh themselves here, there being a very good Hospital, and a
Magazin always furnished with what ever is needful, to finish their Voyage to
the East Indies; this Port serving them going to the Indies, as the Isle o^
Sancta Helena does in their return. The whole Isle is not above a League and
half in circuit. Its City is not so beautiful as many have believed it, but of
a good Trade, wealthy and well frequented by the Portugals. Its Castle is good,
since it has sustained diverse Assaults of the Hollanders. The Soil is dry,
has none, or very little Fresh Water; but the great number of Fruits, as
Cocos, Oranges, Citrons, as others common to the Indies; and the quantity of
Cattle, as Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, etc. which are found here, recompense
these Inconveniences. Their Figs are long and large, being excellent and
h^althful. The Tree sprouts, and dies every year; it shoots forth but one
Branch, where many Figs ripen one after another, so that they are found to
continue almost all the year: the Leaves are so great, that two will cover a
person of a moderate Stature: dying, it leaves a Root, which shoots forth
another Fig Tree the year after

Their Swines-flesh is so healthful, that Physicians order it for Sick people.
Their Pullain are good and delicate, though their Feathers, Flesh, Blood, and
Bones, are very black, and if boiled in Water as black as Ink. Here they are
said to have Sheep, whose Tails weigh about 25 pound weight.

Kingdom of Quiloa, its chief places, etc.
QVILOA is 150 Leagues, or little more from Mozambique, in a strait line: and
near 250 by Sea: It has two Cites, the Old and the new; the Old on the main
Land, the New in an Island, divided from it by a small Channel: This last is
much the fairest; its Houses high, magnificent, and well furnished; accompunied
with Gardens, where they gather excellent Fruits throughout the whole year. The
Kings of Quiloa once commanded all the Coast into Mozambique and Sofala; but
this Estate has received a great change since the coming of the Portugals into
these quarters. Its People.
Its Inhabitants are yet rich, and have a great traffic for Gold, which they
bring from the Main Land, where there is near as much as on the Coast of
Sofala; as also Silver, Ambergreece, Pearls and Musk: They are part black, part
white; these coming from Arabia, and are Mahometans; the others of the Natives
are partly Idolaters both the one and the other go clad after the Arab or
Turkish manner; the richest wearing Clothes of Gold and Silver, Silks, fine
Calico^s, and Scarlet, enriching the Guards of their Swords and Daggers with
fair Pearls and Precious Stones, as the Women do their Ear-Pendants and
Bracelets. They are very comely, of a civil behavior, neat in their Houses, and
love to go in rich Apparel. Here the People are observed to use a strange
custom to those of the Female Sex, which is not used by any other Nation or
People, save themselves; which is that they sow up the Privy-parts of the
Female Children, only leaving a small vent for the issuing forth of their
Urine. And thus sowed, they keep them carefully at home until they be married;
and those that are by their Husbands found not to have this sign of their
perpetual Virginity, are sent to their Parents with all kind of ignominy, and
by their Parents are as disgracefully received. The Country, though unhealthful
to the Europeans, ought to be esteemed good, since the Inhabitants are rich,
the Soil fruitful in Grains and Fruits, feeding many Beasts and Fowl. Its
Forests full of Game, and its Neighboring Sea full of excellent Fish.

The Isle and City of Mombaze.
MOMZAMBE is 150 Leagues from Quiloa, seated on a little Hill, and an in
Island, at the bottom of a Gulf, where great Ships may ride safe at Anchor.
This City was formerly great, being about a League in circuit, encompassed with
a strong Wall, and fortifled with a good Castle; well Peopled, of a good Trade;
its Streets in good order, and its Houses high, and well built with Stone and
Chalk, appearing almost all toward the Sea. It was found out when Vasco de
Gama was in the Indies, and afterward taken and retaken diverse times by the
Portugals, who keep a Fort by reason of the goodness of the Haven, and to
maintain their trade. The Isle of Mombaze is but small.

The Kingdom of Melinda described.
MELINDA is another Kingdom, but of a small extent; yet made considerable by
the good intelligence it has always preserved with the Portugals. Since Vasco
de Gama passed there the first time in 1489, until this present, which has
stood it in good stead; the Neighboring States having been taken, pillaged,
and burned diverse times. This kept entire, maintaiming its Trade with the
Portugals, and with the East: Its chief City bears the name of the Kingdom,
seated in a fruitful and delightful Soil, yielding great plenty of Rice,
Millet, Flesh; good store of Fruits, as Lemmons, Citrons, Oranges, etc. But not
well furnished with Corn, the greatest part whereof is broughtout of Cambaya, a
Province in India. This City is fair, well Walled, and the Houses built after
the Moorish manner, with many Windows and Terrasses. Its People.
The Inhabitants on the Sea Coasts are of the Arabian breed, and of the same
Religion. Those of the Inlands, which are the Original Natives, are for the
most part Heathens, and of an Olive color, but inclining to white; and their
Women of a very white Complexion, as in other places. They are said to be more
civil in their Habit, Course of life, and entertainment in their Houses, than
the rest of this Country; and great Friends to the Portugals, who return the
like kind usage to them. This Kingdom of Melinda is not distant from Mombaza
above 30 Leagues by Land, and 60 by Sea; whose People are of the same nature
and disposition with those of Melinda.

Estates of Lamon, Pate, and Chilicia.
The Estates of LAMON, PATE, and CHELICIA, and likewise some others, are under
the Government of Melinda. Panebaxira, King of Lamon, and Brother to the King
of Chelicia, surprised in 1589, Rock Brito, Governor of Melinda, and some
other Portugals, whom they sold to the Turks. The Admiral Thomas Sousa Cotinho
assaulted them, took, and cut off the Head of the King of Lamon, quartered the
others, and hung them up in diverse places to serve for example. These Kings are
almost all Mahometans; yet here are found some few Christians which inhabit
among them.

We have observed on the Coast of Zanguebar but five or six different Estates
or Kingdoms; there are some others, but of lesser note, and all Tributary, or
in good Intelligence, and trading with the Portugals.

The Coast of Ajan described.
Thee Coast of AJAN contains the Republic of BRAVA, which Sanutus calls
Barraboa; then the Kingdoms of MAGADOXA, ADEA, and ADELL: some of their People
on the Coast are White. BRAVA is well built, an indifferent Mart; rich, and
pays Tribute to the Portugals. It is the only Republic at present in Africa,
being governed by 12 Counselors or Statesmen. MAGADOXA is its chief City, and
has sometimes been so powerful, that it ruled over all this Coast; it is
situate in a delightful and fruitful Soil, and neighboured by a safe and large
Haven, which is much frequented by the Portugals, and is very rich, affording
Gold, Honey, Wax, and above all Abyssin Slaves, which by the Portugals are held
in great value; for which they bring them in exchange the Silks, Spices, Drugs,
etc. of India.

ADEA extends it self but little toward the Sea: The Country is fertile in
Grains, as Wheat, Barley, Rice, etc. It is well shaded with Woods and large
Forests, which are plentifully furnished both with Fruits and Cattle, besides
a greatincrease of Horses. The Inhabitants are of the Mohammedan Religion, Its
People.
and follow the Arabians in many of their Customs, from whom they were
descended, keeping much of their Language, and in their Habit naked, save only
from the middle downwards. Of Complexion, for the most part of an Olive color,
and well proportioned; not very expert in Arms, except in poisoned Arrows. Its
other chief places are Barraboa and Quilmanca, seated on the Sea, which is
called the Coast of Ajan, as is Magadoxa.

ADELL within these few years is become the most powerful of all these
Kingdoms: Its Estates extending both on the Arabian Gulf or Red Sea; and on
the Great Ocean, stretching 200 Leagues on each side; Cape Guardafuy ending
both the one and the other toward the East, regards in the Sea the Isle of
Zocotora, famous for the quantity and goodness of the Aloes here gathered,
which they call Zocotorin; about which are several other Isles, but not so
considerable, being small, and many not inhabited. The Arab of Nubia would make
us believe, that Alexander the Great was in this Island, drove thence the
Inhabitants, and planted Greeks the better to manage the Aloes, which Aristotle
had so much prized to him. Its chief City takes its name from the Kingdom; its
others places of most note are, 1. Zeila, of old, Avalis, and its Gulf
Avalatis Sinus, is one of the best places of the Kingdom of Adell, though about
the City there wants Water; yet the Country farther off furnishes Wheat,
Barley, Millet, Oil of Sesamum, Honey, Wax, Fruits, Gold, Ivory, and Incense.
They fell to the Turks and Arabs abundance of Abyssin Slaves, which they take
in War; and in exchange receive Arms, Horses, etc. This Zeila is a noted Port
Town, well frequented with Merchants, by reason of the variety of good
Commodities that it yields. Once of great beauty and esteem, till in the year
1516 it was sacked and burned by the Portugals; before which it was esteemed
the most remarkable Empire of all AEthiopia for the Indian Trade. 2. Barbora,
and 3. Meta, are two of the most noted Seaport Towns in all Adell, both under
the Turks Jurisdiction. The first is seated on the same Sea Coast, as Zeila is,
well frequented by Merchants, nigh to a lofty Promontory, which they call Mount
Fellez: And the last is seated near the Cape of Guardafuy. The People
inhabiting on the Sea Coasts are descended from the Arabs, and of the Mohammedan
Religion; but those toward the Inland Countries, of the old Aethiopick Race,
and wholly Gentiles.

The Coast of Abex, with its chief places and Isles.
The Coast of ABEX has for its principal places, Aquico, of old Magnum Littus,
Maczuma Isle, Macaria Insula, and Suaquem Ptolomais Ferarum. The Turk has a
Bassa at Suaquem, and some say another at Maczuma or Aquico. Suaquem is in the
midst of the Coast of Africa, which lies on the Red Sea or Arabian Gulf,
distant from Sues in Egypt, which ends this Gulf, 250 and odd Leagues; and
from Babel-Mandel, which begins it, 260, or little more: So the Authority of
this Bassa exten^^ almost quite over this Sea. The Isle of Maczuma has good
Pastures, feeds much Cattle: Aquico is almost opposite to Maczuma, and both
have commodious Havens. Its other chief places are, Canfila, Daffila, Emacen,
Barba, Zama, Corberia, and Carna. About this Coast of Abex are several other
Isles, as Bahia de Cabras, Suaquem, Mire, Meger, Ballaccia, Maczua, St. Peitre,
with several others not worth the naming.

All this Coast of Abex has been under the Government of Bernagasso in
Abyssin, and belonged not to the Turk till within this hundred years. A Country
dry, untilled, but of some Trade: the People fierce, retaining much of their
ancient Barbarism. They Fish Coral near the Isle of Suaquem and Aquico; they
frequently pass from Suaquem to Ziden, in Arabia, which serves for a Port to
Mecca, and is about 100 Leagues over. This is the Traject which the Arab of
Nubia describes between Adhab and Giodda, which answer to Suaqnem and Ziden.

The Empire of the ABYSSINS; or the LOWER AETHIOPIA; with its Empires,
Kingdoms, Land, etc. which may be divided into (or comprehended under) three
Parts, or Heads; and then: The First shall contain The Kingdom of CONGO, with
its Kingdoms or Provinces of LOANGA, Loango, Set, Majumba, Quanvi, Quiloogo,
Sellaga, Kaye, Katte.
PANGO, Pango, Cundi Funquenes, Angote, Chicaco de Lula.
SUNDA, Sunda, Betequa, Quincasso.
SONGO, Sonho, Bommo, Matinga, Cascais, Melemba, Calinde, Palmarinho, Mombalas,
Quivala.
BAMBA, Bamba, Mussula, Lengo, Loanda St. Pavo, Fort Mols, Motole, Bengo, Azele.
PEMBA, St. Salvador, Pemba, Tinda, Simba, Lemba.
BATTA, Batta, Agisimba, Gongou.
ANGOLA, Engaze, Maisirgan, Benguela, Quicongo, Manikimsombo, Manikilondo,
Gunze, Mapongo, Embacca.
GIAQUES, Zaire, Dagar, Elifie.
MALEMBA, Meri. Debsan.

The Second shall contain The Empire of MONOMOTAPA, with its Kingdoms or Parts
of SUTUA, Batua, Carma, Zet, Dobdel, Augesa. Calburas, Bafat, Quiticui, Degme,
Hagala, Giera, Amara, Matagasi, Bera, Armeta, Gallica.
MONOMOTAPA, particularly so called, Monomotapa, Zuggi, Tialso, Zimbro, Jouros,
Garma, Mosata, Vigiri Magna.

The Empire of MONOEMUGI, wherein are some Kingdoms, whose chief places are
Agag, Astagoa, Leuma, Camur, Beif, Bagametro, Zembre,

The Third shall contain The Land and Coast of CAFRES, which encompasseth the
Empire of MONOMOTAPA, with its Parts of MATAMAN, Angra dos Negros, Cabo Negro,
Doileus portus.
Coast of CAFRES, particularly so called, Cape St. Anthony, Cape St. Lucia, St.
Martins-Bay, Cape of Good Hope, Carascalis Portus. Biscarius Portus, St.
Nicholai.
CHICANGA, -- Zimbaos. QUITEVA, Deje, Cuama.
ZEFALAN, -- Zefalan.


THE EMPIRE OF THE ABYSSINS, Or, THE Lower Aethiopia.
The Lower Aethiopia, and the Power and Riches of its Emperors.
THE Empire of the ABYSSINS, Heylin makes to be the Dominions or Empire of
Prester John, and says, That he is of such great force, that he is able to
bring into the Field upon a sudden occasion, a Million of Fighting Men; and of
his Wealth and Riches many speak wonders, some saying he is able to purchase
half of all the World, if it were to be sold: Others make it not so great, but
say, that besides his necessary expenses in the management of State Affairs;
the payment of his Army, the pomp in his Court, etc. he lays up yearly in his
Treasury Three Millions of Crowns. But without doubt his Revenue and Force is
great; for it is said, That he himself proffered the Portugals a Million of
Money, and another of Men, if they would employ them in a War against the
Infidels.

The Government of this Emperor is absolutely Tyrannical, the People being
used more like Slaves than Subjects, treating them as he pleases, as well to
their lives as Estates; giving Honors to whom he pleases, which upon any
slight occasion he takes away again. He is held in such great reverence among
all his Subjects, as well Rich as Poor, that at his name they bow their Bodies,
and touch the ground with one of their fingers; and reverence his Pavilion as
they pass by it, though he is not in it. And to keep up this Reverence, which
he holds due to him, he seldom shows himself to his Subjects, and then not
without his Crown on his head, a Silver Crucifix in his hand, and his Face
covered with a Veil of Taffety, which according as he is pleased to grace the
person he talks with, he lifts up and puts down, to show him his Face.

His Titles.
The Title of this Great and Mighty Emperor, I shall borrow from Heylin, who
thus has it: N. N. Supreme of his Kingdoms, and the beloved of God; the Pillar
of Faith; sprung from the Stock of Judah; the Son of David, the Son of Solomon,
the Son of the Colomn of Sion, the Son of the Seed of Jacob, the Son of the
Hand of Mary, the Son of Nahu, after the Flesh; the Son of St. Peter and Paul,
after the Spirit: Emperor of the Higher and Lower Aethiopia, and of the most
Mighty Kingdoms, Dominions, and Countries of Xoa, Goa, Caffares, Fatigar,
Angotae, Balignazo, Adea, Vangne, Goyame, where the Fountains of Nile, Amara,
Banguamedron, Ambea, Vagucum, Tigremean, Sabaim, the Birthplace of the Queen
of Sheba; Bernagassum; and Lord of all the Regions unto the confines of Egypt.

They prosess the Christian Religion, Their Religion.
which was first made known unto them by the Eunuch of Queen Candace, who was
baptized by Philip the Evangelist, and more generally received by the Preaching
of St. Matthew the Apostle. Since which they have much swerved from the purity
of the true Religion, by their many corrupt Opinions which are crept in amongst
them; as they use Circumcision both to their Males and Females, when they are
Children; and they Baptize their Males 40 days, and their Females 80 days after
Circumcision: That Infants dying unbaptized, are sanctified by the Womb, by
virtue of the Eucharist which the Mother receives after her Conception: They
administer the Eucharist to Infants, presently after they are Baptized. They
Baptize themselves in Pouds and Lakes every Epiphany-day, as supposing that to
be the day that John Baptized Christ in Jordan. They hold, that the reasonable
Soul of Man is derived from their First Parents by Seminal Propagation. They
acknowledge but one Nature, and one Will in Christ. After the receiving of the
Sacrament, they hold it unfitting to Spit until Sun-fet. Those Beasts which in
the Old Law are held unclean, are so esteemed with them. They keep their
Sabbath Day on Saturdays: they allow their Priests no yearly means or slipends,
neither do they suffer them to beg; but they are forced to get their
livelyhoods by the sweat of their brows, and labor of their hands. They accept
only of the three first General Councils. They have moreover a Book, which is
writ in eight Volumes (and as they say) by the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem
for that purpose, the Contents thereof they most strictly keep.

We have divided AETHIOPIA into the Higher and Lower; esteemed the Higher, that
which is toward the North and the East; the Lower, that which is toward the
South and West. We have succinctly discoursed of the Parts of the Higher,
proceed we now to the Lower.

Lower Aethiopia, its extent and bounds.
This Lower AETHIOPIA extends it self from the River of the Camaronts, where the
bottom of the Gulf of St. Thomas is, and so turning about the Capes of Negro,
Bona Esperanza, and Des Carientes, into the River of Cuama; which bounds it
from Zanguebar, part of the Higher Aethiopia, as the other does from the
Kingdom of Benim, part of Guiny, which is in Libya Interior. We have like wise
subdivided this Lower Aethiopia into three parts, Its division and parts.
viz. into Congo, Monomotapa, and the Country of the Cafres. We may yet
subdivide these three Parts, each into two others, which will make six. The
first shall be what is between Guiny and Congo; the second, Monomotapa and
Mona-Emugi; and the last, the Land of Cafres on this side, and Westward; and
the Land of Cafres beyond, and Eastward of the Cape of Good Hope. Between Guiny
and the Kingdom of Congo there are diverse Kingdoms, and diverse People: The
Ambosins and Camarones are on the Sea; then the Kingdoms of the Capones, the
Country of Angra, the three Kingdoms of Cacombo, Gabom, and Pongo; of which
this last is most powerful. Among these Estates are the Capes of Lopo
Gonsalves; up in the Land are the Kingdoms of Biafra, Medra, Dauma, etc.

The Land of AMBOSINS and CAMARONES, are near the River of Camarones; a Country
very fertile. The Lands of Capones and Angra are pleasant, because of the many
fresh Streams which water them. The first are poor, the Capones are malicious,
those of Angra addicted to Arms. The Estates or Kingdoms which are about the
Cape of Gonsalves, Its People.
have their People of the same Tongue, the same Religion (who are Idolaters,)
and the same Manners; and their Kings and Lords are in peace, and in good
intelligence with one another: Those nearest the Sea are the most courteous and
civil, by reason of the confluence of Strangers; and when they trade with those
of Europe, they white their Faces with Chalk? their beautiful Garments are made
of Mats, tissued with the Rind of certain Trees, and properly accommodated.
Those of Biafra more advanced in Land, are very barbarous, addicting themselves
to Witcherafts, and sometimes sacrificing their Children to Devils. Those of
Medra, Dauma, and some others further off, are almost quite unknown, and
possibly not worth regard. The Portugals traded here alone a long time, and
possessed several Parts on this Coast: within few years the Hollanders have
taken diverse places from them, some of which they have since retaken.

The Kingdom of CONGO.
Kingdom of Congo, with its Parts or Kingdoms described.
BEyond the Equinoctial Line and unto Cape Negro, lies the Kingdom of CONGO,
under the name of which we comprehend many others, which have been Subjects,
Tributaries, or Allies to the King of Congo; as are the Kingdoms of Loanga and
the Anziquaines, to the North; of Cacongo, and the People Gallas or Giaquas, to
the East, of Angola, Malemba, Mataman, and others, to the South.

Kingdom of Loanga described.
The Kingdom of LOANGA has its principal City of the same name; others say,
Banza Loango, or simply Banza; it is seated on the Sea, as is Quilongo, Quanvi,
and Majumba. It comprehends six Provinces, and is throughout indifferent fertile
in Grains; affords excellent Fruits, Wine of Palms; breeds many Cattle, and all
things necessary for life is found here; it is well stored with Elephants,
having more than any other Country in these parts; they have quantity of Ivory,
but have neither Gold nor Silver. The Country is very hot, by reason of its
lying under the Line; but indifferent healthful and well peopled. Their King
once subject, writes himself now but Ally to the King of Congo, and is called
Mani-Loango, and the Governors of the six Provinces, likewise Mani, that is,
Lord of such or such a Province. Their Subjects are all Bramas, who by Religion
are Heathens.

Kingdom of Congo, and its Provinces.
The Kingdom of CONGO may be said to be the fairest of the Lower Aethiopia,
though those of the Monomotapa, and Mono-Emugi, have more extent, yet has he
always been esteemed the most Polite; has had all his neighbors Subjects,
and the most part yet his Allies. It may have in length 200 Leagues, and about
120 on the Coast. It is subdivided into six great Provinces, to wit, Bamba,
Songo, Sunda, Pango, Batta, and Pemba: which together has 30 or 40000 little
Towns.

Songo, Sunda and Pango lies upon, and mounting from the Sea up the River
Zaire. Bamba, Pemba and Batta are toward the River of Coanza, and the Lake of
Aquilonda; these three last making the most Southern parts, the three other the
most Northern of the Kingdom: and all take their names from the principal
places where the Governors of the Provinces reside.

The Country of BAMBA is well stored with Beasts and Birds, Bamba.
both, tame and wild; well watered with Rivers, has Mines of Silver, and its
People exceeding strong. Its chief places are, Bamba, on the River Loze;
Motole, on the River Dorati; Bengo, also Pavo, Lengo, and Mussulo, on the Sea.

SONGO lies on both sides the River Zaire, Songo.
which sends forth many turbulent Streams, and has so many Islands that one
part of it has very little to do with the other; its chief places are Sonho,
nigh to Cape de Pedro, and on a branch of the Zaire; also Bommo, Matinga,
Cabinde, Malemba, and Cascais, which three last are on the Sea.

SVNDA is indifferent fertile, Sunda.
has several rich Mines of Metals; among the rest the Inhabitants set the
greatest esteem upon Iron, by reason that of it they make their Materials for
War; it is parted by the Zaire. This Country furnishes foreign Merchants with
several rich Furs, as Sables, Martrons, etc. Its several chief places are,
Sunda, Betequa* Iri, and Quincasso.

PANGO is but barren, Pango.
its Inhabitants barbarous, but strong in Arms: Its chief places are Pango,
Cundi-Funquenes, and Angote; and this Country is watered with the River Zaire.

BATTA is also of a barren Soil, and its People also barbarous, Batta.
but indifferent well skilled in Arms; and that being forced to it rather to
defend themselves, than to offend others. Its chief places are Batta, Agisymba,
and Gongou.

PEMBA is held to be the richest and pleasantest Province of all Congo, Pemba.
being very fertile in Grains, Fruits, etc. has good Water; the Air is
healthful; the Inhabitants, since the Portugals sat footing there, are become
very civil, imitating them both in Behavior and Apparel. Its chief City called
Banza, that is, the Court, and which the Portagals call St. Salvador, Its chief
places.
is the residence of the King, seated on an eminence, which discovers the
Country on all sides. This situation together with its being in the middle of
the Estate, gives it a great advantage; some esteem it to have 10000
Inhabitants, others 100000: possibly those understand 10000 Families, and those
100000 Souls; for the King being powerful, and his Court always great, there
cannot but be multitudes. The Isle and City of Loanda, on the Coast of Bamba,
were not long since in the hands of the Portugals; now the East India Company
of the United Provinces have seized it. Its other chief places are Simba,
Pemba, on the River Danda, Lemba and Tinda.

The chief Rivers of Congo.
The most famous Rivers of this Kingdom are the Zaire, the Lelunda, the Danda,
and the Coanza; the three last descend from the Lake of Aquilonda; the Zaire
from the Lake of Zaire, from whence descends likewise the Nile; the Zaire has
400 Leagues course, is very rapid, by reason of the many Cataracts or great
falls which it has from the Mountains; at its entrance into the Estates of
Congo it enlarges it self much, embraces quantity of Islands, and at its Mouth
has no less than 8 or 10 Leagues breadth, yet presses its Waters 15 or 20
Leagues farther into the Sea, and that with so great a violence, that its
Waters retain their natural sweetness, without being corrupted or intermingled
with the Salt-waters of the Sea. The Rivers Danda and Coanza are Navigable, and
receive great Ships. The Isle of Loandu is near the Mouth of the last: It is
observed, that when the Sea is high the Springs of Running-water are fresh, and
when the Sea falls they become salt.

The Congolans are naturally very sweet and easy, able and strong, Its People.
but dull and idle: they will not take the pains to tame Beasts for service,
nor to employ their fine Stones in Buildings, nor make their Birds of Prey for
Hawking; yet make they curious Cloths, Velvets, Damasks, Brocats, etc. They
have no harmony in their Instruments of Music, but a confused mixture of many
cords or strings and many Voices content them; their Money is of gray shells,
taken on the Coast of the Province of Bamba, and these Shells (especially the
Females) are much esteemed, even in other Kingdoms, and almost through all
Aethiopia. Their Grains, Fruits, Waters, Fowl, Its Fertility.
Sea and River Fish are excellent. They have store of Elephants, Mines of
Silver, Iron, Crystal, Marble, Jaspar, Porphyre, etc. They know not their
Histories but by the Reigns of their Kings, and without specifying the time,
for they have no Letters, much less Learning; and hereupon some would make us
believe, that Emanuel of Portugal having sent a famous Ambassador into Congo
with many Presents, among others three fair Books excellently bound, and which
contained the Cannons, the Laws Imperial, the Ordinances, Civil Right, the
Infortiate, the Rubricks, etc. and with these Books, many Doctors of Law to
teach the knowledge of them; and when the King of Congo did understand the
subject that these fair Books contained, and knew the profession of the
Doctors, he was so surprised that he remained sometime silent; but in the end
he caused these* Books to be burned, saying, That he feared they would
overihrow the very foundation of his Estate; and that he contented himself to
judge according to reason, and need no other Interpreter than Common sense; but
withal protesting, that he would remain a good and entire Friend to Emanuel
King of Portugal; and so sent back his Doctors. The Author of the Essay of the
Wonders of Nature applies this story to the King of the Abyssins: It is much at
one; let us return to Congo.

They say, that the Province of Bamba can furnish at a need 400000 strong and
Warlike men; the other Provinces are no less, nor possibly worse peopled than
this, but less addicted to Arms. This being esteemed the Bulwark of the
Kingdom, affected to the service of their Prince, and so strong, that at one,
blow of a Sword they can strike off an Oxes head, or cut a Slave in two. Their
Elephants are so great, that some of their Teeth are found to weigh 200 l. and
they make such esteem of their Tails when they are old, that sometimes they
exchange three Slaves for one Tail. They make of them diverse Ornaments and
Cords for their Instruments of Music. The Kingdom falls only to the Males, and
in default of Legitimates to Bastards: to shun all process, all Riches belong
to the King, who disposes of them to whom he pleases, keeping to himself a
certain Revenue. Christianity has been introduced about 150 years ago, but not
without much difficulty in its beginning.

Estate of Cacongo.
East of Congo, and South of Anziquaines, is the Estate of CACONGO; and South of
Cacongo are the Giaques or Jaggas, which the Abyssins call Gallas, and others
Imbagolas. These People are Vagabonds, Cruel, Men-eaters, like to the
Anziquaines and Moceveies, living only on what they steal from their
Neighbors. The great Jagge disposes absolutely, both of their Idolatry and
their War.

Kingdom of Angola.
The Kingdom of ANGOLA, once Abonda, is between Congo on the North, Mataman on
the South, Malemba on the East, and the Sea on the West. This Kingdom has 100
Leagues of Coast, to wit, from the 10th unto the 4th degree of Meridional
Latitude; and that which continues unto Cape Negro, and belongs to diverse
Lords, tributary to it. The principal City of the Country is Engaze, and
likewise Dongo, which Modern Authors place at the meeting of many Rivers: It is
75 or 80 Leagues from the Sea. The Mountains of Cambamba, rich in Mines of
Silver, are in this Country, which the Portugals cause to be labored. Its
other chief places are Massirgan, on the River Coanza; Benguela, seated on the
Sea, on the Bay of Thora; and Quicongo, a Seaport Town.

Its Trade.
Through the whole Country there is a great traffic for Slaves, 20 or 25000
yearly being transported from the Port of Loanda. There are such multitudes in
this Kingdom, that the Grand Soba (as they say) can in a moment raise 100000
Men; and that in Anno 1584, he raised 1200000. In Anno 1585, 600000. Yet these
last were put to flight by 200 Portugals at the head of 10000 Aethiopians. The
first by 150 Portugals at the head of 8 or 10000 Congolans, which may make us
judge of the goodness of their Militia.

The Kingdom is divided into Provinces or Mirindes, which have each their
Sobas, which a 100 years ago, or little more, were only Governors for the
Kings of Congo, now subject all to the Great Soba of Angola, who makes only
some Present to the King of Congo. Its People use the same Tongue, Money, and
Arms, with those of Congo.

The Empire of the MONO-MOTAPA.
The Empire of the Mono-Motapa, its extent, state, and power of their Kings.
THE MONO-MOTAPA, that is, the Emperor, King, or Sovereign of Motapa, is
(according to Vincent Blanc) called by his People Tabaqui, and possesses an
Empire so great, that it is made of 1000 Leagues circuit: It is said by him,
that this Prince deports himself with gravity, and that there is no access to
his person but with very great submissions: That he is always adorned with
Chains and Precious Stones, like to a Woman, or rather like a Spouse: Is
pleased to receive Presents, but gives little; keeps a great Seraglio of Women,
which it is forbid to approach; and one part of his Guard (according to some)
is likewise composed of Women, who are active at their Arms, and courageous. He
calls his principal City Madrogan (which is the Mono-Motapa of others) where
his Royal Palace is, which is magnificent and great, flanked with Towers
without, with four principal Gates; within hung with Tapestries of Cotton mixed
with Gold, and adorned with many rich and stately Movables. His Habit, etc.
This Prince is always clothed after the manner of his Predecessors, nor may he
change any thing, except the Ornaments of his Neck and Buskins. He wears no
Foreign Stuffs for fear of Poison and Witchcraft; his Drink (...) Wine of Palm
distilled with Manna, Amber, and Musk. He spends much in Odours and Perfumes,
making them be mixed in those Lights which are carried before him, and which
serves where he is. His Court has a great many Officers, which serve with
order and silence; besides which, they are thronged with People. His Officers
are easily known, because they carry the Talmassara on their Shoulder, more or
less enriched, according to their condition or degree of place; but all in the
same fashion with the Kings. The Inhabitants are all black, of a mean stature,
active, and such good Footmen, Its Inhabitan^^
that they are said to outrun Horses: They are courageous, addicted to Arms,
as also to Trade. The Commonalty cover themselves but below the Waist, for
which their Apparel is made of Skins of Beasts, Cotton, Cloth, or the like; but
the better sort have Cloths and Stuffs, which are brought them from the Indies:
The Maids cover nothing of their Body till they are married. Their Houses are
of Wood, or Earth whited, fashioned like a Clock, or rather like a Bell. Those
of the greatest Lords are the highest. They have as many Wives as they please;
but she who is the first espoused is always the chief, and her Children alone
inherit the Fathers Goods and Estate. The Women are here used very
respectfully, none offering so much as to take the Wall of them. The Maids are
here not thought fit to be married, till their Menstrua or Natural Purgations
shows their ability for Conception, which makes them solemnize with a great
Feast their first Flux. They have no Prison in all the Country, but all Affairs
are determined and ended on the place, so soon as they are convicted of the
fact or crime; but above all Offenders, those for Theft, Adultery, and
Witchcraft, are the most severely treated. And this sudden execution of
Criminals, makes the King to be reverenced by his Subjects. Christianity found
here some difficulties at the beginning; at present it is established by the
consent of the King, who has likewise permitted the Portugals to work the
Mines of Gold and Silver, which in this Country are in great quantity, and so
rich, that there are some who call this Prince, The Emperor of Gold. Not only
the Mines, but likewise the Rivers have Gold in their Sand: among which, those
of Dos Infantos, of the Holy Ghost, and of Cuama, toward their Springs, which
are toward the Lake Zachaf; but those of the Country care for no more of it,
than is necessary to truck for what they have need of.

Its Fertility.
The Woods have great store of Elephants, which yields them Ivory; as also other
Beasts. Has rich Pastures, which are well furnished with Cattle, has Grains,
Fruits, Fowl, is well watered with many Rivers, in which are abundance of Fish.
The Air is temperate, except that their Winter is colder than may be expected
in that Climate, by reason of the Mountains which enclose it on all sides, and
cross the Country: And their Winter is in the same time when we have our
Summer, to wit, when the Sun is about the Tropic of Cancer.

The power of the King.
The Mono-Motapa is said to be one of the most powerful Princes of Africa, if we
consider the greatness of his Estate, his Riches, and the great number of
Princes which hold of him, or are under his Dominion. They yearly receive the
Fire which the Mono-Motapa sends them, or upon refusal are accounted Rebels.
But all these People, though hardy and addicted to Arms, are unexpert in them:
so that their Number would do them little good, if assaulted by the Europeans.
They believe only in one God, and punish with death Idolaters and Sorcerers.

The chief places in the Empire of the Mono-Motapa.
But a word or two of the chief places of this Empire, and first of the Kingdom
or Province of BVTVA, whose chief places are, Butua, Carma, Gallita, Zet,
seated an the Lake Zachaf; Dobdel, Calburas; Tialso and Zimbra, both under the
Tropic of Capricorn; Bafat, Quiticu, Armeta, Maitagasi, Boro, Amara, Giera,
and Hagala; most of which are Cities of some account, and seated on Rivers.

The chief places in MONO-MOTAPA, particularly so called, are Mono-Motapa, the
chief of the Empire; Zuggi, Jouros, and Mosata. The chief in ZEFALA bears the
same name, seated in an Isthmus so called. The chief in QVITEVA is Cuama,
seated on the River so named. Ab^^^ the Shore of Zefala are several Isles,
among which three bear the name of VCIQVE PARVAE; three of VCIQVE MAJORES; and
two of SPICHELLAE; and farther; a Sea; and toward the Isle of Madagascar is
the Isle of BAIXOS DE INDIA. The chief place of SEDANDA is so called: And the
chief places of CHICANGA are, Zimbdos and Buro. And these are the Parts
comprehended under the Empire of the Mono-Motapa.

The Empire of the Mono-Emugi.
The Mono-Emugi, that is, Lord of Emugi, has his Empire or Estates between the
Abyssins, the Cafres, the Mono-Motapa, and the Zanguebar; so that it is about
the Mountains of the Moon. The Giaques or Zaggaes, which join to Congo, are
likewise esteemed subject to this Empire: He has often War with the
Mono-Motapa, of which he seems once to have been a part, is in peace with the
King of Zanguebar, that he may have commerce to the Sea, for he has much Gold,
Silver, Ivory, and the same Commodities as Mono-Motapa; but its People are more
barbarous and brutish. The chief places in the Mono-Emugi are, Agag, Astagoa,
Leuma, Camur, Beif, Bagametro, and Zembre, seated on the bottom of the Lake
Zaire.

CAFRERIA, or the Land of CAFRES.
The Land of Cafreria described.
CAFRERIA, or the Land of CAFRES, makes the most Southern Coast of all
Aethiopia, winding like a Semicircle about the Cape of Good Hope; some begin it
from Cape Negro, and continue it unto the River of Cuama; this separating it
from Zanguebar, and the other from Congo, or what we have esteemed with Congo.
Others begin it and end it with the Tropic of Capricorn, as well on this side
as beyond the Cape of Good Hope. I esteem under the name of Cafres all the
Coasts which environ the Mono-Motapa, both toward the West, South, and East:
so that we may call these Cafres, Occidental, Meridional, and Oriental. This
distinction being taken in regard of the natural situation in which these
People are from the Mono-Motapa; or we may choose rather to consider them in
Occidental or Oriental, as we have already done; the Cape of Good Hope then
keeping the one from the other. It has formerly been believed, that these
People had neither Kings, Law, nor Faith, and therefore were called Cafres,
that is, without Law. But it has since been known, that they have diverse Kings
and Lords; as those of Mataman, where there are diverse Metals, Crystal, etc.
And of Melemba, among the Occidentals; those of Chicanga, Sedanda, Quiteva, and
Zefala, among the Orientals; and others we know not, toward the South and Cape
of Good Hope.

On the Coast of Cafres are these places and Isles, viz. St. Nicolai,
Piscarius, the Port of Carascalis, the Cape of Good Hope, St. Martins Bay, and
the Cape of St. Lucia. Also these Isles, 4 bearing the name of St. Lucia, 2 of
St. Christophers, 5 of Crucis, and 3 of Aride. Many of which, as likewise the
Capes, are well known by Seamen, especially the Cape of Good Hope. All these
Coasts of Cafreria are bounded within Land by a Chain of Mountains, formed by
the Mountains of the Moon, and which enclose Mono-Motapa. That part of these
Mountains which advance toward the Cape of Good Hope, are called by the
Portugals, The Cape of Good Hope.
Picos Fragos, that is, Watery Points or Rocks. This Cape is the most remarkable
piece in Cafreria; the most Southern point of Africa, and of our Continent; and
the most famous Promontory of the whole World. Vasco de Gama knew it in 1498,
and after having doubled it, found the way by the East Indies to the Great Sea;
and from hence the Portugals boast to have been the first that had the
knowledge of this Cape. But we have made appear in the general discourse of
Africa, that the Ancients have both known and spoke of it. Near the Cape of
Good Hope, and farther toward the South, is the Cape of Needles, which should
be more famous, since it is more Southernly than the other by 12 or 15 Leagues:
But the name, Cape of Good Hope, is given to all that Head of Land which is the
most Southern of Africa.

The Air, Fertility, Commodities, etc. of the Country.
The Air of this Country is sometimes temperate, and sometimes cold, by reason
of the Mountains which are covered with Snow and Ice, from whence descends
quantity of cold Waters. The Valleys and Lower Countries pleasant and fertile;
has store of Woods and Forests, in which are abundance of Beasts and Fowls, as
Deer, Antilopes, Baboons, Foxes, Hares, etc. Also Ostriches, Herons, Pelicans,
Pheasants, Partridges, Geese, Ducks, etc. They are well supplied with good
Water, feed much Cattle, which they truck with Strangers for Knives, Scizzars,
Spoons, and diverse Toys; they have likewise much Fish in their Rivers.

The People and their Trade.
The Inhabitants are Black, have thick Lips, flat Noses, long Ears; and in a
word, very ill-shapen. They are more barbarous and brutish than the rest of
Africa, they are Man-eaters; their chief ornaments in their Apparel are, Chains
of Iron, Brass, Beads, Bells, or the like; and cutting and slashing their Skins
in several shapes. Clothing they have none, only in the Cold season they wrap
themselves about with Skins of Beasts. Towns they have none, or very few, for
the most part living in the Woods and Forests, like brute Beasts. But the
Cafres on the East are much more civil than the others; most of them have made
a part, and are yet subject to the Mono-Motapa, who about 50 years ago divided
his Estate into four parts, giving to his eldest Son what is within Land, and
by much the greatest part; and to his three younger Sons, Zuiteva, Sedanda, and
Chicanga, toward the Seacoast, for their Portions. Cefala or Zefala seems to
make its piece apart, whose King pays Tribute both to the Mono-Motapa and the
Portugals; and these have diverse Fortresses on the Coast, Sena, Tete, Cuama,
etc.

Zefala is so abundant in Gold and Elephants, that some take it for the Ophir
whither Solomon sent his Fleet every three years: And they give for a reason,
that the Gold, Ivory, Apes, etc. which that Fleet brought, are here found in
abundance; That this Fleet parting from the Red Sea, there is no likelihood it
should go to Peru, which some take for this Ophir; besides, that there is there
neither Ivory nor Apes; but that it was rather to some part of Asia or Africa.
They add, that there remains not far from Zefala some footsteps of ancient
Buildings and Inscriptions, left there by Strangers long time ago: Nay
likewise, that there is some notes and Books how Solomon sent thither his
Fleet. Moreover, the Septuagint translate Sophira instead of Ophir, and the
name of Sophira is not overmuch different from Sopholo. However it be, there is
here store of Gold both in the Mountains and Rivers, and often very clean and
pure, as well in Powder as Sand; and this Gold is esteemed the best and finest
in Africa, ours seeming but Brass in comparison of it.

The Country is healthful and pleasant, seated only on the Coast, the
Mono-Motapa confining it within Land: A part of its now Inhabitants are not the
Natives, but descended from that Coast which belonged to the Mono-Motapa. The
Natives (as I said before) are Black, and Idolaters or Cafres, the others very
swarthy, and for the most part Mahometans. They have a great Trade on this
Coast for their Gold, two or three Millions being yearly brought hence, and
that for Toys and things of a very small value, which are carried them from
diverse parts of Asia and Europe, and some parts of Africa.

The ISLES of AFRICA, as they lie and are found In the Mediterranean Sea, And
on the Coast of BARBARY, as the ISLES of MALTA, Marzasirocco, Vallett^, il
Borgo, Madalena, Medina, St. Maria Meleca, St. Maria Loret^^, Rodumifessa.
GOZA, Goza Cast, Scilendo.
Cumin, -- Cumin. Forfala, Gamelera, Chercura, Lampedusa, Limosa, Panthalaria,
Galata, Albusama.
In the Occidental or Atlantic Ocean; as On the Coast of MOROCCO; as the ISLES
of Madera, Tonzal, Sancta Cr^^,
Porto Sancto.
The CANARY ISLES, or ISLES of Forteventura, Forteventura, Chabras, Lanegala,
Lancellotta, Lancellotra, Porto de Cavallos.
Grand Canaria, Canaris, Tedele, Arginogy.
Teneriffe, Laguna, St. Crux.
Gomer, -- Gomer. Fer, -- Hierro, Palma, Palma, St. Andre.

The ISLES seated about those of the CANARIES, Graclosa, Alegria, St. Clara,
Rocco, Savages.
The ISLES of CAPE VERD; or the ISLES of St. Antonio* St. Vincent, St. Lucia,
St. Nicholas, Salt, Bonavista, Mayo, Fuego. Brava, St. Jago, St. Jago, Ribera
Grande.


In the Meridional of ETHIOPIAN Ocean, as Between GUINY, and the Lower
AETHIOPIA, where are the ISLES of St. Thomas, -- Pavoasan, Princes, Anncabon,
St. Matthew, Assension, St. Helena, Perdinando Po* Tristan de Cunha, Goncalo
Alvarer.
On the Coast of ZANGUEBAR; as the ISLE of Madagascar, or St. Laurence,
Ving^gora, Tombaja, St. Andrew, Cacambout, Port of St. Vincent, St. Anthony,
St. Augustine, Boamarage, Angoada.
The ISLES seated about the Isle of MADAGASCAR, and in the Sea of ZANGUEBAR,
particularly so called; among which are those of Zocotora, Penda, Zanzibara,
Sanctus Rochus, Monfia, St. Christophers, St. Esprite, Comerae, Aliadorae,
Syrtium, Nona, Baixos, St. Anthony, St. Maria, Radix, St. Maurice, Mascarenhae,
Diego Roix, Johannis de Lisbo^, Sancta Clara, Sancta Just^^, or Juliani, St.
James, St. Vincent.

In the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecque, And on the Coast of the Higher AETHIOPIA; as
the ISLES of Bahia Cabras* Suaquem, Miri, Meger, Maczuam, Balaccia, St. Pi^tr^.


THE ISLE OF MADAGASCAR, OR St. LAURENCE.
Isle of Madagascar, with its length and breadth.
THE Isle of MADAGASCAR, or St. LAVRENCE, is much greater than any about Africa,
if not the greatest of both Continents. It stretches it self from a little on
this side the 12th unto a little beyond the 26th degree of Meridional Latitude,
which are more than 14 degrees of Latitude; but sloping from North North-West
to South South-East, it is from Cape St. Sebastian to that of St. Romain about
400 Leagues long. Its breadth ought to be considered at twice; in that part
nearest the Equator it is 60 or 75 Leagues broad; in that part toward the
South the least breadth passes 120, and stretches sometimes to 150 Leagues.

Its Commodities and Trade.
Our last Relations say, That it has Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Rocks
of Crystal, and excellent white Marble; that there are found Emralds, Saphirs,
etc. many sorts of Gums and Rozins, especially great store of that Gum which
the Druggists call Dragons Blood, which they extract out of the Flowers of a
certain Tree which grows there. They have also Talque, Cotton, Indico, Sugar
Canes, Saunders, Ebony, Ivory, Honey, Wax, Hides. Their Ground yields Salt,
Saltpeter, and in most places Grains; and upon their Sea Coasts is found
abundance of Ambergreese. And for these, and several other Commodities that are
here found, are brought them in exchange, Corals, Pater-Nosters, Chains, Beads,
Bracelets, Glass-Pendants, and diverse Toys, etc.

Its People and their abode.
Its Inhabitants are for the most part Black or very Tawny, and some White,
which in all appearance came from Asia. They are of a good Stature, and well
shaped, are very tractable and courteous to Strangers, and more especially to
the French, than any other Europeans; are addicted to idleness, and not caring
to cultivate the Earth; their clothing is only a piece of Cotton-cloth of
several colors, which they fasten about, their Middles, and hangs down to
their knees; and on their Heads, a Cap made of the Bass of a Tree; besides
which, they adorn themselves about their Neck, Arms, Legs, etc. with those Toys
aforesaid. Their Feeding is exceeding gross; their Houses are no better than
Hog-sties, or little Huts made of Branches of Trees, except those of their
princes which are made of Wood; but of no large size, nor over handsome: They
lie upon Mats; and their Cloth which they wear about them in the day, serves
for a Coverlid in the night. They are Heathenish, and given to Adoration, (some
say they adore the Devil) using Sacrifices, which they do in the Woods, not
having Churches; they have no Civil Form of. Government, but he that can make
the greatest party, and has the greatest Family, is in most esteem and command
to which end they have as many Wives as they can keep, to increase their
Progeny.

The Isle very plentiful of Cattle.
They have a great number of Oxen, Sheep, Kids, Hens of diverse sorts, and
quantity of Rice; they make Wine with Honey and certain Roots, which is so
strong that they are frequently drunk with it; they have for the most part
those Beasts that are found among us; but yet all with some difference: Their
Oxen have between their Neck and Shoulders a great lump of Fat, which they
esteem excellent: Their Sheep have their Tails 20 Inches about, and as much in
length: Their Goats are very high, and their Hogs little. They have
Salamanders, Camelions of diverse colors; Apes of many kinds, and believe that
these Apes would speak, but for fear they should be compelled to labor. They
have Crocodiles and Tortoises, of which some have their Shells so great, that
they will cover 10 or 12 Persons; and they find sometimes 5 or 600 of their
Eggs as big as Hens Eggs: their Flesh is delicate and fat, in taste resembling
Veal. They have other Tortoises which are only 3 or 4 foot diameter; and their
Shells being polished are figured with diverse colors, of which they make
Cabinets, little Boxes, and other pretty Movables esteemed in the Indies and
in Europe. Their Fowls.
Their Pheasants are stronger and fairer than ours, their Partridges bigger,
and of diverse colors: They have Paroquets as big as Crows, and black; another
middle sort, and some as little as our Larks; the one and the other of diverse
colors: They have Singing-Birds not yielding to those of the Canaries. Their
Bees are little, their Honey excellent; their Ants fly, and leave on the Bushes
where they light a white Gum, which they use instead of Glue. Their Colibri or
Fly-Bird scarce weighing two Bees, so little is it, feeding only on the Dew it
sucks from Flowers. They catch in their Seas an infinite quantity of Fish;
among others, Skates so great, that they are able to satisfy 300 persons one
meal. Their Date-Trees supply them with Drink, their Orchards with Fruits,
their Cotton with whereof to make Thread and Stuffs for Clothing, their Indico
with a Blew color, their Tamarind refreshes them; their Rape or Balasier
blacks their Teeth, which by them is esteemed a great Beauty; they gather Aloes
from several Trees. One of the principal riches of the Country is Ebony, both
for its beauty, smoothness, and black color, and for the flame and odor it
yields in the fire: Its Sap infused in Water, heated and taken lukewarm,
purges Phlegm, and cures Venerial distempers.

Their Fruits.
Among their Fruits they have Damsons twice as big as ours; Mirabolans of many
kinds, Anana's, Citrons, Oranges, Pomegranates, Grapes, Dates, Coco-Nuts, etc.
They gather Maniguet, Ginger, and diverse Roots, which they eat instead of
Bread, and which serves for diverse other uses; they have quantity of Rice,
Millet, Beans, Pease, French-Beans, both red, white, green, and all sorts of
Pulse. The Sensitive Herb is found among the Tapates, whose Leaf touched, they
all close and shut up one within anothen, hanging toward the ground, and not
raising up nor opening themselves again till a good while after, and that by
little and little.

Its chief places.
The Isles has many good Roads and commodious Ports, and every where are found
good Water and Victuals; but the Air is unhealthful to the Europeans, by reason
of the great Heat which here reigns, it lying under the Torrid Zone; yet the
French have established a Colony sometimes in one place, and sometimes in
another. The Bay of Anton-Gil, or of St. Anthony, is the best in all the
Island. On the same Coast, and farther toward the North, is Boamarage; more
toward the South Arganda, and continuing Cacambout, Manialoufe, Manajara; or
the Port of Pru^es, Matatane, Manapate; or the Port of Gallions, Manatenga,
And^^boul, Romag. near the Port St. Case and Antipere; or Sancta Clara near
Cape St. Romain. All these places or Ports are builded with Wood, covered with
Leaves, and enclosed with Pallisadoes, as throughout all the Isle. On the other
side toward the West, and directly opposite to the Coast of Africa, are
Vingagora, St. Andre^^^ the Bay of Pracel, St. Vincent, St. James; the Port or
Gu^ph of St. Augustine, the best next to Antongil, Tombaja, etc. The middle of
the Isle rises into Mountains covered with Wood, where is Ebony, Saunders,
Orange Trees, Citron-Trees, etc.

The Isle of Sancta Mary described.
About Madagascar are a great many of Isles, as that of SANCTA MARY, near the
Bay of Anton-Gil, about ten or twelve Leagues in circuit, is fair and fertile;
affords store of Provisions, and Potters Earth, and their Seas quantity of
Whales, which they catch by darting on them a certain Iron fixed to the end of
a Cord; which when they have tired themselves, they make to the shore; and of
these Whales they make Oil, with which, as also with their Provisions and
Potters Earth, they drive a Trade.

The Isles of Comeres described.
The Isles of COMERES, are Five principal ones, as St. Christophers, St. Esprit,
Loura, Comera, and Gasidsa. The Inhabitants of this last are perfidious; the
others more civil, and under one King alone, who resides at Ansuvanny, where
there is some Trade; the most part are Mahometans; the Soil is pleasant and
fertile, because of the Rivers which descend from the Mountains, and water
their Fields. They have all sorts of Birds, they have no Iron; they fetch from
Madagascar, Rice, Millet, Ambergris, and Slaves, which they transport into
Arabia, and the Red Sea; from whence they bring Stuffs, and Indian Habits,
Amfium or Opium.

In 1613. the Hollanders tauched on this Island, and received great
refreshment. It is observed, that for a Quire of common Paper, they had an Ox;
for a common Looking-Glass another; for a Dozen of Little Bells which they
fastened to Hawks Legs another; for a Bar of Iron, three Oxen, etc.

The Isle of Maurico described.
The Isle MAVRICE or SANCTA APPOLLINA, between 19 and 20 degrees, seems to have
been inhabited before the Hollanders established a Colony. It is about 15
Leagues in compass. Mandelslo says, that this Island has a good Haven, both
deep and large enough for fifty Said of great Ships to harbor in, which makes
it to be very pleasant, having many Mountains which are well clothed with
Trees, and always green; among which, some are so lofty, that they seem to
overtop the Clouds. And its Valleys as pleasant and green, and adorned with
several sorts of Trees, as well those that bear Fruits, as Cocoes, Dates,
Oranges, Citrons, etc. as those which yield none; as great quantity of
excellent Ebony, and other Trees; some of whose wood is Yellow, others Red,
others mixed; and all with fair and lively colors. The Leaves of their
Palm Trees are large enough to cover a man; the Birds are here so tame, that
they suffer themselves to be taken with the hand, or killed with a stick. They
have Tortoises strong enough to bear a man, but fourfooted Beasts they have
none.

Besides these Isles aforesaid, there are several others which are seated about
the Isle of Madagascar, as Two bearing the name of Deigosoares: Two by the name
of Nunni Pereirae: Three by the name of Deigo Roix: Four by Sancta Clara: Two
by St. Romanus: Three by St. Julianus: Three by St. Jacobus: Nine by St.
Vincent: Three by St. Christophers: Three by Comora: And eight by the name of
Bugi.

Also the Isles of Boamarage, St. Anthony, St. Maria Radix, Mascarenhae,
Johannis de Lisboa, Syrtium, and Mosambicha-Nova, with some others.

The Banks of India very dangerous for Shipwracks.
Between the Isle of Madagascar, and the main Land, about 70 Leagues from the
Isle, 100 from Cefala, and 150 from Mozambique, are the Banks of India infamous
for Shipwracks, and particularly for that of the Admiral Fernando Mendoza in
1586. The Banks and Rocks are of sharp Stones, and with diverse points like to
Coral, some black, others white, others green, but all horrible even to behold.

There rests a great number of Islands to the North and East, and between the
North and East of Madagascar, and among these Isles many Banks and Rocks. We
will omit a particular description of them, as unnecessary, and only say, that
the French have often designed to establish a powerful Colony in the Country;
encouraged by its Commodities, and the great Commerce it is like to maintain.

The Isles of CAPE VERDE.
The Isles of Cape Verde described, viz.
ONe hundred and fifty Leagues from Cape Verde, and toward the West, are a body
of Islands which extend themselves from 13, unto the 19 degree of Latitude, and
from 153, unto 157 or thereabout of Longitude. They are called in general the
Isles of Cape Verde, because that Cape is the nearest main Land to them.
Amongst these Isles there are 10 in some consideration, though a part of them
not inhabited; they are ranged almost in form of a Cressant or Semicircle, of
which, the unequal part regards the Continent, and the two Points, the Ocean:
That which makes the Point toward North and West, is that of St. Antonio,
which those of St. Vincent, St. Nicholas, and Sancta Lucia follow, advancing
between East and South; then those of Salt, Bona Vista, and Maya, descend from
North to South, and are the most Easterly of all: Those of St. Jago, of Fuego,
and Brava, the most Southern; returning from East to West, and advancing a
little toward the South. So that St. Anthony and Brava make the two Ends or
Points toward the West; Bona Vista makes the middle of the half Circle toward
the East.

SANCTA LVCIA, St. Nicholas.
St. NICHOLAS, and St. JAGO, are the greatest, having each 100 or 120000 paces
of length; 15, 20 or 30000 of breadth; and 200 or 250000 paces of circuit. St.
Anthonio and St. Vincent are less by more then half, and not of above 100000
paces in circuit; the rest, which are the least, have not above 30, 40 or 50000
paces. I make no account of seven or eight others, whose names have not been
given us, and which are rather Rocks than Isles.

St. JAGO is the greatest and the chief of all, having a Bishops seat in the
City of the same name; St. Jago.
besides which, are Ribera Grande, with a good Port toward the West, Praya
toward the East, St. Mary toward the North, all with their Ports. Some place
likewise St. Thomas, whose Port is dangerous, others St. Domingo, others St.
Michael: possibly these fall under some of the others. Ribera Grande has 500
Houses; the Air is unhealthful, the Land hilly, but the Valleys fruitful in
Grains, Vines, Fruits, Sugar Canes, Millons, etc. Feeding much Fowl and Cattle,
and particularly Goats in abundance: These Beasts bringing forth young every
four Months, and three of four at a time; and the Kids are very fat and
delicate.

Sancta Lucia, St. Vincent, St. Anthony.
SANCTA LVCIA is the best peopled after that of St. Jago. St. Nicholas, St.
Vincent, and St. Anthony, have been esteemed Desert, yet they appear to have
many Inhabitants, though not so many as they could feed: The Ships of the
United Provinces passing here in 1622. found in that of St Anthony 500 persons,
Men, Women, and Children, all Aethiopians. St. Vincent and St. Nicholas, had no
less. At Mayo these Aethiopians are strong, and of good stature; but it is to
be believed, that every where are some Portugals to keep the rest in aw.

Salt. Bona Vista.
The Isles of SALT, of BONA VISTA, of MAYO, and of St. JAGO, yield so great
quantity of Salt which is made naturally of the Water which the Sea from time
to time leaves, that besides what they consume in the Country, they laded
every year more then 100 Ships, which is transported into other Countries; and
yet there remains six times as much, which becomes useless. It is reported,
that the Isle of Mayo could make alone, lading for two thousand Sail of Ships
yearly; and the others not much less. The other riches of the Country lies in
the Skins of their Goats, which are in so great quantity through all these
Isles, that many flocks are seen of 1000 Head. The Skins are sent to Brasil,
Portugal, and other places, and make excellent Cordovants. The Flesh is salted
in the Country, and sold to Ships going and returning from Brasil to the
Indies. Besides the Salt and Woats which are the principal riches of the
Country, they have many Wild Horses, Oxen, Apes, etc. also Cotton, whereof
they make several Manufactures.

Also Rice, and many sorts of Grains. Among their Fowl, they have one kind
particular to them, which they call Flamencos; the Feathers of their Bodies are
all White, and those of their Wings Red as Blood. Their Tortoises are not above
two or three foot long; they come out of the Sea, and lay their Eggs in the
night, covering them with Sand, and the heat of the Sun hatches them. Fuego,
Brava.
In Fuego and Brava they gather Wines which yield little to those of the
Canaries.

The Sargasso Sea.
Between the Islands of Cape Verde, and the main Land, inclining toward the
Canaries, the Sea is called Sargasso, because from the 20 to the 24 degree and
for the length of 30, 40 or 50 Leagues, the Sea is covered with an herb like to
that which is found in the bottom of Wells, and which the Portugals call
Sargasso. This Herb, except that it is more Yellow, resembles Sea-Parsley,
bearing certain Grains or Fruit at the end, but of neither taste nor substance.
Many have been much troubled to know from whence these Weeds come, which are
distant from the Isles, and from the firm Land more then 60 Leagues, and in a
part of the Sea, where there is no bottom found: Nevertheless, they are so
close, and in so great quantity, that the Water seems rather a Meadow or Green
Field, then a Sea. Ships which fall among these Weeds, had need of a good Wind
to disingage themselves; and I believe it was these which hindered Sataspes from
finishing his course about Africa, and were the cause of his misfortune. This
Sataspes, Son of Teaspes, one of the Achemenides, A story of Sataspes.
having ravished the Daughter of Zopyrus, the Son of Magabises, was condemned
by Xerxes to be crucified. His Mother, the Sister of Darius, caused this
punishment to be changed into another, to wit, he was caused to make the
Circumnavigation of Africa; which could not be done without great difficulty
and hazard. He embarked in Egypt, passed the Pillars of Hercules, entered into
the Occidental Ocean, and passed far to the South, along Africa; but knowing
that it would yet require much time and pains to end this course, he returned
into Egypt, and thence to the Court, where he said he had met with somewhat
that hindered his Ship from passing farther. Xerxes took him for a liar, and
made him suffer the death he was before condemned to. But to continue: The
Isles of Cape Verde.
The Position wherein the Isles of Cape Verde are now found, answers much
better to the Position of the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, then that of the
Canaries. Ptolomy places his Fortunate Isles between the 10 and 16 degree of
Latitude; the Isles of Cape Verde are between the 13 and 19; the Canaries
beyond the 26. The Meridian of the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, is at 8 degrees
of Longitude from the Coast of Africa, and toward the West. The least Meridian
of the Isles of Cape Verde, is at 8 degrees of Longitude from the same Coast,
and toward the same side. The least Meridian of the Canaries touches the Coast
of Africa. Ptolomy confines his Fortunate Isles under one Meridian, and extends
them from South to North, between the tenth to the sixteenth parallel or
degrees of Latitude, which are five degrees of Latitude. The Isles of Cape
Verde are not justly under one Meridian, but under two or three, and extend
themselves from the 13 to the 19, which are five degrees of Latitude. The
Canaries, on the contrary, are all couched from West to East, and almost under
the same parallel or degree of Latitude, which is the 27; lengthning themselves
from the first to the 6 of Longitude. These four Reasons are very strong to
prove, that the Isles of Cape Verde do rather answer to the Fortunate Isles of
Ptolomy, then the Canaries. Their distance in regard of the Equator, is not
different from that of the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, but three degrees; that
of the Canaries, is 15. Their distance in regard of the Coast of Africa, agrees
with that of the Fortunate Isles, not with that of the Canaries. The
disposition of their situation from South to North, approaches near to that of
the Fortunate Isles; and the number of the degrees of Latitude which they
contain, absolutely agrees with it. The situation of the Canaries from East to
West, and the little Latitude they contain, are much contrary. Notwithstanding
all these Reasons, we shall yet make it appear, that oft-times we must not
conclude on the Positions of Ptolomy, and that the Canary Islands answer to the
Fortunate Islands of Ptolomy, and the Ancients, and not these of Cape Verde.

Let us speak first a word of the Madera's and Porto Sancto, which belong to
the Crown of Portugal as well as those of Cape Verde. But before I pass to the
Madera's, a word or two concerning its Inhabitants, who Mondelslo makes to be
black, corpulent, but well proportioned; he says, they are envious,
mischievous, and dangerous people; for the most part Pagans, worshipping the
Moon, and adoring the Devil, whom they call Cammate: Some of them are
Mahometans, as far as Circumcision. They marry many Wives, whom they make to
labor like Slaves, as well in the Fields as in their Houses; and they are
accustomed to such hardship, that as soon as they are delivered, they go and
wash themselves and the Child in the Sea or next River. They are not admitted
to sit at meals with their Husbands, but wait till they have dined or supt.
They believe the Resurrection of the Dead, but withal think that they shall
rise White, and trade there as the Europeans do. He says, they are great
Drunkards, and their debauches are always at the Funeral of their Friends,
which commonly lasts four or five days together: During which time they do
nothing but drink and weep in remembrance of their Friend departed. They are
very turbulent and quarrelsome, being always at wars with their Neighbors;
their Arms are the Bow, and a kind of Lance, in which they are very expert. He
says also, that the greatest Marks of their Victories, are the Privy-parts of
their Enemies, which they cut off, and give to their Wives who wear them as
Neck-laces, which by them are esteemed far beyond Pearl. The Country is
indifferently fruitful, The Fertility.
has store of Cattle, as Oxen, Beufflers, Elks, etc. whose Hides they have a
good Trade for; as also for Elephants Teeth, Wax, Rice, Ambergris, Sugar
Canes, Cotton, whereof they make several Manufactures, Cordovants, etc.

MADERA Island.
The Madera Isle first discovered by the Portugals.
THe Isle of MADERA or MADEIRA as the Portugals say, is under the 32 degree of
Latitude; about 25 Leagues long, 8 or 10 broad, and 60 of circuit. It was
discovered in 1420 by John Gonsalvo and Tristan Vaez, under the Auspicies of
Henry Infanto of Portugal; and under the same Johannes Zarco, and likewise
Tristan Vaez, discovered Porto Sancto in 1428. The one and the other were
Desert, and particularly Madera was so covered with Wood, that they were fain
to set it on fire to make room for what they would Till. The History says,
that this fire lasted six or seven years, before it ran through all the Island
and consumed the Woods; and among the first Inhabitants, some were constrained
to save themselves in the Water, to avoid the heat of the Earth; but yet their
design so well succeeded, that the Earth, for a long time after, yielded sixty
for one; which by little and little, diminished to 50, 40, 30, and possibly now
to twenty five for one. The Air is almost always temperate, Its Air, Fertility,
and commodities.
many Fountains, and seven or eight Rivers so refresh this Country, that it is
very pleasant and fertile. The Vines bear more bunches of Grapes than Leaves,
and their wine is strong and racy; their Wheat excellent, though the Country
be Mountainous: Their Sugars delicious, bearing the Bell from all others; they
have much Fowl, as Hens, Pigeons, Quails, Partridges: they have quantity of
Fruits, as Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, Honey, Wax, Dragons Blood,
Cordevants, Cedar-wood, with which they make all sorts of Joyners work so
artificially, that it is transported into Europe, and elsewhere. Those
Mountains and Woods which are restocked, have Wild Boars, Its chief piaces.
etc. Its principal Towns, are Tunghal or Tonzal; the chief of the Island, and
a Bishopric, Moncherico or Monchico, and Sancta Crux. All the Island contains
36 Parishes, 5 or 6 Religious Convents, 4 Hospitals, 6 or 7000 Houses, and
about 25000 Persons; so many Castles and Gardens in the Field, that it seems a
Garden of Pleasure.

Porto Sancto.
The Isle of PORTO SANCTO or the Holy Port, has almost the same Commodities
with Madera, but is not above 8 or 10 Leagues in circuit; has no Fortress,
which was the reason that in 1606. the Pirates took away 6 or 700 persons.
Madera answers to the Ancient Cerne Atlantica, and some have esteemed Porto
Sancto to answer to the Ancient Ombrio or Inaccessibilis; but we shall show the
Country in the Canaries.

The CANARY Islands.
The Canary Islands described, viz.
THe CANARY Islands are Westward of Africa, almost opposite to the Capes of
Bojador or Non; they are to the number of Seven, seated between the 26 and 28
degrees of Latitude; and between the 5 and 6, or little more of Longitude. If
we comprehend some little Isles above Lancelotta, and likewise the Salvages,
they would reach to the 29 or near the 30; if likewise the Madera, and Porto
Sancto, they would pass beyond the two and thirtieth degree of Latitude. But
there are few Authors esteem the Salvages, almost none the Madera, among the
Canaries, because this last is too far distant and belonging to the Crown of
Portugal; the Canaries to the Crown of Gastile; and the Salvages being Desert,
almost no account is made of them. And now we shall make it appear, that the
Body of the Seven Isles of the Canaries, answers in all things to the Body of
the Seven Fortunate Isles of the Ancients.

Canary Isles; the Fortunate Isles of the Ancients, and why.
We have before set down those Reasons which might make us believe, that the
Isles of Cape Verde might answer to the Fortunate Islands, but now shall
produce others, and those stronger for the Canaries. In the Occidental or
Atlantic Ocean, and to the West of Africa, Ptolomy makes account of only one
Body of Islands, which he describes to the number of six. We find now in that
Ocean, and not far from Africa, three different Bodies of Islands, and each
very considerable; to wit, the Azores, the Canaries, and those of Cape Verde.
Of these, the Canaries are nearest to Africa, and the most Eastern; the Azores,
the farthest and most Western; and those of Cape Verde do remain in the middle,
as to Longitude: And moreover, those of Cape Verde are the nearest the
Equator, and most Southernly; the Azores the farthest off, and most
northernly; and the Canaries in the midst, as to Latitude.

Now the one of these three Bodies of Islands must answer to the Fortunate
Isles of the Ancients, and of Ptolomy, placed in the first Meridian; and among
Modern Authors, if there be any which would give the first Meridian to the
Azores; and others to those of Cape Verde; and others to the Canaries; it is
for the most part out of the belief they have, that one or the other answer to
those Fortunate Isles.

Ptolomy having made account but of one body of Islands in the Occidental
Ocean, it is more likely to be that which is nearest the Main Land, and Gades,
then those farther off. This reason makes for the Canaries. Pliny, Solinus,
Capella, and others, have made account of three different Bodies of Islands in
this Ocean; to wit, the Fortunate Islands, the Gorgades or Gorgons, and the
Hesperides, placing their Fortunate Isles near the Coast of Mauritania, the
Gorgades two days sail from the Coast, and the Hesperides, forty days sail
farther then the Gorgades, and at the bottom of some Gulf; so that these
answer, either to the Azores, or to the Isles of St. Thomas, in the bottom of
the Aethipian Ocean; or rather to the Antilles or Caribes in the Gulf of
Mexico, as we shall speak more in another place: They cannot answer to the
Canaries, nor can the Gorgades answer to others than those of Cape Verde; the
Canaries then remain for the Fortunate: This is another reason for the
Canaries. But the goodness of the Air, the fruitfulness of the Soil, their
proximity to the Coast of Africa, the names and particularities of every one of
the Fortunate Isles, absolutely concluded them the Canaries.

The Fortunate Isles received this name from the Ancients only, because of the
healthfulness of the Air, and fruitfulness of the Soil. The Canaries are
excellent healthful, the Azores little, and the Isles of Cape Verde not at all
healthful; likewise the Canaries have the best Grains, Wines, Fruits, etc. that
are in the World, which they transport every where. The Corn of the Azores will
not keep, and their Wines are consumed in the Country, not being strong enough
to be transported to other places. In the Isles of Cape Verde, the Inhabitants
can scarce gather Corn and Wine necessary; exporting nothing but Salt and Goats
Skins. Pliny esteems some of his Fortunate Isles 8000 paces from the Coast of
Africa; the Azores are 300 Leagues; those of Cape Verde, 150: Among the
Canaries, Forteventura is not above 10 or 12 Leagues from Cape Bojador. The
Air, Soil, and Neighborhood to the Coast of Africa makes then for the Canaries:
Let us proceed to confer their old and new names, and other particulars.
Ptolomy calls his Fortunate Isles, Aprositos, that is, Inaccessibilis; Herae,
that is, Junonis Insula, Pluitalia; Ortelius reads Pluitalia, Casperia,
Canaria, Centuria, which interpreters write Pinturia. Pliny, Solinus, and
Capella, call them Ombrio, Junonia, Junonia Minor, (instead of which, Ortelius
puts Theode) Capraria, Nivaria, and Canaria.

In the numbering of these Isles; Pliny and his two Apes or Copiers, Solinus and
Capella, agree upon six, changing little in the rank, names, and number of
Ptolomy; but Pliny makes mention of one Pluvialia, among his Fortunate Isles, a
little before he comes to number the other Six. This Pluvialia must then be a
Seventh, and possibly Theode the 8.

Conferring the Fortunate Isles of Ptolomy, with those of these three Authors,
we shall find that his Aprositos answers to their Ombrio; his Herae Insula, to
their Junonia: There is nothing answers to their Junonia Minor, or Theode,
whether they be two different, or only the same Island: His Pluitalia answers
to the Pluvialia of Pliny, which the two others did not know; his Casperia to
their Capraria; his Canaria, to their Canaria; and his Centuria or Pinturia, to
their Nivaria. Some names being corrupted by others.

At present it will be hard to judge which of the Canaries answer to each of
the Ancients Fortunate Isles; yet let us see if we can effect it, and do it
better then others have done; there is no difficulty for the Great Canary,
since it retains its ancient name: The Isle of Ferr also most apparently
answers to the Pluitalia of Ptolomy, or rather to make all particulars better
accord with the Pluvialia of Pliny, where he says, Non esse aquam nisi ex
imbribus, as at this day according to the common opinion, it has no Water, but
what distills from a certain Tree, always covered with Clouds. The Isle of
Teneriffe likewise, whose Pike is always covered with Snow and Clouds, may
answer to their Nivaria, quae nomen accepit a perpetua nive. Nebulosam, says
Pliny; ab aere Nebuloso, says Solinus and Capella. There remain four or five
Islands wherein will lie the difficulty, Aprositos, Junonia, Junonia Minor,
Theode, if it be other then Junonia Minor, and Capraria.

Pliny seems to join this Capraria with Pluvialia, and says after Sebosus,
Junoniam abesse a Gadibus 150000 pa. ab ea tantundem ad occasum versus
Pluvialiam, Caprariamque. Seeing the great distance he gives between these
Isles, and from East to West, it may be said, that Pluvialia and Capraria are
the most Western of the Fortunate Isles; Junonia the most Eastern; and that of
the Isles of Ferr and Palma, being the most Western of the Canaries; that of
Ferr being already allowed for the Pluvialia; Palma will rest for the Capraria
of Pliny. On the other side, Junonia being the most Eastern, and 750000 paces
from Gades, it must either answer to the Forteventura or Lancelotta, which are
the most Eastern of the Canaries, and 6 or 700000 paces from Gades or Cadiz.
But Pliny and Solinus make mention of two Junonias, of which, one being less
than the other, we will give Lancelotta, which is the least, for their Junonia
Minor; and Forteventura the Greater, for the other Junonia: And it seems in
this passage, Pliny would observe those he met with first, from the nearest to
the Coast, to the farthest off. Of the Seven Canary Islands we have given Six,
which answer to the other Six among the Fortunate Isles. There remains the Isle
of Gomer, among the Canaries; and Ombrio or Aprositos, among the Fortunate
Isles: This might make it be judged, that none must answer to the other; but
there are many reasons to the contrary. The name of Aprositos, that is,
Inaccessible, or of Ombrio and Ombriona, as Capella writes it, shows, that this
Isle has been in a manner unknown, in regard of its Neighbors; nay, it seems
impossible to be landed upon. Gomer is between the Isles of Ferr, Palma, and
Teneniffe; these three having been known, Gomer being in the midst and near
these Islands, must likewise be known; and the Port of Gomer being one of the
best, and most frequented of the Canaries, it cannot answer to the Aphrositos
of the Ancients. Let us therefore leave this Gomer for Theode, and say,

That farther in the Sea, and about 100 miles, or, as others say, 100 Leagues
from the Canaries, is an Isle they call San Borondon: Authors say, that those
which think not of it, find it sometimes by chance; but that it is never found
by those who expressly seek it: However it be, it is held for truth, and Vincent
Blanc assures us, that from the top of Teneriffe, whence may be seen all the
Canaries, this is likewise sometimes seen, yet that those which attempt to go
to it, cannot find it, though with great pains; whether it be that the Fogs
hide it, or that some Current carries them from it; and for this reason they
have given it the name of Fortunada, Incontada, and Nontrovada, etc: After all
these particularities, I can doubt no longer, but this Isle is the Aprositos,
Inaccessible, and the Ombrio, that is, the shadow of the Ancients. And so the
whole body of the Canaries, will answer to the whole Body of the Fortunate
Isles, without adding the Madera; and from hence we have reason to place the
first Meridian in the Canaries, as Ptolomy has placed it in the Fortunate
Isles, since these first answer to the last; which will give a great facility
to the reconcilement of Ancient and Modern Geography, otherwise not to be done.
Let us proceed to what each of the Canaries may have at present considerable,
beginning with those nearest the main Land.

The Isle of Forteventura described.
Forteventura, once Erbania, is not far distant from the Cape Bojador, above 10
or 12 Leagues; from the Great Canary 16 or 18; from Lancelotta 6. Its greatest
length is 25 Leagues, 15 or 16 its greatest breadth. In the middle, it
streightens so much, that there remains only a League or two from one Sea to
another: And this part was crossed with a Wall, which separated the Island into
two Estates, when it was discovered. The Land is partly Mountainous, and partly
in Plains; fruitful in Wheat and Barley: Along the Coast glide many streams of
Fresh Water: and along these streams are the Tarbais Trees crooked and soft,
which bear Gum; of which is made pure white Salt. In the Country, besides the
Palm Trees, which bear Dates, the Olive Trees, Mastick Trees, and the Orsolle,
a Grain for Dying, there is a kind of Fig Tree, from which they have Balm as
white as Milk, and which is of great virtue in Physic. They make Cheese of
their Goats Milk, with which the Country is so well stocked, that they may
afford more then 50000 yearly; and besides the profit made of their Skins, and
their Fat, (each Beast yielding 30 or 40 pound) their Flesh is excellent. The
Ports of this Island are not proper, but for smaller Vessels. Its chief places
toward the Sea, are Forteventura, Ricquerocque, Chabras, Baltarhays, Lanegala,
Fozonegro, and Tarafulo. Most of which are well frequented by Merchants,
especially by the English, who of late are incorporated into a joint Fellowship
and Stock; and not only to this Isle, but to all the Seven Canary Isles.

The Isle of Lancelotta.
LANCELOTTA is 16 or 18 Leagues long, and 10 or 12 large: The access to it, is
difficult on the North and West Coast; the Country is plain toward the East,
and the Continent where its Town and Ports are, as Cayas or Lancelotta, Porto
de Nayos, and Port de Cavallos: These last are near one to the other; the Isle
has the same properties with that of Forteventura.

The Great Canary Isle.
The GREAT CANARY is almost equal in length and breadth, which is about 18 or 20
Leagues. It is the principal of these Islands, both because of its greatness,
fertility, and the goodness of its Air; and because the Governor and Bishop of
these Islands, whose yearly Revenue is 12000 Ducats, have their Residence in
the City Canaria, Its Inhabitants, chief places, fertility, commodities, and
Trade.
which is fair, its Inhabitants well clad, and civil; and how hard soever it
rains, its streets are dry, being only Sand. Its other places are Tedele,
Galder, Argores, Gusa, and Del Douze Ingennos, or Twelve Sugar Engines. This
Island it exceeding fruitful, and the Soil so fertile, that they have two
Harvests in one year, reaping their Wheat, Barley, and other Grains in February
and May. Their Wheat excellent, and its Bread very white; but from the
excellency of its Fruits, as Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, Figs, Olives,
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Melons, Potato's, and above all, from its Wine, which
is far beyond that of Spain. (Which among all others, bears the Bell with us in
England.) From these we may judge of the goodness of the Island. They have also
several other good Commodities, as Honey, Wax, Sugarcanes, Cheese, and Wood,
in great abundance; and breeds such plenty of Cattle, that the Leather is not
one of the least Commodities they vend to other Nations, as Spain, England,
Holland, etc. They have also store of Fowl; it is well covered with Firr Trees,
Dragon Trees, Palm Trees, etc. And its Rivers well filled with Fish; but above
all, they have Plantons which delights in Water; it is cut and shoots forth
yearly into three or four Branches; each Branch bears 30 or 40 Apples,
resembling a Cucumber; they incline to black; being ripe, they eat more
deliciously then any Comfit in the World.

The Isle of Teneriffe, with its high Pike Teitha, described.
TENERIFFE, which some call Enfer, is distant from the Grand Canary 16 or 18
Leagues, toward the North-West: Its utmost length is about 24 or 25 Leagues,
and 12 or 15 its greatest breadth. The Land is raised in little Hills, and
toward the middle, is the Pike of Teitha or Terreira, a straight and round
Mountain, which reaches in height 45000 English paces, which is 45 miles, (some
make it not so high, others higher;) but all agree that it is the highest
Mountain in the World; even so high, that it may be seen in a clear day 60
Leagues distance at Sea; and from the top of it, a man may easily discover, and
count all the other Canary Islands, though some of them be above 50 Leagues
distance from this. It often casts forth fire and Sulphur: Its Summit is in
form of a Sugar Loaf or sharp point, called the Pike of Teneriffe: For two or
three miles about it, are only Cinders and Pumice Stones; two or three Miles
lower, all is covered with Snow throughout the year, though there never fall
any in those Islands; and yet lower are found the great Trees Vintaico, whose
Wood is very weighty, and never rots in Water. Under these Trees Laurels cover
almost 10 or 12 miles of the Country, where the Singing Birds of the Canaries,
known among us by the name of Canary Birds, warble their pleasant notes. The
foot of the Mountain casts forth diverse Branches, and extends it self into a
good part of the Island, which abounds more in Corn, then any of the rest; and
sometimes it alone feeds them all. The Country between Rotana and Realejo, is
so fruitful and pleasant, that its like can scarce be found in the World, such
quantity it produces of Grains, Wines, Fruits, Honey, Wax, Sugar, Flax, Its
Fertility.
Silk, etc. And from hence they have their Vines which they carry to the West
Indies; the best of which grow on the Coast of Ramble. There are certain Shrubs
which yield a liquor like to Milk, which after it is thickened, makes an
excellent Gum called Taybayba. From the Dragon Tree, cut toward the Root, they
draw a red liquor which they call Dragons Blood, well known to Apothecaries.
Its chief places
Its principal City Laguna so called, because of the Lake near to it, is 4 or 5
Leagues from the Sea, contains two parishes, and is the residence of the
Governor of the Island. The other Cities, are Sancta Crux, Rotana, Rajalesa,
Carachico, and Adeca. When it was discovered, its Kings to the number of seven
dwelt in Caverns, and the bodies of their dead were set up about Caves, where
they became as dry as Parchment; among which, the most honorable had a stick
put in their hand, and a vessel of Milk before them.

The Isle of Gomer described.
GOMER is 8 or 9 Leagues from Teneriff, is 10 or 12 Leagues long. Its chief
City of the same name, often receives the Indian Fleet, and furnishes them with
Corn, Fruits, Sugar, and Wines, as well as those of Teneriff, and Canaria. The
Country is high, plain, bears many Dragon-trees, feeds small Cattle. Its Roads
are deep and large: The People of this Isle were formerly more barbarous than
those of the other Canary Isles, using many strange Customs not known
elsewhere; among which they held it for a great sign of Hospitality, to let
their Friends lie with their Wives, and receive theirs in testimony or return
of kindness.

Isle of Ferr described.
The Isle of FERR is the most West of all the Canaries, distant from Palma 15 or
16 Leagues; from Gomer only 5 or 6. This Isle in reason should be well known,
many persons having been there, and many Authors treated very amply of it; yet
I will a little show the diversity found touching the greatness, and quality of
the soil; as also the Water with which the Isle is served. Its chief place is
called Hierro, seated on the Sea shore. Here is found plenty of Hogs, Goats,
and Sheep; also of Beasts, Fowl, Fruits, and quantity of Grains and Sugar
Canes, and has much Cattle which yield abundance of Milk and Cheese. A Tree
whose Leaves destil^^ Water, which serves the Isle, there being no Rain or
Rivers.
Here is said to be no fresh Water, only in the middle of the Isle there grows
a Tree, whose Leaves are much like those of the Olive, which being always
covered with Clouds, drops from its Leaves into a Cistern which is underneath
it, very good Water; and in such great abundance, that it suffices all the
Inhabitants; as also all the Cattle and living Creatures in the Island. One
Jackson an Englishman, who reports to have seen, considered, and measured this
Tree in 1618, says, That the water falls into a Pond containing 20000 Tuns,
which in one night is filled; and that from this Pond the water is by diverse
Channels conveyed into other Ponds or Cisterns, through the whole Isle, which
is very well peopled: some say it has in it about 8000 people, and above
100000 head of Cattle, which for an Island but of six Leagues Circuit is very
well; for if the Tree be in the middle of the Isle, it cannot be above a League
distant from any extremity; and moreover more than 20000 Tuns of water, for
100000 months will be a Tun a day, for every five months, which is too much
drink, if they drink nothing but water.

These particulars are contradicted by others. The Conquest of all these Isles
says many Trees, not one alone, otherwise it would be immortal. Sanutus says,
that the Cloud begins to rise about noon, and in the evening quite covers the
Tree, which at the same time destills water, drop by drop along the trunk,
branches and leaves; and that it continues so till day. Others say, that this
water falls from Noon all night, until a little after the Sun be risen. But
most will have the Cloud perpetually about the Tree, and that it destills
continually. Suarez makes the Pond or Cistern of not above 20 Tuns. The
relations of 1602. say, two reservers, each 20 foot square; but neither Suarez
nor others makes any mention of other reservers in the Isle; but will have this
water in one place alone whither all go to fetch it. But let us pass from the
Ocean, into the Mediterranean Sea, and come to Malta, which is one of the best,
but none of the least considerable pieces of Africa. Nigh unto these 7 Islands,
called the Canary Isles, are the Isles of Roco, Sancta Clara, Gratiosa,
Alegria, and the two Savage Isles.

PALMA is distant from Gomer, 12 or 15 Leagues to the North West. It is round
or oval, and its Circuit about 25 Leagues: Abounds in Corn, Wine, Sugars, and
all sorts of Fruits. It is well stored with Cattle, and therefore made the
victualling place of the Spanish Fleet that pass to Peru and Brasil. The City
of the same name, has great confluence, by reason of its Wines, laden for the
West Indies, and other places. Its best, and like to Malvoisie, is made about
Brenia, whence are taken more than 12000 Pipes yearly; also St. Andre, and
Tassa Cord, are on the Sea. It has little Corn, which is brought from
Teneriff. Four Sugar Engines: the Church of Palma, and the Governors House, are
esteemed fair.

The Island of MALTA.
The Isle of Malta.
THe Isle of MALTA is in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea, and almost at an
equal distance from the main Land of Asia, and Europe. It is about 600 Leagues
from the Coast of Souria, and 500 from the Straight of Gibralter: This Straight
beginning the Mediterranean Sea toward the West; and that Coast ending it
toward the East. Likewise from Malta to the nearest firm Land of Europe, Its
situation.
which is Italy; and to the nearest Coasts of the firm Land in Africa, which
are the Coasts of Tunis, and Tripoly, (these bounding the Mediterranean Sea on
the South, that on the North) is 80, 90, and near 100 Leagues.

The Ancients have esteemed it rather in Africa, then in Europe, and the
opinion has been followed by almost all modern Authors: though it be nearest
the Isle, and Kingdom of Sicily, which is in Europe, and from which it likewise
holds, then to Africa: and though it be in the hands of the Knights of Malta
who are all Europeans, the native tongue of the Country, and most of their
Customs, have always more resembled those of Africa, than Europe. This Isle at
present is very famous, The Isle famous for being the seat of the Knights of
Malta.
not for its greatness, nor for its fertility, neither for Ancient renown; but
by reason it is the residence of the Great Master, and Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem, whom at present we call of Malta, where they have settled since they
lost Rhodes: and because it serves as a powerful Rampire for all Christendom,
and particularly for Sicily and Naples.

Its length and breadth.
The length of the Isle is not above 20, or 25000 paces, its breadth 10, or
12000, and its Circuit about 60000 paces, which are 20, or 25 Italian miles in
length, 10, or 12 in breadth, and 60 in Circuit. The Soil except the Ancient
City of Malta, Its soil and Commodities.
is almost all stones, craggy, and dry: yet it produces Wheat, Barley, Cummin,
and all sorts of Fruits; among others Figgs, Apricocks, Citrons, Melons,
Grapes, etc. It feeds Horses, Asses, Mules, Hogs, Goats, Sheep, Hares, Conies,
Hens, Partridges, Quails, Faulcons, and other Birds of prey. And its Beasts,
Fowl, Grains, Fruits, as likewise their Capers, Honey, and Cotton, of which
they make Cotton Cloth, and several Manufactures, are excellent; yet it wants
much Corn, and Wine for the necessary food of its Inhabitants, which are 75 or
80000 souls: and among which there are about 15 or 16000 Soldiers, besides the
Knights, so that they are constrained to fetch their provision from Sicily,
which they have at a certain rate, and with privilege to pay no Custom.

Its Inhabitants.
The natural Inhabitants of this Island are said to be miserable, churlish, and
uncivil people, of complexion, not less tawny then the Moors; use the African
Language, but follow the Religion of the Church of Rome, which the Knights are
bound to defend. Their women are fair, who are debarred the society of men, and
go veiled, as not desiring to show themselves, and are guarded after the
Italian manner; they have here a great many of Curtizans, which are tolerated,
who for the most part are Grecians, who sit at their doors playing on
Instruments, etc. to entice men in to them.

Its Ports, Roads, and chief places.
On the Coasts of this Isle, and beginning by Malta, and turning toward the
East, South, and West, etc. to make the Circuit, the Ports, Roads, and
Harbors, which present themselves, are Marza, or Marza-scala: then Marza
sirocco, where the Turks landed the 19 of May 1565, when they had a design to
besiege Malta. The Great Master Vignacour has since caused to be built two
Forts, which defend the entrance,; and a third upon that languet or tongue of
land, which advances into the middle of the Port, enough to hinder any for the
future from casting Anchor there in quiet; continuing toward the Coast which
regards the South, and far toward the West, is nothing but Rocks, except it be
a little Bay or Golfe of Pietra Negre, others call it Pietra Sancta, where the
5 of July arrived the first succor in favor of Malta. This relief was but of
six hundred men, who passed from Pietra Sancta to the old City and from thence
to the Bourg Il-Borgo, which the Turks besieged, after having taken the Fort of
St. Elmo, and this assistance served much to the defense of that place. Pietra
Sancta regards toward the South, The Isle has often withstood the fury of the
Turks.
the Rock of Forfolo or Furfura. Toward the West are the Golfes or Bays of
Anteofega, the Islanders call it Hayntofeca, then Muggiaro where the Turks
first cast Anchor the 18 of May 1565. Between the West and North is the Bay or
Port of Melecca, where the great relief arrived the 7 of December following.
Melecca regards the Island of Goza, and in the straight or channel between both
are the Isles of Cumin, and Cuminat. This part of the Isle about Melecca is
almost divided from the rest, by the Golfe or Port of the Saline Vecchie, or
old saltpits toward the East; and that of Muggiaro toward the West; and if
the Turks had seized the pass which is between them, this assistance had proved
vain. Next to the Golfe of the old Saline, is the Creek and Chapel of St. Paul,
where according to common tradition he was ship wrackt: next is the Creek of
new Salines, and the Creek of St. George, where the Turks dis-imbarked their
Ammunitions to serve to assault the Fort St. Elmo. And in fine, the Ports of
Marza Massetto, and Marza grande are those where at three several times have
been builded, and fortified three Cities, and diverse Forts contiguous to each
other. It Borgo, or the Bourg is 2000 paces in Circuit, the Isle of Sengle
1500, each of 1000, or 1200 houses, the one and the other so well fortified,
that they received 70000 Cannot shot, and sustained an incredible number of
assaults of 60 or 70000 Turks. The Arsenal for the Gallyes is yet in the Bourg,
but there resides there only Malteses, and Mariners, and in the Isle of Sengle
Mariners and Soldiers of Fortune.

The residence of the Great Master.
The great Master and the Knights reside at present in the City of Valetta,
which is now by much the most considerable of these Cities, both for its force,
the advantage of its situation, and the beauty of its public and private
buildings. It is built upon Montit Sceberros, which forms a Languet of Land all
of a Rock; and between the Ports of Marza Massetto, and Marza grande commanding
on all sides, and into all parts of the one and the other Port, and its ditches
to the landward, which are cut out of the Rock, which are exceeding broad, of a
very great depth, strongly flankt, and well fortified. The Walls are strong,
join to the Rock, and are about 60 foot high, and are well provided with Guns,
etc. against any occasion. It contains above 2000 houses, which are for the
most part uniform, builded of Freestone; they are commonly two stories high,
flat at top, and with Tarrasses. The Market place is spacious, from whence
several fair Streets do take their rise; to every house there is a Cistern to
preserve water for their occasions; besides these houses there are several
stately Structures, as the Great Masters Palace, which is a gallant Edifice,
having a Tower which overlooketh the whole Island; the Hall or Chamber of
Assemblies where they sit in Council, is curiously adorned and painted, wherein
their Fights both by Sea and Land, as well at home as abroad, are lively
represented; and this as also the Armory, which may on a sudden Arm 20 or
25000 men, are in the Great Masters Palace; then the Churches of St. Paul, and
St. John Patron of the Order, the one the seat of a Bishop, and the other of a
Prior, are magnificent; likewise the seven Alberges of the Knights like so many
Palaces, where the Commanders of the seven tongues treat the Cavaliers at the
expense of the Order. The Arsenal near Porto Reale is as well furnished with
all sorts of Munition as any in Christendom. Also the Hospital of St. John's
toward the Castle of St. Elmo does merit fame, not only for its buildings
which are curious, but for the entertainment there given to those that fall
sick, where the Knights themselves lodge when sick or wounded to receive cure,
where they are exceeding well attended, have excellent good diet, served by the
Junior Knights in silver, and every friday visited by the Grand Master,
accompanied with the great Crosses: a service which was from the first
institution commanded; and thereupon called Knights Hospitallers. Here are, as
Sandys says, three Nunneries, one for Virgins, another for Bastards, and the
third for penitent Whores.

Castle of St. Elmo.
The Castle of St. Elmo is at the end of the City of Valetta toward the Sea,
and at the opening of two Ports. During the siege of Malta it was taken, and
sacked by the Turks, after having wasted 18000 Cannonshot, given diverse
assaults, and lost 4000 men of their best Militia, among others Dragut, one of
their most famous Coursaiers. The Christians lost 1300 men among whom many
Knights. But this Fort was restored to a far better Estate than before: and is
separated from the City only by a ditch cut likewise in the Rock; on the other
side, and on the point of the Borgo is the Fort of St. Angelo; and likewise
above the Borgo, and the Isle of Sengle, have been made new works to hinder the
Turks from lodging there.

Besides these three Cities, and the Forts about them, the ancient City of
Malta, Medina, is in the middle of the Island, on an easy ascending hill, and
in an advantageous situation. The Turks assaulted it in 1551 but soon retired.
The Bishop of the Isle has here his residence; and near the City is yet the
Grotte and Chapel of St. Paul where they believe he preached, and where he lay
when he suffered shipwreck, and this place is of great account among them. All
these Cities and Forts have 250 or 300 pieces of Cannon on their Rampart; The
Isle very strong and well provided for War.
and their Magazins are so well provided with Powder, Shot, Wood, Biscuit,
Salt-meats, and all Provisions, and Ammunition, that they call it Malta Flor
del Mondo, Malta the Flower of the World: being provided always with
Ammunitions and Provisions for a three years siege; yet this is to be
understood, not only because of its Fortifications, and Ammunitions, but
likewise because of its force, and the resolution of its Knights.

The Order of Knighthood first instituted.
This order of Knighthood according to Sandys, received their denomination from
John the charitable Patriarch of Alexandria; though vowed to St. John Baptist
as their Patron. Their first seat was the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem,
built by one Gerrard, at the same time when the Europeans had something to do
in the Holy Land, where they received such good success, and became so famous
that they drew diverse worthy persons into this society: which by Pope Gelasius
the second, was much approved of. He says, that one Raymond was the first
Master of this Order, who did amplify their Canons, and entitled himself The
poor servant of Christ, and Guardian of the Hospital in Jerusalem; and at the
allowance of one Honorius the second, were apparelled in black garments, signed
with a White-Cross; this Order we have said began at Jerusalem, and at first
meddled not but with the Government of the Hospital of St. John, and were
called Friars Hospitallers, or simply Hospitallers, as those of the Temple
Templers; but when these Hospitallers were constrained to make profession both
of Hospitality and Arms, they were called Knights Hospitallers, or Knights of
the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem; These Knights often forced to remove their
habitations.
after the loss of Jerusalem, they held their Convent in the City and Fortress
of Margatt, then in Aicre or Ptolomaido; and all the Latin Christians being
driven from the Holy Land, and from Souria, they retired into Cyprus. But
during their stay in Cyprus, they gained Rhodes, and established themselves
there so powerfully, that they were called Knights of Rhodes. Margaret was
taken from them in 1285. Aicre in 1291, little less than 200 years after
Godfrey of Bulloin had Conquered the Holy Land, and this order began before;
after the loss of Aicre they lived in Cyprus from 1291 to 1309. in which year
they took, and settled in Rhodes, and maintained it more than 100 years,
sustaining four sieges, till in 1522 Sultan Solomon became Master of Rhodes;
they then retired into Europe, now into one place, and then into another, and
in fine to Malta, which Charles the fifth gave them in 1530. with some little
neighboring Isles, as likewise the City of Tripoly in Barbary, which they
could keep no longer then 1551. that place being too far engaged in the Enemies
Country. These Knights are of diverse Nations, and are divided into eight
Tongues, to wit of Province, of Auvergne, of France, of Italy, of Arragon, of
England, of Germany, and of Castile; so that the three first are in France, and
the last in Castile; each Tongue contains many Priories, and each Priory many
Commanderies; these three Tongues which are in France, have near 300
Commanderies. The other five Tongues which are in Italy, Arragon, England,
Germany, and Castile, made near 400. but there are no more in England, England.
the Kings of England when they confiscated the goods of the Church, having
likewise seized the goods and Commanderies of the Knights of Malta; and in
Germany a part of these Commanderies being fallen into the hands of Lutherans,
and Calvinists, serve no longer: so that at present France alone furnishes
little less than half the Commanderies of Malta.

And it has been observed that from the first establishment of this Order,
unto this very present, of 57 great Masters, there has been 37 French, only 4
or 5 Italians, 7, or 8, Spaniards, and 11 whose Nation and Tongue the History
could not observe; but apparently the most part were French, since this Order
began by the French; of these 34 known, 12 were in the Holy Land, and in
Souria, 13 in Rhodes, and (...) in Malta unto Father Paul of Lascaris; of every
one there is a Grand Prior, who lives in great reputation in his Country, who
orders the affairs of their Order; and for England, St. John's by Clarken-well
in times past was a mansion of the Grand-Prior. There are several Councels
among these Knights, Their Government.
as that for deciding of differences which may happen among them; the Council
of War, the General Chapter, which may augment, or moderate the Authority of
the great Master, renew the Ordinances and Government of the Religion, or their
Order, and which is held every five years.

The Ceremonies performed in making these Knights.
The Ceremonies used in Knighting are these which follow; first being clothed
in a long loose garment, he goes to the Altar with a Taper in his hand of
White Wax, where he kneeleth down, and desires the Order of the Ordinary; then
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, he receives a sword,
therewith to defend the Catholic Church, to repulse and vanquish the enemy, to
expose himself to death for the Faith, to relieve the oppressed, and all by the
power of the Cross, which is desigured by the cross hilt, then is he girt with
a belt, and thrice struck on his shoulders with his sword, which signifies that
he is cheerfully to suffer all afflictions for the honor of Christ: who taking
it of him, flourishes it aloft three times, as a provokement to the adversary,
and then sheaths it again. Then he that gives him Knighthood, does exhort him
to get true honor by laudable and courageous actions, to be vigilant in the
Faith, etc. then two other Knights of the said Order, do put on a pair of gilt
spurs, which does signify that he should do no ignoble action for gain, and to
value Gold no more than dirt; and thus with a Taper in his hand he goes to
Mass, where he is excited to Hospitality, to works of Piety, redemption of
Christian Captives, etc. Also he is asked whether he is resolved to live among
them, to quit the Authority of secular Magistracy, to revenge their injuries,
whether he be of any profession, whether a freeman, joined in Matrimony, or
vowed to another Order; and having answered thereunto, upon the receipt of the
Sacrament he vows in this order: I vow to the Almighty God, to the Virgin Mary
his immaculate Mother, and to St. John Baptist, perpetually by the help of God,
to be truly obedient to all my superiors, appointed by God and this Order, to
live without any thing of mine own, and withal to live chastely; which done he
is received as a member of them; besides other prayers, they are commanded to
say daily 150 Pater-nosters, for such as have been slaves in their Wars. None
are admitted to this Order, but those who can prove their Gentility for six
descents, which is examined and approved by the Knights of their Nation; they
remain a year upon approbation, before they are admitted into the Society,
where they come very young, that they may the sooner come to a Commendum at
home. Their habit as we noted before, are black Cloaks, with large white
Crosses of fine linen set on the shoulder place; but in time of War they wear
Mandilions of Crimson with the said White Crosses set behind and before, and
about their necks they wear a Riband with a branch of the Cross. If one of
these Knights be convicted of a Capital offense, he is in the first place
publicly degraded in the Church of St. John, where he received his Knighthood;
also strangled, or thrown into the Sea. There are of these Knights 1000,
whereof 500 always reside in this Island; the other 500 dispersed throughout
Christendom, at their several Seminaries, which upon any summons are to make
their personal appearance; every Nation do feed by themselves in their several
Alberges, and sit at table like Friars. Of these there be 16 of great authority
(Counselors of State,) called the Great Crosses, out of whom the Officers of
their Order, as the Marshal, the Admiral, the Chancellor, the Master of the
Hospital, etc. are chosen, and who together with the Master punishes the
trangressors as aforesaid. Now when the Great Master happens to die, they
suffer no vessel to go out of the Land, until another be chosen, lest the Pope
should intrude on their election, which is thus performed, The several
Seminaries nominate two Knights, and two also are nominated for the English;
and these 16 from among themselves choose 8, and these 8 choose a Knight, a
Priest, and a Friar servant, and they three out of the 16 great Crosses, elect
the Great Master who being thus chosen, is styled The most illustrious and most
reverend Prince, the Lord Friar A.W. great Master of the Hospital of St. John
of Jerusalem, Prince of Malta and Goza. The Great Master being thus chosen, and
received with these and many other noble Ceremonies, has a great power over
all the Commanders and Officers of the Order; he assembles the Councels, calls
the Officers of Justice, who exercise in his Name, and execute under his Seal;
he Coins money, disposes of Treasure, imprisons, and sentences the faulty,
pardons the Condemned, creates Knights of Grace, confers even to the eighth
dignity of the Great Cross, etc. In the Council and at Table he sits under a
Canopy of State, and is bravely attended, and served by Knights according to
their Order, and without Fee, and does all the acts, of Sovereignty, and has a
great revenue to support his Dignity.

Their possessions.
Besides Malta, the Great Master, and the Knights of Malta possess the Isles of
Cumin, and Cumiot which are very little; Forfola or Furfura, which is but a
Rock, (and when they would jest with any among them, or play on some young
Knight, they call him Prince of Forfola,) The Isle of Goza of which the Great,
Master takes the title of Prince; this is the Gaulos or Gaudos of the Ancients;
and to this day called Gausditch by its Inhabitants, and Gausdosch by the
Moors. It is about 6 or 8000 paces from Malta, and about 20000 paces in
Circuit, its form approaching to an Oval. Its Fortress is on an uncommanded
hill, and the Town beneath it; all the Isle though mountainous is peopled not
by Villages, but by Hamlets, and houses scattered here and there, the Air being
very good, and the land watered with many streams. It may assist Malta with its
Corn, Fruits, Muttons, Hares, Fowl, Honey, etc. they take here excellent
Faulcons; and that which is presented to the Viceroy of Sicily in the name of
the Great Master of Malta, and for Malta, likewise those which are presented to
the King of France, are for the most part taken here.

This Isle of GOZA was taken, and pillaged by the Turks in 1551, who carried
near 4000 souls Captives, there remaining almost as many. At present it is
restored, and the Castle well fortified, and all the approaches of the Isle
defended with some Forts. Its Governor is one of the Knights whom the Grand
Master sends from three years to three years; the Inhabitants speak Arab, or
Moresco, as at Malta, have the same manners, and are all Catholics.

Likewise LAMPEDOZA, and LINOSA or Limosa distant from Malta, about 10000
paces, belong to these Knights, but both are esteemed desert. West of them and
toward the Cape of Bona is the Isle of Pantaleria, which belongs not to the
Knights, but to the Catholic King; but because we have not remembered it
before, we will here speak a word of it. Its Circuit is about 30000 paces. Its
City, and Port regard Sicily toward the North; and Malta toward the East.
Above the City is a Castle or Rock, which nature has made craggy, and
inaccessible on all sides. The Land bears little Corn, quantity of Pulse, and
Kitchin-herbs; produces abundance of Cotton, Anniseeds, Figgs, Melons, Capers,
and excellent Grapes, etc. The manners, habit and tongue of the Islanders
retain much of the Moors, yet they are all Catholics like to Malta, and under
the Viceroy of Sicily. In the midst of the Island, and in a Cave is a Pit,
which exhales continually an obscure vapor, which spreading it self on all
sides on the Rock, dissolves into water, and distills with such abundance, that
it furnishes all the Inhabitants have need of not only for their drink, and
other uses, but for their Beasts; nor is there any other fresh water in the
Isle, the Land being dry, reddish, and so hot that a naked foot can scarce
suffer it.

For the rest the Knights of Malta are always in Arms against the Moors,
Mahometans, and all the Pirates of the Mediterranean Sea, Knights always in
Wars.
and by their expeditions with those few Galleys, they have delivered out of
their hands a great number of Christian Captives, reduced many Mahometans to
the Christian Faith, maintain their Arms in good reputation, and on all
occasions which present themselves, whether of their own, or with other Princes
of Christendom, they freely employ and venture both their lives and goods in
favor of Christians in general and particular.

But it is time to finish Africa, and to say that if we would have believed
certain Authors among the Ancients, this Africa had been represented to us with
unsupportable heats, unsufferable droughs, fierce and cruel Beasts, perfidious
Men, horrible and afrightful Monsters, whereas time, which daily discovers
things unknown to the Ancients, has made us see that the greatest heats of
Africa have some refreshments; that the driest sands have some wells, some
waters; that the vastest solitudes have some green fields, some Fruits; that
the Beasts are not so dangerous, but that Men may desend themselves from their
fury; nor the Men so faithless, but that they have Commerce and Society among
themselves, as also with Strangers; that their Dragons, Serpents, Griffons,
etc. are for the most part imaginary. And moreover, the generosity of its
Lions, the docility of its Camels, the Feathers of its Estriches, the odor of
its Civets, the swistness of its Barbes, the agility of its wild Asses, the
greatness of its Elephants, the strength of its Eagles, the diversity of its
Parroquets, and the wantonness of its little Monkeys, etc. recompense the
mischief which other Beasts may do. And though there are as yet some people
fierce, and Man-eaters, the most part of the others are very ingenious and
tractable. The Egyptians have long since sufficiently made known their cunning
in Sciences, Arts, and Arms, so have the Carthaginians, etc. and the Ancients
esteemed the Aethiopians the most innocent and justest men in the world,
believing the Gods sometimes banqueted with them. Besides there are many
particulars worthy of observation in Africa; what City was ever fairer, or more
magnificent than THEBES, in the higher Egypt? Than MEMPHIS in the middle? Or A
LEXANDRIA in the lower? Out of Egypt, what City was ever richer, more powerful,
or more proud than CARTHAGE, except Rome? And at present PEZ is so splendid,
that there is no City in Europe to be compared with it; though many believe it
not to compare to CAIRO in Egypt: Among the Seven Wonders of the World, some
place three in Egypt alone, the Statue of MEMNON at Thebes, the PYRAMIDES near
Memphis, and the PHARVS of Alexandria.

Commodities of Africa.
Not only these beautiful Works, and fair Cities, not only the infinite quantity
of Gold, and other Metals, Precious stones, Grains, Fruits, Spices, Druggs,
Wines, Oils, Sugars, Honey, Wax, Cordovants, Amber, Ambergreece,
Elephants-teeth, Estriches-feathers, Saffron, Coral, Civet, Musk, Incense,
Coffee, Capers, Olives, Ivory, Silk, Cotton, Flax, etc. of which they make
Velvets, Silks, Damasks, etc. a thousand several Manufactures which are found
there, ought to make us account Africa very considerable: but its extent which
is little less than Asia, twice as great as Europe. Its position is in the
Southern part of our Continent; the South is esteemed after the East, before
either North or West: It was the portion of Cham, second Son to Noah, which may
make us judge it the second in greatness and goodness. Its first Monarchies
have been known before those of Europe; some will say before those of Asia.
Arts, Sciences, Letters, and Laws, have been in great reputation here, before
they passed into Greece or the rest of Europe.

AMERICA as it is divided into SEPTENTRIONAL, which may be divided into
CANADIANE where there shall be The ARCTICK LANDS, as Island -- Bellested.
Groenland, -- Beareford. North Wales, -- Sea hor(c-p) in^ South Wales, --
Hudsons Bay.
CANADA, or NEW FRANCE, whose chief parts and people are those of Estoriland,
-- Hope advanced. Saguanay, -- Quebec. Canada, -- Mont Real. Acadie, --
Martengo. New England, -- Boston. Mary Land, -- Marys town. Virginia, -- James
town. Carolina, -- Charles town. The Hurons, -- St. Peter. Isle of Bermuda's,
-- Southampton. Florida, -- St. Hellens.

MEXICANE, with it Audiences, Provinces, etc. of MEXICO with its Provinces and
chief places of Mexico, -- Mexico. Panuco, -- Panuco. Mechoachan, -- Mechoacan.
Thascala, -- Thascala. Guaxaca, -- Antequera. Tabasco, -- No. ^en. de la
victoria. Jucatan, -- Merida.
GUADALAJARA with its Provinces of Gudalajara, -- Guadalajara. Xalisco, --
Compostella. Chi^^etlan, -- St. Sebastian. Culiacan, -- St. Michael. Cinaloa,
-- St. John. Los Zacatecas, -- Zacatecas. New Biscay, -- St. John. Quivira, --
St. Fee. Anian, -- Anian. Cibola, -- Cibola, California, -- Port de Montere.
GUATEMALA with its Provinces, etc. of Guatemala, -- St. Jago de guatemala.
Vera Pax, -- Vera Pax. Soconusco, -- Gueyet lan. Chiapa, -- Cui dad Real.
Honduras, -- Valladolid. Nicaragua, -- Leon. Costarica, -- Cartago. Veragua, --
la Conception.
St. DOMINGO with its Isles, the chief of which are Cuba, -- St. Jago. Jamaica,
-- Sevilla. Hispaniola, -- St. Domingo. Soana, -- St. German.


MERIDIONAL, which may be divided into PERUVIANE where three shall be TERRA
FIRMA, with its Provinces, etc. of Panama, -- Panama. Carthagena, --
Carthagena. St. Martha, -- St. Martha. Rio de la Hacha, -- Rio de la Hacha.
Venezula, -- Venezula. New Andalousia, -- Comana. Paria, -- Macuregua^a.
Caribes, -- Taupuramune^. Guiana, -- Macurewaray. Popayan, -- St. Fee de
Antiochia. Granada, -- St. Fee de Bogata.
PERU with its Audiences of Peru, -- Quito. De los Quixos, -- Baesa. Pasamores,
-- Loyola. Lima, -- Lima. De la Plata, -- de la Plata. Chili, -- Copiopo.
Magellanick Land, -- St. Phillip.

BRAZILIENE, where there shall be BRAZILE with its Capitaines, or Governments
of St. Vincent, -- Sanctos. Rio Janieto, -- Schastian. Spiritu Sancto, --
Spiritu Sancto. Porto Seguro, -- Porto Seguto. los Isleos, -- Los Isleos. Baya
de los Sanctos, -- St. Salvador. Seregippe, -- Seregippe del Rey. Fernambuco,
-- Olinda. Tamaraca, -- Tamaraca. Parayba, -- Parayba. Rio Granda, -- De los
tres Reys. Siara, -- Siara. Maranhan, -- Junipara. Para, -- Para.
PARAGUAY or, RIO de la PLATA, with its Provinces, etc. of Paraguay, --
Paraguay. Chaco, -- Chaco. De la Plata, -- Aslumption. Tucoman, -- St. Jago del
Estera. Urvaig, -- la Conception. Parana, -- St. Ignatious. Guayr, -- Ouidad
Real.




map of America A New Mapp of AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALE Designed by Mou^sieur
Sanson Geographer to the French King, and Rendered into English, and Illustrated
by Richard Blome By his Majesty's. Especial Command.
London Printed for Richard Blome

blazon or coat of arms of the earls of ShaftesburyTo the Rt. Honble. Anthony
Earl of Shaftesbury Baron Ashby of Wimbourne St. Giles and Lord Cooper of
Paulet. This Mapp is most humbly D.D. by R.B.



AMERICA.
AMERICA is a Continent different from that wherein we inhabit, or which we
call Ours; for the surface of the Globe being described into two Hemispheres,
divided by the first Meridian; America is in that Hemisphere which is opposite
to ours.

The Voyages of Columbus, Cabral, and Visputius into America.
In 1942, and some succeeding years, Christopher Columbus, a Genouese, for and
in the name of Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Isabella Queen of Castile, made
diverse Voyages into the Islands which are before this Continent, and discovered
part of the Coasts of the Continent. In 1501 Alvares Cabral, for and in the
name of Emanuel King of Portugal, Navigating along the Coast of Africa, on a
Voyage to the East Indies, some Eastern Winds carried him so far to the West,
that he discovered the Coast of a main Land, which was afterward called
Brazil; where a little after Americus Vesputius, a Florentine, was expressly
sent with a particular charge to discover this Country: In which he was so
happy, that his name was given to that part of the Coast which he discovered;
and in fine, to the whole Continent. From these Voyages of Columbus, Cabral,
and Americus Vesputius, the Spaniards pretend to be the first who discovered,
or caused to be discovered, and gave knowledge of this Continent.

America known by the Ancients.
The Greeks and Latins have given fair testimonies, that the Ancients have had
some knowledge of America. Plato in his Timaeus, and in his Critias, calls in
the Atlantic Isle, and esteems it as great or greater than Asia and Africa
together. It seems that Plato (or Solon, or the Priest of Egypt, etc.) had
knowledge of the greatness, situation, and form of the two parts of America;
so well they agree to Asia and Africa: the Northern America with Asia, the
Southern with Africa.

America bounded.
AMERICA is almost divided into two parts, of which one is between the Equator
and the North; the other, in regard of us, is toward the South, and part under
the Equator.

After Plato, Theopompus, either in his Treatise of Wonders, or in his History,
makes mention of another Continent besides ours, and touches diverse
particulars: Among others, that its greatness is so vast that it was not wholly
known; that its Men were greater, stronger, and lived longer than we; that they
had Gold and Silver in so great quantity, that they made less account of it
than we do of Iron: That they had a great number of Cities, and among others
two very great ones, and of Customs much different; the principal aim of the
one being to War, and the other to Religion; which I esteem agreeing with Cusco
and Mexico, which we have so found when first known to us; Mexico more inclined
to War, and Cusco to the adoration of its Divinities.

AMERICA having been known to the Ancients under diverse names, and all these
names preserved till now, there remains to know from whence the People of this
America should descend, whether from Europe, Asia, or Africa.

It is to be believed, that the first of our Continent which were carried into
America, were so either by chance or by force; the Eastern Winds having driven
them from the Coast of Africa or Libya, where they sailed, and carried them so
far into the West that they have found these Lands.

And it is likewise to be believed, that of those which have been so carried,
some have been unfurnished of Victuals for so long and impremeditated a Voyage,
and so have been constrained to eat some among them to preserve the rest, as
others since have done. And thus America may have been peopled by diverse
Nations, How America became first peopled by those of our Continent.
and at diverse times, and according to the Parts from whence they were,
according to the hunger and necessity they suffered upon the Sea, they became
more or less barbarous. And that some have been carried by chance or force from
our Continent to the other, we may judge both by Ancient and Modern Histories.
Diodorus Siculus makes mention of certain Phoenicians, ( Aristotle had said
almost the same before of the Carthaginians) who sailing along the Coast of
Africa or Libya, were carried far into the Occidental Ocean, where they found a
very great Isle, distant from our Main Land many days sail, and the Country as
beautiful as that of Toscany, so that some of Carthage would here have settled;
but that the Republic prohibited any more to pass, fearing lest it should
weaken their Estate, commanding those which were passed to retire, and
abolishing as much as they could the knowledge of their Country; yet with
design to retire thither, if they should become so unfortunate as to fall under
the Romans subjection. Those particulars which Authors apply to this Isle,
agree better with America Meridionalis, which is almost an Isle, than with the
Isles on this side it.

Besides these Authorities of the Ancients, the accident which arrived to
Alonzo Zanches de Guelva, in Adalousie, or whatever other Pilot he was, who
landing at the Madera, where was Christopher Columbus, who told him how he had
been carried by force into the West, which he had discovered, and how he had
returned: And the like accident which happened to Cabral in 1501, (as we have
already said) makes it sufficiently appear how the same thing may have happened
to other Saylors; and particularly to those Nations on this side. which lie
upon the Ocean, as the Moors, Spaniards, Celtes, and Bretons, etc. And those
who traded on the Ocean, as the Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and Tyrrhenians;
and this is the more easily, because between the two Tropicks, the Eastern
Brises or Winds do for the most part blow, and easily carry, nay sometimes
force Ships from East to West. It is true, that it is hard to turn from East to
West by the same course: And possibly from these two so different things the
Poet took occasion to say, -- Facilis descensus Averni;
Sed revocare gradum superasque revertere ad auras,
Hoc opus, hic labor est.
Understanding it easy to descend from our Continent into the other, which we
esteem the Lower Hemisphere; but hard to return from that to ours, which we
esteem the Higher: the means to return with least difficulty not being found
out but with time; and after having (and that at diverse times) essayed all
courses, which is, by disingaging themselves from between the Tropicks, which
some attribute to Pedrarias de Avila, who about the year 1514 began to give
Rules for the time of parting; and the course was to be held, to go from our
Continent to the other: and likewise the time and course to return from the
others to ours.

Since some have passed from this world of our Continent, and by our Coast into
the other Continent: It may likewise be believed, that others have passed from
the other Coast, that is to say, from Asia. Whence it comes that some believe,
that the Inhabitants of Peru and Mexico, descend rather from the Chinois and
Japanois, than from the Europeans or Africans.

But this subject will be too tedious to handle, let us therefore content our
selves to speak a word or two of this America in general, before we descend to
particulars.

AMERICA considered in its whole Body, is part on this side, and part beyond
the Equator: It stretches it self to near 54 degrees beyond, and extends it
self to 80 or more on this side, which are more than 130 degrees of Latitude;
our Continent not having much more than 100: But the breadth of America is very
unequal, this Continent being composed of two great Peninsula's, almost divided
the one from the other by the Equator; its breadth here is not in some places
of above 30, 40, or 50 Leagues, The bigness of America.
though in other places 1000 or 1200, and possibly much more in America
Septentrionalis, if the Land of Jesso be contiguous to it.

The situation and Land of Jesso.
This Land of JESSO, or YEDSO, is between America and Asia, and we know not yet
whether it join upon Asia or America, or make a Piece apart; if it be divided
both from the one and the other, and that New Denmark and Greenland are upon
it, as there is much reason to believe, it makes a Piece not less than the
three parts of our Continent, or of the two of the other; but possibly it makes
a third part of the other Continent: Let us proceed to the two parts of
America, as they are esteemed and known at present.

AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALIS.
AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALIS, is that part of America which is not only the most
Northern of the two America's, but likewise does all lie between the Equator
and the North; The length and breadth of America Septentrionalis.
it extends it self from the 8th or 10th degree of Latitude, even beyond the
Artick Circle; and if we comprehend the Artick Lands with America, it advances
at least to the 88th degree of Latitude, which are 70 degrees for its height
from South to North. Its length from West to East possesses near all the
degrees of Longitude of the other Hemisphere, to wit, from about the 180th,
where ours end, even beyond the 300th, which is the end of the other.

The Mer del Nort is on the East of it, the Mer del Sud on its West; toward
the North its bounds are unknown, there being Land found even beyond the 80th
degree of Latitude, Its bounds.
with appearance that they extend yet farther toward the Pole: so that we
cannot judge to what degree, or whether it be contiguous to New Denmark and
Greenland, or whether it be in Islands; and on the South it makes America
Meridionalis.

We will divide this America Septentrionalis into Canadiana and Mexicana. Under
the name of Canadiana is understood that part of America which is about Canada,
where the English, French, Hollanders, Danes and Swedes have diverse Colonies:
And under the name of Mexicana, Its division, according to Mons. Sanson.
that part of America which the King of Spain does almost alone possess, and
where he has established abundance of Colonies, subdividing Canadiana into the
Artick Lands, and Canada or New France; and Mexicana into New Mexico, and
Mexico or New Spain.

Of these four parts, Mexico or New Spain is the most advanced toward the
Equator and the South, the Artick Lands toward the North, Its situation.
the other two parts rest in the middle; Canada or New France toward the East,
and New Mexico toward the West. The first is under and about the Tropic of
Cancer, the second under or about the Polar Circle, the two others lie from 25
or 30 unto 60 degrees of Latitude; so that the first is within or very near the
Torrid Zone, the second within or near the Frozen Zone, and the two in the
middle quite in the Temperate Zone.

The first and most Southernly ought to be called Mexico or New Spain, Mexico,
because Mexico is by much the fairest City, and the Dominion of the ancient
Kings of Mexico extended over the best part of it: New Spain, because the King
of Spain possesses near all of it, having established a great many Colonies; a
Viceroy, diverse Archbishops, Bishops, Audiences, and Governments: the Natives
of the Country that are left, being almost all Tributaries to him.

The second may be called the Arctick Lands, because it approaches the Arctick
Pole, Arctick Lands.
and is for the most part comprehended within the Arctick Circle: these are but
little known. We understand well that they are divided by some Streights, and
that it apparently consists in many and diverse Isles, which has been the cause
a Passage has been sought to go this way to China and the East Indies. The
Natives do here enjoy a full and entire liberty, the People of Europe not
thinking it worth their pains to establish Colonies.

Of the two middle parts, the most Easternly and nearest to Europe, ought to be
esteemed under the general name of Canada or New France: Canada, or New France.
of Canada, because in that particular Region the Europeans first Landed; of
New France, because the French did first establish themselves here before any
other Europeans. The most Western and farthest from Europe may in general be
called New Mexico, because the Spaniards of Mexico or New Spain discovered it
not till after they had been sometime settled in this other.

Of these four parts of America Septentrionalis, to wit, Mexico or New Spain,
New Mexico, Canada or New France, and America Arctica: New Spain is washed by
Mer del Nort, and Mer del Sud: America Arctica likewise by both Seas; New
France only by Mer del Nort, and New Mexico only by Mer del Sud.

These four great parts are subdivided into many less, which we call Regions,
Peoples, Provinces, etc. We will observe the chief of them the most clearly and
succinctly as possibly we can; but because New Spain touches on America
Meridionalis, we will begin our America Septentrionalis by the Arctick and New
France; so proceeding to the one and the other Mexico, that we may pass in
order to the parts bordering on America Meridionalis. And likewise, because the
Arctick Lands of America are very little known, and that we cannot judge to
make a particular discourse of them, we will content our selves to speak
something here before we pass to the other parts.

That part of America which is comprised for the most part between the Arctick
Pole and Circle, or which at most descends unto the 60th or 55th degree of
Latitude, is named according to our method, America Arctica. In all this part
we know only some Coasts and Gulphs of that which is most toward Europe: There
we have the Isles of Iseland and Groenland, we might likewise put Shetland,
which we know not whether Isles or parts of the New Continent, as we are
likewise ignorant of all the rest of America Arctica.

ISELAND, Iseland.
subject to the King of Denmark, is 150 Leagues long, and little less than 100
broad. Its Inhabitants
Its Inhabitants are very lusty, and live above an 100 years; they scarce
addict themselves to any thing but the feeding of their Beasts, and Fishing.
The Coast toward the South is much better, and best inhabited. The Governor of
the Island resides at Bellested on the Coast, Scalhold and Holdon, Bellested,
Scalhold, and Holdon, its chief Towns.
within Land, are Bishops Sees. The Mountains of Hecla and Helga often vomit
Fire, though the Circle of the Pole Arctick passes over this Island, and
incloses part of it in the Frozen Zone, leaving the other in the Temperate, if
that can possibly be, which lies so contiguous and near to the Frozen; yet does
it not hinder them from enjoying many rare things in their Mountains, in their
Lands, in their Fountains and Rivers, in their Beasts, and in their Fish.
Iseland does (in my Judgment.) apparently answer to the Thule of the Ancients,
though some Authors of the Country maintain the contrary.

Groenlandt, or Greenland.
GROENLANDT, that is, GREENLAND, has been long known to those of Iseland and
Norway. Account is made that one Torwald, and his Son Errick of Norway, passed
into Iseland about the year 800; and that from Iseland, Errick and his Son
Lieffe, passed a little after into Groenlandt where they established some
Colonies of Norwegians: And the same History says, that Lieffe had some
Combats with the Ancient Sekreglingres and Native Inhabitants of the Country,
and that those of Norway held but a small part in the East Coast of Groenlandt,
the Sekreglingres keeping the rest within the Country; and that what the
Norwegians possessed and knew in Groenlandt, was not the hundredth part; but
that there were diverse People, governed by several Lords, of which the
Norwegians had no knowledge.

Its Fertility.
They say, that in several parts of Groenlandt there are Lands which bear as
good Wheat as any Ground in the World; and Chestnuts so large, that their
Kernels are as big as Apples; that the Mountains yield Marble of all sorts of
colors; that the Grass for Pastures is good, and feeds quantities of great and
small Cattle; that there are Horses, Stags, Wolves, Foxes, Black and White
Bears, Beavers, Martles, etc. That the Sea is full of great Fishes, as
Sea-Wolves, Dogs, and Calves, but above all of Whales; that the white Bears
live more on the Sea than on the Land; and that as the Black ones feed only on
Flesh, the White ones do on Fish, and are especially greedy of little Whales,
which causes a great Antipathy between them and Whales, who pursue them
wherever they can scent them: The Marhval, a strange kind of Fish.
That their Fish Marhval carries a Tooth or Horn so strong and long, that it
fights against and pierces the Whale, as the Rhinoceros does the Elephant: and
they assure us, that the Horn is of the same greatness, form, and matter, and
has the same properties as those which we here esteem in the Unicorns.

The Norwegians and Danes, who sometime since have passed into Groenlandt, say,
that the Language of its Inhabitants is so different from that of Norway or
Denmark, that there is little appearance they could descend either from the one
or the other; and that if formerly there have been any Colonies of Norwegians,
they are quite extinct. In 1636 the Danes which went thither to Trade, demanded
by signs, if beyond that ridge of Mountains there were any Men; the Savages
made them to understand, they were innumerable, higher, Its Inhabitants
and stronger than they; and that they used great Bows and Arrows, and would
not have any Commerce, nor suffer the sight of Strangers. The Habits of those
with whom the Danes traded (some of which they brought into Denmark) were of
Skins of Wild Beasts, their Shirts of the Entrails of Fish, and their Wastcoats
of the Skins of Birds with their Feathers.

These same Relations make mention of an Old and New Groenlandt; this
descending toward the South, the other mounting toward the North; but that
some years since the North Seas have been so laden with Ice, that the first
ones not being melted before Winter, and the other having continued from time
to time, to add to them, and lie in heaps one upon the other, the Sun in the
end has not had power to break them, and in succession of time this way has
been stopped up, and the communication of Iseland with Old Groenlandt lost.

CANADIANE; In which may be considered The ARCTICK LANDS, called AMERICA
ARTICA, with its chief places; and such are, ISELAND, Bellested, Schalhod,
Holdon.
GROENLAND, Bearesord, Mudder Point, Trime Point, Warusick Foreland, Warwick
Sound, Cape Farwell, Resolution Isle.
NORTH WALES, Seahorse Point, Cape Pembrook.
SOUTH WALES, Hudsons Bay, James Bay, Cape Henretta Marie.

CANADA, or NEW FRANCE, with its chief Parts and Places; and such are those of
ESTOTILAND, Sir Tho. Smiths Foreland, Merchants Isles, Cape Charles, King James
Foreland, Cape Prince Henry, Hope advanced, Ganse Bay, Slapers Haven, Clapmuts
Bay, Orang Bay, Hollandsche Bay.
SAGUANA, Quebeck, Tadousac, Bay Savage, Breast, Port de Quartier, Port de St.
Nicholas, Chichekedec, Port Neuf, Jaus Coudres, Isle of Orleance, Sillery.
CANADA, Mont Real, Richelieu, Point Verte, Croipapequiac, Cape de l'Evesque,
Assumpsion Isle, Isle of Plate, Isle of Birds, Isle of Ramec, New Foundland,
Isle of Brien, Isle of Cap. Breton, Isle of St. John.
ACADIE, Martengo, Macomode, Paspay, Port de Rosignal, Cape de Sable, Port
Royal, Cape de Mines, Isles of Forchu. de Sable.

NEW ENGLAND, Boston, Plymouth, Charlestown, Dorchester, Cambridge, Ulielands
Isle, Long Isle.
MARYLAND, Mary's Town, Calverton, Herrington.
NEW YORK, -- New York. VIRGINIA, James Town, Elizabeth Town, Dales Gift,
Wicocomoco, Pouhatan, Bermuda, Secotam, Cape Henry, Smiths Isle, Isle of
Paquiwock, Croatoan, Wokokon.

CAROLINA, -- Charlestown. The HURONS, St. Peter, St. Francis, Alexis, St.
Michael, St. Joseph.
Isle of BERMUDES, Southampton, Harington, Pagets.
FLORIDA, St. Hellens, Port Royal, St. Matthews, St. Augustine, St. Jago.



CANADA, OR New France.
UNder the name of CANADA, or New France, we esteem that which is on both sides
the great River of Canada or St. Laurence, with the Isles that are before its
Mouth, unto, and so far as this River is known; and from the Gulphs and
Streights of Davis and Hudson, unto New Spain or Mexico. In this extent we have
the Isles of New Foundland, Terra di Librador, Canada, which communicates its
name to the rest, Acadia, Saguenay, the Irocois, the Hurons, the Algonquins,
with about a hundred other sorts of people, whose names are known.

The Isles of NEW-FOVND-LAND, or according to the Biscains, New Foundland.
of Bacallaos, that is, of God-fish, are so called by reason of these Fishes
here found in such great quantity, that sometimes they seem to hinder the
sailing of Ships; in like manner are they found in the Gulf or Bay of St.
Laurence. Besides the Cod-fish here are other sorts of Fish in great plenty, as
Thornback, Ling, Salmons, Oysters, etc.

The greatest of these Isles, and which commonly takes the name of
New Foundland is 4 or 5 Leagues circuit. It is situate betwixt the degrees of
46 and 53 of Northern Latitude, and is severed from the Continent of America by
an Arm of the Sea, and is distant from England about 600 Leagues. A Country
ill-inhabited toward the East and South, the Inhabitants being retired farther
within Land; but the English have of late settled some Colonies to maintain
their Fishing-Trade. Its Inhabitants.
The Natives are of a reasonable good Stature, and well proportioned; but
full-ey'd, broad-faced, beardless, and of an Oker complexion, not over
ingenious; their Houses are very mean, and their Apparel and Furniture worse.
The Country being for the generality reputed fertile, if well cultivated, and
would yield good Grains; is enriched by Nature with plenty of Fish, Fowl, and
wild Beasts, and is blessed with a wholesome Air, though the rigor of the Winter
season, and the excess of Heats in Summer do something detract from its, due
praise.

East of New Foundland is a great Bank, a thing as remarkable as any in all
Canada. This Bank is much different from those which are covered with Water
when the Sea is high; uncovered and dry on an Ebb: Saylors must shun such Banks
like death. This, which we now speak of, is like a Country overflown, always
covered with the Sea, and having at least 20, 30, or 40 Fathom water, for the
depth is unequal. Off from this Bank, on all sides, the Sea is no less than 200
Fathom deep; and yet this Bank is 200 Leagues long, 20, 25, and sometimes 50
broad. It is on this Bank that the New-found-landers, (that is, those Ships
that go to fish for Cods of New Foundland) do for the most part stop and make
their freight.

About this great Bank, and more toward the Main Land than the Ocean, there
are some others much less, but of the same nature. It is almost incredible how
many Nations, and of each how many Sail of Ships go yearly to fish for these
Cods, with the prodigious quantity they take; a Man being able to take 100 of
them in the space of an hour. The manner of Fishing.
They fish with Hooks, which are no sooner thrown into the Sea, but the greedy
Fish snapping the Bait is taken by the Hook, and drawn on Shipboard they lay
him presently on a Plank; one cuts off his head, another guts it and takes out
its biggest bones, another salts and barrels it, etc. Which being thus ordered,
is hence transported by the English and other European Nations into all parts
of Europe, as also into the other three parts of the World. They Fish only in
the day time, the Cod (as they say) not biting in the night; nor does this
Fishing last all Seasons, but begins a little before Summer, and ends with
September: In Winter the Fish retires to the bottom of the deep Sea, where
Storms and Tempests have no power.

Another kind of Fishing.
Near New Foundland there is another kind of fishing for the same Fish, which
they call dried Fish, as the other green Fish. The Ships retire into some Port,
and every Morning send forth their Shallops, one, two or three Leagues into the
Sea, which fail not to have their load by Noon, or a little after: They bring
them to Land, lay them on Tables or Planks, and order it as the other; but
after the Fish has been some days in salt, they take it forth, exposing it to
the Air and Wind, lay it again in heaps, and return it from time to time to the
open Air till it be dry. That this Fish may be good, it must be dried in a good
and temperate Air; Mists moisten it, and make it rot; the Sun hardens it and
makes it yellow.

At the same time they fish for Cods, green or dry, the Fishers have the
pleasure of taking Fowl, without going forth of their Vessels. They take them
with a Line as they do fish, baiting the Hook with the Cods Liver; these Fowl
being so greedy, that they come by flocks, and fight who shall get the Bait
first, which soon proves its death: and one taken, the Hook is no sooner thrown
out again, but another is caught in the like nature. But enough of these, and
of Cod-fishing.

In the year 1623, Sir George Calvert, Knight, the Principal Secretary of
State, and afterward Lord Baltimore, obtained a Patent of part of
New Foundland, which was erected into the Province of Avalon, where he settled
a Plantation, and erected a stately House and Fort at Ferry-land, where he
dwelt some time: And after his death it fell to his Son, the Right Honorable
Caecilius, late Lord Baltimore, also Proprietor of Maryland.

CANADA taken particularly, is on the Right hand, and toward the lower part of
the great River; The River Canada.
and its name is communicated both to the River and Neighboring Country. This
River is the largest of America Septentrionalis, and one of the fairest in the
World: It is about 200 Fathom deep, and at its Mouth 30 Leagues broad. Its
course (according to the report of those of the Country) is already known for 4
or 500 Leagues; and there is some likelihood that we may in the end discover,
that the Lake which seems to be its head-Spring, disburthens it self into the
Sea by two or three different courses; one toward us, which is that of Canada;
another toward the West, and above California; the third toward the North,
and into the Christian Sea; and that the Mouth of this may show us the way we
have so long sought, to go to the East Indies by the West.

People with whom the French Trade. Their Colonies.
The People with whom the French trade here are the Canadans, the Hurons, the
Algonquins, the Attiquameques, Nipisiriniens, Montagnets; those of Saguenay,
Acadia, etc. And to this purpose they have diverse Colonies on the great River
at Tadousac, at Quebeck, at Three-Rivers, at Sillery, at Richelieu, at
Montreal, and without the Bay of Chaleur, at Miscou, at Port Royal, etc. This
Trade is only managed by Exchange; they give the Skins of Bevers, Otters,
Martles, Sea-Wolfes, etc. for Bread, Pease, Beans, Plumbs, Kettles, Cauldrons,
Hatchets, Arrow-heads, Pinchers, Coverlids, etc. But to instruct them in
Christianity, many Ecclesiastics of Religious Orders have had diverse
disbursements, and residences; likewise an Hospital and Seminary of Vrsilines:
The Jesuits have the chief care of these Houses.

North of Canada is ESTOTTILAND, Estottiland.
or TERRADE LABRADOR near Hudsons Straight; it is called sometimes the Land of
Cortereal, and sometimes new Britany; however, I esteem it a part of new
France; the Country is Mountainous, Woody, full of wild Beasts, well furnished
with Rivers, rich in Metals, of a fertile Soil in most places, and would produce
grains, fruits, etc. if its Inhabitants would give it tillage. South of Canada
are New England, New York, Maryland, Virginia, and Caroline; of which in Order.

New England described.
NEW ENGLAND, North of Maryland according to the report of Captain Smith, has
seventy miles of Sea Coast, where are found diverse good Havens, some of which
are capable to harbor about five hundred sail of Ships from the fury of the
Sea and winds by reason of the interposition of so great a quantity of small
Isles which lie about the Coast to the number of about two hundred. And
although it be seated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, yet the Climate is
more uncertain as to heat, and cold, than those European Kingdoms which lie
parallel to it. Yet the Air is found very healthful and agreeable to the
English, which has occasioned the settlement of diverse Potent Colonies here
who live very happily, and drive a considerable Trade for their provisions to
our American Plantations, especially to the Barbados. This Country is Inhabited
by diverse sorts of people, the chief amongst which are the Bessabees about the
River Renobscot; and the Massachusetes, a great Nation, The Native Inhabitants.
and every one are governed by their particular Kings, and do much differ in
Customs and Manners from one another, as they do in the other parts of America,
living generally at variance with each other; Their chiefest riches is in their
Furrs and Skins which they sell to the English in truck for Commodities; they
are for the most part ingenious, well disposed, and with little pains would be
brought to Christianity. This Country is for the generality of a fertile soil,
is well watered with Rivers, has plenty of Fish, as Cod, Thornback, Sturgion,
Their Fish.
Porpuses, Haddock, Salmons, Mullets, Herrings, Mackeril, Plaice, Oysters,
Lobsters, Crab-fish, Tortoise, Cockles, Muscles, Clams, Smelts, Eels, Lamprons,
Drums, Alewives, Basses, Hollibuts, Sharks, Seals, Grampus, Whales etc. Here
are great variety of Fowl as Phesants, Partridges, Pigeons, Heathcocks, Fowls.
Oxeyes, Geese, Turkeys, Ducks, Teal, Herns, Cranes, Cormorants, Swans, Brants,
Widgeans, Sheldrakes, Snipes, Doppers, Blackbirds, Loon, Humbird, with diverse
others too tedious to name. They have also great plenty of Beasts both tame and
wild, as Cows, Sheep, Goats, Swine, and Horses; Beasts.
and for wild Lions, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, Martins, Rackoons, Mooses,
Musquasus, Otters, Bevers, Deer, Hares, Coneys, etc. Amongst the hurtful things
the Rattlesnake is the most dangerous; and here are several sorts of stinging
Flies which are very troublesome to the Inhabitants. Trees.
Here are sundry sorts of trees as the Oak, Cyprus, Pine, Cedar, Chestnut,
Walnut, Firr, Ash, Elm, Asp, Alder, Maple, Birch, Sassafras, Sumach, etc. also
several Fruit Trees, as Pomgranates, Maracocks, Puchamins, Olives, Apples,
Pears, Plumbs, Cherries, Grapes, Fruits.
with those common in England. And their ground also produces Potatoes,
Carrots, Turrips, Parsnips, Onyons, Cabbages, with most of the Roots and Herbs
found in England, The soil being very agreeable for them. But the fruits are
not found here so good as in Virginia, nor in Virginia as in Caroline, as lying
more Southwards, and having the greater influence of the Sun. This Country
affords several rich Furrs, has Iron, Amber, Pitch, Tarr, Masts, Flax,
Linen, Cables, Its Commodities.
and Grains in great plenty. The English which now Inhabit this Country are
very numerous and powerful, having a great many Towns several of which are of
considerable account, and are governed by Laws appropriate to themselves, and
have their Courts of Judicature, and assembling together, each Town having two
Burgesses for the looking after the affairs of the Colony. Government.
And as to matters of Religion and Church Government, they are very strickt,
and make a great show, being much of the stamp of the ridged Presbyterians.
Amongst their Towns these are of chief note. 1. Boston, commodiously seated for
Traffic on the Sea Shore; Its chief Towns.
at present a very large and spacious Town, or rather a City being composed of
several well ordered streets, and graced with fair and beautiful houses, which
are well inhabited by Merchants, and Tradesmen who drive a very considerable
Trade; It is a place of great strength, having two or three hills adjoining, on
which are raised Fortifications with great Pieces mounted thereon which are
well guarded. 2. Charles Town seated on and between the Rivers Charles and
Mistick; it is beautified with a large and well built Church, and near the
Riverside is the Market place from which runs two streets, in which are diverse
well built houses. 3. Dorchester, an indifferent Town seated near the Sea. 4.
Cambridge commodiously seated on a River, does consist of several streets, and
is beautified with two Colleges, and has diverse fair and well built houses.
5. Reading commodiously seated about a great Pond, and well Inhabited. 6. St.
Georges Fort seated on the mouth of the River Sagadebock. 7. New Plymouth,
seated on the large Bay of Potuxed. With diverse other Towns of some account,
most of which bear the Names from those of England; but amongst the Indians are
known by other names.

New York described.
NEW YORK, formerly New Netherland is seated betwixt New England and Virginia;
It is now called New York from his Royal Highness the Duke of York the
Proprietor thereof, by grant from his Majesty. It is a Country of a fertile
soil, is well watered with Rivers, and is found to produce the same Beasts,
Birds, Fowls, Fish, Fruits, Trees, Commodities, etc. and in as great plenty as
New England, so they need not be taken notice of here. This Country is also
possessed by sundry sorts of people, not much unlike those of New England, and
are very expert at their Bow and Arrows, which is their chief weapon of War;
are found to be of a ready wit, and very apt to learn what is taught them; in
their Religious Rites diverse ceremonies are observed amongst them, Its Native
Inhabitants.
and are said to worship the Devil whom they much fear; their Priests being
little better than Sorcerers, who strangely bewitch those silly people. When
any woman finds her self quick with child she keeps her self chaste from man
until her delivery, the like she observes in the time of her giving suck, a
strange Custom which our European Dames would not well relish; upon the least
offense the man turns away his wife, and marries again, and the Children
begotten by her she keeps; Furnication is here permitted; they are very
dutiful to their Kings, they believe the transmigration of the soul, and
concerning the Creation of the world have strange foolish opinions. They are
much addicted to sports, recreations, and dancings, and observe Festival times.
Their habit is but mean as the rest of the Indians, yet do they paint and
besmear their faces with several colors, which they hold Ornamental; their
diet and habitations are also mean; Here is one very considerable Town now
called New York, being well seated both for security, trade and pleasure in a
small Isle called Mahatan regarding the Sea made so by Hudsons River, which
separates it from Long Island: The Town is large containing about 500 well
built houses, and for Civil Government it has a Major, Aldermen, Sheriff, and
Justices of the Peace, for security of the Town here is raised a Fort called
James Fort, a place of considerable strength; The Town is Inhabited by Dutch as
well as English; and has a considerable Trade with the Indians, and is like to
be a place of considerable Account.

Province of Maryland described.
MARYLAND, is South of Virginia, from which it is severed by the River
Patowmeck. The Bay of Chesopeak, giving entrance to Ships into Virginia, and
Maryland passes through the heart of this Province, and is Navigable for about
200 miles, into which fall the Rivers of Patowmeck, Patuxent, Severn, and
Sasquesahanough, which lie on the West side of the Bay, and to the East those
of Choptanke, Nantecoke, Pocomoke, with some others to the great improvement of
the soil. The Country of late years since the felling the Woods, and the people
accustoming themselves to English diet, is very healthful and agreeable to
their Constitutions few dying at their first coming, of the Countries disease
or seasoning; and as to temperature of the Air, the Heats in Summer nor the
Colds in winter are offensive to its Inhabitants. Its soil.
The soil is rich and fertile naturally producing all such Commodities as are
found in New England, and does abound in the said several sorts of Beasts, and
Fowl, both tame and wild; has also the same Fish, Fruits, Plants, Roots,
Herbs, Trees, Gums, Balsams, etc. but the Fruits are more excellent and in
greater plenty; here Mulberry trees grow wild, and were the people industrious,
the Silk trade might be soon brought to perfection, but their employment is
altogether taken up in planting and ordering their Tobacco, Trade.
which is the only and Staple Commodity of the Country which they vend for
such necessaries as they have occasion for. They yearly freighing about one
hundred sail of Ships there with. People.
The Natives as to their Complexion, Stature, Costoms, Laws, Religions,
Dispositions, Habit, Diet, etc. are much the same with the Indians in the other
parts of America, and are of diverse Tribes or sorts of People, and each
governed by their particular King. This Province of Maryland is by Patent
granted to the Right Honorable the Lord Baltimore and to his Heirs and
Assigns, being absolute Lord and Proprietor of the same, having Royal
Jurisdictions and Prerogatives both Military and Civil, as making of Laws,
pardoning of Offenses, conferring of Honors, Coining of Money, etc. and in
acknowledgment thereof paying yearly to his Majesty and his Successors two
Indian Arrows at Windsor Castle on Easter Tuesday. This Province is severed
into ten Counties, viz. five Eastwards, Division of the Province into Counties.
and five Westwards of Chesopeak Bay, and in every County there is held an
inferior Court every two months for small matters, from which there lies
Appeals to the Provincial Court at St. Maryes, and each County have their
Sheriffs, Government.
and Justice of the Peace. The English which are reckoned about 16000 have
begun of late to build some Towns, which it is hoped in few years will come to
good perfection, as Calverton, Herrington, and Harvy-Town, all commodiously
seated for the benefit of Trade, and convenience of Shipping, but the principal
Town is St. Maryes, seated on St. Georges River, beautified with several well
built houses, where his Lordship Charles Lord Baltimore, has his House, and
where the general Assemblies and Provincial Courts are held, and public
Offices kept. But his Lordship's general Residence is at Mattapany about eight
miles distant, where he has a fair and pleasant house.

Virginia by whom first descovered.
VIRGINIA is said to be first discovered by Sir Francis Drake (as indeed all
this tract of Sea Coast) and was so named by Sir Walter Rawleigh in honor of
Queen Elizabeth, who then Reigned; but before it was brought to any perfection
much time was spent with no small expense, and loss of men's lives. And about
the Reign of K. James, a Patent was granted to certain persons, as a
Corporation, and called the Company of Adventurers of Virginia; but upon diverse
misdemeanors and miscarriages about the year 1623, the Patent was made void,
and has been since free for all his Majesty's Subjects to Trade unto. It is
situate Southwards of Maryland, Its Bounds.
and has for its Eastern limits the Atlantic Ocean. It is blessed with a good
Air, and the Clime of late since the clearing of woods is found very agreeable
to the English, so that few die of the Country disease called seasoning. Its
Fertility.
The soil is so fertile that an Acre of ground commonly yields 200 bushels of
Corn, and is very apt to produce what is put therein, as English Grains, Roots,
Seeds, Plants, Fruits, etc. besides those appropriate to the Country and other
adjacent parts of America; and it is observed that their Fruits (which are in
great abundance and of various sorts) for goodness may compare with those of
Italy or Spain, which are esteemed the best in Europe. They have great
abundance of Beasts, Fowl, and Fish, Its Beast, Fowl and Fish much the same as
in New England.
which I have taken notice of in New England, and their Turkeys are said to
weigh about six stone; amongst their small Birds is the Mock-Bird which
counterfeiteth the notes of all Birds, for which it is esteemed excellent. Its
Commodities.
The Commodities which this Country does or may produce, are Flase, Hemp, Woad,
Madder, Potashes, Hopps, Honey, Wax, Rapeseed, Anniceseed, Silk (if they would
make it Mulberry Trees here growing in so great plenty) several sweet Gums and
excellent Balsomes, Alome, Iron, Copper,; several sorts of Woods, Plants, etc.
used by Dyers, Pitch, Tarr, Rosin, Turpentine, sundry sorts of rich Furrs,
Elk-skins, and other Hides, but above all Tobacco, which is their principal
Commodity, and the standard by which all other Commodities are prized; but it
were to be wished the Inhabitants would employ their time about other
Commodities as well as Tobacco, and they would soon find the profit, and their
Tobacco would not be such a drugg as now it is. Its Rivers.
This Country is well watered with several great and strong Rivers which loose
themselves in the Gulf or Bay of Chesopeak, which gives entrance for Shipping
into this Country, as well as to Maryland; and is a large and capacious Bay
found very commodious for Shipping, being said to run up into the Country
Northwards above 200 miles; amongst the Rivers those of most note are Pawhatan
now James River, found Navigable about 150 miles; Pamaunke now York River, also
large and Navigable about 60 miles; and Rapahanock which is long and Navigable
about 120 miles; And near or adjoining to these Rivers for the convenience of
Shipping the English are seated, and have some Towns, Its chief places.
the chief of which is James Town commodiously seated on James River, a neat
Town, and beautified with well built Brick Houses, and here are kept the Courts
of Judicature, and Offices of public concern for the Country. Next to James
Town may be reckoned Elizabeth, a well built Town, seated on the mouth of a
River so called. Also Dales-gift, Wicocomoco, Bermuda, and others. The
Governor of this Country is sent over by his Majesty, and the Country is
governed by Laws agreeable with those of England; and for the better observing
the same, the Country possessed by the English, is divided into the Counties of
Caroluck, Charles, Gloucester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New Kent, Its division
into Counties.
Lancaster, Middlesex, Nansemund, Lower Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland,
Rapalianock, Surrey, Warwick, Westmorland, the Isle of Wight, and York, and in
each of these Counties are held petty Courts every Month, from which there may
be Appeals to the Quarter Court at James Town. As to the Natives which here
Inhabit, they are much of the nature of those already treated of, so I shall
omit them here. Only say that it is the Habitation of diverse sorts of Indians,
which have no dependence upon each other, being of particular Tribes, and
having their peculiar King to govern them, every Indian Town being the
habitation of a King, and these people do rather live at enmity than amity
together.

Its situation bounds.
CAROLINA a Colony not long since established by the English, and is that part
of Florida adjoining to Virginia, in the Latitude of 36 degrees, and extends
it self to that of 29, which makes it extreme Southern bounds; on the East it
is washed with the Atlantic Ocean, and on the West it has that large tract of
Land which runs into the Pacifick Ocean. It is a Country blessed with a
wholesome and temperate Air, the heat in Summer, nor the cold in Winter (which is
so much as to check the growth of Plants, Trees, etc. the several fruits and
plants having their distinct seasons) being no ways troublesome to its
Inhabitants, but very agreeable to the English; and being found thus healthful
has occasioned several persons to remove from the Bermudes to settle here, who
dwelling in so pure an Air durst not venture in any other Country. Nor do those
from the Bermudes only remove hither, but from most of the American
Plantations, as well as from England, it being esteemed by all one of the best
Colonies that ever the English were Masters of, for here is altogether Health,
Pleasure, and Profit, centered together, which cannot be met with in so large a
measure in any other part of the Indies. This Country has first Inhabited by
the English about the year 1660, and became a Proprietorship, which his present
Majesty King Charles the Second, The Proprietors.
granted by Patent, to the Right Noble George Duke of Albemarle, the Right
Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon, William Earl of Craven, Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury, John Lord Berkley, Sir George Cartwright, Sir Jo. Colleton, and Sir
William Berkley, and to their Heirs and Successors; and the said Lords
Proprietors having by their Patent power to Establish a Government, and make
Laws for the better regulation thereof, and the inviting of Inhabitants, have
formed a Model so well framed for the good and welfare of the Inhabitants, that
it is esteemed by all judicious persons without compare. The Natives of
Carolina according to the observation of one Ledener, (who made three several
journeys from Virginia to Carolina about the Year 1670, for a discovery of
those parts, The Native Inhabitants.
and the nature and disposition of the Inhabitants) are said to be of a ready
wit and good understanding, they instruct their Children in such things as
relate to their Families, and Country, which is so preserved from Generation to
Generation. They worship one God, as Creator of all things, to whom their High
Priest offers Sacrifice, but believes he has something else to do than to
regard Humane affairs, committing them to lesser Deities, viz. to good and evil
Spirits, to whom their inferior Priests make their devotion and Sacrifice.
They believe the transmigration of the soul, and when any one dies they interr
with them provisions and Housholdstuff for the next World, which they fancy to
be beyond the Mountains, and Indian Ocean. In their Marriages they are very
Superstitious; for the generality they are of a good and honest meaning, much
addicted to mirth and dancing, and above all are much prone to Honor and
Valor which they place above all other virtues. They are great favorers of
the English, living together in love and friendship, and upon all occasions
ready to contribute their assistance unto them. The Country is by them divided
into several Kingdoms, and the people in the one keep no correspondence with
those that border upon them, often waging War against one another. The Soil is
rich and fertile, and produces excellent Fruits, as Apricocks, Peaches,
Grapes, of which the English have made good Wine; Olives, of which good Oil is
made; Wallnuts, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Its Fruits.
Cherries, Figgs, Mulberries, Strawberries, Water-Mellons, Marachocks, Quinces,
and other Fruits known to us in Europe, which for goodness are no wales
inferior to them, and in the Southern part Oranges, Limes, Pomegranates, and
Pomecitrons, and the earth is generally very apt to produce and bring to
maturity Corn, all sorts of Garden Herbs, Roots, etc. Commodities.
The Commodities which this Country does and may produce are Wines, Oils, Silk,
Mulberry-trees growing wildly, Cotton, Indico, Ginger, Tobacco, Masts for
Shipping which for length, streightness and bigness are the best in the World,
etc. And it is believed that here may be made more Wines, Oils and Silk than
England will vent. Besides the Mulberry-trees, here are Cedar, Oak, both white
and red, Its Trees.
Poplar, Bay, Ash, Pine with diverse others whose names are not yet known. The
Woods are well stored with Pheasants, large Turkeys, Partridges, Fowls.
Turtle-Doves, Pigeons, great variety and plenty of small Birds, also Deer,
Hares, Conies etc. The Country is well watered with Rivers, which with the Sea
sufficiently furnish the Inhabitants with excellent Fish and such common in
Virginia; here are great plenty of wild Fowl, as Geese, Cranes, Herons, Swans,
Curlews, Heath Cocks, Oxeys, Brants, Dotterels, Widgeons, Teal, Duck and
Mallard in an undestroyable quantity. Here are at present two considerable
Settlements, viz. at Albemarle River in the North, and at Ashley River in the
middle of the Country which is likely to be the scale of Trade for the whole
Country as being very commodiously seated for Shipping, and in a healthful
place.

In all these parts, which we have passed under the name of CANADA, the the
people are very barbarous, having neither Religion, nor Learning. Diverse people
have diversity of Languages: they count their years by the course of the Sun,
their months by that of the Moon, their four Seasons by any remarkable thing
happening in them. They are of a middle stature, The People of Canada.
well proportioned, disposed to running and swimming, of an olive or tawny
color, because they go for the most part naked, often anointing themselves
with a certain Oil to hinder the Flies from tickling them; they wear few
Ornaments on their bodies, though their Women do; making themselves Necklaces,
Bracelets and Scarfs, formerly of Fishes, Shells, Porcelain, etc. now of Glass,
Crystal, and Toys, carried hence.

Customs observed among them.
They make Feasts at their Marriages, at their Victories, at the reception of
their friends; and take much Tobacco. They eat sometimes the flesh of their
enemies which they have taken in the War, and fed well before, whom they kill
with excessive cruelties. They use Bows and Arrows, in which they are very
expert.

FLORIDA.
FLORIDA may be esteemed a part of New France, since the French were the first
that established there any Colony, by the consent of the people of the Country.
It may likewise be esteemed part of New Spain, since at present the Castilians
have two Colonies under the Jurisdiction of the Audience of S. Domingo, one of
the four Audiences of New Spain, but these two Colonies are so weak, and so
near the one to the other, and the Country is so that that is not considerable.
We may say, that Florida is between new France, and new Spain, and that it
extends it self from the River of Palmas, which bounds it from the Province of
Panuco in new Spain, unto the River Jordan, which divides it from Virginia,
which I have esteemed in Canada or New France. Its Coast.
The greatest part of its Coast is on the Gulf of Mexico, which flows on its
South: Another part on Mer del Nort, which washes it on the East: Between this
Gulf and the Sea, Florida stretches out a Peninsula toward the South; where
the Cape of Florida is not distant from the Port of Matnasas in the Isle of
Cuba, above 35 or 40 Leagues. The more Western Coast of Florida, reaches 450
Leagues, the Eastern 150; the Peninsula between both, advancing 150 Leagues
from the Coast, and not being above 60 or 75 Leagues broad, makes yet another
Coast of 350 Leagues; so that all Florida has not much less than 1000 Leagues
of Coast on the Sea.

The Castilians have no Colony on the Gulf of Mexico, nor on the Coast, where
the French have formerly been. Those two Colonies they have here, are St.
Augustine, and St. Matthew, 15 or 16 Leagues one from the other, on the Eastern
Coast of the Peninsula, and there where it approaches the Coast, where the
French had settled: the North and West of Florida is enclosed with Mountains,
which divides it from New France, and New Mexico. St. Augustine which is the
best, and strongest of the two Colonies, was taken and pillaged by Sir Francis
Drake in Anno 1585.

Florida first discovered by the English.
FLORIDA was first discovered in 1496 by the English, under the Conduct of
Sebastian Gabott, whom Henry the Seventh, King of England, sent to seek by the
West a passage to fall into the East: he contented himself to have seen the
Country yet unknown, and to make report thereof to his Master; afterward
better searched into by John de Ponce of Leon, Also by John de Ponce and others.
who in 1512 would have established a Colony for his Master the King of
Castile, were it not for the resistance of the Country made against him, who
oftentimes made him retreat, and at last forced him to return to Puerto Ricco
of which place he was Governor; where, on a desperate wound in his last
encounter, which he there received, he ended his life. In 1524 Lucas Vasques of
Aillon, and some other Spaniards, landed diverse times at Florida, with no other
design than to take away its Inhabitants, whom they transported to Hispaniola,
and Cuba to work in their Mines, wherein they had already consumed the greatest
part of its Inhabitants. Pamphilus Narvaes was likewise there in 1528, who
traversed it as far as the Mountains of Apalachi, where he hoped to find Gold.
The most famous landing that the Spaniards have ever made in Florida was in
1534, Ferdinand Soto his landing here.
under the conduct of Ferdinando Soto; who being rich with the spoils he had
gained, in his Conquest of Peru, led hither 350 Horse, and 900 Foot, with which
force he traversed Florida almost on all sides, without endeavoring to bind a
Colony; much molesting those of the Country, by whom he was in like manner
turmoyled, during the many years he coasted it; till in the end, not finding
those riches he expected, he died with grief, and was buried at the bottom of a
River, for fear lest his body should fall into the hands of his Enemies. His
people returned in 1543, there remaining about 30 Horse, and 300 Foot. All the
advantage Soto received by his travel, was, the giving the name of Florida to
the Country, either because he arrived there the day of Pasquae Floriae; or
because that, landing, he found the herbs and flowers in their prime and
verdure. In 1549 the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the Council of the Indies
thought it not good to send any more Armed men, but rather some Religious
persons, to sweeten the fierce humors of these barbarous people Lewis of
Barbastre, Lewis of Barbastre a Benedict massacred here.
of the Order of St. Benedict went with some other Fathers; but presently those
of the Country seized and massacred him, with his two Companions, fleaing them,
and hanging their skins at the doors of the Cabanes; the rest saved themselves,
by retiring into those Ships that brought them.

The French were not in Florida, save under the Reign of Charles the Ninth.
Francis Ribaut was sent in 1562. He made alliance with those of the Country,
and built the Fort Caroline on the River May. Ribaut being returned to France,
with promise to bring thither more people: but too long delaying his return,
his men grew diffident and mutinous, and built a strange kind of Vessel, and
with the small stock of provisions they could stow in her, put to Sea, where
they endured so great want, that they were forced to cast lots to eat one
another; which fell first to him who had been the cause of their discord.

An Exploit of the Spaniards.
Rene Laudoniere returned in 1564, restored the Fort Caroline; but the
Castilians, jealous to see this establishment near their New Spain, resolved to
drive them thence: they landed with show of no design against the French; but
their intentions were otherwise, for in the end they surprised the Fort, out of
which Laudionere could scarce save himself, took Ribaut on the Sea who had
before been Shipwrack'd; hanged the Soldiers, and flead Ribaut, as Lescarbott
says.

Another by the French.
In 1567 Dominic de Gourgues, a Gascon, and of Mont de Marsan, made an attempt
of his own head to revenge this Affront: he put to Sea at his own expense, with
a hundred and fifty Soldiers, and eighty Mariners; landed in Florida, and with
the aid of those of the Country, who affected the French, retook Caroline from
the Spaniards, with two other Forts which they had new built; caused them to be
hanged on the same trees whereon they had hanged the French; razed the Fort,
and returned into France in 1568, where he had no small trouble to clear
himself for his exploit.

The fertility of Florida.
Florida being between the twenty fifth or thirtieth and fortieth Degrees of
Septentrional Latitude, the Country cannot choose but be good, their Woods and
Forests are well clothed with trees, as lofty Cedars, large Oaks, Cyprus and
Bays, trees of a large proportion, also great store of that wood called by the
French Sassafras; as also another tree called Esquine, the Bark of which trees
are an excellent remedy for many distempers, especially the French Disease. And
in these Forests and Woods are found all sorts of Beasts and Fowl; the Country
is well stored with several sorts of Fruits, as Grapes, Cherries, Plumbs,
Mulberries, Chestnuts, etc. It is enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver, but in
no great plenty, nor much regarded by the Natives. It is well watered with
fresh Streams, which are stored with variety of Fish, and Crocodiles, which
they eat; they have all sorts of Fowl and Venison as we have. The people are of
an Olive-colour, great stature, Its Inhabitants, as to their Stature, Habit,
Customs, etc.
but well proportioned; their hair is black which they wear very long; their
women do far exceed other adjacent Nations in handsomness, which makes them
much desired by Strangers, and their shape and beauty is more discernable in
that they go naked till their Purgations, and afterward only they make use of
skins of Beasts, taken in hunting, which they embellish with Feathers, of
diverse colors, which they tie about their waists, and hangs down to their
knees, only to hide their Privities; and their Arms, Back, Breast, Knees, and
other parts which are exposed to sight, are stained with several sorts of
Paintings, not to be washed off, which is esteemed a great ornament among them.
They bear some reverence to the Sun and Moon; they are accounted very crafty,
cunning, deceitful, revengeful, and much addicted to War; their Arms are Bow
and Arrows, as are almost all the Americans; they know the nature of their
Herbs, and have Flowers of fine colors; they pass a part of the year in the
Woods, where they live on Hunting; and part near the Lakes, Rivers and Sea
where they Fish. They have a Custom among them, that is, the Women when their
Husbands die, do cut of their hair, and strew it on his Sepulcher, and are
restrained from marrying again till their hair is long enough to cover their
Shoulders. The Country yields great plenty of Mayz, which is their natural
bread, which they sow and reap twice in one year: this Grain they gather, and
put into public places, and distribute it to every Family as occasion requires.

The manner of their Whale Fishing.
Their Whale Fishing is made with a cunning and boldness, which those of Europe.
dare not attempt. The Fisherman having discovered one, enters into his Canott,
then leaps upon his back, and there riding takes his time to plunge a stick
into one of his nostrils; and what ever endeavor he uses, though he plunge
under water, he holds fast; and expecting his rising, fastens another stick on
the other side, and then retires with a cord fastened to these sticks; the Whale
not able to breath, grows weak; and then by little and little, he draws it to
the shore, where assisted by his Companions, he cuts it in pieces, drying it to
make Flowr, and of that Flowr Bread, which lasts a long time.

The people of Florida are governed by their Paraousti's, who lead them to War
where they kill the men, but preserve the women and children; they have their
Jovona's, or Sacrificers, who serve as Physicians, and to whom they bear
honor. Their Paraousti's being dead, are interred with many Ceremonies;
living, are much feared and obeyed. They have many wives, among which one is
esteemed the chief, whose children may hope for the charge and dignity of their
Father.

The House of Paraousti Ovade (when Captain Albert was there to beg of him some
provisions; besides diverse movables and ornaments) was hung as high as a Pikes
length with Tapestry, made of rare Feathers, and of most beautiful colors,
composed of such Artifice, that they were worth the most part of ours. The
Coverlid of his Bed was white, tissued in diverse copartiments and with a fringe
of Scarlet about it.

Rivers in Florida.
Rivers of most note in Florida are: 1. Rio de Flores. 2. Rio de Spirito
Sancto. 3. Rio de Neives. 4. Rio Grande. 5. Rio Secco. 6. Rio Garunna. 7. Rio
Charente. 8. Rio Axona, and some others.

Chief Towns.
Chief Towns (or rather Cottages) in Florida, are: 1. St. Hellens. on a
promontary so named. 2. Port Royal, a good and well frequented Haven, seated on
the mouth of a River so named. 3. St. Matthews, 4. St. Augustine. 5. St.
Phillip. 6. St. Jago, once (if not at present) possessed and fortified by the
Spaniards, with some others of less note.

The ISLES of BERMUDES.
EAst of Virginia and Florida we have the Isles of BERMVDES, so called from
John Bermudes, a Spaniard, by whom it was first discovered; also called the
Summer-Islands, from the Shipwreck which one Sir George Summers, an
Englishman, there suffered: It is about 15 or 1600 Leagues from England, 400
from Hispaniola, and only 300 from the nearest Coast of Virginia and Florida.
Of these Isles the greatest, called St. Georges, Its Parts.
is five or six Leagues long, and almost throughout not above a quarter, third,
or half a League broad; the others are much less. All together make a body
which form a Cressant, and enclose very good Ports; as those of Southampton,
Harrington, Pagets, the Great Sound, Dover, and Warwick.

Its Air.
The Air is almost always serene, sometimes moist and hot, but very healthful,
agreeing well with the English Bodies, who have here at diverse times settled
and established a fair and powerful Colony, and have strongly fortified the
Approaches, which at present are very difficult; and the Earth is exceeding
fertile, yielding two Crops a year; The Earth fertile.
their Mayz they gather in July and December: They have excellent Fruits, as
Oranges, Dates, Mulberries, etc. They have plenty of Tortoises, which is their
ordinary food, and the Hogs which the Spaniards formerly carried thither are
excellent, and much increased; they have many Sea-birds, and other' Fowl; they
have no fresh Water but that of Wells and Pits, there being neither Fountain
nor Stream in these Islands. They have no venomous Beasts, their Spiders not
being poisonous, but of sundry and various colors; No venomous Beast here.
and in the Hot weather they make their Webs so strong, that ofttimes Birds are
entangled and catched in them. Cocheneil and Tobacco, with some Pearls and
Amber, Its chief Commodities.
are their principal Riches, for which they have a good trade. Their Governor
is sent them by the King of England, who governs them by our English Laws, whom
they also own as their Supreme; and it is observed, that scarce any are found
to die but with Old age.

MEXICANE, with its several Audiences of MEXICO, whose Provinces, with their
chief Places, are those of FLORIDA, St. Hellens, Port Royal, St. Matthews, St.
Augustine, St. Jago, Naguater.
MEXICO, particularly so called, Mexico, Chulula, Tezcuco, Quitlavaca,
Queretaro, Mestitlan, Cuyocan, Acapulco.
PANUCO, St. Jago de los Valles, Pabuco, St. Lewis de Tempue.
MECHOACAN, Mechoacan, Colima, St. Philip.
THASCALA, Thascala, los Angelos.
GUAXACA, Antequera, Spiritu Sancto.
TABASCO, Nos. Sen. de la Victoria. JUCATAN, Merida, Campeche.

GUADALAJABA, whose Provinces, with their chief Places, are those of
GUADALAJARA, Guadalajara, St. Maria de las lagos.
XALISCO, Compostella, la Purification, Xalisco.
CHIAMETLAN, St. Sebastian. CULLACAN, St. Michael, P^ast^^.
CINALOA, St. John. LOS ZACATECAS, Zacatecas, Nombre de Dios.
NEW BISCAY, St. John, St. Barbara.
QUIVIRA, St. Fee. ANIAN. CIBOLA, Cibola. CALIFORNIA, Port de Montere. Port de
Roque.

GUATEMALA, whose Provinces, with their chief Places, are those of GUATEMALA,
St. Jago the Guatemala, St. Salvador, la Trinidad, St. Michael, Xeres.
VERA PAX, Vera Pax. SOCONUSCO, Guevetlan. CHIAPA, Cuidad Real. HONDURAS,
Valadolid, Gratias di Dios, Truxillo, St. George de Olancho.
NICARAGUA, Leon, Granada, Jaen.
COSTARICA, Cartago, Nicoya, Castro de Austrio.
VERAGUA, la Conception, Trinadad, Sancta Feo, Parita.

St. DOMINGO; In which are the Isles of ANTILLES, or CAMERCANES, otherwise
called the Isles of LUCAYES, and the CARIBE Isles; the chief among which are
those of CUBA, St. Jago, St. Spiritus, Porto del Principe, St. Christophoro.
JAMAICA, St. Jago, Port Royal, Passage, Melilla.
HISPANIOLA, St. Domingo, Porto del la Plat^, St. Jago, Monto Christo.
SAONA, St. Juan del puerto Rico, St. Germain.
BOREQUEM, St. Juan del Puerto Rico. St. CRUX. St. CHRISTOPHERS, Sandy point,
Basse terre.
NIEVES. ANTEGO. MONT SERRAT. GUADELOUPE. MARIGALANTE, MARTINIQUE. St. OLOUZIA.
BARBADOS, St. Michaels, Little Bristol, St. James, Charles Town.
St. VINCENT. GRENADO. BARBADA. ANGUILLA. DOMINICA.


MEXICO, OR New Spain.
MEXICO, or NEW SPAIN, is the fairest and most famous part of America
Septentrionalis, and sometimes the Spaniards, comprehended under this name all
that America: We may esteem that which belongs to the Catholic King for the
greatest part; in which we shall have several Provinces, and all comprised
under four Audiences or Courts of Parliament: viz. that of St. Domingo; of
Mexico, which bears the particular name of New Spain; of Guadalajara, or Nova
Gallicia; and of Guatimala.

The Audience of St. Domingo.
The Audience of St. DOMINGO has under it all those Islands which are before
the Gulf of Mexico; then Florida which is North-West of them, and in America
Septentrionalis; and Venezuela, New Andalousia, and Rio del Hacha, which are
toward the South of them, and in America Meridionalis.

The Audience of Mexico, and its Provinces.
The Audience of MEXICO has the Provinces of Mexico, Panuco, Mechoacan,
Tlascala, Guaxaca, Tavasco, and Jucatan. That of Panuco is North of Mexico;
Meochan, West; Tlascala, East; Guaxaca, Tavasco, and Jucatan, continuing
likewise toward the East. The two last lie wholly upon Mer del Nort; Guaxaca,
and Tlascala, on the two Seas of North and South; Mexico and Mechoacan only on
that of the South, and Panuco on that of the North.

The Audience of Guadalajara, and its Provinces.
The Audience of GVADALAJARA contains the Provinces of Guadalajara, Xalasco, Los
Zacatecas, Chiametlan, Cinaloa: some add New Biscany, and others likewise
Cibola, Quivira, Anian, California, etc. New Biscany, and Los Zacatecas, touch
not the Sea; Guadalajara, little; to wit, between Xalisco and Chiametlan: and
these begin on Mer del Sud. Others advance themselves far into that which they
call Mer Vermejo or the Red Sea, the Isle of California being on the other side.

The Audience of Guatimala, and its Provinces.
The Audience of GVATIMALA, South-East of that of Mexico, continues between the
Seas del Nort and del Sud, advancing toward America Meridionalis.

There are under it the Provinces of Guatimala, Soconusco, Chiapia, Vera Pax,
Honduras, Nicaragua, and Castorica: and these two last lie on both Seas;
Honduras and Vera Pax on the Gulf of Honduras, toward the Mer del North;
Chiapa, within Land; Guatimala, and Soconusco, on the Mer del Sud.

The Audience of MEXICO, so called from its principal City; now known by the
name of Nova Hispania; and by this City of Mexico the Spaniards began to make
themselves absolute Lords of all these Quarters. Which before their arrival was
very populous; but in the space of 16 or 17 years, destroyed above six Millions
of its Inhabitants by cruel and unchristian-like deaths, as roasting some,
cutting off the Members of others, putting out the Eyes of others, casting
others alive to be torn in pieces and devoured by wild Beasts, and the like
horrid deaths; and only to act their Tyranny over them, rather than to reduce
them to obedience, which might have been otherwise obtained without shedding so
much Blood. The City of Mexico described.
This City was called by its ancient Inhabitants Tonoxtitlan, and was the
residence of their Kings, and is at present the fairest of all America, seated
in the midst of a Lake, in some places 10 Leagues long, and 7 or 8 broad,
having 25 or 30 Leagues circuit: It is not joined to the Main Land, but by 3
Caus-waies, of which, that toward the West is but 3 quarters of a League long;
that toward the North a League and an a half, and the last, 3 Leagues. It was
by this last that Cortez and the Spaniards made their approaches, and took the
City. All this Lake is salt; but there falls into it another almost of the same
bigness, which is fresh, and good to drink; both together are 45 or 50 Leagues
circuit, in which are said to be about 50000 Wherries continually seen to row
and carry Passengers; they have about 50 Burgs or Towns on their Banks, whereof
some have once been esteemed great Cities: The salt Lake yields quantity of
Salt, the other so much Fish, that its Fishing has been farmed for 100000
Crowns yearly. In this City may be found 4000 Natural Spaniards, 30000 Indians
or Americans, (there having heen formerly 200000) 20000 Negroes; and its
Jurisdiction contains 250 Towns, of which some have their Schools; more than
3000 (some say 6000). Estancia's, that is, Farms; and in all 500000 Americans
Tributaries. The residence of a Viceroy, etc.
It is the residence of the Viceroy of America Septentrionalis, as also of an
Archbishop, and many other Officers of Justice of the Mint, and of the
Inquisition. It has a famous Academy, 150 Monasteries for the one and the
other Sex. It is distinguished (as under its Ancient Kings) into these
Quarters, which at present are called that of St. John, of St. Maria the Round,
of St. Paul, and of St. Sebastian, and of St. James, formerly Tlatelulco. In
this last, which is very great and the fairest, is the Palace of the Viceroy,
the House of the Archbishop, the Court of Audience, the Mint, and other
Offices. In this City of Mexico is a Cathedral Church, which was begun by
Cortez with so much haste, that to raise two Columns, for want of Materials
they made use of the Stones which had made part of the Statues of the Idols.
Here is also a Printing House, several Houses of Jesuits, Dominicans,
Franciscans, Augustinians, and other Religious Orders; some Colleges,
abundance of Hospitals, and other public Buildings; all of great state and
beauty. They have here four things which are remarkable for Beauty, viz. their
Women, their Apparel, their Horses, and their Streets.

Chulula described.
Among those places which are, or have been on the two Lakes of Mexico, Chulula
is reckoned one of the fairest; scarce excepting that of Mexico, with which it
in times past contended as well for state as bigness, once containing near
20000 Houses, and beautified with so many Temples as there are days in the
year. The People were said to be so addicted to Idolatries, and so barbarous in
their bloody Sacrifices, Its Inhabitants
that it sacrificed yearly no less than 5000 Infants of both Sexes on its
Altars before its Idols. Tezcuco described.
Tezcuco, once twice as great as Sevil in Spain; its Streets are fair and
large, its Houses stately and Beautiful, and adorned with many Conduits and
Aquaeducts, which furnished them with fresh Water; though seated on the brinks
of the Salt-Lake of Mexico. Quitlavaca, Quitlavaca described.
built on diverse little Islands like to Venice, was joined to the Continent by
a Caus-way made of Flint-stones of about a League long, but narrow; called by
the Spaniards, Venezuela, containing about 2000 Houses. Yztalpalapa,
Yztalpalapa described.
seated part on the Lake and part on the Banks, with a Paved way to Mexico,
from which it is distant two Leagues: once a large City, having no less than
10000 well built Houses, which were plentifully supplied with fresh Waters from
its many Ponds, as well as its beautiful Fountains. Queretaro has two
Fountains, Queretaro described.
of which one is so hot, that its Waters at first burn, being cold, fatten
Cattle; the other runs four whole years continually, and ceases other four
whole years; having likewise this property, that it increases in dry, and
diminishes in moist and rainy weather. Mestitland described.
Mestitlan, once of good repute, containing about 30000 Inhabitants, seated on
an high Hill, begirt about with pleasant Groves and fertile Plains, which
affords excellent Fruits, and very good Grains. Cuyocan, of about 50000 Houses,
and Mexicaltzingo of about 4000, Cuyocan and Mexicaltzingo described.
both upon the Lake, were in times of Paganism adorned with many beautiful
Temples, so rich, that at a distance they seemed to be made of Silver; but now
their luster is decayed, most of them being converted to Monasteries and
Religious Houses. Acapulco, a City and Port on Mer del Sud, Acapulco described.
seated on a safe and capacious Bay, full of convenient places or Docks for
Ships to ride in, so that it is said to be the safest Haven of all those Seas;
it is distant from Mexico 100 Leagues. The Mexicans keep here some Vessels, and
trade to the Philippines, and to China, from whence they are distant 3000
Leagues.

The Air of Mexico.
The Air of Mexico is sweet and temperate, though situate under the Torrid
Zone, the Heats thereof much qualified by the cooling Blasts, which rise from
the Sea on three sides of it, as also by the frequent refreshing Showers, which
always falls in June, July, and August, which is their hottest Season of the
year: The Soil is so fertile that they gather their Crop twice a year; yet want
they good Wine and good Oil by reason of the Summer-Rains. Its fertility.
It is believed, that no Country in the World feeds so much Cattle, some
private persons having 40000 Oxen or Cows, others 15000 Sheep, etc. and an
infinite number of tame Fowl, as Hens, Turkies, etc. whence it comes that Oxen,
Sheep, Goats, Hogs, and tame Fowl are hardly worth the buying. Their Horses are
excellent, the Race coming from the best of Spain.

Mines in Mexico.
There are few Mines of Gold, though many of Silver, about Mexico; as those of
Comana, Fuchuco, Archichica, Temozcaltepeque, Zacualpa, Tasco, Ymiquilpo, Cu
Tepeque, Talpajava, Zumpango, Guanaxuato, and others. And these Mines are not
so rich as those of Peru; but easier wrought, and with less expense and loss of
Men. The principal Riches of the Country, after their Silver, Gold, Iron and
Copper, are their Grains, Fruits, Wool, Cotton, Sugar, Silk, Cocheneel, the
grain of Scarlet, Feathers, Honey, Balm, Amber, Salt, Tallow, Hides, Tobacco,
Ginger, and diverse Medicinal Drugs. Its Inhabitants
The Natives of this Country are more ingenious than the rest of the Savages,
and are much civilized since the Spaniards had to do here; they are excellent
in many Mechanical Arts, especially in making fine Pictures with the Feathers
of their Cincons, which is a little Bird living only on Dew, and place their
Colors so well, that the best Painters of Europe admire the delicacy, they far
exceeding a piece of Painting. They have some memories of their Histories, make
use of certain Characters instead of Letters of our Alphabet; their Tongue was
extended so far as they could extend their Dominion, though in diverse Provinces
there were diversity of Languages: They are excellent in refining of Metals,
expert Goldsmiths, and curious in Painting upon Cotton.

The Plant Magney, a very great rarity.
Among their Rarities of this Country there is a most admirable Plant called
Magney, from which they extract several things; it has on it about 40 kinds of
Leaves, which are fit for several uses; for when they are tender they make of
them Paper, Flax, Thread, Cordage, Girdles, Shoes, Mats, Mantles, Stuffs, etc.
upon them grow Prickles so strong and sharp, that they make use of them instead
of Saws, also they serve for Needles. The Bark, if it be roasted, makes an
excellent Plaster for Wounds; from the top Branches comes a kind of Gum, which
is a sovereign Antidote against Poison: from the top of the Tree comes a Juice
like Syrup, which, if seethed, will become Honey; if purified, Sugar: they make
also Wine and Vinegar of it, and it affords good Wood to build with.

In this Country are two Mountains, one which vomits flames of Fire like Aetna,
and another in the Province of Guaxaca, which sends forth two burning
streams, the one of black Pitch, and the other of red. The Kings of Mexico were
rich and powerful in regard of their Neighbors, having no less than 2 or 3000
Men for their ordinary Guard, and having been able to raise 2 or 300000 Foot;
among the 25 or 30 Kings, which were his Tributaries, some could arm 100000
Men; their Revenues vast, which they raised out all Commodities, as well of
Natural as Artificial, which the King received in kind, participating of the
Fruits of all Men's labor, and sharing with them in their Riches. Their Palaces
were magnificent, both that within the City, and those in diverse parts of the
Kingdom; they kept great Attendance, lived in great Pomp, were much reverenced
of their Subjects; in their Vestments stately, being adorned with Gold, Pearl,
and Precious Stones, wearing a rich Crown resembling that of a Duke; their
Coronations held with great pomp, at which times they used bloody Sacrifices of
Men and Children, which for the most part were their Enemies, but sometimes
their own; their Temples were stately, with many Idols whom they worshipped;
which were attended with abundance of Sacrificers or Priests; and to excite
their Soldiers to valor, they used three degrees of Honor or Orders of
Knighthood, which according to their merit were conferred upon them; the first
was distinguished by a red Ribband, the second called the Tiger or Lion-Knight,
and the third the Gray-Knight; which among other things were privileged to
apparel themselves in Cotton in a different habit, and to adorn themselves with
Gold and Silver, which things are prohibited to others.

The descent of the Mexicans.
Moreover, the present Mexicans descended not from the Ancient Inhabitants of
the Country, but from diverse People, which had their residence in the North,
and not unlikely from that which we call New Mexico. The History they produce
of the manner how they came from these quarters at diverse times, of the time
which the one and the other, and particularly of him whom they last employed in
their Voyages, those Ceremonies they observed, and likewise the name of their
chief Mexi, seems to accord somewhat with the Voyage of Moses and the Hebrews,
when he led them to the Land of Promise. These People becoming Masters of
Mexico, formed a considerable Government, and gave it diverse Kings. Montezuma,
under whom Ferdinand Cortez entered the Country, was but the ninth in number.

The story of the Ynca-Mango-Capac, and his Wife Coya Mama-Oelho.
The Ynca-Mango-Capac, and his Wife Coya Mama-Oelho, were the first that led
them to a human and civil life, they made themselves be believed to be Brother
and Sister; Children of the Sun and Moon; and that they had been sent here
below for the good of Men. And with this belief they withdrew them from the
Mountains, Caves, and Forests, and gave them the first knowledge of the Law of
Nature. Ynca-Mango-Capac taught Men how to till the Earth, to graft Plants, to
feed Flocks, to gather the best Fruits, to build Houses and Cities, etc. Coya
Mama-Oelho, learnt Women how to Spin, Weave, Sow, make Habits, etc. and above
all instructed, that their principal care ought to be to serve and obey their
Husbands, and feed and instruct their Children.

And these People finding themselves in a better and more reasonable way of
living than before, easily submitted themselves to the Government of these
Ynca's; addicted themselves to the Religion they taught them, which was to
adore the Sun, as that Star which above all the rest did most visible good to
Men, Beasts, Grains, Fruits, Plants, etc. and so soon as these Ynca's knew the
affection of the People, they raised Arms, assembled Troops, and reduced to the
same Government and the same Religion many neighboring People; but still more
by sweetness than force: and in the end, composed an Estate or Empire, which
for its greatness and riches, and likewise for its Laws, was one of the most
considerable of the World. And if we should put in parallel the Politics of
the Ynca's of Peru, or of those of Mexico, with them of the Greeks and Romans;
Acosta maintains that these would have the advantage, and that the Ynca's had
so great a care of the good and repose of their Subjects, that there cannot be
found in all History any King or Emperor that ever bore himself with so much
sweetness, freedom, and liberality toward his People, as did the Ynca's, Kings
of Peru and Mexico. So soon as a Province entered under their Obedience, they
made Channels every where to water the Lands; and that these Lands might be the
more commodious for Tillage, they caused to be laid level what was unequal,
evening by degrees what was too steep: The Lands proper for Tillage were
divided into three parts, viz. for the Sun, for the King, and for the
Inhabitants of the Country; and if these were in so great number, that the
third part of the Land was not sufficient for their food, so much taken from
the Third of the Sun and of the King, as was needful.

The Lands being equally parted according to the ability of every Family, the
labor began with those of the Orphans, Widows, the old and impotent, and
Soldiers when they were in War; after these, every one labored and cultivated
his own: then those of the Curacca's or Governors, which were to be after the
Private persons; those of the King and of the Sun were the last. And this Order
was so religiously observed, that a Governor having caused the Field of a
Kinsman of his to be tilled before that of a poor Widow, was hanged in the
Field he caused to be tilled before its degrees: so careful were they of the
Poor. Besides this labor for the Tillage of the Lands of the Sun and the
Ynca's, Private persons were obliged to make Clothes, Hose, Shoes, and Arms for
the Soldiers, as also for those whom Age or Sickness made incapable of Travel
or Labor. The Wool or Cotton was taken from the Flocks; and on the Lands
belonging to the Sun and the Ynca's: and each Province gave only what was easy
and common, and each Private person only his labor: young Men under 25 years,
Men above 50: Women and Lame people were exempt from these Tributes. They made
no account of Gold, Silver, or precious Stones, but for their adornment,
beauty, and splendour, nor needing wherewith to buy Victuals or Clothes; their
Lands and ordinary Occupation yielding and furnishing them with what ever was
necessary. Yet if at their hours of leisure they could discover any, they made
a Present of it to their Curaca's: these to the Ynca, when they went to salute
him at Cusco, or when the Ynca visited his Estates; and then it was employed
either for the Ornaments of the Royal-house, or the Temples of the Sun. The
Temple of the Sun at Cusco.
The Temple of the Sun at Cusco was so stately, and enriched with so much Gold,
Silver, and precious Stones, that it is incredible. In this Temple, besides the
principal Apartment which was for the Sun, there was others for the Moon,
Stars, Lightning, Thunder, Thunderbolt, and Rainbow, which was the device of
the Ynca's. They esteemed the Stars as waiting-Maids, which followed the Moon,
and all the rest Executioners of the Justice of the Sun; to whom alone they
sacrificed Sheep, Lambs, Rabbits, Fowls, Spices, Henbs, Habits, Their
Sacrifices. Their Priests.
etc. besides Men and Children, as was said before. The Priests of this Temple
were all Descendants of the Ynca's. In the Temples of other Provinces it
sufficed, that they were descendants of the Privileged Ynca's, Curaca's or
Governors of those Provinces. They called Privileged those to whom the
Ynca-Mango-Capac had communicated this Title for them and their Children; but
ordinarily the great Priest was Uncle, Brother, or one of the nearest kin to
the Ynca.

To make appear the Riches in some respect of this Temple, The richness of the
Temple.
that which enclosed the diverse apartments of the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. were
all wainscotted with Plates of Gold. The Sun, placed on his Arter toward the
East, was of one Plate of Gold much thicker than the others, and the Figure in
the same manner as our Painters here describe it; viz. a round Visage,
environed with Rays and Flames. At the taking of Cusco, this piece, or the
Image of the Sun, fell to Maneca serra de Lequisano, a Castilian; who being a
great Gamester, lost it one Night at play; which made it to be said, That he
had played away and lost the Sun in a dark Night, long before it was day. On the
two sides of the Sun were the Bodies of the Kings or Ynca's, deceased, ranged
according to their times, and enbalmed in such manner that they appeared
living: They were seated in Thrones of Gold, raised upon Plates of the same,
and accommodated in degrees or ascents: The Bodies of the Queens were according
to the same order in the apartment, and on both sides the Figure of the Moon,
where all the Ornaments, Doors, Wainscots, Thrones, etc. were of Silver. Near
this Temple was a Garden, where the Herbs, Plants, Flowers, Trees, and where
Beasts of all sorts, as also Birds, even to Butterflies and Flies, were of Gold
and Silver; and so lively represented, that they seemed Natural. And there were
likewise of these Gardens near the Palace of the Ynca's, and near the Houses of
the Virgins vowed to the Sun. In all the Provinces there were Temples of the
Sun, built after the model of those of Cusco, but not so rich: Here the Virgins
that vowed to the Sun were taken from the Curaca's, or the fairest in the
Province: Of these the Ynca or King might make use; but not of those of Cusco,
being reserved only for the Sun, and which the Ynca himself might not see.
Though these Ynca's and their People adored not, nor made any Sacrifice but to
the Sun, yet the most knowing among them esteemed, much beyond the Sun, the
Pachachamac, that is, the Author of the Universe; The Opinion of the Ynca's.
but whom, not seeing, they contented themselves to adore in their inward
parts. They had likewise some knowledge of the Deluge, believing that the Souls
could not die, and that the Bodies should revive. Their Amauta's or
Philosophers addicted their principal study to the Morals, cared little for the
Metaphysics, Medicine, or Astronomy; yet observed the Equinoxes, the
Solstices, and called the Eclipses the Anger of the Sun, and the Sickness or
Sleepiness of the Moon, from which they wakened her by making great noises.
Their Poesies were on diverse honest Subjects; their Comedies and Tragedies on
diverse accidents of human life, or on the Victories and Triumphs of their
Ynca's or Curaca's. But we are entered too far into this matter: The Ynca G. de
la Vega says, that there is Subject to many Volumes if we would recount all
observable and good in the ancient Government of Peru, touching the Order
established, to know the number of Persons that was in each City and each
Province; what was its Revenue; what Forces might be raised; touching the
Judges, the Curaca's or Governor, and other Officers of Policy or for the
Militia; touching the public Magazins for Provisions, clothes, and Arms;
touching their Ceremonies in their Sacrifices, in their Feasts, in their
Funeral Pomps; in their mourning a whole year after the death of their Kings;
likewise in the establishment of their Colonies; of their Schools; of their
Post-houses on great Rods, which they had built so stately that the Romans had
not the like. The Spaniards great enemies to the Menicans.
But, as he says, the best of these good Laws and Policy was abolished when
the Spaniards became Masters of the Country; adding, that if there were
Barbarism before the reign of the Ynca's, after them the Spaniards brought in
another worse than the first: The Inhabitants of the Country, for the most
part, not having what was necessary for life, whatever labor or service they
rendered their Masters; who ought to have contented themselves with the Riches
they had reaped, and may yet reap, from the goodness of the Country. The ransom
of Atahualpa, the pillage of Cusco, and the first incursion which the Spaniards
made into Peru, yielded them the value of 20 Millions of Ducats; but Pizarre
and Almagre, the two first Spanish Chiefs which conquered Peru, and put to
death Atahualpa; and in likelihood Guascar, likewise Brothers and Ynca's, were
so blinded with the Gold they found, and became so cruelly covetous, that each
seeking to have all, they began between themselves an unhappy War, and in the
end murdered, hanged, strangled, and beheaded one another till there was not
left one of them, their Children or Brothers, etc. By which God seemed not only
to have chastised their unbridled Ambition and insatiable Avarice; but to
revenge the Blood of the Ynca's they had unjustly slain, and their ill treating
the Indians.

Province of Panuco, and in fertility.
The Province of PANVCO is 100 Leagues long, and as many broad, divided by a
River of the same name into two almost equal parts: That which is Southward,
and toward Mexico, is the most fertile and best tilled; the other toward the
North, and Florida, being worse. Like wife, that which approaches the Sea is
worth much more than that within Land. The Castilians have established only
three Colonies, Its Colonies and chief places described.
of which St. Stevan del Puerto is the Metropolis, seated on a River of the
same name, and 12 Leagues from the Sea; the greatest Town of Traffic in this
Province, built by Ferdinando Cortez out of the Ruins of Panuco, once the chief
City of the Province till destroyed by him. Next, St. Jago de los Valles,
likewise on the same River, situate on an open Country, and therefore fenced
about with a Wall of Earth. And, Thirdly, St. Lewis de Tempico, seated on the
North Banks of the River Panuco, and near the Coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
These Colonies are so weakened by the incursions of the Inhabitants, who now
knock one on the head, and then another, that the best had not above sixty
Native Spantards, An. 1600. They have Mines of Gold in the Country, which are
not wrought; good Salt Pits, out of which they draw the greatest profit, etc.

The Province of Mechoacan and chief places described.
The Province and Bishopric of MECHOACAN, between those of Mexico and New
Gallicia, stretches on the Coast of Mer del Sud near 100 Leagues, advances
within Land from that Coast to the Zacatecas near 150 Leagues. Places of most
note are, 1. Colina, seated ten Leagues from the Sea, built by Gonsalvo de
Sandoval in the year 1522. 2. Zacatula, on the Mer del Sud, and at the Mouth of
a River of the same name. 3. Mechoacan, the Metropolis, which takes its name
from the Province so called, now the Seat of the Archbishop. 4. Zinzouza, once
the Seat of the Kings of Mechoacan. 5. Pazcuaro, once the Seat of the Bishop.
6. Valladolid, seated near a Lake as large as that of Mexico, once the Seat of
the Archbishop, till removed to Mechoachan. 7. La Conception de Salaga. 8. St.
Michael, built by Lewis de Velasco, then Viceroy of Mexico. 9. St. Philip,
built by the said Velasco at the same time, to assure the way going from
Mechoacan or Mexico, to the Silver Mines of Zacatecas: this way being often
pestered and frequented by the Chichimeques, Otomites, Tarasques, and other
barbarous and as yet unconquered People, who greatly perplex and annoy the
People that border upon them. Some place likewise in this Province the Cities
of Leon, of Zamora, of Villa de Lagos, and about 100 Towns, of which many have
their Schools.

The Soil of this Province, and its Commodities.
The Soil of this Province is very different, but every where fertile, and in
most places yields such great increase of all sorts of Grains, Fruits, etc.
that it hardly has its fellow in the whole World. It produces likewise
Cotton, Ambergreese, Gold, Silver, Coppers soft and hard; of the soft they make
Vessels, of the hard Instruments instead of Iron. They have black Stones so
shining, that they serve them instead of Looking-Glasses. They have store of
Plants, Medicinal Herbs, Mulberry-trees, Silk, Honey, Wax, etc. The Country is
said to be so healthful, and of so sweet an Air, Its Air.
that Sick people come hither to recover their health. It is well stored with
Rivers and Springs of fresh Water, which makes their Pastures exceeding rich
and fat. Cattle and Fowl are here found in great plenty, and their Rivers and
Lakes afford store of Fish.

The virtue of the Plant Gozometcath.
Between COLIMA and ACATLAN is found the Plant Gozometcath or Olcacazan, which
takes Blood-shot from the Eyes, preserves the strength of the Body, or restores
it to the Weak, cures the Tooth and Headache, resists all Poisons; and in fine,
is most excellent against all Diseases. Those of the Country will judge of the
event of any Sickness whatsoever it be, when they apply the Leaf on the party:
If they fasten easily, they soon hope a cure; but if they resist or fall off,
they expect nothing but a great and long sickness or death.

The Province of Thascala with is Cities described.
THASCALA, or LOS ANGELOS, is between Mexico and the Gulf of Mexico, from
whence it advances unto the Mer del Sud, stretching it self on the Coast of
this Sea 25 Leagues; on the other 75, or 80. Places of most note are, 1.
Thascala, which gives name to this Province; once the Seat of a Bishop, and
once governed in form of a Commonwealth, and exceeding populous. It had four
principal Streets or Quarters, which in time of War were each of them governed
by a Captain; and in the midst of these Streets it had a most spacious
Marketplace, which was always thronged with People for the negotiating of
their Affairs: It is situate on an easy ascent betwixt two Rivers,
encompassed with a large, pleasant, and fruitful Plain, about 20 Leagues in
compass. 2. Los Angelos, (or the City of Angles,) a fair City, built by
Sebastian Ramirez, Anno 1531, now the Bishops Seat. 3. Vera Crux, built by the
said Cortez, being a place of great concourse by reason of its near situation
unto the Gulf, from whence it is a thorough-fare to the City of Mexico, which
is distant from it 60 Leagues. Its Port of St. Joan de Vlva, though but bad, is
in some esteem, being the best on the Mer del Nort, and held more commodious
than that of Mexico. 4. Zempoallan, seated on a River of the same name, the
Inhabitants whereof did Ferdinando Cortez* good service in his conquest of
Mexico. Beside those Towns or Cities, they count in this Bishopric or Province
200 Towns, 1000 Villages, and 250000 Indians under its Jurisdiction, which are
exempted from all extraordinary charge and imposition, because of their
assisting the said Cortez in his conquest of Mexico. The Country is more hot
than cold, fruitful in Corn, Mayz, Sugar, Wine, The fertility of the Province.
Fruits; feeds much Cattle, full of rich Pastures, well watered with fresh
Streams. In the Valley of St. Paul was a Country man possessed of 40000 Sheep,
which were the product of only two, which were brought him from Spain. The
Inhabitants are much of the same nature and condition with those of Mexico
aforesaid.

The Province of Guaxaca, with its chief places described.
GVAXACA is between the Mer del Nort and Sud. The Plain of the Province makes a
Lozenge, whose 4 sides are each 75 Leagues, or little more. Its Cities are, 1.
Antequera, a Bishprick, and which sometime communicated its name to the
Province. It is seated in the Valley of Guaxaca, and adorned with stately
Buildings, and beautified with a magnificent Cathedral Church, whose Columns
are of Marble, and of a prodigious height and thickness. 2. St. Jago, seated in
the Valley of Nexapa, but upon a lofty Hill. 3. St. Ilefonso, on a Mountain in
the Province of Zapoteca. 4. Spiritu Sancto, in the Quarter and on the River of
Guaxacoalco, near the Mer del Nort. 5. Cuertlavaca, of note for a Labyrinth,
not far distant, hewed out of a Rock. 6. Aquatulco, a noted Port on the Mer del
Sud, well frequented by those who transport the Merchandises of Europe and
Mexico to Peru; a place of great Riches till plundered by those two eminent
Travelers Drake and Cavendish, both Englishmen; besides those places, there is
said to be 300 Towns, and as many Estancia's or Hamlets, which are inhabited by
the Natives of the Country, which pay Tribute to the Spaniards. The diverse
Quarters of this Province are all fertile, not only in Grains, The fertility and
commodities of this Province.
but also in Fruits, Cocheneil, Silk, Cassia; and the Earth well stored with
Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals, and almost all the Rivers stream down
sand-Gold. Here is also a kind of Almond, which they call Cacao, which they
make use of instead of Money.

The Province of Tavasco described.
TAVASCO is only a Coast of an 100 leagues long, between Guaxaco and Jucatan,
scarce 25 Leagues broad between the Province of Chiapa and the Sea; the Country
is full of Pools and Marshes toward the Coast, Wood and Forests toward the
Mountains; and the Rains being continual for 8 or 9 Months in the year, the Air
is very humid; and its situation being much under the Torrid Zone, it
engenders an infinite number of Vermin, Gnats, and Insects, yet the Soil is
excellent, Its fertility and commodities. Its chief Colony.
abundant in Mayz and Cocao, which is their principal Riches. There is
observable here but one Colony of the Spaniards, which they call Villa de
Nuestra a Sennora de la Victoria, so called because of the Victory Cortez
gained in 1519 against those of the Country, when he went to the Conquest of
the Kingdom of Mexico. It was called Potonchan when it was besieged, taken and
sacked by Cortez; and it is observed, this was the first City in America which
defended it self, and which suffered under the Spaniards Sword.

The Province of Jucatan, with its chief places described.
JVCATAN is the last Province of the Audience of Mexico toward the East. It is
a Peninsula of about 400 Leagues circuit, situate between the Gulphs of Mexico
and Honduras. The Isthmus which joins it to the Main Land, is not above 25 or
30 Leagues over, from whence the Country continues enlarging it self from 50 or
75 Leagues breadth, and ends at Cape de Cotoche, which regards toward the East
Cape St. Anthony in the Isle of Cuba, at the distance of 60 and odd Leagues.

The Coasts of JVCATAN are very much cumbred with little Isles, which often
prove dangerous for Ships; but covered with abundance of Sea-Fowl, which those
of the Neighboring and far distant Countries come to chase. The Isle of
Cozumel.
The Isle of Cozumel, to the East, has formerly been famous for its Idol
Cozumel, which all the People of the Neighboring Continent went to adore. And
it was in this Isle, or the Continent near unto it, that Baldivius
unfortunately saved himself, having been Shipwreckt near Jamaica, he had taken
a little Boat (like to those used by Fishermen, The Misfortune that befell
Baldivius here.
wherein going with about 20 of his Men, he was brought hither by the Sea; but
no sooner had he set foot on Land, but he and his Men were seized by the
Natives; who immediately led them to the Temple of their Idols, where they
presently offered up, or sacrificed and ate him and four of his Men, and the
rest they reserved till another time. Among these, Aquilar, who had seen the
Ceremony, escaping with some others, fled to a Cacique, who treated him
courteously for many years, during which time some died, others married in the
Country. Aquilar in the end was fetched thence by Cortez, who was of no small
use unto him in his Conquest of Mexico, because that he had learned their
Tongue. The Air of Jucatan.
The Air of Jucatan is hot, the Country has scarce any Rivers, yet wants no
Water, being supplied every where with Wells; within the middle of the Land are
to be seen quantity of Scales and Shells of Seafish, which has made some
believe the Country has been overflowed. What it yields.
They have scarce any of the Corn or Fruits of Europe, but some others of the
Country; and quantity of wild Beasts, principally Stags and wild Bears; and
among their Fowls, Peacocks. They have yet found no Gold, much less Latten;
which makes it appear, that it is not true, that the Spaniards found here
Crosses of Latten, there being none in all America. The Cities of Jucatan are
four, Merida, Valladolid, Its Cities.
Campeche, and Salamancha. 1. Merida, is the Metropolis, being the Seat of the
Bishop and Governor for Tavasco and Jucatan, distant from the Sea on each side
12 Leagues: The City is adorned with great and ancient Edifices of Stone, with
many Figures of Men cut in the Stones; and because they were resembling those
which are at Merida in Spain that name was given it. 2. Valladolid, beautified
with a very fair Monastery of Franciscans, and more than 40 thousand Barbarians
under its Jurisdiction. 3. Campeche, situate on the shore of the Gulf; a fair
City of about Three thousand Houses, and adorned with many stately and rich
Structures, which in 1596 was surprised and pillaged by the English, under the
Command of Captain Parker; who carried away with him the Governor, the Riches
of the City, and many Prisoners; besides, a great Ship laden with Honey, Wax,
Campeche-Wood, and other rich Commodities.

The Conquest of the Kingdom of Mexico was much easier to the Castilians than
that of Peru; the Kingdom of Peru being Hereditary, and its Ynca's loved, and
almost adored by their Subjects; the Kingdom of Mexico being Elective, and its
Kings hated, if not by those of Mexico, yet by all the neighboring Estates,
and envied by those might aspire to the Royalty. This diversity was the cause
that Motezuma died, and the City of Mexico taken, there was nothing more to do
or fear as to that Estate. In Peru, after the death of Guascar and Atabalipa,
and some other Ynca's, the Spaniards could not believe themselves safe so long
as there was any remainder of the Race of these Ynca's; which made them under
diverse pretexts persecute, banish, and put them to death. And so much for
Mexico or New Spain.

The Audience of GUADALAJARA, or NEW GALLICIA.
THE Audience of GVADALAJARA, or Kingdom of NEW GALLICIA, makes the most
Occidental part of New-Spain, and contains the Provinces of Guadalajara,
Xalisco, Los Zacatecas, Chiametlan, Culiacan, Its Provinces.
and New-Biscany; some others add Cibola, and others likewise California,
Quivira, Anian, etc. that is, the Castilians pretend to extend their Power to
the farthest part of this New World.

The Province of Guadalajara, and its Cities described.
The Province of Guadalajara has only two Cities or Colonies of Spaniards, viz.
Guadalajara, and Sancta Maria de los Lagos, of which, the first is the chief of
the Province, built in 1531 by Nonnez de Guzman, after he had finished his
Conquest. It is the residence of the Kings Treasurers; dignified with the
Courts of Judicature, the Sea of a Bishop; beautified with a fair Cathedral
Church; a Convent of Augustine Friars, and another of Franciscans. It is
situate in a pleasant and fruitful Plain, and watered with diverse Fountains
and little Torrents not far from the River Baranja; the neighboring Mountains
having furnished them with Materials for their Buildings. Santa Maria de los
Lagos was built by the same Guzman, and made a place of great strength, only to
hinder the Incursions of the Chichimeques, who are a barbarous and untamed sort
of People, who border upon them toward the North-East; who live upon the
Spoils of other people, harboring in thick Woods and private Caves for the
better obtaining their Prey; which said Town keeps them in such awe, that they
dare not molest them.

The Air of this Province. The Inhabitants, etc.
The Air of this Province is temperate and serene; except it be in their Summer,
which is much troubled with Rains. The People (as generally throughout all
Gallicia) are crafty, very docil in matters of Religion, inconstant, impatient
of labor, much given to pleasures, delight in strong Drinks; their habit for
the most part is a Shirt of Cotton, over which they wear a Mantle, which they
fasten about their Shoulders: They are of a good Stature, and well
proportioned, little subject to sickness, nor knowing what the Plague is, they
ordinarily living 100 years. The Country is rather Mountainous than Plain, well
furnished with Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead, and Margasites, etc. but none of
Gold, Its fertility and commoditles.
Iron, or Steel: The Plains tilled yield ordinarily 100 for one of Corn, and
200 for one of Mayz; they have much Pulse, many Olive Trees, whose Fruit is
often spoiled by the Ants, as their Grains are by Pies. These Pies are no
bigger than our Sparrows, but in such quantity that where they alight, in a
little time they devour the whole Crop. Almost all the Fruits of Europe are
here found in great plenty, which for goodness surpass those of Spain. Their
Pastures likewise are rich, and feed abundance of Cattle.

The Province of Xalisco.
In the Province of XALISCO are the Cities of Compostella, the Metropolis of the
Province, built by the said Guzman; once a Bishops See, till removed to
Guadalajara; built in a Plain, but so barren, that it will scarce produce food
either for man or Beast, and with the disadvantage of so bad an Air, that made
it to be soon left. La Purification, a small City, built also by the said
Guzman, seated near the Port of Natividad on the Seaside. And lastly Xalisco,
so called from the Province; once of some account till destroyed by the said
Gazman.

The Provinces of Chiametlan, Culiacan, and Cinaloa described.
North-East of Guadalajara and Xalisco are the Provinces of CHIAMETLAN, whose
chief City is St. Sebastian, seated on a River of the same name; night to which
are many rich Silver Mines. The Province of CVLIACAN, whose chief Cities are
St. Michael, seated on the River of Women, built by Guzman, and Piastla seated
on a River so called, about two days Journey from the Sea; well built, and of
good esteem till the great damage it received from the Spaniards in their
Conquest. And lastly, the Province of CINALOA, whose chief City is St. John, an
ancient Colony of Spaniards. There are every where rich Mines of Silver, plenty
of Provisions, Fruits, Mayze, Pulse, and Cotton: their Inhabitants are great,
strong, and warlike; and particularly in Cinaloa, where they have made the
Spaniards abandon the City of St. John, who have rebuilded other-where that of
St. Philip and Jacob.

The Provinces of Los Zacatecas and New Biscany.
North of Guadalajara are the Provinces of LOS ZACATECAS, and new BISCANY.
Account is made of four Colonies in Los Zacatecas: 30 Towns and 4 famous Lodges
near the Mines, of which the principal are Los Zacatecas, inhabited by
Spaniards, who have here a Convent of Franciscans. Avino, Sombrarino, St.
Martin, and possibly St. Luke. The Cities are Xeres de Frontera, Erena, Nombro
de Dios, besides that in the Isthmus of Panaman and Durango. There are no
Cities spoken of in New Biscany, but only excellent Mines of Silver, at St.
John, Sancta Barbara, and at Eudes, which they esteem the best, built only for
the benefit of the Silver Mines, which the Spaniards enjoy. The Zacateca's want
both Water and Food, except toward Durango and Nombro de Dios: New Biscany
has Cattle and Grain. All these Provinces hitherto are not only of the
Audience, but likewise of the Bishopric of Guadalajara.

Above, and Northward of New Gallicia and the Audience of Guadalajara, we have
quantity of People and Provinces little known: we call them in general New
Mexico, because esteeming these quarters likewise under the name of Mexico,
they make that part of Mexico latest known; others pass them all under the name
of New Granada, and place here the City of Granada, which Herrerd makes in
Cinaloa, others in Cibola, and others in the Kingdom of Mexico taken
particularly: so little assurance is there of the Relations of these quarters.
However, here is observed diverse People very different in their Languages,
Manners, and Customs; some having fixed and settled Habitations, others
wandering after their Flocks: among the first there are some that have many
Cities, some containing in them about 30, 40, or 50 Thousand Inhabitants, and
in these Cities the Houses are built of Stone several Stories high. New Mexico,
taken particularly, has 10 or 12 of these Cities, New Mexico described.
whose Houses have their Chambers, Halls, Parlours, and other Conveniences,
very populous; among which the City called New Mexico is the chief, distant
from Old Mexico about 500 Leagues, being the residence of the Governor, where
the Spaniards keep a Garrison, and have changed its name to St. Fogie. Province
of Cibola.
Cibola has seven Cities, each of 3, 4, or 500 Families, and (with those which
remain in the Field) may make likewise 8 or 10 thousand Men. All these
Inhabitants are addicted to War, their Country tilled, and abounding in all
Victuals.

The Province of Quivira described. Its Inhabitants
QVIVIRA has not many Houses, nor over stored with People, and those that do
inhabit here are very rude, and barbarous; the Men cover their Bodies with the
Skin of an Ox ill accommodated, the Women only with their Hair, which they wear
so long, that it serves them instead of a Veil to hide their nakedness: they
live almost altogether on Raw-flesh, which they devour rather than eat,
swallowing it without any chewing: They live in Hoords or Troops, resembling
those of the Tartars; not having any certain abode, but remove from one place
to another, staying where they find good Pasture for their Cattle.

The Province of Anian described.
ANIAN is yet poorer than Quivira: the Spaniards have long since overrun both
the one and the other, but finding nothing of worth, neglected them; but after
all, there are Opinions much contrary, touching the temperature, fertility, and
situation of these two Provinces; some making them cold and barren, others
temperate and good.

California described.
CALIFORNIA has a long time been esteemed to be only a Peninsula; but the
Hollanders having taken on these Seas a Spanish Vessel, which had rounded it,
and made the Chart of it, who saw that it was an Isle, which extends it self
from South-East to North-West, and from the 23th degree of Latitude, to beyond
the 45th, lying along the West side of America. Its length is of 7 or 800
Leagues: Its breadth under the Tropic of Cancer, not above 20 or 25 Leagues;
from whence it still enlarges it self unto 150 Leagues toward the 40th degree
of Latitude. The Air has been found Cold, though in a situation which ought
to render it more hot than temperate. The Country ill peopled, they fish for
Pearls in Mer Vermejo, and on the East of the Coasts of California, and
likewise along and on the Coasts of New Granada, or New Mexico. Mark de Niza, a
Franciscan, his Relations of this place.


Mark de Niza, a Franciscan, made a Voyage into these parts in 1529, and at his
return recounted Marvels of what he had seen and understood; of People that
wore about their Heads pieces of Mother of Pearl, of diverse Provinces rich in
Gold, of Cities and Houses well built, whose Gates were adorned with Turquoises
and other Stones. That the chief City of Cibola was greater than Mexico: That
the Kingdoms of Marata, Acu, and Tonteac, were likewise very rich and powerful.
Also the description of these parts by Vasque de Cornada.


The Relation of this Friar caused Mendoza, Viceroy of Mexico, to send Vasque
de Cornada, Governor of New Gallicia, to search out the truth. Who, far from
finding the Riches he hoped for, found only people naked, very poor, rude and
barbarous; some Cities he found indifferently well built, but sadly furnished;
assuring us that the Kingdoms of which the Friar had made so much account of
were almost all Imaginary. Tonteac being only a Lake, about which there were
some few Habitations: Marata a thing invisible, and Acu a beggarly Town, in
esteem amongst them, only gathered some Cotton. Possibly the Friar said more
than he had seen, that he might incite the Spaniards to send some Colonies
hither, and have the Means to convert those People: And Cornada less, because
he found not that present profit which he did in his Government: however it be,
this contrariety, with those we have observed touching the City of Granada, and
the Provinces of Quivira and Anian, may make us see how dangerous it is to
trust those that come from parts so remote and unknown, whatever specious or
fair Habit they wear, or whatever good Tongue they have, or whatever
protestations they make of Truth.

The Audience of GUATEMALA.
THE Audience of GVATEMALA is between the Seas Del Nort, and Sud; and between
diverse Isthmus's and Tongues of Land, which are found in the most Southernly
part of America Septentrionalis. Its Provinces are Guatemala, Its Provinces.
Soconusco, Chiapa, Vera-Pax, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costarica, and Veragua.

The Province of Guatemala, with its Cities, described.
GVATEMALA and SOCONVSCO are on the Mer del Sud, Chiapa within Land; Vera-Pax
and Honduras on the Mer del Nort; Castaria, Nicaragua and Veragua, on both
Seas. Guatemala has 150 Leagues along the Coast, and advances within Land 30
or 40 Leagues. Here were built the Cities of St. Jago, of Guatemala, St.
Salvador or Curcatlan, La Trinidad or Conzonate, St. Michael, and Xeres de la
Frontera or Chuluteca; they are all upon, or little distant from the Sea:
Guatemala is more advanced within Land, and yet the principal, being the Seat
of the Bishop and Court of Audience. In 1541 this City was almost overwhelmed
by a deluge of boiling Water, which descending from that Vulcan which is above
and near the City, threw down, and tumbled over all that it met with, as
Stones, Trees, and Buildings; where it stifled many People, and among the rest,
the Widow of him who had conquered and so ill treated that Province. The City
was rebuilt farther to the East, and may have near 100 Houses, about 1000
Inhabitants, and its Country about 25000 Indians Tributaries. A certain private
Person had once a strange fancy came in his head, A strange fancy of a
private Person in these parts, and the event thereof.
that there was a very rich Mine of Gold in this Vulcan of Guatemala, and that
he needed but to find some way to put down a Cauldron, and draw out what he
could wish for, as one does Water out of a Well; he undertook the enterprise,
and caused to be made great Chains of Iron, and a great Cauldron, so strong,
that he believed the fire could not damage it; he caused a way to be made to
carry to the top of the Mountain his Chains, Caularon, and Machins, which were
to serve to let down and draw up his Caul^ron full of Gold, which he believed
to coin at the bottom of the Mountain; but he found the Fire so violent, that
in less than a moment of time he had neither Chains nor Cauldron. Which so
perplexed him with grief and shame to see his own folly; having not only spent
all his own Estate, but the best part of his Friends; so that he would have
precipitated himself into the Mountain, had he not been hindered; but in a short
time he died for anger and grief.

The sertility of this Province, withits Commodities and Trade.
The Country is colder than the situation may bear; and subject to Earthquakes;
has excellent Balms, liquid Amber, Bezoar, Salt, Grains; is full of rich
Pastures, which are well stooked with Cattle, plenty of Cotton Wool, excellent
Sulphur, store of Med^^inal Drugs, and abundance of Fruits; among others Ca^ao
in such great plenty, that it yearly lades many Vessels, which are transported
to other places. The Country is more inclining to Mountains than Plains, but
well watered with Rivers. The People are pusillanimous and fearful; Its
Inhabitants
the Men are expert at the Bow, and the Women at the Distaff: they are more
civil, and embrace Christianity more than their neighboring Countries do, and
are willing to receive Advice from the Spaniards, who are their Masters.

The Province of Soconusco described.
SOCONVSCO has only the little City of Guevetlan on the Coast, and nothing of
particular or worthy to be noted in it; only it has some Grains, feeds some
Cattle, its Rivers have Fish, and its People more barbarous and rude.

The Province of Chiapa described.
CHIAPA is not over fertile in Grains nor Fruits, but the Country well clothed
with lofty Trees, and some of which yield Rozin, others precious Gums, and
others bear Leaves, that when they are dried into powder make a Sovereign
Plaster for Sores. The Country is full of Snakes, and other venomous
Creatures. Places of most note in this Province are 1. Crudad-Real, built by
the Spaniards, situate in a round Plain at the Foot of a Hill, Its chief
places.
and begirt with Mountains resembling an Amphitheater; now the residence of a
Bishop, and governed by City-Magistrates, by them called Alcaides. 2. Chiapa,
seated in the fruitfullest Valley of the whole Country. 3. St. Bartholomews,
remarkable for having near it a great Pit, or opening of the Earth, into which
if any one casts a Stone, though never so small, it makes a noise so great and
terrible as a clap of Thunder. 4. Casapualca, a small Town, but famous also for
a Well it has, whose Waters are observed to rise and fall according to the
flowing and ebbing of the Sea.

Among the Bishops of Chiapa, one was Bartholomew de las Casas, of the Order of
St. Dominique, Some memorable actions of Bartholomew de las Casas Bishop of
Chiapa.
who having seen the Cruelties with which the Spaniards treated the People of
America, endeavored by diverse Remonstrances to hinder it for the future, and
to that end went into Spain; but finding no redress, wrote and printed a
Treatise of their Cruelties, which was endeavored to be suppressed, but some
Copies escaping, were translated and reprinted in Italian, and other Languages.

There are in this Relation things that can scarce enter into the belief of
man: He makes account, that in diverse parts of America and its Isles, the
Spaniards had put to death in his time (which was fifty years after their
Invasion of it) 12 or 15 Millions of Persons, The Spaniards cruelty toward the
Natives.
by several cruel and unchristian Is^^ Deaths, as by Fire, Hunger, Boiling of
them, impaling them; by the H^^^^^ and Sword; as also in excessive Labors in
the working in their Mines, in earrying of heavy Burdens, like Horses, and the
like Cruelties. He also says, that they treated those that remained worse than
Slaves, nay, worse than Beasts; cutting off the Ears of some, others Noses or
Hands; sometimes cutting them alive into pleces and quarters to feed their
Dogs, and learn them to devour these poor Americans; and if they found one of
these Dogs killed, or a Spaniard knocked on the head in the Field, they would
hang up a dozen of these miserable People, in honor (as they said) of the
Twelve Apostles, or else put the neighboring Country to Fire and Sword. He
says, that it was ordinary with them to abuse Boys, to deflour Virgins, and to
ravish Women, whom they sold afterward for a Cheese: and oft-times a hundred
Men and Women, and sometimes five hundred and more, for an Ass or a Horse. He
observes, that a certain Chacique having escaped out of Hispaniola into Cuba,
to shun the cruelty of the Spaniards, they becoming after Masters of Cuba, and
this poor Chacique falling into their hands, they condemned him to the Fire,
where being incited by a Friar to turn Christian, that at least after this life
he might be saved in Paradise; when he understood that it was a place that the
Spaniards went unto, he would not be a Christian, nor go thither, so much he
dreaded them. And he affirms, that the most part of these Murders, Burnings,
and Pillages, were voluntarily done to terrify others, and make themselves
absolutely obeyed; which they might as well have gained by fair means and
gentle usage. But let us return to what concerns our Audience.

Remarkable Fountains.
Near Chiapa are several Fountains, which have some singularities; as that
aforesaid, which rises and salls with the flowing and ebbing of the Sea, though
far from it. Another, that for three years together increases, though there be
never so little Rain; and for three years after diminishes, though there be
never so much: and so continues from three years to three years. Another there
is, that falls in Rainy-weather and rises in dry. And there is another that
kills Birds and Beasts that drink of it; yet cures those Sick which demand
violent Remedies. But we should swell too large, if we should speak of all
Singularities found in America.

The Province of Honduras, with its chief places, described.
HONDVRAS and NICARAGVA are two great Provinces. Honduras is more than 200
Leagues long, and near 100 broad. Nicaragua little less. Honduras communicates
its name to the Gulf which lies on Mer del Nort: Its chief places are, 1.
Valladolid, of near an equal distance between the two Seas, situate in a
pleasant and fruitful Valley, and on the banks of the River Chamalucon. 2.
Gratias di Dios, situate on a high ground, 30 Leagues Westward of Valladolid,
and near the rich Mines of Gold of St. Piedro, and serves for a place of
defense for those that work in the Mines, against the Savages. 3. St. Juan del
porto de los Cavallos, once a famous Port, but through its Ruins is
uninhabited. 4. Truxillo, seated on the ascent of a little Hill betwixt two
Rivers, in a rich and fruitful Soil, with the benefit of an excellent Port. 5.
St. George de Olancho, seated in the Valley of Olancho, noted for the Golden
Sands that the River Guayape was said to yield. The Country has pleasant
Hills, The fertility of the Province, with its commodities.
and fruitful Valleys for Grains, Fruits, and rich Pastures: It is well
furnished with Rivers, has Mines of Gold and Silver; but its greatest profit
is made by Wool, which it transports to other places.

The Province of Nicaragua described.
NICARAGVA has five Colonies of Spaniards; the Country is destitute of Rivers,
except that part which is toward Veragua, called Costa Rica; the want whereof
is supplied by a great Lake which ebbs and flows like the Sea. Upon its Banks
are seated many pleasant Cities and Villages, which are inhabited by the
Spaniards and Indians; a Lake well stored with Fish, and as full of Crocodiles.
The Air of the Country is healthful, though hot, Its sertility in its ^^^its,
Cattle, Fowl, etc.
the Soil fruitful and pleasant; it has Fruits, Cows, Hogs, Sheep, Turkies,
Pullain, and so many Paroquets that they are hurtful: It yields not much
Grain, it has plenty of Cotton-Wool and Sugarcanes, and toward Segovia are
some Mines of Gold and Silver. Its Inhabitants
Its Inhabitants are of a good stature, active, very comformable to the
Spaniards as well in Behavior as Apparel. Its chief places are, Its chief
places.
1. Leon, situate on the aforesaid Lake in a Sandy soil, but begirt with
Woods: It is the residence of the Governor, as also the Seat of a Bishop. 2.
Grenada, on the same Lake, beautified with a fair Church and a strong Castle,
seated in a fruitful Soil, and well stored with Sugar-Ganes, 3. Jaen, seated at
the end of the said Lake, 4. Segovia the New is farther within Land, rich in
Veins of Silver. 5. Realeijo, near the Mer del Sud, having the benefit of a
good Port, by reason of which it is inhabited for the most part by Shipwrights,
Mariners, and those that depend upon Naval Affairs.

The Province of Costarica described.
COSTARICA, and VERAGVA, are the two most Eastern Provinces of the Audience of
Guatemala. In COSTARICA are the Cities of Carthage, seated between two Seas,
where there are some places, which serve in for Ports: Aranjues and Nicoya are
on the Mer del Sud, Castro de Austria within Land.

The Province of Veragua, described.
VERAGVA, has toward the East the Isthmus of Panama, and was once under the
Chamber of Panama; though this City be esteemed in America Meridionalis, and
Veragua in the Septentrionalis: There are placed in this Province four or five
Cities of Spaniards, viz. 1. La Conception, seated on the Mer del Nort, and is
the Residence of the Governor. 2. La Trinidad, seated also on the said Sea. 3.
Sancta Fe within Land, being the place where the Spaniards melt, refine, and
cast their Gold into Bars and Ingots. 4. Carlos, seated on the Mer del Sud.
And 5. Parita, seated on the said Sea.

The Country both of the one, and the other Province, is rude, mountainous, and
little fertile, only for Mayze and Pot Herbs. In supply thereof, they have
exceeding rich Mines of Gold and Silver in their Mountains, and Sand-gold in
their Rivers; but there remain yet some Natives in these quarters, who still
molest and annoy the Spaniards, killing and eating them when they can catch
them.

The Isles ANTILLES, or CAMERCANES.
BEtween the two America's Septentrionalis, and Meridionalis, and before the
Gulf of Mexico, are abundance of Islands of different greatness; HISPANIOLA,
and Cuba are the greatest; Jamaica, Boriquen, and others of the middle sort;
the rest, much less.

Hispaniola, Christopher Columbus the first discoverer of this Isl^^ Its Colo^^
HISPANIOLA, is in the middle of these Isles: near 200 Leagues from West to
East; and 50 or 60 from South to North. Christopher Columbus was the first that
made discovery of this Isle, in his first Voyage that the made in 1492. being
conducted thither by some of the Inhabitants of Cuba. There remain 10 Colonies
of Spaniards, of which, 1. St. Domingo (built by Bartholomew, Brother to
Christopher Columbus) is the chief, pleasantly seated, its houses well built,
which for the most part are of Stone, its Haven is large and safe for Ships to
ride in, it is enriched by the Residence of the Governor, the Court of
Audience, the Sea of an Arch Bishop, the Chamber of Accounts, the Treasury
Court; and, besides many Convents of Religious Houses, and Hospital endowed
with a large yearly Revenue, a place of great Trade, till the taking of Mexico,
and the discovery of Peru; since which time it has much decayed, nor has it
yet recovered it self of the great loss and damage it sustained by Sir Francis
Drake, in 1586. It now being Inhabited by not above 2000 Families, of which
about 600 are Natural Spaniards, the rest Mestiz, Mulatts, Negroes, and
Canaries. Porto de la Plata holds the second place by reason of its Commerce,
and is well seated on a commodious Bay. Then 3. St. Jago de los Cavallieros,
for the beauty of its situation. 4. El Cotuy for its Gold Mines. 5. Salvaleon
de Yquey for its Sugars and Pastures. 6. Azua likewise for its Sugars, being a
noted Haven. 7. St. Maria del puerto for its Cassia. 8. Monte Christo for its
Salt. 9. La Conception de la Vega, the foundation of Christopher Columbus, for
whose fake it was made an Episcopal See, which at present is united to St.
Domingo; and the last of the ten Colonies is El Zeybo seated on the Sea shore,
but of small account.

This Isle stocked by the Spaniards.
So soon as the Spaniards were Masters of this Island, they caused to be brought
from Spain, Grains, Fruits, and Beasts of all sorts. The Grains would not
thrive in the Plains, by reason of the richness of the soil, the stalks taking
away all the force of the seed; but when they found out the reason, they sowed
them on hills, and there where the land was lean; so that then they yielded a
great increase. The Fruits became excellent; and the Beasts multiplied in such
manner, that they grew wild for want of proper owners, being hunted to death by
any one, only for their skins. The Sugar Canes brought from the Canaries
yielded exceeding great profit. The Country for the most part flourishing and
beautiful, the Trees and Meadows being always in their Summer livery: and the
soil so fertile, that in the space of sixteen or eighteen days, herbs, and
roots will come to their perfection and ripeness, but the Mines of Gold,
Copper, and other Metals which remained, are no longer wrought; the Spaniards
having consumed and perished in them, not only the most part of the ancient
Inhabitants of this Country, but likewise of the Neighboring Isles.

The Isle of Cuba described.
The Isle of CVBA is longer and streighter than Hispaniola, near 300 Leagues
from West to East, and from South to North, only twenty five or thirty almost
every where, so that in Continent, these two Isles are almost equal, their
qualities are likewise in many things correspondent, as in their Grains,
Cattle, and Fruits. The Air of Cuba is healthful, and its Forests furnished
with the best Wood, Its Fowls.
for building of Ships: It feeds store of Pullein, Pigeons, Tortells,
Partridges, Flamengo's, Whose feathers are white when little, and of many
colors when grown great. Its Rivers stream down more Gold, than those of
Hispaniola: Its Ports likewise greater and more safe; but yet there are more
Rocks and Banks about Cuba than Hispaniola. Its chief places described with
some of their rarities.
For the greatness of the Isle, it has but few Cities, the chief of which are
St. Jago, seated in the bottom of a capacious Bay, about two Leagues from the
Sea, whose Port is esteemed one of the best of all America; being the seat of a
Bishop, who holds from the Arch Bishop of St. Domingo; and beautified with a
Cathedral Church, and some Religious houses near the City, and from the Sierra
de Cobre they fetch Copper, yet the City is much ruined, and has little trade.
Toward Baracoa, its Mountains yield Ebony and Brasile; it has this
inconveniency that its Port cannot receive great Vessels. The goodness of the
Air the fertility of the Soil, and a pleasant Plain has made St. Salvador the
best place of the Island, where they have a great trade; though off from the
Coast. Near Porto del Precipe, a Haven-Town in the North parts of the Isle,
there are Fountains of Bitumen which they make use of instead of Pitch, to
caulk their Ships, and the Indians for diverse Medicines.

The Port of Havana, having its entrance straight and deep, receives the Ocean
in form of a Gulf, capable to receive a thousand Vessels, and secure them from
the fury of the Sea, or Winds. The two Capes which enclose it, have their
Castles to defend the entrance, and a third joining to the City regards the
opening of the Port; the Ships which return from New Spain into Europe,
assemble together at Havana, where they are furnished with all things necessary
either for Food or War; and dispose themselves to depart by the month of
September, passing by the Channel of Bahame, which carries them into the Ocean.

Twenty five Leagues from Havana, toward the East, is the Port of Matanca's,
that is Massacres; for that once those of the Country here slew some Spaniards.
A Vast Prize taken by Pieters Heyn.
In 1628 Pieters Heyn, General for the West India Company, surprised the Fleet
returning to Spain, and carried it in to the West India Company: It was laden
with Silver, Silk, Cocheneil, Hides, Cassonade or powder Sugar, and diverse
other Merchandises all of great value: This Prize was esteemed worth near seven
Millions of crowns; yet this great service was but very ill recompensed by the
Governors of the said Company.

Jamaica described.
JAMAICA is an Isle of a large extent being from East to West 170 miles in
length, and from North to South where it is broadest about 70, being of an Oval
form, and waxing narrower and narrower at both extreme ends. It is seated
betwixt the Tropicks in the 17 and 18 degrees of Northern Latitude, Its
situation, Extent.
and bears from off the Isle of Hispaniola Eastwards about 35 Leagues. In the
midst of the Isle from East to West runs a continued ridge of lofty Mountains
which are well stored with fresh Springs whence flow the many Rivers that so
plentifully water the Island, Well watered.
to the great benefit of the Inhabitants. The Air is observed to be more
temperate than any of the Caribe Isles, and of as mild a temperature as any
place betwixt the Tropicks, being always refreshed with cool breezes, frequent
showers, and great dews in the nights, that it may be deemed Temperate, and by
its continual verdure exceeding delightful. The Weather.
The weather is less certain than in the Caribe Isles, the most observable wet
seasons are in November and May, there being no seemable Winter, but by a
little more rain and thunder in the Winter months; nor is there scarce any
sensible lengthning or shortning of the Days or Nights. Hurricanes are here
never known. Its fertility and commodities.
This Isle in most parts (especially the North) is of a Fertile and rich soil,
and liberally answers the Cultivators cost and pains for what is planted: The
chief Commodities that it produces are Sugars, which are so good that they out
sell those of the Barbados 5 s. per cent; Cocao the richest Commodity of the
Island. Indico, Cotton, Tobacco but indifferent, Hides, Copper, great variety
of Woods for Dyers, also Cedar, Brasilletto, Lignum vitae, Ebony, etc.
Tortoises in exceeding great plenty, whose flesh is excellent good and
nourishing, but those that are troubled with the French man it is dangerous to
eat; Salt, Saltpeter, Ginger, Cod-pepper, Piemente being an excellent
Aromatic spice, of a curious gusto, having the mixed taste of diverse Spices;
Cocheneil, diverse excellent Druggs, Gumms, and Balsoms, many of which are not
yet known by their names. Here are greater abundance of Cattle, than in most of
the English Plantations, as Horses, Cows, Hoggs, Sheep, Goats, Asnegroes Mules,
Great plenty of Cattle.
which came from the breed of those put into the Woods by the Spaniards when
they were first Masters of the Island, which for want of Masters became wild;
but since the English have had to do here they are much wasted to what they
were. The Bays, Rivers, Roads and Creeks, Fish. Fowl.
are well stored with excellent Fish of sundry sorts appropriate to the Indies.
Likewise great store of Fowl both tame and wild, the chief of which are Ducks,
Teal, Wigeon, Geese, Turkyes, Pigeons, Hens, Plovers, etc. Here are great
plenty of excellent Fruits, as Oranges, Fruits.
Cocarnuts, Pomegranates, Limes, Guavers, Mammes, Alumee-Supotas, Avocatas,
Cashues, Prickle-Apples, Prickle Pears, Grapes, Sower sops, Custard-Apples,
Dildoes, Plantains, Pines, etc. And Herbs, Roots, Herbs and Roots.
and Flowers common to England grow here very well. Here are very noxious
Beasts or Insects found, those most dangerous are the Alegators, Hurtful things.
some of which are fifteen and twenty foot long; here is also Manchonele which
is a kind of Crab, likewise Snakes and Guianas, but not poisonous; as also
Muskettoes, and Merrywings, a sort of stinging Flies found very troublesome to
the Inhabitants. The Diseases that Strangers are most incident unto are
Dropsies (occasioned by ill Diet, Drunkenness, Diseases.
and Sloathfulness) Calentures too frequently the product of Surfeits, also
Fevers, and Agues; but it is experimentally sound that if a good Diet and
moderate Exercises are used, without excess of Drinking, they may enjoy a
competent measure of health; and the reason of the great mortality of the Army
at their arrival, was the want of Provisions, together with an unwillingness to
labouror exercise, joined with discontent. This Island is divided into Fourteen
Precincts, Divisions or Parishes, Its division in to Precincts or Parishes.
many of which are well Inhabited, especially the Southern part, so far as the
ridge of Mountains, which runs in the midst, nor are its Southern parts
(especially near the Sea) without Plantations, though not so thick as about St.
Jago; and of late years the Island is much increased in its Inhabitants and
Plantations, being likely to prove the Potentest Colony the English are Masters
of in America, being able to bring into the Field upon occasion about eight or
ten thousand men. This Isle abounds with goods Bays, Roads, and Harbors, the
chief amongst which are Port, Royal formerly Cagway, Its chief places. Port
Royal.
seated on the extreme end of that long point of Land which makes the Harbor,
which is exceeding commodious for Shipping, and secured by a strong Castle, and
land locked by a point of land that runs twelve miles South-East, from the main
of the Island, having the great River that runs by los Angelos and St. Jago,
falling into it, where Ships do commonly water, and conveniently wood. The
Harbor is two or three Leagues broad in most places, with good Anchorage, and
so deep, that a Ship of one thousand Tun may lay her sides to the Shore of the
point, and load and unload with Planks afloat, which commodiousness does make
it much resorted unto, and as well Inhabited by the Merchants,
Store-house-keepers, and other Inhabitants, this being the only noted place in
the Isle for Traffic and resort, being said to contain about 12 or 1500 well
built houses, which are as dear rented as if they stood in well traded streets
in London; yet its situation is very unpleasant and uncommodious, having
neither Earth, Wood, or fresh water, but only made up of a hot loose sand,
which renders it more unhealthful than up in the Country, and Provisions are
very dear, about 12 miles up in the Land from this Town is St. Jago, St. Jago.
or St. Jago de la vega, which when the Spaniards were Masters of it was large,
containing about 2000 houses, which were destroyed and reduced to about 500,
when the English first seized the Isle, and here the Governor resideth, and
where the chief Courts of Judicature are held, which makes it to be well
resorted and inhabited, where they live in great pleasure, recreating
themselves in their Coaches and on Horseback in the evenings in the Savana near
adjoining, as the Gentry do here in Hide-Park. The present Governor is his
Excellency Charles Earl of Carslile, Viscount Howard of Acorpeth, Lord Dacres
of Gilsland, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, a
person for prudence and noble qualifications every way be^itting such a place.
Six miles Southward of this Town is seated Passage at the mouth of the River,
Passage.
which at six miles course falls into the Harbor of Port Royal; it contains
about twenty houses only serving for the convenience of passage from Port Royal
to St. Jago. Its other places are Port Morant in the Eastern point, Port Morant.
a very capacious and secure Harbor, and hereabout is a Potent Colony of the
English seated. Old Harbor a good Bay for Ships to ride in. Old Harbor. Port
Negril.
Port Negril in the extreme Western point, very commodious and secure to
windward, in which Men of War do often ply when they look for the Spanish
Ships; not far from which place was seated the old Town of Melilla, founded by
Columbus. Port Antonio, seated on the North, Port Antonio.
a very safe Land locked Harbor, at the mouth of which lies a small Isle
wholly taken up by the said Earl of Carlisle; with diverse other good Bays and
Harbors along the Coast. Its other chief places are Sevilla, seated in the
North part of the Isle, Sevilla.
once beautified with a Collegiate Church, whose Chief bore the title of Abbot,
amongst whom was Peter Martyr, who described the History of the West Indies by
Decades. Mellilla.
And Mellilla, seated on the North East, where Columbus mended his Ships at his
return from Veragua.

This Island was of considerable importance to the Spaniards, by reason that
all his Plate-Fleet which comes from Carthagina, steer directly for St. Domingo
in Hispaniola, and from thence must pass by one of the ends of this Isle to
recover Havana, which is the common Rendezvous of this whole Armado, before it
returns home through the Gulf of Florida; nor is there any other way, whereby
to miss this Island, because he cannot in any reasonable time turn it up to the
windward of Hispaniola; which though with great difficulty it might be
performed, yet by this means he would lose the security of his said united
Fleet, which meet at Havana, from all the parts of the Bay of Mexico, Nombre de
Dios, and elsewhere, accompanying each other home.

The Isle Boriquem, with its chief places described.
BORIQVEM, is little less either in Circuit, or Fruitfulness than Jamaica. St.
Juan del Puerto Rico is the Residence of a Bishop, and a Governor: It has an
excellent Port, which sometimes communicates its name to the Island: El
Arricibo, and Guadianilla or St. Germain, are the other Cities; all the Isle
has few Ports, it is traversed by a Chain of Mountains, which cut it from West
to East; here is sound a white Gum, which they use instead of Pitch, to caulk
their Ships; and instead of Tallow, to make Candles; and for want of other
Medicaments, for Wounds and Sores, besides its Gold, Sugars, and Gayac; it has
many Salt-Marches. These four Isles are the greatest, and chiefest of the
Antilles; the rest are numerous, and ought to be considered under the names of
the Lucays, and Caribes. The Lucays are North of Cuba, and Hispaniola; of
which, Lucayon is the chief, the greatest, and the most Northernly of all;
Bahama gives its name to the Channel, which is between the Isles and Florida; a
Channel so rapid, that, in despite of the Winds, it carries Ships from South to
North, or rather from South-West, to North-East. Guanahani is the first Land
which Columbus discovered near America, and named in St. Salvador, because he
had been in danger to have been cast into the Sea by his own men, in the fear
they had, that they should find no Land.

The CARIBE ISLES.
THE CARIBES or CANIBALS ISLANDS, are so called from its Native Inhabitants,
who were Canibals or Men eaters, and these are a great Body of Isles forming a
Demy-Circle toward America Meridionalis, the chief of which are set down in
the Geographical Table, and which I shall take notice of, and first with
Barbados.

BARBADOS, the most considerable Colony the English are Masters of amongst all
the Caribe Isles. Barbados.
Its situation is in the North Latitude of 13 degrees 20 minutes; and although
but of a small Circuit, not exceeding eight Leagues in length, and 5 in breadth
where broadest, yet it is a Potent Colony, and able on occasion to Arm about
10000 Fighting men, Its strength.
which with the natural strength of the Isle, is able to give resistance to the
powerfullest Foe. It is exceeding fertile, bearing Crops all the year long,
Fertility.
and the trees always clothed in their Summer livery, but the two seasons for
Planting is in May and November, but the Sugar Canes are Planted all the year
round. And here are found to grow in great plenty excellent Fruits, as Oranges
both sweet and sower, Fruits.
Pomgranates, Citrons, Lemmons, Limes, Macows, Grapes, Juniper Apples, Momins,
Acosous, Papayers, Monbains, Icacos, Raysins, Cherries, Cocos, Indian Figgs,
Plantins, Bonauves, Guavers, Castard Apples, prickle Pears, and Apples,
Millons, both land and water, and Pine Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies.
They have great plenty of Fish and Fowl, Fish and Cattle.
common with Jamaica and other places in the Indies, and have also a competent
stock of English Cattle, and Horses, but something dear, by reason they employ
their Grounds better than to breed upon; and most roots, herbs, and seeds, and
flowers common with us in England are found to thrive, and grow very well. The
Commodities that this Isle produces are Sugars, Indico, Cotton, Wool,
Commodities.
Ginger, Fustick, and Logwood, but especially, Sugar, Indico, Cotton, and
Ginger; lading yearly therewith 200 sail of Ships both great and small, to the
great enrichment of the Inhabitants, and profit of England. This Isle lying so
near the Equinoctial Line, cannot but be hot, yet not so but that travel and
labor is sufferable, and that occasioned by the cool breezes of wind which
rises with the Sun, and blows fresher as the Sun mounteth up. And the Air is
found very moist, so that all Iron-tools are much subject to rust. This Isle is
not over plentifully watered with Rivers, or fresh Springs, there being but one
that may appropriate that name, or rather a Lake which runs not far into the
Land, notwithstanding which defect the Inhabitants have no want of water, for
the Land lying low, and even, there are several Ponds, and most houses have
Wells or Cisterns, which holds the rain water. And here is a River called
Tuigh-River, remarkable for that on the top of the water is gathered an Oil
which is made use of to burn in Lamps. Its Trees.
Amongst the Trees here growing, (which for the most part are appropriate to
the rest of the Caribe Isles) those of most note are the Cedar, Redwood,
Mastick, Locust, the Iron wood tree, also the Cassia Fistula, Coloquintida,
Tamarind, Cassavie, of which is made their Bread, the Poison tree, and the
Physic Nut, also the Calibash, the Shell of whose Fruit serves like Goards to
carry liquid things in; the Mangrass tree, the Roucou, of whose Bark is made
Ropes, as also Flax which being spun is employed to several uses; the Lignum
Vitae, and the Palmeto. Here are several Insects and Animals, Its Insects and
Animals.
as Scorpions as big as Rats, but no ways hurtful, Lizards so harmless that
they frequent the houses, and love the company of men; Land Crabs in great
abundance which are good to eat. Also Muskettoes, Cockroches, and Merrywings,
which are very troublesome in the night in stinging.

Its Division and Towns.
This Isle is severed into Eleven Precincts or Parishes, in which are fourteen
Churches and Chapels; besides many places which may not improperly be called
Towns, as composed of a long and spacious street, and beautified with fair
houses, and of late years the whole Isle is so taken*up, that there is no such
thing as any wast ground. Its chief Towns are 1. St. Michaels, formerly called
the Bridge Town, or Indian Bridge, seated at the bottom of Carlisle Bay which
is very deep, capacious, and secure, fit to give Harbor for about 500 Vessels
at one time. The Town is large and long, containing several Streets, and graced
with above 500 well built Houses. It is very populous, being the Residence of
the Governors, the place of Judicature, and the scale of trade, where most of
the Merchants and Factors in the Isle have their storehouses for the
negotiation of their affairs, in the supplying the Inhabitants with such
Commodities as they have occasion of, in exchange of theirs the product of the
Isle. For the security of the Ships here are two strong Forts opposite to each
other, with a Platform in the midst which commands the Road, all Fortified with
great Guns, etc. 2. Little Bristol formerly Sprights Bay, has a commodious
Road for Ships, which is secured by two powerful Forts, and is a place well
resorted unto. 3. St. James has the convenience of a good Road for Ships,
which is well secured by a large Platform and Fortified Breast-works; It is a
Town of a good trade, well Inhabited, and the more, as being the place where
the Monthly Courts for the Precinct is kept. And 4. Charles Town, seated on
Oyster Bay, well secured by two strong Forts with a Platform in the midst; this
Town having the accommodation of a weekly Market, and being the place where the
Monthly Courts are kept for the Precinct, makes it to be well Inhabited, and
frequented. This Isle is of a great strength as well by Nature as Art, Its
strength.
being sheltered with Rocks and Shoals, and where it is not thus defended by
nature it is fortified with Trenches and Rampires, with Pallisadoes, Curtains,
and Counterscarfs, and for its further Defense has three Forts, one for a
Magazine, and the other two for Retreats; they have also a standing Militia,
consisting of two Regiments of Horse, and five of Foot; which are always to be
ready at beat of Drum, Its Inhabitants.
or sound of Trumpet. The Inhabitants of this Isle may be ranged under three
sorts, viz. Masters, Christian Servants, and Negro-slaves, which are very
numerous. The Masters for the most part live at the height of pleasure. The
Servants after the expiration of five years are Freemen of the Isle, and employ
their times according to their abilities, and capacities; and the Negro-slaves
are never out of Bondage, and the Children they get are likewise perpetual
Slaves. These poor creatures, although they have such extreme hard usage for
Diet, Apparel, or Lodging, and are held to such hard labor, and so ill treated
by their Masters or Overseers, yet are well enough contented with their
conditions, and where they meet with kind Masters think nothing too much to do
for them, so that it is great inhumanity and pity to wrong them. Every Sunday,
(which is the only day of rest to them, and should be set apart for the Service
of God) they employ either in getting of the Bark of Trees, and making of Ropes
with it, which they truck away for Shirts, Drawers, or other conveniences, or
else spend the day in dancing, wrestling, Isle of St. Christophers described.
or other meriments.

St. CHRISTOPHERS, so called from Christopher Columbus the first discover
thereof, seated in the Latitude of 17 degrees 25 minutes. In Circuit about 75
miles; the soil is light and sandy, and very apt to produce several sorts of
Fruits, Provisions, and Commodities, as Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, etc.
This Isle by reason of its several great and steep Mountains (in the midst from
which spring the Rivers which plentifully water the Land, many of which are hot
and sulphurous) with horrid Precipices, and thick Woods, renders it impassable
through the midst. On the Sea side is a Salt pit, not far from which is a small
Isthmus of Land, which reaches within a mile and a half of the Isle of Neivis.
This Isle is very delightful, and of a most delectable Prospect, for if the Eye
be directed downwards from the top, it has a prospect of curious Gardens,
which gently descend to the Sea side; and in regard of the continual ascent of
the Isle, the lower stage or story does not debar the eye of the pleasant
prospect of that which lies at a remoter distance; which is terminated by
those high Mountains; and that which makes the prospect the more delectable in
the several Plantations, are the fair houses covered with glazed Slate. This
Isle is divided into four Cantons or Quarters, two of which are possessed by
the English, and two by the French, which parts are not so well watered as
those of the English, but better for Tillage and not so hilly. The English have
two fortified places, one commanding the great Haven, and the other a descent
not far from Point de sable; and the French have four strong Forts, the chief
of which Commands the Haven and is called Basse Terre. And for the better
security of each other, constant guard at their Forts are kept. In the parts
belonging to the English, are five Churches for Divine Worship. The chief place
belonging to the French is at Basse-Terre, being a Town of a good bigness, and
garnished with well built houses, where the Merchants have their storehouses,
and is well Inhabited, here is a large and fair Church, also a public Hall for
the Administration of Justice, a fair Hospital for sick people, and a stately
Castle, which is the residence of the Governor, of a most pleasant situation
on the foot of a high Mountain not far from the Sea, having spacious Courts,
delightful walks, and Gardens.

Nieves described.
NIEVES, or MEVIS not far from St. Christophers as before noted; of a small
extent not exceeding 18 miles in Circuit; In the midst of the Isle is a
Mountain of a great height, but of an easy access, and well clothed with wood,
and about this Mountain are the Plantations which reach to the Sea-shoar. Here
are diverse springs of fresh water, and one of a hot and Mineral quality, not
far from whose Spring head are Baths made, which are much resorted unto. It is
indifferent fertile, and has store of Deer and other Game for Hunting, and is
found to produce the same Commodities as the rest of the Caribe Isles. It is a
well Governed Colony of the English, and its Inhabitants which are esteemed
about 3 or 4000 live a good quiet and contented life, and free from want of
Food, or Raiment; for Divine Worship here are three Churches, and for its
security has a Fort and a public Storehouse. This Isle (as the rest of the
Caribe's) is troubled with Muscheto's, Chigos, Murigoins, and other stinging
Flies, which are found troublesome to the Inhabitants.

ANTEGO, an Isle about 6 or 7 Leagues in length, Antego.
and as much in breadth in many places; it is seated in the Latitude of 16 degrees.
11 minutes, it has some few Springs of fresh water, but has many Cisterns and
Ponds for the preserving of Rain water; It is encompassed with Rocks which
makes its access difficult and dangerous. Here are plenty of wild Fowl, and
Fish, nor is there any want of tame Cattle. It is in the Possession of the
English, but thinly Inhabited, not exceeding 8 or 900.

St. VINCENT, seated in the Latitude of 16 degrees. about 20 miles in length, St.
Vincent,
and 15 in breadth of a fertile soil, yielding abundance of Sugar Canes, which
grow naturally without planting; It affords many safe Roads and convenient Bays
for Shipping, is well watered, but the English who are Masters of it, have made
as yet no great settlement.

DOMINICA, Dominica.
seated in the Latitude of 15^1 degrees. about 12 Leagues in length, and 8 in
breadth; It is very Mountainous, but has fertile Valleys affording good
Tobacco, which is the chief Commodity. It is a Colony of the English, but not
considerable.

MONTSERAT, Montserat.
In the Latitude of 17 degrees. a small Isle of about 10 miles in length, and less
in breadth, very Mountainous, but interlaced with fertile Valleys. It is much
Inhabited by the Irish, who have a Church.

ANGVILLA, Anguilla.
in the Latitude of 18 degrees. 21 min. about 10 Leagues in length, and 3 in
breadth: It is a poor beggarly Isle, Possessed by about 2 or 300 English, but
said not worth the keeping.

BARBADA, Barbada.
in the Lat. 17 degree, an Isle of no great extent, not exceeding 15 miles in
length; of a fertile soil, yet of no account to the English who are Possessors
thereof.

Sancta Crux.
SANCTACRVX, Inhabited by the French, the Isle is woody and mountainous, and
not well provided with fresh waters, and of no considerable note.

GVADALOVPE, Guadaloupe.
about three Leagues in length, possessed by the French, of good Anchorage in
most parts of the adjoining Sea, and of some note for its fresh water, which it
furnishes Ships with in their necessity, to finish their Voyages.

GRENADO, Grenado.
but a small Isle (being not above six miles in length) in form of a Cressent,
the two horns being not above a mile asunder, it is possessed by the French,
said to be of a fertile soil, and well clothed with Woods, and has a commodious
Haven.

And now I shall be bold to say that Hispaniola, Cuba, and the Neighboring
Isles, answer to the Hesperides of the Ancients. All agree that the Hesperides
were 40 days sail from the Gorgades, and the Gorgades only two from the Coast
of Africa. The Isles of Cape Verde answer to the Gorgades, as we have made
appear in Africa. From these Isles to those of Hispaniola, and Cuba, is at
present 25 or 30 days sail, which may well be 40 of the Ancients; and moreover
there is no Isles in the Atlantic Ocean beyond these. And when the Ancients
place these Hesperides in one Gulf alone, as Capella does, or in more, as
Solinus does, they seem to mean the Gulf of Mexico, which contains many other
lesser. And if Pliny seems to make account but of two Hesperides, and others of
many more, Pliny understands Hispaniola and Cuba alone, in regard of which the
rest are little considerable; Solinus and Capella intend in general the body of
these Islands. But let us proceed to America Meridionalis.

AMERICA MERIDIONALIS.
The degrees of Latitude, and Longitude of America Merionalis.
AMERICA MERIDIONALIS is the most Southern part, or Peninsula of America; which
extends it self from about the 12 degree on this side of the Equator, unto the
54 beyond it, which are 66 degrees of Latitude: and from the 291, or 92, where
is Porto Viejo, unto about the 350, where there is Cape St. Augustine, which are
57, or 58 degrees of Longitude. It reaches then from South to North, 1650
Leagues; from West to East, little less than 400.

Its bounds on the North and East, are the Mer del Nort: toward the South the
Magellanick Sea; Its bounds.
And on the West, the Mer del Sud, or Pacifick Sea.

Its form approaches near a Triangle, whose sides are almost equal; from Porto
Viejo to Cape St. Augustine are 1400 Leagues; from Cape St. Augustine, to Cape
Freeward in the middle of the straight of Magellan, are 1500 Leagues, and from
that Cape to Porto Belo, 1600. Its situation is for the most part under the
Torrid Zone, part under the Antartick temperate Zone; of that which is under
the Torrid Zone, the greatest part is beyond the Equator, the less on this
side; so that the greatest part of these people have their seasons contrary to
ours: The Coasts of this Country are all known more or less, the Inlands very
little.

America Meridionalis divided into parts.
AMERICA MERIDIONALIS may be divided into PERUVIANA, and BRASILIANA,
subdividing Peruviana into Terra Firma, and Peru; and Brasiliana, into Brasile,
and Paraguay; the first division is taken by a line which from the mouth of the
Amazona, goes to seek the utmost part of Chili toward the South, and this line
divides America Meridionalis into two equal parts; the one belonging almost
wholly to the Castilians alone, and the other for the most part to the
Portugals: These have their Viceroy in St. Salvador, a capital City in the Bay
of All Saints, and almost in the middle of the Coast of Brazile; the other in
Lima, or Los Reyes, that is, the Kings, at present a capital City, and in the
middle of the Coast of Peru.

map of Central America A New Mapp of AMERICA MERIDIONALE Designed by Monsieur
Sanson Geographer to the French King, and Rendered Into English and Illustrated
by Richard Blome, by his Maiestis Especial Command London, Printed for Ric
Blome
(...) ye Rt Hon^^^ James Du^^ of Monmouth and Auckland Earl of Doncaster and
Dalkeith Baron of Ashdale Tindale and Whichester etc. This Mapp is most humbly
Dedicated by Ric Blome



We may yet divide the Terra Firma, into Terra Firma and Guiana; Peru into Peru
and Chili; Brazil into the Coast of Brazil, and Main Land of Brazil; Paraguay
into Paraguay, and the Magellanick Lands. Of this America Meridionalis, Brazil
possesses all that is toward the East; Terra Firma, and Guiana, that which is
toward the North; Paraguay and the Magellanick Lands, that which advances
toward the South; and Peru and Chili are toward the West, in regard of Brazil
and Paraguay. Parts possessed by the Castilians.
The Castilians possess almost all Terra Firma, nothing at all in Guiana; they
hold Peru and Chili between the Andes and Mer del Sud, scarce any thing beyond
those Mountains; besides their Viceroy, who resides at Lima or Los Reyes, they
have established in what they possess, many Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, etc.
for the rule of the Church; many Audiences and Seats of Justice, for the
Secular and Civil Power; and many Governments for the Militia.

The Archbishops and their Suffragans.
The Archbishops are those of Lima, in Peru de la Plata, in Los Charcas, and of
St. Fe de Bogota, in the new Kingdom of Granada. The Archbishop of Lima has
for Suffragans the Bishops of Cusco, Quito, Arequipa, Truxillo, and Guamanga,
all in Peru. The Archbishop de la Plata has for Suffragans the Bishops of
Baranca, or Sancta Crux in La Sierra, Cividad della Pax in Chiquiago, St. Jago
del Estero in Cucuman, Buenos Airs in Rio della Plata, Nostra Sacra del'
Assumption in Paraguay, Panama in Terra Firma, or Castilla del Oro, St. Jago
del Estremadura, and the Imperial in Chili. The Archbishop of Sancta Fe de
Bogota in new Granada; has for Suffragans the Bishops of Popayan, of
Carthagena, and of St. Martha in their Provinces of the same name.

In the Diocese of the Archbishops and Bishops are a very great number of
Parishes, Chapels of Ease, Monasteries, etc.

The Audiences under the Viceroy of Peru have formerly been those of Panama in
Terra Firma, of Sancta Fe de Bogota, in the new Kingdom of Granada; of Quito
and Lima in Peru, de la Plata in Los Charcaes, and de St. Jago de Estremadura
in Chili: That of Panama and of Chili subsists no longer, but are reduced into
Governments. Of these Governments there are here eleven, viz. Panama,
Carthagena, St. Martha, Popayan, the new Kingdom of Granada, los Quixos,
Passamoros, los Charcas, Tucuman, Chili, and Rio de la Plata. Peru, wherein are
Lima, Quito, and Cusco, is not among these Governments, but depends immediately
on the Viceroy.

But before we leave America Meridionalis, let us speak a word or two touching
that part which is toward Mer del Sud, there is found a great diversity
between that near this Sea and that within Land: that which is nearest the
Coast is for the most part plain, and above the Plains are many Hills, or
rather Mountains; after these Mountains there are other Plains and beautiful
Valleys, and then Mountains almost inaccessible, which are those that bound
Chili and Peru toward the East. It scarce rains in the Plains, often in the
first Mountains, sometimes between the two ranks of Mountains; and snows often
between the two last Mountains: The Soil of the Plains of the first Mountains
and of those between the two ranks of Mountains, are fruitful and pleasant; the
last are only Rocks, barren, extremely cold both in Winter and Summer, and
almost always covered with Snow. And that which is observable, these Mountains
beginning near the Straight of Magellan make two Branches; which one in the
sight of the other traverse all the length of America Meridionalis: and so they
are in the same Parallel, yet of quality and temperament so different, that
each Region has its Beasts, Grains, and Fruits unlike, nay the Men transported
from the one can scarcely live in the other. But let us proceed to its Parts.

TERRA-FIRMA.
Terra firma, so called by Christopher Columbus.
UNder the name of TERRA-FIRMA taken in general, we understand that part of
AMERICA MERIDIONALIS, most advanced toward the North, and which touches
AMERICA SEPTENTRIONALIS by the Isthmus of Panama. This name of Terra-Firma is
taken from Christopher Columbus, not having discovered any but Isles in his
first and second voyage; in his third and fourth he made a good part of these
Coasts, which judging to be Main Land, that name was given it.

Its extent.
It extends it self from the Isthmus of Panama, unto the mouth of the Amazon,
near 1000 Leagues; its breadth, between the Mer del Nort, and the Estates which
are along the Amazon, is not above 200 or 250 Leagues, or little more. This
breadth being only the quarter of the length is the cause that we have divided
this Terra-Firma into two parts, of which the most Occidental, and the best for
the most part belongs to the King of Spain; the most Eastern, and the least,
is almost all in the hands of the Natives; some Europeans having only settled
some Habitations on the coast, and this may be called Guiana; the first is five
or six hundred Leagues long, this about four hundred.

The Spaniards have established in Terra-Firma, many Governments, viz. those of
Panama, Carthagena, Sancta Martha, Rio de la Haches, Venezuela, and of Paria or
Nueva Andalouzia, on the Sea Coast of Mer del Nort; those of Popayan, and the
new Kingdom of Granada are within Land, or on the Pacifique Sea.

The Government or Province of Panama described.
The Government of PANAMA, and which particularly takes the name of Terra-Firma,
is between the North and South Seas, placed in the Isthmus, which joins the two
parts of America together. The Country is either low and miery, or mountainous
and barren, and therefore very unfit to bear Corn, only some Mayze it yields.
Yet here is found good pasturage for Cattle, it is well watered with Rivers,
some of which stream down Sand-gold. Its air is very unhealthful, by reason of
the great heats and foggs it is subject unto.

Its chief places.
Its chief places are, 1. Panama, which takes its name from the Province, as the
chief, being the residence of the Governor, honored with a Bishops Sea, which
is Suffragan to the Archbishop of Lima, and the Courts of Judicature, and
beautified with three fair Monasteries, as also a College of Jesuits. It is
seated on the Sea shore, and is a place of great resort. 2. Nombre de Dios once
famous, being made the Staple of such commodities as were trucked betwixt Peru
and Spain, which were brought hither by Sea, and so conveyed by Land to Panama,
from whence they were shipped for Peru; and the like was done for those Goods
sent from Peru to Spain; but by reason of the unhealthfulness, as also lying
too open to the invasions of the English or other Nations, it was removed to
Porto Belo, a place of great strength, built for that purpose by Philip the
second, King of Spain, seated on the North Sea, distant from Panama 16 or 20
Leagues, which makes this passage have a great trade between Peru and Mexico.

It was once proposed to cut this Isthmus to make a communication between the
one and the other Sea, but the Pacifique Sea being found higher then Mer del
Nort, this proposition vanished; that the Mer del Sud is higher then that del
Nort, may be judged by the eye; the Lake of Nicaragua, the Rivers of Paria or
Orinoque, of the Amazones, together with abundance of others, having their
springs near Mer del Sud, and discharging themselves into that del Nort, after
a long course, which could not be but with a great declension.

The Isles of Pearls.
At the opening of the Gulf of Panama, are the Isles of Pearls once famous; the
Pearls of Gubagua, and de la Margarita being at most not above eight or ten
Carrats: there was found in these Isles from 25 to 30, both round, oval, and in
pairs, all excellent; whereas among the others few were found well formed, or
without spot.

Carthagena described.
CARTHAGENA is a Peninsula joining to the firm Land by a Causway of 250 Paces,
all Sandy. It is a place of great strength, especially since the damage it
received by Sir Francis Drake in 1585. Its Port is one of the most famous of
America, where the Spanish Fleet that goes to the West Indies by Order puts in
here, which makes it be of a great resort, and is become very rich: Its Houses
are well built, and beautified with a Cathedral Church and 3 Monasteries. The
other Cities of this Government are, St. Jago de los Cavalleros, of old, Tolu,
worthy of note for the most Sovereign Balsom of all these parts, little
Inferior to that of Egypt. Mopoz, near the confluences of the Rivers of Martha
and Magdalens, Sancta Maria, and la Conception. The Air of this Government is
moist, scarce healthful, the best is near Tolu; there is brought from these
quarters Gold, Long-Pepper, Dragons-Blood, Its Commodities and Trade
excellent Balm, Emeralds, and Slaves.

St. Martha described, with its Fruits, Commodities, etc.
SANCTA MARTHA, so called from its chief City, is a Country unfit for tillage,
being Mountainous and barren, yet some they have; it yields good Fruits, and
has Gold, Saphirs, Emeralds, Jaspar, Cassidoins, Brazil-wood: and the Sea
yields Pearls. The Air in the Mid-land parts, by reason of the vicinity of
Mountains, which are always covered with Snow, is very cold, and on the
Seacoasts as hot and scorching. Its chief places are, Its chief places.
1. St. Martha, situate on the Sea-shoar, neighboured by a convenient and safe
Haven, which is defended from the fury of the Winds by an high Mountain near
unto it; it is honored with an Episcopal See, but still laments the Ruins it
suffered from the English by Sir Francis Drake and Sir Anthony Shirley, in Anno
1595 and 96. 2. Teneriff, seated on the Banks of the River Magdalen. 3.
Tamalameque, by the Spaniards called Villa de los Palmas. 4. Los Reyes,
situate in the Vale of Vpar, on the Banks of a rapid and deep River called
Guatapori. 5. La Ramada or Salamanca, seated in the same Vale of Vpar, about
which are several Veins of Brass. And, 6. Ocanna, or St. Anna, seated on the
River Caesar. Among the Governments of America Meridionalis, those of Rio de la
Hacha, of Venezuela, and of Paria, are of the Audience of St. Domingo in the
Isle of Hispaniola, which is of America Septentrionalis, yet their situation
makes us describe them here.

Rio de la Hacha described, with its Commodities.
RIO DE LA HACHA is East of St. Martha, of whose Bishopric it depends. This
Government has only the City of Nuestra Sennora de la Nieves, or de los
Remedios, and sometimes also Rio de la Hacha. It yields Gold, precious Stones,
Salt, and its Soil is fertile.

Venezuela described.
VENEZVELA had its name so given, for its being built on many little Isles, and
in a Lake, as Venice is. Its Air is sweet and healthful, and the Soil so fertile
in all sorts of Grain and Fruits, and so well stocked with Cattle, that it is
termed by other Countries a Granary, as indeed they find it so, it supplying
their wants. It is well watered with Rivers; here is also wild Beasts for
hunting; and in the bowels of its Earth are rich Mines of Gold and other
Metals. The other Cities are Nuestra Sennora de Carvalleda, seated upon the
Sea, but its Haven is very unsafe; nigh to this City there are Hills whose tops
are said for height to equalize those of Teneriff. St. Jago de Leon, Valenza la
Nueva, Xeres la Nueva, Segovia la Nueva, Tucuyo, and Nuestra Sennora della Pax.
Segovia la Nueva is more advanced toward the Barbarian people of any, its Soil
is lean, but in recompense feeds many Cattle and Venison. The Lake of
Maraycabo, near 100 Leagues circuit, is esteemed in this Province.

Paria described.
PARIA, or New Andalusia, is on the River Paria or Orinoque, and is likewise
called Serpa and Comana from the name of its principal City, which they call
Nueva Cordova: They fish many Pearls along this Coast, before which are the
Isles of Cubago, Margarita, and the Trinity or Trinidado, formerly so famous
for this fishing. These Isles are very barren, scarce affording sustenance for
its Inhabitants, which defect is supplied from the adjacent Countries, which
made the Spaniards abandon them so soon as the said Fishing left them.

The Governments of POPAYAN, Popayan des^ribed.
and the New Kingdom of Granada, are toward Peru; that of Popayan is divided
into two parts, the one answering to the Chamber of the new Kingdom of Granada,
the other to that of Quito or Peru. The Air of all Popayan is generally
healthful, and very fresh by reason of the Mountains. The Land is more proper
for Fruits and Pasture, than for Grains; and, as in all the neighboring
Countries, here are likewise many Mines of Gold and other Metals. The Cities of
Popayan, which answer to the new Kingdom of Granada, Its Cities.
are five, but have formerly been ten; Sancta Fe de Antequera, Calamanta; Arma,
Sancta Anna de Anzerma, and Cartago; all upon or near the River of Sancta
Martha: the other five were Antioquia, St. Sebastian de la Plata, St. Vincent
de los Payezes, Neyva, and Villa de los Angelos. The first was transported to
Sancta Fe de Antequera, the others abandoned by reason of the continual Wars
made upon them by the Paezes, Pixos, and Manipa's, who could not be tamed. The
Cities of the Government of Popayan, Other Cities in Popayan.
which answer to the Chamber of Quito, are nine. Popayan, which has its name
common with the name of the Country, seated on a pleasant River in the midst of
a rich Plain, being the residence of the Governor, as also the Sea of a
Bishop, and adorned with a Cathedral and a Monastery of Friars. Cali, seated at
the Foot of a high Mountain on the Banks of a River, and Almanguer on the sides
of a plain, but barren Mountain. Timana, St. Juan de Truxillo, and Guadalajara,
of Buga advance toward the East. Madrigal, otherwise Chapanchica, St. Juan de
Pasto, and Agreda, or Malaga toward the West, and approaching near the Mer del
Sud.

Granada, with its Cities described.
The new Kingdom of GRANADA lies almost all along the River Magdelane, and from
its Springs to the middle of its course, are found a great many Cities, as
Sancta Fe de Bogata, the Metropolis of this Kingdom of Granada, the residence
of the Governor, and the Sea of an Archbishop; a City well inhabited by
Spaniards, as well as the Natives. St. Michael, de Sancta Fe, about 12 Leagues
from Sancta Fe de Bogata. Tocayma, seated on the Banks of the River Pati. La
Palma de los Colimas, a Town built by the Spaniards. Tunia, built on the top of
a Hill, being now a place of great strength, serving for a Fortress against the
Savages; it is also a wealthy Town, enjoying a good Trade. La Trinidad de los
Musos, seated on a River, of some note by reason of the Veins of Crystal,
Emeralds, and Adamants, that are in its adjacent Fields. St. John de los Linos,
seated in a corner full of Veins of Gold, also Velez, Ybagua, Mariquita, and
Nuestra Sennora de los Remedios, and these four last are on the left hand of
the River, the other seven on the right. Distant from this River, and between
the Governments of Sancta Martha, and Venezuela, are likewise Pampelona, rich
in Mines of Gold, Cattle, and Herbs. Merida and St. Christopher: Tudela,
between la Trinidad and la Palma has been transported to St. John de los
Lianos.

Gonzalo Ximenes, and Ferdinand Cortiz, gained great Riches out of these parts.
^n 1536 Gonzalo Ximenes overrun a great part of this new Kingdom of Granada,
and made booty of about 250000 Pezo's of Gold, of which near 200000 were
exceeding pure; and besides the Gold 1800 Emeralds of diverse sizes. In another
Incursion made by Ferdinand Cortez into these quarters, were found five
Emeralds of a vast price. They were cut into diverse fashions; one into the form
of a Fish, another into a Bugle or small Horn, a third into a little Bird, a
fourth into a Bell, whose Clapper was a large Pearl, fashioned like a Pear, and
the last into a Cup; for which alone a Genouese Lapidary proffered 40000
Ducats, with hopes of gaining great profit by it.

Many rich Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals.
The Air of this Government inclines to Heat, the Valleys have Grains and
Pastures, but no Wine; the Mountains have many rich Mines of Gold and other
Metals; the Silver Mines of St. Agatha are rich, those de los Remedios have
store of Gold, and there are 12 or 15000 Negroes which labor in them. Those of
Musos near la Trinity, and those of Pampilona, St. Christopher, and Merida, are
likewise of some esteem; but above all, the Mine of Emeralds near la Trinity,
where there is a Rock full.

GVIANA, taken in general, comprehends all that is found between the Rivers of
Orinoque and of the Amazons; from the Mountains which are above the Lake of
Parima unto the Mer del Nort. These Mountains toward the South divide it from
what is above the River of Amazons: Orinoque divides it from Terra-Firma, or
New Andalousia, on the West, and the River of Amazons from Brazil on the East.
The length of this Guiana is near 400 Leagues, the breadth 150, and in some
places 200; The length and breadth of ^uiana.
and if we would divide Guiana into Guiana and Caribane, this last would
possess all the Coast, and Guiana the parts within Land. The Coast has at
diverse times been frequented by the Spaniards, English, Hollanders, and French,
who have all endeavored to establish some Colonies, what in one place, what in
another, and all with design to have commerce with those within the Country,
where they hope to find a new Peru: I mean the Kingdom of Manoa, or El Dorado,
which they esteem very rich in Gold. Rivers in Guiana, with their Springs,
Cataracts, length and breadth. The Essequebe.
And they have observed exactly the Rivers, Gulphs, and Capes, which present
themselves on this Coast. Among these Rivers the fairest and greatest are,
Essequebe, Brebice, Corretine, Marruvine, Cayanna, the Aparuvaca or Cape
Ruvaca, and the Viapoco. The Spring of the Essequebe, according to the report
of its Inhabitants, is not above a days journey distant from the famous Lake of
Parima, and thence takes its course for 20 days journey to the Sea, into which
it discharges it self. It is interrupted by diverse Cataracts, which hinders its
being navigable for any considerable way, which causes the Inland Country not
to be so perfectly discovered, as it might be were it otherwise. The Brebice
and Corretine.
The Brebice and Corretine have little less course than the Essequebe, and no
fewer Cataracts; the last has its Mouth to the Sea very large, but not deep.
The Maruvine.
The Marruvine is no less than 4 or 5000 Geometrical Paces broad at its Mouth,
and the length of its course is esteemed to be 30 or 40 days journey. The
English, who have mounted this River farther than any others, have observed
abundance of Rivers which lose themselves in it; and say, that here is found
the Sensitive Plant or Herb, which has this natural property, to close if
never so little touched; and to shut up its Flowers and fade if the least sprig
be took from it, not opening its Leaves till a good while after. All these
Rivers, for the most part, have their Cataracts under the same Parallel, within
4 or 5 degrees of Latitude on this side the Equator, which may make us judge
that there is some ridge of Mountains, or at least a continued Eminence, which
makes these Countries within Land, of a higher situation than those Parts
neighboured by the Sea. Cayanna.
Cayanna has likewise in it those Mountains which are near the Lake of Parima;
and from its Spring to the Sea, is no less than 100 Leagues in a strait line,
and twice as much according to its course: It embraces an Isle where the French
have endeavored to settle a Colony, which in time may come to good effect. The
Apuruvaca
Apuruvaca or Caperuvaca has a longer course than Cayanna: It forms a great
Lake not far from its Spring, and embraces an Island near its Mouth. When
Harcourt, an Englishman, was on this River, he found many People, and those
much different from one another. Keymish, another Englishman, who was with the
worthy Sir Walter Rawleigh, who took so much pains to find out the Kingdom of
Manoa, assures us, that in his time they could find no such People; which makes
it appear, that these People are sometimes on one Coast, and sometimes on
another. There are here found Paroquetto's, and other very rare and beautiful
Birds, with pretty Apes and Monkies. The Viapoco.
Viapoco has a longer course than the Cayanna, a shorter than the Apuruvaca;
and like all the others of this Coast, suffers a fall 18 or 20 Leagues from the
Sea, where it disburthens it self with other Rivers into a little Gusph of 7 or
8 Leagues wide, leaving on the Right hand Cape de Condi, or d'Orange. There is
found along this River Tobacco, Canes from which Sugar may be extracted, and
Shrubs which yield Cotton: and amongst the Beasts they have Stags, wild Boars,
tame Swine, and Beeves which have no Horns, etc. But let us speak a word or two
of the temperament and quality of the Soil of these Quarters, in which there is
something extraordinary.

It is true that Guiana is under, The situation of Guiana.
or very near the Equator; that part which stretches most within Land, and the
nearest to the Amazons, is under the Equator: from that line the Coast
stretches on this side unto the 8th degree of Latitude; yet the greatest part
of this Coast lies under the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th of these degrees, which is
almost in the middle of the Torrid Zone, and consequently seems to be in a
Climate extremely hot. But the Eastern-winds, which do almost continually blow
upon the Coast, the Nights being equal with the Days, the large Rivers which
refresh and water the Country, the great Dews which fall, the height of their
Mountains, the thickness of their Forests, etc. yield such refreshments as
renders this Country one of the most pleasant, and would be made (were it
cultivated) one of the best and richest Countries in all America: They have two
Summers and two Winters, their Summers during the Aequinoxes, and their Winters
during the Solstices; and to speak truth, they have always either Spring or
Autumn, their Flowers being always in their beauty, the Trees always in their
verdure, and their Fruits fit to gather all the yearlong. The Air is so
temperate and healthful, that those of the Country live commonly 100 or 120
years, sometimes 150, without being subject to any disease or sickness. The
fertility of the Country.
Provisions cost almost nothing, all sorts of Game being had for only hunting;
all sorts of Fish are here very plentiful: They have several rich Commodities,
as Cotton, Cotton-Thread, and Hamacks or Beds of Cotton, China-wood, green
Ebony, white and red Saunders, Dyersstood, Brazil, Medicinal Oils, Jallop,
Salsaparilla, Turbith, Gayac, Gommegutte, Gum-Arabick, Gum-Eleni; a Balm
excellent against the Gout, Torquesses, Emeralds, Stag-skins, Tigers, Otters,
and black Foxes; grains of Musk taken from Lizards, Munkeys, Apes and Tamarins,
a little Beast of pleasure so beautiful and joyful that one alone has been
sold for 500 Crowns. The Americans themselves loving to play with them, and
putting about their Necks collars of Pearls, and Pendants of Stones in their
Ears.

In the bowels of its Earth are Mines of Copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron, which are
very rare in America; and to all appearance there are Mines of Gold and Silver;
here is also Roch-Alum, Crystal of the Rock, Azure, and likewise Dragons
Blood, etc.

That part of Guiana most advanced within Land, and which retains particularly
the name of Guiana, is very little known; yet here should be the Kingdom and
City of Manoa or El Dorado, of which some have formerly made such account; but
not being found at present, is by most believed Imaginary.

The AMAZONE.
THE River AMAZONE is the greatest and swiftest, either in the one or other
part of America, and it may be said the largest of both Continents: From its
Springs to its disburthenings into the Sea is 8 or 900 Leagues in a strait
line, and according to its course 11 or 1200; it receives, both on the Right
and Left, abundance of Rivers, of which some have 100, 200, 300, others 4, 5,
or 600 Leagues course. All the Amazon is inhabited by abundance of People, The
Amazon inhabited by abundance of People.
less barbarous than those of Brazil, nor yet so much civilized as those of
Peru were: They eat not one another, for by their Hunting, Fishing, Fruits,
Corn and Roots, they are furnished with what is needful either for Meat or
Drink: they have some Idols particular to them, but pay them no adoration,
contenting themselves to expose them to public view when they enterprise any
Affair. Its beginning, Springs and Mouths. The breadth of its Channel.
The Amazon begins at the Foot of the Cordillier Mountains, 8 or 10 Leagues
from Quito in Peru, pressing forward its streams from West to East: Its Springs
and its Mouths are under or near the Equator. The breadth of its Channel from
Junta de los Rios, which is 60 and odd Leagues from its Springs unto Maranhon,
is of one or two Leagues, and below Maranhon, two, three, or four, enlarging
still as it approaches the Sea, where it makes an opening of 50 or 60 Leagues
between the Capes de Nort and Zaparare; this on the Coast of Brazile, the other
on the Coast of Guiana: Its depth likewise from Junta los Rios unto Maranhon is
at least 5 or 6 Fathom, in some places 8 or 10; from Maranhon unto Rio Negro,
10, 15 or 20, and from Rio Negro to the Sea 30, 40, 50, and sometimes much more.

The course of the Amazon endeavored to be found out by Prancis Orilhant,
Pedro de Orsua, and others, with the adventures and misfortunes, which befell
them.
One Francis Orilhane was the first that took any pains to know the course of
this River. In 1540 he transported himself to Junta de los Rios, where he
caused to be built a Vessel proper to descend this River to the Sea: In 1541 he
imbarqued himself with some Soldiers, had diverse encounters in the way, but
about the end of August he found the Sea, after which he hasted to Spain to
make this discovery known unto the King. In 1549 he returned from Spain to the
Amazone, where after his spending a long time upon the great Sea, being
sometimes beaten to and fro by the impetuosity of the winds which caused great
storms, then retained as long by calms, which together with the loss of a great
many of his men, at length he entered into its mouth; yet after all these
labors and miseries, he was so unhappy, that not finding the true channel to
remount the Amazone, he died with grief; having gained nothing for all his
travel, labor and expense, but the honor that some give his name to the
River, calling it Orelhane. After Francis Orelhane, the Amazone was let alone
for a good continuance of time. In 1560 those of Lima in Peru, tried it another
way; they caused some to embark on the River of Xauxa, otherwise of Maranhon,
which begins in Peru, below Guanuca, and about 150 Leagues from Lima, passes
within 30 or 40 of Cusco, and by a course of 5 or 600 Leagues descends into the
Amazon, which has scarce made 300 at this meeting, yet is found the large;
this voyage was likewise unhappy; for Pedro de Orsua Chief of this expedition
was slain by his own men, and Lopez de Aguyre chief of the sedition, finished
to descend to the Sea by the Orinoque, and landed at La Trinity, where he was
arrested, and chastised for his felony. In 1566 those of Cusco tried again the
discovery of the Amazone by the Amarumaye, which could not succeed, there being
two competitors for this expedition; who made war, fought, and weakened each
other in such manner, that there remained but a few to be knocked on the head by
the Chonchis: Maldonado one of the Chiefs of this expedition, together with two
Friars escaped and brought the news; after this of Maldonado no more discovery
of the Amazon was attempted till 60 or 70 years after. In 1635 Jean de Palacios
reattempted this design, transporting himself, with some others to Annete, to
see with what means he might serve himself to make this voyage; but in 1636 he
was killed, and the greatest part of his men returned; but two Friars and 5 or
6 Soldiers, put themselves into a Skiff, with a resolution to descend the
River, and in the end arrived at Para, the chief Colonie of Brazile under the
Crown of Portugal, where they told the news to Piedro Texeira, Captain Major of
Para. Texeira happy in the discovery of the course of the Amazone.
Though Brazile was then in arms against the Hollanders, yet Texeira forbore
not to equip 47 Barques^^ caused to be embarked in them 70 Portugals, with
1200 Indians, who knew how to manage Arms; and likewise 800 Boys and Women to
serve them; with these he departed in October 1637. remounted the River, and
was so happy, that he finished his voyage even to Peru, left a part of his men
there, where the River Chevelus falls into the Amazone; the rest he left at
Junta de los Rios, except himself, with some few persons which came to Quito;
where he made his report in September, 1638. The news being brought to Lima to
the Count of Chinchon, Viceroy of Peru, he gave order to furnish them with all
things necessary for their return; and that the Father Christopher de Acogne, a
Jesuit, and his companion should go with them to carry the news to Spain. They
parted from Peru in February 1639 and arrived at Pera in December following,
and soon after Father Christopher de Acogne carried the news to Spain, arriving
there in 1640. and exposed his relation to public view.

These two last Voyages of Texeira mounting and descending the River, have
given us a more ample and true knowledge of the Amazon than all those before
him could do; and according to their report, all the Regions which are about
the Amazon enjoy a temperate Air. The Eastern Winds which blow all day, the
Nights equal to the Days, the annual Inundations like to those of the Nile, the
great quantity of Trees and Forests, which are upon or near the River, yield
much refreshment, and keeps them from being troubled with thousands of ugly
Insects, which they are pestred with at Peru and Brazil. They say, that the
Leaves and Fruits of the Trees, the verdure of their Herbs, and the beauty of
their Flowers, gives great delight to the Inhabitants all the year long. The
Country very fertile.
The Country (by reason of the Inundation of the River) is very fertile in
Grains, has rich Pastures, and their Fruits, Plants and Roots are in great
plenty, and may compare with any Country in all America; their Rivers and Lakes
are well stored with Fish, among others the Sea-Calf and Tortoise are very
large and delicate. The Country is well clothed with Woods, some Trees being 5
or 6 Fathom about, and along the River may be built as great Ships as any that
swim on the Ocean. Their Ebony and Brazil is grown to an inexhaustible
quantity; they have great store of Cacoa and Tobacco, plenty of Sugarcanes,
which they might easily husband, and abundance of other Commodities, without
having regard to Gold, Silver, and other Metals which are found there.

Abundance of different Nations along the Amazon.
They have abundance of different Nations upon and about the Amazon; the most
part of these Nations so well peopled, and their Villages so thick, that the
last House of the one may easily hear the noise made in the first House of the
other. Of these People, the Homagues are esteemed for their Manufactures of
Cotton-Cloth: the Corosipares for their Earthen Vessels: the Surines for their
Joyners-work: the Topinamubes for their Power. The Bow and Javelin being their
general and common Arms.

Rivers that fall into the Amazon.
Among the Ravers that fall into the Amazon, the Napo, the Agaric, the Putomaye,
the Jenupape, and the Coropatube, and with some others, have their Sands mixed
with Gold; below Coropatube there are diverse Mines of Gold in the Mountains of
Yaguare, Mines of Silver in that of Picory, and of diverse Stones in that of
Paragoche, and of Sulphur in many others.

The Amazonian Women.
As for the Amazonian Women, and their Kingdom, from whence it is pretended this
River took its name, many accounts have been made, and diverse Relations given
of it to Quito, Cusco, and other places; and possibly those of the Country
would have frighted the Castilians and Portugals which have been on this River.
But it is no otherwise, than that the Inhabitants of the Country being in Arms,
there has sometimes been some Women so courageous, as to be in their party;
but there never was a whole Country or Kingdom of these Women. And in fine,
they seek them so far within the Country, that they cannot be on the Amazon: so
those may turn to a Fable, as well as those which the Greeks have formerly
recounted to us of such Wonders.

PERUVIANE where there shall be TERRA FIRMA, whose Governments or Provinces,
with their chief places are those of PANAMA Panama. Nembre de dios. Darien.
CARTHAGENA Cartagen^. Mo^^^ Sancta Maria. la Conception.
St. MARTHA St. Martha. Teneriff. Tamalameque. Los Reys.
RIO de la HACHA Occanna. Rio de la Hacha. Rancheria.
VENEZULA Venezula. Nos. signo. de Carvalleda. St. Jago de Leon. Nueve Xeres.
Valenza la Nueve. Segovia la Neuve. Tucuyo. Truxillo.
New ANDALUSIA Comana. Corduba. Maurenabi.
PARIA Macureguara: Catetios. Orinaque,
OARIBES Taupuramunen. M^reshego.
GUIANA Macurewaraj. Manoa del dorade.
POPAYAN Sancta Fee de Antiochi^. Calamanta. Arma. Anzerma. Carrago. Popayan.
Almangher. Timana. Truxillo. Guadalajara. St. John de Pasto.
GRANADA Sancto Fee de bogata. St. Michael. Tocayma. Tunia. Trinadad. St. John
de los lanos. Velez. Mariquita.


PERU, with its Audiences of QUI TO with its Provinces of PERU Quito. Rio
bamba. Porto Viejo. Guayaquil. Cuenca. Lox^. Zamora. Yaen. St. Michael.
de los QUIXOS, Baesa. Archidona. Avila. Sevilla del Oro.
PAZAMOROS, Loyola. Valadolid. St. Jago de las Montane^.

LIMA, whose chief places are Lima. Cusco. Arequipa. Valverde. Arnedo. Leon de
Guanuco. la Parsilla. Truxillo, Miroflores. Cachapoyas.
De la PLATA, whose chief places are, de la Plata. Potossi. Oropesa. Sancta
Crux de la Sierra.

The Country of the AMAZONS, or the people Inhabiting by the River AMAZONE,
which are many, and of sundry sorts. CHILI, whose parts of Jurisdictions take
their names from their chief Cities in each part, as those of Copiapo.
Conception. l'Imperial. Villa Rica. Valdivia. Osorno. Caftro. St. Jago. Serena.
de la Frontera.
MAGELLANICK LAND St. Phillip. de la Guadero.
TERRA DEL FUGO, or the ISLAND of MAGELLAND,
PERU.
The greatness of Peru.
PERV is an Empire or Kingdom, so rich, and great, that all America
Meridionalis, or at least the half of that America, sometimes takes the name of
Peruviana, Peru, taken more precisely, extends it self, more or less, according
to the diversity of Authors: It is for the most part between the Equinoctial
Line, and the Tropic of Capricorn, where it has more then 600 Leagues length;
and if we add the Part of Popayan, which is on this side the Line, and which
depends on the Chamber of Quito, in Peru; and that part of Tucuman, which is
beyond the Tropic of Capricorn, and which depends on the Chamber de la Plata,
Its length and breadth.
in Peru; its length will not be much less than a 1000 Leagues. Its breadth is
likewise very diverse, esteeming what the Spaniards more absolutely possess.
Its breadth will not be above one hundred, or sometimes two or three hundred
Leagues; if we add all the Estates that lie upon the Amazon, unto the Confines
of Brazile, we may make account of 6 or 700 Leagues of breadth. According to
some Authors, this Country is divided into three Parts, and all different from
one another; which Parts are, the Hill-Countries, the Andes, and the Plains.
The Hill-Countries are twenty Leagues broad, The parts of Peru are three, and
all different from one another, as well in fertility, as otherwise.
at the narrowest; the Andes, as much; and the Plains, Ten Leagues, and
something more; and each part extends it self the whole length of the Country.
The Hill Countries are bare and naked; the Andes well clothed with Woods and
Forests; and the Plains, well furnished with Rivers, together with the benefit
of the Sea; yet, in many places, the earth is sandy and dry, which makes it
unfit for Grains, or Fruits. In the Hill-Countries, their Summer begins in
April, and ends in September, during which time they have fair weather; and
from September to April, which is their. Winter, it raineth: This Part is much
subject to Winds, which it receives from the Coast, which brings a
difference in the weather; some Winds bringing Snow, others Thunder, others
Rain, and others Fair Weather; and where there falls but little Rain, it is
observed to be the more Fertile in Corn and Fruits. On the Andes, it is said to
rain continually; whereas, in the Plains, seldom, or never; and their Summer
begins in October, and ends in April; so that when it is Summer here, it
is Winter with those in the Hill-Countries; And its observed, that a man, in
one days journey, may see Summer and Winter, so that at his setting forth he
may be in a manner frozen, and before night scorched with heat.

Peru by the Spaniards divided into three Audiences, in which are several
Provinces.
That part of Peru, best known, and on the Mer del Sud, has been by the
Spaniards divided into three Audiences, viz, Quito, Lima, and De la Plata: That
of Quito is the most Northern; that of De la Plata the most Southern; and that
of Lima, in the middle; and each of these Audiences has diverse Provinces.
Quito holds part of Popayan, part of the true Peru, Los Quixos, or La Canela,
Pazamoros or Gualsongo, and likewise St. Juan de las Salinas. That of Lima,
holds the true Peru, where there were several Provinces, which the name of Peru
has swallowed up. And the Audience De la Plata holds the Provinces of Tucuman,
and De los Charcas, and these Provinces comprehend abundance of other lesser
ones, the knowledge of which is little necessary.

The Audience of Quito described. Its chief Cities.
The Audience of Quito is about the Equinoctial Line, and is 2 or 300 Leagues
long, and large. The Quarter of Popayan, subject to this Chamber, has the
Cities of Popayan, Cali, Timana, and others, which we have already treated of,
with Popayan, in Terra Firma. The Quarter of Peru, subject to Quito, has the
Cities of, 1. St. Francisco del Quito, or simply Quito; once one of the
principal Cities the Ynca's of Peru, being the Regal Seat of their Kings, where
they had a magnificent Palace. Its Streets are strait, broad, and well ordered,
and its Houses well built; is adorned with a fair Cathedral Church, two
Convents of Dominican and Franciscan Friars, as also with the Courts of
Judicature: once very large, but at present, it has not above Five hundred
Houses of natural Spaniards, Two or three thousand Houses Inhabited by the
Natives; and in its Territory near a hundred Villages, where the Natives also
reside; since the Spaniards became Masters of Peru, they have made this a place
of good strength, being well Fortified, and as well stored with Ammunition. 2.
Rio Bamba, of no note, except for its ancient Palace of the Kings of Peru. 3.
Cuenca, seated in a Country well stored with Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, and
Veins of Sulphur. 4. Loxa, seated in a sweet and pleasant Valley, between two
Rivers, the Inhabitants are well furnished with Horses and Armor, which is the
chiefest part of their Wealth. 5. St. Michael de Piura, of no great account,
except it be for its being the first Colony which the Spaniards planted 6.
Peru. in St. Jago de Guayaquil, of some note; seated near the influx of the
River Guayaquill, at the bottom of an Arm of the Sea. 7. Castro de Vili,
another Colony of Spaniards. 8. Porto Viejo, seated not far from the Seashore,
but of no account, by reason of the badness of its air; its Port-Town is Mantu,
nigh to which is a rich Vein of Emeralds. 9. Juan. And 10. Zamora de los
Arcaides, both so called in reference to two Cities of those names in Spain;
and these are the Cities, or Colonies, which the Spaniards possess in the
Audience of Quito, which have been established, at diverse times, and not long
after the Conquest of Peru.

The fertility of the Country. Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals.
The air of the Country is sufficiently temperate, though under the Line, it is
Fertile in Grains and Fruits, well stored with Cattle especially with Sheep; and
also plentifully furnished both with Fish and Fowl; but the Fertility of the
Country is most seen about, or near Quito, and Porto Viejo; near Lona and
Camora are Mines of Gold, near Cuenca, Mines of Silver, Quicksilver, Copper and
Iron: Near Porto Viejo, Mines of Emeralds, and about Guayaquil is found
Salsaparilla.

The Province de los Quixos.
The Province or Country, DE LOS QVIXOS, otherwise de la Canella, is Eastward of
Quito: Its chief Cities are, 1. Baesa, built in 1559 by Giles Ramirez de Avila,
Eastward of Quito about eighteen Leagues, now the Residence of the Governor.
2. Archidona, twenty Leagues, South-Eastwards of Baeza. 3. Avila, so called in
reference to Rimerez de Avila; and 4. Sevilla del Oro, all Colonies of
Spaiards: The Country is Mountainous, rude, and unfertil; yet produces a
Cinnamon-Tree, which pruned, the tree, bark, and leaves are Cinnamon; but the
Fruit is by much the best, and most perfect.

The Province of Paramoros.
PAZAMOROS, South of de la Canella, has three Cities, or Colonies of
Spaniards, viz. 1. St. Juan de las Salinas, or Valladolid; 2. Loyola, or
Cambinama; And 3. St. Jago de las Montannas: The Air of the Country is said to
be healthful, the soil indifferent fruitful, and feeds many Cattle; and also
abounds in Mines of Gold. Los Quixos, and Pazamoras depend as to their
Spiritual Government on the Bishop of Quito.

The Audience of Lima.
The Audience of LIMA, is at present most famous of all, by reason of the Cities
of Lima and Cusco; this having been formerly the Metropolis of the Empire of
the Ynca's, and the other being the present Residence of the Viceroy of Peru;
and this Audience comprehends the true Peru; the chief depending Cities,
besides Lima and Cusco, are, 1. Arnedo, seated in a Valley among Vineyards. 2.
La Santa, or la Parsilla, seated in a Valley, nigh to which are rich Mines of
Silver. 3. Truxillo, situate on the Bank of a small, but pleasant River, about
two Leagues from the Sea, where it has a large, but unsafe Haven, and in a
pleasant Valley; the Town indifferently well built and large, and beautified
with four Convents of several Orders. 4. Miraflores, about 5 Leagues from the
Sea, in the valley of Zanu, of some note for the abundance of Sugar Ganes that
grow there. 5. Cachapoyas, or St. Juan de la Frontiera, of good account in
former times for furnishing the Kings of Peru with handsome women. 6. Leon du
Guanuco, rich and pleasantly seated, and beautified with some Religious Houses,
a College of Jesuits, and in former time with a stately Palace of the Kings.
7. Areguipa situate at the foot of a flaming Mountain, in the valley of
Quilca, made happy by a flourishing soil, and temperate air. 8 Valverde seated
in a valley of the same name, which yields plenty of Vines, from which they
make good Wine; the Town is indifferent large, being Inhabited by about 500
Spaniards besides Natives; and beautified with a fair Church, The City Lima
pleasantly seated.
an Hospital, and three Fryeries. The City of Lima is two Leagues long, and one
broad, seated in a pleasant valley, being begirt with sweet Fields and
delightful Gardens, below which is its Port Collao. The Houses in this City are
well built, Its Houses, Streets, etc.
its streets large, and so ordered that most of the chief take their rise from
the Marketplace; It is said to consist of 10000 ordinary Families, besides
Passengers, and those that come hither for trade, which are many, by reason the
riches of Peru that yearly pass through this City to go to Spain, which has
not a little increased its wealth. The City encloses several fair Edifices and
Churches, Has many stately Edifices.
among which these following may not be forgotten: viz. The Palaces of the
Viceroy and Archbishop, then the Cathedral Church built after the Model of
that of Sevil in Spain, and endowed with an Annual Revenue of 30000 Ducats,
also the Courts of Judicature, the Colleges and Monasteries; also its four
Hospitals, to wit, one for the Clergy, another for the Spaniards, a third for
the Indians, and the fourth for the Widows: The air about this City is
healthful, temperate, always serene, and the soil the most fertile of all Peru.

The City of Cusco, with its several magnificent Places, and other Buildings.
Among the other Cities Cusco is the chief among those of the Provinces of the
Hill-Countries, and the Andes, being by much the most famous; having been the
Residence of the Ynca's, or Peruvian Kings, who for the more beautifying this
City ordered all their Nobility to build each of them a Palace for their
Residence; at present it is of the greatest account in all this Country, as
well for its beauty and greatness, as for its populousness, being said to be
the habitation of about 3000 Spaniards, and 10000 Natives; besides Women and
Children. Besides these Palaces, It is adorned with a Cathedral, and 8 Parish
Churches, four Convents of Religious Orders, a College of Jesuits, a stately
Temple dedicated to the Sun, also several Baths about the City, and abundance
of very fair Houses, in the fields. Its situation is betwixt two pleasant and
useful Rivers; and begirt with Mountains.

Its Fertility.
The Country for the most part is fruitful, they have good pastures, which are
well stocked with Cattle, they gather abundance of Coca, have excellent
Venison, and the Country generally well furnished with Rivers, in which they
take good Fish. Has Mines of Gold and Silver.
It yields many Mines of Gold and Silver about Cusco, and particularly of Gold
at St. Juan del oro, at Oropesa Vermillion; and Quicksilver, between Arnedo,
and Port de Guajara, and likewise at Barranca are rich salt pits.

The Inhabitants of Guanuco, and of Chachapoyas, are the most civilized of
Peru. There are yet every where a great number of these Indians, there being
esteemed under the jurisdiction of Truxillo, 50000 Tributaries, 30000 in that
of Guanuco, as many in Guamanga, 50000 in that of Arequipa, and 100000 in the
jurisdiction of Cusco, etc. There are likewise others who yield no obedience to
the Spaniards, among which are the Manatiens not far from Cusco, who maintain
themselves in their Mountains; who often butcher and eat those Spaniards they
can entrap.

The Province de la Plata, with its Cities described.
The Province DE LA PLATA, or de los Chaecas, is South of Peru, and under the
Tropic of Capricorn. It is divided into two or three other lesser parts, to
wit, de los Charcas, de la Sierra, and of Tucuman, This last is quite beyond
the Tropic, and we will describe it with Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, with
which it shall best agree. The two others are for the most part on this side
that Tropic. The chief City is de la Plata, that is of Silver; and this City
gives sometimes its name to the Province; is the Residence of an Archbishop;
dignified with the seat of the Governor, the Courts of Judicature, and
beautified with a fair Cathedral, besides several Religious Houses. The City is
seated in a pleasant and fruitful soil. Its Houses well built, and so large,
that within its walls are the habitations of 800 natural Spaniards, beside
60000 Natives Tributaries, under its Jurisdiction. Its Mines by reason of the
incommodities of the waters, were abandoned so soon as those of Potossi were
discovered, which, since this discovery, from a small Village is now become a
very considerable and large Town, of two Leagues Circuit, being Inhabited by
about 40 or 50000 Spaniards, besides about 30000 Natives, and others, that work
in the Mines. It is seated below the Mountain, which bears the same name, from
whence they have their Silver. A City esteemed free because of its large and
ample privileges; the Officers for the Treasure of the Province residing here,
being also much frequented by Merchants, which come hither to trade for their
Silver, bringing them several Commodities in exchange that they have need of,
so that I may say, it is plentifully furnished with all Commodities, as well
for delight, as necessity. The other Cities are Neuestra Sennora, de la Pax, or
Villanueva, Oropesa and Chicuito a City of Indians; Then Sancta Crux de la
Sierra; and in Tucuman St. Jago del Estera, Neuestra Sennora de Talavera, and
St. Michael or Tucuman.

This Province rich in Mines of Silver.
That which is most observable in this Province are the Silver Mines, de la
Plata, de Porco, and above all those of Potossi, being the most famous in the
world, though yielding nothing but Silver. It is observed of this Mine, that it
has four principal veins, the first which is called the rich; was Registered
the 21 of April 1545. and the others in little time after. These Enregisters
are made to take notice of the time granted to those which discover the Mines,
to whom they belong, defraying the charge, and paying to the King the right of
a fifth part. It is said that the rich Mine had its Metal out of the Earth, in
fashion of a Rock, or like a Chrest of 300 Foot long, 12 or 15 broad, and 10 or
12 deep. And that which is likewise observable, is that all these Veins are
toward the Sun rising, and not one toward its setting: they have now
exhausted all that was the best and easiest to take away, and the Miners are
descended into the Earth, some to 500, others to 10, or 1200 Degrees of depth.
The Rich vein yielded the moiety of good Silver; but now scarce will Quintal of
Ore yield two Ounces of pure Silver; yet some will say that the Catholic King
receives for his fifth part, near two millions of Crowns yearly. Account is
made of 20000 men, working in these Mines, and of 50000 Indians, which go and
come to the City of Potossi, to trade.

SANCTA CRVX DE LA SIERRA, or the Holy Cross of the chief Mountain of its
little Province, is East of Potossi, but enclosed with many barbarous Nations
on the West and South; among others, the Chirigudgues, which are a sort of
People not to be reduced to order, though between La Sierra and Tucuman. The
Country is hot, but sometimes oppressed with cold and sharp winds; the Land
has Grains, Mayz, Wine, and feeds much Venison.

The riches of the Ynca's of Peru. Their Policy. Their Forces.
The Ynca Garcilasso de la Vega has given us a very fine History of Peru, of
its Ynca's or Kings, with their Riches, great Revenues, Policies, and Forces:
as to their Wealth, it was showed by the vast Treasures which the Spaniards
became Masters of; all their movables, besides Rooms full of several sorts of
Images, being of Gold and Silver, together with several Rooms filled with
Treasure. Their Policy was showed in the management of their Affairs, and
enlargement of their Territories, treating their Subjects kindly and lovingly;
and allowing them share in the spoils of other Countries, merely to endear
them, and gain their affections; and by these, and the like means, they were
much reverenced, and faithfully served by their Subjects. And lastly, as to
their Forces, we may conclude them to have been great, if we look back upon
their great and many victories they have gained, as also of the Civil Wars
maintained between the first Spanish Chiefs that Conquered this great Empire,
though with no small pains, Its Inhabitants.
expenses, and loss of men. The People are said to be of a strong and healthy
constitution, courageous and warlike, great Dissemblers, ignorant of Letters,
much given to Drink; were formerly so barbarous, that they adored only Beasts,
or those inanimate things, which they might make use of, or which they feared
might hurt them; sacrificing not only Fruits and Beasts, but likewise Men and
Women taken in War, and sometimes their own Children.

Two rare Plants worthy of note.
Among the rarities of this Country, here is a Plant, which, if put into the
hands of a Sick person, will immediately discover whether he shall die or
recover; for, if he, at the putting it to his hand, look of a cheerful
countenance, then it is a sign of his recovery; but if sad, and troubled, a
sure sign of death. They have another Plant, of which the North-part, regarding
the Mountains, bears its Fruits only in Summer, and the Southern-parts,
toward the Sea, in the Winter season only.

CHILI.
Chili bounded. Its length and breadth.
CHILI is between Peru, which is North of it, and the Patagons which are on its
South toward the Straight of Magellan, and between Paragua, and the
Magellanick-Land, which are on the East of it, and the Mer del Sud, which
washes it on the West; its length, from North to South, extends from the 26
Degree of Latitude, unto the 46, and reaches 500 Leagues. Its breadth, from
West to East, is between the 296, and 302, and sometimes 305, 306, 307 Degrees
of Latitude; and sometimes likewise stretches 500 Leagues. But the Andes,
bounding it almost all along the East, these Mountains in some places advance
so near the Sea, that they leave it but a small breadth.

Chili divided into three quarters, which are subdivided into 13 Jurisdictions.
Chili is divined into three Quarters, and these Quarters into thirteen
Jurisdictions; one of the three Quarters retains the name of Chili, and
contains the Jurisdictions of Serena, Quillata, and St. Jago de Chili,
extending it self from the River of Copiapo, unto that of Maule; where are on
the Coast the Ports of Copiapo, of Guasco, of Coquimbo, where Sir Francis Drake
was repulsed, and of Valpayraso, where he surprised a Vessel laden with 25000
Pezo's of Gold of Valdivia, and a great quantity of Wines. The second Quarter
advances from the River of Maule unto that of Gallegos, and is called the
Imperial from one of its principal Cities: The Jurisdictions of this part are
those of Conception, of Ongol or de los Infantos, of the Imperial, of
Villarica, of Valdivia, of Osorno, and of Chilva. The Conception, Valdivia, and
Chilva, have their Ports of the same name; that of Canten serves for the
Imperial: These two Quarters of Chili and the Imperial, are between the Mer del
Sud and the Andes. Beyond these Mountains in the last Quarter Chicuito or Cuyo,
where are the Jurisdictions of Mendoza, and St. Juan de la Frontera. All these
Jurisdictions take their Names from the principal Cities; besides which they
have some others: But a word or two of some of the chief Cities in Chili, Its
chief Cities described.
and first of Copiapo, seated in a Fertile Valley of the same name, and
neighboured by a good, but small Haven. 2. Conception, seated in a capacious
Bay, by which, and the Mountains which encompass it, which are well fortified,
it is a place of good strength, so that it is made the Residence of the
Governor, where he has a strong Garrison of Spaniards. 3. L'Imperial,
situate on the Banks of the River Cauten, a place of great strength and power,
esteemed one of the strongest in this Country, and is the Sea of a Bishop. 4.
Villa Rica, 25 Leagues from the Mer del Sud, another Colony of Spaniards. 5.
Valdivia, neighboured by a capacious and safe Haven, as also by rich Mines of
Gold; another Colony of Spaniards. 6. Osorno plentifully stored with Mines of
Gold, but seated in a barren soil. 7. Castro, built on the Bay of Ancud, in a
fruitful Island, about 50 Leagues in length, and 9 or 10 in breadth. 8. St.
Jago, seated on the Banks of the River Topacalma, at the Mouth whereof is a
noted Haven, called, Valparaiso. and 9. Serena, situate on the Banks of Rio de
Coquimbo, not far from its influx into the Sea; a Town, though but small, yet
of good strength, especially, since it is become a Colony of Spaniards; rich
also in Mines of Gold.

Chili very cold.
Chili in their Language, signifies Cold, which in regard of the Mountains of
Sierra Nevada de los Andes, are said to be extremely cold; and where reigns a
certain Wind, so sharp, and piercing, that it insensibly extinguishes the
natural heat, so that people often die in a moment; and then freezes, and
hardens their bodies in such manner, that they corrupt not.

The Valleys and the Plains nearest the Sea, are well inhabited, Its Fertility*
and have the Air healthful, serene, and temperate; the soil exellent, and
Fertile; though not without some difference, according as it is nearer or
further from the Equator. The Quarter of Chili ought to be hotter, and that of
the Imperial as hot as Spain: but the vicinity of the Mountains on one side,
and the other, renders it a little colder than otherwise might be expected, as
to the Climate; but yet hot enough to be one of the best Parts of America. The
Valley of Copiapo yields sometimes Three hundred for one; those of Guasco, and
Coquimbo are held no ways inferior to it; that of Chili is so excellent,
Mines of Gold, Silver and other Metals.
that it communicates its name to the Country. Above these Valleys are Mines of
Silver, Quicksilver, Copper, Lead, and great plenty of Gold; both in the
Ingots, and Sand.

Valdivia gained great riches here.
Valdivia, who was here after Almagre, and who at the beginning succeeded
better than his Predecessor had done, extracted a great quantity of Gold out of
this Country; and caused to be wrought several Mines of Gold, so rich, that
each Indian rendered him thirty or forty Ducats daily; and when he had employed
but twelve or fifteen Indians in this work, they would have yielded three or
four hundred Ducats a day; and in a month, about Ten thousand; and in a year,
about a hundred, or ^ hundred and twenty thousand Ducats. This agrees with what
the Ynca Garcilasso de la Vega reports in his History, saying that the Count
Valdivia had for his Portion a part of Chili, and that his Subjects rendered him
the yearly tribute of a hundred thousand Pezo's of Gold. But the thirst after
this Metal being instiable, and Valdivia, The Avarice of Valdivia proves his
ruin, and death.
the more he received, the more still he coveted, forced to work in these Mines
those Indians, who, not accustomed to so hard a labor, nor to serve so cruel a
Master, resolved to rid themselves of him, and to cast off their heavy yoke: In
pursuance of which, those of Arauco, and thereabouts, began the revolt; and
after diverse encounters, slew and took a hundred and fifty of his Horsemen.

These Arauques, with their Neighbors, assembled themselves to a Body of
Twelve or thirteen thousand men; who after having been diverse times beaten by
Valdivia, and in all likelihood of being quite subdued; at length, an old
Indian, who in all possibility, had before observed the order which the
Spaniards held in their Battles, advised them to divide their men into many
Squadrons; and showed them how each Squadron, one after another, must assault
the Spaniards; and that the first Squadron being broken, must rally in the tail
of the last; which succeeded so well, that in the end, they so wearied the
Spaniards, and their Horses; that when they began to think of a retreat, they
were prevented, and utterly defeated. Some say, that Valdivia being fallen into
their hands, was fastened to a Tree, and his Almoner to another, so near
together, that they might discourse together, and condole one another
misfortunes. And that the Arauques, from time to time, (though contrary to
their custom, to eat human flesh) did cut off gobbets of flesh from their
Legs, Thighs, and Arms, which they caused to be roasted, boiled, or broiled,
according to their several Appetites, which they did eat in the sight of these
poor tormented Creatures, whilst they were finishing their days in such a
lingering death: Others say, that they took off the top of his skull, and poured
melted Gold into his Brains, Mouth, and Ears, making afterward a Goblet of his
Head, and Trumpets of his Bones, etc.

The City of Valdivia taken and destroyed by the Natives, with others.
After the death of Valdivia, the Spaniards had great disadvantages in Chili,
till that Gracias de Mendoza, son to the Vice Roy of Peru, had reduced part of
these people to obedience, which continued for no long season; for in 1599,
these people surprised the City of Valdivia, seized on the gates and chief
places, invested every house, to the end nothing might escape their hands, set
fire through all, killed and took prisoners 4 or 500 men, women and children,
took the Fort, wherein were three hundred thousand Pezo's of Gold, besides
which they carried away with them all the Arms, Ammunition, and Artillery.

After the taking of Valdivia, the Imperial was besieged, which they stoutly
defended and maintained for the space of Twelve Months, and would have done
longer, were it not for the Famine and sickness that so extremely reigned
amongst them, that reduced their Forces, together with the Inhabitants of the
City, to about twenty men, who no longer able to defend themselves, submitted
to the mercy of the Arauques; So that in the end, of 13 principal Cities that
were in Chili, 6 or 7 were ruined; viz, Valdivia, l' Imperial, Ongol, Chilliam,
St. Crux, la Conception, and Villarica: Osorno, in time received relief: The
men found in the taken Cities were knocked on the head; they permitted the
ransom of women, one of whom they gave for a pair of Spurs, a pair of stirrups,
or a Horses bridle; for a Sword they would give half a dozen; but this commerce
was soon Prohibited by the Viceroy of Peru; that Arms serviceable for War
might not be put into the hands of these Barbarians.

Of those which they had got by means of this commerce, or which they gained at
the taking of so many Cities, and in diverse defeats of the Spaniards, they
after made use, and became so dextrous, that they mounted on horseback, managed
the Lance, Musket, Halberd, etc. and continued the War from 1599 to 1641 when
the Marquess Vadez made peace with them. During this War there happened a thing
worthy of observation; A sad disaster befell a Ship of Biscay.
to wit, In 1614, a Ship of Biscay bringing relief to the Spaniards that were
in the Fort of Arauque, it unfortunately fell out that it suffered a Shipwreck
on the Coast, so that the men fell all into the hands of the Arauques, who
immediately slew them all, save only the Trumpeter, who being about to pass the
same Fate with his Fellows, thought he would once more sound before he died,
which saved his life.

The reason of their last revolt.
The reason of the last revolt of the Arauques was, that after having served the
Spaniards for near 50 years, and being for the most part become Christians, the
Spaniards had yet taken some of their wives and children, and sold them away
into perpetual and cruel servitude, which made them not only resolve to cast
off the Spanish yoke, but likewise to renounce Christianity.

Unde the name of Arauques are comprehended the Inhabitants of the Mountains,
and Valleys of Arauco, Tucapel, and Puren; which are between the Conception,
the Imperial and Ongol. Peace being made with these people, there rested in
Chili none but the Pulches as enemies to the Spaniards: but these Pulches being
beyond the Andes, they have little to do with them; and the Country is restored
to a good estate, and the Cities better rebuilt.

The City La Conception, and Valdivia described.
LA CONCEPTION is at present walled with walls of stone, has a Citadel; and
because the Governor of the Province resides here, though the soil be
ungrateful, the Inhabitants have so tilled, manured, and so embellished it with
Gardens, that it is become one of the pleasantest abodes of Chili. Valdivia is
situated on an elevated ground, which with the addition of Art, is held one of
the strongest in Chili.

The Jurisdiction of St. Jago has under it more than 80000 Indians, which are
divided into 26 Partimiento's, or parts; that of the Imperial has as many;
Osorno 200000, Castro del Chilve 12 or 15000 only, the other Jurisdictions more
or less.

The Inhabitants of Chili.
The Natives of Chili are for the most part 6 Foot high, well proportioned,
strong, active, warlike, and cruel when they have the advantage of their
enemies; of a white complexion, their Garments for the most part are skins of
beasts, their common Arms are Bows and Arrows.

The Fertility of the Country.
The Country is subject to Earthquakes, the soil in the midland is for the most
part Mountainous, and unfruitful; toward the Seaside, level, fertile, and well
watered with Rivers, which makes it yield plenty of Wheat, Mayz, and other
Graius; which, as also their Vines, were transported from Spain hither, which
now are so abundantly increased that they often furnish Peru. Nor does any
Country in all America afford more Cattle than this does, their Sheep like
those of Peru, are very large; Its Commodities.
they have here long Pepper, abundance of Honey, good Fruits and Plants, but
their chiefest riches is drawn from the Gold and Silver.

In the Mountains of the Andes, though very cold, are 12 or 15 Vulcans, which
perpetually vomit fire: These Vulcans take their name from the Valleys where
they have their rise, or from Cities or Towns there adjacent.

BRAZILIANE where there shall be BRAZILE regarding the Sea, with its
Governments (as they are Inhabited by the Portugals) of St VINCENT Sanctos, St.
Vincent. Itauchi, St. Paul. Philippe villa.
RIO JANIERO St. Sebastian. A^g^a (...) Reyes.
SPIRITU SANCTO -- Spiritus Sancto, PORTO SEGURO Porto Seguro. Sancta Crux.
LOS ISLEOS los Isleos. Camamu.
BAYA de los SANCTOS St. Salvador. St. Antonio. Fapesipe.
SEREGIPPE Seregippe del Rey. Olivera.
FERNAMBUCO Olinda. Recif. St. Michael. Calvo.
TAMARACA -- Tamaraca. PARAYBA Payraba. St. Anthony. St. Katherine.
RIO GRANDA de los tres Reys. Copoaba. Juaon Lostao. Natall. Brandibe.
SIARA Siara. St. Jago. St. Sebastian. Cors. Soutpan. Clean Salinas. Camucipe.
MARANHAN Junipara. Sancta Ann. Comma. St. Lewis. Nuestra sennora.
PARA Corrupa. Estiero. Cogemine. Comata. Para.

BRAZILE within Land, which is possessed with abundance of several sorts of
people, (most of which are unknown unto us) among which are the Paries,
Carayaes, Amixocories, Noneaes, Amacaxies, Apnyes, Aquigiraees, Tapiguiries,
Panaguiries, Apetubaes, Tapuxenquies, Caraguatayraes, Quiriguiaes, Bigrorgies,
Vibes, Guigraes, Jubaes, Oquigties, Pahies, Aries, Guipaes, Cuigtaies,
Pirivies, Annaciugies, Laratiies, Guaracacativies, Aturavies, Aquitigpaes,
Maimimyes, Caracujvyes, Mandeivies, Caraembas, Macutiies, Napares, Parapoties,
Pahacuries, Cuaxraes, Nuhinvies, Taraguaigies, Piraquies, Anacuyes, Tapacuvyes,
M^caraguacies, Tupioys, Cayviaries, Jacuyvies, Ca^ucujares, Jobiores, Cumpehes,
Cicules, etc. PARAGUAY Or, RIO de la PLATA, whose chief Provinces and Places,
are those of PARAGUAY Paraguay. Eupana. Guabiano.
CHACO Chaco. Rioxa. Estero.
De la PLATA Assumption. las seite Corrientas. Sancta Fee. Buenos Airs.
Penabobre.
TUCOMAN St. Jago del Estero. St. Michael de Tucoman. St. Salvador. Salta.
Corduba.
URVAIG la Conception. St. Nicholas. St. Francis Xavier. Ibicuit.
PARANA St. Ignatius, Itapoa, or the Incarnation. The holy Sacrament. Acarag.
Sancta Maria.
GUAYR Cuidad Real. Villa ricca. St. Paul. No. sen. de Loretto. St. Francisco
Xavier. St. Joseph.



BRAZILE.
BRAZILE is most commonly taken for the most Eastern part of America
Meridionalis. In 1501 Alvarez Cabral a Portugal sailing along the Coast of
Africa, in his passage to the East Indies, by a great Tempest (the wind blowing
Eosternly) he was driven into these parts; A Column erected here by Alvarez
Cabral, a Portugal, with his Masters Arms therein.
where he erected and left a Column whereon were affixed the Arms of Portugal,
to remain to future ages, signifying that he took Possession of it for the
Crown of Portugal. A little after, Americus Vesputius was expressly sent to make
a more particular discovery of it, which so well succeeded that in a short time
some Colonies of Portugals were here established, and the name of America was
given it in honor to Americus Vesputius, which name was soon after
communicated to all this new Continent; but this quarter particularly took the
name of Brazile, by reason of the great abundance of that wood here found more
than in other places.

BRAZILE, taken in its greatest extent, is one half of America Meridionalis,
which some call Brasiliana, but which they divide into Brazile, and Paraguay:
this Brazile separated from Paraguay begins at the River of Amazones, and
extends it self to the Provinces of Paraguay: Brazile bounded.
and though that be but from the first degrees. of Lat. unto the 21; yet the Coast
making a great Demi-circle, has no less than 1200 Leagues. The Mer del Nort
washes it on the North, South-East, and East; Paraguay and Peru, bounds the
rest toward the South and West.

Great part of Brazile unknown.
The high Country is wholly unknown; and likewise part of the Coast. It has
every where abundance of Barbarous people, who make war with, and eat one
another; the diverse relations hitherto given us, make mention of more than 100
of these peoples, The parts best known.
yet these are few in regard of those yet unknown. The most famous, and best
known, are the Margajas, Topinambous, Ovetacas, Paraibas, Petiguares, Tapouyes,
Cariges, Morpions, Tobajares, etc.

The Portugals have only seized on what they found most commodious on the
Coast, and have from time to time placed diverse Governments, which they call
Capitanies. The most ancient is that of Tamaraca, then of Fernambuco, The
Governments or Capitanies which the Portugals hold.
now the most famous of all is that of the Bay of all Saints: they count
Fourteen in all, which following the Coast, from the River of Amazones, toward
Paraguay, are, Para, Maranhan, Giara, Rio Grande, Parayba, Tamaraca,
Pernambuco, Seregippe, Baya de Todos los santos, los Isleos Porto seguro,
Spiritu sancto, Rio Janiero, and St. Vincent.

Chief places in the Capitany of St. Vincent described.
Each Capitany has depending on it, one or two more Colonies of Portugals. In
the Capitany of SAINT VINCENT, the principal is Santos, seated at the bottom of
an Arm of the Sea, distant from the Main, about three Leagues, accommodated
with a very good Port, capable to receive Vessels of 400 Tuns. This Town is
Inhabited with about two hundred Families of Portugals, who have beautified it
with a fair Church, and two Convents of Friars; and since the assault that Sir
Thomas Cavendish made upon it in 1591, they have environed it with a wall, and
well Fortified it with strong Bastions. The next is Saint Vincent, which has
not above one hundred houses of Portugals, but its Port little commodious. The
third and fourth Cities are Itanchin, and Saint Paul, beyond the Mountains, and
Forest, Pernabiacaba; which are very difficult to cross, the way being cut
through the trees: the City is seated on the Top of a little hill, and
neighboured by some Mines of Gold, found in the Mountains; a Town of about one
hundred houses, and two hundred Families, beautified with a Church, two
Convents, and a College of Jesuits, This Capitany wants Salt, Wine, and Oil,
but in recompense they have all sorts of Fruits, and many Mines of Silver about
St. Paul.

The Capitany of Rio Janiero with its chief places described, and its
Commodities.
The Capitany of RIO JANIERO, takes its name from its Rivers; so called, because
it was entered into in the month of January. The Portugals have built the City
St. Sebastian, at the mouth of the Gulf, which the River makes falling into
the Sea; and Fortified it with strong Bulwarks. And more to the West, they have
likewise built the City of Angra de los Reyes, and made it a strong Colony.
This Capitany has much Brazile-wood, Cottons, and all Provisions, but no
Sugar. These two Capitanies, Rio Janiero and St. Vincent, are on this side and
beyond, or rather under the Tropic of Capricorn.

The Capitany del Spiritu Sancto, with its Cities.
The Capitany DEL SPIRITV SANCTO, has one of the best soils of all Brazile,
well stored with Cotton-wool, but deficient in Sugars. Its River is called
Parayba from a name common to three Rivers in Brazile; one is beyond St.
Vincent, the second this, and the last waters the Capitany of Parayba; that
which waters Spiritu Santo, is pleasant, but rapid. The City has but two
hundred and odd Families of Portugals. Its principal buildings are, a Church
dedicated to St. Francis, a College of Jesuits, and a Monastery of
Benedictines.

Porto Seguro, and its Cities.
PORTO SEGVRO belongs to the Duke of Aveiro, and has three Colonies, viz. 1.
St. Amaro, or St. Omers, once of great account for making Sugars, where they
had five Sugar Engines, for the ordering and making it, but deserted by the
Portugals, for fear of the incursions of the Savages. 2. Sancta Cruz, a Town
not very large, neither with a commodious Harbor. 3. Porto Seguro containing
not above two hundred houses, but held of some Antiquity. It is built on the
top of a white cliff, which commands the Haven. The soil of this Capitany is so
fertile in Grains and Fruits, Its fertility.
that it furnishes its Neighbors; It has likewise Sugar.

Los Isleos with its chief places.
LOS ISLEOS, belongs to Don Luco Giraldo, a Portugal; Its chief Town is seated
on a small River, but neighboured by a great Lake of twelve Leagues circuit,
from which this River takes its rise, and contains not above 150, or 200
Families of Portugals. It has a long time suffered persecution, and the Colony
almost lost by the Guaymures, a race of the most savage and barbarous people of
Brazile, which being driven out of their own Country fell into this
Praefecture, which they had utterly ruinated, had not (as a Jesuit tells us)
some of the Relics of St. George been brought hither; which seeing, the
Planters re-took courage, and bravely repulsed these Barbarians. The River
which waters this City turns eight or ten Mills, or Sugar-Engines.

Baya de los Santos described.
The Capitany del BAYA DE LOS SANTOS, took its name from the Bay or Gulf,
wherein is seated St. Salvador its principal City: This Bay having its mouth to
the Sea, eight or ten Leagues wide, and its depth twelve, fifteen, or twenty
fathom every where, encloses many Isles, of which the most outward to the Sea
is Taperico: This Bay makes likewise diverse openings, fifteen or twenty Leagues
within Land, from whence it receives the Rivers of Pitange, Ceresippe, Cachera,
and others, each with their little Gulf: This Bay is memorable for the rash
attempt of Peter Heyns a Dutchman, A memorable Exploit of Peter Heyns a
Dutchman.
Admiral of a Fleet of the United Provinces for the West India-Company, who in
1627 entered this Bay, where there were 26 sail of Spanish Ships, four of which
were men of War, all lying under the Protection of the Castles and Forts; who
notwithstanding the shots that he received from the Forts, Castles, and Ships,
fell amongst them with such boldness, that he sunk their Vice Admiral, and took
all, or most of the rest, with a condition only of their lives. The City of St.
Salvador, The City of St. Salvador is fair, and beautified with many stately
Edifices.
is in the most Northern part of the Gulf, seated on a little Hill, and
toward the Sea; it regards its Ports made in a Demi-circle, whose two points,
or extremities have each their Castle; St. Antonio toward the Sea, and
Tapesipe toward the Bay. This City all environed with a wall, is great and
populous, and dignified with the Residence of the Viceroy of Brazile, for the
Crown of Portugal, as also with a Bishops See, together with diverse Officers.
It is beautified with many Churches and Religious Houses, but above all, the
College of the Jesuits is magnificent. This Capitany is best peopled, and the
richest of all Brazile: It has 40 or 50 Sugar-Mills, the most of which are
about this Bay; every where there is quantity of Cotton, and on the coast is
found Ambergneece.

Seregippe del Rey, and its City.
The Capitany SEREGIPPE DEL REY has only a little City, and Olivera is that
alone which gives it a degree amongst the Captains of Brazile; and here is
esteemed to be some Mines of Silver.

The Capitany of Fernambuck, with its Colonies, and Cities described.
The Capitany of FERNAMBVCK is one of the best of all Brazile, possessed by the
Albuquerques. The Portugals have here established Thirteen Colonies, among
which Olinda is the chief, being a fair and pleasant City, seated near the
Seashore, but with no commodious Haven, only its entrance is defended by a
Castle which is well Fortified; Account has been made of two thousand Families
of Portugals, besides the Clergy and the slaves which were in great number,
which they employed in their Sugar-mines; and among the Portugals two hundred
Families, which possessed each twenty five, thirty, forty, or fifty thousand
Crusados, and more; the chiefest Ornament of this City is the College of the
Jesuits, built very rich and magnificent, and endowed with many Houses in the
City, many Sugar-Engines, and much Cattle in the field; also a Collegiate
Church, with six or seven others, besides Chapels, several Monasteries, and
Hospitals, etc. From the City a Tongue of Earth advances to the Sea, at the end
of which is Recif, a well-peopled Town, where the Ships load and unload their
Merchandises.

This place is become Famous in our time, having been for many years disputed
between the Portugals, and the Hollanders; but these have in the end been
driven out by the other.

Its Trade and Commodities.
Besides the Colonies, there are abundance of Aldees for the Indians; it is
observed that every year there is laden from Fernambuck, 80, 90, and sometimes
a hundred Ships, the most part with Sugars, and some with Brazile-wood, and
that only in the space of four years, which were 1620, 21, 22, and 23, there
was transported from Angola in Aethiopia, unto this Capitany 15 or 16000 slaves
to work in their Sugars, and Brazile.

The Fertility of its soil.
The Soil is fat and fertile, the Sugar Canes coming of themselves both on the
Hills and in the Valleys, and the Brazile-wood, being brought in a prodigious
quantity from the Forest Gran Mato of Brazile, 20 Leagues from Olinda. All
these conveniences, with the goodness of its pastures, makes them call this
Capitany the Paradise of Brazile.

But in 1630, 31, 32, the Dutch West India Company took, and ruined Olinda,
Olinda and St. Augustine ruined by the Dutch.
and after it St. Augustine, and almost all the Fortresses, which the Portugals
held in this Capitany: and were not driven out till within 9 or 10 years, but
from time to time molested.

The Capitany of Tamaraca, with its chief places described.
TAMARACA is the most ancient Capitany, but the smallest of all Brazile; that
of Fernambuck enclosing it on one side, and Parayba on the other. Its Fertility
is admirable; the Port dos Francezes is a place of no great note, but for its
commodious haven, which is well defended by an impregnable Castle, which is
seated on the top of an hill.

The Capitany of Parayba, with its chief City.
The CARAYBA of Parayba, had likewise beginning from the French in 1584, which
soon after was seized by the Portugals, and its principal City Parayba was
called by them, Philippine, or Neustra Seignora da Nieves; and by the
Hollanders when they were Masters of it, Frederickstad: It is two or three
Leagues from the Sea; there where the River Parayba falls, having two Castles
on the two parts, which end it, and defend its entrances, that on the right
hand is Cape Delo, where is the Fort St. Katherine, the other Cape del Nort,
where is the Fort of St. Anthony. This City is walled, and is seated on the
banks of the said River; at the bottom of an Arm of the Sea, not above three
Leagues from the Ocean. The bounds of this Capitany.
This Capitany on the North touches Rio Grande, on the South Fernambuck,
enclosing that of Tamaraca, on the West: the River Parayba, dividing it into
two equal parts; the Inhabitants addicting themselves to till the fields, where
they possess their Heritages, Farm-houses, and Ingenno's, which are
magnificently built. These Ingenno's are the Mills which serve to bruise the
Sugar Canes; Its Inhabitants addicted to Tillage, and making of Sugar.
they are built along the River, where are the Fields and Closes; in which lie
the Canes and some Copses from whence they fetch wood to boil the Sugar. And
sometimes, these Ingenno's are so great, and so ample, that they contain
besides the house of the Master which is well built, many others: either for
the Portugals, which serve them, or for those Negroes and Slaves, which belong
unto them; and their number amounts to 50, 60, 80, and sometimes to a hundred
Families. There are a score of these Ingenno's in the Capitany of Parayba. The
nature and fertility of the land.
The Land is unequal being in Mountains, Valleys and Plains. The Plains are for
the Sugar; the Valleys for Tobacco, Mandioche and Fruits; and the Mountains for
Wood. The lands which are tilled, yield one hundred for one, their pastures
feed many Flocks of Beeves, Sheep, Their Cattle and Fowls. The habitations of
the Natives.
Goats, Hoggs, and Horses, which are strong and laborious. The Natives of the
Country have some Aldees, that is, Villages, built after their mode, each
Village having only four, five, or six houses, but very long like Halls, where
are 4, or 5, or 600, sometimes 1000, 1200, or 1500 Inhabitants; their movables
being only their Hamacao's, which are their Beds, their Bow and Arrows and some
Mandioche. In each Aldee they have a Captain, which they choose among
themselves, and they give them a Portugal to see what passes: there are of
these Aldees, in all the Capitanies of the Portugals, six principal ones in
that of Parayba, as many in that of Rio Janerico, three in Tamaraca, three in
Fernambuck, and so in others.

The Capitany of Rio Grande described.
The Capitany of RIO GRANDE, was once possessed by the French, after they had
quitted R. Ganabara: and here they made alliance with the Petivares in the year
1597. Feliciano Ceca of Garovulasco, Captain of Parayba came to assault them;
but without forcing them away that time; in 1601 they were quite expelled. The
French had discovered an excellent Mine of Silver at Copooba, and another of
Emeralds, near the Bay of Moncourou, bebetween Rio Grande, and Siara, and rich
Salt Pits near the Point de Salinas. The principal Fortress that the Portugals
hold here, is De los tres Reyes, or the three Kings, on the right hand of the
River.

The Coast of Brazile from Cape de Frio, until on this side of that of St.
Augustine, and so to the middle of the head of Potengi, stretches from South to
North, and continually regards the East. The rest of this Capitany, and that of
Siara Maranhan and Para, extend from East to West, regarding the North, and are
the nearest to the Equinoctial Line. The Coast of these four last Capitanies
has no less extent on the Sea, than that of all the others together, but are
worth much less.

The Capitany of Siara, with its Commodities.
The Capitany of SIARA is among many Barbarous People, and therefore not much
frequented; yet is of some trade, by reason of the Cotton, Crystal, Precious
Stones, and many sorts of Wood, which are here found. They have likewise many
Canes of Sugar, which are of no use, there being no Sugar Engines in the
Country.

The Capitany of Maranhan, with its chief places.
The Capitany of MARANHAN is an Isle, which, with some others, is found in a
Gulf, about twenty five Leagues long, and broad. This Isle has forty five
Leagues Circuit, has twenty seven Villages, of which Junaparan is the chief,
and in each Village four, five or 600 men, so that the French made account of
10000 men in this Island.

The fertility of the Country, with its Commodities.
The Air serene, temperate and healthful, the Waters excellent, and which scarce
ever corrupt on the Sea. The Land as fruitful as any in America, yielding
Brazile-wood, Saffron, Cotton, Red-dye, Lake, or Rose color, Balm, Tobacco,
Pepper; and sometimes Ambergrease is gathered on its Coast. The Land is found
proper for Sugar, and if it were tilled, would produce Grains; some say, it
has Mines of Jasper, and white and red Crystal, which for hardness surpasses
the Diamonds of Alenzon: It is well watered with fresh Rivers, and pleasant
Streams, well clothed with Woods, in which are store of Fowl. The people are
strong of body, Its Inhabitants, and Apparel.
live in good health, commonly dying with age; the women being fruitful till
eighty years of age, both Sexes go naked until they are married, and then their
apparel is only from the Wast to the Knees, which is Manufactures of Cotton, or
Feather-works, in which they are very ingenious.

The Country or the Isle of the Tapouies.
The Tapouy Tapere, that is, the Country of the Tapouies, is another Isle, East
of Maraguon, at Full-sea it is an Isle; on the Ebb only, Sands separate it from
the Continent. The soll is yet better than that of Maranhan, it has but
fifteen Villages, the chief bearing the name of the Country; they are greater
and better peopled than those of Maranhan.

The Country and City of Comma.
West of Tapouy Tapere, and on the firm Land, Comma, a City, River, and Country
of the same name, is of no small value; its fifteen or sixteen Villages are as
well peopled as those of Tapouy Tapere. Between Comma, and Cayetta, which
approaches Para, are diverse people descending from the Toupinambous, as those
of Maranhan, and Comma, descend from the Tapouyes.

The French were likewise diverse times possessed of the Isle of Maranhan:
Ribaut was here in 1594. Ravardiere in 1612. This last chose a most commodious
place in the Island, and built the Fort of St. Lewis; the Portugals drove them
out in 1614, and built new Forts, St. Jago, and Neustra Sennora. Among the
Rivers that full into the Gulf of Maranhan, Miari is the greatest, then
Taboucourou.

The Capitany of Para, with its Commodities.
The Capitany of PARA has a square Fort, seated on a Rock, raised four or five
fadom from the neighboring ground, and well walled, except toward the River;
it has four or five hundred Portugals, who gather in the Country Tobacco,
Cotton, and Sugar. This Capitany holds beyond the Mouth of the Amazone,
Corrupa, and Estiero, and among the Mouths of that River Cogemine.

Of a temperate Air.
Brazile has an Air sweet, and temperate, though under the Torrid Zone, the
days and nights being almost equal; the freshness of the Sea, Rivers, and
ordinary Dews contributing much to its wholsomness. They lie very subject to
Storms, and Thunders; and if it lighten in the evening, it is without Thunder;
if it Thunder, without Flashes. That which likewise proves the goodness of the
Air, is, that their Serpents, Snakes, Toads, etc. are not venomous; Serpents,
Toads, etc. not venomous here.
but often serve for food to the Inhabitants: yet the soil is more proper for
the production of Fruits, Pastures, and Pulse, than the Grains, or Vines of
Europe. They carry them Wine, and Flowr, Corn being subject to spoil on the
Sea. The Natives use Rice and Manjoche to make their Bread. Its fertility and
Commodities.
They have likewise quantity of Pulse, Trees which bear excellent Fruits,
Herbs, Four-footed- Beasts, Birds, and Fish in great abundance, many of which
are not known to us; many sorts of Palm Trees, which yield them great
Commodities: they have some Mines of Gold, but more of Silver; but the riches
of Brazile is drawn from the Sugars, and the Brazile-wood, which comes from
their Araboutan, a mighty Tree, which bears no Fruit. They have abundance of
Parroquetos; among their Monkeys, they have black ones, and of diverse colors,
the most part very pleasant. The skin of the Tapiroussou, curried, becomes so
hard, that it makes Bucklers, not to be pierced by the strongest shot Arrow.

The Inhabitants of Brazile, and what they are addicted unto; their Customs,
etc. Their Habit.
The Brazilians are of a mean stature, gross headed, large shouldred, of a
reddish color, their skins tawny; they live commonly to a hundred and fifty
years, and free from diseases, caring for nothing but War and Vengeance. They
wander most part of their time in Hunting, Fishing, and Feasting; in which
Manjoche furnishes them with Bread; Cumin-seed, with Drink; and and the Flesh
of Beasts, or of their Enemies cut in gobbets, and some Fish, are their most
excellent meats. The men are very cruel, forgetful of courtesies received, and
mindful of injuries. The Women are very lascivious, they are delivered with
little or no pain, and immediately go about their affairs, and not observing
the custom of a Months lying in, as is used among us. They let their hair grow
long, which ordinarily hangs over their shoulders; both Sexes go naked,
especially, till Married: They are esteemed excellent Swimmers; and diverse,
being able to stay an hour together under water. They paint themselves with
diverse colors, all over the body, on which they leave no hair, not so much as
on their Eyelids, but only a Crown about their Head; and fasten a Bone, which
is well polished, and some little Stone, which is esteemed amongst them, in
their upper Lip, and Cheeks. Others cut their skin in Figures, and mixing a
certain tincture it never comes out. They make Bonnets, Frontlets, Ruffes,
Bands, Cloaks, Girdles, Garters, and Bracelets, with Feathers of diverse
colors, which they work, and mix the colors together very excellently. The
Brazilians which have stayed among the Portugals, are, for the most part,
become Christians; the others wander without Religion.

Some knowledge of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
There is a great diversity of Tongues among them; insomuch, that Jarric assures
us, that in his time he observed sixty different ones; and though they have no
Sciences, yet have they some knowledge of the course of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, giving them diverse names, and calling the Eclipses nights of the Sun and
Moon.

The riches of Bra^ile.
All the Wood of Brazile belongs unto the King of Portugal, private persons not
being permitted to trade in it. Their riches come from Whale-Oyl, Confects,
Conserves, Tobacco, Silver, Hides, and other. Commodities; but principally from
Sugar, no Country in the World exporting so much as Brazile does. The Isle
Madera has but ten Sugar Engines, the Isle of St. Thomas possibly less; but
Brazile 4 or 500.

The names of Mestiz, Mulates, Cariboco, Criolo, etc. Explained.
As for the names of Mestiz, and Mulates, which diverse times have been met with;
it is to be observed, that the Portugals being long since here established, and
having from time to time caused to be transported a great many Negroes, as well
Men as Women to serve them; This mixture of diverse Nations, and diverse colors,
has made them to distinguish their Children, and to call those who came from
Father and Mother of the Europeans, Mozom^o; those who came from an European
and a Brazilian, Mestiz, or Mamelucco; those from an European and a Negroess,
Mulates; those from a Brazilian and a Negroess, Cariboco; those from the Father
and Mother of Aethiopians. Criolo. Moreover, it has been known that an
Ethiopian woman whose Husband was likewise an Ethiopian, has brought forth
two Children, the one black, and the other white; and a Brazilian Woman, whose
Husband was likewise a Brazilian, to bring forth two, the one white, and the
other black: and oft-times blacks have whites, and whites blacks; and there are
to be seen white Aethiopians, that is to say, in all the features of their
face, and in their hair, all the proportions of an Ethiopian, but with skin
and hair white.

Before Brazile lies a train of low Rocks, but of a small breadth; but which
continue almost all along the Coast, leaving but certain overtures by which the
Rivers discharge themselves into the Sea. Ships that go or return from Brazile,
pass necessarily by these overtures, or openings, which often times proves very
dangerous.

PARAGVAY or, Rio de la Plata.
THe Province of PARAGVAY, or Rio de la Plata, (other then the Province de la
Plata in Peru) is on the River which those of the Country call Paraguay, the
Spaniards Rio de la Plata, from whence it takes its name: We may comprehend
under the name of Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, all the neighboring Provinces,
and those which are on the Rivers falling into the Paraguay; and consider them
in three, or in seven parts: To wit, in Paraguay or Rio de la Plata, which may
make the higher, and lower part of that which is upon the River; Into, Chaco
and Tucuman, which are on the Rivers, which descend on the right hand, and into
Parana, Guayr and Vraig, which are on the Rivers which descend on the left
hand: These are toward Brazile, and the Mer del Nort; the other two, toward
Peru and Chili, and the two first in the middle.

The River of Paraguay described.
The River of Paraguay, or de la Plata, has its springs in the Lake of Xarajes
on the confines of Peru and Brazile; and descending from north to South, turns
in the end to South-East, receives a great many fair and large Rivers, among
others; Putomayo, Vermejo, or Salado, and la Garzarone on one side, Guaxarape,
Parana, and Vraig on the other.

The Paraguay falling into the Sea makes a Gulf of fifty and odd Leagues wide,
between the Capes of St. Mary and St. Anthony; and an hundred and fifty Leagues
within Land is ten or twelve, and descending farther fifteen, twenty or five
and twenty Leagues broad; but of so little depth, and so cumbred with Rooks and
Banks, that what with them, and the sudden storms which often rise from the
South, sailing up it proves very dangerous.

The Province of Paraguay described.
The particular Province of Paraguay, in the highest part of the River is little
known, nor have the Spaniards here any Colonies, yet it bears its name common
with the River, and communicates it to all the neighboring quarters: The
People are not so barbarous as in Brazile; Its People.
some addicting themselves to Husbandry, in which the men till and sow the
ground, and the Women reap and gather in Harvest; others know how to make
Stuffs, Vestments, spin Cotton, etc.

The Province de la Plata with its Colonies described.
Below Paraguay is the Province dela Plata, where the Spaniards have some
Colonies; viz. 1. The Assumption being the chief place in this Country, is
well built, and very well frequented, neighboured by a great Lake, in the midst
of which is a great Rock, which exalts its head about one hundred fathom
above the water; this Town is said to be inhabited by three sorts of people:
viz. 1 By natural Spaniards who are Masters of it, to the number of about four
hundred families. 2. Mulatoes, being those that are born of Spaniards and
Negro's, of which there are said to be several thousands; and lastly, by
Mestizo's, which are such as are begotten by the Spaniards upon the Natives,
and these are not in such great number: The next Town of note is Buenos Airs,
seated on the ascent of a small Hill, on the Southern Bank of the River de la
Plata, said to contain about two hundred families of Spaniards. It is
encompassed with a Mud-Wall, but its chiefest strength is in its Castle, which
is but small neither over-well provided with Ordnance and Ammunition; the other
Towns are, Las Siette Corrientes, St. Fe and St. Spiritu, or Torre di Gabboto;
the two last, and Buenos Airs, are on the right side; the Assumption, and Las
Corrientes, on the left, and this two hundred and fifty, or three hundred
Leagues from the Sea; Buenos Airs little less than an hundred; St. Fe little
more; the Assumption alone is on the Paraguay, Las Siette Corrientes where the
Parana, etc. falls into the Paraguay.

The fignification of Paraguay, and de la Plata.
This name of Paraguay is given by the Natives of the Country, and signifies a
River of Feathers, either because there are here found great quantities of
Birds, whose Feathers are various and of diverse colors; or because those of
the Country, dress and adorn themselves with those Feathers. The name de la
Plata has been given by the Spaniards, and signifies Silver; because the
first that came to them from Peru, came down this River.

Chaco described with its several Inhabitants.
CHACO has its soil fat, fruitful, and enterlaced with many Rivers. It is
inhabited by diverse Nations, whose Idioms are very different. The Tobares have
about fifty thousand souls. The Mathaguaici's thirty thousand, but not so
valiant, as the Chiriguanes, a Nation much esteemed, and which will not suffer
the Spaniards to inhabit amongst them; they are in continual War with the
Mathaguaici's, making Slaves of as many as they can catch, which made these
call the Spaniards to their aid. The Moconios and Zipatalagars have no sewer
people then the Tobares, and all so valiant in War, that the Chiriguanes dare
not assault them. There is likewise another Nation, whose Language, as they
say, scarce yields to the Latin; but the beauty of the Orechons, is in the
greatness of their Ears. The most part of these people are well-made, very
tall, most of them being about six foot high, they are of an airy and lively
spirit.

Tucuman bounded, and described.
TVCVMAN is very large, being no less then three hundred Leagues long and
broad; yet it touches not the Sea on any side; la Plata bounds it on the East,
Chili on the West, Peru and Chaco on the North, and the Magellanick Land on the
South. The Air and Soil should be excellent; this Country disingaging it self
from the Torrid Zone, and advancing toward the middle of the Temperate Zone;
and almost all the Rivers having their courses toward the East, which brings
some refreshment. And moreover they have but two seasons in the year, each of
six months: the Summer from about the twentieth of March, unto the twentieth of
September, and the Winter, from September to March.

The Tucumans famous.
Among the People of these quarters, the Tucumans are the most famous, since
they have given their name to the Province; then the Zuries, Diaguites, etc.
The Castilians have established here diverse Colonies, that the Province de la
Plata might have communication with those of Peru and Chili. St. Jago del
Estero.
St. Jago del Estero formerly Varco, is in the midway between Buenos Airs and
'Potossi; two hundred and fifty Leagues from this, and little less from the
other. This place is honored with the seat of the Governor of the Province,
as also with a Bishops See, and diverse other Officers of the King. The Land is
furnished with Wool, Its Commodities.
Cotton, Wood, with which they make and dye their Manufactures, Cocheneile,
etc. which they carry to the nearest Capitanies of Brazibe, making great profit
by them.

Several places of note in the way to Peru, described, with their Commodities,
and fertility of the Country.
After St. Jago del Estero; there is likewise on the way to Peru, 1. St. Michael
de Tucuman, seated at the foot of a rocky Mountain, but near a fertile Soil,
both for Corn and Pasturage. 2. Nuestra Sennora de Talavera, situate on the
River Salado, in a fruitful Soil, abounding plentifully in Cotton, of which the
Inhabitants make several Manufactures, in which they are so industrious, that
they have gained by their Trade (to the Mines of Potossi a hundred and forty
Leagues distant, and other places,) great riches. 3. Las Juntas. 4. St.
Salvador. 5. Salta. 6. Corduba, on another side, and there where two great
Ways meet, the one of Buenos Airs, to Potossi by St. Jago del Estero, and the
other of Sancto be and Spiritu Sancto to St. Jago del Estremadura in Chili by
St. Luyz, which makes this place of some consideration: Besides that the Air is
temperate, and the Soil fruitful and pleasant, and which yields Grains and
Fruits, it is well watered with fresh streams, in which are good Fish. In their
Woods they have Fowls, much Venison and other Beasts; they have Wine, Salt, and
in their Mountains appearance of some Mines of Silver. The Colony is of three
hundred, others say six hundred Spaniards. Their principal trade is on Peru and
Chili side. The Natives are much civilized both in habit and manners, imitating
the Spaniards, from whom they are willing to receive instructions. Its
Inhabitants.


The provinces of Parana, Guayr and Vraig.
The Provinces of PARANA, GVAYR and VRAIG pass under the name of Paraguay, in
the relations which the Fathers Jesuits give. It says, that these Fathers
having long observed that there was an innumerable company of Souls, which
might be converted to Christianity; they cast themselves among these
Barbarians, learned their tongue, drew them from the Woods, Mountains, and
hidden Caves; assembled them in diverse habitation; and by this means lead them
to a sociable life, taught them first Tillage, and the most necessary Arts and
Manufactures; then to read and write, to music, singing and dancing, but above
all instructed them in the Christian Religion, and Piety.

Several good orders observed by them.
These Habitations are composed of near a thousand Families; and each Family
besides the Father, Mother, and the Children; receive often some aged person,
not able to work, or some Orphan. So soon as a Habitation is established, the
Fathers introduce the Government they are to follow; give them Magistrates and
Officers, chosen among the most capable of their Body, declare to them the
polity and rules they are to observe, take care that the fields assigned to
each family be tilled and sowed in due time, that their flocks be well kept;
and if there happen any contest among them, what the Fathers ordain stands as a
sentence without revocation.

Of these Habitations; Parana has six, St. Ignatius on the River of Tibiquari,
Itapoa or the Incarnation, and the Holy Sacrament on the River of Parana, N. D.
de Yguazu on that of Iguazu, Acaraig or la Nativita de N. D. likewise on the
Parana. The Air in all these Habitations is good; the Soil fertile, they have
too much Wood, little Pasturage; and near Yguazu little Fish, by reason of the
Cataract.

The province of Guayr, with its Colonies and Habitations described.
The Province of Guayr is under the Tropic of Capricorn, advancing it self unto
Brazile. There has been here, for a good continuance of time two or three
Colonies of Castilians; Cividad Real, or Ontiveros, and sometimes Guayr, after
the name of the Province. Villarica, and St. Paul, which some esteem in
Brazile. The habitations for those of the Country, are Nuestra Sennora de
Loretto, and St. Ignatius on the Parana; St. Francis Xavier L Incarnation, and
St. Joseph on the Tibagiva; the seven Archangels, and St. Paul in the Land of
great Tajoba, toward Brazile.

The River Parana.
Below Cividad Real, there where is the separation of the two Provinces of
Parama and Guayr, the River Parana makes a Cataract, as remarkable as any in
the World. This River precipitating it self from a very high Rock, finds it
self likewise engaged among very high Rocks for the space of fifteen or sixteen
Leagues, where with a great declension it strikes against some, traverses
others; divides its waters into many Branches, re-assembles them; and after
having been so long in foam and froth, disingaged from these Rocks, it
repasses; but in every hour of the day once only is heard, at the bottom of the
River, a certain Lowing, which raises up the waters, but which endures but for
a moment, and the River retakes its ordinary course, which is Navigable above
and below the Cataract.

The province of urvaig with its chief places described.
The Province of Vrvaig is on the Sea, and between Brazile, and the Mouth of the
Paraguay; it takes its name from the River of Vrvaig, that is, of Snails, by
reason of the prodigious quantity here found. Its habitations are, La
Conception, there where the Vrvaig falls into the Paraguay; St. Nicholas, on
the River Piration; St. Francis Xavier, up within Land; and likewise on the
Vrvaig; Ibicuit, or the Visitation, on the Paraguay, and almost directly
opposite to Buenos Airs, on the other side.

But there has been no relation of these Parts since those of 1626, and 1627,
which were Printed in 1636 in Antwerp, and in 1637 in France. If these people
have since inclined themselves to Christianity, as those Relations say they had
begun to do, no doubt, but they are by this time, all or the greatest part,
Christians.

The Magellanick Land, and Island.
The Magellanick-Land bounded.
SOuth of Chili, Tucaman, and Rio de la Plata, lies a great Region, and a great
many of Isles, which we pass under the name of the MAGELLANICKS. They make
together the last, and most Southern part of America Meridionalis: washed on
the East by the Mer del Nort, on the West by the Mer del Sud, or the
Pacifique-Sea; on the South by the Magellanick-Sea, which may in general be
extended over all the Coasts of these Magellanick-Lands and Islands.

The Straight of Magellan first discovered by Magellan the Portugal.
The straight of Magellan only, formerly, rendered all these Quarters famous;
because that the People of Europe, and particularly the Castilians, seeking a
passage other then that of the Cape of Good-Hope, to go to the Moluccoes, and
East Indies; Magellan, a Portugal Gentleman, but in the name and service of the
King of Castile for some discontent he had received in the payment of his wages
in Portugal, was the first that found this Straight at the extremity of America
Meridionalis; and who passing from Mer del Nort, unto that Del Sud, between the
21 of October, and the 27, or 28 of November; in the year 1520, gave means, not
only to the Castilians, to pretend the discovery of the Molucco's, by the West,
against the Portugals, who boasted to have first discovered them by the East:
but likewise showed a way to make the whole circuit of the Terrestrial Globe,
which certainly had never before been done.

The two openings of our Straight, as well toward us, and the Mer del Nort, as
on the other side, and toward the Mer del Sud, are between the 52, and 53
Degrees of Latitude, the middle descending unto the 54. And the two Capes of
the first opening, are that of the Virgins, on the right hand, and on the
Continent; and that of St. Severin, or of St. Espritt, on the left, and in the
Magellanick Isles, or Terra del Fogo. The two Capes which end the other
opening, are Cape Victory, on the right hand, and Cape Desired, on the left.

The length and breadth of this Straight.
The length of this Straight is near two hundred Leagues; Its breadth only two,
three, six, ten Leagues, and sometimes more; incommodious for the most part,
being subject to Whirl-Pools. The Waves of the Mer del Sud predominate for
fifty and odd Leagues, the rest is beaten on by those of the Mer del Nort; and
it is observed, that so long as the Mer del Sud predominates, the Straight is
locked between very high Mountains and Rocks, always covered with Snow, and
which seem to touch on the other; which makes the approach difficult on this
side, and withal, the Sea is exceeding deep. The bottom of that which is beaten
by the Mer del Nort, is easily found, and the Fields and Valleys, according to
the Season, are very pleasant, both on the one and the other side. And
moreover, here the straight much enlarges it self, and has store of commodious
Ports and Roads, not fast distant from one another; where the waters likewise
are good, and the Wood which is found in the Mountains, above the Coast, has
something of Cinnamon, and being put in the fire, renders an agreeable Odor.

So soon as the discovery of this Straight was known in Spain, the Castilians
had a design to make themselves Masters of it; with an intent to hinder all
other Nations from passing. In 1523 Dom. Gutieres Carvajal, Bishop of
Plaisance, sent in the name of Charles the fifth, four Ships, to make it more
particularly; but this Voyage proved very unfortunate, for three of the Ships
perished in the Straight, and the fourth retired (with no small hurt) to Lima.
In 1526 Garsia de Loyosa was likewise here for the same intent, which proved
also fatal; for the Admiral coming out of the Straight was lost, as also some
at the Molucco's. In 1535 one Simon de Alcazova entered it; but the mutiny which
was among his people was the cause of his loss and ill success. Dom. Gutiers
Carvajal, Bishop of Plaisance, sent other three Vessels, in 1539, of which the
Admiral was lost, one returned back, and the third passed on. Some others there
were which went (all of which were Castilians) some by the Coast of Spain,
others by the Coast of Peru; but none could ever find a way to seize this
Straight, whereby to hinder a passage to others.

Sir Francis Drake in this Straight.
For in 1575 Sir Francis Drake, happily passed this Straight, came into the Mer
del Sud, pillaged and burned along the Coast of Chili, and Peru, quantity of
Spanish Vessels, and making a very rich booty, he returned into England.

This course of the English very much alarmed Peru, and was the cause that the
Viceroy sent Dom. Piedro Sarmiento, to take full knowledge, and make report in
Spain of all the Coasts, Harbors, Anchorages, and particularly of places where
Forts might be built, and Colonies established in this Straight. This report
made in Spain, Dom. Diego de Valdes was sent with twenty three Vessels, and
twenty five hundred men. But this voyage was likewise unhappy; for seven or
eight Ships, with about seven or eight hundred men, were lost almost in sight
of Spain; also some others of his Ships, with about three or four hundred men,
likewise perished during the Voyage; and Valdes returned into Spain, with seven
or eight of his Ships. Sarmento with four remaining was at this Straight, built
Nombre de Jesus at the beginning of the Straight, and left there a hundred and
fifty men, and began farther in the Cividad del Rey Philippe: but the want of
many things, and the cold, too harsh for the Spaniards, made the last work
cease, and the men be brought back to the first Colony. Pedro Sermiento
returning into Spain, fell into the hands of the English, near the Coast of
Brazil; and on the other side, Famine, Miseries, and the Cruelties of the
Inhabitants of the Straight, soon destroyed the Colony he had left.

After Drake, many other English and Hollanders passed at diverse times, and in
diverse years. Spilbergen in 1615. more happily then the rest, having taken his
time in January and February, which is the Summer of these Quarters, the Sun
returning from Capricorn.

The Straight dele Maire discovered by Isaac le Maire, a Hollander.
But in 1617 a hundred years after Magellan, Isaac le Maire, a Hollander, having
discovered another Straight incomparably more easy to pass then that of
Magellan, this only is now made use of, and called the Straight Dele Maire: It
is between the 55 and 55 degrees of Septentrional Latitude. It has throughout
10 or 12 Leagues of length and breadth; and so soon as it is passed, there is
found a very great Sea, there where we have formerly believed to be a Land so
great, that some would make it a third Continent under the name of Terra
Australis or Terra Incognita, and Magellanica.

The Inhabitants of Magellan, Maire, and the Magellanick Land.
The Inhabitants of the Straight of Magellan, Maire, and the Magellanick Lands,
are very barbarous, having very sharp and dangerous Teeth; they go almost
naked, though in a Country very cold; they have neither Religion nor Policy;
they are born white, but paint some part of their body red, and others black:
And this Painting is a Band drawn straight from Head to Foot, or else cross
their Body, or slooping; the rest is in its natural color, or else sometimes
varied with diverse colors. They garnish their Arrows and Javelins with
Fish-bones, or with Stones very sharp, of which they make their Knives; they
use likewise Clubs and Slings.

The Patagons a sort of people.
Amongst these People are the Patagons, a particular Nation in the Continent,
which some call the Race of Toremen. If report be true, they are the greatest
men, known at present in any part of the World: They are said to be no less
then ten foot high, and we are assured, that the greatest men that were with
Magellan, or with the English and Hollanders, that passed this Straight,
reached but to their Girdle.

But it is time to leave America. The first expense made to go thither, was not
of above 15 or 16000 Ducats, which were advanced by Lewis de St. Ange,
Secretary of State, and not taken out of the Treasuries of the Kings of Castile
and Arragon, who then protested they had not so much money to expend; yet
notwithstanding this little has returned them infinite riches. Christopher
Columbus seized on Hispaniola, and the Neighboring Isles a little after 1492.
Americus Vesputius of Brazil in 1497. Ferdinand Cortes took Mexico in 1519.
Pizzarre, Peru in 1529. So others have seized of diverse parts of America, and
still of those which are the best; and have brought thence so much Gold, Silver
and Riches, that they have filled almost all Europe, and made those Estates,
Lordships and Commodities on this side, which before were valued but at Twenty
pence, Twenty shillings; or Twenty thousand pounds worth, now a hundred times
as much.

The Spaniards have received great losses from the English and Dutch.
But we must confess, that these discoveries, and these conquests of new Lands
has cost Spain store of men, not so much in the War as on the Sea. In 1590. a
hundred Spanish Ships laden with very great riches to return to Europe, passing
in company near Florida, a tempest surprised them, and cast them all away, save
one, whom Linscot reports to have seen in Tercera; and this Author assures us,
that at the same time diverse other Tempests, or diverse English Rovers took away
or sunk another hundred of Spanish Ships; so that of 220 parted the year before
from New Spain, St. Domingo, Havana, Cape Verde, Brazil, Guiney and other
places, not above 14 or 15 escaped shipwreck or the English Rovers.

Likewise after, and at other times, sometimes the English, sometimes the
Hollanders have not only taken abundance of Spanish Vessels on the Sea, but
likewise diverse places on Land, and sometimes whole Provinces and Islands. The
Hollanders held not long since a good part of Brazil; the English hold at
present Barbados, Jamaica, and some other places in the Isles and Lands about
it. And all those Isles which are on this side Hispaniola, are in the hands of
the English, French and Hollanders, who likewise establish diverse Colonies on
the Coast of Guiana; which if they subsist, those Isles are not already more
troublesome Thorns to Mexico and Terra-Firma, then these Colonies in Guiana
will be to Terra-Firma, Peru and Brazil.

The Trade of America in geral.
To give a small touch of the Traffic of this New World, it is observed to give
employment to many Ships of great burden, and that of several Nations, as well
Europeans, as others, by which they have gained much riches; in which, England,
Spain, France, Portugal, Holland etc. have been large sharers. To sum up the
rich staple commodities that it produces, as also what Commodities they
receive in exchange, will not be unnecessary.

Its Fruits and Commodities.
First then, Its Earth yields Grains, excellent Fruits, Plants, Sugar, Indico,
Tobacco, Ginger, Long-Pepper and other Spices, Several Medicinal Drugs, Cotton,
of which, as also of the Feathers of their Birds, they make excellent and
curious Manufactures. In the bowels of the Earth lie hid, in abundance of
Mines, Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Tin and Copper; there is also plenty of
Quicksilver, Amber, Precious Stones, Pearls, Bezoar, Amber Greece, Gum
Arabic, and several Precious Gums, Cocheneile, Saffron, Crystal, excellent
Balsom, Rozin, Salt, Honey, Wax, Rich Furs, Ox-Hides, Tallow, Whale-Oyl, Dried
Fish, Pitch, Tar, Jallop, Salsaperilla, Gayac, Turbith. Several excellent
Woods, as Campeche, Brazil, Lignum Vita, Green Ebony, Cedar, Cypress, Firrs,
and excellent Wood for building of Ships.

Commodities sent them in exchange.
For these and other such rich commodities they take in exchange, Beads,
Necklaces, Bracelets, and the like Toys; as also Looking-Glasses, Ribbons,
Needles, Pins, and all sorts of Haberdashery Ware; also Knives, Hatchets, Saws,
Nails, Hammers, and other Instruments made of Iron; with several other of the
like cheap Commodities.

We have thus comprised all that seemed most necessary concerning America: true
it is, whole Volums might be made only touching the Nature and Propriety of
their Grains, Herbs, Plants, Fruits, Fowl, Beasts and Fish, which are all
different from ours; yet those which have been carried from hence; have thrived
and multiplied exceeding well, either in one place or another: But of all our
Beasts, nothing so much astonished them as our Horses; and it was near a
hundred years in Peru, and other parts of America, before those People would be
persuaded to mount on them.

FINIS.

