THE DEVIL THE Greatest Sinner IN THE WORLD: Or, A REPLY to THOMAS POWEL, who
calls himself A Minister of the Gospel, yet Affirms, JESUS CHRIST was the
Greatest Sinner in the World.

By JOHN VAUGHTON.

The Lord frustrateth the Token of the Liars, etc. Isaiah. 44.24, 25.

He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both
are Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

AN Epistle to Thomas Powell.
T. P. here follows a Copy of the Words thou gave under thy Hand, the 29th of
the 2d Month, 1676. to J. V.
Jesus Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World, I Thomas Powel Minister of
the Gospel affirms. SInce thy giving forth of the forementioned Words, thou
have published in print a Paper in Vindication of the aforesaid Word^, though
thou wast in Love several times desired to condemn them before the printing of
the said Paper, and so no more to have been made of them; but thou refusing to
do it, put forth thy printed Paper, as aforesaid, to which Paper thou have
received an Answer, entitled, A Vindication of Jesus Christ, etc. to which
thou have replied, still vindicating thy former Words, viz. That Jesus Christ
was the greatest Sinner in the World; In thy printed Papers thou say, by
Imputation, but thou said not so in thy first Paper. In thy Epistle to thy
Book entitled, Mr Powell 's Answer, etc. thou say, Christ was the greatest
of Sinners; I query of thee, whether thou believe the Devil was not, and is
not the greatest of Sinners, he being the Original and first Cause of it, by
whom it was brought into the World, and by whom it is continued and increased in
it? I hope thou will not deny but that the Devil is the greatest of Sinners;
and do thou think that the Devil must have no Sin imputed to him, who is the
greatest Sinner? do thou think he must bear no Punishment for the Sin of
Mankind, seeing he is the Original and first Cause of it all? Consider of this
thou and the Divines of thy Way, and answer in Plainness according to plain
Scripture, which you profess to be your Rule, remember what God has said unto
the Serpent or Devil, the greatest of Sinners, Because thou have done this,
thou art cursed above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field, etc. Here
thou may see what Punishment God justly brought upon him for leading Man and
Woman into Sin; here thou may see how God both imputes Sin to him, and
punishes him for it; and thou may consider Christ's Words to the Goats on
the left Hand, Mat. 25.41. Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; here again thou may see God imputes Sin to the Devil,
the greatest of Sinners, the Original of all Sin, and not only to him, but also
to his Disciples, and does and will punish them both for it; John 3. and 8. He
that commits Sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the Beginning;
for this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works
of the Devil (which is Sin) John does not say, he came to take the Guilt of Sin
upon him, which is the Devil's Work, but says, he was manifest to take away
our Sins, and in him is no Sin; and John further says, In this the Children of
God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil, whosoever does not
Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, 1 John
3.10. T.P. I would have thee to consider whether thou have not charged that
upon Christ Jesus, the immaculate Lamb of God, which is justly and properly to
be charged upon the Devil, to wit, that he was the greatest Sinner in the
World; I could rejoice to know thee to come out of that Spiritual Blindness
which thou art fallen into through the Delusions of that Evil One, who
certainly is the greatest of Sinners, whatever thou or any other may think or
say to the contrary.

And in Order to convince thee of the Falseness of thy Charge against Christ,
to wit, That he was the greatest sinner in the World; I ask thee to show by
plain Scripture, if thou can, how Christ can be a Sinner, or the greatest
Sinner in the World, and not sin? Sin is the Transgression of the Law of God,
Christ did not transgress the Law, but fulfilled it; that which renders Man a
Sinner in God's Sight is the transgressing of his holy Law, which the Serpent
did when he tempted the Woman to eat of the Tree, which God commanded she
should not eat of, he told her a Lie to encourage her to transgress God's Law,
and she and the Man did transgress the Law of God in eating that which God had
forbidden, and thus they were lead into Sin by him, who is the greatest of
Sinners; for he became a Sinner by transgressing the Law of God, and he being
the first Sinner, and the Original and first Cause of it in all Mankind, does
justly merit the Name of a Sinner, and not only so, but the greatest of
Sinners, by Action and Imputation, and to him belongs the greatest Punishment;
and thus the Man and Woman came properly and justly to merit or deserve the
Name of Sinners, by transgressing the Law of God, and to have it imputed unto
them, or charged upon them, and to be judged, condemned or punished for it in
their impenitent and unbelieving State.

T. P. take notice, that though we deny and oppose thy Charge against Christ,
as unscriptural and unsound, when sai'st, He waes the greatest Sinner in the
World. And in thy Epistle thou sai'st, that the Word, He was made Sin for us,
many understand, a Sacrifice for Sin, etc. which thou sai'st, thou acknowledges
to be a Godly Sense; the Godly Sense is the true and right Sense, which Sense
we own, and had thou kept to this Godly Sense, thou had not been opposed
by us, but thou giving another Sense contrary to this that is an Ungodly one,
and therefore we oppose it; yet we own that holy man Christ Jesus to be that
one Offering, who has perfected forever them who are sanctified; I say, we
dearly own him, who offered up himself through the Eternal Spirit, as a Lamb
without Spot and Blemish; he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours
only, but for the Sins of the whole World, we have received Power from God the
Father to preach Forgiveness of Sins that are past in the Name of Christ Jesus,
through the Forbearance of God: John Baptist says, Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the Sins of the World; be did not say, behold the greatest
Sinner in the World, neither did he say, he was g^ilty of the Sins he took away
And so T. P. and thy Brethren, keep to Scripture Language, which is a Form of
found Words, which Words were given forth by the holy men, as they were moved
by the holy Spirit of God, which Spirit gave them a right Knowledge of God and
Christ, and led them to speak right things of God and of Christ, which Spirit
thou and thy Brethren being Strangers to, speak wrong things of God and of
Christ, and of the Scriptures also, for which in Love to God, Christ,
Scriptures, and your immortal Souls, we do justly blame you. Christ says, I am
the Light of the World, he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness (or
Ignorance) but he shallhave the Light of Life; Joh. 8.12. he also says,
Believe in the Light that ye may be the Children of the Light. Joh. 12.36. We
would have you to take Christ's Counsel, believe in the Light, and that will
give you the Knoledge of God, Christ and the Scriptures, and will lead you to
speak right things of God and Christ, and to live a Godlike and a Christ like
Life, and then you and we shall not differ.

T. P. I have yet mere to say unto thee in Way of just Rebuke for thy
unscriptural and ungodlike Words which thou have given forth in thy Epistle to
the aforesaid Book, which take as follows; thou having affirmed that Jesus
Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World by Imputation, etc. thou say,
all that I shall urge in the defense of this great Truth is this, either Christ
died justly or unjustly, I mean God the Father in punishing his Son acted
therein either justly or unjustly; unjustly, who dares to assert, justly, who
dares to deny. etc? T. P. in these Words laid down by thee, thou chargest God
with punishing his Son, but how will thou prove it? If thou continues of this
mind, I would have thee offer us some proof for what thou say, if thou
can. which is either Scriptural or Reasonable: By God's punishing his Son, I
can understand no other by thy Words here inserted, or any elsewhere in thy
Book, then his being spit upon, crowned with Thorns, called Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils, betrayed, murdered and hanged on a Tree.

If thou say, this was the Punishment wherewith God punished him, then I ask
thee, who were the Instruments God made use of in inflicting these punishments
upon him? Christ said, He that dippeth his Hand with me in the Dish, the same
shall betray me; and after Judas had taken the Sop, Satan entered into him, and
he went to the malicious Highpriests and betrayed his Master, and they sent a
Band with Swords and Staves to take him; and as Steven said, those bloody
Highpriests, Judas and the rest of their Company were the Betrayers and
Murderers of him, and they laid their wi^ked Hands upon him, and crucified the
Lord of Life, Acts 7.25. Him being delivered by the Determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked Hand, have crucified and
slain, Acts 2.25. Now if thou charge these beforementioned Cruelties exercised
or inflicted upon him as God's punishing his Son; will not this prove thee a
Ranter in Principle at least? for do thou not hereby justify the Devil and
all his bloody Train to be God's Servants, and Doers of God's Wiill herein; for
I have heard, that some of the rude Ranters have said, that the Devil is God's
good Servant; and what do thou say less? for if all these Cruelties be
esteemed PRINCIPALLY God's Act, it is easy to prove from Scripture, that the
Devil and wicked Men did inflict those Cruelties upon him; Christ told that
bloody Generation, They were of their Father the Devil, and the Lusts (or
Works) of their Father they would do, he was a Liar and a M^derer from the
Beginning; here thou may see that Christ told this bloody Crew, That the
Lusts (or Works) of their Father they would do, which Lusts (or Works) was
Lying and Murder; Christ did not tell them, that their lying and murdering of
him were the Works of God, or his punishing of his Son, but that they were of
their Father the Devil. Thou say in the same Page, Christ may thank Sin for
all his Sufferings, etc. If so, then he might thank the Devil, who is the
Author of it (but he i^ not worthy of Thanks) this is some of thy dark divining.

There is another Thing I am not willing to omit, that is in the same page;
thou say. That Sin set the Father against Christ: It may be thou may^st call
this a Thesis, but it is a dark one; it may be thou may say, It Is D^v^^try,
and ^^e Quakers are a Silly Ignorant People, and do not understand it; but come
Tho. Powel, thou say, Scripturs is thy Ru^^^, show us plain Scripture for
it, if thou can; for t^^ Quakers love Scripture very well, and God has
given them the Knowledge of them, and Comfort of them by the Holy Spirit, by
which the holy Men were moved to give them forth; Glory to his holy Name for
the same, and for all his Blessings and Mercies. Now Christ says, The Father
has not loft me alone; for I do always those things that please him, John
28.29. and the Father says of the Son, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear ye him, 2 Pet. 1.17. T. P. I desire thou may believe the
Father and the Son's Testimony beforementioned, and Repent of thy dark and
unscriptural Affirmation.

T. P. There is one more dark unscriptural Saying of thine, which I must rebuke
thee for; thou say in the same page of thy Epistle, the words are, viz.
Christ was accounted a Sinner by Wicked Men; but that is not all, he was
accounted also a Sinner by his Father.

Answ. In this Position or Affirmation thou hold forth, that God and Wicked
Men are of one Mind (which never was or can be) Wicked Men say, He cast out
Devils by Beelzebub; and said, Say we not well, thou art a Samaritan, and have
a Devil? And Wicked Men told the Blind Man, whose Eyes Christ opened, Christ
was a Sinner; and thou say, God accounted him also a Sinner, or else (say
thou) he would not have dealt so severely with him as he did.

T. P. This is written in Love and Rebuke to thee; and remember that its
written, The Rebukes of a Friend are better then the Kisses of an Enemy.

John Field.

THE DEVIL THE Greatest Sinner IN THE WORLD.
THat Thomas Powel should call his Pamphlet, An Answer to John Vaughton and
John Field, their Fictious Pamphlet, as he does falsely style it in his
Titlepage, I might indeed very much admire, but that I do find him grown to a
very great height of Confidence or Impudence [that he has said, That he is
satisfied, that neither Christians nor his Aequaintance will give Credit to any
thing that the Quakers should say of him, page 1.] A notorious Untruth indeed;
for many, both Christians and his Acquaintance do believe, That what the
Quakers have said of him is true, and he himself is made to confess to much of
it, as hereafter I shall make appear; and notwithstanding he does find fault
with that Account that I have given of that Discourse that past between T. P.
and my self, which Account given by me I shall stand by; and I could have added
something more, that at that time passed between us, which might have tended
further to the manifesting of his Folly, but I did not at that time think it
material to the Controversy, that was then and is still between us; but
inasmuch as he has undertaken to give forth a Narrative, and to tell his
Reader its a True One (when indeed much of it is false, and its much short of
giving an Account of much of our Proceedings, and the Fairness of our Dealings
to him is omitted) but such is the Practice of many, who would assume to
themselves the Name of Gospel. Ministers, and pretend to the People, that
Scripture is their Rule, and the only Rule of Eaith and Practice; and when we
call to them for plain Scripture, for the proving of their Doctrine (though so
fundamental that they confide in it, and upon it lay the whole stress of their
Salvation) we cannot obtain it; but instead thereof they give us their dark
Meanings and feigned (humble Conceivings) and their Hopes (though vain) that
its according to it, as this my Adversary has done, who has passed over much
of the material Passages of my Book, and has taken no notice of them, and yet,
as I said before, calls his Pamphlet an Answer to it; for Proof whereof I refer
my Reader to the 8th page of my Book, which is as follows; But Thomas Powel
having now in print declared, that he meant by Imputation, then we must read
his words thus, I Thomas Powell Minister of the Gospel affirms, Jesus Christ
was the Greatest Sinner in the World (by Imputation) Now T. P. with the rest of
the Divines of thy Way, give us plain Scripture that says, Jesus Christ was by
Peter, Paul, or any of the Ministers of the Gospel, affirmed to be the Greatest
Sinner in the World by Imputation; and give us plain Scripture that says, He
took the Guilt of our ^ins upon him: for though it is said Isa. 53.6. That he
laid upon him the Iniquity of us all; or as the Hebrew word has it, He made
the Iniquity of us all to meet on him; or as in the 10th Verse it is said, He
was made an Offering for Sin; it does not say, he was gulity of Sin. Now T. P.
give us plain Scripture that says, Jesus Christ by taking, bearing or
suffering for Sinners, that he became guilty of Sin, and that he was the
Greatest of Sinners; and give us a plain Scripture that says, He has more
Sins to answer for then any particular Sinner: For although I have read of the
Sins of David, whom I suppose you do believe was an Elect Person, whose Sins
were (as in Scripture recorded) Murder and Adultery, yet I do not find by any
Testimony of Scripture, that Jesus Christ was guilty of David's Sins, nor of
Paul's Sins, who was a Persecutor of him in his Members; nor of Peter's Sin,
who denied him. And T. P. I query with thee, Whether thou be an Elect Person,
or nay? if yea, then tell me, whether Jesus Christ be guilty of thy Lies, some
of which are hereafter mentioned, viz. T.P. affirmed, That he had writ the word
Imputation; but the Original being showed, his Lie appeared; and then he said,
he had writ the word Imputation, but that John Vaughton Note. After T. P. had
writ Jesus Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World, and had laid the Paper
by, and after several words more had past between us, he said, God made the
Devil, and I gave him the same Paper again, and in it he writ, God gave the
Devil his Being. And of this I have Witness.
snacht his Paper from him; and this also was and is testified to be a Lie.

So much of my Book, and more that might be mentioned, he has not taken notice
of it, and it stands over his Head.

And now I shall proceed to clear my self from the Lies that he would cast upon
me (for they are his and not mine) I shall begin with the first that he charges
me with, which is in the 2d. page of his Book; his Words are these, If J.
Vaughton had been a Christian he would have done like a Christian, i. e. done
me right by acquainting the World, that though Thomas Bye denied the Word
Imputation, as spoken by me before, yet he denied not but that it was spoken by
me just after it was written. Reader, is not T. P. in a passion thinks thou or
void of Understanding, first to note me as a Liar, and then to query whether I
am a Christian or no, and at another time to conclude me to be none, and to
charge me with doing him wrong, because I did not tell the World that he spoke
the Word Imputation after he had written, when he had told the World himself,
and had brought his Witness to prove it, a thing that I did not in my Book
contradict, that which I contradicted him for was his saying, that he mentioned
the Word Imputation before he gave me those Words under his Hand, viz. Jesus
Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World, I Thomas Powel Minister of the
Gospel affirms; so that his saying, and bringing his Witness to prove that he
spoke the Word Imoutation before, was and is a Lie, and for his saying, he can
produce the Original under T. B's Hand, but this neither proves the Words true,
nor I. Vaughton a Liar, as T. P. would have it, who after all his Busle does
confess, that his Witness having called to Mind cannot remember that T. P. had
the Word Imputation before, but for all this T. P. makes a great Noise, and in
page 3. says, that he does not say positively he had it not, and counts John
Vaug^ton as a flagitious Relator; what his Witness now says is not the matter,
but what his witness did then confess and acknowledge, that is it I related in
the 8th page of my Bo^k, i. e. Thomas Powel did not speak nor mention the Word
Imputation before he wrote those Words: Now if this be not a positive Assertion
tell me what is one, and then let me know whether thou have not abused me in
accounting me a flagitious Relater, and thy Witness also, by getting desiring
or procuring him who cannot read writing to subscribe as a Witness to that
which he cannot call to mind, will this evidence pass or be taken by any that is
conscientious? but this is T. P's. Witness still, who indeed has said, he is
not willing to have T. Powel run down, but he will help him what he can, though
to little purpose, except it be to ensnare himself: So its evident the Lie is
between T. Powel and his witness, and I am clear of it, but T. P. says, to
clear him from the ^ie (a thing he would not be guilty on for a World) believe
him who will, I cannot so long as I can trace him in them, but T. P. said, that
T. B. said to clear him (though he could not remember the Word Imputation
before, yet he gave him his Hand freely and voluntarily The greater is his
wickedness, if it be so, and he must bear his Burden. Another Lie of John
Vaughton's, as he falsely terms it is in the 9th page of my Book where in I make
use of William Farrinton's Name, telling my Reader that he said, T. P. was a
Liar, and that he had told many Lies about it; though Thomas Powel counts this
a Lie, and says William Farrinton denies it, yet I can prove it by a witness
who heard him speak it, and William Farrinton since has given it under his
Hand that T. P. has spoken some Untruths about it; I would have this
Equivocater to tell me what Difference there is between an Untruth and a Lie;
but he says, that William Farrinton said, If he knew him to be a Liar (which I
question not but he does) yet he would not have told such as the Quakers. What
he means by such, I need not much inquire, but that he has since T. P's Book
was written, told the Quakers that T. P. had spoken diverse Untruths about it,
so that I shall still note T. P. for a L -- The third thing that he charges
upon me as a Lie, is no Lie of mine; the matter is this, That W. F. upon sight
of what T. P. had written, said he would not stand by his Words for 10000.
Worlds, and that he should not preach in his Meeting House till he had
publicly condemned it; did he publicly condemn it before he preached? no such
matter, then no Lie of mine; but he says, Note. And W. F. in whose meeting
house he preached, did when he had done, stand up and publicly condemned what
T. P. brought in Vindication of his Doctrine out of Luther.
that I know that he condemned it in a Sermon; He might be ashamed of his
Confiidence, if he is not past it; for instead of condemning it, he told the
People, he hoped he had proved that Evangelical Doctrine, which was, that Jesus
Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World, as he affirmed; the People at that
time being desired to turn to their proof to see whether he had done it, many
answered No, nor never could; but T. P. tells me, he does now condemn it, as I
in my Ignorance take it, page 4. viz. That he was a Sinner Actually. Why
Ignorance? It Is Blasphemy to affirm that Christ Jesus was a Sinner by Action or
Imputation; for though wicked men did say Christ was a Sinner, yet they could
not convince him of Sin; and God does not impute Christ a Sinner, that never
committed Sin, and Christ cannot justly be imputed a Sinner except he had
committed Sin; for he only is a Sinner that commits Sin, which Christ never
did, therefore no Sinner by Action nor Imputation in God's account; for it is
evident, that Sinners are out of a converted estate, and are in Error, as in
James 5.20. Let him know that he that converteth a Sinner from the Error of his
Way, shall save a Soul from Death, etc. but Christ Jesus was never in Error,
and therefore no Sinner; for God is holy and pure forever, and Christ Jesus is
the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Father's Substance,
etc. Heb. 1.3. It is said Mat. 9.14. Christ came not to call the Righteous, but
Sinners to Repentance; if Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World, as T. P.
has affirmed, then the greatest Sinner calls the lesser to Repentance, which
is absurd. Again, Romans 5.8. God commended his Love to us in that whilst we
were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. If Christ Jesus was the greatest Sinner
in the World, as T. P. has affirmed, then the greatest Sinner died for the
lesser, which is contrary to the Apostle Peter's Testimony, as it is recorded in
1 Pet. 3.18. Christ also has suffered for Sin, the Just for the Unjust, that
he might bring many to God. Again, James 4.8. Cleanse your Hands ye Sinners,
and purify your Hearts ye double minded: So that by this Scripture it does
also appear, that SINNERS are in an unclean Estate, and have need of cleansing,
and if the lesser Sinners have Need, much more the greatest, for so T.P. has
affirmed Christ Jesus was: And though he calls himself a Minster of the Gospel,
yet is he an Enemy to God and Christ, also a Contradicter of plain Scripture
Testimony; and such is his Wickedness against us, that when we have given our
Belief of Christ Jesus, and have confessed unto him in all his Manifestation,
both within and without, in plain Words, such as our Adversary confesses in
themselves good, yet unsavourily, says he, smells a Quakers Rat in them, and
he does also avouch, That all we say concerning Christ without is but a mere
Equivocation, vide page 10. of T. P 's Book; and yet our Adversaries do
confess, though to the Contradiction of themselves, that it is but a reasonable
Thing for Persons to give their own Meanings to their own Words; but this
reasonable Thing we have not yet obtained from them. The fourth Lie he charges
John Vaughton with is, his denying the Quakers to be no Christians: The Quakers
are Christians, and Christ is the hope of their Glory, and J. V. no Liar in
denying the contrary; and T. P. says, the Quakers have been proved no
Christians, that I deny, except such Quakers as have been of the Forger's
making: And for his terming Thomas Hicks an ingenuous Man for undertaking to
prove the Quakers Hetrodox, both in Principle and Practice, is a vain Flourish
and an empty Boast; for in undertaking that Work he has procured himself a Name
that will certainly render him odious to Posterity; and for his Pains and
Labor therein, he shall certainly have his Reward with the Liars and Maker of
Lies in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, except he repent: But why
does T. P. say we are DUMB is it not because he is in Consusion; for he tells
his Reader, that we drowned him with our Voice, and T. H. may give him the Lie
herein, for does he not know that the Quakers Voice has been loud enough to
prove him a Perverter, a Liar and a Forger. The fifth Lie he charges me with
is, my denying that to be our Principle, which (he says) we have so often
declared, viz. Christ dyed only as an Example; I deny that it is our Principle,
or that we have often declared that Christ died only as an Example; for we do
own (and ever did) that Jesus Christ was an Offering or a Sacrifice for Sin,
And he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but for the
Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2.

And for T. P's saying, That the Quakers are conscious to themselves, that they
are no Christians, is surely a Lie of his own coining.

Now having cleared my self from his Lies, which he would have made mine, I
shall take a little notice of his Passage, wherein he tells his Reader, He
shall make him Smile, by which those that are serious may see what Spirit this
Man is of, who scoffs at Revelation, and makes ado about my going (as he says)
into the Country when he was at London, and there was neither Preacher nor
People. Now I declare, and that in Truth, That at that time I went into the
Country to a Meeting of our Friends, and I being told that it was T. P's Day to
be there, according to his usunl manner, and having Time enough before our
Meeting to go to his Meeting, I did go, not upon Revelation after that manner
as he would insinnate, but upon the Information, as I had before; and when I
came to his Meeting, I was told that he altered his Day on that day I was there
before, whether it was to prevent my meeting with him or not, I shall leave:
and I do say, that we do not place our going to enquire for a Place or Person
upon Immediate Revelation. And I shall refer my Reader to that Passage of his
to his Reader, that says, They made us who were a great People, to desert our
Place, whether we met with him and his People or no: So that I have good Cause
still to trust in the Revelation of God's Power, which did not only confound
and drive him away from disturbing Note. T. P. came into his Meeting when I was
speaking to the People in the Fear of God, and the People were generally still;
and after he came in, he endeavored to stir up the Bad, but the Lord's Power
was with us, and T. P. went away, and took the roughest of the People with him,
and then we had a Peaceable and a Quiet Meeting for about Three Hours, and
though he tells his Reader, That we were so rude, that one would have thought
that we came out of a Bear-Garden. Yet I say, this is a great Untruth, for such
Behavior was not on our Parts, who were sober, and kept in God's Fear, and to
Scriptural Expressions, but on thine, whose saying to one of us, when at thy
Meeting, was, Sirrah, come down; which I am sure savours more of a Bear Garden
Expression, then of a Minister's of Christ Jesus. And thou further said at
that time, and in thy Book since avouchest, That we deserve to be whiped,
scourged, and put in the Stocks; by which people may see, was thy Power as
great as thy Will, that Whipping, Scourging, and putting us in the Stocks
should be the Weapons or Arguments that thou would use instead of the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God and true Ministers Weapons) So that its
manifest, that a Measure of the old persecuting spirit, that ever was a Mark of
the false Church and her Ministers, has entered thee; but thy Horn is too
short. We were sober, and kept in God's Fear, and the Rudeness was with him,
and those that followed him, of whom I do say, Except they come to Repent, and
turn from the Evil of their Doings, they cannot lay down their Heads in Peace:
For it is not every one that cries Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.
of us, and hindering the Testimony which God had put into our Hearts that day,
but also settled the minds of the greatest number of the people, and the Hearts
of many were tendered; and I hope the Sense that a Remnant had of God's
immediate Power, will be as an Engagement for them to wait daily for to feel
the same, that so their Hearts may be engaged unto the Lord, and that his Fear
may be ever placed in their Hearts, that they may know him to be to them as a
Fountain of Life, to keep them from the Snares of Death.

And for Thomas Powell's Railing against me, and calling me False Prophet, and
pronouncing me accursed, and such like Expressions, comes from the Heat of his
Spirit, and so may justly be reckoned amongst his Bed-ridden Performances, and
his Fly-blown Duties, as he calls them, which Phrases (he says) Christians
understand very well. I would have T. P. to tell me, Whether the Spirit of God
leads to such Performances and Duties, or the spirit of Satan? And may not
thou be ashamed to take Money of People for such Duties and Performances? Well,
God's Hand is against thee and thy Practice; and it had been better for thee to
have stood still, as I have formerly told thee, and to have known God's
Salvation, and his Power to have kept thee from venting forth such Bed-ridden
and Fly blown Stuff; and if thy best Performances be such, what is the worst?

And T. P. in his 5th Page says, He shall first consider the Title of my Book,
which is this, A Vindication of Jesus Christ, the Immaculate Lamb of God. Note,
He leaves out what I vindicate him from, which was from the Foul and
Blasphemous Imputation of one Thomas Powell, a Preacher among the Independ^nts,
who affirmed, Note, It was not a Position, as he would insinuate; but it was an
Affirmation.
That Jesus Christ was the Greatest Sinner in the World; he takes no notice of
it, as though it concerned him not, and yet he calls his Book an Answer to
mine; furely he still persists in Lying, notwithstanding I warned him to the
contrary.

But he goes on, and says, He admires at my Confidence, to style my Book A
Vindication of Christ Jesus; if I had not been a Quaker (he says) it had been
something. What! is it nothing now? or, is it become a Crime for a Quaker to
vindicate Christ Jesus from such foul and blasphemous Expressions, as he has
uttered? and is his admiring at it, and his saying, He cannot believe it, and
calling my Title but a Pretense, and a Bait to catch poor Souls, a sufficient
thing to prove it so? But it is no Wonder why the Man is grown to such a Degree
of Incredulity as to believe after this rate, seeing he excludes having any
Dependency on Christ within, as the Quakers own him; and how do the Quakers own
him as to his inward Appearance? To be the True Light that Lights every man
that comes into the World.

And T. P. says, We say we own every Principle of the Christian-Religion. Is
that become a Crime in this pretended Minister's Account? Its very probable it
is so; for he tells his Reader, That our owning Christ, or any other Principle
of Religion, to be a mere Mystical Romance; and that we own such a Christ as
Vnchrist's Christ; such kind of Stuff and Matter as its like he has learned
from Thomas Hicks the Forger (and the rest of his Brethren) he communicates to
his Reader, instead of bringing plain Scripture to clear himself from his soul
and blasphemous Charge of Sin to Christ. I need not much enlarge to prove we
own Christ Jesus, or our selves Christians, seeing it never entered into the
Hearts, nor was ever the Doctrine of any of the Leading-Quakers, as he terms
them, to Deny Christ Jesus in any of his Appearances or Manifestations, whether
within or without; and though Men in their prejudiced Spirits do judge us as
Denyers of Christ Jesus: Yet be it known unto all, That we expect Salvation and
Redemption by no other Thing or Means whatsoever, then by that Christ Jesus
declared of and born witness unto in the Holy Scriptures: But if our
Adversaries, and men of corrupt Minds, who are satisfied in their Bed-ridden
Performances, and their Duties Fly-blown with Sin cannot believe us, be it
known unto them, That we never did go about to impose a Belief upon any without
inward Conviction; but we still did and do commit our Testimony to the Witness
of God in the Consciences of all men, knowing that it is God only that can
persuade the Hearts of men and Women to love the Truth, and to walk in
Subjection thereunto.

The next thing I shall take notice of is in the 6th page of my Adversary's
Book, his words are these; They acknowledge such a Christ as Vnchrists Christ;
for his Proof he has these words, They deny him to be God Man in one Person,
they deny him to be a Distinct Person from the Person of the Father, and they
deny him also to be a Distinct Person from any of his Members.

We own God, the man Christ Jesus, by whom God will judge the Secrets of all
Hearts, and the true Unity and Fellowship, as they owned them that writ the
Scriptures, howbeit we confess, both that Christ after the Flesh was born of
the Virgin Mary, yet is God over all blessed forever, that the Father is
greater then the Son, and yet one; and that Christ is Head and Lord of his
People, yet one with his People; but for T. P's School-Distinctions, and
School-Gibberish we shall not trouble our selves therewith; for his Words are
not according to the Form of sound Words laid down in the Scripture, yet he
pretends the Scripture to be his Rule.

If any desire further Satisfaction concerning us in the matter above hinted
at, they may peruse these Books entitled, The Divinity of Christ asserted; The
Christian-Quaker; and Quakerism a new Nick Name for old Christianity.

And for his saying, that it had been better for me to have entitled my Book,
No Christ but Conscience; and in this, said he, thou would have been true to
thy principle. Here Is a notorious Untruth; for we never preached such a Christ
as could be defiled with sin; but Conscience may be defiled, and may be seared,
and if this be his State, Woe and misery will be his Portion, notwithstanding
his Imagination of Christ's Righteousness to be his, and his Sin Christ's. And
to proceed he says and avouches that the Discourse between us, save a passage
or two was feigned, page 6. of his Pamphlet; in which he says, I relate this
as our greeting one another, i. e. you Quakers hold damnable and erroneous
Doctrines; And to prove him a L -- in this I refer my Reader to the 3d page of
my Book, and the Title of that part of the Discourse which passed between us;
my words are these, Something of a Discourse, etc. not all, nor yet our
greeting; for he having formerly given me a Book, wherein he pretends he
discoursed the Devil? and that he had almost persuaded him to believe he was
the true God; the thing seemed to be fictious; but however, I asked him,
whether the thing was real? and whether he had seen the Devil? if he had, after
what manner? he said, He was clothed with black like a Minister; I queried,
how he knew that he was the Devil? he said, he asked him whether he created the
Heavens and the Earth; and he said, Yea, and you too; by this (said he) I knew
him to be the Devil: my answer to him was this, how does this prove him to be
the Devil? for he that did create the Heavens and Earth, and gave man Life,
Breath and Being was and is the true God; but T. P. said, He told me also, that
him whom I and the greatest part of the World worshipped was not the true God,
and by this also I knew him to be the Devil: How does this prove him to be the
Devil? wast not thou at that time in Distraction? he said, he was, then said I,
thou could not worship the true God; for a man must first know him before he
can worship him; and then he in his Fierceness breaks forth and said, You
Quakers hold damnable and erroneous Doctrines: And though he says, the
Discourse is fictious both in its Dependency, and in its Matter; yet I do
affirm, that the Discourse that past between us, his Questions and my Answers,
and my Questions and his Answers are placed in my Book according as they were
spoken; and if I had done otherwise, it had been somewhat like that notable
Forger Tho. Hicks, a man so much in his Esteem for his Dexterity in such
matters, that he counted him a Divine in the presence of the People at his
Meeting in Hartford Shire; but T. H. gives him the Lie, and in plain Words
said, I am no Divine; if T. P. thinks that I have placed this passage of T. H.
and his upon my Memory only, he will be mistaken; for I have it, and much more
of that days work in writing from diverse Persons who took it in short Hand
from their Mouths.

One thing more I shall take notice of, that is, his telling his Reader, He
durst not enter into Disputation with us on the Lord's Day, yet notwithstanding
he sends me a Challenge to meet him (on that Day he calls the Lords Day) and
procures T. Hieks to help him; the Words of his Challenge I thought meet to
insert, to the End that his Brethren might see what Attempts this late upstart
Preacher, though in vain, does make, who threatened, with one more, in one day,
to shake our Foundation quite down, which is more then all his Brethren have,
could, or ever shall do^. The Words of Thomas Powel's Challenge are, viz.

John Vaughton, I expect thee for to make good what thou have fathered up on me
next Sabbath Day at my Meeting in the Country; I shall be sure to be there, and
another with me, where I with him shall shake your Foundation quite down; for
it is sandy, and I perceive you are upon your last Legs already; this day I go
into the Country, being the 31. of August to prepare my self for expelling that
Soul-damning Doctrine which thou have vented in the poor Country; thy Friend
Tho. Powel.

By this People may see the notorious Falsness of this man, who challenges me
into the Gountry, and yet would insinuate into his Reader, that we assaulted
him, dogged him, and followed him into all places, when I can truly say, that
since this Controversy has depended between us, that neither I, nor the
Friends concerned with me, have followed him into no other place but public
Meetings; but the Spirit of Cain having entered him, from whence his Fear comes,
which makes him to say, he dare not go alone.

Now you Divines of his way consider, whether Tho. Powel be a Gospel-Minister,
or a false Prophet, and (take his own Phrase) run on the Devil's Errand? But
for our Foundation, it stands sure, notwithstanding his Attempts, and the
Skirmisher's too.

I have also taken Notice of a Marginal Note in Page 6. of his Book, his Words
are these, Reader, if thou believe that this Discourse passed between J. V.
and my self, thou must value his Memory at an high Rate; but I am apt to think
that his Memory is as fallible as yours and mine, though he had the Confidence
to tell me that he was perfect: A Forger indeed, I never told Tho. Powel that I
was perfect; he would insinuate into his Reader, that the Discourse was
feigned, from his Supposition of the Fallibility of my Memory, his Thoughts of
the Fallibleness of my Memory is no Proof of the Discourse feigned; and for the
Fallibility of his Memory I have an Instance, that he said, I told him I was
perfect, which Words he never had from my Mouth; for we preach not our selves,
but Christ Jesus; and the Doctrine of Perfection is the Doctrine of Christ, and
they that oppose it are Antichrist, and the State of Sanctification, through
the Spirit of God, I do believe is attainable on this Side the Grave; for I do
declare that I have no Faith in the Papist Purgatory, though our Adversaries
number us amongst them: And in page 7. he notes me for a Liar, in saying he
said, Burn the Bible; hear his Proof. Mr Bye my Witness does also attest, that
as far as he remembers, I said no such Word, but away with the Bible, which was
the Words I spoke, I very well remember. Must the fallible Memories of T. P.
and his Witness go for a Proof, and I from thence termed a Liar; no such
Matter, for I have a Witness that heard, and can very well remember that T. P.
said, Burn the Bible more then once or twice. And in page 10. he avoucheth,
That one of the Quakers Principles is, that all except themselves shall be
confounded and damned; this he brings for the Vindication of his former
Assertion that he had given in the Name of the Quakers, in Answer to a young
Man that put this Query, Seeing you are but a People of about 25 Years
standing, and you say that your Way is the right Way, what became of the People
that dyed before you were a People? they (said T. P.) believe they are all
damned; This he would not have imputed to his Envy and Malice, but to his
Judgment, and that Judgment (he says) is grounded from an underiable
Consequence, that resulteth from several Phrases scattered up and down in their
own Books; one that he mentions is this, that their Way is the only Way; Now
how does this prove, that our Saying Christ Our Way is the only Way, to be
determined as our Belief, that all that dyed before we were a People are
damned? for we do believe the Way of God, which is but one, was in all
Generations, and that there was a Remnant that walked in this Way, and found
Acceptance with him, and this Way was and is Christ, who is the true Light that
lights every Man that comes into the World, and this Light is not Conscience
(as he would wickedly insinuate) but it shines in the Hearts and Consciences of
all the Sons and Daughters of Men, to discover and make manifest those Things
that are Evil; and they that receive it in this its Manifestation, come to know
the Power and Sufficiency of him who said, I am the Light of the World, he that
believes in me shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.

And my Adversary talks of several Quakers Books, yet he says, He has but one
Quakers Book in his Study, i. e. a Catechism of G. F. and (he says) it is to
his Purpose, he quotes it thus, Quest. Father, Are Jews, and Gentiles, and
Christians that do not believe in the Light, that which does enlighten every
Man that comes into the World, all out of him who is the Life, the Light of
Men? Answer, Yea Child: From these Words this passionate Man falls a railing,
and says, It Is a Hellish Book, and that the Principles contained in G. F 's
Catechism are Principles that the Devil in Hell has hatched; ergo,
Soul-damning Principles. Principles that are of the Devil's making, or
hatching, as he phrases it, are Soul damning; but that G. F's Words are of the
Devil's hatching, that I deny; for they are in themselves safe and sure; for
how can People be in him, i. e. Christ the Light, that lights every Man that
comes into the World, and not believe in him? and if not in him, then out of
him; and this is no ways to his Purpose (as he said it was) to prove that we
believe that all were damned that were before we were a People, or that our
Principles are Soul-damning: And now I come to my Adverversary perfect
Confirmation of his Assertion (as he calls it) which seems to be very fictious;
but however hear it, page 8. he says, For a perfect Confirmation of my
Assertion, viz. That the Quakers do hold, that all who dye not in Belief of
their Principles shall be damned; see in this ensuing Relation that I shall
stand by; Once a Maiden-Acquaintance of mine was courted by a zealous Quaker,
who during the Time he was Suitor, had prevailed with her to go with him to
hear his Friends, scil. Quakers, and that once or twice; at last he demands
of her how she liked them? she answered worse and worse, which occasioned him
to break off from her, and withal to say, that if she heard any other, she
would certainly be damned. Would T. P. and his Brethren have their Faith and
Principles be concluded and determined Damnable from the Words of one Man?
Certainly no, and that such an one as they have not so much as the Knowledge of
his Name; but this is perfect Confirmation (as he calls it) not to mention his
imperfect Ones) But I shall at this Time leave it amongst his Fly-blown Stuff.
And he tells his Reader, He has preached almost three Years for only Charges
defrayed: But I may take Leave to tell him, that that does not clear him from
preaching for what he could get; but if his Charges were so great every time he
went into the Country, as it was that Day he met with the Country-Priest he
told me of, and two of his Companions at a Tavern, where after their
Friendship, threatened to kill him for preaching against the Papists; and as
they were going to have him to the Place of Execution, which was upon a Bed he
having about five Pounds in his Pocket, as he himself related, it tumbled out,
of which he said, It was as the Ram that appeared for the saving of Isaac, to
save him from being executed by them; for after they perceived his Money, they
consulted and agreed to save his Life; but it may be supposed, if this Story of
his be true, that he had taken so much of the Vintner's sweet Wine that he was
not in his Right Senses; for he also said, They put him into a Coach, and set
him down at the Stocks Market London, and that he knows not the Persons, Tavern
nor Street where this thing was done.

To his Reader I take notice of these Passages, where he says, viz. The Father
accounted Christ a Sinner -- and that the Father punished his Son, or inflicted
Punishment upon his Son -- Sin set the Father against Christ -- that Christ's
Sufferings are penal -- God the Father punishing his Son -- and that Christ
suffered justly. For these Sayings, I desire thee, or any of thy Divines to
give me plain Scripture for, seeing you call it your Rule; and give us no more
your Corrupt Meanings upon it, neither your Feigned Humble Conceiving, nor Vain
Imagination, but let it be plain Scripture it self.

Here follows some of T. P's brief seasonable, soul-affectionate and good
Advice, as he calls it, unto the Principal Leaders of the Quakers, etc. O
profligate flagitious Wretches! that must imbrue your Hands in the Blood of
Souls, that you cannot go to Hell alone, but you must have Company with you --
O ye Promulgaters of Errors -- Leaders of a great many to Hell, etc. This with
much more Stuff that is fly-blown with Sin, as he says his Holy Duties are,
who also says, Our Books have Croaking Toads, and Creaking Vipers, that swarms
therein, etc. Which Expressions of his savor more of Railing Rabshekah's
spirit, then of the Meek Spirit of Jesus.

Thomas Powell, thou in thy Postscript having desired us to clear our selves
from those notorious Lies and Forgeries that thou have charged us with; I have
done it, and do return them upon thee and thy Witness, with the rest of thy
Confederates, to whom they do belong.

And T. P. as to the Promise that Thomas Hicks has made thee, it will be
unsafe for thee to give Credit to it, or to conside in it; for that which he
has promised thee is a Work too ponderous for him, to wit, to prove the
Quakers No Christians, and their Religion a Cheat; for Gog and all his great
Army cannot do it. Moreover, Thomas Hicks of all men should cease boasting of
what Help he will minister to thee or others, seeing he has undertaken more
Work of his own already, then himself or any other that he has brought for his
Assistance could perform; the Task he has already undertaken lies still at
kis Door.

JOHN VAUGHTON.

Postscript.
CHrist Jesus was the Father's free Gift, as it is said, God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son a Light into the World, that
whosoever bolieveth in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; so
that Christ Jesus was not bound or forced, for says he, I lay down my Life
freely; so that it was his free Love; and will the Professors now, after all
their seeming and pretended Love to him, brand him with being guilty of their
Sins? Well, we do say, he is not guilty of any man's Sin, but has all power in
Heaven and Earth-committed unto him, and can pardon Sin without being guilty of
it, and is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World; and the
Father has committed this Power unto him, and he does not charge his Son with
the guilt of the World's Sins; therefore T. P. and the rest of the Divines of
thy Way, repent of your Evil, and of all your hard Speeches which you have
uttered against the Spotless Lamb of God, and those that follow him in the
Regeneration, and content not your selves in saying, your Sins are imputed
Christ's, and his Righteousness imputed yours, whilst you are in the Act of
Sin and Rebelling against his Spirit; for this Covering, or vain talking will
be too short in the Day of the Lord, that hastens to be revealed against all
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, or make a
Profession of Christ the Truth, and live still in the Unrighteousness, and in
the Sin, and in Rebellion against God's Light and Spirit, which, makes Sin
manifest, and reproves for it in the very Heart, where Sin has been and is
committed; and this Light many of you have been calling with many opprobrious
Names and Terms, for which you must repent, or else you cannot lay down your
Heads in Peace, that is the Word of Truth unto you all, whether you will hear
or forbear.

John Vaught^on.

Thomas Firth's Testimony to the Truth of so much of the Discourse that past
between Thomas Powell and John Vaughton, as was printed in J. V's Book
Entitled, A Vindication of Christ Jesus, etc.
WHereas Thomas Powel relates, That the Discourse in the aforesaid Book was
Feigned or Fictious, save a Passage or two; I, who was an Eye and Ear-Witness,
do affirm it to be True, as it is there related and I have Unity with the
publishing of it.

Thomas Firth.

THE END.

