THE Church-Papist (SO CALLED;) HIS RELIGION AND TENETS Fully Discovered: IN A
serious Dispute, which long since happened between a (then) reputed Papist and
an open professed Romanist, whereby the common (and trite) Arguments of
pretended Visibility, Succession, Universality, etc. of the Roman Church,
Traveling the Nation to amuse and stagger the Weak, and to seduce and pervert
the unstable sort of People, are briefly Confuted. WHEREUNTO IS ADDED, A short
Discourse, Proving Episcopacy to be of Divine Institution, Kingly Government of
Gods setting up, and the Religion of the Church of England, to be the best in
the World. By one of the Children of the late Captivity, 1680.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Hartford, at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY Lord Jermyn, EARL OF St. Albans, BARON of BURY
St. EDMONDS, and KNIGHT of the most Noble ORDER of the GARTER.
MY LORD,
THE Occasion of the following Tract happening in your Country, your Native
Country, between your Countrymen discoursing of Religion, and particularly the
one defending that Religion wherein your Lordship is most eminently Principl'd;
and of your exemplary Piety and Devotion therein, the eyes of your Country have
been often witnesses, has encouraged my presumption to this Dedication: Nor
will your Lordship deem the Patronage of these few Leaves a diminution to your
Glory, seeing you have made it the Glory of your Honorable Person and the
Admiration and Joy of all Protestant Professors in the Church of England, that
amidst and after so many Trials and Temptations in foreign parts (where you
have resided) you should still remain unshaken in your Faith, that no self or
private Conveniences, no politic respects to Times or Places could allure you
from the public profession of the Religion of the Church of England; of that
pure Religion confirmed to be the truest on Earth by the most signal proof
under Heaven, even by the crimson Stream of the dear blood of Gods Vicegerent,
who for the Church suffered many and bitter Agonies of Life, as if the Thorns
which once surrounded the Temples of our Savior, had been platted anew on the
Brows of this holy Martyr.

We often read of an innocent Lamb without spot offered in Sacrifice, but here
a spotless Shepherd more innocent than his Sheep, became an Oblation for his
Flock; a Royal Shepherd too, whose Holiness entitled him to an Alliance with
the Majesty of Heaven, and made him truly a God on Earth, and Son of the Most
High. It cannot be denied, but in his sufferings for the Church, this great
Patron of Religion came near to those of the Eternal Savior of Mankind, whom
the Jews put to Death for planting Religion in the World; and a People, worse
than Jews, slaughtered this good King for defending the same Religion and
Church which was nailed to the Cross in Mount Calvary; his own people too
imitated the Jews in perpetrating the horrid Villainy, that here is a Testimony
and Reputation to the Protestant Profession transcending all the Testimonies of
former Ages, and the greatest that ever Age or Nation could boast of. In all
the Romish Calendar of Canonized Saints, in their whole Roll of pretended
Martyrs, where is there one, since the Apostles time, worthy to have been a
Torch bearer or born a Flambeaux at his Grave? Had Rome, for their Faith, such
a glorious Name to boast of, what Pilgrimages from their utmost Confines, what
Processions from all parts of their Territories would be made to his Shrine?
Even Divine Adoration would be given at his Tomb; (and indeed such Devotion
would come nearer to true Worship there, than at all the profane Altars they
have before bowed.) And as in the Infant Plantation of Christ's Church, the holy
Shepherd (the Lord of Life) was smitten, and the Sheep were scattered, hid, and
concealed for a space; so likewise as if true Religion had not only been
deposed, but Crucified too with this Martyr on the Scaffold, the true Church
was forced to walk invisible (as to the knowledge of her Enemies) in this Land,
and not to be found but in Cells and silent places; for then were Instructions
to right Faith and good Life chained up, and temptations to Atheism Irreligion,
and Profaneness let loose upon men: Then holy Guides and Pillars of the Church
suffered, some Death, some a barbarous Captivity; Persecution raged on all her
Children; then Treason triumphed, Rebellion was rampant, and with Faction and
Sedition became the Epidemical Tutors of the times; then nothing was dangerous
for men to practice but Loyalty and Virtue, or to profess but the old
Protestant Religion: Thence followed the fatal Necessity forevery true
Protestant to be his own Priest, and to fortify himself by consulting the
Divine Oracles and Writings, which the Saints (of old) and Fathers of the
Church had left to Posterity, for our strengthening against the Assaults of
Schism. And then it was that I applied my self to a sedulous examination of
those Principles in Religion which Education had instilled, and to search the
bottom on which my profession of Faith was founded; and it was then that I
found the best direction for my task and purpose from that most excellent
Advice (which I apprehended might well serve every Subject as the Son of a
King) of that glorified Saint (and holy Martyr for the same Faith) left to his
Son, then Prince of Wales, which is able to rivet the most wavering Spirit on
the rock of Assurance Indeed, who can remember his holy Life in that Faith, and
his submission to Death for the same, or read his Divine Writings, and be
faithless? And who can be so merciless to himself as not to contemplate the
former and read the latter for his Confirmation in Religion, in the Religion of
his King, the best of Kings, in the Religion proved, by undeniable Authority,
to be the best in the world.

The King of Kings preserve his Sacred Majesty our Sovereign, and the Royal
Progeny, and their Posterity, in the perseverance of the same profession of
Religion, to the perpetual honor of their Names and Crowns, the safety and
glory of the Church and Kingdoms. And the same Divine Providence bless your
Lordship with long and happy days, to be still a Light in your Sphere by your
Zeal and Constancy in the Protestant Profession, to the still Confusion of Face
of those enemies of Gods Church, whose malicious Impudence continually asperse
the Devotion of great and (cast a suspicion on the Religion of) good men; and
as you have fervently imitated our grand Master (of adored and blessed memory)
in his transcendent unimitable Constancy in the true Faith, which set him (not
as his Enemies machinated, in a Cloud) a Sun in full glory, ever shining after
death, so your Lordship (after Life on Earth finished) may be a Star of the
next Magnitude with him in the Firmament of Glory, is the fervent Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, and most Devoted Servant, John Underwood.

THE CHURCH-PAPIST So Called.
A Church-Papist, or (Stilo Novo) more modernly, a Papist in disguise, is one
who holds Unity and Communion with the Church of England in a strict
compliance, subscribes to all the Protestant Professions of Faith, and received
Principles in the same, yet in heart adheres (also) to the Church of Rome, in
all such Points and Doctrines as are agreeable to Scripture, and the Apostolic
Faith. He is known by his high Conformity to the Liturgy, Doctrine, and
Discipline of the Church, and noted for his devout observance of all the Rights
and Ceremonies used in public Worship; nor can the Church impose the thing
(not thwarting the Canon of holy Scripture) to which he thinks it not his duty
to incline his Obedience: He cannot be brought to countenance those who would
diminish (or so much as dispute) her Authority, or labor to introduce
Novelties, and schismatical Fangles into her Government, accounting such as
wild Boars breaking into the Vineyard to root it up, nor will he be justled out
of his belief, of what the cruel Experiment of the late Times have shown him,
that the Lambskin of Reformation harbors Wolves for Desolation. He is one who
will and does take lawful Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, Test, etc. tendered
him; and is obstinate in nothing more than in keeping them. He peaceably
submits to the Government without dishonorable Reflections on Church or State,
and in defense of both dares and will venture his All: He is one who esteems
Obedience better than Sacrifice, and prefers performing his Duty before his
Life; He looks upon the Governors of the Church, as those whom God has sent,
and through whose words we are to believe in Christ, St. Joh. 17.20. and upon
the Magistrate and Temporal Rulers, as Ministers of God to us for our good, and
knows that the Powers that be, are ordained of God, and that to resist the
Power is to resist the Ordinance of God, and will not incur Damnation by
resisting. He is the same man who (stilo veteri) in the late Usurpation, would
not swallow the several unhallowed Bits (against Law and Honesty) tempted on
him, not the Vow and Covenant, nor subscribe the Association, public
Protestation, not take the League and Covenant, Abjuration (of certain
Doctrines) Oaths, etc. contradictory one to another, and contrary to former
lawful Oaths; nor close with the Engagement contrary to them all: He was the
chief sufferer in those times, and still is the Butt at which envenomed Arrows,
from all corners, are shot, and principally aimed at (by the Enemies of the
Church) for the first Destruction. Under the like denomination of
Church-Papists, were then the best of men delivered to popular ignominy and
Contempt, (preparatives for Ruin, and Forerunners of all Confusion) so
exposed were the greatest and best of men, the Church or Nation of England ever
produced; pretended fears and Jealousies (of being Popishly addicted) assaulted
the Throne, and pretenses of Hypocrisy in Religion, made many Martyrs for the
true one. The Sluice of Blood first opened in the best Counselor of State, many
Torrents followed; the Veins of Royal Majesty it self, of the great Patriarch
of our Reformed Church, of the most Religious of the Nobility, and of many
prime Christians of the Protestant Profession were launched, and flowing in
many streams made up a Red Sea.

Under such an Appellation and Reproach was the Author of this Paper, in the
same usurped Times particularly numbered and persecuted; and by the cruelty of
the pretended Reformers suffered many Calamities, Plunderings, Imprisonments,
Loss of Employment, etc. narrowly escaping with life; and so strong was the
Calumny (which took away the Lives of the best Protestants in the world) cast
on the Churchmen, that it prevailed on the belief of many (who were innocent of
the malicious Project) that we were Papists indeed, even the very Papists
themselves were beguiled thereby, and believed us of their persuasion, insomuch
that soon after the blessed Restoration of the Government, the Author was
accosted with their Salutes, expressing their amazement, in that (now
persecution ceased, and a door opened for more freedom, as they said (he
communicated not with them in worship; but his refusal of their solemn
invitation showing them their mistake, one of them (no mean one) set upon him,
and made it his business to gain a Proselyte, engaging him to comply with (or
answer) the Arguments he soon after delivered in Writing, which put the Author
upon a serious Scrutiny and Study to know his own Religion aright, and to
defend it; (for he being a Layman, had then read little of Controversy upon
the Points.) He happened at the very first on the best Lights, the Word of God,
and the Word of the King, Authorities rightly understood and aptly applied, not
to be withstood by any in the world. The best direction to understand the
former, he received from the later, even from that best of Christians and King
of Protestants, in his EIKON ASILIK by which were framed the following Answers,
which have slept these many years (from their first Conception) and might have
been dumb till the Papers had turned to (Ashes, had not the now revived term of
disguised Papist been clamorous, and awakned them to face the world, that the
well meaning Christian may not in thought join with the Deceiver to reproach
the Innocent, that the old Intrigue and Stratagem now on foot, may not proceed
again to trapan the Nation into an Uprore and Confusion, by first rendering a
man criminal by aspersion (to fit him for a destruction without pity) then
cruelly destroy him for a Crime, of which he is not guilty.

See here, then, such a Church Papist dissected, and behold him and his
Religion in the following Pages.

The aforementioned Arguments of Dr. R. S. are four in number: The First, from
the perpetual Visibility of the Church of Rome, viz. 1. That Church only that
is Visible in all Ages, is the true Church; But, only the Roman Church is
Visible in all Ages, Ergo, only the Roman Church is the True Church.

The Proof, THe Major is manifest, which I prove by St. Matthew. 18.17. Dic
Ecclesiae, Tell the Church: But how can we tell the Church if it be invisible,
tanquam Idea Platonica, Ergo, The Church is Visible in all Ages.

The Minor is clear by all Church Histories, Councils, Fathers, that the Roman
Church only is Visible in all Ages, for no other Church can show her Visibility
in any Kingdom, City, or Village, from the Apostles time to Luther, Ergo, only
the Roman Church is the True Church.

The Second Argument from Succession, viz. 2. That Church only that has lawful
Succession, is the True Church; But, only the Roman Church has lawful
Succession, Ergo, only the Roman Church is the True Church.

The Proof, THe Major is proved by St. August. That Church (says he) in which
is Succession, is the Rock against which Hell-Gates cannot prevail. And
Irenaeus says, Successione confundimus: omnes, Succession confound all
Heretics; but only the Roman Church have lawful Succession; Numerate
Sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri sede, and in illo ordine Patrum quis cui successit
videte, as, says St. August. In hoc ordine successionis nullus Donatista
Episcopus invenitur: And our English Bishops had no succession from Roman
Catholic, for immediately after their Consecration, Stapleton, Harding, etc.
told them to their faces they were no Bishops; Ergo, only the Roman Church have
lawful Succession.

The Third Argument from pretended peculiar Privileges belonging to the Roman
Church, viz. 3. That Church only that have confuted, and anathematized all
Heretics, converted Nations, deprived Schismatical Bishops, restored Orthodox
Bishops, called Councils, etc. that is the True Church. But only the Roman is
such, Ergo, only the Roman is the True Church.

The Proof, THe Major is plain, because these Privileges belong to the
Authority of the Mother Church, which is Matrix and Radix omnium Ecclesiarum.

The Minor is proved, for, In Ecclesia Romana semper viguit Apostolicae
Cathedrae Principatus; therefore in the Oriental Councils, when some Bishops
would not agree, diverse cried out Romam ambulent, Let them go to Rome: Nam a
Petro ( inquit August.) ipse Episcopatus and tota Authoritas nominis hujus
emersit, and it is manifest no Protestant Church ever confuted Heretics,
converted Nations, deprived Schismatics, restored Orthodox Bishops, but slept
Endimion's Sleep for above a thousand years, or like a Didopper dived in the
Apostles time, and never rose again until Squire Luther, that second Elias,
that fifth Evangelist.

The Fourth Argument, from Universality of the Roman Church, viz. 4. That
Church is only Catholic, which is dispersed through all Nations. But only the
Roman is dispersed through all Nations, Ergo, the Roman Church only is the
Catholic Church.

The Proof, THe Major is proved, for Universality is an evident mark of the
Catholic Church: Si vestra Ecclesia (says St. August.) sit Catholica,
ostendite per universam terram ramos suos copia ubertatis extendere; for no
Heresy can be Universal, no Heretic can be Catholic, Protestants are so far
from Universality, that it is as hard a matter to find a Protestant in fifteen
hundred, as motum in vacuo.

The Minor is as evident, that the Roman Church was dispersed through all
Nations, by St. Paul to the Romans, 3.8. where he faith, that the Roman Faith
was Preached in all the World, that is Peter's Faith; and what Faith the Romans
had then, the very same they have at this present; for the Roman Church is not
to be new bottomed, neither to be reformed of new Calciners: Fidei enim Regula
una omnino est, sola, immobilis, irreformabilis (as Tertullian) the Doctrine of
Faith once delivered to the Apostles by the prime verity, Jesus Christ, and
assisted by the Holy Ghost for ever, cannot be altered, and the Church being
built upon a Rock, need no repairing of new Masons: Soliditas illius Petrae,
quae Apostolorum Principe est laudata, perpetua est: and sicut Petra permanet
quod in Christo Petrus credidit ita permanet quod PetrO Christus instituit.
Here St. Leo says, the Church is Perpetual, and cannot fail so long as Christ
is the Son of the Living God: And although the Protestant Church be fallible,
yet the Roman is infallible; therefore, Vivat Fides Catholica, Vivat Ecclesia
Romana; quae fuit tempore Apostolorum, and est eritque per secula sempiterna.

THE ANSWER.
SIR,
I Derive not my Faith from Luther or Calvin, as Beginners of it, yet do
confess with St. Paul, (Acts 24.14.) that aften the way which they call
Heresy, so worship I the Lord God of my Fathers; I mean, as those Fathers did,
whom Justin Martyr calls Patres Patrum, professing the Ancient Catholic Faith;
all the Articles of my Faith being grounded on Scripture, and the constant
belief of Fathers and Couneils in the Church of Christ the first four hundred
years. Antiqua Ecclesia primisquingentis Aunis vera Reclssia fuit. Bell. lib.
4. de not. Eccl. c. 9.
The Opinions of any Posterior Fathers, where they vary from the Doctrine of
the First, I think it unsafe to follow. For St. Hierom teaches me well; Nec
Parentum nec majorum Error sequendus est; sed Authoritas Scripturarum and Dei
docentis imperium; nam Judaei post Baalim abierunt quos didicerunt a Patribus
(In Jerem. ca. 9.) We are not to take error by Tradition from our Fathers or
Ancestors, but the true sense of holy Scriptures is to be followed, and the
Power of God instructing us in them, for the Jews went after Baal by the
example of their Fathers: As your Fathers did, so do ye: Acts 7.51. I am of the
Apostles belief, and I am sure they were no Papists; rather Protestants,
protesting the Truth and sincerity of Faith against Error and Schism: So we by
receiving the true Sacraments (which are called Visible Signs protesting the
Faith) protest against those which are corrupted, and against all Doctrines
contrary to Scripture and the Apostolic Faith, etc. and so in that sense you
may call me Protestant. Now to prove only the Roman Church to be the True
Church, you say: That Church only that is Visible in all Ages is the True
Church; but only the Roman Church is Visible in all Ages, Ergo, only the Roman
Church is the True Church. And to prove the Major, you instance the words of
St. Matthew, Dic Ecclesiae To which I answer, that it is not said Dic Romanae
Ecclesiae, (Tell it to the Roman Church) therefore makes no more for Rome than
for Greece, or any other place where the Church is, has been, or shall be. And
to prove the Minor, you only say it is clear by Church Histories, Councils, and
Fathers, that the Roman Church only is Visible, but bring not one particular
proof from any of them to make it evident, and evince that the Church was no
where else Visible; for History also tells us that the East or Greek Church,
though often in great misery and persecution, was, and is a Church from the
Apostles time: So that Argument which is common to others, you cannot
appropriate only to the Roman; seeing it makes as much for the Greek Church (in
whose Language the Oracles of the Son of Ged were written) as for it: The Greek
Church was first honored with the Original written Gospel, and the Latin
Church had it only by Franslation from it.

That there was and is a Church constant in all Ages (though not apparently
flourishing, and visible at all times to all the world) I not deny; but that
there is no Church where it is not Splendid and Visible to all eyes, you have
not yet made any ways apparent: Certainly the Ark of God was not less an Ark,
in being in Dagon's Tent and the Hands of the Philistines. Persecution (the
fare of the Church Militant) obscured the Churches Rays in many Nations, and
sometimes so totally Eclipsed her, as she was not visible to Humane Eyes:
Besides, your Position, that Visibility is the only mark of the true Church,
you have not proved to be granted be Churches differing from the Roman,
therefore is a Principle of your own, and a begging of the Question. I deny it
to be the only mark, for a mark must be infallible, and That mark which may
possibly deceive, and is common both to a True and a False Church, and may as
probably lead to the one as the other; is no certain infallible mark to find
the true Church. But Visibility may deceive, being common to both; and may as
readily lead to a False as a True Church. Therefore Visibility no sure mark and
unerring Rule to find the True Church.


The Major is undeniable, bearing its own Proof, Truth, and Reason in it self.
The Minor is apparent in all Ages, even from the beginning of the World to this
day: Go up into Paradise, the Garden of Eden, there was Truth and Falsehood,
even as soon as God had laid his Church, the Devil began to build a Chapel;
for (in Genesis) not long after, Et Deus dixit (And God said, etc.) the Devil
was busy to set up a false Worship and wrong Obedience; and then comes, Et
Serpens dixit, And the Serpent said, which visibly and miserably deceived our
first Parents. The Church was with Moses in Egypt, there were Magicians and
mock Miracles; Falsehood ever followed the Truth, or Truth found it where it
went: There were Calves in Dan and Bethel, there were worshipers of Baal; Error
is almost as old in the world as Truth: No sooner went the Apostles out to
Preach, but a false Doctrine appeared in Simon Magus, and his Followers, Acts
8.14. In one place or other Erroneous and false Churches have been always
Visible to this day, (even when the true Church have been obscured by
Persecutions) for so it must be according to the saying of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
11.19. Oportet esse Haereses; Were the idolatrous People in the time of Elias,
Achas, Manasses, and others, the True Church, because they only were Visible to
the World? For where was Visibility of the True Church, when the Prophet cried
out and complained (1 Kings) He only was left alone? (so a true Church may be,
though not visible, for there were seven thousand true Worshippers which he
knew not of.) Where was Visibility when the Shepherd was smitten, and the Sheep
scattered, hid, and concealed? Zach. 13.7. Joh. 16.32. Where was Visibility of
the True Church in the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, when neither Church,
Book, nor Men escaped? Was she not as St. Joh. testifies, Revel. 12.6. fled
into a Desert where she should not be found for a space, etc. And St.
Chrysostom (in Math. 24.) says, In the time of Abomination of Desolation, (
viz. of wicked Heresy,) Nulla probatio potest Christianitatis, etc. No proof
of Christianity can be made, or refuge found for Christians to know the true
Faith, but only the Divine Scripture: So the Church of Antichrist may be
Visible and Flourishing, when the true Church of Christ is in obscurity and
has no Luster. Therefore Visibility is not in all Ages and all times an
infallible mark of the true Church, but is a mark also of a false one; and so a
true Church has been, and may be, though not Visible to Humane Eyes, etc. Your
next Position is from Succession, viz.

2. That Church that have lawful Succession is the True Church; But only the
Roman have lawful Succession, Ergo, only the Roman Church is the True Church.
To prove the Major you twice instance St. Augustine, but direct to no place
where; therefore I know not whether he speaks as you represent him; or if he
does, whether he denotes a Succession in Place, of Persons, or of Doctrine; and
you bring in Irenaeus to say, Successione Confundimus omnes, etc. but there is
no such saying in the manner you mention, found in Irenaeus; it is only
corruptly quoted by Bellarmine, (Bellar. li. 4. de notis Eccles. ca. 8. Sect.
2.) nor have I heard or found Irenaeus, or any other Father make Local,
Personal, Visible, and Continued Succession, a necessary Sign or Mark of the
True Church in any one place, (as though a True Church could not be in any
place without it,) yet the Faith was delivered over by Succession in some
places or other to their time, and is to our time, and shall be till there be
no time; for a True Church may be, has been, and is in places, where there
has not been Continued, Visible, Personal Succession. Were not Jerusalem,
Antioch, etc. and others in the Primitive times true Churches, yet Succession
of Bishops has not continually succeeded in them to this day, and later
Churches are true likewise: Constat omnem Doctrinam quae cum illis Ecclesiis
Apostolicis Matricibus Originalibus Fidei conspiret Veritati deputandam: So
says Tertullian, De praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 21. And in the same place,
Ecclesiae posteriores non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate
Doctrinae: The Succession Irenaeus stood upon, was of the Churches then in
Asia, and of Smyrna, where Polycarpus sat Bishop, as that of Rome. Testimonium
his perhibent quae sunt in Asia Ecclesiae omnes, and qui usque adhuc
successerunt Polycarpo, Iren. l. 3. advers. Haeret. ca. 3. And St. Hierom tells
us, Ecclesia non in parietibus consistit, (in Psalm. 133.) So Succession in the
Fathers Account is not tied to Place, or Person, but to the verity of Doctrine;
as Tertullian (de praescript. c. 32.) Ad hanc formam provocabantur ab illis
Ecclesiis, quae licet nullum ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis Authorem suum
proferunt, ut multo posteriores, quae denique quotidie instituuntur, tamen in
eadem fide conspirantes; non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro cansanguinitate
Doctrinae; showing that modern Churches, such as are daily instituted and set
up agreeing and linking together in the same true Faith, are no less to be
esteemed Apostolical for their neerness and consanguinity of Doctrine; and to
that we have as good Succession as any Christian Church this day in the whole
Catholic Body, the Religion professed in the Church of England being nearest
of any Church now in being, to the Primitive Christian Church. Churches that
have Doctrine, that is not allied in Blood, to that of Christ and his Apostles,
have no lawful or good Succession; for Consanguinitas Doctrinae is required:
Irenaeus speaks plain, Illis Presbyteris obediendum est, qui cum Episcopatus
Successione Charissima acceperunt veritatis. Iren. l. 4. ca. 43. We are to obey
those Priests, who with their Succession in the Office of Bishop have received
the Pledge or Gift of Truth: whereupon Stapleton (Relic. cont. 1. q. 4. A. 2.
Notab. 1.) is forced to confess, successio nec locorum tantum est neo
personarum, sed etiam verae and sanae Doctrinae. And why it cannot be of
Pastors he again tells us ( Notab. 4. ibid.) name Pastore Lups fleri potest;
which is true, many great men have turned Heretics; Judas changed from an
Apostle to a Devil, so it is the easy for others to change from Shepherds into
Wolves. Nor can the Roman Prelates pretend they have only this veram et sanam
Doctrinam, or claim a lawful succession of Pastors continually holding entire
the Unity and the Eaith, for they have not kept the Unity of the Church, but
have had more Schisms among them than any other Church, above thirty
acknowledged by their own Chronologer Onuphrius; Even Popes themselves have
many of them (by confession of several Romish Authors who have written of their
Lives) been very vile, erroneous, Heretical, etc. So it is clear Rome has no
lawful Succession, by confession; they have only a Succession of gross
Superstitions and Errors for a bout a thousand years, for which they can show
no Practice on Warrant from the Apostles. You further say, That our English
Bishops had no Succession from Roman Catholic, for immediately after
Conscoration, Stapleton, Harding, etc. (your own men) told them to their faces
they were no Bishops, Ergo, only the Roman Church have lawful Succession.

I see you are put to hard straits for proof, that, seeing the Fathers will not
speak for you, you are forced to be your own Testimony, which with me is less
than nothing (for who will or can take an Adversary's bare objections for a
sufficient confutation of a matter in question) for by this your Argument and
Rule of proof, should I tell you that any of our Party say Stapleton, Harding,
etc. were no Scholars (though indeed they were great Clarks) and should I say
they were damnable Heretics and forsakers of the Truth (as in truth they are)
you ought to admit it as a convincing Testimony (else why do you obtrude your
sayings for proof?) but let that pass. You confess English Bishops had
Consecration from the Roman, and so enabled and qualified for the service of
the Church; If then the Roman had any lawful power to consecrate (which I deny
not) I do not question but their Consecration is valid enough and hold good,
notwithstanding Stapleton and Hardings words to the contrary; for such sayings
do not unordain, and so we have your Succession and Consecration to boot. But
whether ordinary Mission or Ordination be so absolutely necessary to the being
of Truth, as though Truth could nor be without it, is with me a question,
seeing Christ encouraged the Faithful that did wonders in Christ's name and was
not sent, (St. Mark 9.39, 40.) forbid him not he is on our part, etc. nor did I
ever conceive a necessity lay on the English Church to receive Orders from
Rome, more than on the Roman to receive Orders from it, seeing we were a Church
Apostolic as soon, yea were a Church before any settlement of a Church in Rome.
The Religion of Christ was received in Britain, tempore (ut scimus) summo
Tiberii Caesaris, in the latter time of Tiberius Caesar, as says St. Gildas
(de excid. Brit.) the same is acknowledged by your own man Baronius; whereas
St. Peter kept in Jury long after Tiberius his death: And (as Theodoret and
Sophronimus Patriarchs of Jerusalem affirm) the Apostle St. Paul first taught
in Britain; Also Aristobulus mentioned Romans 16. came to this Isle and
discharged the Office of a Bishop, as Dorotheus witnesses, and in his Synopsis
also averreth Simon Zelotes Christum praedicavit in Britannia ubi crucifixus
occisus et sepultus est; The same also affirms Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 40.)
Simon Zelotes Evangelii Doctrinam ad occidentalem Oceanum Insulasque
Britannicas perfert. And Joseph of Arimathea An. Dom. 53. taught the Gospel in
Britain as Baleus Flemingus and others affirm, likewise Tertullian who lived
An. Christi 200, says, Britanorum loca Romany inapoessa Christo subdita sunt
( advers. Judaeos cap. 7.8;) After him Origin An. Christi 260. witnesses
Britanniam in Christianam consentire Religionem. So it is evident and most
clear that Apostles and Apostolic men delivered over the Faith to us, and were
the first Planters; we had many Waterers after of this Plantation, and a
succession of Doctrine by confession on all sides. St. Jerome also Anno 405.
records Gallia, Britannia, Africa, etc. unum Christum adorant, unam observant
Regulam veritatis: In which time Bellarmine confesses the Church was a true
Apostolic Church, Antiqua Ecclesia primis quingentis Annis vera Ecclesia fuit,
etc. (Bell. l. 4. de notab. Eccl. cap. 9.) and then, viz. the first four hundred
years we and Rome were of one joint Belief and Faith from one Fountain (Christ
Jesus and his Apostles) and the same faith we had then, the same we have now,
we hold to the old Foundation, the Scripture, Creed, and, ractice of the
general Church in those times; so are we a true Church and a right Member of
the Catholic, having lawful succession of Doctrine, conveyed to us (as before
is proved) from Apostles and Apostolic men; whereby it is evident we are no
Novelists nor any of our Profession, the Antiquity whereof our very Enemies do
acknowledge.

Reinerus a Roman Inquisitor (above three hundred years since) speaking of the
Professors at Lions, calling them Valdensae, Leonistae, etc. in contempt,
says, they are more pernicious to the Church of Rome than all other Sects for
three causes; First, being of longer continuance than any other, the Sect
enduring ever since the Apostles. Secondly, It is general, creeping into all
Lands. Thirdly, It has a great show of Godliness, they live justly, believe
all things well concerning God, and all the Articles contained in the Creed,
only they Blaspheme in hating the Church of Rome, etc. He calls us indeed a
Sect, as of old, the Priests of the Jews called the Church of Christians, a
Sect of Nazarites, Acts, 24.5. but you see, by Confession we had our Doctrine
in former Ages, and were a Church from the Beginning, and are not estranged
from the Church of Rome where she holds the Truth, but she from us and the true
Catholic Church of Christ; nor do we depart from her (as they charge us) or
are any further remote from her, than she her self is from her primitive
Purity, ancient Principles, from Scripture, Reason, Charity, Antiouity, and
from what she was in her best of times: our present Church of England (though
often have been under clouds and heavy persecutions) still retaining the
primitive verity to this day. So your second Argument is invalid in that you
have not proved (nor can prove) that the Church of Rome has this lawful
Succession of uncorrupted Doctrine and Principles, or that succession of
Pastors is necessarily tied to one particular place for ever to make the being
of the Catholic Church, as though the universal Church of Christ could cease
to be, if Rome and her Prelates were extinct and turned to Ashes.

Your third Argument from pretended Privileges belonging to the Roman Church,
viz. 3. That Church only that have confuted and anathematized all Heretics,
converted Nations, deprived and restored Bishops, called Councils, etc. that
is, the true Church. But only the Roman is such; Ergo, only the Roman is the
true Church.

The Major (you say) is plain, because these Privileges belong to the Authority
of the Mother Church, which is, Matrix and Radix omnium Ecclesiarum.

I answer, you should first have proved her to be the Mother Church and Radix,
etc. before you exercise (or can claim) the Authority of a Mother; I would fain
know what Church is the Mother of the Roman; or is Rome it self Motherless; for
I deny her to be the Mother of the universal Church of God: yet do agree that
those Privileges (you mention) do belong to the Authority of the Catholic
Church; but it is an insolent and intolerable usurpation (of the Rights and
Privileges of the Universal Church) for any particular Church to confine all
the Catholic Privileges to her particular self, I am sure she has not this
power from Christ to judge and condemn her Sisters; for she is not Matrix and
Radix omnium Ecclesiarum (as you say) there were elder than she (therefore she
at best but a Daughter Church, and Sister to others) Jerusalem (if any
particular) was it, as was prophesied of old, Mic. 4.2. and fulfilled, Luke
24.47. and so Theodoret, lib. 5. Hist. Eccl. cap. 9.) tells us, Ecclesia
Hierosolymitana quae aliarum omnium Matter: And Men were first called Christians
(not at Rome but) at Antioch, Acts. 11.26. St. Gregory Nazian. says, The
Church of Caesaria was Matter prope omnium Ecclesiarum, meaning of neighboring
Churches, not of the whole Catholic Church: Et Constantinopolitana Ecclesia
dicitur omnium aliarum caput; so in that sense, and no other, Rome may be
called Head of those Churches in her Patriarchat. Every particular Church that
teaches the Catholic Doctrine may be called Catholic, (as a Member of the
universal) and so was the particular Roman whilst it held all things true
concerning the Faith; but never was she Matter and Radix omnium Ecclesiarum, for
the Universal Church has no particular or local Root of its being, Jerusalem,
as I said before, if any, was it. Or if you will have a particular Root of the
Catholic Church, it is in the East, not in the West at Rome -- se praecisam
esse a Radice orientalium Ecclesiurum, etc. St. August. Epist. 170, But the
Head, Root, Matrix, Fountain, etc. of Rome and all other particular Churches,
is the Catholic Church and her Unity, and to break her Uunity by usurping a
Power or Priority, which Christ never gave, is at the least abominable, if not
certainly damnable; it is against a command too, The Text is clear, There was a
strife among the Apostles which should be greatest, St. Luke, 22.14. Christ
answered them, The Princes and Rulers exercise Dominion, etc. but it shall not
be so with you; He that will be greatest, etc. St, Matt. 20.26. There is no
Priority much less Superiority given to Churches National; Tertullian tells us,
Omnes Primae, and omnes Apostolicae, dum unam omnes probant unitatem (de
praescript. advers. Haeret. cap. 20.) Porro unam esse primam Apostolicam ex qua
reliquae hanc nulli loco affigit B. Rhenanus: therefore not at Rome. And it is
to be observed, that Tertullian, long since, numbering the then Apostolical
Churches reckons Rome last of them, ( Tertull. ibid. cap. 32.) and Pamelius
lately puts Rome after others ( cap. 21. number. 129.) what you speak out of St.
Augustine, In Ecclesia Romana semper viguit Apostolicae Cathedrae Principatus,
that in Rome there did always flourish the Principality of an Apostolic Chair
(in relation to the West and South parts of the Church, all the other four
Apostolical Chairs being in the East) does not give Rome, nor the Pope thereof,
power to exercise this Principality (beyond his Limits, out of his own
Patriarchate) over the whole Church of Christ: for in the same Epistle of St.
August. (Epist. 162.) Melciades then Bishop of Rome had leave granted him to
hear a matter of the Donatists adjudged by the African Bishops, and other
Bishops by the Emperor were sent Judges to determine with him, for if he had
done it without leave the Epistle tells us it had been an usurpation, seeing
(ad cujus curam, etc. ibid.) it belonged to the Emperors care and charge, and
that he is to give an account to God for it. Yea a Pope himself says it is
Antichristian to be styled universal Bishop, St. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 78
monstrous and blasphemous, Absit a cordibus Christianorum Nomen illud
Blasphemiae, ibid. Epist. 76: and further, (St. Greg. Epist. 83.) In isto
scelesto vocabulo consentire nihil aliud est quam fidem perdere. So the Roman
was not then universal Bishop, had no power over Patriarchs and National
Bishops, no Monarch over the whole militant Church for near six hundred years
after Christ: and Britain in those times was never subject to the Sea of Rome,
for it had a Primate of its own ( Et a Patriarcha non datur Appellatio, says
the Civil Law) from whom lies no Appeal. Now then the general power of
anathematizing Heretics, depriving Schismatics, restoring Orthodox Bishops,
etc, belong to the Catholic Church Militant, and her Authority in general
Councils lawfully by her called and constituted; and that the Catholic Church
is our Mother no man will deny that accounts God to be his Father. But this
Holy Catholic Church (mentioned in the Apostle's Creed) is not the Church of
Rome, nor any other particular Church on Earth: The Holy Catholic Church there
spoken of contains not only the whole militant Church on Earth but the whole
Triumphant alive in Heaven; for so St. August. Euch. cap. 56. Ecclesia hic tota
accipienda est, non solum ex part quae peregrinatur in terris, etc. verum
etiam ex illa quae in Caelis: And who converted Nations originally? Did not
Christ send out his Apostles, and seventy Disciples at another time, and then
after sent many more? were not then Apostles Apostolic men, and the general
Church they that converted and confuted Nations and planted the Church of
Christ in the World? Now this Holy Catholic Church, before ever Rome was a
Church, is Matrix and Radix omnium Ecclesiarum, of Rome as well as other. The
Catholic Church was ever one and the same Church, ( viz. the Church of God
spread over the whole World (and as before described by St. August.) Rome could
never be it, for if Rome, a particular Church, can be now the Catholic Church,
then by the same Rule (if it be not out of Rule) some other particular Church,
before it, was the Catholic Church; and how came that to lose it and Rome to
get it, that it is now, as you say, translated to Rome; and does it not follow
by the same rule that Rome (also) may transire in non Ecclesiam, pass way in no
Church; for what Patent or holy Charter from Heaven has Rome above the former,
and above other particular Churches that it shall there remain to the end of
the World? Nay, they that most stand for it, even the greatest Champion Rome
has, can only say, It Is a pious and probable Opinion to think, Cathedram Petri
non posse seperari a Roma and proinde Romanam Ecclesiam non posse errare vel
deficere. (Bellar. de To. Pont. cap. 4.) so it is but pretended probality, and
that is no proof able to convince: However, he that thinks the contrary, viz.
that the particular Church of Rome can err and fall away from the Faith (which
the true Church can never do, I mean the Catholic Church before described can
never fall away from the Faith) and St. Peter's Chair be severed from Rome, is
by Bellarmines own confession no Heretic, for he adds, Contraria sententia nec
est Haeretica nec manifesta erronia (Bellarm. ibid.) And if the Apostolic
Chair can be removed from Rome, and the Roman Church fall away from the Faith,
then it is so far being the only Catholic, that it cease to be a part of the
Catholic Church; where it appears that Rome never was, is, or can be, The
only Catholic Church of Christ.

Your fourth Argument, from Universality of the Roman Church, has its Answer
already in a great measure: But something more I shall particularly answer to
the same, which you propound, thus. Arg. 4. That Church is only Catholic which
is dispersed through all Nations. But only the Roman is dispersed through all
Nations, Ergo the Roman only is the Catholic Church.

And how comes the denomination of the Church to be changed from Christian to
Roman; certainly it is no small felony to rob the Church of the more honorable
Appellation and give it your own name. Men were first called Christians at
Antioch; and yet the Universal Church was never styled Antiochian.

If you make a difference between the Christian Faith and the Roman, speak out
and confess it; If you mean the Christian Faith, why do you not say so? alter
your Minor Proposition and the conclusion will follow for the Church of Christ,
and I Will assent to it without more ado, for then your Proposition will be true
and you will contend without an Adversary. But have you any other Doctrine can
parallel this Sacrilege in taking away the Christian Name from the universal
Church of Christ? As though the Spouse of Christ could become Anabaptist,
forget her Virgin Name and change her Beloved. Is Christ and Rome convertible?
Is the Gospel of Christ become the Gospel of the Pope? or has the Pope a
Gospel of his own that is spread over the World? was there not a true Church
(that had Radix Essentiae, and is the Root, Essence and Being to Rome and other
particular Churches) before Rome received the Faith? And what was that Church
called? not Roman surely: And why did you not say the Church of Jerusalem or
the Church of Antioch, etc. (where the first Plantation was) is dispersed
through all Nations; Ergo, the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, etc. only is the
Catholic Church? it had been more tolerable though as little to sense. The
first Appellation (before ever Rome was a Church) viz. Christian, shall stand
with me for ever: I dare not change from Christian to Roman, in as much as
Christian Religion is elder and was before ever Rome was converted; therefore
Christian, not Roman, is the primitive and right term and name of the universal
Church. Besides, How the Roman (or any particular Church) can be the Catholic
(for at best she was but a Catholic) Church, is no ways apparent. St. Cyril
tells us, Catholica est illa quae diffusa est per universum Orbem; Rome is not
the universal (but the Christian Church is) so not Catholic in extent. Romana
Ecclesia particularis confesses Bellarmin, (lib. 4. de R. Pont. c. 4.) so not
the Catholic Church; Rome it self must be judged by Scripture and the
Catholic Church (and is right no further than it agrees with the Catholic)
and not the Catholic Church by it. Our fierce Adversary Stapleton, pours out
his Reason why Roman is esteemed Catholic, Quia ejus Communio erat evidenter
and certissime cum tota Catholica; So you see the Communion of the Roman was
with the Catholic, not of the Catholic with it: And St. Cyprian in the rent
and open Schism between Cornelius and Novatian employed his Legates, etc.
Elaborarent ut ad Catholicae Ecclesiae unitatem scissi sorpor is membra
componerent: Now the members of this torn Body were they of Rome, then in open
Schism between Cornelius and Novatian, (St. Cypr. li. 2. Ep. 10.) And St.
Cyprian endeavored to bring Rome to the Unity of the Catholic; so Rome then
was not The Catholic, nor is the Radix, etc. or can she be her own Original.
There is a double Root, (as one learnedly observes) Radix Essentiae, which
gives Essence and Being to Rome and all other particular Churches, and there is
Radix Existentiae, as Rome with all other particular Churches (and no more than
other Patriarchal Churches) which was and is the Root of the Churches
Existence, agreeable to that known and received Rule in Art, that Universals
give Essence to their Particulars, and Particulars supply their Universals with
Existence. But to shut up and confine the Universal Church of Christ, (as it is
now spread) in the narrow compass of Rome only, is ridiculous Nonsense.
Ecclesia non in parietibus consistit, says St. Jerome, in Psalm. 133. The Church
is every where, ubi fides vera, etc.

You bring in St. Paul to say, ( Romans 1.8.) that the Roman Faith was preached
in all the World: But you abuse St. Paul, for it is not said preached; nor is it
said Roman Faith. Their Faith was spoken of (as his course was to commend and
encourage the faithful in every place) St. Paul intending to impart to them
some spiritual gift, for they were not then established: He only commended then
the Faith of the Saints then in Rome (which they had newly received) viz. the
Christian Faith (never called it the Roman Faith) and so much he spoke, and
more, of the Faith of other Nations and Persons to whom he wrote, and yet never
any Nation or Person usurped a Style was never given them. St. Paul, These.
1.8. witnesses that, From the Church of Thessalonica sounded out the Word of
the Lord, and in every place the Faith of the Thessalonians was spread abroad;
and were ensamples to all that believe, etc. ver. 7. ibid. (which was a true
Faith) and yet they never nicknamed the Universal Christian Church
Thessalonian, nor did they ever arrogantly and audaciously adopt the Universal
Church of Christ as their own Offspring and Issue, (or that they only were the
Catholic) as Rome does in your Position. St. Paul did commend the Faith then
in Rome, but now it is changed and not worthy commendation. You say that is St.
Peter's, and why not St. Paul's Faith; was not his as good, and the other
Apostles the same that St. Peter taught? Was there no true Faith but what came
from Rome? (and it is yet a question whether St. Peter was ever there, Rome
could never yet make it appear) Was all the Doctrine of the other Apostles
invalid? Was not their power equal? ( Matthew. 28.19, 20. and 18.18. Joh. 20.22,
23.) It Is most sure one was not above another (as before is proved) Christ's
Word was delivered to all to Preach; from which our very greatest Adversary is
forced to confess, Summa Potestas Ecclesiastica non solum data est Petro sed
etiam aliis Apostolis, (Bellarm. li. de To. Pont. ca. 1.) all are Supreme: Then
they who pretend to be St. Peter's Successors, have not Supreme Ecclesiastical
Power any more than the Successors of the other Apostles; for St. August.
(Tract. 50. in St. Jo.) says, Si hoc Petro tantum dictum est non facit hoc
Ecclesia. The Keys were given to St. Peter and all the rest in a Figure of the
Church (as one says) to whose power and to whose use they were given; not to
one to Lord it over the rest: It shall not be so with you, etc. (as before.)
And St. Augustine, (de Agon. Chri. ca. 30.) Petrus Personam Ecclesiae Catholicae
sustinet, and huic datae sunt Claves quum Petro datae, so the Power is in the
Catholic Church, not any single Person, as is evident by the practice of the
Primitive Church many hundred years after Christ, when was no Universal Bishop
(as before is proved) to St. Gregory's time. St. Peter's Faith, not his Person,
is the Rock against which, etc. for afterward to his Person Christ said, Get
thee behind me, Satan, etc. And a Temptation did too much prevail on him when
he most horribly fell in a personal and shameful denial of his Master (which
cost him many bitter Tears.) Epiphanius, (li. 2. Here Is. 59.) tells us it is his
Faith, Super hanc Petram solidae Fidei edificabo Ecclesiam meam: So St. Greg.
Nyssen also, Haec sides Ecclesiae fundamentum est (de Trin. adver. Judaeos.)
The same Interpretation gives St. Hilar. (li. de Trin.) Super hanc igitur
confessionis Petram Ecclesiae edificatio est. And this Faith the whole
Catholic Church has, which is the Rock against which Hell Gates shall not
prevail, to cause the Church to fail fundamentally.

If any were supreme why not the beloved Disciple, to whom it was never said,
Get thee behind me Satan, and who never denied his Master: Or St. Paul, though
none of the twelve, yet an Apostle for whom there is more color, for He had
the Right Hand of Fellowship given him, Gal. 2.9. And he himself owned expressly
an Authority, 1 Cor. 7.17. And so ordain I in all Churches. -- In all Churches,
in the Roman as well as other (if Rome was then a Church.) Sollicitudo omnium
Ecclesiarum, The Care of all the Churches, he says, 2 Cor. 11.28. And where
was St. Peter's Supremacy, yea where was his Infallibility, when St. Paul
rebuked and opposed him to his face, in that He walked not uprightly according
to the Truth of the Gospel? (Gal. 11.3.4.) And where was his Supremacy when he
was sent on Errands by the Church, viz. by the other Apostles, Acts 11.3, 4.
and Acts 15.13. And how can St. Peter's pretended Successors claim a Supremacy,
that St. Peter had not himself. If any succeeded our Lord in the Principality
of the Church, Epiphanius twice tells you it is St. James the Lords Brother;
Ille primus Episcopalem Cathedram cepit, quum ei ante caeteros omnes, suum in
terris Thronum Dominus tradidisset, (Epiphan. l. 3. Haeres. 78. Page 103.)

You go on and say, What Faith the Romans had then, the very same they have at
this present, etc.

Not so neither, for Rome was a right Church, and is now a wrong; Their Faith
is changed, at least what Faith they have now, they had not then; the true
Church then (and many hundred years after) knew not your present Errors and
Superstitions, not your prayer (in the Church) in an unknown Tongue, as St.
Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 14. The Church owned no supreme Prelate, no Pope above
his fellows, usurping a power to depose Princes, no worshipping of Images, no
invocation of Saints, no adoration of the Bread in Sacrament, no breaking of
Christ's Institution in the Eucharist, giving the holy Sacrament but in one
kind, no Purgatory, no Decretal Epistles and Canons against Scripture to be
believed as Scripture, No Doctrine of Devils, etc. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3.

St. Augustine (whose memory is honored through the whole Christian world in
all Churches) was of the true Catholic Church, no man will deny, and yet he
was no Romanist in Opinion; for he was in the separation of the Afric Church
from Rome, with many other Bishops, and died therein. Ergo, it is possible to be
of the true Catholic Church, and yet out of the Roman.

We are taught by St. August. (de Bap. con. Don. ca. 4.) Evident Scripture
before all things must take place, for it is, as your own man, Stapleton,
confesses, ( Relict. con. 4. q. Ar. 3.) the Foundation and Pillar of Faith:
(Scripturam Fundamentum esse and Columnam Fidei fatemur) Then I shall not
easily be led away from the Foundation by the subtle tradition of men, seeing
St. Paul gives more warning ( Coloss. 2.8.) Beware lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of men. Now what my
Faith is I have told you in the beginning of my first Paper, which I take to be
the Faith of the present Church of England. I embrace the Faith which the
Apostles delivered, I believe the holy Scripture and the Creeds, and these in
the sense of the ancient Primitive Church: I submit in all humility to the four
great General Councils, (so much magnified throughout Christendom) their
Determinations and Interpretations; and I do believe all points of Doctrine
generally received, as fundamental in the Church of Christ. This I confess and
subscribe to, and seeing I so do, you are bound in charity to believe me, for
you have all the proof that can be had, or that ever Man or Church required.
Now show me where I do depart from the Foundation, and yet I am no Papist, or
show me (if you can) where the Church of England does fail in any one point
fundamental in the Faith.

We do not, Hominis consuetudinem sequi sed Dei veritatem, as St. Cypr. (l. 2.
Epist. 3.) teaches, for Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas est Erroris, ibid.

We are bid to go to the Law and the Testimony; The Word is a Light unto our
Feet, and Lanthorn to our Paths: we are taught to Search the Scripture, which
is able to make the man of God perfect, (says St. Paul.) It was proclaimed
from Heaven by God the Father first at Jordan, then at Mount Tabor, This is my
well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him; and to hear him is
Life: And I know, They committed two Evils that forsook the Fountain of Living
Waters, to hew out to themselves Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no
water, Jer. 2.13.

That Episcopal and Kingly Government are inseparable in England, and the
Establishment of both are, Jure Divino.
WE have in the late Tragical Revolutions been too severely taught, that no
Project of Government either in Church or State, Episcopacy excluded, is
consistent with England's happiness; and that Episcopacy and Monarchy are
inseparable, and the only props of this Nations Peace, we, by the same cruel
Experience have been made sensible; whereby it appears that it is England's
great Interest to uphold both for her safety, and that the one cannot subsist
without the other, was well understood by that second Solomon, King James of
blessed memory, from whom we have the Maxim (in his Basil. Do.) Sublato
Episcopo tollitur Rex, no Bishop, no King: And no Faction or Profession (though
nick-naming themselves Protestants) deviating from the Principles in Doctrine,
and Practice in Worship, from the present Church of England, can stand with
Monarchy. A right Protestant of the English Church, protests not only against
the errors of Rome, but against all Schism and errors of every Sect, and
against all Doctrine not agreeing with the Primitive Profession, and Practice
of the ancient Church of Christ.

There are sorts of People that are ever clamorous, and designing to Reform the
Reformed, and even to amend Reformation it self, chiefly plotting a great
alteration (which is more than a Reformation) of Church Government, by removal
of Bishops from the Government; but these are enemies to good Reformation, for
no good Reformer ever held Episcopacy unlawful, the Order does emanare ab
Apostolis. The Government is of Divine Right, of which Christ himself (the
Great High Priest, Heb. 4. v. 14. and Bishop) laid the Foundation, was Bishop
over all, and the Apostles were Ministers; After him every Apostle had his
Charge, many of them a Diocese, and was Overseer, that is, Bishop over many
Churches, and they left this way of Government a Pattern for all Posterity to
follow. So it is manifest that Church Government by Bishops is as old (and
universally practiced) as Christian Religion, and Christian Faith was received
in England soon after the Crucifixion of our Savior, and the Government of the
Church by Bishops entered with it, as well it ought; for there was no other
Government, Order, or Constitution in the Primitive Church: Apostles, Angels,
Bishops, Patriarchs, etc. are Synonima, one Office under several Denominations.
St. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by God, was a great
Apostle or Bishop: Timothy had a Jurisdiction over the Ephesians, and was
ordained Bishop ( Tim. 3.22.) and so was Titus Bishop of Creet, and had many
Ministers under them. Thus entered Episcopacy and that Order of Priesthood to
the Government of the Church in the beginning. There was an order of Priesthood
in the old Law, of which the high Priest was chief, and there were Priests and
Levites: so in the new it seemed meet to the Eternal Builder of the Church to
leave, (by the example set by his Apostles) an Order and Method of Government
therein; and this divine Emanation the Universal Church has in all Ages
embraced, and this Order best keeps the Presbyters and Clergy in Unity one with
another, and in an Union of Doctrine and Worship in the Church throughout,
which otherwise, the order of Church Discipline left to every Presbyter's
private fancy to use after his own modelling, would greatly hazard the
introducing as many Novels (may be Schisms and Factions) as there are parochial
Churches in the Land; what a Medly! what a Confusion! what a Hydra! what a
Babel! what an open Mockery as it were, of God would there be throughout the
Nation to the scandal thereof; so the Church in England would have no
appearance, no face and constant dress to be known by; Strangers would be at a
loss for the true English Church, finding here a Hydra of many faces not one
like another.

But who, and what generation of men, are wiser and more holy than the Apostles
and Fathers of old, to set up a new way of Government (of their own contriving)
in Christ's Church? what Power on Earth can abrogate that Government by divine
Institution reared, and continued by the same right all Ages in the Church of
God? And what necessity is here of a change or alteration of Government in the
Church from that which is Apostolical to that which peradventure may prove
Diabolical? for what good can be expected by pulling down that which is of Gods
setting up and introducing a new (we know not what) of Man's absolute devising?
But if perchance, any Irregularities have crept in, or undue practices,
contrary to the established Order, have been committed in any part of this
Government which should call for (or minister a Necessity of) Reformation;
surely not unhallowed hands of the profane Laity (who should be governed by
the Church and not the Church corrected by them) are fit Instruments of this
Work, especially in a Nation that has so lately felt the dire Effects and
Issues of a popular (pretended) Reformation, and wherein those men have shown
to the World what ill Workmen they are. Let the people reform their own
Manners; This reforming part of what is amiss in the Church belongs only to
them to whom the Holy Spirit said, I will be with you always to the end of the
World; with the Church, i. e. with the Apostles, (whose personal continuance
lasted not in the World) and their Successors in the Office of Apostles,
Bishops, Pastors, Patriarchs, etc. in the Church, who shall have the assistance
of the Holy Spirit for ever, As my Father sent me so send I you: And as Christ
sent them so they sent others; so what shall seem meet to the Holy Spirit and
to them whom Christ has sent and through whose word we are to believe in
Christ, (St. Jo. 17.20.) the Governors of the Church successively, to whom
Christ has promised to be with, and in whom only the Jus Divinum remains, may
reform and alter what they judge convenient; for it is of the same power that
changed the Sabbath from the last to the first day of the week, and it is from
and by the same Power and Divine Authority that the Church conveys all the
Ordinances, Sacraments and Holy things of God to his People from Generation to
Generation. These Pastors and Governors with whom Christ according to his word
is always present to the end of the World may (I grant) transfer the Government
(should they deem a necessity) into more hands, under other names than that of
Bishop; which (note) will still be but Episcopacy degenerated into another
denomination, the Power will be the same, not altered but translated from one
to many, in whom the Supremacy and Jus Divinum will remain: In all this the
Church loses not her Right; But to take away the Government by Bishops from
the Church, without her Authority or Consent, is to cut off great part of her
self, and to deprive her of much of her Being; And for Laymen to encroach upon
her Government and force it from her, is to rifle her of her Divine Right
devolved to her as aforesaid. The Authority came not from the Laity, so they
have nothing to do therewith, and no Authority to disturb it: For who can touch
the Ark of God (though in their Judgment it should seem to totter) and be
guiltless, when Uzziah's indiscreet Zeal was so severely punished? and what
misery did such misguided popular Zeal lately bring on this Nation in rudely
meddling with God's Ark, the Church, and pulling down that Government and those
Governors they should Religiously have obeyed; And if Uzzah's fault (whose
fervent Zeal was to uphold not overthrow the Ark) was followed with so great
destruction on his body, what punishment may they from Divine Justice expect
who through Malice, Avarice and Ambition, seek to destroy the Government and
Authority of the ancient Church of God?

Think not then, Oh thou perverse Enemy of the Apostolical Government of Gods
Church, that your expectation of a change in this Age can have any foundation;
that they who enact just Laws can propose unjust things to be enacted, that any
one Member of the whole Community, any one of the Representatives of us Laymen
in this Lay-Parliament will adventure to lay violent hands on the Church of
Christ, by endeavoring to pull down her Governors from their Seat to lay her
desolate, to bid defiance to the Spouse of Christ, and so make War again,
against the Soul of the Lords anointed; for rothing can pass into a Law but by
Royal Assent, and what unhallowed Lip dare offer at a motion savouring of
abolishing that radieated Government which his Majesty, not only by his
Education and choice has received, and (following the Wisdom and Piety of his
Forefathers and Predecessors) has approved and confirmed as most Catholic and
Sacred, but obliged by solemn and sacred Tie of an Oath at his Coronation to
preserve and maintain with all the Legal Rights of the Church. Who can be so
impious to lay a snare for his precious Soul, or so vile to imagine to prevail
in endeavoring to wheedle him to so great a Transgression as the horrid sin of
Perjury, and to betray his Mother the Church to be worried again by her
inveterate Enemies, and so consequently himself at last to be at the discretion
and mercy of the same Gang, who have been as ready to unhinge the State as
unsettle the Church, and do assuredly expect the one from the other, that it is
more than likely the old Design is now a new on foot; for every stroke that
hurts the Church does wound the State.

It would be strange and savor much of Satanism if any should advise a Son
from inheriting his Fathers Virtues, to set at naught the Holy Counsel of so
great a Saint in Heaven, not to observe the pious Injunctions and Admonitions
of a Religious King and Father, whose dying Speeches, as if he had bequeathed
his Piety and Religion, his Zeal and Honor for the Church to be a Portion for
his Children and a Glory to the Crown in his Successor obliged the Prince of
Wales (our present Sovereign) by a sweet invitation of Reason and Righteousness
to stand firm to the Religion in which he was educated; amongst his admirable
Instructions, divine Admonitions and Advices he says -- Above all, I would
have you, as I hope you are already, well grounded and settled in your
Religion: The best Profession of which I have esteemed that of the Church of
England, in which you have been Educated: Yet I would have your Judgment and
Reason now Seal to that Sacred Bond which Education has written, that it may
be judicially your own Religion, and not other men's Custom or Tradition which
you profess. In this I charge you to persevere, as coming nearest to God's Word
for Doctrine, and to the primitive examples for Government. And in another
place he adds: I do require and entreat you as your Father and your King, that
you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection
from the true Religion established in the Church of England. I tell you I have
tried it, and after much search and many Disputes, have concluded it to be the
best in the World; not only in the Community as Christian, but also in the
special notion as Reformed, keeping the middle way between the pomp of
superstitions Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastic Anarchy.

Now behold, Oh ye Enemies of the Reformed Church of England, yea all the World
behold, the Profession of this pure Religion is confirmed to be the truest on
Earth by the most signal and Authentic Proof under Heaven, a Proof that bears
Majesty, yea Divinity in it, it is descended from on High; Kings are Gods on
Earth; The King, the most Sacred of Kings has tried it, ( and it is the Honor
of a King to search out a Matter, Prove. 25.2.) God's Vicegerent made it the
great Business and work of his Life to search for Truth and pure Profession of
Religion, and in the controverting confounded all the Arguments and
Argumentators against God's Church, to their Amazement and Confusion. He in the
Decision would not part with one jot of Truth to betray or oppress the Church:
His Righteousness he held fast and would not let it go, Job. 26.6. for when he
was in the cruel hands of his implacable Enemies (oven a Captive at their
dispofal) at New Castle, far from the Aid of good Men or Books to assist and
comfort him, at this disadvantage (as if God had delivered him as he did Job to
be buffeted by Satan, and winnowed) their great Champion of their new Gospel,
Dr. H. the deputed Tempter of the Synod and Commons House, furnished with all
the ensnaring Arguments Sedition and Treason could invent, was sent to
captivate the Soul of his Sovereign, and ruffle him out of his Faith (thereby
to lay a stone for their new Babel) but met with such Divine and convincing
Reasons from the King, who so concisely and sweetly answered every point of
their long studied and tedious Sophisms, as overcame the Giant and all his Host
of sophistrated Arguments, that returning in high discontent to those who sent
him, in great discomposure of Spirit furiously cried out, Never man spoke as
the King spoke, and argued as the King argued, he is able to confound ye all,
etc. and being enraged that he was vanquished, fell into a Conflict of Spirit,
and not long after finished his days. Kings represent God, are Children of the
Most High, Sit upon Gods Throne; the King has tried it, (and where was there
ever, or can be found on earth, a Prince, for Piety, Religion, and Wisdom, his
equal, or one like him) and who can be more concerned for a Child than a
Father, for a People than their King? The King has tried it, and whom can we
trust but those that have tried? and whom can a Child better trust than a
Father? and whom can we, a People, better trust than the Father of our Country,
our King, a Nursing Father, who had no end but the salvation of his Child, the
salvation of his People, and to preserve them from Apostasy in the time of
Trial and Persecution they might meet with? A King, who was able to try,
laborious in the search, judicious to discern, and most wise and learned to
judge, who took care of us all as for his own soul, was faithful (before the
Lord) unto the death, preferring his Religion before his Crowns and Life, the
Church and his People before his own safety; no torment inflicted on his Body,
could make a Conquest of his Soul, for his unvanquished Fortitude after many
hard Conflicts, bitter Afflictions and Indignities heaped on him, witnessed the
truth of the holy Faith and Religion of the Church of England, by giving up his
Life for the same, so imitating his Savior, subscribed and signed the Truth
with his last blood.

Kings are Divinely inspired (as by the Actions and Writings of this Holy One
is sufficiently evidenced) The Eyes of God are with Kings on their Throne, Job.
36.7. The King is an Angel of God to discern good and bad, 2 Samuel 14.17, 20. An
Angel of Light; and to whom then should we repair for Righteous Judgment, but
to him who sees with Gods byes, to the Angel of Light, to the Light of Israel,
(...) Isiah. 8.19. Never was there a Test in any Age or Nation like it, what
doubt can there be of the purity and truth of the Profession, but that every
man may safely take and subscribe to our Religion upon this Trial, and Center
his Trust upon this Testimony and Evidence, and Author it here for ever? What
better proof can the whole World produce? Is it not worth ten thousaend? 2 Samuel
18.3.

Yet not wholly to take it upon the trust of others, and be led to
implicithess, barely to take our Profession of Religion from other men's Custom
or Tradition (as he said) this good King has given us a light, and marked us
out a way to confirm our selves in it, to make it our own by Election, in
weighing it with sound Reason and Judgment (though hodietter Lessons than) from
his Divine Truths and Testimony can be offered to the World) and so has put us
to School to the most Choice, Learned, Religious, and Rational Treatises of
holy Churchmen upon the point; that we must acknowledge, though we are owing to
Education for initiating and first Principling us in our Religion, we are
wholly owing to his Directions, convincing Arguments, and Divine Testimony for
the Confirmation of us in it; in it, in the best Religion in the world, which
he has taken by Divine Inspiration from above, not sole Infusion beneath, by
Revelation from Heaven, not Education; Seducement, or Custom on Earth; and
Heaven it self has hallowed and approved it, by the late miraculous replanting
the same Profession of Religion and Faith in this Land, and restoring the Royal
Defender thereof in peace. Hope not then (Oh thou full of wicked Imaginations)
that any Branch of that Royal and Holy Stem can be of any other Religion than
the best in the world, even the Reformed Religion professed and established in
the Church of England, Thou shall not Revile the Gods, nor speak evil of the
Ruler of thy People, Exodus 2.21 Acts 23. Think not then that any Child of so
pious and sacred a Parent, can despise the Admonition of an Angel of Light,
(and his Book as Heretical) and abandon that Religion the best Religion so
recommended, so proved, and the Truth thereof so confirmed, but will
Religiously observe such Divine Admonitions and Holy Injunctions, and will Bind
them for a Sign upon his Hands, and to the as Frontlets between his Eyes,
always before him, Deuteronomy. 6. that it may be well with him for ever; and not by
following strange Gods, and those ways he was warned to avoid and beware of,
Rob the dead, the most innocent dead, his Royal Father, of the Glory of his
Sufferings, of his Crown of Martyrdom; for this were to unsweeten the memory of
the purest Innocence (next the Savior of the world) that ever was born of a
Woman. This were (which is a most malicious wickedness but to imagine) not only
to Countenance his Enemies cruelty that murdered his Body, but more
barbarously against all Humanity and bonds of Nature to crucify his Honor, to
slay his everlasting Name and Memory, to render him Inglorious, his Death a
Reproach, to defile his Sacred Dust, to raise a Persecution against him in his
Grave worse than all the smarts and horrid terrors of his Life, to render his
Religion (that Religion which he watered with his Blood) a Heresy, and himself
a most grand Heretic, so consequently to die deservedly, and the destruction
of him and his faithful Subjects (in defense of him and the Church) to be
Righteous; as if his Enemies depriving him of his Crowns on Earth, were not
sufficient, but his dear Offspring to ravish from him also that which he has
in Glory; to help the Popish and Phanatick Enemies to dethrone a Saint, and
unsaint a Martyr that is Canonized in Heaven, to pull him from thence, and as
much as in them lies to tear his precious Name out of the Book of Life; to make
blacker his days on Earth, than all the malice of his Enemies could ever make
it, to take his blessed Memory out of the Calendar of Time, to eraze it out of
the Rubric, to repeal and make scandalous the Statute of the Realin that has
ordained his day, his day of Glory, his day of sufferings for the Church (the
Thirtieth of January) to be observed for even; to ravish his Name from the
number of the Good and Virtuous on Earth, to take the Head of the grand Rebel,
O. C. from the Pole of Infamy, and to rank that Usurpers Bones again amongst
the Shrines of Kings, and even to marble his Hearse into a Statue amongst the
Worthies of England. But never can the blessed Name and Honor of Holy Charles
be thus stormed, whilst the Earth shall bear any Successor on the British
Throne, descended from his sacred Loins, and God grant his Race to Sway the
Scepter, may be as lasting as the Sun and Moon. -- Repent therefore (Oh thou
Dissenter from all Charity and Goodness) of this thy wickedness, and pray God,
if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

No Insidel that had seen the Finger of God in the late great Restoration of
Church and State, but would have embraced the Faith of the Church of England in
the Notion and Manner as Religion is here Established upon the account of the
Miracle only, as may well be concluded from that credible Relation given of a
great Prince or Vizier in the Ottoman Territories, who hearing the Story of the
Stupendous Miracle of restoring the King of England to his People, and the
Protestant Religion to the Nation, even the sudden Redemption from Banishment,
and returning the Captivity of Church and People in peace, in the midst of
Armies without bloodshed, was startled into an Amazement and holy Rapture, and
in the high Transport passionately cried out; Oh had I the happiness to be
acquainted with that blessed Prince, His Religion should be my Religion, His
God should be my God.

It is no new thing that Miracles have Converted Nations, but it is a strange
thing that there should be so stupid and benumbed a Generation of Men in any
Nation, whom Miracles move not, even this wondering of the Mahumetan (like
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.29. There is no other God can deliver after this sort)
in a holy Reverence to this power of the Almighty, and work of his Mercy; is a
kind of Adoration of the God of the Protestants of England, and as much as in
him lies, an embracing of the Faith in his Heart. -- Can then any Christian of
England forget these Magnalia Caeli, (or forsake that Faith, Doctrine, Worship,
and Discipline, which not the Arm of Flesh, but the Might of Providence has so
amazingly Replanted and Sceptred in this Land) and be good?

This Profession of the Church of England is apparently owned by God himself to
be his own Church, for lately taking of his Rod of Correction, and, in his good
time, ceasing Chastising his People, whom he for their sins had afflicted; he
dissipated all Sects from Government, and every Religion from Establishment,
but that which he called back from Captivity, which he Redeemed from Thraldom
to Liberty; and to him who continued his Faith, he restored his Kingdoms; for
the sake of the Church he re-Inthron'd the King in his Rights, and for the sake
of the King he re-Established the Church.

Oh the Majesty and Divinity of Kings, whose Government is Ordained by God
himself! By me Kings Reign, etc. Diadema Regis in manu Dei, Isa. 62.3. The Lord
does set the Crown upon the Kings head, Psalm. 21.3. Kings are of Gods setting
up, 1 Samuel 9.10, 17. 1 Samuel 10.24. See ye him whom the Lord has chosen, and
ought not to be of the Peoples pulling down. They are Christi Domini, the Lords
Anointed, Touch not mine Anointed, etc. And who can stretch forth his Hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. Every man's right,
the property of every English Man is preserved to him by the Law, per Magnum
Chartam Anglia, so the Right of Kings is conveyed and confirmed to them by the
great Charter of Heaven, an indelible Law (greater than that of the Medes and
Persians) that no man may presume to attempt to alter: Kings have their Titles
from above, and hold their Kingdoms under God, for all Kingdoms are his, (and
not the Peoples) He establishes Thrones and Kingdoms for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.4,
5. and Chap. 29. v. 23.2 Sam. 7.13. Psalm. 89. A King is more honored than the
Angels, has Gods more peculiar Divine Stamp upon him, and is made the Son of
God: I have chosen him to be my Son, and I will be his Father, Chron. 28.6. 2 Samuel 7.14. And who can without highest Rebellion to the King of Heaven, attempt
to deface this holy Stamp, by approaching to hurt Gods Son and Vicegerent, in
Office or Person. The Persons of Kings are sacred, invested with Divinity,
which strike an Awe on all good men: This David, when a Subject, well knew and
felt, and Adored the Divinity; David, the most undaunted Courage of the Earth,
the great Champion of Israel, whom no danger could affright, that encountered
the mighty Goliath in the Head of the puissant Army of the Philistines, was the
most Valiant of the World, that slew his ten thousands, yet when his King
(though a single Person) became his Enemy, and sought his Life (causelessly) to
take it away, he could not lift up a hand against his Person, when it seemed
easy to have destroyed him in the Cave; dread fell upon David, and his heart
smote him but for cutting off the Skirt of Readiness Garment, 1 Samuel 24.5. and
said, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords
Anointed, to stretch forth mine Hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of
the Lord, v. 6.10. And David, though he knew he was to succeed Saul in the
Throne, and be King after him, and had a second opportunity to have been
avenged of his Enemy Saul, (who again pursued after his Life) and might have
slain him in his Trench, and put to the Sword his whole Guard of Armed Men
whilst they lay sleeping, yet he became afraid to unsheath a Sword against his
Enemy to cut him off, and would not permit any man to hurt the Lords Anointed,
but saved him from danger, 1 Samuel 26.9, 11. Yea sharply robuked the Kings
Guards for being no more watchful over their Charge, telling them what they,
for their Carelessness justly deserved: Ye are worthy to die, because ye have
not kept your Master the Lords Anointed, v. 16.

Now to escape meriting this Sentence of David, let all English Spirits unite
in a vigilant Care to preserve his Sacred Majesty, our Royal Master, the Lords
Anointed, the Protector and Defender of us all; Let every good Subject and Son
of the Reformed Church, the Protestant Church of England, still Fear God and
Honor the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove.
24.21. Vigeat Ecclesia Anglicana vere Catholica, and Vivat Rex Angliae Regum
Protestantissimus; Exurgat Deus, And let the Enemies of both be for ever
dispersed. Amen.

FINIS.

