NEWS FROM HELL: OR, THE Devils Court IN AN UPROAR.

HIS DEVILSHIPS falling Sick, upon the News of the Pope and Poperies likely
Downfall.

HIS Last WILL and TESTAMENT.

HIS LEGACIES to the POPE and JESUITS; AND To other SINNERS in particular.

WRITTEN by S. V.

LONDON, Printed for R. G. MDCLXXIII.

NEWS FROM HELL: OR, The Devils Court in an Uproar.
THe Devil upon his late Conference with, and the courteous Entertainment, and
fair Promises he received from his H^liness the Pope, they having jointly
considered and taken care for the good of Souls; that is, how he may have whole
shoales come in amain; which he is certain to have, if that they will but
embrace his Holinesses Doctrines, and put in practice his most Immaculate
Commands; as in Murdering Heretics, Deposing of Princes, Blowing up of
Parliaments, and such like: his Devilship, I say, has been carousing it amongst
his d^mnable Associates, and kept open House for all that came; which I verily
believe few have done besides a Jesuit or two. But on a sudden he heard an
Echo crying, Honesty begins to get ground, Popery like to be wholly suppressed,
and Virtue like to be embraced: At which the Grand Sophy of the Satanical
Synagogue belched out a groan, the rebound of which left all the Stygian
Hell Hounds in a most clamorous howling; they presently run all about their
Father of mischief, to know what qualm came over his stomach. H^ darting an eye
upon them able to confound a thousand Conjurers in their own Circles, (though
with a wet finger they could fetch up a little Devil) mumbling out, Hell is
undone. Why? yelped all the rest. An Armado (quoth he) cannot save us. Our
Legions in the World next above are overthrown; all those Battalions that
warred under the Colors of our red and fiery Dragon, are debauched: Jesuits.
suffer this brack in our Acherontick Territories, and hotter assassinations
will every day pell-mell maul us. All about him cried, They would never endure
it.

Whilst this indigested mischief lay broiling on their stomachs, room was made
for an Intelligencer. The Devil gnashed his Jesuit.
teeth, and asked, If the news were current? It was answered, Yes.

Hey (cries the Messenger) to unclasp a Book of my memorandum; Let me be hung
in Chains of Ice, (as you are in Fire, if I lie) and be bound to eat Flakes in
the frozen Zone for a thousand years, if the Globe of the Terrestrial World be
not new molded; the Ball of it has none of the old stuffing: Catholics turn
Heretics, Jesuits burn their Books and Beads; Bellarmine's Doctrines, which by
your assistance have got ground, are now confuted; Transubstantiation turned
out of doors. Not an Inch of Knavery in a short time will be had for Love nor
Money. If you would give a Million of Gold, you shall not have a Courtier ere
long in Debt; if you would bestow a thousand Pounds worth of Tobacco on a
Soldier to swear a Garrison-Oath, he would die ere he will do it. All Rich Men
besides begin to be Liberal, Poor Men not Contentious, Beggars not Drunk,
Lawyers not Covetous, rich Heirs not riotous, Citizens not envious, Clowns most
religious. No more, cried the Tartarian Tramagrant. The other stopped in his
careere; and it was time: for this last Cannon shot through both his
Broad-sides; the fall of this Millstone had almost burst his Heart; he sighed
nothing but flashes of Fire; spit nothing but flakes of Brimstone; wept nothing
but scoops full of Scalding water: for now he saw the dilaceration of his own
Luciferan Kingdom, and the Exaltation of his Enemies. Out of his presence he
commanded all; they break their Necks for haste. He bawled for Music; ten
thousand Soul^ were presently set a yelling. He took no pleasure in it* he felt
himself damnably heart-burnt; pangs worse than the tor^ures of everlasting
Death fell upon him, and no hope of his recovery; which made an unexpressible
howling in Hell.

No amendment being in him, he called for Physicians; but not one would come
near him, they knew his payment too well: for Apothecaries they were subtle
enough, and cared not for his custom. He then roared out for a cunning
Scrivener to make his Will: one was at his elbow presently, him he hugged in
his arms, and cried out, Welcome my Son, thou shall for ever bind me unto thee.
Sir Satrapas Satan then goes on, and tells him, He is fallen into a low and
miserable estate, his case is desperate; and therefore being utterly given
over, he sends for him to make his last Will and Testament: and so Seignior
Scrivano b^gins, (...) gallops as fast with his Pen, as Monsieur Diabolo could
with his Chaps. The Will runs in th^se words, or words to this effect
following: Viz.

His Will.
BEhemah Dornschweyn, Prince of all that lies betwixt the East and West, the
North and South; mighty both on the Sea and the Land, chief Vayvode of Usury,
Simony, Bribery, Perjury, Forgery, Tyranny, Blasphemy, Calumny, etc.(my Vassals
and Deputies, with all their petty Officers under them) Patron of all that
study the Black and Negromantick Arts; Father of all the roaring Boys, the
Founder and Vpholder of Paintings, Dawbings, Plaisterings, Pargettings,
Consuring, Cementings, Winkle-filings, and b^tchings up of old decayed and
weather-beaten Faces: being confounded and tormented in every Limb, but having
my Memory and Wits fresh and lively, do make this my last Will and Testament in
manner and form following.

Legacies.
Imprimis, I will bequeath the World (whereof I am Prince) with all the
Pleasures, Inticements, and sorcerous Vanities thereof, to be equally
distributed amongst my Sons and Daughters; and because (of my own knowledge) I
find very many of them to be damnably wick^d: I lay upon all such a Fathers
heavy curse, not caring though they hang in Hell, because they have run a
villainous, impious, pr^ous and devilish Life and Race

To Ladies.
It^m, To all those Ladies, Gentlewomen and Citizens Wives, (being set down by
their Names in my black Book) to whose houses I have been welcome at midnight,
my Wis^ is, that they all shall mourn.

To Usurers.
Item, I further will and bequeath to my loving and d^^^est Friends, the
Usurers of this City, all such Moneys as are now, or hereafter shall be taken
at above the rate of Ten in the Hundred.

To Gallants that follow him.
My will is, that every Gentleman that serves me, shall be kept in his Chain;
yea, the worst that has followed me, let him go in a black Suit of durance.

To Harlots.
Item, Whereas I have many base Daughters lurking about the Suburbs, I give to
them Carbuncles a piece, the biggest that can be gotten. To Bawds.
And to those Matrons (that for my sake have been ever dear to those my said
Daughters) I give to each of them a bottle of the same Aqua Vitae whereof I my
self drink.

To Bankrupts.
Item, I give my invisible Cloaks to all Bankrupts, because they have made
them; but to one Poet only (called Po^t Comedy) I give my best invisible
Cloak, because it better fits his shoulders than my own; but chiefly, for that
he will trim it up well, and line it with, Come not near me; or, Stand off: And
because he is a Slip of mine own grafting, I likewise bequeath to him my best
Slippers, to walk and play with his Keepers noses.

To Officers.
Item, I give to all Officers that love me, a brace of my own Angels to hang
about their Necks as a remembrance of me.

To Brokers.
Item, My will is, that all the Brokers in Long-lane be sent to me with all
speed possible, because I have much of them laid to pawn to me, which will (I
know) never be redeemed; and what I give to them shall be in Hugger mugger: and
for the rest of their Brethren about the City, let them be assured, they shall
not be forgotten, because I hear they pray for me hourly; I pity these poor
despised Souls, because if they should miss me, I know not what will bec^me of
them

For reparing the way to Tyburn.
Item, I give toward the mending of the High w^y b^t^een Newgate and Tyburn,
all the Gr^vel that lies in the Ki^n^y^, Reins and Bladders of Churles,
Usurers, B^^^s, Harl^ts, and Wh^re-masters and rather then th^s^ Gravel pits
should grow scanty, I wish that they be supplied continually.

To J^ylors
Item, I give to all J^ylors a^^ K^epers of Pri^^ns, t^ ev^ryone of them, the
Soul of (...) Bear, (t^ b^ R^ven^us;) the B^dy of a W^lf, (to be Cruel;) the
Speech of a Dog, (t^ b^ Churlish;) the Tall^ns of a Vulture, (to be Gras^ing;)
and my C^u^tenance to bear them out in their Office, that they may look like
Devils to the poor P^is^ners.

To Bully-cocks.
Item, My will is that if any Bully-cock happen to be stabbed, swagg^^ing or
s^^aring in a Tavern (or to be killed in the quarrel of his Wh^re, let him be
fetched hither in my own Name) because here he shall be both looked to, and
provided f^r.

To the Pope and Jesuits.
Item, I give unto my white S^n^ (whom the World call Jesuits) to each a
thimble full of my Brains * f^r truly I have been more beholden to them, than
to my l^^ing Friends the Beakers; for by their making Adulte^y and Fornication
Venial Sins* they have h^lp me to thousands of Souls, which otherwise had never
been wasted over into our Acherontick Territories.

To the Devils Overseers.
Lastly, I make and ordain by this my l^^t Will and Te^tament, a Common
Barret^r to be my Executor; and two Knights, who are my sworn Servants, and ^^e
of the P^^^ (their Names and Service being nailed upon Pillars in W^^tmin^ter
Hall and Palac^, I make them (albeit they are purblind) my Overseers; and f^r
their pains therein, I will bequeath to each of them a great round Pearl to be
worn in their Eyes, because I may be still in their sight when I am g^n^ from
them.

And to testify that this is my last and only Will which shall stand, I
subscribe my Name unto it, thereby renouncing, retracting revocating,
disanulting, and quite cancelling all other Wills formerly by me made
whatsoever: In witness whereof, all the States Infernal, Avernal, Acherontick,
Stygian, Phlegetontick, and Periphlegetontick, have likewise subscribed, in the
year of our Reigning in the World 5674.
Monsieur Noverint (being a man whose conditions were too well known) had
nothing said to him at this time, because the Devil was very bad, and had no
stomach to talk of old reckonings (for Universe was in his debt) but had his
payment, and was glad he got away.

Now as it often happens to rich Curmudgeons, that after they have settled
their Estate on their Deathbeds, (as they verily fear) and that their Wives
gape to be Widows, that from their Husbands Coffin they may leap into a Coach
and be Ladies; their Sons and Heirs cursing as fast (as the Mothers pray) until
the great Caponbell ring out; the Daughters weeping (when they know their
Portions) only because they are not Marriageable; or if Marriageable, because
ere they mourn in black, they have not Suitors to make them merry: and the
Kindred as greedy (for their parts) to se^ the Winding Sheet laid out, that
they may fetch their fat Legacies. And then (Oh terrible then!) the old Fox
revives, falls to his sleep, calls for his victuals, feels himself m^nd,
remembers his Bags, cries out for his Keys, seals up his Money; no talk of a
Will, no hope of a Widow, no sharing of his Wealth. Even the self-same Pill
took this Diego Daemonum, and recovered upon it: for all his Children,
Acquaintance, and Servants standing about him, howling and crying for him,
Behold! this howling of theirs made him almost out of his wits, that madness
quickened his spirits, his spirits made him rouse up himself, and with rousing
he began to look into what danger he was fallen; and by looking into it, to
devise Plots again to raise it. Hereupon a Synod was called of all the subtlest
and plaguest Praters in Hell, of which there are good store. Magog Mammon there
discovers his Disease, the cause of it, and his peril: His fear is, that his
Kingdom would now be sorely shaken, and his sorrows, because all they should be
sure to smart for it more then he himself; he therefore craves their Infernal
counsel.

They all Conser, they Cousult, and from that Consultation (after many
Villainous Projects tossed upon their Horns, like Dung upon Pitch-forks, and
smelling worse) this Advice was hatched, and had feathers sluck on the back,
the rest were plucked naked: and this it was; That Minotaure Poluphem (the Sire
of all those Whelps barking thus in the Kennels of Hell) should forthwith put
fire into his old bones, and fall to thrashing of the Dam to get more
Hell Hounds, (brave young Devils) whom he may (like Tumblers) hoyst from one
Friends shoulder up to another, and so pop them into the World; and they going
again to Bull with other black Goblings, may engender what Monsters they
please, to set all the World, and all the People in it out of Tune; and the
worse Music they make, the more sport it is for him.

This Act was Filed upon Record, most Voices carried it away: The Council
flowed current; the Court is adjourned; and the great Beglherby of Limbo falls
hotly to his business. Now you must understand, that the Devil being able to
get Children faster than any Man else, he had no sooner touched his old
Laplandian Guenevora, but she as speedily quickened; and no sooner quickened, but
was delivered, and lay In; and had at this Litter, or Burden, two Twins.

The Father gave to each of them a Name; the one was called Hypocrisy, the
other Ingratitude. Both (...) s^its.
Hypocrisy was put to Nurse to an Anabaptist of Amsterdam, but Ingratitude was
brought up at home. In a short time they were able to practice any Tricks that
were taught them: So that being ripe for Masters, Hypocrisy was presently
bound to a Puritan Tailor by his Nurse; and did nothing but make Cloaks for
Religion to wear of a thousand Colors. He ran away from the Tailor, and then
dwelt with a Vizard-maker; and there he was the first that invented wearing of
Two Faces under a Hood. After this he traveled into Italy, and there Learned
(and since he has Taught Jesuits) to Embrace with one Arm, and Stab with
another; to Smile in your Face, yet wish a Poniard in your Bosom; to Protest,
and yet Lie; to swear Love, yet Hate mortally. From Italy he came into the Low
Countries, where he would drink only with a full Glass, to overreach you in
your Cups of your Bargain. Further description of a Jesuit.
Out of Germany he is again come over into England; his Lodging is uncertain,
for (like a Whore) he lies everywhere: he sometimes is at Court, and is there
exceeding full of Complements; he goes sometimes like a threadbare Scholar,
but with looks humble as a Lambs, and as innocent; but his Heart prouder than a
Turks to a Christian. He has a bewitching Presence, a sweet Breath, a musical
Voice, and a warm sort Hand, but it is dangerous to keep Company with him,
because he can alter himself into sundry shapes: In the City he is a Dog, and
will sawn upon you; in the Fields he is a Lions Whelp, and will play with you;
in the Sea he is a Mermaid, and will sing to you: but that fawning is but to
reach at your Throat; that playing is to get you into his Paws; and that
singing is nothing else, but to sink and confound you for ever.

This Ficture of Perdition (Hypocrisy) was not drawn so smoothly, so
cunningly, but his Brother (Ingratitude) though there went but a pair of shears
betwixt them, was as ugly in shape, and as black in Soul; he was a Fiend in
proportion, and a Fury in condition: It catches at any thing, but cannot see
the Party from whom it receives.

This is that Torpedo, which if we touch, a numbness strikes all our joints and
we have no f^eling one of another. This is he which m^keth one forget God and
his Country, the King and his Kindred, only to please the Devil his Father. He
that this day has been comforted with thy Fire, fed with thy Bread, relieved
with thy Purse, and kept from being lousie with thy Linen, to morrow will be
ready to set the same House on fire that hid him from cold; for thy Bread, to
give thee Stones; for the Money thou lentest him, to sell thee (like a Judas;)
and for thy Linen which wrapped him warm, glad to see thee in danger to go
naked. Thus have we this Gorgoa in his live colors; because therefore that
the odiousness of this Beast should still be in our Eyes, God has
Hieroglyphically figured it in many of his Creatures.

The Vip^r is an Emblem of it, whose young ones gnaw out the B^lly in which
they were bred. So is the Mule, whose paunch being full with sucking* she kicks
her Dam. So is the Ivy, which kills that by which it climbs. And so is Fire,
which destroys its Nourisher.

My purpose was, when the Grand Helea had gotten these two Furies with nine
Lives, only to have drawn the Curtains of her Childbed in which she lay ^n,
and to have shown no more but the well-^^vo^ed Fa^es of her p^ir of Monkies;
but you see I have from her withered Teats brought them to their Cradles, from
their Cradles carried them to Nurse, and from thence followed them till they
were able to do service in the World: how they h^ve sp^d, you h^ar, and how
they are like to prosper, you may judge.

FINIS.

